



Henry the seconde.

M. D. XLVII.

HENRY the second of that name, and the 59. King of France, Pharamond, the only sonne of Francis the first, that died vppon the 30. day of the moneth of March, in the year of our Lord 1547. succeeded in the Crowne by order of succession, according to the auncient salicque lawe of the land. Hee while the Nobilitie were busied to prouide for the obsequie and funerals of his deceased father, and staying for his sacrying and anoynting, in the moneth of Aprill following, made and ordained an edict,An edict against blasphemers. to be published against blasphemers of the name of God: which action made shewe of a notable and commendable beginning: yet, that so laudable a worke continued no longer in force, then many others had done before it. Neuerthelesse, it wrought this effect, that thereby it euidently appeareth, that succession, and not the sacrying and annoynting of a Prince, is the chiefe originall of royall authoritie.
The 16. of Iulie, the Court was much troubled by a contention, and memorable action that happened betweene Messieurs de Iarnac, and Chastegneraye, gentlemen of great account, that had defied each other, by reason of certaine words vsed by one of them, which had procured the other to giue the lie. The King in steade of ending their cause, by aduise of his Councell, and to constraine the offender, to satisfie the offended, graunted them the combat: wherevpon, according to the Kings appoyntment, they appeared vpon the day aforesaid, at S. Germaines in Laye: where, in the presence of the King, Princes, Lords, and others, they entred into the lists. There Monsieur Iarnac, who by all the company was esteemed the weaker, by reason he was newly recouered of a certaine sicknesse, withall despised and litle fauored, ouercame the other (to whom before they entered into the combat, euery man adiudged the victorie:) and wounded him in such sort, that not long after he died, to the Kings great griefe: who vppon that occasion, expresly forbadde all combats whatsoeuer: in this manner hee beganne with a bloodie tragedie, and ended with the like, as heereafter you shall heare.The King sacred at Reims.
The 27. of Iulie, after hee was sacried and annoynted at
Reims, with all the auncient and accustomed ceremonies therevnto belonging, in the presence of twelue Peeres, spirituall and temporall. The spiritual, were the Arch-bishop of
Reims, the Bishop of Langres, Beauuais, Noyon, Laon, and
Challons: the temporall, the Duke of Bourgongne, Normandie, and Guyenne, the Earles of Champagne, Flaunders, and
Thoulouse. Most part of the Princes and Nobilitie of the Realme being likewise present, with diuers Ambassadours of straunge nations. But the Ambassadours of Florence, Mantoue, and
Ferrare, came not, by reason of a controuersie that fell out between them, concerning their preheminence of places, and for that they could not agree therevppon, they absented themselues, till the cause was further debated.
The Constable exalted.Anne de Montmorency, Constable of France, who certaine yeares before had been bannished the Court, and secretly held at Chantilly: as soone as Francis the first died, was repealed againe, and the new king committed the principall charge of the affaires of the Realme vnto him, which at that time were executed by the Cardinall de Tournon, and the Admirall Annebaut, who as then had good leisure to repose themselues, yeelding their place to him, whom the king termed his Gossep, one that in times past had done him many seruices, as afterward hee did.
Mesieurs de Longueual, d'Espars, de Boncour, de Framezelle, de Antipe, the Barron de la Garde, the Generall Bayard, and others, were narrowly sought and pursued, for diuers secret causes, in such sort, that some of them were forced to saue themselues by the gilded Gate, others by meanes of their friends.
Warres in in Scotland.The king hauing made a Progresse into Picardie, went further into the Realme, and caused an Armie to bee leuied vnder the conduct of Monsieur D'esse, to ayde the Queene Dowager of Scotland, against the Englishmen, causing her to be safely conducted into
Scotland, to the end, to impeach the vnion of both those Realmes, which might bee to the preiudice of France, and thereby to maintaine the ancient amitie, that had long continued betweene the countries of
France and Scotland. Monsieur Pierre Strossie, Coronell of certaine Italian companies, Monsieur D'andelot, Coronell of the French Infanterie, and the Rhingraue, General of the Lansquenets, accompanied Monsieur D'esse. And while they with their Troupes kept the Englishmen from inuading Scotland by land,
Leon Strossi, Prior of Capoue, with his Gallies, and certain French ships, came close vnder the Castle of S. Andrew, which he entred by force: and taking all that hee found therein, returned into
France. D'esse presently after draue the Englishmen out of a Fort, by them erected, hard by that Castle: but before the fire waxed greater, by meeting of Ambassadours on both sides, the peace before spoken of, and propounded at Ardies, betweene the kings of
England and France, was made and concluded, whereby that warre ceased.
The rest of this yeare, passed ouer without any matter of importance done in France. The king hauing taken such order in
Guyenne, touching the Impost of Salt, and other customes, that in fine, it prooued the spring and beginning of those insupportable exactions, that bred and produced the seditions of the yeare ensuing.
Ordinances for custome of Salt, and other things.Autome and all the rest of the year, was much troubled with showers of raigne, whereof ensued great ouerflowings and invndations of waters, foreshewings and prescriptions of the troubles, that after ensued both within and without the Realme.
The house of Guise being insinuated into the kings good fauor, by means of Diane de Poictiers, Duches of
Valentinois, that wholly ruled him, hee gaue the Arch-Bishoppricke
Bishoppricke of Reims to Charles, yonger brother to the Duke of Guise, to whom not long before, Pope Paul Farnese, had sent the Cardinals Hat: this was,The Cardinal of Lorraine solicited the Pope to take part with the king of France. that great and so much renowmed Cardinall of
Lorraine, that liued in such fame in the times of the Kings successors to Henry the second. Charles of
Burbon, brother to Henry Duke of Vandosine, and after King of Nauarre, was also made Cardinall at the same time. But the difference was great betweene these two Cardinals. The
Lorraine, a man of great iudgement, and one that seemed to be borne onely to stirre vp strife within the Realme, was as then sent and imployed in Ambassage vnto the Pope, to drawe and perswade him to fauour the King of Francis part, and wholly to disswade him from the Emperour, against whom as then he was much incensed, because his Lieftenant in Italie had ceased vppon the towne of
Plaisance, after the murther of Pierre Louis the Popes sonne, slaine by the conspiracie of his owne subiects, the 10. of September 1547.
The Emperour and the King sent vnto the Councell.The Emperour sent his Ambassadours to the Councell, as then holden in Bologne, to protest against such as were assembled in that place, thereby to induce them to returne againe vnto
Trent. The King likewise sent his Ambassadors thither, to exhort the^ to looke vnto the^selues, and to prouide for their affaires. These practises and deuises, in time prooued the sparkles of the fire of vengeance, and desire of reenterie into warres, inclosed within the hearts and breasts of those two Princes, specially of the King, who partly prouoked by the opinion of his meanes, and partly solicited by such as knowing his nature much inclined to the delights and pleasures of the Court, and of a soft spirit, little practised or broke^ with matters of estate, thought to fish in a troubled water, as the common saying is: not beeing able to distresse the peace made with the Emperor at
Cresoy, in the year of our Lord 1544. complayning against the animositie of the Emperour, vsed towards France: and among other examples to pricke him, alleadging the death of Coronel Vogelsberg, beheaded at Ausbourge, at his returne from the warres of
Scotland, where he had serued the King.
While the King made preparation to ride on progresse throughout his Realme, Gasper de Colligny sieur de Chastillon, sent into Picardie,The Fort of Chastillon. caused a fort to be erected near vnto Bullen, that as then was holden by the Englishmen, which after annoyed them much. The King beeing in Bourgongne, made his entrie into most part of the Townes, and hauing visited La Bresse, Sauoye and
Piedemont, returned vnto Lyons, where hee held a feast for the Knights of the order of S. Michaell.
Commotions in Guyenne by reason of exactions.During his voyage into Sauoye and Piedemont, the commons of Guyenne, Saintonge, and Angoulmois, rose vp in armes, because of the extortions vsed by those that had farmed the impost of salt, and in short space assembled to the number of
40000. men wel armed, besides those of the ylands, and by common consent, set vppon the farmers of Salt: and although in the beginning, the king of
Nauarre had sought by all meanes to disswade them, neuerthelesse, they held firme, and earnestly pursued their enterprise against those of the farmers, vppon whom they might lay hands. The commons of Gascoigne likewise rose vppe and followed the pernicious examples of the rest, whereof ensued the massacring of many of the Kings officers in diuers places of the countrie, who abusing their offices, had beene the causes of that mutinie.
Fault of the Gouernour and the Iurats of Bourdeaux.The Maior and Iurates, hauing charge within the Cittie of
Bourdeaux, the parliment of Guyenne, and Monsieur de Monneins, that therein commaunded as Lieftenant for the King, in stead of remedying and taking order for those tumults, defended it too long: specially Monsieur de Monneins, who not reproouing the
insolencie of one of the principal leaders of those troupes, named La Vergne, made him become so bold and impudent, that not long after, he presumed to rayse and call the people togither by sound of bell: besides this, he committed an other fault, which is, that beeing fearefull, and hauing withdrawne himselfe into the Castle of du Ha, thereby, as hee supposed, to put the people in some doubt. He sent out diuers Caliuers, at seuerall times, to represse their insolencie, but it fell out contrary to his intent. For that this issuing of the Souldiours, set the people in such a rage, that hauing found mutinous companions for the purpose: as La Vergne, l'Estonnac, Maquanan, and others, presently they fought, where the farmers and their partakers, were put to flight, and many gentlemens houses (vnder pretence of searching for the exactors of Imposts, whom they affirmed to bee hidden therein) were robbed and spoyled.Disorder in the capitall Towne of Guyenne. The commons entred into the Towne, where they rung a bell to assemble the people, no man daring to passe through the streets, vnlesse hee were armed, and in company of the Nobles, otherwise they were cruelly massacred and murthered, by such as met them. The Councellers of the Court of parliment, were constrained to put off their gownes, and in their dubblets and hose, with Saylers cappes, to beare pikes, and so to march with this mutinous companie, that constrained two brethren, called Messieurs de Saulx, one a Captaine of the Towne, the other of the Castle called Trompette, to bee their Leaders, and to assist them at the spoyling and robbing of diuers houses of the Cittizens their friendes, whom they massacred before their eyes.
Tho sacking of the towne-house, and massacring of the Gouernour.The Towne-house, wherein there laye great quantitie of armour was sacked, and Monsieur de Monneins, beeing so ill aduised to leaue the Castle of Du Ha, (where he was in safetie) to go out to intreat and perswade the people, was cruelly murthered with diuers wounds, both before and after his death: a Locke-smith giuing him the first blowe, and the Fryers, that within 3. houres after in the night-time, sought to take vp his bodie, all filthie and moyled with durt, and lying in the streets with a gentlemen called
Monteluen, were in danger of massacring, because they buried them within that Temple. But the principall Leaders of this mutinie, longing to put water into their wine, and such as had made their pray by spoyling houses,Execution of iustice against the mutinous. hauing withdrawne themselues, some in one place, some into another, the parliament beeing strengthened and assisted, by honest and peaceable Cittizens, beganne to shewe his authoritie, and caused some of the notablest companions amongst them, to bee taken, whom they executed: namely, La Vergne, that was drawne in peeces by foure horses.
The Constable with all rigor punished those of BurdeauxThe king beeing certified thereof, wrote vnto the commons, assuring them with all speed to take order therein, commanding them to laye downe their armes, which was the cause that euery man withdrew himselfe. But in the meane time, an armie was prepared, to enter into
Saintonge, and Quiennie, Monsieur de la Deuese, ceased vppon the Castle Trompette, and put out l'Estonnac and his adherents. The Constable had commissio^ to punnish those of
Guyenne, followed by Francis de Lorraine Counte d'Anmalle, after Duke of Guise, much renowmed in the raignes of
Francis the second, and Charles the ninth. This Earle conducting 4000. Lansquenets, and great numbers of French Horsemen, entred into Saintonge, which hee pacified without resistance, not punishing them for their offences past, minding to obtaine the name of a milde and gentle Prince, and leauing the report of crueltie and seueritie vnto the Constable, who being accompanied with all the forces, and both the armes ioyned in one, entred into Bourdeaux all armed, giuing most hard speeches vnto the Captaine of the towne, that at his entrie, presented him with the keyes of the towne, that at his entry presented him with the keyes of the Citie, beseeching him to be fauourable vnto the citizens: but he being master of the town, without blow giuen, bereaued the citizens of al their titles, registers, priuiledges, and franchises, depriued them of all honours, burnt all their priuiledges, caused the Court of Parliament to cease, wholly disarmed the citizens, pulled downe their belles, and constrained the principallest of the citie, to the number of seuen score, to goe to the Fryers, there to fetch the body of Monsieur de Monneins, and to conuey it to the Church of S.
Andrewes, where it should be buried: each of them with a waxe candle lited in his hands, hauing first before the Constables lodging, asked mercy both of God and the king, and Iustice, Estonnoc, the two brethren du Saul, and others had their heads striken off. He forgot not likewise those that had bene assistant at the murthering of the Gouernor, and the sacking of the houses, a Prouost Marshall with a great number of souldiers went through Bourdeaux, Baradois, and
Agenois, executing such as had rung the belles, and in the ende, he tooke the two chiefe Leaders of the Commons, named Talemagne and
Galaffie, who were broken vpon a wheele, hauing first bene crowned with a Crowne of Iron burning hot, for their punishment in vsurping the soueraigne Maiestie.
Pastime in the Court.This Tragedie, ended in Comedies at the court, for Anthony de Burbon, Duke de Vandosine, espoused Ieane d'Albert Princesse of
Nauarre, and Francis de Lorraine, Duke d'Aumalle, the daughter of the Duke of Ferrare. But among those sweete and pleasant conceits, they mixed a most rigorous and bitter ordinance, establishing within Parris an extraordinary chamber,Persecutions against those of the religion. therein to proceed against those of the religion, as then called
Lutherans, whom they burnt to death, if they remained constant in their profession.
The coronation of the Queene.The pleasures of the Court increased more by the deliuery of the Queene of a young sonne, and great part of this yere was passed ouer in playes and sumptuous sports. The Q. being crowned at S.
Dennis, vpo^ the 10. of Iune, and the 16. of the same month, the king made his magnificall entry into Parris, and there ran at tilt, to showe some pleasure to the Ladies and Gentlewomen, which being ended, he sat openly in the Court of Parliment, where in presence of the Princes and Peeres of his Realme, he gaue iudgement in diuers causes, according to the auncient custome of his predecessors.Difference betweene the kings in times past, and those of our time. For the auncient kings of France, were carefull, and vsed ordinarily to hear the complaints of their subiects, but of late yeares they referred that maner of exercise vnto the consciences of their Officers, seeing by other mens eyes almost concerning all their affaires, which is neither good nor comfortable for the people, nor yet any meanes to further Iustice. And since this carelesnesse hath entred into the maiesty of our kings, the estate of the realme hath bin weakned, and the maiestie royall imbased: so that in the end, the peple haue not refused to rise against the person of the king, and sometimes to murther him. But remedy herein wil be had, when our kings abstain from shameful actions, and only do that whervnto God hath called them.
A generall procession.After many sports and deuises, the king caused a generall and solemne procession to be made in the moneth of Iuly, wherein hee was present, assisted by the Queene, the Princes of the bloud, Lords, Cardinals, Orders, Estates and dignities of Parris, and at his returne from the Bishops Pallace, where hee had dyned, hee would see and beholde the burning of certaine Christians, detesting the errours and abuses mainteined and holden by the Papists and their Doctors. Among the which was a Taylor, where not long before,A notable Taylor. by the force and vertue of the spirite of God, had made answere and giuen notice
of his saith and religion, in presence of the king and diuers Courtiers, where hee sung a wonderfull lesson vnto the Duches
de Valentimois, of whom I spake before: saying vnto her, that she ought to content her selfe, to haue so much infected France, without mixing her venome and filthiniesse, with so holy and sacred a thing as is the religion, and the truth of the sonne of God: and that it was to be feared, that for the same occasion God wold send a greeuous plague and punishment both vpon the King and his Realme. But the King being moued and sore greeued with such exhortations, which touched her to the quick to whom they were spoken,Punishme^ts of those of the religion. hauing commaunded that his iudgement should speedily be giuen, said he would in person behold the execution of his Taylor, and the better to do it, he went vnto the house of Monsieur de la Rochpot, in Saint Anthonies streete, before Saint Catherins Church, right against the scaffold where the Taylor shewed most singuler and constant patience: and hauing espied the king, he beheld him with so stedfast a countenance, that by no means he would looke of, and the sire being put vnto him, he had his eyes so stedfastly fixed vppon him, that the king was constrained to leaue the windowe and to withdraw himselfe, being so moued thereat, that he confessed that he thought the shadowe of the Taylor followed him, and with the apprehension of that spectacle, for the space of certaine nights after, it still represented it selfe before his eyes, in such maner, that he made an oath and protested, that he would neuer see nor heare any more of those Lutherians.The Kings protestation. But not remembring the same, about ten yeares after, he heard that which he ought to haue giuen better respect vnto, and pretending to see the person of a man of great estimation burnt, he lost both his sight and his life, as when time serueth you shall reade.
Orders for apparrell, made in paper.At that time excesse of apparrell was so great in euery man, by reason of the pompe and magnificence of the Court, that it bred a dearth and scarcitie of all things, so that cloth of gold, silkes, lace, and imbroydery, were forbidden to be worne by diuers persons, euery estate being appointed what he should weare. But this was but an ordinance made in paper, and of litle co^tinuance, and the greatest example showne by the king himself, who ordinarily went plain in his apparrell, the rest of the Court vsing what apparrell they would.
Estate of Scotland.Monsieur de Termes, knight of the order, was sent into Scotland, to supply the place of Monsieur de Esse, there to continue the warres, Mary Queen of Scots being of the age of sixe or seuen yeares, hauing the yeare before bene conueyed into France, Monsieur d'Esse before his departure, hauing giuen the English men an ouerthrow before Hedungton, and taken the Isle of
Horses, left the rest of his affaires vnto his successor, that behaued himselfe most brauely, and with great honour.
Hard dealing vsed against Monsier du Biez, because of Bullen.For the recouering of Bullen holden by the Englishmen, the king commanded his Nobilitie and Captains to assemble themselues, by the first of September next after ensuing, before Bullen. In the month of Iune, Iaques de Couci Lord of
Veruin, had beene beheaded in Parris, and Edward du Biez, Marishall of France, his father in lawe, after a long imprisonment, degraded of his estate.
The Marishall was accused to haue vnaduisedly placed his sonne in lawe within Bullen, and the other for hauing yeelded vp a place so impregnable and well furnished, vnto the enemie, to the which ende, diuers witnesses and Commissaries were appointed and procured, by suche as had credite about the king, so that not verie long after, it was plainly and manifestly seene, and openly knowne, that the innocencie of those gentlemen, had beene falsely accused and condemned, by the enuie of certaine Courtiers, that ruled the king. who acknowledged the fault by him therein committed, but remedied it not, the condemnation against Monsieur de Veruin, continuing still in force, vntill the yeare of our Lord 1575. that his sonne and heire, by petition made to king Henry the third, besought the king to restore the name and honour of his Father, and Grand-father by the mothers side, and commaundement was giuen vnto one of the Heraults, to be assistant at the funerals of those two Lords, which were solemnely holde^ at Bulle^, in the month of Iune. 1577.
VVarre at Bullen.But to returne to the warres of Bullen, the king being arriued at Monstrueil, vpon the sea, the 17. of August, caused his armie to march towards
Bonlamberg, and hauing taken the Fort of Selaque, where
Monsieur de Chastillon entered by force, and that of
Blaconnet by composition. The Englishmen left
Bonlamberg, which was presently repaired, after that, they besieged the Tower of Ordre: but by reason of the winter time, the Forts beeing garnished with men and victuals, the king dismissed his armie, and withdrew himselfe till spring time. This yeare the proces of
Merindol, was pleaded in the Court of Parliament at Parris, beeing the 50. time that it had beene heard, which was thus.The notable proces of Merindol and Cabrieres In the moneth of September 1540. the parliament of Prouence, had by default condemned 17. persons of Merindol, to bee burned for religion, and that the Village of Merindol should be rased, and all the trees cut downe within 200. paces round about it: this iudgement for a time co^tinued in suspence, although both the Bishops, and Spiritualtie of the countrie, were very earnest to haue it executed, but many Gentlemen and others of good account, stayed the rigor thereof: and about fiue moneths after, king
Francis, first Earle of Prouence, sent a pardon to those of Merindol and others surnamed Vandois, vppon condition, that within three yeares after, they should abiure and renounce their errours. They accordingly made their apparance in the Court of Parliament, requiring to let them see the Coppie of their accusations, (which was denied them) touching the poynts that accused them to haue maintained and published certaine errours, and that they should by the word of God, be better instructed: which done, they said they would bee readie and most willing, to follow al good counsell whatsoeuer. And because their error was ntot shewed vnto them, and that they only sought their blood, they in open Parliament presented the confession of their faith, with a most ample and large declaration and answere, vnto the false reports and vntruthes, imposed and deuised against them, desiring therein, eyther to be maintained and vpholden, or otherwise to be heard and permitted to speake in their owne defences. From that time, till the yeare of our Lord 1544. there was diuers practises vsed to oppresse and ouerthrowe those poore people, but while their enemies contented themselues to assault them by words and threatnings, they solicited and besought the king, that it would please his Maiestie, to call the hearing of that arrest of contumacie before himselfe. The President
Chassane, a man of indifferent iudgement, being dead, one
Iohn Menier succeeding in his place, who hauing forcibly taken the goods of certaine husbandmen of the village of Oppede, whereof he was Lord, vnder pretence of religion, was become a mortall enemy vnto those of
Cabrieres and Merindol, where those husbandmen dwelt, who in haruest time, in despight of Menier, reaped the corne which as then they found vpon their ground, which hee held from them by force: so that as then the execution was pursued. And thervpon the Parliament at the instant request of M nier, sent an huissier, to the Cardinall de Tournon, at whose request king
Francis the first, sent letters pattents to the parliament, for the execution of that first sentence, and by that meanes in the moneth of Aprill 1545. Menier naming himselfe Lieftenant to Monsieur de Grignan, Gouernour of Prouence, hauing assembled an armie of theeues, and beeing accompanied by Monsieur de la Garde, set fier in diuers villages about Merindol, sent great numbers of poore Countrie-men into the Gallies, and caused a young man to bee openly harquebushed, and finding no man within Merindol, pilled, sacked, burnt, and rased all the houses, and hauing besieged, battered, and by composition taken the litle Towne of Cabrieres, in stead of holding his promise made vnto them, he chose out 25. or 30. men, such as pleased him, that were cut and massaced to peeces, in a Medowe that lay vnder the Towne, and about 40. women, wherof most of them were great with childe, were burnt within a barne, and many beeing found hidden in their Cellors, were tyed two and two togither, and so ledde into the Hall of the Castle of Cabrieres, where they were most cruelly murthered. Within the Church, many olde women, young maides, and children, that had saued themselues, were all put to the sword. The number of the slaine and massacred, amounting vnto 800. persons and more. The Barron de la Garde ledde aboue 800. persons away, and put them into the Gallies, where the most part of them died in great miserie. Many women and maides were deflowred, and great numbers ledde prisoners to Marseille, Aix, and Auignon. Diuers villages beeing wholly burnt and consumed by fire, whereby the desolation and misery of that countrie was exceeding great. But king Francis being sicke, for the space of certaine years after that cruell massacre, and vrged in conscience with a remorse of that mischiefe, whereof hee had partly beene the cause, and sorrie before his death hee could not execute open punishment vppon those that abusing his name and authoritie, had committed so horrible a mischiefe among his subiects of Prouence, expresly charged his sonne Henry, not to deferre that punishment, saying: that if he put it in obliuion, God wold bee reuenged thereof against him, and that their memorie would remaine in horrour and execration vnto all straungers, if the persons that had committed so notable a crime, should bee suffered to escape vnpunished. This clause expresly set downe within the Kings testament, aduanced the discredit on the Cardinall of Tournon, and put Grignan and la Garde in great paine: but to conclude, they had more feare then hurt, for the king by his letters patents of the 17. of March, 5549. caused the matter to bee heard by the Court of Parliament in
Parris, where Menier and three others his companions, appeared in person, the rest of the Councellors by their Atturneyes. And there, after long proces, in stead of punishment, one man onely, called
Guerin, a Councellor, lesse culpable then the rest, was hanged in Parris: Menier, principal of that massacre escaped, and falling out of his wits died, beeing ceased with a secret fire within his bodie, in the open sight and knowledge of all the countrie of
Prouence. The rest of the matter vanished (as it were in a smoke) before the sight of men: but God made both the king, his Councell, and all his Realme, to know and well perceiue, that the blood of so many innocent persons, and others that were put to death, both before and after that time, for the confessio^ of the Gospell, is most precious in his sight: as the things that happened and fell out in the yeares ensuing haue well declared, which we must in order set downe, as time and place shall serue.

The death of Margaret Queene of Nauarre. The same year in the month of December, did Margaret de Orleans, Queen of Nauarre, sister to king Francis the first, a most noble and famous Princesse, and of as notable a spirit, as any that liued in her time.
In the beginning of this year, the king suppressed and abolished the imposition of salt, in the countrie of Guyenne, with all the officers that had the execution thereof, for the summe of
450000. frankes, with the countries of of Poicton, Saintonge, Angoulmois, Perigort, high and lowe Limosin, and high and lowe
Marthe, should pay vnto him, with 25000. frankes to the officers for their charges. Touching those of Bourdeaux, in the month of October before, they had procured and obtained a general pardon, vpo^ condition, that they and their successors, shuld alwaies keep two ships furnished for the wars, readie to put to sea, and to serue vnder whomsoeuer it should please the king to commaund, and to receiue into the Castles of Trompette and du Ha, such garrison, as the king should send into them, and to victuall them with all sorts of victualls, which they should yearely furnish and renue, taking away the olde. And therevpon, in the moneth of Ianuarie after, the king reestablished the parlement, and their Towne was reduced into the former estate, they that had beene beaten making the amends.
Three Presidents in Parris displaced, and after reestablished, onely Liset.At that time, three Presidents of Parris, not well thought of, by the house of
Guise, as then beeing in great credit, were displaced out of their offices: but not long after, S. Andre, and Minard, hauing promised to become good seruitors, were restored againe. Liset was made Abbot of S. Victor, that an other of lesse iudgement then himselfe, might haue his place. And so hee tooke vppon him to deale in matters of diuinitie, wherein hee sped so hardly, and of a good practition, hee became so ignoranta sophister, that falling in a great laughter, hee was suddainly taken with a disease and so died. Hee shewed himselfe a sworne and perpetual enemie to those of the religion, thinking to aduance himselfe by cruell inuentions: but hee was cut off by the way: thereby seruing for an example, to many better men then himselfe, not to bandie against him vho is able to surprise and intrappe the subtillest in their fond inuentions, and against whom the wisedome and force of man, is nothing but meere beastlinesse and vanitie.
Remedies for false and clipt mony.This yeare because that most of the mony in France was found to be clipped, by the kings edict, al such mony was commaunded to bee cut in peeces and molten, and many of that occupation, among the which were diuers quoyners executed.
Bullen restored to the King.In the monthes of Februarie and March, a peace was agreed vppon, betweene the kings of
England and France, wherevpon the 25. of Aprill insuing,
Bullen was deliuered into the hands of the king of France, who made his entrie into it vpon the 25. of May after.
About that time died Claude de Lorraine, first Duke of Guise, and Iohn Cardinall of Lorraine, both beeing poysoned, with Humieres, the Cardinall of Amboise, and Iohn of Caracciol, Prince of Melphe, Lieftenant generall for the King in Piedemont, and Marshall of France, after whom succeeded Charles de Cosse, Barron de Brissac, in his time a most valiant Captaine. Now wee enter into warres,Occasion of warres begun betweene France and Spaine. as hotly begunne, as euer they were, betweene the Frenchmen and the Spaniards. The king from time to time casting his eyes vppon the Duchie of Millan, and withall, remembring the titles therevnto pretended, by the house of Orleans, wherevnto they neuer renounced, beeing no lesse sorrie for that which had happened in
Plaisance, in regard of Pierre Louis, sonne to Pope
Paul Fernese, who therin had been slaine by his houshold-seruants. For besides that, the report went, that it had been done and practised by the subtill meanes of Ferdinand de Gonzague, Lieftenant for the Emperour in Lombardie, thereby to aduance his maisters affaires, he had ceased vppon Plaisance. The Pope desirous to reuenge himselfe, and hauing not an arme as strong as his heart, had sent Camille Vrsin to keepe and defend Parma, and accepted the offer by the king, in ayde vnto him: which was to receiue the familie of Farneses, and al their lands and goods into his protection. The Pope had giuen Parma vnto his Nephew
Octauian, who not long after was inuested therewith by
Iulius, the third successour vnto Paul: but the Emperour pretending, that the Title of protector, belonged better to him, then to the King, that had nothing to doo in Italie: and perceiuing that accord between the king and the Pope, to be as a thorne within his foote, determined to assure himselfe of Parma, and wrought in such maner, that Pope Iulius abandoned his vassall Octauian, that had espoused the Emperours Bastard-daughter. Octauian repaired to the king, that named himselfe Protector of the lands of the Church, and of the Ferneses: and Pope Iulius being solicited to take order therein, made no account thereof, wherevppon the king determined to ayde Octauian: and not long after Gonzague besieged Parma, which caused the king to commaund the Marishall of Brissac, his Lieftenant in Peidemont, to fortifie and strengthen Mirandole, but Gonzague hauing discouered the enterprise, surprised the Soldiours that Marshiall Brissac sent thither, and caused them to stay. On the other side, the Pope began to threaten the king, because hee had receiued Octauian into his protection, and said he would excommunicate him, and all the Realme of
France. To coole the Popes chollor, the king expresly forbadde all his subiects, not to carrie any mony to Rome, neyther yet to go thither for any cause whatsoeuer: ordaining the Metropolitans of his Realme, to supply their default therein, vntill further order should bee taken. This was no small blowe vnto the Court of Rome: and surely if the king had still continued in that mind, the Popes had neuer pilled
France in such maner, as afterward they did, but thereby they had beene taught to become wise. Which had surely beene a beginning of reformation throughout Christendome: but it being grounded onely vppon temporall considerations and commodities, it proceeded to no good end.
Octauian was declared a rebell vnto the Sea of Rome, and presently war was proclaimed against him: Gonzague entering by armes into the territories of Parma.
Beginning of warres beyond the Mountaines.On the other side, the king dispatched newe forces into
Piedemont, commaunding the Marshall of Brissac to ayde those of Parma, and Mirandole. From whence proceeded the taking of Quiers, S. Damian, with certaine Forts and Castles in the Marquisall of Montferrat. Whereby Gonzague was constrained to leaue Parma, to defend the Millannois. At that time the Emperour found himselfe much busied with many important affaires, hauing to doo both with the king of Fance, the
Turkes, and Affrica, besides the troubles which as then were not fully ended in Almaine.
The Histories are very diuers, touching the breach of this peace, betweene the Emperour and the king: but it must bee vnderstood by this newe commotion, happened betweene two so puissant Princes, for asmall matter, as it outwardly appeared, that they sought some former quarrell, whereinto both of them most willingly entred, vnder pretence of their new warre, for Parma: but aboue all things, the iust iudgement of God minding to scourge Christendome, as then filled with all disorders, and culpable of greeuous crimes, was the onely cause thereof.
Preparation for warres in Picardie.In the beginning of the yeare 1551. Marie, Queene of Hungaria, sister to the Emperour, and Gouernour in the lowe Countries, made great preparations for warres, both by sea and land. And vnderstanding that the Marshall de S. Andre, was readie to sayle into England, to beare the order of France, vnto Edward king of England, sent certaine shippes to lye betweene Douer and
Calis, to take the Marshal, who taking shippe at Deepe, held an other course, and so performed his voyage. And for his securitie, hee caused certaine Flemish shippes to bee stayed at
Deepe, which were presently released assoone as they vnderstood of his arriuall in England.
On the other side, Queene Marie caused an arest to be made of all French Marchants shippes, that as then were in any Port within the lowe Countries, wherewith diuers Marchants were not very well pleased, by reason of the disorders and losses, that commonly happen by such arrests. Monsieur de Villebon, minding to refresh Turouenne, wherein hee commaunded, with new victuals.
Monsieur du Reux, a great aduersarie to France, sent certaine Souldiours to lye in Ambuscado, and to impeach that enterprise, but in the end hee was constrained to retire, without effecting that they went for. Irons in this sort beeing heated, commaundement was giuen to the Ambassadors on both parts to depart. The Queene of Hungaria stayed the Ambassadour of France prisoner in a certaine Castle, with a great guard, where hee stayed for a time.
The kings proceedings towards the Pope, the Emperour, and the Councell of Trent.But before further proceeding vnto warres, the king sent Monsieur de Termes to Pope Iulius, to excuse himselfe, in respect of that which he had done in the behalf of
Octauian Fernese: hee likewise shewed vnto the Emperour, what reason mooued him to take armes, and sent the Abbot of
Bellosanne, to signifie vnto the councel of Trent, that hee could not send the Bishops of his Realme vnto such a Councell, neyther yet esteeme that assembly to bee a generall Councell, that they should respect the animositie of the Pope, against the Realme of
France, and the eldest sonne of the Church: and therefore that they should not finde it straunge, if hee seemed not to shewe obedience to that assembly, not made for the common benefite of Christendome, but onely for the particular profit and commoditie of some speciall men: not that thereby hee pretended to leaue or forsake papisticall religion, but protesting onely to doo it, that hee might not bee surprised, by such as vnder pretence of religion, and reformation of abuses, sought to imbase his kingly estate and dignitie, which hee hoped to impeach by all iust and reasonable meanes that possible he might.An edict against small dates, and other abuses in the Court of Rome.
After this protestation, hee published an edict made the yeare before, touching the obtaining of Benefices: against the deceites of pettie dates, and other abuses vsed the Court of Rome, and also touching the auncient arrests and edicts, made against Annates, and abuses of reseruations and exactions inuented by the Popes: forbidding his subiects not to go to Rome for Annates, nor any other occasions touching or concerning Benefices, appoynting them to bee disposed and ordered by the ordinaries: certifying into all places, what wrong Pope Iulius did, both to him, and to Octauian Fernese, Duke of Parma, whom hee depriued of the place wherein hee had beene solemnly inuested.

The Cardinals and others of the Popes creatures in
France, fearing least this edict (whervpon Charles de Moulin a Councel of great vnderstanding, wrote a most learned Co^mentary, in the which he discouered many terrible practises in
Rome) wold giue a hard push vnto the Papasie, with earnest sute, procured the King to publish and ordaine, farre straighter and seuerer edicts, then euer he did against the religion: to the end that Iules and the Cardinals on ye other side of the mountaines, might assure themselues of him to bee their friend, as long as they seemed to agree with him. Those ordinances were followed by diuers cruell and terrible executions in many places of the Realme, against great numbers of the religion that were burned for most boldly confessing the truth of the Gospell, reiecting mans traditions induced and brought into the Church and seruice of God. Those that were assembled at Trent, wrote vnto the king, to induce him to accept and allow the decrees of their councell, and to send the Bishops of his Realme vnto them, as also to intreate him to be a meanes vnto the Switzers, to send thither likewise: but warre beeing open in all places, and the Emperour hauing sent for the Spaniards that were in Almaine, to make warre in Italie against
Parma, the pursuit of the Councell of Trent, hung still vpon the field.
Preparation for warre in Lorraine.Warres in this sort beeing kindled, the King determined to assure himselfe of Lorraine, beeing in some suspition of the Dutches, that as then was Dowagar, and hauing sent certaine companies into the frontiers, the Emperour also strengthened all his fortes and places, the one beholding the other with seuerall intents, whereof in time the effects appeared.
The Princes of Almaine take counsel, to deliuer themselues from seruitude.Because the Emperor proceeced with the Almaine Prince, in such sort as seemed inconuenient, they not being acquainted with any such kinde of seruitude, much lesse to bee in subiection of the Spaniards, perceiuing that the King made preparation to set vpon the Emperour, esteemed it a most fit and good occasion, for them to serue their turnes, which King
Henry of France, thereby to abash the Emperour
Charles, and so to procure the meanes of better and more friendly vsage towardes them on his behalfe, or else wholly to leaue them. And therevppon entred into secret conference with the King, to beseech him, that it would please his Maiestie to imploy his meanes to procure the auncient libertie of the Germaines. He thinking to haue found an entrie and means to attaine vnto most high and hautie enterprises, thereby to abase the greatnesse and pride of his most glorious enemie, and by that meanes to erect the honour of France, willingly gaue eare vnto the
Almaines, and to the same end, about the beginning of the yeare, he sent the Bishop of Bayonne,Tho Kings letters to the Protestant Prince. vnto the Princes Electors, with letters importing many protestations, and offers of amitie, as also shewing and declaring the many and great wrongs by the Emperour done vnto the Princes and towne of Almaine, protesting that hee was fully resolued for their cause to imploy both his forces, and his person, to defend their rights and priuiledges, not exspecting any recompence, but onely honour, to haue thereby deserued the good will and liking of so puissant a countrie as that of Germaine. And therewith assuring them by the faith of a Prince, that his only intent and meaning was, to deliuer all the estates of Germaine from the oppressions of the Emperour and his Spaniards, which hee likewise meant to do, particularly in the behalf of his louing Cousin, Iohn Duke of
Saxon, and Philip, Lant-graue of Hessen, as then detained and kept in miserable seruitude by the Emperor, contrary to his oath and promise. And in the end of the letter he added these words: We wil promise you likewise by the liuing God, and before all the Kings, Princes, and Potentates of Christendome, that our intent is not in any sort whatsoeuer, to permit that either you in generall, or any of you in particular, of what estate or condition soeuer he bee, shall suffer or endure any wrong or iniurie, and much lesse will wee (that beare the name of most Christian king) permit that any damage or hurt shall be offered or committed, either to the persons or goods of your most reuerend Prelates, Abbots, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, as our aduersries haue most wrongfully giuen foorth, but rather meane to take and receiue you into our protection and sauegarde, so you will acknowledge it both vnto vs, and to our allies, and therein certifie vs of your whole and full intents: hoping for the good and revnion of the Churche, whiche is to bee expected by the recouerie of publique and auncient libertie, wherein GOD willing wee will imploye all our force and meanes whatsoeuer. Which most reuerend Prelates, most noble Princes, and other estates of the holie Empire, we thought good to certifie vnto you, to the ende you should not be ignoraunt of the cause of this our warres, whereby we meane to pursue the Emperor, both with fire and sword, and (although to our great disliking) to cut him off (as a putrified member) from the bodie of the Common-wealth, or at the least, constraine him from henceforth, from further molesting or troubling of your estate.
Effects contrary to words.While the king in this sort termed himselfe the Protector of Almaine, and defendor of the Countrey and nation of the holy Empire, giuing a great hope of the revnion of the Church, his Officers in many places of the realme, burnt such as they called Lutherians, and that agreed and consented to the doctrine holden and beleeued by most of the Princes and Townes of
Almaine, open enemies to the traditions and ceremonies of the Pope. On the other side, he made great preparations for a voyage into
Almaine, whereby hee shewed as if hee woulde haue driuen the Emperour and all his adherents out of those Countries: And minding to goe thither in person, in the moneth of March, he being in the Court of Parliament in Parris, named and ordained Catherin de Medicis his wife, Regent of the Realme,The first Regency of Catherin de Medicis. making many Edicts concerning pollitique Gouernment, the ordering of Souldiers, and the obseruation of military discipline, thereby reforming both the abuse of the Leaders, and the insolency of the souldiers: so that as then you might haue seene both good and commendable orders among all the souldiers, as well on this side as beyond the Mountaines. France likewise abounded with Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and souldiers, well ordred and gouerned, in respect of that which after was seene in the time of Henry his sonne. The Constable Genenall of the army,A good order and pollicie among souldiers, but not long obserued. assisted by the Princes of the bloud, and other Noblemen of France, marched towards
Victry, where the Army was to assemble, and besides the newe and olde companies of French souldiers, there came twentie of the olde companies of Piedemont, such as might compare both with the Phalangees of the Macedonians, and the auncient Romanes, those of Gascoigne seconded them, the companies of Monsieur de Duras, for the most part beeing composed of Gentlemen and olde Souldiers, euerie man able to commaunde. Of all this Infantery, next to the Admirall, Monsieur Chastillon was Coronell, besides 10000. Lansquenets in twentie Companies, and diuided into two Regiments, conducted by Recrod and
Rhingraue their Coronels: with a great number of horsemen sent vnto the king, by the Protestant Princes, vnder the conduct of Coronell
Chartel.

The French horsemen (whereof Claude de Lorraine, Duke of d'Aumalle yongest sonne of the house of Guise, was Leader) were 1500. men of armes, euery man hauing two Archers with him, all made 4500. horses, 2000. light-horse, and as many caliuers on horse-backe. Of voluntarie souldiers, both Gentlemen and others, there were so great numbers, that all the countrie was couered with horses: but now wee must see what all these troupes effected.
The Duke and the countrie of Lorraine, put into the kings hands.The Constable beeing neere to Thoul, Chrestienne, Duches Dowager of Lorraine, came vnto the king, byding at Ginuille, there to excuse her selfe of the suspitions imposed vpon her, because the Emperour was her near kinsman, and considering the tempest that as then threatned
Lorraine, shee committed her selfe, and Charles her sonne, into the protection of the king, who sent the young Prince vnto the
Dauphin his sonne, where hee was brought vppe, and after married a daughter of France.
Meane time, Thoul yeelded vnto the Constable: which done, he parlied with the Towne of Metz, an imperiall and faire Cittie: they offered to serue the armie with victuals for their mony: and to permitte the king with all his Princes, free passage through the Towne, as at other times they had done vnto the Emperour: but the Constable hauing partly perswaded them by promises, and then vsing some threatnings,Metz an imperiall Towne, surprised and brought vnder the French king. in great chollor, said vnto the^: that the king wold haue a passage, and repassage through their Towne, without any conditions, and that it were best for them, not to hazard the contrary, if they minded to obtaine the kings good will and fauour, without the hurt and discommoditie of his armie.
Those of Metz would gladly haue resisted, both by word and deed, but not hauing in time prouided for themselues, they were constrained to bid their libertie farewell, and to open their gates to two companies of foote, which drewe so long a tayle after them, that in fine, all meanes of resistance was wholly taken from them, for that all the valiantest sousdiers in France were there in person: and vppon the 10. of Aprill, the Constable accompanied with diuers Princes and great Lords, stayed the comming of the king, who within eight daies after, made his entrie into the Towne, with all his armie, where he stayed three daies to take order for their affaires, receiued oath and fidelitie of the Cittizens: he likewise swearing both to them, and those of Thoul, to defend them against all men, and to preserue their rights and priuiledges, and franchises in al things whatsoeuer: also to prouide for the strength and fortification of (...) place, which as then hee fully pretended to make one of the principall bullwarkes and Frontier-townes of France, wherein hee left as Gouernour,
Monsieur de Gonnort, brother to the Marshal de Brissac, giuing him in charge to looke vnto the citadell, and other fortifications of the Towne.
The French armie goeth towards Strasbourg.Metz yeelded to the king, the armie beeing composed of 30000. men, marched into Almaine, and in the beginning of May, stayed two daies vppon the plaine of Sauerne: the horsemen going within a myle of the towne of Strasbourg, the Cittizens whereof, being taught by the misfortune of Metz, wroght with more pollicie for themselues: sending certaine victuals vnto the armie, wherewith the Constable seemed not well content, thinking to put them in some feare, and assoone as Pierre Sturne, Goteshem, and
Sleidam, their Deputies, were departed, hee sent two Gentlemen to the Councell of the Towne, to knowe their aunswere, where, in a long time and eloquent discourse, they shewed The Constables proceedings with those of Strasbourg.the kings good will and meaning vnto the countrie of
Almaine, the causes why hee had raised an armie, and beene at so great charges, requiring that the souldiers might enter into the Towne, to buy such necessaries as they wanted: but the Councell of the Towne vsing delayes, the next day the Constable vsed many speeches vnto the Deputies, threatning them very hardly.
But whatsoeuer hee said, it little auayled, for those of
Strasbourg put a strong Garrison into their Towne, preparing themselues vnto resistance, if any pretence were offered: meane time, not refusing to furnish the campe with victuals, and all other necessaries whatsoeuer: but the armie dooing nothing, marched towards Hagenaw, and VVisbourg, where the Deputies of three of the Electors next adioyning, as also of other Princes,The request of the Almaine Princes to the king. came to beseech the King, to pitie the poore pesants, to impeach the spoyle of the countrie, and not to passe any further, but rather to hearken vnto a peace, without pressing them to a perpetuall alliance, considering their bounden duties vnto the Emperour, withal, making a specially request for the sauegard of the territories of Strasbourg.
Letters of Duke Maurice.At the same time beeing the eleuenth of May, Duke Maurice, Elector of
Saxon, sent letters vnto the King, conteining the effect of the treatie made at Lints, wherein a peace had beene propounded, which the Emperour seemed to hearken vnto, concerning Almaine, desiring the King (if his meaning were to bee comprehended heerein,) to declare and shewe vppon what conditions hee intended to compound, and make agreement with the Emperour.The kings answere to the Princes
The King perceiuing, that by meanes of his great armie, the Protestant Princes had brought the Emperour to some reason: and on the other side, vnderstanding that the Queene of Hungary with her forces, was entered into the field, left the Almaines, and at his departure, made aunswere vnto the Princes, that he contented himselfe, to be esteemed the cause whereby the Princes that were prisoners, should shortly bee deliuered, and the countrie of Almaine, enioy a happy peace: and that, if thereafter it should haue cause to vse his helpe, hee would not spare what meanes soeuer hee had, to doo them good.
Meane time, the armie fedde vppon the poore pesants, and the country belonging to those of Strasbourg (that stood vpon their guard) was nothing spared. The Leaders notwithstanding repressing the insolencie of the Souldiers, as much as possibly they might, but in so great a multitude it is impossible, that some disorder should not bee committed.The meeting at Passau, where the French Ambassadour was present.
Duke Maurice hauing driuen the Emperor out of
Almaine, and thereby procured an assembly and meeting to bee holden at Passau, there to take order touching the reducing of the Countrie of Almaine into her an^^er
(...), Ambassadours for the Emperour, the Electors, and diuers
^^aces of Germanie met togither.
Where the Bishop of Bayonne, Ambassadour for the King, fayled not to come and vpon the 3. of Iune, in a learned Oration, he shewed the ancient and long coniunction of the countries of
Almaine and France: the affectio^ that the
His Oration.king bare vnto the Empire, as then hardly and euill gouerned by the Spaniards and their adherents, finding it good for the Protestant-Princes, to agree and make an accord with the Emperour, so the prisoners might be deliuered, the ancient alliance of France, with the Empire, and the last capitilation made with the Princes, ratified and confirmed, that the Emperour should do him reason, and that his whole desire was, to consent and agree with them all, and particularly with Duke Mauris: the answere thervnto, was composed with many thankes and declarations, couched in such sort, that neither the Emperour nor the king,Their answere. could in any sort bee discontent therewith. Touching the renuing of auncient alliances, they said, that a matter of so great waight and importance, required great and more ample assembly: meane time, they desired that the amitie alwaies holden and continued between the two nations, might stil remaine in force, and that the controuersies betweene the Emperour and the king, might bee appeased: promising therein to imploy all meanes possible: meane time, they desired the king to shew what wrong he could pretend had beene in any sort offered vnto him by the Emperour, to whom they would not faile to write, that thereby some end and finall agreement might be made.
VVarres in the Duchy of Luxenbourg, with diuers exployts, spotles, and pilling of places.During this assembly, the Queene of Hungary hauing commaunded the Marshall of Cleueland, to enter into the Duchy of Luxenberg, with an armie of 3000. foote, and 600. horse, caused them to ioyne with the companies of the lowe countries, in such sort, that their armie being compassed of 12000. foote, and 3000. horse, beganne to worke many exployts, and hauing taken Stenay vppon Meuse, a small Towne belonging to the Duchie of Lorraine, they enterprised against other places, but not to any effect, onely that they burnt certaine villages and small hamblets, but the kings armie approaching, they beganne to retire, which made the Councell to determine vpon the conquest of the Duchie of Luxenbourg, wherewith they first set vppon a strong Castle called Roc de Mars, which was presently taken and spoyled. The like was done to Mont S. Iohn, Solieure, and other places. The Emperours, and the kings forces, skirmishing before
Thionuille, and the armie passing by it, made towards
d'Auuille, which beeing battered, and yeelded vnto the king, the Captaines were kept prisoners, and the Souldiers suffered to depart without armes, onely a white sticke in their hands. Iuoy was likewise battered, and after yeelded vpon the like condition. The Gouernour beeing sent prisoner vnto Parris, all the spoyle was giuen vnto the Constable, who distributed the greatest part thereof among his troupes, and particularly to that of his eldest sonne: whereat the Souldiours of the olde companies began to mutinie: next Iuoy, they tooke
Monmedy, and while they were imployed therein, the Marshall
Sedan, heire vnto the house la Marshe, obtained certaine companies of the King, wherewith hee recouered the Towne and Castle of
Bouillon, with all the places depending and belonging to the Duchie:VVinning of the Duchy of Bouillon. which done, the Castles of Lumes, Treton, Glaion, and others, were taken and ouerthrowne, and to please the olde Souldiers, they had the spoyle of
Cimay, a Towne and Castle belonging vnto the Duke
d'Arscot, giuen vnto them. Where the assieged hauing withdrawne themselues into the Castle, and desiring to make some composition, were myned vnder the gate, and other places of the Castle, by the great fury of the assailantes, (wholly famished and thirsting after spoyle,) wherevnto they ranne with so great haste, that some of their Matches fell into a certaine quantitie of powder,The Castle and Towne of Cimay burnt. whereby about sixe score of the most forwardest of them were burnt and blowne vp into the aire, and to conclude, the fury of warre burnt both the Towne and Castle, but because the Army began to diminish, and to weaken, some being laden with spoyle, and the greatest part sicke and not well at ease, about the ende of Iuly, such as were left, were placed in Garrisons, there to attend the Emperors resolution, who hauing to do both with the Protestant Princes and the King, determined to agree and compound with the Princes, by their meanes to aide himselfe against the King: and vpon the last of Iuly, he made and concluded a peace with Almaine,Peace in Almaine. to beginne his warres with France. The King was much moued at that agreement: yet he discharged the Hostages of Duke
Maurice, who likewise released his, beeing the Earles of
Nantueil and Iametz.
The Emperours enterprises for the recouery of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun.After this appointment with the Almaines, the Emperor vsed such means that the Princes and Townes of
Almaine, by litle and litle agreed to furnish him with men, money, and Artillery, therewith to driue the King out of Metz, Thoul, and
Verdum, imperiall Townes: to the which ende, he gathered an Armie of
50000. foote, and 20000. horse, with a great number of Artillery, and while he was preparing this armie, Albert Marquesse of
Brandenburge, who in the Kings name had made most cruell warre vpon many Townes and Bishopprickes in Almaine, being secretly reconciled vnto the Emperour, hauing to the number of 2000. horse, and 8000. foote, with certaine artillery, approched the Frontiers of
Luxembourge, and of Lorraine, where for a long time he helde the King in hope, to follow the warres for him, and all that time his troupes ouerranne the plaine country, and there forraged themselues after most strange maner: but in the ende, he found the meanes to withdraw himselfe from the Kings armie, and hauing impeached those of Metz from victualls, he departed with all his troupes.
Difficultie of the siege of Mets.Winter approaching, many were of opinion that the Emperour would not hazard so puissant an armie, as he then had, vnprofitably to fight and striue against the colde and the Ice, and by that meanes, constraine it of it selfe to be dispearsed, and miserably ouerthrowne. But the hope he had to recouer the Towne of Metz, wherein were many Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, caused him to reiect all other apprehensions whatsoeuer, in such sort, that his Forces began to marche and set forward towards the countrey of Lorraine: meane time, the Duke de Neuers fortified Stenay, and constrained the Burgonian Garrison of Vireton, to yeeld themselues to him. A company of the old bandes being in Roc de Mars, were drawne from thence: Those that commaunded in Verdun, Iuoy, Danuille, and Monmedy, strengthened themselues, and made prouision for their owne defence: not long after, the Emperour came to Sarbruch,The Emperors approach a Towne lying within seuen myles of the Citie of
Metz, from whence hee sent the Duke of Alue, his Lieftenant General, and the Marquesse of Marignan, with 4000. foote, 4000. horse, and sixe field peeces, vnto the Towne to view it, and to chuse the most commodious places wherein to lodge his men about it. The Duke of
Guise being Lieftenant Generall for the King within the Towne, caused certaine troupes to issue forth, that skirmished with the Emperours Forces,A skirmish. wherein the Duke of
Alue lost aboue 150. men: on the French part, there was fiue souldiers slaine, and one Gentleman of Picardie, named
Marigni, and two Captaines hurt, that died not long after.
The King being at Rheims, was aduertised by the Duke
d'Aumalle, touching The Marquesse of Brandebourg ouerthroweth the Duke d'Aumalle, and taketh him prisoner.the practises of the Marques of Brandebourg, with the Emperour, and required to send some forces of 200. men of armes, with whose helpe, and the rest of his troupes, he said he doubted not, but easilie to ouerthrow the Marques: to the which end, Monsisur de Bourdillon was sent thither, but the Duke for that time sent him backe again: esteeming that ye Marques as then hauing past the Meuse, ment to ioyne with the Emperours armie: but about the end of October, the Duke beeing aduertised that the Marques beganne to dislodge, placed himselfe in order of battell, with al his horsemen, vpon a plaine called la Croix du Monstier, to see what way the Marques held, who hauing intelligence that the countrie people, and certaine Frenchmen, skirmished and spoyled some of his footemen: would himselfe in person go to see what they were, and went so neare, that his Interpreter was slaine with a caliuer, standing close by him, who therewith re^urning in great chollor, appoynted his horseme^ to aduance themselues, and to set vpon the enemie: and so in great furie charged the Dukes companies, who as then thought to retire. At the first onset, the Marques set vpon a great troup of Pages, and others that were placed there to make a shewe, who were presently dispearsed. The second charge was made vpon a squadron of Light-horse and Argolets, who in a manner made no resistance, and so all the strength fell vppon the Lanciers, who presently by the Rutters Pistols, were forced to retire, beeing ill prouided of Lances to make resistance. The Duke perceiuing his horsemen to bee disranked, and flying to saue themselues, and the Marques at hand-blowes with diuers of his Leaders, rancked himselfe in order againe, with some fewe of his men, and entered into the skirmish, where his principall Gentlemen hauing beene slaine before his eyes, the rest hurt, beaten downe, and taken prisoners, and all his men put to flight and chased, himselfe beeing hurt in two places, and his horse slaine vnder him, in the end was taken prisoner, and all his company in a maner ouerthrowne. The Vicount of Rohan, slaine by them that tooke him, and many Cornets, Captaines, and Gentlemen, to the number of two hundreth and more, slaine in the field: the number of the prisoners beeing many more, this Josse of so many Gentlemen, was a mends for the happie successe, which the king had about a month after, against the Emperour.
The Marques beeing victorious, sent the Duke
d'Aumalle his prisoner, into Almaine, for whom afterward hee got 50000. Crownes for a ransome, which the king payed, at the instant request of the Duches de Valentinois, mother in lawe vnto the prisoner: which done, he went vnto the Emperour, as then beeing before
Metz with all his campe, at the same time. The Counte de Reux, Lieftenant generall for the Emperour in the lowe Countries, entred into Picardie with a great armie,Taking of the towne and Castle of Hesdin from the King, and the spoyling of Picardie by the Emperours armie. where hee burnt Noyon, Nesse, Chauni, Roye, and the pleasant Castle of Foulenbray, with more then
800. Villages: which done, he besieged Hesdin, the Towne beeing taken, they inclosed the Castle, hauing beaten downe a great Tower that stood on the Parke side, and caused a great peece of a wall to bee vndermined, filling the ditches with the rubbish therof, which serued the assaulters for a bridge to passe ouer, to make the assault, wherewith the defendants were striken in such feare, that without further resistance, they yeelded the Castle, vpon condition to depart, their liues and goods saued.
A gentleman named Monsieur de Rasse, who as then commanded in the Castle, in fauour of the Constable, made that composition: but if his maister had not intreated for him, it had cost him his life, because hee neuer defended himselfe, and not long before had sent word vnto the King, that hee doubted not the Castle. But for the same cause hee was sent home vnto his owne house, and neuer after imployed in the warres.
Resolution of the assieged within the Towne of Metz.The king hauing receiued that second losse, wrote vnto the Duke de Guise, to knowe in what disposition he found himselfe to bee within the Towne of Metz. The Duke sent him aunswere, whereof the effects prooued correspondent with his words, and with all certified him, of the order holden by the Emperour in his campe. When the king perceiued himselfe to bee secured on that side, hee left the Duke de Neuers, for Generall of his armie in Lorraine, made
Monsieur de Chastillon, Admirall of France, and his Lieftenant in Picardie, in place of Monsieur d'Annebaut, not long before dead within la Fere.
The Admiral de Chastillon presently went to
Hesdin, and the companies of the Duke de Neuers, beganne to trouble the Emperors armie, by surprising their victuals: great pittie it was to beholde, what miserie the souldiers at that time endured, by reason of the winter. The Italians left the Emperours campe, constrained to do it by force of colde and famine, and went vnto the Duke, to bee imployed vnder the king,The state of the Emperours armie before Metz. and while the Duke d'Alue vsed all the meanes hee could to place his batterie, those within Metz made many assaults, sometime on horse-backe, sometimes on foote, to the great discommoditie and losse of the Emperours campe, much abashed at the boldnesse and valour of the Frenchmen, who at that time did many straunge and vnaccustomed actions: as entering so farre into the campe, that they set vpon the Artillerie: ranne into the enemies Tents, and in small troupes neuer ceased to giue alarmes vnto the Emperours campe. About the 20. of Nouember,Valour of the assieged. Batterie. the batterie beganne to playe vpon the Towne in three seueral places: and the 26. of the same moneth, the walles of the Towne were battered with 40. great Peeces, that shot both night and day without ceasing, but onely to refresh them: beeing one of the most furious batteries, that euer was seene at any time. The assieged, not only Princes and Lords, but euery man whatsoeuer, carried earth to make rampiers, by which their diligence, they no lesse abashed the Emperours campe, then by their valour.
Hesdin take^ by the Frenchmen from the Emperour.The French armie conducted by the Admirall de Chastillon, entering into Picardie, where the Duke de Vandosme commanded as Lieftenant for the king, caused the Emperours armie conducted by the Counte de Reux, to withdrawe themselues from thence, who left his sonne with a strong Garrison within the Castle of
Hesdin, which beeing assieged vpon the 17. of December, and furiously battered with 4066. cannon shots, without any reasonable breach: feare so much ceased vpon the assieged, that the next day after they yeelded themselues, with liues and goods saued. On the other side, the Duke de Neuers continued his course, molesting the Emperours armie, and by the conduct of Monsieur de Mouy, cut off a great Conuoy of victuals and munitions from them, without the losse of any man: wherein Mouy obtained great honour, by hauing aduanced himselfe so farre, and brauely returned from among a great company of the enemies, without leauing one man behinde him, and yet bereauing them of a great reliefe.

The Emperour retrait and raysing of his campe from Metz, to the great honour of the assieged.Touching the Emperour, his batteries beeing spent in vaine, and his Mines, countermyned by the diligence and industrie of the assieged, that neuer ceased by sallies, and continuall charge, to molest, and dispearse his armie, wholly afflicted with cold and necessitie, about the
18. of December, hee caused the greatest cannons of his batterie to bee dismounted, with resolution to retire with honour and commoditie, wherevnto the Counte d'Aigremont, was imployed, to discouer, and to assure his passage. The Duke de Neuers prouided with great diligence for Thoul, thereby to shunne a surprise, and by diuers courties made the Emperour to make haste away, who being aduertised of the condition of Hesdin, perceiuing the dispotition of his armie, and his forces vsed against Metz, to take no effect, hauing lost a great number of men, and much treasure, and part of the reputation which before hee had obteyned. Vpon the fift of Ianuarie he beganne to retire, leauing all the charge vnto the Duke d'Alue, to seperate and retire his armie. Great pittie it was, to see and beholde the number of poore Souldiours, that as then were discharged and sent away, without any meanes to helpe themselues. The Duke d'Alue, and the Counte de Brabancon,The dislodging of the campe. with the most part of the armie, dislodged in great disorder, departing by night onely with two fiers for their guide, making no noyse, and without sounding of trumpet, drum, or fife, leauing their Tents standing, with some quantities of armour, barrells full of pouder, and great store of necessarie prouisions, part of the artillerie vnder ground, and many poore sicke men: whom the Duke of Guise and others, caused to bee friendly vsed and comforted: Vidasme de Chartres, set vpon the rereward of the Duke of d'Alues campe, where he ouerthrew a company of light horse, burnt great quantitie of pouder, and brought more persons then he desired, without any losse of his owne men. The rereward was left vnto the Marques of Brandebourge,The retrait of Albert Marques of Brandebourge. vppon whose campe many issues were made, but hee kept himselfe so close, and wrought in such manner, that he escaped safely away with all his troupes. Solemne prayers and thanksgiuings were yeelded vnto God, through all the Realme of France, for the happie successe of that great siege: specially the Duke of Guise caused a general procession to bee made within the Towne of Metz, where hee was accompanied by all the Princes and Lords, that had assisted at that siege:Deliuerie of Metz. as the Princes of
Anguien, the Counte Montpensier, and the Counte de la Rochesuryon, the Duke de Neuers, Horace Fernese, who not long after espoused Diane, Bastard-daughter to the king, Pierre Strossie, le Vidame de Chartres, Monsieurs de Montmorency, d'Anuille, de Gonnor, la Brosse, Lieftenant of the companie of the Duke of
Lorraine: la Rochefoucant, the Vicomtes de Turaine, and
de Martigues, Delangues, Entragues, de Biron, S. Remi, and others in great number: which done, hee went vnto the Court, leauing the gouernment of the Towne vnto la Gonnor, that commaunded in it before the siege.
Siege, batteries, assault, taking, and vtter destruction of the towne of Terouenne.About the end of the spring, the Emperour sent Monsieur de Binecourt, with a puissant armie to besiege the Towne of Terouenne, a very strong place, wherunto in great diligence, was sent Monsieur d'Esse: and with him Francis de Montmorency, eldest sonne vnto the Constable, with their companies, followed by diuers Lords, Gentlemen, and Souldiers. The Towne was most furiously battered, and the assieged sustained three assaults, such as neuer had been seene the like: where on both sides many men were slaine. On the French part were
slaine, Messieurs de Esse, de Vienne, de Beaudisne, de la Roche, Pose, de Blandi, and captaine
Ferrteres, with many Gentlemen and souldiers: after that, the Assaylants vsed great meanes to mine the walles, so that in the ende, by a mine very properly and promptly made, they filled the diche: which
Monsieur de Montmorency perceiuing, by aduise of all the Captaines, demanded a composition, but while they were in parley, the Almaines and Burgonians entred in diuers places, and began to kill all that they met: the Spaniards couetous of money, warranted many Gentlemen, and French souldiers: Monsieur de Ouerti, to saue the life of
Monsieur de Montmorency his Generall, was sore wounded, whereof not long after he died: which newes much pleased the Emperour, who therevppon caused the Towne to be rased to the ground.
And because the report went that Hesdin should be besieged, the Duke de Bouillon Marshall of France, vndertooke to defend the Castle, the Duke Horatio Fernese, the Counte de Villards, with diuers other Lords and Gentlemen, being assistants, with about 2000. souldiers, where they were presently inclosed by the Emperours army, whereof Emanuel Philebert Duke of
Sauoy, and Prince of Piedemont his Nephewe was Generall, which place hee battered more freely then at any other time it had bene, and mined in so many places, that it seemed readie to fall, by which meanes the Frenchmen were constrained to parle, and while they were vpon the point to make a composition, nothing rested but the signe: on the one side a Priest by misfortune hauing put fire vnto the artificiall works made within the Castle, therwith to defend the assalt, on the other side, the Burgonions that desired nothing but the spoile, hauing caused their mines to worke, part of the souldiers were burnt with those artificiall fires, and part blowne vp with the mynes, the rest remained at the mercy of the Emperours souldiers, that entred into the Castle. The Duke de Bouillon,Hesdin taken from the Frenchmen, and rased. charged the Prince of Piedemont with his promise, but he answered him and said, that there needed no Hostages to be giuen, seeing he found himselfe to be maister of the place: and by that means, the Duke with diuers others were taken prisoners, by whom the Prince gained a most great raunsome. The Castle was taken vpon the 18. day of Iuly, Duke
Horatio, the Vicount de Martigues, the Seneschal de Castres, and diuers Captaines and Gentlemen were slaine therein, which is the fortune of warre: but the Emperour caused it to be rased to the ground.
The ouerthrow of some of the Emperours forces, and the taking of the Duke of Arscot.After that, the French Armie being assembled by Amiens and Piquigny, about the
15. of August, there happened an encounter, wherein the Prince of
Conde had the leading of the light Horse, and with the same he brake into the Emperours troupes, beating and driuing them before him aboue a myle, slaying of them to the number of seuen or eight hundreth men: and tooke prisoners about fiue hundred, and among the rest the Duke of
Arscot, bearing away their Ensignes: which done, the Emperours Army retiring towards Arras, the kings Armie about the ende of August laie about Corbie: Wherein there was almost 7000. horse,
25. thousand foote, and aboue an hundreth peeces of Artillery both great and small. The Emperour determined to cause this great Armie either to consume of it selfe, or else at the siege of some Towne or Castle. But to the contrary, the king desired nothing but battell, and to effect his will, he approached neare to Cambray, and making towardes
Valenciennes, caused a certaine charge to be giuen, where the Frenche horse men had the better, and perceiuing that the Emperors Forces wold not hazard themselues, the king withdrew his Campe, sending the Marshall de S. Andre to ouerrunne the plaine countrie, belonging to the Counte of S. Paul, and about the ende of October, hee discharged a part of his armie, the rest were placed in Garrisons to passe the winter time.
 In the Spring, there the king made three armies: the first vnder the co^duct of the Prince de la Roche Suryon, in Vermandois, composed of tenne thousand foote, three hundreth launces,Three armies in France. and fiue or sixe hundreth Argoletiers in the second, marching towards
Crecy, conducted by the Constable: there was 25. Ensignes of Frenchmen, as many Suissers, two Regiments of Lansquenets, and two thousand horse, part light-horses, and part Argoletiers, with the rereward of France, and some English and Scottish horsemen. The third, conducted by the Duke de Neuers,Exployts of th^se three armies. was composed of twentie companies of Englishmen and Scots: two Regiments of Lansquenets, three hundreth launces, eight hundreth light-horse and Argoletiers, and two hundreth Almaine Pistoletiers: the first entered into Artois, where it made great spoyle, and burnt many places, that of the Duke de Neuers ouerranne
Ardennes, tooke the Castle of Orcimont by composition, destroyed and burnt great numbers of villages, and constrained the Garrison of the Castle of Beaurin, to yeeld by composition: and then entered into the countrie of Liege, hauing assured and opened the nauigation of the Meuse, by the taking of certaine little Castles, and strong Forts, that lye along by the riuer side: the Constables armie tooke Mariembourg, and fortified Rocroy. Issuing out of Ardennes, those of Dinam were sounded, to know if they would remaine as newter: but they made a most bolde and voluntary answere, accompanied with some Harquebush shot. Wherevpon the Herault, and Trompet of the Duke de Neuers, somoned them, and the Duke by force tooke the Castle of Agimont, in the beginning of Iulie, finding the Castles of Castelthierri, and Valuin, wholly abandoned and forsaken: which done, hee wanne Bouines by assault, wherein most of the Inhabitants were slaine, or executed to death, because they seemed to resist the kings armie. Dinam after some small resistance, yeelded it selfe, the Inhabitants hauing their liues saued, and the Towne not burnt, as that of Bouines, but wholly sacked. Therein happened a cruell skirmish betweene the Frenchmen and the Almaines, that would haue violated and forced certaine women and maides, taken within the church, which quarrell was ended by the king: the Castle not long after was taken by composition.An ouerthrowe of the Emperours forces. While these things were in this sort executed in the countrie of Liege, the Prince de la Roche Suryon being in Artois, ouerthrew two Cornets of the Emperours horsemen, whereof 200. of them were slaine, and the Cornets sent vnto the king: who vndersta^ding that the Prince of Piedemont assembled an armie, determining to fight, if the Spaniards would aduance themselues, purpased to passe the Sambre, which he effected: and being followed by the Duke de Neuers, he entered into the countrie of
Hainaut, about the 20. of Iuly, where he made a horrible spoyle: some of his troupes running to the subburbes of Neuelle, the frontier Towne of Brabant, wherein, with all the villages round about it, they set on fire, winning great spoyle: then the armie drew towards
Baius, one of the principall Townes in Hainaut, leauing nothing about it, but fire,The kings reuenge for the spoiles done in Picardie. smokes, ashes, and miserie, throughout all the plain countrie: a most lame^table tragedie between two so great Princes. The Frenchme^ being inca^ped about Baius, made greater fiers then euer they had done, burning all the castles and Gentleme^s places throghout the countrie. The goodly house of
Mariemo^t, belo^ging to the Q. of Hungarie was not forgotte^, neither yet the castle of Tragny. Baius beeing assayled vppon the 22. day of the same moneth, yeelded it selfe to the kings mercie, that caused it to be burnt in reuenge of the spoyle of
Foulembray, as also of the Townes and villages of
Picardie, that had beene burnt during his beeing in Almaine. They set fire likewise in an other goodly Castle belonging vnto the Queene of Hungarie, then in Reux, after that in
Bauets.
The armie being past beyond Monts, Hainaut, Landreei, Auanes, le Quesnoy, Vallenciennes, and Cambray, the Prince of
Piedemont vsed all the meanes hee could, to bee reuenged for those extreame losses, but could not effect it: the Frenchmen beeing strong, and well conducted, in the end, about the tenth of August, both the armies met neere vnto Renty, where there chanced an indifferent hard incounter on both their partes.Encounters of both the armies by Renty. The Emperour lost about 800. or 900. men, and the King two hundreth, after the which skirmish, winter opproaching, the king dismissed his armie, and that of the Emperour making towards
Hesdin, burnt and spoyled all the plaine countie, and therein had done much hurt, if the Duke de Vandosme, that laye not farre from thence, had not resisted him.
Continuance of warre.In spring time, the warre beganne againe betweene the two Princes, and the report of the courses made by the Emperours armie, gaue occasion to the Frenchmen, to enterprise vppon the Castle of
Cambresis, which was presently taken by assault, and good warre holden with the Spaniards. Maruembourg, was victualled by
Bourdillon, Lieftenant to the Duke de Neuers. The king and the Queene of England, intreated the Emperour, and the King of France, to make a peace, wherein Cardinall Pole, an Englishman,Vaine treatie of peace. trauelled much as then all flaming with fire, against those of the religion, who at that time were most sharply handled within the Realme of England.
This treatie of peace beganne with great bruit, but in fine, it vanished like smoke, and warre beganne againe stronger then euer it was. The Duke de Neuers, and the Admirall de Chastillon, beeing made Gouernours of Picardie, (because the Duke de Vandosme, as then king of Nauarre, and Soueraigne of
Bearc, by meanes of his wife, was gone to take possession of his new estates,) tooke good order both for the victualling and keeping of the places and frontiers of the countrie: notwithstanding, not long after, as some of the Garrisons of Picardie, marching with 1500. horses of the French rereward, called the companies of Nobilitie, and foure hundreth footemen, had in such sort ouerrunne the countrie, that in fine, they returned al laden with spoyles,The rereward of France ouer throwne. being ledde by la Iaille, their Generall.
Haulsmont Gouernour of Bapaulme, finding them inclosed betweene a Wood, a Village, and a Riuer, whereof hee caused the passages to bee broken downe and surely kept, without espials, order, feare of the enemie, or hurt: charged them so couragiously with a small company of men, that in short space, he made them loose both courage, bootie and liues, at his discretion: where la Iaille was hurt, aboue fiue hundreth taken prisoners, some escaped, and the rest slaine. Those of Hannuyers and Arcesiers men, much giuen to derision, made it a co^moniest, saying: that they had taken Nobles of France without waight: but to say the truth, there was as then but fewe Nobles in those troupes, onely certaine Wagoners and Pages that were imployed in the muster, and to make a shew, sent by Widdowes, and Orphanes of Gentlemen deceased: or by the Lords of certaine fief, rated at certaine values. To assure Picardie, the king went into Villiers Costerez, sending the Duke of Guise further vppon the frontiers, and the Admirall into the middle of the Prouince.
The estate of Predemo^t touching the warres betweene the Emperor and the king of France.Now I must shew you what was done in the warres of Piedemont, and other places beyond the Mountaines. The Marshall de Brissac, who the winter before had taken Iuree, and Bielle, in the spring time fortified
S. Iaco, tooke Crepacuore, and by means of Monsieur
Saluaison, by a surprise most brauely executed, got
Casal de Montferrat, a towne and Castle, and a place of great importa^ce, spoyled Poman, S. Saluadour, and other small places, not to bee holden, and hardly to bee strengthened and fortied in any conuenient time. The Duke of Alue hauing succeded
Gonzague, in the Gouernment of Lombardie, about the end of Iulie entered into the field, with 20000. foote, 4000. horse, and 40. cannons, and besieged S. Iaco, wherein were Captaines,
Birague, and Vimercat, who constrained the Duke to retire from Pont de Sture, where he fortified himselfe, hoping by famine to constraine such places to yeeld, as hee durst not besiege. The king sent foure thousand foote, and foure thousand horse, to strengthen Marshall de Brissacs forces,Taking and spoyling of Vulpian. who perceiuing himselfe so strong, besieged Vulpian, and by Kochepose ouerthrew the Dukes forces, sent to ayde them: by force tooke the basse Towne, and soone after, the Castle by composition was yeelded: Vulpian had the walles rased and beaten downe, and not long after, Mont-Coluo, a Towne and Castle yeelded vnto the Frenchmen.
These things were done in the moneths of September and October: not long afer, the Dukes troupes, by meanes of an Ambascado placed hard by Iucise, slewe and tooke certaine French souldiers, whereby they wrought some small reuenge, for their great losses at
Vulpian and Mont-Caluo.
A particular discourse of the warre of Siene, from the beginning to the end.Before I leaue the affaires beyond the Mountaines, it is necessarie I should say something touching the warres of Siene, that fell out and kindled in this yeare, beginning at the originall thereof. During the siege of Metz, the Emperour beeing ceased of Siene, an auncient and famous Towne in the territories of
Tuscane, placed Don Diego de Mendosse Gouernour therein, with a Garrison of Spaniards: Don Diego vsing rigor more therein then was conuenient, the Sienois not content therewith, beganne to conspire against him: hee vnder colour of fauouring the people, caused the Gentlemen to leaue their armes: which done, he beganne to molest both the one and the other, who consulting togither, sent vnto the king, to desire him to receiue them into his protection, which hee consented vnto.
The Fugitiues of of Sienie, in the kings name beganne to raise men throughout Italie, vnder the conduct of the counte
Petillane, Hieronyme de Pise, and Maire de Sainctefior. The Duke of Florence sent eight hundreth men to ayde
Mendosse. But the Sienois mooued at the newe extortions raised vppon them, let foure thousand men co^ducted by the Counte de Petillone enter into the towne, that draue out the Spaniards, but not without great losse on both parts, part of the Spaniards hauing saued themselues (without cannon) within the Iacopius, and in the
Citadell, were entred vppon by force, and put to the sword. Their Generall, and others of the Florentine Captaines, issued by composition, and ceased vpon Orbitelle, a place not farre from thence, which they fortified. The Emperour beeing returned into
Almaine, after the siege raised before Metz, commaunded
Don Garsie de Tolede, Viceroye of Naples, to ouerrunne the plaine countrie of Sienois, which he did with 12000. foote, and one thousand fiue hundreth horse: on the other side, the king sent Monsieur de Termes, that set good and strong Garrisons within all the places of the Segnerie of Siene, hauing as then vnder the kings pay, aboue twelue thousand foote, not accounting the naturall countrimen, sworne enemies vnto the Spaniards, but very fewe horsemen. And because the Emperours campe, conducted by the
Viceroy and Ascagne de la Corne, seemed to threaten
Siene, they fortified the Towne with al diligence. The Viceroy assailed Monselice, Montelle, and Montalein, where Monsieur de Termes tooke order, and maintained himselfe in good sort, vntill the king sent Pierre Strossi, with a great companie of men, and made him his Lieftenant Generall in Toscane. Strossi came to Siene, raised more Souldiers in Italie, whereof Duke Cosme beeing aduertised, solicited Pope Iulius and the Emperour, in such sort, that they ioyned with him to driue out the Frenchmen. To this end Iaques de Medicis, surnamed le Mediquin, Marquis de Marignan, hauing charge of the consederates armie: about the beginning of the yeare 1554. besieged Siene, and approaching it by night, had almost surprised it, by reason that as then the fortifications were not all finished, but the Sienois withstood him, and repulsed the Marques, who at that time lost many of his men, notwithstanding, hee left not off to incampe himselfe before the towne, and forraging the plaine countrie, directed a furious batterie, whereby in the end, hee reduced the Inhabitants to great extremitie, without the comming of
Strossi, who entering therein, presently tooke order for the rampars, and the reparation of the breaches, not hauing forgotten to furnish all the places about Siene, and because Rodolphus Baillon, Generall of the Emperours horses, and Ascagne de la Corne, had made an enterprise vppon Chiusi, Strossi by night went to meete them, with sixe hundreth men, and hauing taken them at an aduantage, put their troupes in disorder, slewe Baillon, and sent la Corne prisoner into France.
The king with all speede sent new forces into
Toscane, and the Ile of Corse, wherein Monsieur de Termes had taken the Townes of S. Florent, and S. Boniface, a Port of the sea, leauing good Garrison therin, vnder the charge of Iourdan Vrsin, with certaine Captaines, Frenchmen, and Gascous, for the defence of the Yland, part whereof as yet obeyed the
Geneuois, vppon whom being participants with the Emperour, Monsieur
de Termes had taken those Townes.
But to returne to Siene, the last secorers that the king sent thither, beeing of fiue thousand Switzers and
Gascons, with some light-horse: Strossi suddainly made a sallie with sixe thousand chosen footemen, and fiue hundreth good horse, and therewith tooke Montcatin, and Montcarlo, from the Duke of Florence, which hee fortified. The Marques of
Marignan, constrained to leaue the siege of Siene, to ayde the Duke, was in danger to bee wholly ouerthrowne, if Storssi had taken occasion when it was offered. But the Marques fortified with new ayde, Strosci was constrained to bring his wearied forces to breath themselues within Siene: meane time, Leon, Prior of
Capoue, and brother to Strossi, hauing not the meanes to staye for the French Nauie, ceased vpon certaine Geneuois shippes laden with corne, and hauing filled them with Souldiers, warred vppon the coast of Toscane, and to spoyle the Ports of the sea, belonging to the Duke of Florence. After that, hee went to lye before Scarlin, where approaching to viewe the place, he was stricken with a Harquebusshot, whereof hee died.
Strossi much greeued thereat, went to continue the siege, staying for the French ayde, which not long after being arriued, conducted by Monsieur de Monluc: Strossi made his armie, wherein he had sixe thousand Italians, two thousand Gascons, as many Switzers, two thousand fiue hundreth Lansquenets, and about a thousand horse: wherewith he determined to set vppon his enemies, if they would come foorth: and perceiuing that they withdrewe themselues from
Siene, he committed the custodie thereof, vnto Monsieur de Monluc, and went to batter Ciuitelle, lying in the territories of
Florence: to the ayde whereof, the Marques of Marignan made so great hast, that he had almost surprised the assaylants, where there was much blood spilt on both sides. Stressi constrained to discampe, besieged Foyan, a strong and very rich place, which the first day of his arriuall was taken by force: and Charlot Vrsin, with all the souldiers that kept it, put to the sword, and the Towne spoyled and burnt. The Marques hauing recouered certaine cannons, approached the armie of Strossi, that marched towards
Montpulcian, where the Italians began to forsake him, and by that means his forces were lesse then those of the Marques, which constrained him to retire:The battell and ouerthrow of Strossi, and the French armie in Toscan. but in stead of dooing it couertly, and by night, for the safetie of his troupes, he determined to march openly in the day time, and to saue his Artillerie, he sent it before him. Whereof the Marques being aduertised, with all speed pursued after him, and hauing ouertaken him in the field, betweene Martian, Lucignan, and Foyan, gaue him battell: where the fight was dangerous and bloodie, but Strossi hauing the lesse and weaker companie, the Frenchmen fled after Bighet, an Italian Ensigne, Coronel of the armie, that first saued himself, after that the horseme^ were dispersed. The Gascons and Switzers, that fought valiantly, were ouerthrowne by aduancing the^selues too farre among their enemies, and almost all their Leaders slaine in the field: the number of the slaine is diuersly reported, some said two thousand fiue hundreth, others foure thousand, besides many hurt, that liued not long after, and fiue or sixe hundreth prisoners. The Marques wrote vnto the Emperour, that all
Strossies footemen were slaine at that bartaile, but as then he forgot to pursue his victorie: which if hee had done, Strossi and all the Kings armie at that time had beene wholly ouerthrowne.
Strossi that had shewed maruellous prooses of his valour and noblenesse, saued himselfe in Montalcin, leauing
Foyan, that was presently taken by the Marques, as also
Martian, Lucignan, and other places, wherewith the Sienois meruellously abashed, were in mind to haue yeelded, had it not been for
Monluc, that assured them, and after did great seruice vnto the king, as also to the Towne. Bighet partly cause of the ouerthrowe of the armie, and the Counte d'Alte, that had cowardly yeelded vp
Lucignan, a most impregnable place, were beheaded. Presently after, the Duke solicited those of Siene to yeeld vnto the Emperour, and they about the end of Ianuary, in the yeare of our Lord 1554. answered him most brauely: but yet to vse so great and loftie words, they had need of better means of resistance: while these things were effected, Monsieur de Lanssac beeing gone on ambassage to
Rome, diuers articles were there drawne and set down, to end the troubles of Siene.
The Pope gaue charge to his Legats, that laye residents by the Emperour and the king, to bring them to an agreement, but nothing tooke effect, each of the^ seeming to haue right on his side, meane time, the differences touching religion began to increase: such as would not receiue and acknowledge the traditions of the Pope, were cruelly burnt. They suffered the Turke to win diuers places in Europe, and his Gallies as then came before Corse, to ayde the Frenchmen, were at the siege of Calui and Boniface among the Christians, and holpe to conquer the Island, and then returning homeward, spoyled the coast of Toscane, besieged Plombin, and the Ile of
Elbe, belonging to the Duke of Florence, and passing further, executed an infinit of mischieses vpon the realmes of Naples, Sicile, and Calabre, and so laden with great spoyles, and numbers of Christians their prisoners, they arriued in
Constantinople and other places, without any impeachment: so much, and so great, was the hatred between the Emperour and the King, that they had rather see the Turke inriched with Christians teasure, then once to consent and agree in one, to inuade so common an enemie. But returning to Siene,Siene besicged and taken. the Marques of Marignan came to besiege it with all his forces, onely vpon the hope he had, that Strossi beeing wounded, and Monluc lying at the poynt of death, being dead, (for it was thought they could not liue long) Lanssac and Fourqueuau taken, the Sienois being wholly destitute of counsell, and French secorers, would yeeld vnto him. Strossi beeing somewhat recouered, and hauing been certified of the death of Monluc, hazarded himselfe with sixe companies of foote, and two of launciers, to come to
Siene. Where, by the prudence and resolution of Serillac Nephew to Monluc, (he entered) who by a stratageme of trompets, caused an alarme in the Marquesse campe, that thought verily some new armie had been come to set vppon them: but hauing found Monluc liuing, and in some better estate then he had been, he returned againe, yet not without great daunger: Monluc hauing made many skirmishes vppon the enemie, perceiued that in fine, they would take the Towne, whervpon hauing shewed the Souldiers and the Townes-men, what he thought the Marques would do, hee gaue order that euery man should be stinted in his victuals: and that they should liue by prescript rules of war. The Sienois very willing to followe his counsell and aduise, did as he commanded. The Marques hauing assayed, by scaling the walles in the night-time, to enter into the Citadell, and the Fort of Camollia, was valiantly repulsed, with the losse of sixe hundreth of his men, and by many skirmishes, batteries, intelligences, and combats, seeking to become maister of the towne: being not able to effect his will, determined to proceed with the first and surest resolution, which was to constraine them by famin: by which meanes his campe indured much miserie, and euery moneth diminished more and more: neuerthelesse, in fine, his perseuerance ouercame them, so that vpon the 20. day of Aprill 1555. an honourable composition hauing been made and agreed vpon, with Monsieur de Monluc, his troupes, and those of Siene, the towne was yeelded vnto the Marques, and after, into the hands of the Duke of Florence. Touching that which after happened to the territories of Siene, I meane not at this present to intreate further thereof, leauing that to the description of the warres of Italie, from whence I must returne vnto Picardie.
Warres in Picardie.Mariembourg being revictualled, the Leaders that co^manded in those quarters for the Emperour, hauing erected an armie of twentie thousand foote, fiue or sixe thousand Rutters, and some Enfignes of olde bands of Spaniards, caused a place called Giuets, to bee fortified, from whence they forraged the Country lying nearest vnto it, and famished Mariembourg. The king assembled his forces at
Maubert Fontaine, whereof Francis de Cleues, Duke de Veuers was Lieftenant Generall: hauing eight hundreth launciers, as many light-horse, and about eight thousand footemen, who once againe revictualled Mariembourg. The 26. of Iulie, the Rutters and the French light-horsemen met togither, but the Rutters were presently constrained to reenter into their fort, and the Count de Barlaimont, General of the Emperors Armie, refusing battaile, the French men retired: presently after, the prince of Orange entred in to the kings country, and spoiled the Castle of Faignolles. After that, in winter time, Messieurs de Sanssac and Bourdillon, the third time reuictualled Mariembourg. The raigne and troublesome season, togither with the want of victualls on both sides, impeached the armies from meeting togither: During this last voiage, the king hauing gotten the writings and euidences, whereby Iohn de Brosse Duke
d'Estampes, claymed a right and title vnto the Duchie of
Bretaigne, into his hands, gaue the Count of Ponthieure, in exchange thereof vnto the said Duke.
The Emperor resigneth all his estates vnto his son and his brother.At the same time, the Emperor a prince of great valour and courage, as all Histories do witnesse, hauing so long time borne a world of affaires and troubles within his braines, determined to discharge himselfe thereof, and hauing sent for the Prince
Don Philip his sonne, vnto Brissels (then king of
England) resigned vnto him his kingdomes of Spaine, Naples, Cicile, and others, whereof hee gaue him letters pattents, commanding all his subiects to obey him: Those letters being deliuered vpon the 25. of october, 1555. were read in open counsel by the Chancelor. And among many notable instructions and aduises, by the father giuen vnto the Prince his son, he exhorted him to make peace with the King of France, and to haue pittie vpon Christendome miserably tormented, by so long and cruell warres. He likewise left off the Empire, and by letters vnto the Electors, desired them to giue that dignitie vnto Ferdinand his brother, to whom by right it ought to appertaine, hauing by them bin chosen and elected for king of the Romanes.
Wars in the Isle of Corse.About the same time, the Geneuois assaied to win the Isle of
Corse, not long before taken from them by Monsieur de Termes, and sent thither the Prince d'Aurie, that assailed the port of S. Florent, which yeelded by composition, the souldiers issuing armed, and their goods saued, returning to
Boniface to Iourda^ Vrsin: d'Aurie following after them, thinking to win it, but he was soone repulsed to his great losse. About the moneth of the same yeare died the Marquesse of
Marigna^,The death of the Marques of Marigna^. being out of fauor with the Emperor. For hauing too long prolo^ged the taking of Siene, and consuming a whole armie about it, he was solemnly buried at Millan, the Duke d'Alue being assistant at his funerall.
 King Philip following his fathers counsaile, and solicited therunto by Mary Queene of England, his wife, inclined to peace, which to effect, after many meetings and conferences, a truce for 5. yeares was agreed vpon between the^. The Count de Lalain,Truce for 5. yeares between the
2. Kings. came to Blois to sweare the truce vnto the king, and the Admirall de Chastillon went to Bruxelles to the Emperor and king Philip to do the like. For certaine moneths that this peace endured, one called Villegagnon a knight of
Malthe, rigged and prepared certaine vessels, and made a voiage vnto Amerique,Villegagnon saileth for Amerique. promising to do woonders for the king in that new world, but his minde not well setled, and his vniust behauiours wrought him discredit, whereby he did nothing to any effect. But if this enterprise had beene taken in hand by a wise leader, it had surely beene an ouerturne to the execution of great matters. But the ruler and disposer of all mens actions, had otherwise ordained.
Beginning of the breach of peace.Pope
Paul the fourth, of the familie of Caraffes in
Naples, enemie to the Spaniard, being aduertised, that within
Rome, certaine assemblies were made and holden in the houses of
Marke Anthonie Colonne, and the Cardinall of Saint Fior,
enemies to the King of France, tooke that for an occasion to reuenge himselfe, and without much examination, caused the Cardinal Camille, Colonne, Iulian Cesarin, and the Abbot of
Bresegue to be committed prisoners in the castle of S.
Ange, summoned Marke Anthonie, watched carefully to take and intercept all letters and pacquets, disarmed all strangers, and placed straight and hard watches and sentinelles throughout all the Citie of Rome. Some write, that the Colonels suspecting the Pope to be a French man, and fearing some surprise, thought in time to prouide for their affaires. And the Pope taking the matter to bee other then it was, vsed the meanes aforesaid. The oppressed beeing seruants vnto the king of
Spaine, gaue him to vnderstand, howe they were vsed, hee commaunded the Duke of Alue to ayde the Colomnes and others their participants. Whereuppon the Duke presently went to Naples, and did what hee could to reestablish the Colomnes and
Vrsins in their Segneries. They on the other side, fortifying themselues about Rome, and holding the Pope inclosed, he determined to demaund ayde of the king of France. For the which cause hee sent his Nephewe Cardinall Caraffe, that bare a triumphant hat and a sword vnto the king, beeing at Fontainebelleau, about the ende of the moneth of Iune. The king granted his request, adding that he would aduertise the king of Spaine thereof, which hee likewise did, but the answere hee receiued, litle pleased
Caraffe. Whereof ensued the beginning of a fyer, that after produced great flames. The Annalistes and Hystories of France, Italie and Spaine, make different discourses of the breach and rupture of this peace, which would desire a bigger volume. It suffiseth mee to passe it ouer in breefe. The Pope was the first that put the Irons into the fyer, and the Kings did not greatlye withdrawe theyr eares, to lende theyr helping handes, as not wishing great good vnto each other: Theyr principall officers prouoked by many and diuers passions, and those that gouerned them, hauing desire to mount aloft, and to rise higher, and perceiuing that truce imbased them, were very well pleased, that within Rome they had begun to erect the Scaffold whereon to act some newe tragidie in Christendome, and specially in France.
Warres betweene the kings, begun about Rome.So the French men would oppose himselfe against the Spaniard for the Popes cause: Strossi Marshall of France, in place of Monsieur de Sedan, deceased at his returne from prison out of the lowe countries, was sent to Rome, there to resist the Spaniards, vntill the ayde of France came thither: on the otherside,
Don Iohn de Lume gouernour of Millan, came into
France, and Duke Octauian Farnese restored to the possession of Plaisance by the Spaniards, forsooke the King of France. In the meane time, the Duke d'Alue, forraged the country about Rome, tooke Anagne, Pilastrine, Segne, Tiuoli, and besieged Ostie: cutting off their victualles, holding Strossi, with Monluc and theyr troupes, inclosed within Rome: about the end of December, the king sent the Duke of Guise, to be his Lieftenant General, in the armie that marched to help the Pope.
The Duke of Guise being in Piedemo^t, giueth alaru^ to Italie.In the month of Ianuary
1557. the Duke of Guise well accompanied, being arriued at
Turin, the Capitall towne of Piedemont, the Spaniards fortified Millan, and refreshed the Garrisons of the places of importaunce in Italy. The Duke of Ferrare armed and lodged souldiers, vpon the frontiers of Ferrare, garrishing
Florence and other townes vnder his obedience, specially those that bordered vppon Bologne. The Duke of Alue prouided for the townes within the Realme of Naples, and vppon the sea coast of Calabria: as then all Italie was in armes, euery one standing vpon his guard, diuersly discoursing vpo^ the Duke of Guises arriual and intents, hauing a stro^g armie of 14. or 15000. foote, 8000. launces, and 1200. light-horses: some say more, the report being giuen forth, of an other supply readie to march forward, assoone as war shuld bee opened in those parts: but it was as necessary to imploy them elsewhere.
Ostie taken from the Pope by the Spaniards.In the meane time, the siege of Ostie continued, those that kept the Fort, hauing sustained many assaults, their powder fayling, and the Souldiers and Cittizens, for the most part, beeing hurt, a composition was graunted, and the place yeelded vnto the Spaniards, that agreed with Cardinall Caraffe, for fortie daies truce, to the end, the Pope might haue some time and leisure, to thinke vppon some good agreement. The Cardinall to the contrary, stayed for the Frenchmen, and solicited the Venetians to take part with them, which they refused,Agreement betweene the Pope, the King of France, and the Duke of Ferrare. desiring not to obtaine the King of Spaines ill will: but the Duke of Ferrare tooke the French Kings part, and receiued the title of Defendor of the Church, and betweene the Pope, the King, and the Duke, it was agreed, that hee should prouide 20000. foote, and 1000. horse, and pay al the charges of the armie. The King should furnish as many foote, and twise as many horse: and the Duke sixe thousand foote, two hundreth launciers, foure hundreth light-horses, and twentie Peeces for batterie: which had beene sufficient forces, to haue made and wrought great conquests, if the Popes Cofers had not beene stirred: but that Article made all the rest of no effect.
And how would hee haue furnished mony for so great and puissant an armie, whe^ in effect he suffered the like armie of the Duke of Guise to maintain it selfe, or rather to bee dispearsed: in such sort, that the returne therof, seemed rather a company of men ouerthrown and spoyled, then a braue retrait of Souldiers comming victorious.
The nature of the Popes.The Popes in these latter times, haue alwaies vsed to hold on the stronger side, to aduance their affaires, at the cost and charges of those that hearken vnto them: and when they haue obtained their desires, to leaue and forsake such as assist them in their greatest need, as it happened in this warre, trauersed by wonderfull deuises on all sides: but to conclude, the enterprises and pretences, of great and mightie men of this world, are wholly like smoke, if the fauor and helpe of the most great and puissant God of heauen doth not assist them.
The taking of Valence beyond the mountainesThe Duke of Guise hauing ioyned his forces in
Piedemont, with those of the Marshall de Brissac, marched towards Valence, and giuing out that Pauie had been taken by the Frenchmen, summoned Captaine Spoluerin, that had two thousand souldiers with him to keepe it, to put all to fire and sword, if hee entered therein by force. Spoluerin that feared his skinne, and the losse of his booties, wrought so well with the Souldiers, that they consented to the yeelding vp of the towne, so they might issue with liues and goods saued: which was agreed vnto, and the 18 of Ianuarie,
Spoluerin, and others of the principall Commanders being entered into
Pauie, were beheaded, because of their cowardise. The Cardinall of
Trent, Gouernour of Millan, sent to summon the Duke of
Guise, to restore Valence vnto him againe, as taken contrary vnto the articles of truce: his answer was, that the Duke of
Alue hauing first broke^ the truce, the Frenchmen could not chuse but follow, and that he intended nought but warre, vntill such time, as that the Pope should be satisfied, and touching Valence, that they had iustly set vppon them, because their Garrison had shotte their ordinance against the French souldiers, that marched by the Towne to ayde the Pope.Ostie taken againe with the fort and other places. On the other side, Strossi, Monluc, and others that were in Rome, perceiuing the Duke of
Alue to be gon from thence, marched with 5000 foote, and 600. horse to besiege Ostie, which they presently took, the fort yeelded by compositio^, the spaniards issuing with their liues, armes, and goods saued, taking with the^ certaine peeces of artillery, they likewise tooke
Velitres, Tuscule, Marin, Grotteferrate, Palesan, S. Ange. S. Paul, Vico Valerio, and diuers smal places in the territories of
Rome, from whence they draue the Spaniards.
The French armie in Italy.Departing out of Piedimont: the Duke of Guise hauing consulted what was best for him to do, resolued within himself, to martch straight forward to Rome, and being at Bologne, he complained vnto the Popes officers, because hee sawe no preparation made for the wars, saying, that the king had bin otherwise promised. They made him answere, that there were 10000 souldiers ready prepared in the Marquisat of Ancore, wherewith for that time he seemed to bee content, and being arriued at Rome, he mustered his troupes, where he found fiue thousand Switzers, their General being the marques de' Elboeuf: 4000 Grisons, 7000. French men, and Gascons, some Italian, 750. lanciers, and
1500. light horses. The Duke de Nemours commanding the footemen.
Warres and taking of townes in Piedemont.According to the counsell holden in Piedimont, the Marshall de Brissac being in the field, by composition tooke
Valfeniere, lying between Ast and Carmagnolle, which he vtterly spoyled, assailed and tooke Chiauasse, a Castle standing vpon a mount, wherein he placed a garrison. The report being spread abroad, that the French men would enter into the realm of
Naples, the Spaniards took good order for the keeping of the places neer vnto the Marques de Ancoue, but the Duke de Guise not desiring to go so farre into the country, tooke Campilio, and besieged Ciuitelle, from whence, he was constrained to raise his siege, hauing lost a great number of his best souldiers. In
Piedemont, Marshal de Brissac was constrained to retire from Coni, the Duke of Guise beeing ayded by the Marquesse of Pescaire,Estate of Italie. Strossi, and the Duke de Palliane, took
Montfort, by assault, a little towne hard by Cintelle, which was spoyled and burnt. But the Duke of Guise perceiuing his forces to diminish, and the Spaniards daily to increase, and that the Popes promises tooke no effect, aduertised the king of his estate, and on the otherside, offered battell vnto the Duke d'Alue, lying betweene Ferme and Ascoli, but the spaniards perceiuing, that with a litle patience,The spaniards refuse battaile. the Pope would soone be brought to reason, and the French men disperse themselues, or else easily be spoyled, knowing likewise, that some thing was to be effected in the countrey of
Picardie, they thought it but a point of foolish hardinesse, without conuenient meanes so to hazard the estate of the king of
Spaine. And because that neither the Pope, nor the Duke of
Ferrare, furnished that which had bin promised, and to the contrary, that the French army receiued not one penny pay of the Pope, and that the Ferrarois borrowed forces of his sonne in law the Duke of
Guise, therewith to defend himselfe, they began to consult vpon their returne into France,The subtilty of the Pope. but the Pope who as yet had not that he sought, fearing if he should be left alone, the Spaniard wold not faile to pare his nailes, sware vnto the Duke of Guise, that he wold neuer make agreement, nor once accord with the Spaniard without the kings of Frances consent: for assurance whereof, hee would send the Duke de Palliane his son for hostage into France. By which deuises, he staied the French men, to see what successe the affaires begun in Picardy would haue, where the French men hauing bin ouerthrowne in battell vpon S. Lawrence day, S. Quintius taken,He maketh peace with the King of Spaine. and
France in great distrust: the Pope perceiuing his hopes to vanish like smoke, and that the Duke of Alue approached neare to
Rome, hee sent Cardinall Caraffe vnto him, with full power and authoritie to agree vppon a peace with the King of Spaine: which was concluded about the moneth of September, the Pope hauing renounced the league made with the French King, who sitting between two stooles, fell on the ground, and all the intents of the house of Guise and others, tooke no effect, whereby the armie all wearied and dispearsed, returned into France, cursing both the Pope, and all his traine.
Truce broken in the frontier of Picardie, whereof ensued the battell on S. Laurence day, where the Frenchmen with great losse were ouerthrown. The taking of S. Quintins and other places.The King hauing resolued to send the Duke of Guise to ayde the Pope, contrarie to the aduise and counsel of the Constable, and diuers Princes and Lords, that disswaded and besought him to the contrary, and that he should rather seeke to maintaine the truce, gaue expresse charge vnto the Admirall, to take order for the safetie of his Townes and Forts in Picardie, and to make some enterprises vpon certaine places in the lowe Countries. Wherevnto the Admirall that had been of the Constables opinion, although he wel perceiued from whence such resolutions proceeded, not daring to refuse the commission giuen, with great diligence tooke order accordingly, and therevpon made an enterprise vpon Douay, which hauing not taken effect, he tooke Lens, a small Towne in Artois, which he pilled, whereby the Gates of warre were fully opened, Picardie and Champagne exposed to continuall courses, and the frontier places on both sides fortified. The Queene of England sent a Herault of Armes into France, to defie the King, and to proclaime warre against him: and about the middle of the month of Iulie, the prince of Piedemo^t acco^panied with the duke
d'Arscot, the Earles of Mansfeld, d'Aiguema^t, Meigue, and Barlaimo^t, bega^ to erect a puissant armie at
Guiets, staying for further ayde of Rutters and
Bourguignons. The Duke de Neuers prouided for Rocroy, Mesieres, and Mariembourg, which he doubted would be assayled, from whence the Prince retired, perceiuing it to bee too dangerous an enterprise for him, marching towards the Towne of
Guise, with 40000. foote, and 15000. horse, not accounting 10000. Englishmen, which he daylie expected, the French armie beeing 18000. foote, and 6000. horse. The Admirall, with the Sieurs de Villebon, de Senarpont, and others, were of aduise, that the townes of
Picardie should be fortified, specially such as lay in greatest danger: but they were not beleeued, in such manner, that the Prince of Piedemont hauing stayed a time before Guise, presently sent his horsemen to inclose S. Quintins, and marched thither with all his armie: so that vpon the suddaine, the Towne was besieged on all sides. Monsieur de Teligny being within it,S. Quintins besieged. with a broken companie of launciers, and one Bruiel a Gentleman of Breton, was Gouernour of the Towne, with very fewe footemen: and the Inhabitants themselues wholly ignorant in Marshall affaires, made great difficultie to receiue a greater Garrison being mooued thereunto. The Admirall determined to enter therein, and to the same end, vppon the 2. of August he departed from
Pierrepont, with foure companies of launciers, and three of light-horses: and being at Han, hee was constrained by reason of the danger of the voyage, to take no more but 2. companies of foote: wherof onely the third part entered with him into S. Quintins,The Admirall entereth into Saint Quintins. the rest stayed behinde, and were constrained to retire, because the towne was almost besieged round about: touching the order therin taken by the Admiral, concerning the fortifications, and other things, it is most certaine, that nothing was by him forgotten. The towne being wel ayded by those fewe men that entered with him, there was found disorder touching their victuals, their powder beeing burnt and blowne vp by the Cittizens default, that knew not how to behaue themselues in Marshall affaires, which much troubled the Souldiers. Aduise being giuen vnto the Constable Generall of the French armie, what state S. Quintins was in, he sent the Prince of Conde, Generall of the light-horse, the Marshall Saint Andre with foure hundreth launciers, and
Monsieur d'Andelot with tenne Ensignes of footemen, from la Fere, to enter into Han, as well to bridle the campe, as to seeke by all meanes to refresh and strengthen those of Saint
Quintins, d'Andelot offered to enter therein, with two thousand men, while the armie on all sides, should giue an alarme vnto the enemie, who by means of certaine prisoners, hauing discouered the enterprise, tooke such order therein, that their pretence tooke not effect.
The Constable bringeth his armie vnto S. Quintins, to cause certaine men to enter.Meane time, the Spanish armie increased, by ayde of the Englishmen, being to the number of tenne thousand foote, and about one thousand fiue hundreth horse. The Constable desirous to helpe those of S. Quintins, hauing determined vpon all the meanes that might be vsed, to helpe the Towne, and being fully bent to execute the same, the 9. of August, he caused the French and Almaine footme^ to passe ouer the bridge, that lieth aboue
la Fere, with certain Peeces of artillerie: and the tenth of August, being S. Lawrence day, the horsemen ioyned with the foote, and so marched towards S. Quintins: where, about nine of the clocke in the morning they arriued, and there rancked themselues in order of battell, right before the subburbes of Isle, as then taken by the Spaniards, that were driuen out againe euen to the Chaussee: meane time, the artillerie played vpon the Prince of Piedemonts campe, wherein it mooued great disorder: and while that was done, the Constable caused as many troupes to enter into the Towne, as possible hee might: which done, the King of Spaines armie resolued with themselues by a prompt and generall resolution, to set vppon the Constables forces, and so constraine him to fight: to the which end, the Prince of Piedemont, and the Counte d'Aiguemont ioyned togither, at such time as the Duke
de Neuers was gone to relieue Monsieur d'Eschenets, that held play with the enemie, while the rest that went to ayde the Towne, should enter: the Constable being vpon retrait, not minding to giue battell, the Duke ioyned with the Prince of Conde, and so made assault near vnto a wind-mill, withall his light-horse, and they two togither without any losse, ioyned themselues with the maine battell, but their enemies followed them, and approaching with 8. great Squadrons of horsemen, the Counte d'Aiguemont, was the first that with two thousand horse, charged the Frenchmen on the one side: the Dukes
Ernest, and Henry de Brunswic, seconded by the Counte
de Horme, with two thousand Rutters, and ten thousand lanciers, fell on the other side, the Counte de Mansfeld, and other leaders, entred vpon the middle part with three thousand horse, with so great force, that the Frenchmen were ouertrowne. The Duke of Neuers being one of the first, notwithstanding after many daungers, hee got out of the preace: and although the parties were vnequall, yet the Frenchmen failed not to fight, where the Constable was both hurt and taken, and with him the Dukes of Montpensier and de Longueuille, the Prince of
Mantoue, the Marshal S. Andre, and many others, as wel knights of the Order, as Lords and Gentlemen: the chiefe of name that were slaine, were Iohn de Burbon, Duke de Anguien, the Viscount of Turaine, and others, and most part of the Captains of the footemen, who perceiuing the horseme^ co^ming, placed themselues in a square battell, but they were presently broken, and part slaine, the rest taken prisoners. This bloodie fight indured for the space of 4. or
5. houres, the Spaniards pursued the Frenchmen within a myle of the towne of
la Fere. And surely al me^ were much abashed how so many escaped, considering the great fear and disorder they the^ were in. The Prince of Conde, the Duke de Neuers, the Counte de Sancerre, Messieurs de Bourdillon, Grammont, Cruecueur, Piennes, Descars, and others escaped, Montmorency the Constables eldest sonne, tooke another way. This ouerthrow caused great feare in Parris, for in it the Frenchmen lost great numbers of men, wherin the Histories seeme not to agree: some say 5000. others 8000. slaine in the field. The King came presently from Compiegne to
Parris, to assure his capitall towne, and at the same time raised a subsidie of 300000. Frankes, to satisfie his most vrgent affaires: while king Phillip receiuing the Ensignes taken from the Frenchmen, and beholding the prisoners, who in a maner were led before him, as in a triumph, contented himselfe with that victorie, without enterprising at that time to enter further into France, whereof neuerthelesse many Townes were in great feare. King Henry by his Lieftenants, prouided for his Frontier-townes, and gathered his campe at
Laon, causing 14000. Switzers to be sent for. Touching those that were besieged within Saint Quintins, at the comming of
d'Andelot,The Towne of S. Quintins taken by assault. they were relieued with foure hundreth souldiers, and about 50. men of commandement, with some Gentlemen of name, and certaine Canoniers: but king Phillip being arriued in his campe, the batterie began most furious* and the assieged by no means could be ayded, but onely with three hundreth men, whereof a third part were slaine in entring. The Towers and fortifications from S. Iohns Gate, to the Tower standing vpon the water, hauing been battered with the Cannon shotte, the Spaniards became maisters of the Duches, and vpon the 20. of August, the Erenchmen diuided and placed in eleuen seuerall breaches, sustained a generall assault, and could not bee forced: yet the Towne was taken, by entring at a tower which no man guarded, the French souldiers therein were most slaine: the Admirall his brother (that not long after saued himselfe) Iarnac, S. Remi, de Humes, and other Captaines and Gentlemen of name taken prisoners, and the son of Monsseur de la Fayette, the Captaines Saleuert, Ogier, Vicques, la Barre, l'Estang, and Gourdes slaine. During these stormes,The King threatned to be slaine. the king being in
Parris, as he went to masse, a yong man named Caboche, borne in Meaux, who ordinarilie, and of long time, had followed the Court, and because of his faire writing, serued the kings Secretaries, whether being out of his wits, or stirred by some other motion, presentented himselfe before him, with a naked sword in hand, and crying out, said: Stay King, God hath commanded me to kill thee, but presently the Switzers of the guard fell vpon him, wherewith he was committed, and by the Court of Parliament condemned to be hanged for that attempt. After the taking of S. Quintins, the Counte de Aremberg, with 1200. horse, and 3. Regiments of Lansquenets, besieged Castellet,The taking of Castellet. where he made a furious batterie. The Barron
de Solignac, that commanded therein, peceiuing himselfe destitute of the ayde that had beene promised him: and that the place was not strong ynough to defend an assault, not hauing aboue three hundreth men therein, and they not greatly bent to make resistance, yeelded the place: for which cause he was sent prisoner vnto Parris, and if by chance he had not saued himselfe, by an escape out of prison, he had surely lost his life: because (as it was said) he had made promise neuer to yeeld the place, before hee had sustained an assault. While the King of
France assembled a great armie, as well without, as within his Realme, and by his Lieftenants prouided for his townes in Picardie, and that the Parrisians made generall Musters of their companies, where were found between thirtie fiue, and fortie thousand men.

The assembly in Same Iaques street discouered.Those of the religion multiplied and began to increase in diuers parts of the Realme, specially within the Cittie of
Parris, where hauing bin discouered in an assembly made by night in S. Iaques streete, many were cast in prison, some burnt, and the rest escaped by diuers meanes: in other places also many were taken and executed, the people verilie imputing the causes of the troubles in
France wholly to them. But the king of Spaine imploying his armie,Han taken by the Spaniards. vppon the 12. of September tooke Han, the Castle being yeelded, and the Towne burnt by the Frenchmen themselues. Besides that, hee tooke all such places, as might in any sort impeach or trouble, (that Castle and S. Quentin) which hee ouerthrew and spoyled: further, his troupes surprised certaine companies of Scots within Noyon, and tooke Chauni, wherein he placed a great Garrison, there to make prouision of wines, wherewith to furnish the places which he had taken.
Ayde comming out of Almaine, and Switzer-land, into France, the king for a time caused the troupes that came out of
Italie,Polleuille driuen out of Bresse. vnder the conduct of the Duke de Guise, and Aumalle, to stay in Bresse, and Lyonnois, thereby to impeach the pretences of the Barron de Polleuille, who with twelue thousand foote, and one thousand two hundreth horse: for the Prince of
Piedemont, came to besiege Bourg in Bresse: from whence he was constrained in all haste to retire, otherwise both he and all his troupes, had wholly been spoyled, who in dislodging, dispearsed and separated themselues, in such sort, that in fewe daies after, it could hardly be perceiued what had become of that great number of men.
The kings enterprise against CallaisThe Duke of Guise beeing arriued at the Court, lying in S. Germaine in Laye, because of the Constables imprisonment, was appoynted Lieftenant Generall for the king in all his countries. Wherevpon the secret practises long pretended, were then pursued and fully executed in this sort. Edward the third of that name, King of England, had taken Callais, in the yeare of our Lord
1347. a Port of the sea, and a place of great consequence for the Frenchmen: since which time, the said Towne had still continued in the Englishmens hands, and by them much fortified. The Constable long time before the battell of S. Lawrence. by means of Monsieur de Senarpont, Gouernour of Bullen, had vsed such meanes and practises touching that Towne, which is a parte of the ancient
Domaine of the Crowne of France, that without his ouerthrow and imprisonment, it was most apparant he would haue executed his pretence. In his absence it was concluded, while king Phillips forces by reason of the winter season were dispearsed, to execute that enterprise so much for the aduantage of the Realme of France. And therevpon the king of France raised two armies, one conducted by the Duke de Neuers, making shewe to enter into the Duchie of
Luxembourg: the other ledde by the Duke of Guise, vnder pretence therewith to hinder the victualling of S. Quentins. The Duke
de Neuers marching towards Luxenbourg, the Spaniards and Wallons, ranne thither to defend it: but suddainely hee sent his forces to ioyne with the Duke of Guise, that made shewe of victualling
Amiens, Ardres, and Bullen, and in great haste vppon the suddaine, turned all his forces against the Towne of Callais, wherein as then there was no Garrison. The Princes of Conde, and
la Roche Suryon, the Duke d'Aumalle, and the Marques
d'Elboeuf bretheren; Strossi Marshall of France, Montmorency, the Constables eldest son, Monsieurs de Termes, d'Andelot, de Sansac, d'Estree great Maister of the Artillerie,
de Tauanes, Senarpont, Grandmo^t, Randan, Allegre, Creuecueur, Piennes, Gourdan, and other Lords, Knights and Captaines, beeing in the armie.

 The first of Ianuary, the armie appeared before it, and the same day tooke Nieulay bridge,The taking of Callais. and after that, Risban: which done, they entered the Castle, and then the Towne, all yeelded by composition, within the space of eight daies, the Englishmen and Spaniards, not hauing meanes in time to ayde the Towne. The Englishmen greeued at the losse of such a place, therevpon conceiued a mortall hatred against king Phillip. Presently after the yeelding of
Callais, they besieged the Towne of Guines, in the counte
d'Oye, which was taken, but the Englishmen that were in the Castle, draue the Frenchmen out, and burnt the Towne: who were presently besieged vpon the 13. day of Ianuary, and hauing indured the batterie, and sustained an assault, the second beeing prepared, they asked and receiued a composition. Guines was wholly spoyled and defaced, as beeing noysome to Calais, as also not beeing needefull to bee kept so neare vnto it: so that in fine, the whole Counte of Oye, was reduced vnder the kings obedience: for the which, great ioy was made through all the countrie of France, in exchange of many a teare not long before shedde for their losse, vpon S. Laurence day.
Parliament in Parris.The same moneth the king held a Parliament in Parris, wherein they granted him a subsidie of three Millions of gold, for the maintenance of his warres: that done, hee went to visit Callais, the Gouernment whereof, was giuen vnto Monsieur de Termes. The Duke de Neuers accompanied by the Gouernours of Iuoy, Mesieres, Bouillo^, and Maubert Fontaine, tooke the castle of Herbemont, hard by
Iuoy,Exployts done by the Duke de Neuers. also the Fortes of Iamoigne, Chigny, Rossignon, and
Villeneufue: but by reason of the colde, which as that yeare had not begunne till about the month of Februarie, hee was forced to leaue the field, and to enter into Garrison: while the king in diuers places of the Realme, made many secret leuies of souldiers, commaunding his Captaines not to march with any of their troupes, before they should receiue expresse commaundement from him. In the moneth of Aprill,A marriage between the Dauphin and Marie, Queene of Scots. the marriage betweene Francis, eldest sonne to the King Prince Dauphin de Viennois, and Marie Stuard, daughter to Iames the fift, king of Scots, and of Marie de Lorraine, before widdowe to the Duke de Longueuille, and sister to the Duke de Guise, was concluded, and after vppon the
28. of the same month, accomplished with great solemnitie.
During this marriage, there was a certaine motion of peace to bee made betweene the two kings, at Peronne, by the Duches
Dowager of Lorraine, and the Cardinall, brother to the Duke of Guise, but all in vaine: for on the one side, king
Phillip tooke Nesle, and the Englishme^ spoyled the coast of Normandie: on the other side,Taking of Theonuille. the king of France determined to besiege
Theonuille, to the which end, he sent Monsieur de Bourdillon, to see what might be done, he being acco^panied by
Vieille Ville, Gouernour of Metz, with the olde troupes of the Garrisons of Metz, Thoul, Verdun, and Danuilliers, in the beginning of May, incamped himselfe before Theonuille: fifteene daies after, the Duke de Neuers came thither, and then Monsieur
de Guise, Generall of the armie, followed by the most valiant Captaines and Gentlemen of France.
The batterie beganne the fift of Iune, with 30. great Peeces: the Counte de Horme assayed to enter into it, followed by certaine troupes, but the passages were in such sort closed vppe, that with losse hee was forced to retire. The Duke of Guise going to viewe a breach, seconded by certaine valiant Leaders, caused a false assault to bee giuen, whereby at that time, the Towne hardly escaped from taking: but the assaylants beeing in very small number, were forced
to retire, with losse of diuers good and valiant souldiers: presently after, by the onely meanes and aduise of
Monsieur de Monluc, they tooke around Tower, that much ayded the besieged, and as they were about to myne a platforme adioyning therevnto, the Marshall Strossi was striken with a Harquebu-shot, whereof hee died, his place beeing giuen to Monsieur de Termes. The
21. of Iune, the mynes beeing prepared to worke,Taking and spoyling of other places. the assieged demaunded a composition, which was honourably graunted vnto them, and two or three daies after, they issued foorth, to the number of one thousand fiue hundreth souldiers, but most part sicke, which were well and courteously vsed, not one eyther troubled, or spoyled at their issuing.
The Towne of Luxenbourg wherein were the Countes of
Mansfeld and Horne, was viewed: but not long before,
Arlon was assayled, forced, spoyled, and burnt, and Chigni, Villemont, and Rossignill, taken againe from the Wallons: wherein they set fier onely in Chigni, which they fortified.
Vieille-ville was left within Theonuille, with tenne Ensignes of footemen, and some companies of Launciers.
Enterprises in Flanders, by the Marshall de Termes, who in fine, was ouerthrowne by the Count de Aiguemo^tBecause the Englishmen made diuers warres, as well by Sea, as by land, into the countrie of France, the king caused two small armies to be made and conducted by the Duke d'Aumalle, at la Fere, the other, vnder the Marshal de Termes at Callais. Termes knowing that the townes lying on the Sea-coast, and subiect to the Spaniards, were but meanely manned, because they feared not the Frenchmen on that side, hee made an enterprise vppon Dunkerke, a Towne lying vpon the Sea, betweene Newport, and Graueling, in the which enterprise, hee besieged Berges, that was presently taken and sacked: which done, he went before Dunkerke, which held out but foure daies, and in the end was taken and pilled: where they found so rich a bootie, that the very boyes of the armie were thereby made rich: but as
Messieurs de Villebon, and de Senarpont, staying for Marshal de Termes, that as then was sicke, laye incamped hard by
Graueling, the Earle of Aiguemont, Lieftenant Generall for the king of Spaine in the lowe Countries, with all speede assembled the Garrisons and other forces, to the number of sixteene thousand footemen, a thousand or twelue hundreth Rutters, and two thousand lanciers, determining to impeach the passage of the French armie, from entring any further into Flaunders, and to make them leaue the siege of Graueling: and the Marshall was scarse healed and entered into the armie, but the Counte de Aiguemont was vppon him, not once making shew to fight.
The Marshall perceiuing him too strong, would not likewise hazard himselfe, but rather began to retire towards Callais: which the Earle doubting, determined to stop his passage, and so constraine him to fight, or to make him yeeld by famine, before the towne of
Graueling: which the Marshal perceiuing, assayed to passe the riuer (that runneth from S. Omers) called l'A. And hee had no sooner begun, but the Flemmings onely staying therevpon, got before him, which constrained the French Vangard to range themselues in order, thereby to sustaine the rest of the armie, where it made a braue resistance, driuing certaine squadrons of horses out of ranke, but the Counte hauing made a furious charge, procured the ouerthrow and spoyle of the Marshall, who beeing sore hurt, was taken, with Messieurs de Villebon, Senarpont, Moruilliers, and Chaune, and many Captains and souldiers slaine in the field. The Marshals armie being composed of certaine companies of launciers, three cornets of light-horses,
Scottish-men, 14. Ensignes of French footemen, and 18. Companies of Lansquenets: all beeing eyther slaine or taken. The number that escaped, were not many: that great wound, renewed the former of S. Lawrence day, and brake the enterprise vppon the Duche of
Luxenbourg, where the Duke of Guise pretended to be doing, who in the moneth of Iuly, tooke his course to Thierashe, and so lodged at Pierrepont: which he strengthened with 7. Cornets of Rutters, and a new Regiment of Lansquenets.An army by sea of English men and Flemings, ouerthrowne in Brittaigne. At the same time, the armie at sea composed of Englishmen and Flemmings, to the number of 6000. men, or thereabouts, hauing sayled along the coast of Britaigne, in the end tooke land at Conquet, which they spoyled: and entering further into the countrie, were ouerthrowne by
Monsieur de Kersimon, whereof some he slewe, other he tooke prisoners, and caused the rest to saue themselues by fight within their shippes, where they presently hoysed sayles and put to sea.
Both the kings armies hard by Amiens.Both the kings hauing prepared their armies, no lesse puissant then at other times, incamped themselues, and stayed not farre from Amiens, along by the Riuer of Somme: where they had great numbers of strangers, so that their owne subiects, in comparison of them, were very fewe. There they made certaine courses and skirmishes, but no battell of any consequence. and as it seemed, those two great Princes, were as then come thither to make an agreement: the treatie whereof was mooued, and to proceed therein, they chose the Abbey of
Cercamp, vpon the frontiers of Artois and Picardie: wherefore the King of France appeased the Constable, the Marshall S. Andre, the Cardinall of Lorraine, Moruilliers, Bishop of Orleans, one of the kings priuie Councell, and Secretarie
Aubespine. The king of Spaine sent thither the Duke
d'Alue, the Prince of Aurange,Deputies for peace. Rigome de Silues, Granuelle Bishop of Arras, and Vigle de Zuichem, President of the Councell of Estate in the lowe Countries. They assembled in the moneth of October, hauing sor vmpier, of the differences that might fall out betweene them, the Duches
Dowager, and the Duke of Lorraine her sonne. Meane time, the Constable hauing agreed for his ransome, came to do his dutie vnto the King, who gaue him all the entertainment that possible he might, and made him lye with him, as some certainly report. During this meeting, both the armies were dismissed, and the strangers sent into their countries. While this treatie of peace continued, Charles the Emperour, and his sister Ellenor,Death of the Emperour Charles the fift, and Ellenor his sister, of Mary Queene of England, and of Cardinall Poole. wife vnto King Francis, died in
Spaine: the peace was grounded vppon the marriage of Charles Prince of Spaine, with Elizabeth, eldest daughter of K.
Henry, and of Philebert Emanuel, Prince of
Piedemont, with Margaret, daughter to king Francis deceased. That which prolonged the treatie, was, that the Q. of England demanded the restitution of Callais: but about the end of Nouember she died. After whom likewise died Cardinall Poole, her great Councellor, her death, that changed the state of England: wherein after that, neither the Spaniards, nor the Pope, had more to do, caused the assembly to be referred vnto the peace ensuing.  King
Phillip hauing with great pompe celebrated the funerals of his father, within the Towne of Brussels,The Duke of Lorraine married with the yonger daughter of the French King. stayed in Flaunders, to heare what should be done by his Deputies, before he passed into Spaine. The K. of France, to ioyne the Duke of Lorraine in alliance with him, gaue him Claude his second daughter in mariage, reseruing the elder for the co^clusion of peace. The espousals, were holden in Parris, vpon the 5. of Februarie, and about the 15. of the same month, the Deputies changing place, and being furnished with large and ample instructions, met at the castle of Cambresse: king Phillip lying at
Monts in Hanaut where the Cardinall of Lorraine went to visit him, and after that, the Duches Dowager.

Peace agreed vppon, betweene two kings.At this second meeting, both of them seemed very vnwilling, specially the Spaniards, moued therevnto by newes out of Piedemont, where the Frenchmen had lately receiued an ouerthrow. But in the end, after many arguments and conclusions, they drewe vnto an agreement. In the Tretie at Cercamp, a marriage had beene spoken of, betweene
Charles Prince of Spaine, and Elizabeth of
France.
Now, the Deputies perceiuing king Phillip to bee a Widdower, and esteeming the alliance to bee stronger if hee espoused the Princesse, which before should haue been giuen vnto his sonne, they propounded that Article, which to the good contentment of both the Kings, was concluded and agreed vpon, togither with the marriage of the Prince of
Piedemont, to the Ladie Margaret. The King of France yeelded to the King of Spaine, all that hee had taken from him, both on this side, and beyond the Mountaines: also to the Prince of
Piedemont la Bresse, Sauoy and Piedemont, except foure Townes: to the Geneuois, the Isle of Corse: and
Siene to the Duke of Florence: retaining nothing but
Callais, without gaining a foote of any other land, in all that long and daungerous war, which had desolated so many Prouinces, sacked, burnt, and ouerthrowne so many Townes, Bourges, Villages, and Castles, been the death of so great a number of Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines, Souldiers, Cittizens, and Paisants: caused so many rauishings and violatings of women and maids: and in a word, which had in a manner, tormented all Europe: so that in effect, the king yeelded aboue two hundreth, (others write almost as many more) places, for the conquest whereof, a sea of blood of his naturall subiects had been spent and shedde: the treasures of the Realme consumed: his lands ingaged, and he indebted on all sides: and which is woorse, the fire beeing quenched vppon the borders, not long after, began within the middle of all his Realme, and in euery place thereof, as well is seene during the raignes of his three successors. But these things are the vnsearchable and deepe iudgements of God: which are not lawfull for vs to enter into, but onely to worship and adore him that worketh all things with great wisedome, with mercie towards his children, and with most iust and fearefull vengeance against his enemies.
Counsell giuen the king against the peace and quietnesse of his Realme.The king hauing agreed with his forraine enemies, with whom all men hoped a most sure and perpetuall alliance to be made, was againe put in minde and counselled to redouble the hard and cruell punishments, by him deuised against those of the religion, who in the middle of those troubles, had much increased thoughout all the Realme. And so in steed of spirituall meanes to be vsed in things concerning the soule, diuers euil Councellors to this Prince, caused him to conceiue an extream hatred to those of the religion, filling his eares with many vnworthie and terrible reports against them.
Monsieur d'Andelot first felt it, being for religion committed prisoner in Melun: wherevpon many discontentments and suspitions grewe among the most noble houses, whereof ensued diuers and many mischiefes: which after the death of king Henry began to increase, who hauing vnderstood, that in the Parliament of Parris, many and diuers iudgements were made, touching the condemnation of such as were accused for religio^, was counselled to sit in person at a Mercurialist iudgement,Mercuriales and imprisonment of certaine Councellors in Parris. within the Augustines (because as then the Pallace was preparing and making readie for the marriages) that there hee might heare and vnderstand, the aduise of all his Presidents and Councellours.
Others of the same Councel, esteemed that the presence of the king, wold but abash such as seemed to oppose therin, and that so those of the religion remaining without support, and condemned, they would in fine, procure the execution of their desires. But it fell out cleane contrary: for that some Councellours said, and flatly affirmed, that it would be more conuenient, to deale with lesse rigour against those of the religion, vntill such time, as by a free and generall counsell, they had beene shewed their errour.
Hee that spake boldest, and plainest, was Anne de Bourg, a man of great learning and pietie. The king that neuer had heard any speech of such importance, commaunded the Constable to leade du Bourg, and other Councellours prisoners, to aunswere their obiections: swearing in great chollour, that hee would see the end. Wherevpon,
Monsieur Montgommery, Captaine of the guard, ledde du Bourg into the Bastille, the rest into other places. Meane time, those of the religion were hardly pursued in euery place, who during those troubles, in the moneth of May, caused a Sinode to be holden, by all their Pastors,A Sinode of the religion in Parris. Deacons, and ancients within the Towne of Parris, wherein the Articles of the Doctrine and Discipline of the reformed Churches throughout all the Realme, were written and set downe.
Meane time, the Courtiers sought and deuised, all the meanes of ioyes and pleasures they could inuent, thereby to solemnise the royall marriages, both of the Kings daughter, and of his sister. I speake not of the murther committed vppon the person of a renowmed Player of Comodies, who at that time had made most magnificall preparations, therewith to reioyce the Court, that was slaine in the house of Reims by his owne seruants, so that all his preparations were layd aside:Preparation for the marriages. neither yet of the Queenes Dreame, nor of the apprehensions and discourses of diuers Politicians, who were of opinion, that this great Wheele of earthly prosperities, would shortly turne about: onely I will shew you, that the sighes of prisoners for religion, the horrible torments vsed to some of them, and the earnest prayers of infinit numbers of families, threatned, and that wel perceiued, that the peace had beene agreed vppon, betweene the Frenchmen and the Spaniards, thereby to make a warre with them, that neuer should haue an end: were the winds that hoysed vp the wonderful and strange alterations, which the wise and prouident counsell of God, in short time after made to appeare.
Marriage of the King of France his daughter with king Phillip.Elizabeth of France, hauing been solemnely ledde and conducted by the King her father,andgt; vnto the Cathedrall church of Parris, and there most magnifically, and in great triumph, espoused by the Duke d'Alue, Deputie for the king of
Spaine his Maister. The espousals done by the Cardinall de Bourbon, and after fiers of ioy made for the peace, the reioycings of the people, glad of that rest and quietnesse, the Banquets, Proclaimations, and Ceremonies accustomed, with all maiestie performed, assisted by so many Noble Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Cardinals, Officers, and Domesticall seruants, both of the King and Queenes houshould: there likewise beeing present, the Dukes of Sauoy, and Alue, the Prince of Aurange, the Counte d'Aiguemont, and other Lords of the lowe Countries, in great numbers: and after the sumptuous banquets, playes, maskes, and daunces, followed the last act which changed all those ioyfull and pleasant Comodies, into bloodie and mornfull Tragedies, wherein the king played the lamentable Prologue: for that hauing published a running at Tilt, to bee performed within S. Anthonies streete,Atourney in S. A^thoniesstreete. where (against the aduise of those that besought him to leaue that exercise, to such as should shewe him pleasure therein) he would in person be a principall actor, seconded by the Dukes of Guise and Ferrare.

But the second day of his running, hauing runne verie often, the Queene desired him to leaue off, saying, that the Duke of
Sauoy might supply his place. He sent her word by the Marshall
de Montmorency, that hee would runne but once more, and that for the loue of her. Wherevppon hauing sent a Launce to the Counte de Montgommory, commanding him to runne against him, and the Counte earnestly excusing himselfe, eyther for the respect hee bare vnto his Prince, or fearing to faile, as the first day hee had many times done, not once touching any against whome hee ranne. The King sent him expresse commaundement not to refuse him. With that the Earle ranne, and breaking his Launce vppon the Kinges Cuirasse,The king sore hurt with a splinter of a lance a splinter thereof entered into the Kinges Vizarde, not beeing well closed, and by chaunce ranne into his eye, so farre in, that his head festered. Wherewith the King presently beganne to fall by reason of the blowe, but the Princes and Lordes ranne to him and ledde him into his Pallace of Touernelles, where in great dolor and paine he died, vpon the tenth day of Iuly,He died in the flower of his age. in the thirteenth yeare of his raigne, and the fortie and two yeare of his age: the day before his death, he desired that the marriage of the Duke of Sauoy and Lady Margaret his sister, should be celebrated in his Chamber: and that whatsoeuer had beene accorded vnto (by the treatie of peace) touching the Duke, should wholly bee performed. His heart was buried in the Temple of
Celestins, in the Chappell of the Dukes of Orleans, his royall Obsequies were celebrated vppon the thirteene day of August, and his bodie buried at Saint Dennis, in the Common Tombe for the Kinges of France. Of person hee was a goodly Prince, courteous, milde,The description of king Henry the second. louing his seruaunts and men of valour. Much addicted to his pleasures, and to beleeue such as knewe how to please his humour, who many times caused him to vse muche rigour, which hee could not so soone discouer: the ambition and auarice of certaine men that prouoked him forwarde, were the principall causes of the continuance of warres, which heretofore we haue noted: specially after the breache of truce, set lawes, Iustice, Offices and benefices to sale, diued into, and emptied the purses of French men, by infinit exactions, whereof ensued most great mischiefs.The estate of France, vnder this Prince. Two great sinnes raigned in France during the time of this Prince: that is, Atheisme, and Magicque. Whereunto may be added, the corruption of learning: For that the knowledge thereof, induced by King Francis the first, chaunged into diuers wicked and curious mindes, cause of all mischiefe, specially in the forme and phrase of French Poets, who in the raigne of
Henry, by their impure rimes, filled with all maner of blasphemies, conuerted an infinit number of soules. These sinnes and others, in great abundance still increased, drawing vpon both litle and great within the Realme of France, the straunge punishments which in the raignes of the successors to this Henry, full well appeared.
Fiue sonnes, and fiue daughters.By
Catherin de Medicis his wife, married in Anno. 1533, he had fiue sonnes and fiue daughters. The eldest, Francis the second, borne the 20. of Ianuary, 1543. The second Lois, the Duke of
Orleans, that died at the ende of certaine months. The third,
Charles Maxemilian, borne the 20. of Iune, 1550. King after the death of his brother. The 4. Edward Alexandre, after King, and called
Henry the third, born the 19. of September, 1551. The fift,
Hercules: after called Francis, Duke of Alencon, Aniou, and Berri, and Counte du Maine, borne the 18. of March, 1554. The eldest daughter was Elizabeth, promised to
Edward the sixt, King of England, but marryed to
Phillip king of Spaine, borne the 11. of Aprill, 1545. The second, Claude, maried to Charles Duke of
Lorraine, bonre the 12. of Nouember, 1547. The third,
Margaret, married to Henry de Bourbon, King of
Nauarre, borne the 14. of May, 1552. The fourth and fift, named
Iane, and Victoire, borne at one burthen, vpon the 24. of Iune, 1556, and died presently after. In this Historie you may behold, the successe and estate of the successors to this Henry, beeing his sonnes, with the first whereof I meane to begin.
Heere endeth the troubles, that happened in the raigne of
Henry the second.



Francis the second.

M.D.LIX.

The intent of King Henrie.KING
Henry (by the counsell giuen him touching the rupture of the truce, and by that which after ensued) hauing somewhat discouered, who and which they were, that gaue him euill aduise concerning his estate, was minded and fully resolued, after the solemnization of the marriages, to looke more particularly into such men, therby to retaine some, and send the rest vnto the places fro^ whence they came. But the wrath of God lay vppon the Realme, hauing striken the head, pursued the members, as heereafter it appeareth. Francis the second, yong in aduise,The state of France vnder Francis the second. The Nobilitie. The Courtiers. much more in yeares, was wholly left to the gouernment of his mother, and the vncles of his wife, that ruled ye land as you shal heare. Part of the Nobilitie wearied with the troubles of so long warres, desired nought but peace, leauing all care of publike charges, and casting their eyes vppon the surest side, thereon to lay hold. The Courtiers went which way the winde would blowe: as touching the officers of Iustice, most of them were friends or subiects vnto diuers Lords: some good and vpright men yet resting in the Court of Parliament, durst not almost proceed in any thing, as beeing abashed at the suddaine blowe, giuen vnto the chiefe and principall Court of Parliament, the last Mercurialist. The Ecclesiasticall persons,The Ecclesiasticall persons. held and accounted them for principall Pillers of the Church, that were the greatest burners. As touching the third estate, the great charges and troubles of warres forepast, had wholly bereaued them of al liuely feeling, and moouing.
Two parties.In the Court were two parts, the one, those that held with the Constable: the other the
Guisians. The Princes of the blood, had almost no care of the Common-wealth, nor yet of their owne affaires. The Queene-mother an Italian,
Florentine, of the familie of Medicis, and one that in 22. yeares, wherin she had continued in France, had some good time to knowe the humours both of the one, and the other, and behaued her selfe in such sort, that shee onely ruled.

Those of Guise.Which to attaine, and desiring wholly to driue away the Constable, whom shee did most suspect, shee held on the other side, and placed seruants about the King of Nauarre, by them to know and vnderstand his minde. Assoone as king Henry was deceased, the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall of Lorraine, led the King and his brethren, with the Queenes vnto the Louure, leauing the Prince of the Blood, the Constable, the Marshall, the Admirall, with diuers other knights of the Order, and Lords, that held with the Constable, to attend vppon the dead body. The beginning of the raigne of this young Prince, promised much, when suddainly they beheld
Francis Oliuier, a man of great reputation,Francis Oliuier, restored to be Chancellor. restored againe vnto his place of Chauncellor, and that had been put out of the place, by meanes of the Duches of Valentinois, that wholly ruled the deceased king: they were in further hope, whe^ they perceiued this Duches to be wholly out of credit: for that assoone as he was dead, they caused her to yeeld vp the keyes of the kings closet, with all his precious Iewels, that then were giuen vnto the Queene Regent.
But this was onely a particular quarrell betweene women, for in truth, the Duches during king Henries life, had been in all mens sight as Queen of France. The Queen-mother that hated her extreamly, was very glad to see her wholly dispoyled and driuen out of the Court, contenting her selfe therewith, not to leese the fauour of those of
Guise, who although they onely had their aduancement by the Duches meanes, perceiuing her to bee as a rotten plancke, left her, to pleasure themselues another way. They sent Bertrand (from whom the seales were taken) vnto Rome, and tooke from d'Auancon the ruling of the Treasures:Bertrand keeper of the Seales, discharged of his office. neuerthelesse, hee continued still in the Court, as beeing too well acquainted with their affaires, and as yet it was not necessary to compell him to accept of any new partie. The Marshall of
S. Andre, aduanced by the fauours of King Henry, to whom he was a secret seruant, and wholly fatned by the confiscations of the goods of those of the religion, and by borrowings, neuer to be repayed, hauing made offer of all that hee had, to the house of Guise, was receiued into their band.
The Constable sent homeThe Constable perceiuing, that the king in open Parliament, had declared, that his meaning was, that from thence foorth al men should haue recourse touching matters of estate, the crowne, and of his house, vnto his two Vncles, the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinall of Lorraine: and that by consequent, his mortall enemie entered into his place, and doing that, which wholly apperteined to his offices, of Constable, and Great-Maister of France: yea, and in the presence of the Spaniards, and other straungers, who before had made so much account of him: about eight daies after the kings death, went to present himselfe vnto the king, deliuering vppe the seales, to him committed by King
Henry: and hauing been certified from the king, that the charge of the treasures, and other affaires concerning the estate, were as then committed to the Cardinall: and to the Duke of Guise, the commandement of all things that belonged vnto the warres, and that for his part, the king permitted him leaue to depart, and go vnto his house: saying, hee still retained him of his Councell, and that whensoeuer hee would come vnto the Court, hee should bee welcome: he tha^ked the king for suffring him so to retire, beseeching him, that as touching his comming vnto the Councell, his Maiestie would excuse him, for two causes: the one, because hee could not serue vnder such men, ouer whom he had alwaies commaunded: the other, for that beeing holden and accounted for an olde and simple man, his counsell would not bee necessarie: otherwise, he offered
both life and goods to serue the King. Which done, he went to see the Queene mother, that handled him very rudely: reproching him, that he in presence of the king, with smiling countenance should say, that he had neuer a childe that in any thing resembled him, but onely his bastard-daughter, that married with the Marshall de Montmorency. Yet for the loue of her deceased king and husband, she said she was content to remit her owne particular quarrell: for which, if it pleased her, she could haue caused him to loose his head: yet she exhorted him, not altogither to leaue the Court, but to come thither sometimes. He denied the accusation which she alledged touching her children, affirming it to be false: desiring her to haue in remembrance the many seruices by him done to her, and to the Realme, and not to regard the euill report of such as were his enemies, that shuld not do him all the mischief which they pretended. And so hauing taken his leaue, and brought his maister vnto his Tombe, he withdrew himselfe vnto his house.
The Princes of the blood scattered.Touching the Princes of the blood, the Prince of
Conde was sent into Flanders, there to confirme the peace: to whom was deliuered a thousand Crownes to beare his charges. The Prince of
la Roche Suryon, was sent thither likewise to beare the order of
France vnto the king of Spaine, and at his returne, appointed with the Cardinal of Burbon, to co^duct the Princesse
Elizabeth into Spain. The Parlime^ts, were appointed at the good pleasure of those of Guise. The Cardinal de Turno^, an old enimy to the Co^stable, and to al those of the religio^, was repealed from Rome, reestablished of ye priuy councel:The Kings Officers of his house chaunged. part of the old officers of the kings house were discharged: part sent home vnto their houses, with half their pensions, to giue place to others. And to co^clude, there staied not one in the Court that fauoured the Constable. The Prouinces of the Realme, and the frontier Townes were filled with Guisians: and all Gouernours and men of warre commaunded to obey the Duke of Guise, as the king himselfe. All the Parliaments were aduertised,Those of Guise haue charge of all. that the Cardinall had the whole ordering and disposing of the treasures, and of the estate. The Queene Mother, aduanced aboue all, obtained the monies proceeding of the confirmation of Offices, and the priuiledges of Townes and corporations: whereof shee gaue a part to whome it pleased her: although such summes ought not of right to be exacted, vnlesse the Crowne fall into an other braunch.
First Edicts.The first Edicts, were made against such as bare Armes: namely, Pistols, and Bastinadoes: then against long Cloakes, and great Hose. It was a common saying in euery mans mouth, that the Cardinall was a fearefull man, if there were euer any in all the world: hauing vnderstood by a certaine Magician in
Rome, that by enuie, and then when he should be most in credit, his enemies would cause him to be slaine with a Bastianado: for that cause hee had procured that Edict, being alwaies in great distrust, euen at the time when all men were in most subiection to him. Among so many affaires, the 14. of Iuly, Letters Pattents from the king, confirmed the Commission vnto the Iudges, appointed to proceed in iudgement against
Anne du Bourg,Proces against Anne de Bourg, and other prisoners. and foure other Councellours that were committed to prison. Du Bourg, stedfast in religion, was hotly pursued.
Bertrand, Cardinall and Archbishop of Siens, beeing one of the principall wheeles of this criminall Chariot: and the Cardinall of
Lorraine the leader therof. Those of the religion, perceiuing themselues to be at the point of a more violent persecution, by expresse Letters vnto the Queene, besought her, by her authoritie, to commaund the leauing off to persecute them, in such great
rigor. Shee promised the Prince of Conde, Madame
de Roy his mother in lawe, and to the Admirall, to cause the persecutions for to cease, so they would leaue their assembling togither,The Queen-mother promiseth to doo for those of the religion. and that euery man wold liue according to his own conscience, secretly, and not to the hurt of others. Shee had been most earnestly mooued by the letters of one named Villemadon, that knew great part of his secrets, putting her in minde of her great affection vnto pittie, at such time as shee was barren, exhorting her, not to withdrawe the Princes of the blood from the mannaging of the affaires of the estate, thereby to aduance and make Kings the house of Guise. Those letters were written the 26. day of August, and wrought with so great effect, that from thenceforward for a certaine time, the Queene seemed to hearken vnto the comfort and ease of those of the religion: meane time, those of Guise, to make their gouernment seeme agreeable to al the people, and to leese nothing, in the kings name published letters of the reuocation of all alienations made,Alienations made by king Henry, reuoked. as well for life, as yeares, beeing for recompences of any seruices past, except those sales, whereof the monies had beene imployed for the kings great and vrgent affaires, the Dowries of the kings daughters, and that of the late Queene Ellenor, which as then the Princesse of Portingall enioyed: the rest to be revnited vnto the Kings domaines, and ordinary receipts. This reuocation was a Bowe to certaine Princes, great Lords, and notable personages: who by such pollicie were defeated of their seruices, and all rewards made vnto them, by the late deceased King. On the other side, such as were in fauour with the house of Guise, obtained other letters of exemption, and by that meanes, some were put out, and others kept possession, or else obtained some other new place.
The king of Nauarre solicited to come to the Court, rideth thither.The Constable perceiuing the King would die, had sent vnto the King of Nauarre, to counsell him with all speede to repaire vnto the Court, and to ceise vppon the gouernment of the young King, before any other. This Prince not greatly desirous to deale with such affaires, and as then somewhat distrusting the Constable, stirred not, giuing those of Guise the meanes and leisure to thrust themselues into his place, but certaine Princes and Lords, moouing him againe, hee beganne to hearken vnto it, communicating the same to foure of his principall Councellours, being Iarnac, the Bishop of
Mande, President of his Councell, Descars his Chamberlin, and Bouchart his Chancellour, who were of aduise, that without longer delay, he should ride vnto the Court: whereof those of
Guise beeing aduertised, promised hilles and mountaines to
Mande, and Descars, if they could finde the meanes to staye him: they mooued therewith, staying till their maister was on horsebacke, and onward of his iourney, began to diswade him, shewing him of certaine imminent daungers that were not to bee shunned, by seeking to stand too much vppon his degree, and that hee ought to proceede therein by indifferent meanes, without seeking to hazard himselfe, and to winne the good report and fauour of all men: vpon this counsell beeing come to
Poictiers, where diuers Princes and Noblemen went to meet him, hee shewed many resolutions, and gaue good hope and comfort vnto the Ministers of the Churches, specially those in Parris, Orleans, and Tours, desiring him, that they might as yet bee ayded and assisted, touching that which concerned the open profession of religion.What entertainment hee had. The first disliking shewed vnto him, when hee approached neare the Court, beeing at
S. Germain in Laye, was, that his furriers found no place for him within the Castle: and that the Duke of Guise said vnto his Marshall, that it should cost him his life, and tenne thousand more with him, before any man should take the place and lodging which the king had giuen him, to be neare vnto his person. The second, that not any of the Court, went to meet and receiue him, as the manner is, specially to the Princes of the blood. The third, that being gone to do his dutie to the Queene-mother, and after, to the king: those of
Guise, in stead of going to imbrace and bid him welcome, stayed til he went vnto them: and was constrained to accept the lodging of the Marshall of S. Andre, who after the courtly manner, had offered it vnto him, not thinking to be so soone taken at his word. The fourth, that the next day, in stead of being warned to sit in counsell, no man was sent vnto him, eyther to salute him, or once to see what he did. The fift, that at the end of three or foure daies, the king called him aside, shewing him, that his Vncles the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinall of Lorraine, had the whole charge of all affaires committed vnto them: and that whosoeuer would seeke to please him, must obey them in all things whatsoeuer. But touching his pensions and estates, hee confirmed them vnto him, assuring him, that whensoeuer he would come vnto the Court, hee should be heartily welcome. Diuers of the king of
Nauarres traine, perceiuing that he had quietly swallowed all those pilles, withdrewe themselues, or else claue to the surest side: as Iarnac, that ioyned with those of Guise. Within fewe daies after, this Prince went vnto Saint Dennis, there to accomplish certaine ceremonies accustomed after the death of king
Henry: which done, he went to Parris, accompanied with his brother the Prince of Conde, and some others, but not many: and beeing there, hee sounded the aduise and minds of some, whom he esteemed to be well affected vnto the Realme, but he could not perceiue any thing by them.
Sacrying of the King as Reims.Those of Guise following on their course, vpon the 18. of September, caused the king to be sacred at Reims: and presently after, the Queene-mother sent the Admirall, and the Cardinall of Chastillon, to the Constable, to intreat him to resigne his place of Great-maister, vnto the Duke of Guise: to whom the yeare before, king
Henry had flatly denied it, in exchange whereof, she promised him one of the offices of Marshals of France, for his eldest son.The Constable resigneth his estate of great maister, and the Admirall his gouernment, which was giuen to Brissae The Constable resigned that office wholly into the kings ha^ds, and got the other with al speed to be giuen vnto his son: and the Duke of Guise was presently inuested therwith. The Admirall being Gouernour of Picardie, perceiuing that they sought to put him out, and that for the same cause, they had assayed to set diuision betweene him and the Prince of Conde, and that they beganne to cut off some part of the mony that should bee imployed about the charges of the necessary fortifications of the Frontier-townes, thereby to bring him in disgrace, and so to thrust him out with shame: preuented them, and shewed the king, that the same gouernment for many reasons, belonged to the Prince of Gonde, whose ancestors had long time held it. He had no sooner spoken the word, but they presently tooke him thereat, as touching the resignation, but not concerning the prouision: for that in stead of giuing it to the Prince, those of Guise got the^ a new participant, bestowing it vpon the Marshall de Brissac. While in this sort,Writings against the rule of strangers. they vsed both the Princes, and great Lords, the meaner sort could not be content, for that by diuers printed pamphlets, whereof some were directed to the Queen-mother, some in taunting verse, and some in prose, both by the behauiors past and present, they fully discouered the intent of those of Guise,A Target against those deuises. whom they printed forth in all their colours: they by those dealings, perceiuing some secret matter working, and that their authoritie was but weakly built, bega^ to think better vppo^ it: which was the cause that at one time, they made 18. knights of the order:
whereof sprang the common saying, that the order of
France is a collor for euery beast. And because in those writings it was noted, that to preuent such disorders, it would bee necessarie to assemble and call a Parliament of all the estates of the land: they perswaded the king, to hold him whatsoeuer he were, for a mortall enemie to his authoritie, and guiltie of treason, that should once speake, or mooue the question to bridle it, or to appoynt a Protector ouer him: that they were but practises and deuises, of such as liued discontent, solicited therevnto by Hereticques, that onely sought to ouerthrowe and spoyle the religion of his fathers.
Meanes to interrupt the Parliament.The Queene-mother likewise, no lesse then they, doubted the assembly of this Parliament, and at that time, things were so gouerned, that the King of
Spaine wrote letters to the King his brother in lawe, which were openly read in the Councel-chamber, the king of Nauarre being present: wherin (he said) hee vnderstood, that certaine mutunous, and rebellious persons, inforced the^selues to mooue and stirre vp troubles, thereby to change the gouernment of the Realme, as if the king as then raigning, were not sufficient and capable thereof, and to giue the charge to whom it pleaseth him, without the consent and will of others, or of any his subiects, that for his part, hee would imploye his whole forces, to maintaine the authoritie of the King, and of his officers whatsoeuer: yea, and that it shuld cost both his, and fortie thousand mens liues, alreadie prepared, if any man were so bolde to attempt the contrary: for that hee bare him such affection,The King of Spaines declaration. (as hee said) that from thencefoorth, hee declared himselfe both Tutor, and Protector of him and of his Realme, as also of his affaires, which hee no lesse regarded then his owne. Not long after, the king of Nauarre returned vnto Bearg.
Petitions to the Queene, and what ensued.The pursuites against the Councellor du Bourg, proceeding, moued those of the religion in Parris, to present a petition to the Queen-mother, exhorting her vnto her dutie, withall, setting downe and threatning the vengeance of God, and the daunger that might ensue, by meanes of those so hard and rigorous dealings: which in the end, might turne vnto great troubles. At the first, she aunswered them with an angrie countenance, but in the end, she became somewhat milder, making shew to desire to see one of the Ministers of Parris, to conferre with him. Madame de Roy prouided one, and this Minister went as farre as Reims, where hee stayed a certaine time, but neuer could speake with her, but shee still found some excuse, when any man tolde her of him. Besides du Bourg, about the end of this yeare, diuers were imprisoned within Parris for the religion, and their houses pilled and robbed, as if it had beene in a Towne taken by assault: witnesses beeing seduced,Slaunders and false witnesse against those of the religion. to protest and verifie, that in a certaine assembly made vppon the Thursday before Easter, in the place of Manbert, at a Councellours house, great numbers of Lutherians, men, women, and maides, after the sermon and solemnisation of their Sabbaoth, had eaten a Pig in stead of the Pascal-lambe, and that the candles being put out, euery man tooke his woman, and had his pleasure with her.
The Cardinall by these informations, mooued all the Court: but the Queene-mother for that cause, hauing spoken against certaine of her Gentlewomen, that were of the religion, they found the meanes that in her presence, the two principall witnesses were examined, beeing two young boyes, who said and affirmed, both then and many times before, they had had their pleasures of that Councellours daughters: but in fine, they began to stagger, and couertly to deny in neuerthelesse, the accusation and proces went forward, and because that at the taking of the prisoners, there had beene some resistance in the subburbes of S. Germaine, they sent from house to house, to search for all their weapons, and tooke them away, not leauing them so much as a knise, which were carried into the house of Guise.
The Councellour so shamefully slandered, went with his wife and daughters, and yeelded himselfe prisoner,Innocency found, but in no sort maintained, as it appeareth. where the daughters were sound to bee Virgins: but without doing iustice vppon the false witnesses, and such as had procured them, by vertue of a certaine edict that set prisoners at libertie, which were accused for religion, and notwithstanding their complaints and declarations, they were in a manner forcibly thrust out of the place: and while they were holden prisoners, diuers were burnt wiihin Parris, and other Townes, onely for the religion, which among all those troubles did much increase.
A declaration against the authoritie vsurped by strangers.On the other side, hatred increased both from great and small, against the house of Guise. About the end of October, a Proclamation was made touching the assembly of a Parliament: wherein was prooued, that it appertained vnto the Parliament, to prouide for the gouernment of their kings that were in minoritie: that the king spake nothing, but by the mouthes of the Vncles of his wife: that the Cardinall of Lorraine, and the Duke of Guise, were vncapable of the Gouernment, the one beeing a Priest, and a creature of the Pope, the other and all his familie, euen in the life of the late deceased king, hauing beene so bolde, to say that the Realme belonged to the house of Lorraine, as issued from the race of Charlemaigne, vpon the which Hugh Capet had vsurped: that they had manisestly striuen for certain members thereof: as the Counte of Pronince, and the Duchie of Aniou: they set downe the lamentable effects of their ambition, in the breach of peace: and in the last voyage into
Italie, cause of the ouerthrowe of the battell of S.
Lawrence, and danger of all the Realme: which to auoyde, they were constrained to yeeld vppe all the conquests of Francis the first, and Henry the second: they forgot not likewise their exactions, their dealing with the treasures, and the great debts of the king.
Meanes to vphold that authoritie.They perceiuing that the king which beganne to growe vppe, gaue no great hope, eyther of long life, or issue, beganne likewise with more care to prouide for their affaires. They sought to obtaine and procure vnto themselues, diuers seruants and friends in the Parliamant, inticed the Courtiers, and all the captaines and men of warre to fauour them, shewing a great zeale to the Romish religion, thereby to winne the hearts both of the spiritualtie, and the Cannons. And in the month of Nouember, to please them, a rigorous edict was published against the assemblies of those of the religion, who being found with the maner, were presently condemned to die, their houses rased, and great recompence promised vnto such as should disclose their assemblies. These edicts published, the persecution followed, but the spies beeing abashed of themselues, there were other edicts published against all those that fauoured any of the religion, and that once seemed to abash eyther the Iudges, or the witnesses in any such proces.
The President Minard and Iulian Forme stain.The eighteenth of December, Anthony de Minard, President in the Parliament of Parris, was slaine with a Pistole, as in the euening he returned from the place, to go to his house, but it could neuer bee knowne from whence it came, no more then of the death of Iulian Ferme, Agent for the house of
Guise, slaine hard by Chambourg where the king laye, and sound with certaine notes and memorials, cocerning the liues of certaine notable personages, some were imprisoned, and in great danger for the death of Minard: and among the rest, one Stuard a Scot, who (although he was of the linage of the Queen as then raigning) was cruelly tortured: yet could they not drawe any thing from him, that once might preiudice himselfe, or any other.
About this time, the Elector Palatin, hauing sent his Ambassadour vnto the king, to craue that the Councellour du Bourg might bee giuen to him, to serue him in the towne of Heidelberg: the Cardinal being greatly moued at the death of Minard, wrote vnto the Court of Parliament, that they should presently proceed with their proces against du Bourg: but before it proceeded so farre, expresse Proclamations were once againe made and published against bearing of armes.
Anne de Bourg executed for religion.The 20. of December, Anne de Bourg hauing constantly perseuered in the consession of the faith, concerning those poynts, which at this day are in controuersie and debate touching religion, was degraded: and the next day, the Iudges caused to the number of sixe or seuen hundreth men, as well horse as footemen, and all armed, to set vppe Gibbets, and to carry wood into all the places of Parris there vnto appoynted. And in this sort, vpon the 23. of the same moneth,
du Bourg was led to S. Iohn in Greue, and there hanged: which done, his bodie was burnt and consumed to ashes. Presently after, other were burnt in Parris, and many other places, for the religion, and many meanes inuented to massacre such as passed along the streets, not doing reuerence vnto the Images, as then newly set vppe at all the corners of the streets, and euery passenger was constrained to contribute their money to the boxes presented vnto them, therewith to beare the charge of the waxe-candies,Extraordinary rigors. that were set vppe to burne before them, otherwise it cost the^ their liues. They went likewise from house to house, to gather mony for the maintenance of the officers, and suings of proces, against such as were found faultie therein: and whosoeuer refused or delayed to put his hand into his purse, sped but hardly for it.
The vsurpation of the insupportable dealings of the house of Guise, awaked the French men.These proceedings altogither vnsupportable, the threatnings against the greatest personages in the Realme, the putting backe of the Princes and principall Lords of the Realme, the despising of the Estates of the land, the corruptions of the Courts of Parliament, adicted to the part of the newe and straunge Gouernours, that ruled both the king and Queene, the common treasors, the offices, and the benefices diuided and giuen at their commaundement, and to whom it pleased them, their violent, and of it selfe vnlawsull gouernment against the lawes of the land, and the order of the Realme, mooued most great and maruellous hatreds against the Duke of
Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine, and caused that diuers not being able longer to indure so great oppression, beganne to vnite themselues to gither, thereby to determine vppon some iust defence, that so they might erect the auncient and law full gouernment of the land. Whervpon counsell was asked (both touching lawe and conscience) of diuers Lawyers and Diuines: wherof the greatest part concluded, that men might lawfully oppose and resist against the gouernment vsurped by those of Guise, and if need were, take armes, thereby to repulse and withstand their violences, so that the Princes who in that case are borne as lawful Magistrates, or ony one of them would take the matter vppon him, beeing therevnto required by all the Estates of the land, or else by the greatest part thereof. The first, that with earnest zeale determined vppon this matter of so great consequence, were not all of one opinion: for some of them mooued with a true zeale of seruing God, the king, and the Realme, beleeued verily, that they could not do a more iust and vpright worke, then to procure the abolition of
Ferrany, and the reestablishment of the Estate, and withall, to open the way to some meanes of comfort and reliese to those of the religion. There were some that were desirous of change, and the rest prouoked by euill will and hatred conceiued against those of the house of
Guise, for hauing done some wrong and outrage, eyther against themselues, their friends, or allies. But in effect, their onely and finall intent, was, to inforce themselues wholly to worke the meanes to cease that vnlawfull gouernment, and that the Estate of the realme might bee established as it ought to bee. But for that in this intent, both generall, lawfull, and commendable, there chanced diuers particular and defectiue discourses, it is not to bee wondred at, if that there happened a confusion in the pursuit, and that if the euent fell out but badly, for those that tooke it in hand, specially such as mixed their particular passions, with the consideration of the common profit of the land. For as touching those that onely determined to release and free the Realme of
France from the yoake of strangers, although the greatest part of them are dead in the pursuite thereof, as well then, as since that time, in the raignes of the two kings ensuing, and that as yet, that debate not being determined, yet are they gon out of this world, with that most singular contentment in their mindes, to haue most couragiously sacrificed and yeelded vppe their liues, to reduce their countrie into a true, spiritual, and corporall libertie.
Difficultie, in a great enterprise.In these first enterprises, there appeared an other great and doubtfull difficultie, which was, how they should beginne to addresse themselues vnto the king, for that besides his minoritie, hee had no great vnderstanding, and it was impossible to speake vnto himselfe about such affaires, considering his whole affection and desire was, to bend himselfe vnto the counsel of those two whom they sought to withdrawe and separate from him. To present the matter vnto his priuie Councell, would be as much, as to allowe their aduersaries to bee their Iudges, and so euidently to worke their own confusion: to haue recourse vnto the Parliaments, it would lesse auaile, and yet more daungerous: so that in fine, the surest way was found to bee, by ceising vppon the persons of the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinall of Lorraine, by some deuise, and vnder the name of some one, or some number of the principall members of the Estate, to demaund an assembly of a Parliament, to the end, that they two might there yeeld an account of the administration of the affaires of the land. Wherevppon Lois de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, was most instantly desired to hearken therevnto, and by that meanes to hinder and impeach the to tall ruine, both of the king and Queene.
The Prince of Conde much affected to the good of the king, and of his Realme.And as some haue lightly thought and written, that all this whole proceeding, after named the tumult of
Amboise, had been an enterprise of men, wholly rash, seditious, enemies to God and the Estate, prouoked by dispaire, and induced by fury: so is it found and esteemed by others, euil affected vnto the house and memorie of this Prince, that durst presume to charge him to haue bin mooued and pushed forward, with some particular affection that entered into his minde, and that it was but a meere quarrell against the house of Guise, which by that meanes hee sought to end, and after that, to mooued some greater change: but not to turne this smal Cronicle, into a large Apologie: it shall suffice, simply to rehearse those things, which for the most part, are fresh and in the memorie, of many a Frenchman as then liuing, and such as were borne since, and hauing beene faithfully informed thereof: for, as for men that are partiall, who to gratifie such as held the sword ouer their heades, while they caused the bookes (wherein most impertinently they handle this matter) to bee imprinted, without saying woorse by them, both the world present, and to come, will wholly reiect their witnesse, as full of euident and meere passion, and cleane repugnant to the truth: and will auouch, that the Prince therein shewed himselfe to be a true Frenchman, and most affectionate friend vnto the good and seruice both of the king and Realme.
The Prince then, with his most secret Councell, hauing long and deliberately thought and consulted vppon this poynt, wherein hee was desired to be assistant: as in truth the sequell therof required: first gaue expresse charge and commission, to certaine wise, expert, and well approoued friends, secretly, carefully, and exactly, to inquire, what were the principall thinges that might bee imposed against those of
Guise, which beeing knowne, with a good and safe conscience hee might looke into that which should redownd, vnto the good both of the king, and of his Realme. The informations made, it was found and well known, by men, both of person and quallitie, and such as were indifferent, that they might well and lawfully bee charged with diuers poynts of treason, as also with an infinit number of pillings and interceptions, as well of the treasures of the Common-wealth, as of particular persons. And among other notable crimes, he was assured and offered to haue it iustified, by such as in a maner had beene their houshold seruants, that they ment to cease vppon the Realme,Abreefe collection of the informations made against those of Guise. and put all the Princes of the blood to death, assoone as they once had fully exterped those of the religion: determining in short space to rid themselues of all their enemies, hauing alreadie vnderstood by the Phisitians, that the king could not liue long, neither yet haue issue: which in mans iudgement might easilie be effected, considering that those of Guise, had both iustice, mony, strong Townes, men of warre, and the people at their commandement.
Monsieur Renaudie vndertaketh the charge to cease vpon the bodies of the Guisians.The question was, these informations beeing made, how the persons of those parties so charged, might bee taken and ceased vpon. This was the difficultie which Godfrey de la Remaudie, surnamed la Forest, Barron de Perigot, and a Gentleman of an ancient house, vndertooke to resolue, accepting the mannaging thereof vnder the authoritie of the Prince, who in person promised to bee at the day, and in in the place, where, and when, those of Guise should so bee taken: vppon condition, that nothing should bee sayd, enterprised, nor done, in any sort whatsoeuer, eyther against God, the king, his bretheren, the Princes, nor the Estate: that in doing otherwise, hee would himselfe bee he, that first should seeke for to oppose against al those that vndertooke the contrary: which conclusion was made about the end of the yeare 1559.
1560.The Lady Elizabeth of
France, married vnto the King of Spaine, departed from the Court of Blois, about the beginning of December, beeing conducted
by the king her brother, and the Queene her mother, as farre as Chastellerault and Poictiers, and keeping on her way with the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Prince de la Roche Suryon, and other great Lords, into Gascon: at
Bourdeax the King of Nauarre met her, and so ledde her with great honour through his countries, keeping her companie vntill hee entered vppon the borders of Spaine,The Ladie Elizabeth le^de into Spaine. where she was receiued by the Noblemen and Lords, appointed by king
Philip, who with great pompe and magnificence, they led vnto their Maister, about the beginning of this yeare.
An order for prouision of Offices.The first of Ianuarie, a Proclamation was made in the kings name, for the prouision of Iudiciall offices, the nomination of the offices beeing committed vnto the Iudges, and the Kings officers: who nominating three persons for each office, they should giue their names vnto the king, that out of them hee might chuse him, whom hee iudged to bee fit and capable for the place. But this was but an ordinance in paper, and wholly without effect, as many others had been: the same moneth, and the next, the proces against the Councellors,Coucellors holden prisoners, released.la Porte, de Foix, du Faut, and Fumee, that had beene comitted prisoners, with Anna du Bourg, were ended, and all they for a small fine, were set at libertie. They vsed all the meanes they could, to condemne the Councellour Fumee, but hee behaued himselfe so well and wifely, against all the Iudges, and other his aduersaries, that in the end, hee wound himselfe out of their hands.
Assembly at Nautes.But to returne to that which is more important: The first of February, la Renaudie with a great number of the Nobilitie, and others of all the Prouinces of the Realme, met at Nautes, where vnder colour of soliciting certaine proces in the Parliament of Britaigne, which as then was holden therein, they assembled, where after certaine inuocations vpon the name of God, al before recited, was there by Renaudie exposed and declared. And after diuers of the^ had giuen their iudgements, and esteemed the enterprise to be both iust and necessary: one among therest required, that before they gaue their promise, each of them should sweare, and solemnely vowe to God, not to enterprise or do any thing against the authoritie of the king, or the Estate of France, protesting for his part, that if he might perceiue it, that euen when the execution should bee brought to effect, hee would aduertise the king, and sooner suffer himselfe to bee slaine before his face, then to indure that any thing should bee done, to preiudice his person, that being iudged by the^ al, to be most reasonable and iust, euery man swore, not to attempt any thing, but onely for the good, profit, and moditie of their king and naturall Lord: as also the beginning of the Articles of their accord, was framed in these words: Protestation made by the head,The solemne protestation of the confederates. and al his Councell, not to attempt any thing against the Maiestie of the King, Princes of the blood, nor the lawfull State of France.
After all their consents giuen, they determined vppon that which was most requisit for the execution: where Renaudie hauing shewed them his minde, sware and made all the company to sweare. And among them it was agreed, that vpo^ the tenth of March, the apprehension of those of Guise should bee performed, within the Towne of
Blois, where they presumed the King would still remaine.
Fiue of these Gentlemen of each Prouince, with other forces, were to accompany Renaudie, vnder the conduct of the Barron of
Chastelnau and others, for the troupes of all the Prouinces.

They likewise prouided for many other things, that might impeach this great and hautie enterprise. The company beeing withdrawne, euery man with his commission,Order giuen for the execution. and the place of meeting agreed vppon, vppon the last of Februarie, Renaudie hauing aduertised the Prince what had beene done at Nantes, hee tooke exact order, and that in great diligence, and almost incredible, for all that was to bee required therein, on his behalfe: and not long after, beeing come to Parris, there with more commoditie to effect his promise, he laye in the subburbes of S. Germaine, with a certain Councellor of the Court of Parliament, named
Des Auenelles, that had a house furnished after the manner of
Parris. This Auenelles that made profession of religion, perceiuing much resort of many seueral persons into his house,Des Auenelles discouered the enterprise against those of Guise. and vndersta^ding somwhat by their words, in the end, hee fully perceiued their intent: so that he likewise promised them to imployed himselfe therein: but hauing with himselfe apprehended the danger, hee beeing poore, couetous, and desirous of aduancement, thought to haue found the meanes to helpe himselfe, and with another of the same humour, went to one of the Maisters of Requests, called
l'Alemant, Agent for the Cardinall, and Milet, Secretarie to the Duke of Guise, to whom he shewed the whole pretence.
How the Guisians prouided for themselues.The matter proceeding in this sort, those of
Guise, the Chancellor, and the Queene, were made acquainted therewith: and Des Auenelles hauing had some reward, was sent fro^
Blois to Parris, there to giue out false reports against those of the religion. Besides that, those of Guise sent letters in the name of the king, and of his mother, vnto the Admirall and his brethren, to will them to come vnto the Court.
They likewise gathered people on all sides, and wrote vnto all Bailiffes and Seneschales, to stay all men, both horse and foote, that should bee found bearing of armes, and trauelling to
Amboise. Touching the Admirall, hee beeing arriued, made great protestation vnto the Queen-mother, in presence of the Chancellor, touching the great and extreame rigors, vsed against those of the religion, desiring her to cause those persecutions to bee ended, till they might haue a holy and free councell. Where vppon the Chauncellor did so liuely set down the Admirals aduise before the Councell, the Guisians beeing present,Edist of abolition, touching religion. that presently there ensued an edict of abolition of all forepassed ordinanced concerning the religion, excluding out of that pardon, the Ministers, and such as should be found to haue conspired against the king, his mother, his wife, the Princes, his principall officers, and the Estate, also such as by force had rescued prisoners out of the Officers handes, and taken the kings packets, and slaine his messengers. This edict was made in the beginning of March, which notwithstanding la Renaudie left not off to pursue his enterprise, although hee knewe it well to bee disclosed.
The Prince ryding vnto the Court, to shewe the King and his Councell, the information giuen against those of Guise, assoone as they should be taken, and to require a Parliament of all the estates, being betweene Orleans and Blois, hee vnderstood that all had beene discouered, which notwithstanding he passed forward, thereby to encourage his men. And beeing arriued at
Amboises those of Guise braued him, as much as possible they might: but hee making a shewe, as if hee knewe not what they ment, put them in no little feare.
The chaunging of place, caused la Renaudie to stay in a place called la Carreliere, The maruellous resolutio^ of la Renaudie and others. Lignieres discouereth the enterpriseabout 6. myles from
Amboise, with the principall of his Councell, and the day of executio^ was appoynted to be vpo^ the 6. of that month, in such sort, that those of Guise, although they knewe thereof, had found themselues in no small daunger, with all their adberents, had it not been for Captaine Lignieres: who approaching neare Amboise, to bee assistant at the enterprise, instead of ayding them, went vnto the Court, and there particularly described the names of the Leaders, their meeting-place, with all the circumstances.
The Queen-mother alledging for his excuse, that hee did it to saue the honour of the Prince, whom hee perceiued to be wrongfully accused of treason, and thereby in daunger of his life: by which meanes, the company was no sooner arriued at the place appoynted, but that they were taken and ledde prisoners, one after the other, not once being able to ioyne themselues togither: those of Guise in the meane time, assembled men on all sides, (which fell out well for them) discouered diuers Pistoles and other weapons brought in Trunkes, which were presently ceased vpon: and by that means, they brought the prisoners by dozens and scores, into Amboise: wherevppon the twentieth of March, all the kings guard were changed, and the Gate where the companies of
Renaudie and his troupes should haue entered, was closed vp. The Barron de Chastelnau, and Captaine Mazieres, beeing arriued in the subburbes of la Riche in Tours, and there discoued,What happened to the Baron de Chastelnau and his company. were set vpon by the Counte de Sancerre, but hauing resisted him, as hee thought to cease vppon them, hee was constrained in all haste to retire, and yet without any hurt, eyther to him or his: from thence, the Barron and his companie went to the Castle of
Noisay, where hee found the principall dealers in that enterprise.
Those of Guise hauing made the king beleeue, that certaine rebells were assembled to murther him, hee sent the Duke de Nemours with a troupe of men, who hauing surprised Raunay and
Mazieres, walking without the Castle, tooke them prisoners: many of their men saued themselues, some one way, some an another.
Nemours hauing inuironed the Castle with a strong guard, and brought them two vnto Amboise, after dinner returned againe, with a troupe of fiue or sixe hundreth horses.
The Barron had sent Renaudie, to make haste to come to relieue him, not minding to abandon the place, wherein hee found both armes, powder, and munition. But perceiuing himselfe inclosed, and the Duke returned againe, hee beganne to parley, being required therevnto, and hauing at large declared the causes of that their enterprise, the Duke oftentimes desired him to leaue his armes, and to come and speake with the king, binding himselfe vnto him by the faith of a Prince, that neyther hee, nor any of his, should once be hurt, but all freely set at libertie. The Barron assuring himselfe vppon the word of a Prince, was content to doo as hee desired, the like did all the rest. But beeing in Amboise, they spake not vnto any man, but onely to such as the Duke of Guise would send vnto them.
La Renaudie, the same day being aduertised what had past at Noisay, commaunded the troupes that were beyond the riuer, to march straight vnto Amboise, which they did within the wood, but beeing stayed and intrapped,The troupes sent by Renaudie taken and surprised. by the horsemen sent thither by those of Guise, most of them were taken: who being ledde prisoners, were presently hanged, and then cast into the water: those that were best apparrelled, and likeliest men, were slaine within the woods, to spoyle them of that they had. Therest of the troupes stayed for in the place appoynted were taken, and the Souldiers were tyed by 15. in a companie at horses tailes, and so cast into prison.
The Duke of Guise king in effect.Therevppon, the 17. of March letter were sent out, by the which, after a long discourse made against the prisoners of
Amboise, the Duke of Guise was by the king, declared his Lieftenant Genenerall, with all power to raise in, both foote and horse, therewith to punish the rebelles, without any other forme or manner of Iustice. Other letters were sent out the same day, with commmaundement vnto al those that were in armes, readie to come vnto Amboise, beeing aduertised by their leaders,Meanes to dispearse the troupes. and vppon their faiths giuen, should within 24. houres after the sight of those letters, depart and get them home into their countries, vpon paine to bee hanged, if they once presumed to do the contrary.
The death of Renaudie.The next day, as
Renaudie sought to assemble his troupes, hee was met in the Forrest of the Castle Regnaut, by one named Pardillan, that shot a Pistole at him, but hauing fayled, Renaudie slewe him: but one of Pardillans seruaunts with a shot of a Caliuer, flewe Renaudie: his bodie was carried vnto Amboise, and hanged vppon the Bridge, with a writing made fast to his necke, containing these words: La Renaudie, called la Forest, chiefe of the rebels. The death of la Renaudie, was the cause that diuers of those which ment to assemble, separated themselues, and so retired. But no man made any great pursuite after them: Renaudie had with him fiue hundreth horse, followed by 1000. more, not accounting the footemen.
Among the rest of the prisoners, there was one la Bigne, that had beene Secretarie vnto la Renaudie, about whom was found a paper written in Ciphers: and to saue his lise, he disciphered the paper, which contained nothing but onely that which had been concluded by al the Associates, with their expresse protestation, not to attempt any thing against the kings Maiestie, the Princes of his blood, nor against the State of the Realme, the articles tending onely to this poynt: to take the Gouernment from those of Guise, and to cause the auncient custome of France to be obserued, by a lawfull Parliament. Hee was likewise found ceased with an humble petition vnto the king, in the behalfe of those of the religion: wherein the vniust proceedings of the Cardinall, against the Parliament of Parris, and Anna du Bourg, with others, were fully discouered. Those of
Guise at the first,The souldt-diers that were prisoners released. wold not haue saued any of the prisoners: but thinking that the ouer great number that should bee executed, would make them to be hated of all men, caused the souldiers to bee set at libertie, and to each man they gaue a teston, to bring them on their way. The Captaines la Motte, Cocqueuille, and others, had not lost courage, but gaue a whot alarme vnto the Courtiers of Amboise, and had it not beene by meanes of some wrong intelligence, that constrained them to retire, without losse of their horsemen, the enterprise had surely been executed, but it was nothing but a meanes to kindle the chollor of those of Guise, who that last time caused all the footemen that might bee taken, presently to bee hanged, and as then it was a most daungerous time for all sorts of men, eyther souldiers, Marshants, or others, to bee found abroad without Amboise: for that the least hurt they could receiue, was presently to bee spoyled, and stripped of all they had, and then the theeues, who vnder colour to ayde the king (to whom a new guard was giuen, composed onely of such kinde of men, both horse and foote) committed most straunge and cruell extortions.

The first execution of the prisoners.Those of Guise, perceiuing the troupes that ment to cease vpon them to bee gone, and the rest in prison, and being ayded by those that from all places came to helpe them, beganne to make pursuit after such as were retiring, whereof some they tooke: they commaunded the Prince of Conde in the Kings name, not to depart from the Court without expresse licence, and beganne to hang, drowne, and behead their prisoners, which continued for the space of one whole moneth. All the riuer of Loire being couered with dead bodies, tyed by sixe, eight, tenne, twelue, and fifteene, at long Poles: the streetes of
Amboise lay full of dead mens blood, and euery place was hanged with dead bodies: many were hanged at the windowes of the Castle, and to make men beleeue that all this proceeded onely from those of the religion, that sought to establish themselues by armes: they questioned with the greatest part of them, touching the Articles of their faith,The kings complaints against the Guisians. and disputed with them of the poynts of the religion now in controuersie, therby to blinde matters: and not once touching that which wholly concerned the Estate, and for which cause the enterprise was taken inhand.
Some that returned according to the kings permission, being intrapped, and brought prisoners to Blois: found frends, that sent vnto the king, and the Queen his mother, to procure their deliuerance, but by no meanes they could be spoken withall, the soliciters beeing threatned to bee cut and hewed in peeces, if they happened to present themselues before the king: he would oftentimes in weeping say vnto them: What haue I done vnto my people? what mean they to deale thus with mee? I will heare their complaints, and doo them iustice. Sometimes hee said to those of
Guise: I knowe not what the matter is, but I vnderstand they haue nothing to say but vnto you: I would that for a time you should absent your selues from hence, to the end, that men might see, if it bee against mee, or you, that they complaine.
They very cunningly, and presently, bandied such blowes, and to diuert the people from giuing credite vnto the demonstrations made touching the cause and iustification of their enterprise, they sent letters in the kings name, vnto all the Parliaments and Iudges of seuerall prouinces, wherein those of the religion were accused to haue conspired against the King,A combat of pennes against swords the Princes of the blood, and the Estate of the Realme, wherevnto was made a most large and ample aunswere, wherein all the dealings of those of Guise, were fully discouered, with plaine and most euident proofes against them, to bee guiltie of high treason, and not those that had assembled, to reduce the King and all his realme, into true and perfect libertie. There was likewise published an other pamphlet, shewing by the example of Phillip de Commines, in the last chap. of his first booke, that such are open enemies vnto the Estate, that say it is treason to speake o^ the assembly of a generall Parliament. And that it is the meanes to lessen and diminish the kings authoritie. There was likewise aduertisements vnto the people, and complaints vnto the Parliament: and so some ayded themselues with pen, against the swords of their enemies.
Reuocation of the abolition giuen by the king.The 22. of march, other letters were sent foorth, whereby the king declared, that his meaning was not, that the abolitio^ of the 17. of March, shuld extend further but vnto those, that simply and of ignorance had assembled and trauelled for the keeping of their promise, and that therein were not comprehended such as had guided the conspiracie made against his person, the Queens, Princes, and Noble personages that were about him: in the which number are contained those that came in armes, into the subburbes of the Towne, and such as had beene taken about, and within the Castle of Noisay: which serued for a dispensation of the faith, giuen by the Duke de Neuers, vnto the Barron of Chastelnau, and others.
Presently after these letters, they returned to executions, wherin neither day nor night passed, but that a great number of prisoners were put to death, and all men of quallitie, some hanged, some drowned, the rest beheaded, without any publike sentence giuen, without declaring the causes of their deaths, or without telling their names. They constrained the king and his young bretheren, to bee assistant at those spectacles. Besides that, the Duke of Guise many times for a pastime, after his dinner, caused some of those whom hee most hated of the prisoners, to bee brought foorth, and hanged out at his chamber windowes.
The Barron de Chastelnau, made a maruellous proces against those of Guise, and the Duke de Nemours, they beeing present, thereby made the Chauncellor stand still, and all amazed, that dealt in those affaires against his conscience, and appealed from the sentence giue^ against him before God: the like did most of all the rest, to the great astonishing of all the assistants, perceiuing a most inuincible constancie in all those men: but neither the stout courages of the prisoners, nor yet the cries of both great and small, that as then were present at those executions, could not in any sort, once mollifie the harts of those of Guise, nor yet diuert the rigor of their cruelties.
A Gentleman named Villemongis, beeing vppon the scaffold readie to bee beheaded, hauing wet his hands in the blood of his companions, and lifting them vppe to heauen, cryed out saying: Lord behold the blood of thy children: thou shalt reuenge our cause.
The death of the Chancellour Oliuier.Among the prisoners, that after the Barron spake most boldly vnto the Chancellor, there were two, the one named Picard, the other Campagnac, that shewed him his petegree, from one poynt to the other: but the last of them touched him so neare vnto the heart, that with griefe thereof, the poore Chancellour fell sicke, wherein hee continually sighed and murmured to himselfe, tormenting his bodie in most straunge manner: for that all crooked and aged as he was, yet he stirred his bodie with such force, that he made the bed to shake, with greater force then a young man of Iustie yeares could doo. The Cardinall going to visit him, his paines beganne to increase, and perceiuing him a farre of, hee cried out and said: Ha, ha, Cardinall, thou haste made vs all to be damned. But when the Cardinal went neare him, saying vnto him, that the wicked Spirit sought to seduce him, and that hee should remaine constant in the faith. That is well done now (said hee) and so turning his backe, presently lost his speech: in his great torments many times, lamenting the death of the Councellour du Bourg. Behold how the chiefe and principall condemners of the prisoners in Amboise was taken, and first executed vppon the scaffold, of the terrible and manifest iudgements of God. The rest in time likewise were brought thither, each of them in his turne,
Monsieur Michell, de l'Hospitall, an excellent man, as then Chancellor of the Duchie of Sauoy, was repealed from Nice, where he remained, to succeed in Oliuiers place: and till he came,
Moruilliers, Bishop of Orleans kept the Seales, and vsed all the meanes hee could, to please the house of Guise.

The Prince behaueth himselfe boldly in his innocencie, against all men.The Prince of Conde was in
Amboise during those horrible tempests, where hee behaued himselfe like a man wholly without feare, as knowing himselfe to bee vnculpable. Those of Guise animated the king against him, setting and appoynting men to watch and looke into his behauiour, whereof the Cardinall kept a Register, specially of one word spoken by the Prince in chollor, perceiuing certaine of the prisoners to bee executed at the Castle windowes, saying: that the king was counselled otherwise then hee ought to bee, to cause such Lords and honest Gentlemen to bee put to death, not considering the great seruices by them done, vnto the late deceased king, and all the Realme: of whom beeing so depriued, it was to bee feared, that during those great troubles, straungers would enterprise against the Realme, and that if they should bee ayded by any of the Princes, they would easilie ouercome it.
Presently after, they caused du Vaux his Sewer, to bee committed prisoner, and caused the king to send for him into his chamber, to shewe him, that by the information giuen, hee had vnderstood him to beee the chiefe of the conspiracie: wherevpon the king added many and sharpe threatnings. The Prince for answere, besought his Maiestie, to assemble all the Princes and knights of the Order, that as then were within Amboise, togither with his priuie Councell, to the end, that in so great a presence, they all might heare what aunswere hee would make. Presently therevppon, the companie was assembled in the great Hall of the Castle, and in the kings owne presence, where the Prince hauing recited the speeches, by the king vsed vnto him, and what therevpon had followed, said, that the person of the king excepted, with those of the Princes his bretheren, and the Queenes, and with reuerence vnto them all, those that had said, and reported vnto the king, that hee should bee the head and conductor of certaine seditous persons, that were reported to haue conspired against the person of the king, and his estate, had fallely and wickedly lyed. And that to prooue his innocency therin, he would leaue his place and dignitie of a Prince of the blood, to fight with them, and cause them with his sword or launce, to confesse themselues to bee right villaines: and that they themselues onely sought the ruine of the Estate, name, and blood royall: for the conseruation whereof, hee said, hee would imploy both life and goods, as hee had alwaies made good proofe, as also for his interest to the Crowne and house of France, the title whereof hee ought to procure with much more right, then those that were his accusers: summoning all the company, that if among them there were any that had made the report, or that once would seeme to maintaine it, presently to shewe themselues: wherevppon no man presenting himselfe, he besought the king to esteeme him for an honest man, and from thencefoorth not to bend his his eares vnto the secret tales of such flaunderous and bad persons: but rather to reiect and bannish them from his presence, as enemies both to him, and publike peace: which done, he went out of the Councell, to giue them leaue to consult. But at a certaine signe made by the Cardinall, the king brake vppe the assembly, without asking their aduise, where as then hee might haue made some alteration, or disaduantage to those of Guise.The Admirall sheweth himselfe a faithfull seruant to the king and the Realme,
The Queene-mother much troubled in these tempests, yet according to the maner and custome of all the world, seeking to holde on the strongest side, sent the Admirall into Normandie, to know the cause of their commissions, desiring him most earnestly, without dissembling, to certifie her the truth thereof, with promise not onely to acknowledge his trauels in that behalfe, but to keepe it secret.

Hee executed his commission with all diligence, and without feare of any man, nor long after sent a Gentleman to the Queene, with large and ample letters, therein containing, that those of Guise were the onely cause, and true originall of all the troubles that happened in
France, because of their violent and vnlawfull government; shewing the proofes thereof: adding, that the faithful subiects of the Crowne, held for certaine, that the calamities would neuer be ended, as long as straungers gouerned the King and his Estate: hee exhorted her therevppon, to take the cause in hand, and to giue ease and quietnesse to those of the religion, causing the edicts that tended therevnto, to be well and truly obserued.
Comfort to the prisoners for religion.These aduertisements, bred letters, that were directed to al the Parliaments and other Iudges, freely to release all such prisoners as were detained in their Prisons for the cause of religion: the execution of which letters, neuerthelesse, were long performing, an other thing likewise draue forward this wheele: which was, that cerraine prisoners at
Blois and Tours, for the enterprise of Amboise, hauing found the meanes for to escape out of prison, wrote a letter vnto the Cardinall, partly in iest, and partly full of threatnings, that it should not be long before they would come to see him, with all the rest that were not in his keeping, and that had wholly determined to spoyle his person. Hee beeing a man very fearefull, for that time, put water in his wine, which caused the generall inlargement of diuers prisoners throughout all the Realme: and it was spoken by diuers men, that the Cardinal verified the ancient Prouerbe: which is, If you touch pitch, you shall bee defiled therewith.
Letters in fauour of those of GuiseFurther, those of Guise perceiuing themselues to bee assayled on all sides, by diuers writings, beeing as it were the forerunners of some new onset: the last of March, they caused certaine letters to bee dispatched to all the Parliaments, Bailiffes, and Stewards, as also to straunge Princes, wherein such as had beene present at the enterprise of Amboise, namely, the heads, were accused of high treason, both against God and man: specially those of the religion, and their Ministers, were therin abused in diuers sorts, to the which was added, a number of great and large promises of reformation, both in the Politicque and Ecclesiasticall Estate.
Answere to their letters.To these letters, a most ample and large answer was framed, directed vnto the Parliament, which painted out the house of Guise in all their colours, requiring that they in open Parliament of all the Estates, might yeeld account of their behauiour, in the gouernment of the Estate. The Parliament of Parris sent this answere by one of their Vshers vnto the Cardinal: But that of Rouen seeking to doo more, their deputies beeing sent vnto the king, were constrained presently ro retire, and could do nothing
Letters vnto the king of Nauarre.The ninth of Aprill, letters were written and sent in the kings name, vnto the K. of Nauarre, to the same effect as those that were sent vnto the parliame^ts, being desired to cease vpo^ certaine persons, that attended about his person, accused to be of the enterprise of Amboise: therin likewise was set downe, the acculatio^ imposed against the prince of Conde, who for the same cause had iustified himselfe: mean time, a consultation was holden, to cease vpon the person of the Prince of Conde, which the Duke of Guise, wholly seemed to dislike. Hee on the other side, sent his Secretarie vnto his brother, to aduertise him what had past, to aske his counsell, and to write him answere thereof. This beeing discouered to those of Guise, they wrote a letter vnto the Prince, full of excuses, to the end hee should content himselfe: which hee likewise sent vnto his brother, that made him a plaine answere, fearing to bee discouered.
Warres in Scotland mooued by those of GuiseAt that time those of Guise thought to trouble and ouerthrowe the Estate of Scotland, which their sister the Queen
Dowager, and monsieur d'Oisel gouerned peaceably, they hauing made the marriage betweene their Cousin, and King Francis, caused their Cousin to take vpon her the title of Queene of
England, and of Scotland, onely vpon some vaine imaginations: and not content therewith, they sent certaine intelligencers into England, there to mooue the people to fauour their Cousin, and to bring the Q. of England in hatred with her subiects, specially because of thereligion. Their intent was presently found out, notwithstanding they lost not courage, but to maintaine their credit with the Catholiques, they caused certaine rigorous edicts to bee made in Scotland against the religion, whereof ensued a tumult, appeased by the Q. Dowager, and the Noblemen of the countrie. Therevpon king Henry being dead, and the gouernment of France in their hands, they sent the Bishop of
Amiens and la Brosse, their faithfull seruants into
Scotland, who at their arriuall, would constrame euery man to go to Masse, telling the Q. Dowager, and Monsieur d'Oisel, that their sufferance had spoyled all: saying, that from thencefoorth, they wold vse force, not sparing any man. And therevpon sound diuers means to alter the Esate of Scotland, and although the Queene
Dowager propounded diuers peaceable and sure means, they two would deale as they thought good: but in the end, the Lords and Gentlemen of the countrie, threatned and troubled by such newcome fellowes, rose vp in armes, and desired ayde of the Englishmen their neighbors, in such sort, that in short time they draue out the Priests, reduced la Brosse into a small corner, and compelled the Bishop to saue himself in France. The Queen of England before she entered into armes, had desired those of Guise not to proceed in so hard and violent maner, wherevnto they not being desirous to hearken, vpon the
24. of March, she made a long discourse, wherein she shewed, that she litle esteemed of all whatsoeuer those of Guise and their adherents shuld enterprise or vndertake, against her person or Estate, and withall made it euidently knowne, that her only desire was, and euer should be, to liue in peace and amitie with all Christendome. They sought both by Ambassadors and messengers, to ease the mischiefe by them deuised, but by no meanes could effect i^ so that in fine, things of themselues grewe to such an end, that in the meane time it may be said, that the violence vsed by those of Guise, gaue such a blowe vnto the Papacie with in the realme of Scotland, that euer after it did nothing but languish and consume, and in the end was wholly extirped, and so remaineth.
Touching France, during those executions of
Amboise, as also before that, those of the religion still increased, both in zeale and number,Aduancement of the religion in France. in all the places of the Realme: and yet not without great hinderance by diuers persecutions, and by the meanes of some men, that could no more content themselues to vse it secretly, whereof ensued their open assemblies, and that within some Churches. Those of
Valence, Montelimart, and Romans in Dauphin, beeing the first. The Duke de Guise beeing Gouernour, extreamely offended, that those of whom he thought to be most feared, began to take that course which most displeased him, to stoppe their intents and purposes, first, hee sent Iohn de Monluc Bishop of Valence, who before by meanes of his Sermons, had done more hurt then good vnto the Pope, and because Monluc did not proceed with any effect, and that Monsieur de Cleremont, Lieftenant for the Duke of Guise, was esteemed to be too fauorable.
Mangiron a cruel man, and an extream enemie to those of the religion, had the charge giuen to him, wholly to roote the^ out: at the beginning he proceeded therin with great subtiltie, with diuers of his Agents, playing many seuerall parts: and in the end, hauing found the meanes to driue certaine Gentlemen out of Valence, that maintained those of the religion, he beganne to play his part, sacking their houses, as if the towne had beene taken by assault.Proceedings of Maugiron against those of the religion in the Parliament of Grenoble in Dauphine. to strengthen him, they sent him sixteene Ensignes of the olde troupes of Piedemont, and some Companies of launciers. On the other side, Truchon chiefe President of Grenoble, ayded by diuers Councellours, went to Valence, and passing through
Romans, caused 60. of the principallest to bee cast in prison, while Maugiron pilled those of Montelimart, to whome hee had both sworne and promised not to do any wrong, neither in publike, nor in priuate, that had good means to impeach and hinder him from his pretence, if by faire words hee had not wonne them. To returne vnto the Presidents and Councellors of Grenoble, they caused two Ministers in Valence, to bee beheaded, and hanged three of the principall Cittizens of the Towne. The rest of the prisoners went out by the Golde^ gate, with abiurations, whippings, bannishments, and great fines, wherewith the Iudges and kings Atturneyes, made themselues rich. At
Romans they hanged two men, and whipped one, whom they after sent vnto the Galleyes.
The estate of the religion in Prouence.In Prouence, two Gentlemen beeing bretheren,
Sieurs de Mouuans, named Anthony, and Paulon de Richiend, hauing made open profession of religion, in the time of King
Henry, Anthony was traiterously massacred by those of
Draguignan, in Anno. 1559, whereof Paulon could neuer haue iustice. Not long after, Captaine Chasteauneuf, beeing sent from
Nantes to Prouence, by Renaudie and his companions, to assemble those whom they thought meete to assisist them in the enterprise of Amboise: the Deputies of 60. Churches in that Prouince, being assembled at Merindol, Paulon was chosen Leader of the troupes of Prouence: which hauing accepted, hee made a diligent inquiry through all the countrie, and found two thousand men, that had good means to horse, arme, and entertain themselues, besides a great number of Gentlemen, and other voluntarie Souldiers. And as when the time of marching approached, his Councell were of aduise that the troupes should seeke to enter into Aix, there to erect the religion, and so to giue occasion to those of Guise and others, to mollifie their persecutions, when once they should perceiue men rising in all places of the Realme, to withstand their rigors.
This enterprise discouered, Mouuans determined to make a way through the plaine countrie, where hee made warre against the Images, which were beaten downe in euery Church, causing all the relicques of gold and siluer to bee molten, and to sell the vessels and other to yes belonging vnto the Masse, the mony whereof, euen to a halfe-penny, was left in the hands of the Consuls and others, of euery place. A most admirable militarie Discipline, but yet truly and seuerely executed at that time: wherevppon Mouuans pursued by the Counte de Tande, with a great power, retyred in good order into the high countrie, where hee expected newes from Renaudie: meane time, the Counte (beeing
a wise Gentleman, as any of his time) dealt so wisely therin, that by agreement made between them, it was ordained, that
Mouuans might surely and freely retire, without any hurt or displeasure (neither great nor small hauing beene hurt either in word or deed in all Prouence: the Mages likewise not once complaining of any thing done vnto them) for whatsoeuer had past: with promise to cause iustice to bee done touching the mother of his deceased brother. Captaine Paulon, surnamed the Barron de la Garde, venturing against the faith and promise made to set vppon Paulon, beeing within a straight thing,Periury of Captaine Paulon. to put both him and his troupes vnto the sword, not beeing aboue 50. Souldiers, was himselfe inclosed by Paulon, that offered him battell: but the Barron forgetting his fence, although he had tenne times more men then his enemie, and a good intent do do great seruice to those of
Guise, that had dispoyled him of estate of Generall of the Galleyes, to giue it vnto the great Prior of France their brother, bledde at the nose, and by means of a new Capitulation, renounced the Councell of Constance, and retired with great shame: after that, for a long time holding himselfe secretly, his name seruing for a mockery and ieast to all the world.
Mouuans flattered by his enemies to be intrapped, answereth them in plain FrenchPaulon perceiuing himselfe to bee but hardly bestead in his owne countrie, because of the successe of the enterprise of Amboise, and of the particular threatnings against him, made by ye Duke of Guise, because of the troubles he had raised in Prouence, for a time withdrewee himselfe vnto Geneua, whither the Duke sent men, expressely to practise with him, by infinit promises, both by word of mouth, and writing in commendations of his vertues, and admiring of his valour aboue al the Captains in Prouence, to mooue him to return into his countrie. But
Paulons aunswere to the Duke of Guise, was, that as long as hee knewe him to bee an enemie both to the religion and the State, and that he vsurped the places of the Princes of the blood, hee might well assure himselfe to haue Mouuans his mortall enemie, and although a poore Gentleman, yet one that hath so good credit with the true seruants and subiects to the king, that they at least fistie thousand (where of hee was the least) would imploye both liues and goods, to cause him to make amends for al the wrongs by him committed, against the good subiects and seruants to the king: and that hee might be fully assured, that as long as one of them both liued, hee should neuer bee quiet, nor liue in any assurance of his life, nor any of his race, seeing hee had so much incensed and prouoked the Nobilitie and people of France. Not long before his departure out of France, hee said Mouuans receiued letters from the king himselfe, and from the Queene-mother, wherein they gratified him very much, as one of the most faithfull and affectioned seruants to his Maiestie, promising him great fauour, and withall, ratifying the accord made by the Counte, Gouernour of Prouence. But at the same instant, Mouuans was aduertised, that the Queene-mother had expressely sent vnto the Parliament in Aix, that they should finde the means, to cause him, to cause Mouuans, Chasteauneuf, and other Captaines that were of the enterprise of
Amboise, to bee slaine.Aduancement of the religion in diuers Prouinces.
At the same time, those of the religion multiplyed in
Normandie, and Preaching was publikely vsed in diuers places. Those of Rouan were troubled by an Anabaptist, that was taken and burnt.
The Church of Tours was much troubled by the seditious dealings of the runnagate Monke, named
Richelieu, Captaine of the Kings new guard, but by silence and patience, is kept togither, the Towne hauing failed twise or thrise to be lacked and spoyled in all the other Prouinces of the Realme, those of the religion perceiuing themselues to be wholly destitute of humain ayde, tooke a notable resolution, not to addresse themselues any more to seeke the helpe of man, but what daunger so euer might happen, determined to assemble to pray to God, to heare his word, and to continue in true obedience thereof, liuing in great loue and concord one with the other, and with much edification to the Catholicques, who in great troupes lest the Masse, to make profession both of contrary life and doctrine.
The Queene-mother, perceiuing that those of the religion, addressed themselues no more, to her, willed one of her Maisters of Requests, called Chastelleus, to vse the meane that la Roche, one of the Ministers of Parris, should come vnto her, or some other in his place, to conferre with him about somes meanes whereby to procure the quietnesse of those the religion. La Roche not being found, and they of Tours beeing desired in his place, to send Duplessi their Minister, they excused themselues, beseeching the Queen to content her selfe with letters that should bee written vnto her, which shee seemed not to dislike. Wherevppon a large discourse was written, vnder a deuised name of Theophile, for those of the religion, wherein after certaine protestations of their sinceritie, the depths and grounds of their great griefes against the house of Guise, was fully showne: then diuers remedies wisely propounded, whereby to preuent a ciuell warre, which were, that prouision should bee made for the good gouernment of the Realme, and a Councel to be giuen vnto the king, according to the auncient customes of the Realme, that to staye and remedie the differences of religion, a holy and free councel should be holden, and that in the meane time, those of the religion should be permitted to liue in peace of conscience, and according to the profession of their faith.
Declaration^ of the religion against the house of Guise.This declaration, beeing by Camus deliuered to the Queen-mother, fell into the hands of those of Guise, which construed it in many sorts, to know who that Theophil^ might bee. The messenger was oftentimes in danger of his life, and in the end, he beeing troubled and tormented in diuers kindes, and knowing that such as had giuen it vnto him, would not bee knowne, but kept themselues secret, hee shewed their names in presence of the Queene-mother, and those of the house of Guise, who likewise charged him to bee of the conspiracie of Ambotse, but in stead of beeing secret, he tolde them much more truth then they desired to heare, and yet hee got out of their hands, by vertue of the generall abolution made in the beginning of the raigne of Charles the ninth.
The Guises proceedings too.The
Guises perceiuing themselues to bee so much noted and daylie hated in euery place of the Realme, specially by those of the religion, determined wholly to roote them out, and to the same end wrote vnto the King of Spaine, and other Catholicque Princes, laying the fault vppon those of the religion, touching all the troubles that happened in
France, as also the conspiracie of Amboise. To the Princes protestants they wrote, that the many and great executions made in
France, was onely vppon certaine Sacrementaries, open enemies vnto the confession of Ausbourg. Besides that, their intent was to establish the Inquisition in France, wherein they thought the
Chancellor de l'Hospitall would bee assistant, which he did not, but like a wise Polititian as he was, hee withstood their blowes in such manner, that when in the moneth of May the edict of
Spaine should haue been published, hee knowing that the priuie Councell and the Parliament haue giuen consent, hee moderated it by another edict, wherin he exposed his reasons with such vehemencie and great eloquence, that those of Guise themselues, that onely were the purchasers thereof,The Duke of Romorantin breaketh the pretence of establishing the Inquisition of Spaine. agreed to his aduise, and certified it vnto King Philip, that liked well thereof, although his whole desire was, to see the Realme of
France disguised in a Spanish sute.
Wherevpon the edict of Romorantin was published and set foorth, whereby the King committed the knowledge and inquirie of Heresies, vnto the Prelates of his Reaime, forbad all publike assemblies and vnlawfull forces, declared all the Ministers of the religion, makers, composers, and printers of infamous libelles, tending vnto the moouing and stirring vppe of the people, guiltie of high treason: this edict appeased not the murmurations and troubles, but to the contrary, rather doubled and increased them on all sides.
A Combat of Princes.Against all the bookes published and set foorth, against the vnlawful gouernment of those of Guise, Iohn du Tillet, Clarke to the Court of Parliament in Parris, composed a booke intituled, The Kings Maiorit, wherein hee defended, that in France, the Kings beeing of the age of fifteene yeares, might then command: after that, hee inueyed against those of the religion, saying: that with a false and wrong title, they termed their new opinions to be the Gospel of Christ: naming their Ministers seditious and mutinous, and concluded, that God would fauor and prosper the armes that should bee taken in hand and vsed against them. Many strong and earnest aunsweres were made vnto it, wherevnto, neither he, nor yet his brother the Bishoppe of S. Brieu durst once reply, although by the Cardinall they were most instantly required therevnto: for whose contentment, at the request and solitation of a certaine Councellour named du Lyon, a Printer of Parris, named
Martin l'Hommet, was hanged, for printing a booke,The Tyger put two men to death. intituled, The Tiger, made against those of Guise: the like intertainment was made vnto a rich Marchant of Roane, who beeing present at the execution, and perceiuing the people most strangely mooued against
l'Hommet, desired some of them to vse themselues with greater modestie. His proces was made without any further delay, onely to please the Cardinall, as du Lyon not long after, in a great audiance openly confessed.
The Queen-mothers dealing, and resolution of those of Guise in those difficulties.The Queen-mother much troubled among so many waues, hearing a speech of calling a Parliament, and of establishing the Princes and the Constable, whom shee deadly hated, vnto their places and authorities, which if it happened, she should no longer haue the mannaging of the affaires, resolued to hold and maintaine all things in the same estate, wherein as then they were: and vnder her authoritie to couer the imperfections of those of Guise, who still continued in their grosse and high speeches, protesting that they wold imploy the meanes, both of themselues, and of their friends, that possible they could make, to beate downe and represse the insolencie of those that sought to purchase the alteration of religion: which from that time forward was their pretence, thereby to abolish the other quarrell, that onely concerned the State, which was affirmed to haue beene wholly vsurped, and now to bee most lawfully ruled and gouerned by them. They thought likewise, that hauing exterped those of the religion, as their meaning was to beginne with it, it would be a meanes to cut the sinewes of the Princes of the blood, of whom thereby they should easilie bring to reason, as also the Constable.

Counsell of some of the Nobilitie.Touching those of the religion, the first and principall in the rolle, were certaine Gentlemen, that made free and open profession thereof, and although they had not in any sort, beene priuie, or once consenting vnto the enterprise of Amboise: yet were they accused and summoned, to come and iustifie themselues before the king But they perceiuing that nothing but their destruction was pretended, concluded, some to go vnto the Prince of Conde, to incourage him, the rest vnto all the Churches of the religion, to giue them notice and intelligence of their destructions, then readie to fall vppon them, if each of them sought not to desend themselues.
The Prince of Conde escaped while his enemies consulted his death.The proposition mooued in the priuie Councell, touching the ceasing vppon the person of the Prince of
Conde, and to make his proces, to the end, that hauing begunne with him, they might proceed against the rest, made them to looke vnto themselues.
It chanced, that vppon this proposition, touching the taking of the Prince, the Cardinall was resolutely of that aduise: but the contrary, the Duke of Guise had made a long discourse, to shewe that they should not proceed therein, and that it should bee wholly against his consent and desire. Some at the first were much abashed, that those two heads in one hood, were of so different mindes, but when they well perceiued that nothing was by them neglected, where to find the meanes to laye holde vppon the Prince, euery man then did knowe, that this contrarietie was onely done of purpose, thereby to drawe the Councell to giue their whole consents, to the end, that by those meanes they might fortifie and couer themselues, against all chaunces whatsoeuer. In the meane time, the Prince looking on his owne securitie, with good aduise deliuered himselfe out of their snares, and got vnto Bearn, where as then the king of Nauarre his brother was Resident: they (as the common saying is) vsed to make bread of stones, and to turne all things for their aduantage, beganne to assure the king and his mother, that without all doubt, the Prince was culpable, and that his flying made him to appeare as guiltie: wherevpon commissions were presently made, and sent for to leuie men, to warre against Gascon, whither the Mashall
de S. Andre, vnder pretence of going to see his bretheren, was sent to discouer: which serued to no other end, but onely to cause the two Princes to stand more warity vppon their guard.
La Planche discouereth those of Guise.There rested yet another threed to vntwine, which was to know, if that the Constable were not of the Princes Councell, whom (as they thoght) they held alreadie within their fingers, to this end, they appoynted the Queene-mother to worke the matter, who secretly sent for Lois Regnier, Sieur de la Planche, one of the Councell ours of the Marshal de Montmorency, who beeing entered into her chamber, (the Cardinall standing behinde the tapistrie) and desired very earnestly to say his minde, touching causes and remedies of those troubles, made a large and ample discourse, the effect whereof was, that those of Guise beeing straungers, ought not to haue the gouernment of the Estate, vnlesse some naturall Frenchmen were ioyned in commission with them. Hee likewise made a long answere touching the accusation made against the Prince of Conde, shewing it to bee a meere falschood, once to thinke or suppose, that the enterprise of Amboise, was thought or ment against the person of the king, or for to trouble the Estate.
After that, he desciphered the originall of those of
Guise, behauing himselfe in such sort in all his aunsweres, like a good Politian, and that with so good reasons, that thereby hee escaped from the Court, and nothing was done either touching him, or against the Constable, nor any of his.
Those of the religion, next to God, commit themselues vnto the protection of the Princes of the blood.Those of the religion hauing vnderstood by aduises giue^ the^, by many Gentlemen in diuers Prouinces, that their ouerthrow beganne to approach, if with all speed and readinesse, they prouided not for themselues. Hauing recommended themselues by heartie prayers vnto God, determined to cast themselues into the armes of the Princes of the blood, as Fathers, Tutors, and Conseruers of the innocencies of the poore afflicted people, and that by the natural lawes of the countrie, were called vnto that charge, during the minoritie of the kings. And for the same cause, certaine notable personages, were appoynted among them, to go vnto the king of
Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, at Nerac, to whom with all their meanes, he offered a large declaration, containing a rehearsall of all the wrongs by those of Guise committed against the king and the Realme: with a most humble supplication, that it would please the said Princes to deuise the meanes, to deliuer the king and his Estate out of their hands.
The explort of Monsieur de Mombrun.About this time, Monsieur de Mombrun, a Gentleman well affected to thereligion, beeing narrowly sifted by the Parliament of
Grenoble, and brauely escaped out of his enemies hands, was desired by diuers of the Venitian Marchants, to ayde and assist them, against the violences and extortions vsed in their behalfes, by the Popes Vicelegat, contrary vnto their priuiledges, and auncient franchises.
La Motte Goudrin, Lieftenant for the Duke of
Guise in Dauphine, was likewise entertained by the Vicelegat, to helpe him with all his forces. And although Mombrun had very fewe men, yet hee constrained his enemies to seeke for an accord: which hauing but violated and broken in all the articles, by the Vicelegat, and
la Motte Goudrin, Mombrun raised armes againe, and handled the Priests hardly, that had slaine some of his men after the accord was made and sworne: which done, hee put a great number of la Motte Goudrins souldiers vnto the sword, and vsed him in such sort, that hee made him leaue his fence: but hauing beene constrained to dispearse his little troupe, and soone after betrayed by one of his domesticall seruants, hee saued himselfe by flying out of the Realme, hauing trauersed through many daungers, and saued himselfe in the territories of Geneua, and about the countrie of Berne.
The Princes counsels discouered by la Sagne, wherof ensued the imprisonment of Vidame de ChartresTo returne vnto the Princes, they beeing much confirmed in the resolution by the^ taken to discharge their duties, touching the relieuing of the realme of
France, by the declarations and offers of those of the religion: they began to deale therein, and among other agents imployed in those affaires, the Prince of Conde sent one named la Sagne, vnto diuers great Lords, to desire them not to saile him of their aydes. La Sagne hauing receiued an answere from the Constable, and Vidame de Chartres, came vnto the Court, where hee deliuered certaine letters, and as hee stayed fro an aunswere, hee was so vndiscreet, that hee suffered himselfe to bee vndermined by one Captaine Bonual, who hauing discouered it vnto those of Guise, ranne after him, and brought him prisoner to Fountainebleau, where the letters of
Vidame de Chartres beeing read, wherein he promised the Prince to maintaine his iust quarrell against all men, except the king, his bretheren, and the Queenes: those of Guise sent to apprehend him within Parris, and to keepe him prisoner in the Bastille, where they vsed him with most great rigor, vntill hee died.

They found not so good a baite in the Constables letters, or at the least, would make no shewe thereof, because they would not trouble themselues with so many things at once. La Sagne was well payed for his prating, for that his nostrils were stretched in such sort, that hee tolde all whatsoeuer hee knew, and more then truth, to prolong his miserable life. Mean time, his co^fessions made vppon the racke, caused those of Guise in all haste to dispatch their affaires: for first to their great dishonour, and disaduantage of their kinswoman, they agreed with the Queene of England, prouided for the frontiers of
Lorraine, caused the olde troupes that came out of Dauphine and Piedemont, to lye along by the riuer of Loire, writing on both sides to their partakers.
A proposition in the Councell, for calling a Parliament at Fontainebleau.On the other side, the Queene-mother, that feared least shee should bee disgraced, whatsoeuer might happen by the aduise of the Chancellor and the Admirall, to whom as then she made shewe willingly to hearken, she resolued to cause a motion to bee made in open councell, that it were requisit, that the king should assemble, all the Princes, Lords, knights of the Order, and men of authoritie in his Realme, to take order for the pacifying of the troubles, which they esteemed specially to proceed because of the persecutions against those of the religion.
Those of Guise found this resolution to bee good, thinking thereby to finde a meanes to intrap both the king of Nauarre and his brother, trusting likewise, for that most part of those that should assemble, were of their retinue, that nothing should passe therein, but for their aduantage: and that this meeting would wholly breake off the calling of the generall States, and by that meanes make a sure ground for their affaires. Wherevppon they began to write into all places, in the Kings name, who desired euery man to bee at Fontainebleau, vppon the
15. day of August, for the causes aforesaid. Those of Guise sent letters likewise from themselues, full of all good promises and rewards. The King likewise wrote vnto the King of Nauarre, desiring him to bee there, with his brother, and all such Lords, who as then were with him. But couertly by the meanes of secret practises, those of Guise dealt in such sort, that the King of Nauarre resolued not to come, and that against the aduise of the Constable and diuers great Lords, who said and affirmed, that as then the meanes presented it selfe, whereby to put downe those of Guise, and to reestablish the lawfull gouernment of the Realme. And to conclude, the Constable verilie supposing that the Princes would bee theee, sayled not to come thither with aboue 800. horse, which constrained those of
Guise, as then weake, to flie softly, and to shew a good countenance vnto the Constable and his Nephewes.
The Admirall presented a petition to the King, in the behalfe of the religion.The 21. of August they were assembled, wherein there was not one of the Princes of the blood, and before they began to debate of any matter, the Admirall presented a request vnto the King, for those of the religion in France, whose desire was, that it would please his Maiestie to graunt them libertie of Churches, and free exercises of their religion in all places. The King hauing hanked the Admirall for his vigilancie, fidelitie and sincere affection, caused the petition to be openly read, and then hauing declared from poynt to poynt, the cause of that assembly, desired the assistance, euery man in particular, freely and without feare or passion, to giue him counsell, as occasion and necessitie therein should require: that done, the Queen-mother and the Chauncellour spake,
and the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall, offered (but in generall) to render vp an account of their administration: which finished that daies meeting, the assembly beeing remitted vntill the 23. of August, wherevnto Monluc, Moruilliers, du Mortier, and
d'Auanson, al foure of the priuie Councel, opposed themselues. But hee that spake most to effect, and that deserued most praise to bee a faithfull Councellour, was Charles de Marillac, Archbishop of
Vienne:Oration and aduise of Marillac. who by notable reasons, liuely desciphered, shewed that it was requisite to assemble a nactionall Councell, thereby to remedie the differences in religion, and the third Estate, to direct the gouernment of the Realme. But hee liued not long after this Oration made, and many spake diuersly of his death.
The Admirals Oration censured by those of Guise.The next day beeing the 23. of the moneth of August, the Admiralles turne fell out to speake, whose Oration tended to the ordering of religion and the Estate, before mentioned by Marillac, but with farre more eloquent phraise, wherevnto hee added a most graue and wise censure, against those that by inuironing the king with double guardes, learned him to feare his subiects, and his subiects to hate their Prince, desiring the king most certainly to be perswaded, that all his subiects reuerenced him, and bare most earnest and hartie affection vnto him.
The Duke of Guise much greeued and offended at that which the Admirall had spoken, specially touching the new guards, made a large discourse vnto the contrary, in such sort, that he shewed himselfe in great perplexitie, with all the wit hee had, to defend his broken cause. His brother the Cardinal, walked with some more deliberation vppon those pricking thornes, assaying to refute the humble protestations contained in the request presented by the Admirall, in the name of all those of the religion, who from that time foorth, was most extreamly hated by those of Cuise, who neuerthelesse at that time made shewe not to dislike in any sort, that a generall assembly of the Estates should bee assigned, and that as touching religion, they propounded an other aduise, which likewise was allowed, as in the articles following you may reade.
A Parlia-assigned the 10. of December.And according to the resolution vpon the last of August, letters were dispatched vnto all Bailiffes and Stewards, signifying vnto them, that the Estates generall, were assigned to meete vppon the tenth of December next ensuing, within the Towne of Meaux, to the end they should take order, to cause Deputies to bee chosen against that time. But in this Commission there ranne a clause: which was, that during such elections, the Gouernours and Lieftenants of Prouinces, should seuerally visit the Townes: to inquire and vnderstand the peoples griefes, and to bring them vnto the King, that prouision and good order might bee taken for the good of euery Prouince.
A Sinode of the Clargie the 20. of Ianuary.By the same letters, he assigned the Bishops, Prelates, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, to bee at Parris vppon the
20. of Ianuary next after ensuing, to aduise and take counsell, what shall be fit and conuenient to be shewed vnto the generall Councell, exhorting them in the meane time, to reforme that which belongeth to bee reformed and amended by the Church: further, commaunding them to be watchfull ouer their aduersaries, termed wicked spirits, composed of the remnants of the rebellion and tumult of Amboise.
Gathering of troupes of Souldiers.Those of Guise hauing by this means assured themselues against the Princes, the next day sent letters in the kings name, vnto all Bailiffes and Stewards, for the assembly of men at armes, or lanciers, to be readie by the 20. day of the month of September, the distribution whereof, was done in such manner, that the companies were all mingled, and the suspected inuironed, with others that might set vpon them both before and behinde, the commanders hauing charge to take and put to the sword, al such as they once esteemed or suspected to march to ayde the Princes. On the other side, because the declaration which those of the religion had directed vnto the Princes, in many points concerned those or Guise. At the deniall of Iohn du Tillet, a certain yong Councellour named Des Autels of
Charrolois, presented himselfe, that (vnder the title of an Oration vnto the people of France) made an answere vnto it, and with priuiledge from the King, caused it to be imprinted. But this Orarout was so well schooled by a replye made therevnto, that neuer after hee durst hold vppe his nose, and was disauouched by the Cardinall, that onely had set him on worke, saying, that both time, and his actions, would soone procure him reason at the hands of his enemies. And those of
Guise hauing ioyned the forces,Letters from the king, to the king of Nauarre, and the prince of Conde, with their answeres. returned out of Scotland, with the olde troupes of
Piedemont, Metz, and Picardie, they caused them to approach near vnto them, with 1200. launciers, reserued, besides the deuisions made within the Prouinces, and sent a message in the Kings name vnto the King of Nauarre, whereby the Prince of Conde was charged to haue enterprised against the Estate of France, and to haue sought to cease vpon the least Townes, to haue them in his possession, for which cause hee desired the King of Nauarre, to send his brother vnto him, vnder strong and safe conduction, which if hee refused, hee said hee should in person be constrained to go thither, with such a traine, that it would not be for his commoditie.
The King of Nauarre and his brother, made a graue and bolde answere, which was, that if their accusers would make themselues knowne, and seeme to defend the accusation against them, and beeing bereaued of that authoritie which they vsurped, they with a small company would present themselues before the King: where in his presence, they would euidently shew him, that such accusers, were the parties guiltie, to whose most false reports they besought his Maiestie in any sort not to giue credit.The kings word giuen to the princes to intrap them.
This aunswere made those of Guise to seeke another course, and therevppon dispatched an other message, whereby the King sent word vnto the Princes, that they might without all feare come vnto him, and returne again when they thought good, assuring them by the word of a King, that nothing should be done or attempted against their persons in any sort whatsoeuer, that he would peaceably heare both their causes, and instifications, without committing them to prison, or once making proces against them, that his desire was onely to haue an answereby word of mouth, touching the poynts wherewith the Prince was charged, which the King could not in any sort beleeue: and to conclude, that they should bee receiued and vsed according to their estates and dignities: yea, and that they should haue their places restored, that of order and custome belonged vnto them, touching the mannaging of the affaires of the land, to the end, to haue their counselles and aduise, thereby to reduce all thinges into a good and polliticke order,They were betraied by Amaury Bouchart, Chancellor of Nauarre. without any troubling or molesting the Prince, concerning the religion which hee professed. The like letters were written vnto them by the Queene-mother.
At the first, the King of Nauarre had a good courage, but hauing heard that the affaires in Lyonnois and Dauphin, had succeeded otherwise then he esteemed, begunne to drawe backe, although the Deputies of the Prouinces, offered to assemble their troupes for his securitie, before the French launciers had stopped the passages: or if he found that not to be expedient, they promised to assemble themselues in all places, to strengthen him when hee should go vnto the Parliament. He had a Chancellour named Amaury Bouchart, Maister of Requests vnto the king, who from the beginning, had beene very earnest to mooue him to hearken vnto the declarations and requests, daylie made vnto him from all the parts of the Realme: but this Bouchart hauing heard that the enterprise made against Lyons by
Maligny, had taken an other effect then he expected, wrote secretly vnto the king, desiring him to separate the Prince of Conde, from the king of Nauarre his brother, because that without ceasing hee neuer left off to solicite him, to doo diuers things against his Maiesties officers, as also to trouble the Realme, at the onely instance of certaine Lutherians and Preachers, that came from Geneua, wherevnto hee said, his maister would by no meanes hearken, but that it was to bee feared, that in the end, by long and importunate sute, he would diuert him: whereof hee said, hee could not chuse but aduertise his Maiestie, whose most humble, natural, and faithful subiect hee was, and alwaies would bee, as also one of the Ministers of his iustice.
Hee wrote other letters of the same effect vnto the Cardinall, promising him by word of mouth, to certifie him of certaine things of great importance, which as then hee durst not write: and to conclude, hee promised him the meanes, to giue him intelligence, how and in what sort hee should deuise and frame proces against the greatest Lords of the Realme. Speaking of Geneua, hee ment Theodore de Beza, whom the King had expressely sent for, by the counsell of the said
Bouchart himselfe, to meete with diuers other notable personages, from all the parts of France, whose aduise, specially of
Beza, was, in any sort to procure that the conclusion of
Fontainbleau, touching the assembly of the Estates should bee obserued, and fully executed. But that aduise was not followed, and that touching Beza, hee returned with great daunger of his person, hauing begun to preach publikely in Nerac, where the king of
Nauarre in person was assistant. Some were of opinion, that
Iarnac, who had wholly withdrawn himselfe from the Princes, with
S. Foy his brother, before that Lieftenant of the company of launciers, belonging to the Prince of Conde, had practised with
Bouchart to write those letters.
They determine to go to the king.The Princes giuing credite vnto the kings word, and vpon the protestations and promises made vnto them by his Agents, and among others, the Cardinal of
Bourbon his brother, sent expressely vnto them, accepted the Kings offer, and hauing writte^ vnto the king, that they would ride to
Orleans with a small traine, before the assembly of the Estates should bee prepared. And beeing at Limoges, they were presently visited by diuers Lords and Gentlemen, to the number of seuen or eight hundreth, well mounted and armed at all poyntes: they made them offer of sixe thousand, footemen out of Gascon, and
Poicton, mustered and reaeie to march, 4000. both on horse and foote, out of Languedoc, and as many or more out of
Normandie: with ful assurance of the good willes of most part of the men at armes or launciers, and presents of mony, so it would please the king of Nauarre, to declare himselfe Protector of the King and of the Realme, against the house of Guise. But the euill seruants, which as then attended on him, as
Descars and his companions, (for Bouchart had withdrawn himselfe) gaue him so many alarmes, and deuised such inconueniences, vnder pretence, that they did not deliuer vnto the^ a summe of mony of three or foure hundreth thousand crownes, to looke better into those affaires, that beeing at Vertueil, where another good Agent (being the Cardinall of Armaignac) came vnto him, hee dismissed all his company, and countermanded those that were comming, with many thankes and promises, most earnestly to imploy himselfe in the Parliament, for the good and benefit of all the Estates of France. They hauing shewed him many reasons for the same, and desired that at the least, the Prince of
Conde might stay behinde, thereby to hold their enemies insuspence: he answered, that their innocencie should suffice, that it was no easie matter to put the Princes of the blood to death, that if their liues were taken away, they would receiue their deaths with patience: that God had meanes sufficient to deliuer the Realme of France, which that they should bee the cause of the losse and ruine of so many honest men, that desired to ioyne with them. The Princesse of
Conde, a Lady for her time, as wise and vertuous as any could be found, vsed all the meanes shee could, to diswade her husband from that voyage: but all in vaine, the Lords and Gentlemen that had accompanied the Princes, being vppon the poynt of their retract, after many humble congratulations, protested that by those meanes, being so vnfortunately destituted of their heads, yet they doubted not but that God would raise them others, thereby to saue and deliuer them from the oppression of Lyrants. Those words vsed in the presence of their secret seruants, being rehearsed to those of Guise, were causes to hang newe belles at their eares, and in the meane time, vnderstanding that the Princes were alreadie entered into their iourney, they caused Monsieur de Mompesat, one of their confederates, in the kings name, expressely to forbid the Princes comming vnto the court, vppon paine of death not to enter into any of the kings walled Townes: as then they were alreadie inclosed among the forces of their enemies, vnder the conduct of Marshall de Termes. The Cardinall d'Armaignac, Descars, and others, vntrustie seruants, made the king of Nauarre beleeue, that this verball commaundement of Montpesat, was onely but a meere brauado of those of Guise, which both the king and his mother would disauouch.
The Princes refusing all aduertisements, went vnto OrleansThe Princes hauing past Chastelleraut, were more certainly aduertised of their michiefe to come, and counselled to keepe the high waies, because of diuers Ambassadours that were appoynted and set to kill them, if they once went out of the way, vnder pretence that they sought to saue themselues, and at the same time, means was offered vnto them, to bring them vnto Angers, and so into
Normandie, where they shuld want nothing: but they continued in their first resolution, trauelling by easie iourneyes, and it seemed that one of the bretheren was as a Prouost Marshall, that ledde the other to prison. Therevpon those of Guise led the king to
Orleans, thither calling al the Nobilitie and men of armes: which made both young and olde to thinke, that some pretence was ment against the Sates: but by a rumour spred abroad, it was said, that all those forces beeing assembled and brought togither, was to assiege and chastice Orleans: whereof the principal Citizens were registred in the Criminal bookes, to passe the daunger, and by their confiscations, to grease the hands of diuers hungrie Courtiers, vnder pretence, that they had beene of the enterprise of Amboise.

Rigorous dealing towards those of Orleans.For this cause Mansieur de Sipierre, a slaue to those of Guise, appoynted for Lieftenant to the Prince de la Roche Suryon, Gouernour of Orleans, being arriued in the Towne, about the beginning of October, disarmed the Inhabitants, filled such houses (as were suspected) with Souldiers, and committed the custodie of the Gates vnto the Sheriffes.
The Prince their Gouernour, beeing entered therein about the twelfth of the same month, and receiued with honour by the principall Cittizens, aduertised them, that the king would make his entrie therein, vppon the seuenteenth day ensuing, which terme beeing prolonged for the space of one day, vppon the eighteenth hee made his enterie. The troupes of the Towne being in number about foure thousand men, to whom they had restored their armes, onely their Bastianadoes: the principall Cittizens following in good order, and all the streets hanged with Tapistrie and other hangings.
The king beheld all those troupes passing along through the Subburbes, which beeing reentered into the Towne, hee mounted on horsebacke, riding vnder a Canapie of cloth of Gold, and so went straight vnto the Church: and being on the way, his horse stumbled in such maner, that he had surely fallen, if he had not presently bin relieued. After dinner, al the troupes went to meet the Queene, who likewise made an honourable and braue entrie: but those of Guise were at neither of both, fearing (as some say) to meete with some desperate fellow that might hurt them: because a Magician in Rome had shewed the Cardinall, that both hee and his brother should die a violent death.
The arriuall of the Princes in Orleans, and bow they were receiued.The Euen before all Saints day, beeing the last of October, the Princes trusting to their innocencies, and reposing themselues vpon the grace of God, to whom they recommended themselues, as also caused al those of the religion by praiers to doo the like, arriued at Orleans, and past from the beginning of the gate, vntil they came to the kings lodging, in the Estappe, through diuers souldiers, all footemen, ranged along in rankes so close togither, all armed, that all that long way, not any man could passe betweene them. Not one Courtier nor Townes-man stepped foorth to meete them, onely the Cardinall de Bourbon, and the Prince de la Roche Suryon, who by expresse licence, had obtained that fauour, receiued them.
The king of Nauarre according to the custome, desiring to enter on horsebacke within the Court Gate, was put backe with a rude aunswere, that the great Gates might not bee opened: they being then constrained to light, went into the king, that stayed for them in the great Hall, accompanied with his vncles of Guise, and other Courtiers, whereof not one of them once stepped forward to meete them.
Their entertainment was but meane, and after due and solemne reuerence, night grewe on, which caused the king to go into his mothers Chamber, followed onely by the Princes, those of Guise not once seeking to enter. The Queen mother hauing receiued them with the water standing in her eyes, the king speaking vnto the Prince of Conde, said, hee had beene aduertised from diuers places,The Kings speech to the Prince of Conde. The Princes answere. that hee sought to make diuers enterprises against him and the State of his Realme, for the which cause he had sent for him, to heare what hee could say by word of mouth.
The Prince, that neither wanted courage, nor audacitie, aunswered boldly in his owne defence, and in such sort discouered those of Guise his enemies, His imprisonment.that the king could not otherwise iudge, but that great wrong and iniurie was offered vnto his blood: neuerthelesse, according to the conclusion made before his arriuall, the king commaunded Chauigny Captaine of the guard, expressely sent thither by those of Guise, to take the Prince: which hee did, and ledde him prisoner vnto a house not farre from thence, before the which there was erected a Fort of Bricke, fluncard, and filled with field-peeces, and diuers cannoniers to keepe them, which peeces beate along three streetes, whereby it was able to defend all men from comming neare vnto the prison. The windowes of his chamber were closed vppe, and he was kept so straightly that no man spake vnto him, but onely his Chamberlaine. The king of
Nauarre desired that his brother might bee committed vnto his charge,The entertainment of the King of Nauarre, and others. and hee would gage his life for his foorth comming, but it was refused him: and touching himselfe, his guard was taken from him, and still hauing watch about him both by night and day.
At the same time, certaine were sent to cease vpon
Madame du Roye, mother in lawe to the Prince, being in her house of
Anicy in Picardie, from whence with great rigor she was brought vnto Saint Germains, by Monsieur de Renouart, and
de Caronges: executers of that commission. They likewise sorgot not the Councellour la Haye at Parris, as one that dealt for the Prince: such as were his faithfull friends within Orleans, withdrew themselues out of the daunger. Bonchart, Chauncellour to the king of Nauarre, at the same time was taken in his owne house, by Iarnac, who in shewe made great apparance of disliking:
Bouchart threatning him in presence of those that tooke him, to cause him as a Traitor to loose his head: but all this was but words, and nothing else. The papers were not forgotten,Bouchart taken and ledde to priso^. Imprisonment of the Bailiffe of Orleans. and Bouchart was ledde to Orleans, and then to Melun, with other prisoners that came from Lyons, by that meanes to make readie the proofes against the Prince, whose proces was followed with all diligence.
Hierome Groslot, Bailiffe of Orleans, a man both learned, vertuous, and full of pietie: a louer of the good and quietnesse of the Common-wealth, and an enemie to all Tyrants and factious persons, abhorring auarice and ambition: within two daies after the Princes arriuall, was likewise committed prisoner: hauing three daungerous witnesses against him, which were his office, a goodly house within the the Cittie, and another in the countrie. The cause pretended, was, that his father had beene Chancellour to the deceased king of Nauarre: and he in
Orleans, the Protectour of those of the religion, and an affected friend vnto the Princes.
Further, when time came that hee should make an Oration vnto the king, at his entrie into the Towne, the Bailiffe mooued at some wrong offered vnto him, as it appeared, as he went towards the king, togither with the kings countenance, that looked frowningly vppon him, hee could not vtter his minde as hee had first determined: and therevpon those of
Guise tooke some occasion to accuse him vnto the King: saying, that hee felt his owne conscience to be guiltie of his treason.
Being in prison, false witnesses, whereof the Curate of Saint Paterne, and the Vicar of Saint Catherine, were the principall, with Iaques Aleaume, Iaques L'huillier, le Borgne, le Alemant, and Iaques Masnet, accused him to haue determined to deliuer Orleans vnto the King of Nauarre: to be of the intelligence of Amboise, and to haue beene in a certaine assembly holden by night within the great Church-yard, as also to haue manifestly supported those of the religion.
Dauanson maker of the proces.The maker of the proces was Dananson, a slaue to those of
Guise, that sent such witnesses, as hee perceiued not to bee sufficiently instructed, vnto the Curate of Saint Paterne: that by him they might vnderstand their lesson. Marshall de Brissac had alreadie laid hold vppon the house in the countrie, named l'Isle, and in fantasie made diuision of the goods in
Sipierre: and Boyuin, his Secretarie, was so bold to say vnto the wife of Groslot, that if she would speake boldly, shewing her, that shee must come off with mony vnto his Maister, the Bailiffes affaires might speede the better.
The Guises practises open the mouthes of the estates of the Prouinces.Out of the Kealme, those of
Guise had made the Pope, the king of Spaine, and others, to thinke that at that time, they would roote out all those that bare the name of Lutherians within France, whom they held bound both hand and foote, hoping that winter, to cleare them all out of the countrie: in the springtime to send them into Almaine and Switzerland, to visit their friends: but their deuises could not impeach diuers and seuerall assemblies in many Prouinces, (to determine and deuise what were best for them to present at the Parliament) to giue them some new worke: whereof the Orations made at Blois, Angers, Parris, Bazin, Plessis, Grimaudet, Capel, and others, are proofes sufficient: as also in most part of the other Prouinces, when the oppressours were discouered, and the people disposed to prouide by lawfull meanes against so many disorders, introduced and maintained by straungers: many of them hauing openly said, that they would not indure, that those of
Guise should so oppresse the Princes of the blood: whereof most part that vsed that speech,Conspiracie to extirpe those of the religion. were men of the religion: and those of Guise beeing aduertised, could well shewe and propound this article of religion vnto the Duke de Montpensier, and other great Lords, in diuers places of the Realme, to make them the readier and more prompt to leane vnto them.
The hope of confiscations being mixed therewith, which made many rauening fellowes to looke about them: there was nothing offered, but Estates, Offices, Benefices, Mountaines of Gold, to such as would ayde and assist the King, to extirpe and roote out the enemies of the Church of
Rome.
Passages kept that no aide should come.Besides that, the kings forces were diuided by those of
Guise, into the Townes next about Orleans, as farre as
Bourges, Moulins, Blois, Tours, Saumur, Angers, Chinon, Loudun, and
Poicton, and in all the passages from whence they esteemed that any ayde might bee procured to helpe the Princes that were prisoners. Those of the religion were narrowly looked vnto in diuers Townes, specially in Parris: meane time they proceeded vnto the framing of the proces against the Prince. But because of the obseruation of the formes of iustice,The maner of proceeding against the Prince. neither the informations made at Lyons, against the Marshall of Saint Andre, nor the prisoners of Melun, were sufficient: they produced the Princes words vsed at Amboise, lamenting the death of so many Gentlemen that were executed, with that which hee had vttered riding to Bearn, vnto Monsieur de Genlis, that had renounced the Cerimonies of the Romish Church, to the end, that not being able to accuse him of high treason, they would condemne him of Heresie.
To strengthen this second proofe, those of
Guise sent a Priest vnto him, apparelled after the Romish manner, which certified him, that he had expresse commaundement from the King, to sing Masse before him in his chamber. But the Priest with a rude aunswere was sent backe againe by the Prince, with commission, to shewe the King from him, that hee was not come thither in any sort to bee perticipant or communicate with the impieties and pollutions of the Romaine Antichrist,His magnanimitie in Religion. wherevnto, long before hee had renounced: but onely to yeelde him an aunswere vnto the false and forged accusations imposed against him. Which answer was not forgotten, but thereof a large article was framed, both by the deposition of the Priest, and of the guarde.
As also his accusations against those of Guise.This magnanimitie much mooued those of Guise, but much more in that the Prince spake openly against them, to their discredits: oftentimes shewing a bag which hee helde in his hand, affirming it to be the processe of those Brigands and Guisian theeues: by the which, many points of high treaon, whereof they were culpable, were well prooued and verified: which hee kept and reserued to present vnto the estates, thereby to giue them knowledge of their subtill and vnlawfull gouernments, that imputed their owne treasons vnto the Princes of the bloud, that sought to oppose themselues against theyr tyrannies: and that if euer any man euer sought or ment to enterprise any thing against the King and his Realme, it would bee those Harpiers and vpsprung house of
Lorraine. A Gentleman one of their Participants, and in time past, very familier with the Prince, was appointed by them to conferre with him,He pronounceth warre against the Guisians. as also to sound his full meaning and intent, and therewith to seeke to abate his courage: which hee pretending, the Prince desired him to shewe those of
Guise, that for his part hee hadde receiued so many and great wrongs and iniuries at theyr hands, that their quarrell could neuer bee fully ended, eyther at the swordes poynt, or else by Lanuce: which if hee coulde not effect, yet hee hoped before his death, to make them manifestly to bee knowne and founde culpable of those faultes, by them imposed vppon him. This most haughtie resolution, caused them to sende for the President
de Thou, Barthollomewe Faye, and Iaques Violle, Counecllours of Parris, certayne Maisters of the requests, Bourdin, Attourney Generall,They seeke to make his processe. and du Tillet the Clarke, to examine the Prince vppon high Treason: and that if they coulde not finde him guiltie thereof, they shoulde then examine him vppon the Artickles of his fayth.
The Prince aunswered them, that it belonged not vnto them to put any such questions vnto him, not specifying diuers causes of refusing them therein, which hee might well haue shewed: specially against de Thou, whome hee most sharpelye reprooued, and when they enterprised to proceede further in lawe, the Prince appealed vnto the King. But the next day being the 15. of Nouember, the peale was declared by the priuie Counsell to bee of no force: from which the Prince hauing once againe appealed, hee was commaunded vpon paine of high treason to aunswere before those Commissioners,He purgeth himself of treason, and openly professeth religion. which he did: hauing two Councellers to helpe him. And before them, he clearely acquited himselfe of treason: and boldly confessed and auouched the religion. Not long after, the Secretary Robertet, brought him a certaine paper containing diuers speeches, pretended to haue beene spoken by him at
Amboise, beholding the execution of certaine prisoners. Hee therewith at large expounded his meaning vpon those speeches, yet was there no witnesses produced against him for the same, no nor
Bouchart himselfe, that had faithfully promised vnto the Cardinall by word of mouth, to shewe him many wonderfull things touching the Prince, but they proceeded so farre, that vppon his aunsweres, hee had iudgement of death pronounced vppon him, and his head to bee striken off, vppon a Scaffold before the Kings Pallace, vppon the tenth of December then next ensuing, at the entering of the Estates into the Parliament.
He is condemned by the priuie Councell and participants of Guise.It is affirmed and published by writing, that this iudgement was vnderwritten and sealed by all the priuie Councell, (onely the Chauncellour and Monsieur de Mortier, that delayed it off) as also by diuers great Lords and Barrons, by the eighteene knights of the Order newly chosen, and by diuers others, participants of the house of
Guise, and by more Maisters of Requests, and Councellours of the Parliament, which the king sent for, and caused to come thither, that not once dealt in the cause.
The Counte de Sancerre refused to signe it, desiring the King with weeping eyes, rather to cut off his head, then once to mooue him therevnto, whereat the King much abashed, dismissed the Counte, not pressing him any further therein. They likewise vsed many rude and hard dealings towards the Princesse of Conde, who very stoutly and with a meruellous courage, sued for her husband.
Meanes and subtilties vsed, that no speech should be had in the Parliament touching religion.At the sametime, the Pope published a Bull, bearing date the twentieth of Nouember, wherin hee promised a generall Councell for the ordering and determining of matters of religion, assigning it to be holden within the towne of Trent, vppon Easter day, then next ensuing. On the other side, the Cardinall of Lorraine, had giuen order, to write and Register, the names of all the principail of the religion, in euery Prouince throughout France: which rolles were made and diliuered vnto him.
All those that held on the Princes parts, and with religion, were as then iudged to die, thereby to cease all quarrelles, and that no more speech might once bee mooued touching the reformation of religion, seeing as then the affaires concerning the same, were in that estate which those of Guise desired: and for the execution of so high and haughtie enterprises, as the assembly of the Estates, whereby the libertie of France should wholly haue beene ouerthrown: the forces of the Realme diuided into foure parts, vnder the conducts of the Duke
d'Aumale, the Marshals of Saint Andre, de Brissac, and
de Termes, marched to clear the Prouinces of all suspected persons touching religion: to furnish the charges thereof, they tooke the third part of all Ecclesiasticall reuenues, the Gold and Siluer of Relicques, and the Treasures of the Temple: with promise that the confiscations should restore it all againe.
For supply of Souldiers, the Pope dispensed with all the Cleargie, and promised to furnish them with a great number of men of that calling. As touching the extermination of the Princes and Lords, they proceeded therein with time and leisure.

The King of Nauarre was to bee confined vnto the Castle of Leches, the Admirall into the great Tower of
Bourges, with all his children, his Nephewes in another Tower within
Orleans, which after that, was called the Admirall, hard by that of Saint Aignan, prepared for the chiefe Cittizens of the Towne.
Determination to kil the king of Nanarre, marnellously preserued.The Marshals of Saint Andre and
Brissac, beeing arriued at the Court* were of aduise, that the King of Nauarre should bee slaine, without troubling themselues to set a guard to keepe him: wherevppon they determined to poyson him at a banquet, and then vppon an euening, to kill him as hee went from the kings chamber: which taking no effect, the king was desired to do it, and to stabbe him with his Ponyard, and so to shedde his owne blood, which Gods mercifull prouidence would not permit, although it seemed to bee almost vppon the poynt of execution, the King hauing the Ponyard readie vnder his Gowne, beeing alreadie entered into certaine rough speeches against the King of Nauarre, who in presence of those of Guise, made him so sufficient and good an aunswere, that hee escaped. An other pretence was sought to get him to ride abroade to hunt, and in hunting to kill him.
The Constable had not as yet entered into the Lackes, but they were minded to constraine him therevnto, hauing alreadie sent out commission to laye hands vppon Monsieur d'Anuille, his second sonne. As touching the Admirall and his two bretheren, the declaration by them made, (specially the Admiral and d'Andelot) to bee of the religion, was cause sufficient to condemne them.Meanes vsed to intrap and extirpe all those of the religion. Which to effect, the king sent commission to all the knights of the Order, to certifie them, that he would holde a generall feast of the Order, vppon
Christinas day then next after ensuing: minding (all excuses set apart) that euery man should as then come thither: which beeing expected, the Doctors of the Sorbonists, framed such a confession of the faith, that not any man, how little feeling soeuer hee had of the religion, would for a thousand liues haue once signed or consented therevnto.
The day beeing come, this confession was to haue been presented by the King himselfe, vnto the knights, hee beeing the first that should set hand vnto it, requiring the like of euery one of them, with oath and promise to holde and obserue the same vnuiolably in euery poynt, and to set vppon and ouerrunne all such as should deny it, without exception either of friends or Parents whatsoeuer: and whosoeuer should make the least deniall, or any delay, presently without further inquisition, forme, or manner of proceeding, the king should degrade him of the Order, and as also of estates, dignities, and honours, and the next day after, hee should bee burnt. The like should also bee done vpon the same day, by an assembly of Cardinals, thereby to intrappe the Cardinall of Chastillon: that done, all the Princes and Lords of the Realme, should come to signe to that confession: then all the Gentlemen and Domesticall Officers to the king. The Chancellour had commaundement to do the like among the Maisters of Requests, Iudges, Secretaries, and other Officers of the Courts of Parliaments.
The Queene-mother tooke the charge vppon her, to cause all the Ladies and Gentlewomen of the Court to do the like: it being inioyned vnto al those that had any retinue or houshold to cause them to followe the same rule, vpon paine to aunswere to the contrary at their perils. After that, it was to be sent vnto all the Parliaments, Baliages, Stewardships, and other Iurisdictions of the Realme, to exact the like confession of faith vppon euery man, and whosoeuer delayed or fayled therein, to be presently burnt, without any other forme or manner of proces. If any belonging vnto the Princes or Lords of the Guises part, were exempted from death, for hauing refused to signe, and after repented their fault, for his pennance, all his life after, hee should weare a Sanuenito or coloured robe, after the manner of Spaine, for a perpetuall shame and ignominie.
The Curates and Vicars, were charged to go vnto all the houses of their Parishes, accompanied with the Clarkes, Notaries, and other such persons therevnto appoynted, to take the Signatures, and to keepe a iust record of the number of euery particular Iurisdiction. New Commissions likewise beeing sent out vnto the Captains and Gentlemen, perticipants with those of Guise, to raise men of the same confession, that they might iustly execute that which should bee giuen them in charge.
The Deputies for the Estates, put in feare and hardly handled.As the Deputies for the Estates arriued, and the tenth of December approaching for the beginning of the Parliament, expresse commaundement was giuen them from the king, vppon paine of death, that not any of them should once be so bolde, as to vtter one word in open Parliament touching religion, because his Maiestie had otherwise disposed thereof. But some of them not refraining to say, that the letters of commission to assemble, specified the same. Those they sought by faire meanes to appease, or else to blinde their eyes with the Popes new made Bull, with the assembly of a Councel: others they put in feare: and to some they made faires promises, but to such as were not of the religion, they partly made them priuie to their intents aforesaid. At that instant, there arriued a packet from the Counte de Villards, Lieftenant for the Constable in Longuedoc: who wrote, that the Deputies for that Prouince, that were appoynted to sit in Parliament, were such, as were most affected vnto religion, and such as would not fayle to aske the libertie thereof, as hauing speciall charge to doo it: wherevppon men were presently sent foorth for to arrest them, but they taking an other way to Orleans, without giuing leaue to enter into their lodgings, they were ceased vpon, with all their notes, containing most ample instructions, both for the good and benefit of the Estate, and religion.
Constancie of the king of Nauarre.On the other side, certaine Captaines and souldiers solicited the king of
Nauarre, to saue himselfe, presenting him with the meanes: diuers of his friendes aduertising him of many daungers that might happen vnto him by staying there. But hee committing his life into the hands of God, and doubting least his retrait would rather be cause to bereaue him of his life, refrained that counsell, so that whatsoeuer eyther friends or enemies could say vnto him, yea, although hee might easilie perceiue himselfe to bee openly disdayned and mocked by the Courtiers, hee would not forsake the Towne, neyther yet leaue his brother, before hee had seene what would bee the effect thereof.
The Admirall goeth to Orleans.The Admirall sent for by the king to come to Orleans, without making any account of his friends, and other his familiars disswations, shewing him into what daunger hee would thereby bring himselfe, presently tooke his voyage, and beeing arriued at the Court, hee vnderstood by the Queene-mother, that the Cardinall had fully determined to aske him a reason of his faith in the presence of the King, praying him not wilfully to put himselfe in daunger. His constant aunswere was reported vnto the Cardinall, who therevppon made his full account, that eyther the Admirall should as then renounce the religion, or else loose his life.
The day before the Prince should be executed, the King fell sicke.Vppon Sunday, beeing the ninth of December, as a part of the Kings houshold were alreadie departed from
Orleans, to go to Chambourg and Chenoncean, the king of Nauarre in the morning going to salute the King, hee was warned to come foorth, and to ride on hunting, vntil the States were come: but he excused himselfe, considering his brothers captiuitie, yet had hee expresse commaundement, the next morning to prepare himselfe to ride: vppon the which day, his brother should haue lost his head: but that day the common Prouerbe was truly verified: which is, that God can alter all mens actions: for that the same day, about foure of the clocke in the Euening, the King beeing at Euening prayer, at the Iacobins, hee fell in a sound, wherewith hee was presently carryed into his Chamber, where beeing reuiued, hee beganne to complaine of his head, on that side of his left eare, wherein hee had a continuall Phisola, in such sort, that with the paine, a Feuer ceased vppon him. Which notwithstanding,Those of Guise seeke to withstand the blow. those of Guise caused diuers commissions to be sent abroad vnto the Captaines of their part, to raise men in diuers Prouinces: and not long before, commission had been giuen vnto the Marshall de Termes, to march to meete the Spaniards, as then comming vnto Rayonne, and with them to enter into
Bearn. The Viscounte d'Orthe, Gouernour of
Bayonne, had commaundement from the King, to put the Towne (if neede were) into the king of Spaines hands, thereby to serue him for a passage for his armie to enter into the countie of Nauarre, where hee was, to wast and destroy all the land, and then to proceede with the ouerthrow and vtter extirpation of all the Gentlemen and Lords, who in those countries had fauoured the King of Nauarre, or the enterprise of
Amboise. But a great part of those Lords and Gentlemen, not minding to sell their skinnes so good cheape, raised armes, to the number of seuen or eight hundreth horse well mounted, with fiue or sixe thousand footmen, who were all appoynted, so soone as Marshall de Termes should haue past Limoges, to inclose him betweene two riuers: whereof hee beeing aduertised, and remembring
Graueling, hee retired in all haste vnto Poictiers, giuing aduise vnto the Court what had happened vnto him: whereat those of
Guise beeing abashed, and perceiuing the king to waxe weaker, and euery day sicker then other, determined with desperate minds to kill the king of Nauarre, who not long before being aduertised thereof, made his complaint vnto the Queen-mother: which notwithstanding his enemies would not leaue off, but by all means sought to effect it, if it had not been for the Cardinall of Tournon, that gaue them counsell to stay their enterprise, vntill the Constable, with his sonnes and Nephewes, were come vnto the Court, least that by killing the one, they should chance to mooue a greater daunger, and to stirre those vp, that might procure farre greater trouble then the Princes could effect. Meane time, the king of Nauarre tooke great care to looke vnto himself, yet all that he could do, would not haue preuailed, if his enemies had set vppon him.
The kings disease increasing more and more, th^
^uke of Guise beganne to vtter his chollor against the Phisitians, the Cardinall sent on Pilgrimages,But no man can striue against God. and vsed Friers and Priests at Parris and other places, to make processions: and the king made a solemne promise vnto all the Saints in Picardie, specially to our Ladie of
Glery, (as they terme her) that if it pleased them to helpe him, he would wholly purge his Realme of all those Hereticques. But as then began his more ruine, and his Feuer still to increase: wherat those of
Guise being abashed, what countenance soeuer they shewed, assayed to perswade the Queene-mother, that the kings bodie should be kept from buriall after his death, vntill such time as they had taken order for their affaires, and caused their vniust actions to be allowed by open Parliament: to the end, that no man might call them to account heereafter. But that was vnpossible, for that too many people daylie attending when the time would bee, at the same time the Vidame de Chartres, prisoner in the Bastille, hauing beene carried from thence, to remaine within his house in Saint Anthonies streete: presently vppon his arriuall thither, hee fell sicke and died. The Bailiffe of Orleans was committed vnto the custodie of his mother in lawe. And those of the religion as then were drowned in most ardent prayers, teares, and fastes, thereby to obtaine some ayde and succour at the handes of God, against so many imminent daungers, that as then hung ouer their heads.
The Queen-mother establisheth her authoritie to sustaine those of GuiseThe Queene-mother perceuing her eldest sonne at such extremitie, taking counsell with her selfe, as also of those of Guise, sent for the king of
Nauarre, willing him to come vnto her Chamber, where beeing come, and thinking to enter, a Gentleman spake vnto him in his eare, that at any hand hee should bee carefull not to refuse the Queen, whatsoeuer she should demaund, otherwise it would cost him his life. Beeing entered, hee found the Queene to bee accompanied with the Duke of Guise, the Cardinall of Lorraine, and a Secretarie, who with a countenance framed vnto her passion, made great complaints and declarations vnto the King of of
Nauarre, as touching things past, discouering her minde likewise, concerning things present, and to come: concluding that her meaning was, and so she would haue it, that the said king of
Nauarre shuld release vnto her all the right and title that he might in any sort pretend or claime vnto the Regencie, and gouernment of the king and of the Realme: and neuer seeke to enioy, require, or once desire it: and that if the States would giue it him, hee should remitte it wholly vnto her: and because it should be firmely holden by them, shee said hee should confirme it vnto her by writing vnder his hand: then her meaning was, hee should reconcile himselfe vnto her Cousins of Guise, and so deface the opinion by him conceiued against them: saying, that they ought to leaue all quarrelles, and from thencefoorth liue in peace: seeing the greatest and woorthiest Lords, and Princes of the Land, beganne to shew them the way.
After some excuses, and effectuall aunsweres made by the King of Nauarre, in the end he yeelded the Regencie vnto the Queene,The Regencie of the Realme yeelded to the Queen-mother. that he should be Lieftenant for the K. in
France, to take order for al the Marshal affaires, and to receiue the packets: which hauing opened and read, hee should send the^ vnto her againe, and that nothing should be done without the aduise of him, and the other Princes of the blood: who from thencefoorth should otherwise be respected: that done, shee caused him to imbrase her Cousins of
Guise, and mutually on both parts, to forget all quarrelles past.

From which time forwards they all beganne to salute and imbrace each other, as if they neuer had beene at mortall strife.Reconciliation of those of Guise, with the king of Nauarre. All this was done before the arriuall of the Constable and his Nephewes. Further, they caused the sicke king to say vnto the King of
Nauarre, that of his owne minde, and wholly against the willes or consents of those of Guise, hee had caused the Prince of
Conde to bee committed prisoner, asking his counsell, and desiring him to beleeue him: and for the loue of him, and of the Queene his mother, to deface and wholly remit all the euill will and opinions, that in any sort he might conceiue of them: which after serued them to some good end. Those of Guise not well assured,The feare of those of Guise. notwithstanding all that had beene past, obtained of the Queen-mother, that the guardes of the Gates of
Orleans might bee made stronger, impeaching the entrie of many persons, and commaundements made in paine of death, that not any man (whatsoeuer) should speake vnto the Prince of Conde, without expresse licence and commaundement from the Queen-mother, or else that hee brought her signer.
The death of King Francis the secondThe 14. of December about noone, they esteemed the king to be dead, although hee departed not his life, till about fiue of the clocke at night: not long before his death, those of Guise went to shut themselues within their lodgings, from whence in 36. houres after, they neuer came foorth, before such time as that they had a full assurance, both from the Queene-mother, and also from the king of Nauarre: and before that, they carried vnto their houses the summe of three or foure score thousand Frankes, that rested in the treasor: wherevnto no man resisted, which made all men suppose, that the Queene-mother suffered them to do it, the better to maintaine her selfe in time to come.
A chaunge in the court.Assoone as the king was dead, the Queene-mother sent for the Constable vnto
Estampes, in all speed to repaire vnto the Court: at his arriuall hee discharged the guard, that were placed by those of Guise to keepe the Gates of Orleans: the Prince of Conde continued prisoner in Orleans, tenne ortwelue daies after the kings death, he neuer hauing had the credit once to see him during his imprisonment: after that, he was sent with a guard vnto Han, from whence hee went to
Roye, there to attend the issue of his proces, in other sort, then eyther his friendes or enemies once conceiued.Deliuery of those of the Religion. Those of the religion, that had still remained in long and continuall prayers in their most secret assemblies for certaine daies, beganne to lift vp their heades, being all prepared and readie to die, if the king had liued but certaine weekes longer.
The king of Spaines troupes marching towards
Bearn, were countermanded, and so retired without any exploit.
Monluc that was promised by those of Guise, to be made Counte de Armignac, and stayed for them in that countrie, retired vnto his house, as others adherents vnto them, which did the like: the most secret seruants that those of Guise could haue within the Court, presented the^selues with al humilitie vnto the K. of
Nauarre,The inconstancie of the Court. discouering vnto him ye certaintie of those affaires, that should haue bin executed against his person. But the Queen-mother would not permit, that neither then, nor at any time after, such things should once be spoken of, thereby fearing (as she said) some great trouble that might arise. But it fell out cleane contrary, for that for want of taking order therin, whe^ time serued, it grew to such an issue, that both she and her sonnes, hauing neuer seen any other the^ mischiefs, were deep sunck into them, that before they died, they neuer could find any certaine issue how to auoyde them. The Admirall among the rest, wheresoeuer hee came, glorified the wonderfull workes of God,Constancie of the Admarall. who at that time had deliuered him out of the hands of his most mortall enemies, euen at such time as they thought most to triumph ouer him. Those of Guise besought the Queene to make him to bee silent, yet he ceased not to offer, and also to iustifie the^ to be culpable of diuers poynts of treason, if it pleased her to permit that iustice might bee giuen accordingly. Shee not seeming to hearken therevnto, desired him to thinke well of them, and from that time to liue in peace, assuring him to set good order among them. His aunswere was, that to shewe a good countenance vnto those that had purchased his death, charged his honour, procured the confiscation of his goods, with the totall ruine and ouerthrow of his house, his kinred, and friends, he could not do it, without shewing a double hart, which was a thing cleane contrary to his religion, and not fitte for any honest man to do: yet he remitted the vengeance vnto God, that could well do it when hee should see his time, seeing men would not permit him to haue iustice.
Those of Guise, desiring not to bee farre from the assembly of the Estates, wherein they feared some earnest matter would be propounded against them,King Francis that had been so much mooued against those of the religion, is buried after their manner. caused the bodie of the dead king, to bee conuaied by
Sansac and la Brosse, vnto Saint Denis, where without any solemnitie, or royall pompe, it was buried. The Duke of
Guise as then great maister, and hauing ceased vppon the last receipts of mony, not long before the king died, with whom hee kept companie in his life: was much dispraised and euill thought of, by reason of that great fault: wherevnto his seruants aunswered, that as then hee had no more neede of the kings helpe, by whom he had serued his turne so wel, but that thencefoorth hee was to looke vnto himselfe, and to seeke to eleuate his house.
Such was the raigne of Francis the second, that died at the age of 17. years lacking one month: in the 17. month of his raigne: the
17. day of his sicknesse: and the 17. houre after midnight: and because that during the short time of his raigne, the seedes of ciuill dissention were sowen and scattered in France, which hitherto haue endured for the space of twise seuenteene yeares. I thought at large herein to declare all that had passed in this kings time, the better to please the Readers mindes.
Heere endeth the troubles, that happened in the raigne of
Francis the second.



Charles the ninth.

M.D.LX.

The Regencie confirmed to the Queen mother.FRANCIS the second being dead without issue,
Charles his third brother succeeded in his place, Son to
Henry the second, (the second called Louys, dying an infant) borne the 27. of Ianuarie, 1550. vppon the 20. of December, in open Councell, where the yong king was brought, accompanied with the king of
Nauarre, and other Princes of the blood, with diuers Lords and principall Councellours, an order was established for the mannaging of affaires, and the Regencie confirmed vnto the Queene.
The Parliament.Two daies after, the Estates assembled in a great Hall within Orleans, where the Chancellor made an Oration, wherin he shewed, to what end an assembly in that sort was to be holde^: why they had assembled: what good would happen therby, and wholly confuting those that were in doubt to haue them meet, painting them out in all their colours. After that, hee propounded the means to appease all troubles,The Chancellors Oration. shewing wherein they might relieue both the Estate and religion, inclining to a Councell, exhorting them on all parts, to a perfect vnion and quietnesse of mind: lastly, he spake of the kings debts, which done, hee ended his Oration, and so for that time, the assembly came foorth.
The next day after, certain disputations were holden, to know if the Deputies might as then enter into a Councell after the kings death,De Rochefort, for the Nobilitie. whereby it seemed, all their Commissions not to bee of any force: which beeing decided, they beganne with Orations. Monsieur de Rochefort speaking for the Nobilitie, approoued the Regencie of the Queen-mother, complained of the iurisdictions vsurped by the Clargie: of the disorders happened among the Nobilitie, and of the wrongs done vnto them: set downe the meanes to gouerne the Spiritualtie, and to maintaine them within their bounds: spake for the comfort of the people, specially concerning iustice, shewing that the Offices for iustice, oght to bee freely giuen, iustice reduced to a certaine necessary number of Officers, and that the Nobilitie ought not to be secluded from the administration thereof. After that, he spake touching the disorders vsed in confiscations, and against seditions, besought the King to receiue and maintaine the Nobilitie in their priuiledges, and withall, presented a request, wherein was required the vse of certaine Churches for the Nobilitie,de l'Ange for the third Estate. that as then made profession of the religion. One named l'Ange, speaking for the third Estate, intreated principally against the ignorance, auarice, and carelessenesse of the Cleargie: thereof inferring, that such faults ceasing in them, all troubles would soone be ended. Iohn Quintin Autunois, professor of the ciuill lawe in Parris, appoynted to make an Oration for the Cleargie, (whom the Cardinal of Lorraine had preferred,De Quintin for the Cleargie. as also for the Nobilitie and third Estate: but all in vaine) spake much, but with much dirision: pronouncing nothing but by writing, and that with smal grace, hauing for his co^trowlers diuers of the principall Prelates and Cardinals of the Realme. The summe of his Oration, after many and great commendations, vttered in the behalfe of the Queene-mother, was to shewe the principall causes of the assembly of the Estates, not to deale in any thing touching the reformation of religion, which cannot erre: but rather to solicite and commaund the Ministers of the same, duly and truly to execute their charges, and not to permitany other religion then that of Rome: wherevppon hee made a long inuection against those of the religion, and such as had desired Churches: saying, that hee which had beene the messenger and presenter of their request, (in a manner openly charging the Admiral, set right against, and face to face with that Orator) oght to be holde^ and declaredan Hereticque, and against him, as be-being one, they oght to proceed, according to the rigor both of canno^ and ciuil lawes: thereby to roote the mischiefe out of the heart of France. Hee compared those of the religion vnto the Arians: and the Lords that fauored the^, to the Traitor Gainas in the time of
Arcadius, vsed all his eloquence to prooue the antiquitie of the Romish religion, and that those of the religion in France, were dispersed people, and such as sought to induce an Anarchie, wholly vnworthie of any support or good intertainment, requiring the prohibition of all bookes not allowed by the Doctors of the Sorbonistes: concluding therewith, to desire that all those of the religion might bee wholly rooted out and extinguished: which done, hee directed his speech vnto the king and his mother, making request for the maintaining of the persons and goods of the Cleargie, for their elections, for the obseruations of the ancient Cannons, for the exemption of Tithes, contributions, and cotisations, wherevppon hee made almost a whole houres worke. Lastly, hee pleaded without request, for the Nobilitie, for the third Estate, for the gouernment of iustice: and to conclude, made a long discourse of the institution of a king.
The next day, the Admirall complained vnto the king and to the Queen mother, of the presumptious ignorance of de Quintin,A payment for de Quintin, Orator for the Cleargie. that had so openly charged him, touching the presenting of a request in the behalfe of the religion, at Fontainbleau. Quiutin excused himselfe vpon the lesson that had been giuen in writing, and in his second Orarion, denied his first, to please the Admirall: and not long after, died of sorrowe and greefe, perceiuing himselfe so well discouered, by diuers answeres made vnto his Oration, wherein his Apostacie, his slaunders, and his falsehoodes were fully set downe.

In the beginning of this yeare, the Spiritualtie had commandement from the king, to bee at the Councell of Trent, and commission likewise was giuen vnto all Iudges and other Officers,Order touching religio^. that they should presently release both bodies and goods of all such prisoners, that then were kept or holden in prison for religion: defence beeing made to all men whatsoeuer, not to iniurie them nor their religion, vppon paine of death.
The States continued their conference at Orleans, where the Cittizens of Orleans were much greened, that in the last kings time those of Guise had filled their houses with souldiers, that had fedde vpon them at their owne pleasures, complaining that the Duke
de Nemours held a great number secretly in diuers places, to do some suddaine exploit. The king of Nauarre and the Constable, beeing appeased, the Queen-mother caused all that complaint to cease, contenting themselues, that the Duke disauouched them all. There rested yet another stoppe, which caused the Parliament to bee reiourned vntill the month of May next after ensuing, to be holden at Pontoise.
The King of Nauarre and the Channcellor, desiring the estates to take order that the Kings debts might be paide:The breaking vp of the Parliament. offering to shewe them a particular rolle thereof. The King of Nauarre saying further, that if by accounts, they founde that he hadde receiued any extraordinary giftes, hee woulde freely restore them againe. But those of
Guise and others, that coulde not saye the like, did so much, that those matters proceeded not any further in question, hoping that time would cause them to speake of other things then restitutions.
Not long after, the Prince of Conde recalled vnto the Court, came from la Fere,The King iustifieth the Prince of Conde. to Fontainbleau, and the next day after his arriuall, entred into counsell, vpon the thirteenth of March, where in presence of them all, the king declared that hee had beene sufficiently certified of his innocency, permitting him to make a second declaration thereof at the Court of Parliament in Parris: whither, not long after, the Prince went. On the other side, the King of Nauarre, complained to the Queene-mother, touching the Duke of Guise, that was preferred both before himselfe and the Constable, and proceeded so farre therein, that both he, and the rest of the Princes of the blood, with the Constable and diuers Noblemen,The Queen-mother assureth her regency. began to prepare themselues to depart out of the Court: but she perceiued that to be a blowe wherewith to abate her gouernment, by the Cardinall of Tournons meanes, shee sent for the Constable, commanding him expresly from the King, that he should not depart from the Court. Which done, she stayed the rest, and so brake off that matter, to her no small contentment.
The report of this discontentment, beeing spread into diuers places, the Deputies for the assembly of the particular states of
Parris, began to speake therof, and earnestly to agree of some order to be taken,The particular states of Parris, see clearer then others. touching the gouernment of the Realme, displacing of some, and placing of others in principall offices: to constraine those of Guise to yeeld an account, touching the treasures by them receiued in the last Kings time, as also of other their misbehauiours: to recall the gifts made vnto the Duchesse of Valentinois, the^selues and others: and that before their iustification they shuld not sit in cou^sell. The Queene-mother much troubled therat, found no better nor no surer meanes, then to make a new contract with the king of
Mauarre, and therein to imploy the Constable, that by the
accord between them, the King of Nauarre was expresly declared Liestenant Generall for the King,To breake their intent, the Queene-mother agreeth with the King of Nauarre. and order set downe that the Queene-mother should do nothing but by his aduise and consent. This was written and signed by them both, as also by the Councell, and namely by the Duke of
Guise, who by the Queenes Counsell shewed himselfe much more tractable then euer hee did. Diuers of the King of Nauarres Councell, were of the contrary opinion, although hee alleadged diuers great promises made vnto him from the Queene by word of mouth, alledging that shee would wholly deny whatsoeuer shee had said: that his Lieftenants place should be but in paper, and that if the matter were ruled and ordered by the Estates, both the Queene and those of Guise, with all their adherents, would bee so dealt withall, that the realme would be restored vnto her pristinate gouernment: and that to the contrary, leauing things in that order, France as then beeing at peace and quietnesse with forraine enemies, would presently bee troubled in most straunge and extraordinary maner within it selfe: for partiallities being great on both sides, the one would seeke to ouerrunne the other: and that it was to bee hoped, that if the affaires of the estate were ruled and ordered according to the lawes of the Realme, men might easilie impeach and hinder wicked men, from effecting that which by them is secretly pretended: that then at the beginning it behoued them to looke vnto it, and to bee well aduised, thereby to establish peace and good gouernment in the affaires of the Realme. But whatsoeuer they said, it was to no effect, whereby both the King of
Nauarre himselfe, the Princes of the blood, and all the Realme in generall, did after indure much woe, the wound wherof as yet remaineth fresh.
The increase of the religion not supported.Forth us it fell out, those of the religion openly increasing within France, and in the Court the King of
Nauarre did seem to support them: Sermons were made both in the prince of Condes and the Admirals chambers, as also both within and without the Court, and the Queene-mother caused the Bishoppe of
Valence, to preach within the great Hall, which Bishoppe followed not the Sorbonists doctrine, such as desired nothing but new troubles, thereby not to bee constrained to giue account for things past, and that knewe full well, that the sweete ayre of a firme and steadfast peace, would soone melt and consume them, or else reduce them into so miserable an estate, that they should bee forced to hide their heades, taking that occasion as it fell out. They first inflamed the Constable by the daylie speeches and exclamations of his wife, ordinarily accompanied and plyed by Priests and Friers, and then by his kinsmen. And lastly,The perturbers solicite the Constable to begin their Tragedie. by certaine persons purposely appoynted to that end by those of Guise, as also by the Queene-mother against those of the religion, saying that they went about wholly to abollish the Masse, and all his Reliques, and that vnder pretence of yeelding vppe of accounts and extraordinary giftes, they sought to vnhorse him, that for the space of fortie yeares, had dealt in the greatest and most vrgent affaires of the Realme.
The Marshal of Saint Andre, and Montpesat draue forward this wheele, and therewith perswaded the Constable, alreadie mooued, in that hee sawe and openly perceiued, the auncient traditions of the Romish Church to bee wholly despised, both by great and small within the Court.
His eldest sonne, who beeing a Lord of great iudgement, and perceiuing his Father vppon the poynt to bee separated and disioyned
from the Prince of Conde, and his Nephews de Chastillon, and other great Lords, thereby to become the executioner of the Guisians passions, vsed all the means he could to driue backe the blowe: but he did no more therein, then the Admirall and his brother the Cardinall de Chastillon. The Constable remaining firme in that opinion, that changing of religion would breed an alteration of the estate, which he would not endure: and to conclude, not long after, he and the Duke of
Guise hauing made diuers banquets, togither with the Duke de Montpensieur at Fontainbleau, the Constable made a Supper to the Duke of Guise: the Prince de Iainuille, and the Marshall of Saint Andre, the next day riding to Chantilly, to the marriage of Thore his fift sonne: the Duke of
Guise not long after following him to Nantueil, about fiue myles from thence, where by letters they had many and seuerall conferences.
The common people in diuision, following the example of the Nobilitie.The people of France beeing vsed to cast their eyes vppon the Court, perceiuing that there the great personages beganne to looke with strange countenances vpon each other, they began to do the like. There wa^ted no prouokers nor perswaders in the temples, who without suppression spake of nothing else but fire and sword, whereby in many places ensued great mutinies, as in Beauuais, Amiens, Pontoise, and other Townes, wherein most great excesse and rigor was shewen to those of the religion, who beeing as it were but a handfull, in comparison to those of the Romish Church, demaunded nought but peace, sometimes certaine of them (lesse patient then the rest) not beeing able to indure the iniuries of those that termed them Huguenots, and no Christians, beganne to replye in like manner, calling such as abused them, Papistes, and from such stinging words, they fell to quarrelles: which differences produced an edict made at Fontainbleau, forbidding those reproaches and names of Huguenots and Papists: also not to search any mans house, nor to keepe any man prisoner for the religion, vnder colour and pretence of certaine formes not well obserued.An edict made at Fontainbleau as aremedy against the order taken by the Parliament, which, as then was almost broken. The Parliament of Parris, that likewise beganne to take a part, in stead of opposing it selfe against commotions that might alter and change the quietnesse of the estate, made great declarations vnto the King, affirming most plainely, that the diuersitie of religion, is not to be indured in one estate, condemning that, by them termed to be a libertie of conscience, and requiring the king to make and ordaine an open profession of the Romish religion, and therevnto to inioyne all his subiects whatsoeuer, to obserue and keepe it, vppon such paines and penalties, as hee and his learned Councell should thinke most conuenient.
There were other declarations made touching the wordes of Papistes and to liue Catholickely, contained within the edict, wherevppon those of the Parliament propounded many difficulties, to the great hurt and detriment of those of the religion, that were wholly and openly condemned: and the Pope expresly named the head, and Gods Vicar vppon earth. This winde serued but onely with more speede to assemble and bring togither the tempests of ciuill warres, which at this day as yet continueth.
Sacrying of the king. The Cardinals complaints.In the moneth of Iune, the king was sacred in
Reims, where were present thirteene Peeres of France, the kings eldest brother beeing the first, and all the other Princes of the blood sitting in their degrees, there the Cardinall of Lorraine made great complaintes against those of the religion, wherevpon
it was determined, that a new assembly of the Princes, Lords, and others of the priuie Councell, should bee made in the Court of Parliament in Parrris, to take order therein. Not long after, letters pattents were sent vnto the Presidents de Thou, and
Seguier, to assemble the particular Estates of Parris: but vpon the opposition framed by the Councellour Ruze, in the name of the Nobilitie, those assemblies of Estates were broken vppe, without any resolution: onely in one poynt, which was, that the payment of the Kings debts should bee imposed vppon the Cleargie. About the same time, the act for the clearing the Prince of Conde of treason, was newly published, and proclaimed openly in the Court, by President
Baillet: the doores being open, and all the Iudges and Councellors being present in their Scarlet gownes, within the great chamber, where were present diuers Princes and Noblemen,A decree in the Court of Parliament, to iustifie the Prince of Conde and others. the Duke of
Guise and the Cardinall of Lorraine beeing of the traine. There the Prince was declared innocent in that which had bin imposed against him, and free libertie reserued vnto him, to haue lawe against all such, as hee therein suspected to bee his enemies and false accusers: and such recompence in that case to bee allowed him, as to a man of his estate might appertaine. The like Actes were read and pronounced at the same time for Madame de Roye, Vidame de Chartres deceased,
Monsieur de Cany, and the Councellour de la Haye.
Not long after, the king, the Queene his mother, and the priuie Councell, came into the Parliament, and there, after many and diuers opinions giuen foorth concerning religion, in the moneth of Iuly,The edict of Iulie. an edict was published vppon paine of death, forbidding al iniurious speeches and words whatsoeuer, on both sides to bee vsed: all leagues and things tending vnto sedition: all slaunderous words against Preachers and assemblies, forbidden to those of the religion: who neuerthelesse could not haue beene condemned to indure a greater paine, vnlesse it had beene bannishment out of the Realme: all which prouision, vntill a full and ample declaration should bee made by a generall Councell, or by the next assembly of the Prelates, all faults past, in respect of those of the religion, to bee remitted, with commaundement to punnish all such as should seem to delay them: Bastionadoes forbidden, but onely to men of qualitie. In like sort the Prelates were sent for, to bee at the conference and safe conduct giuen vnto all Ministers, freely to come and dispute of their religion.
Practises against the King of Nauarre.The place beeing assigned at Poissy, while those of the religion were in good hope, because the Cardinall of Lorraine and others, protested to reason quietly touching the articles debated by the parcelles of the holy scripture: means was practised wholly to diuert the king of Nauarre, from the affectio^ by him shewed to those of the religion, and by the means of the assembly at Poissy, to breake off the Parliament, as then reiourned vntil the month of August next after ensuing: because the Queene-mother knewe full well, that the Gentlemen and the Commons, would aske to haue Churches allowed vnto them: which being agreed vnto, would make the Princes part too strong, which she doubted.
Such order therefore was taken in that poynt, that
Descars before that, Chamberlin to the king of Nauarre, and put from his Maister,Descars entertained. hauing discouered him to bee a Pensioner to those of Guise, was restored to his place, and became in more fauour then euer hee had beene.

Also the Duke of Guise, being returned from
Callais, where hee had been with Monsieur d'Anuille, second sonne to the Constable, and a great number of other Courtiers, to conduct the Queene of Scots widdowe, to Francis the second: solicited the Prince of Conde,An agreeme^t between the Prince of Conde and the Duke of Guise. to bee reconciled vnto him: at the which agreement made at Saint Germaines in
Laye, vppon the 24. of August, with the king and the Queene-mother, there were present all the Princes, Noblemen, Cardinals, Councellours, and Knights of the Order. The king hauing spoken of the cause of the assembly, commannded the Duke of Guise to speake, who turning vnto the Prince, spake and said: Sir, I neither haue, nor euer ment to do, or execute any thing, that should bee against your Honour: neither was I eyther author, meanes, or moouer of your imprisonment. The Prince of
Conde answered him and said, I esteeme them both for wicked and mischieuous persons, that were the cause thereof. The Duke replyed and said, I beleeue it well, but that toucheth not mee: which done, at the kings request, they imbraced each other, with promise from thenceforth to continue good friends: and the Queene-mother to witnesse the ioy shee then conceiued, that day held a solemne Feast.
The Queen-mother practise a both with great and small, to maintaine her Regency.As touching the Estates reiourned vnto Pontoire, in the month of August as then it was no longer time to deferre them: but the Queene playing secretly on both parts, to ratifie the agreement made between her and the king of Nauarre touching the Regencie, and to the end it should no more bee spoken of, first sent thither the Councellour du Mortier, that was sent backe againe, finding so many that spake against him. Wherewith the Queene calling her wits togither, she remembred that he had alwaies borne a good countenance vnto the Admirall, pretending in some earnest matter to imploye his ayde: and occasion as then falling out, this Lord was sought vnto by all meanes, and thousands promises were made vnto him, for the ease and reliefe of those of the religion: hee perceiuing that the King of
Nauarre had no desire to deale therein, and (after the manner of simple men) trusting to many and great protestations, made and vttered vnto him concerning his future good, vsed Clarklike meanes, imploying himselfe vnto the Estates, for the confirmation of the accord aforesaid:The States forced to agree to a thing that ouerthrew a lawe of the Realme. and to finish vp the matter, the King of Nauarre himself went thither in person to certifie them, that he had resigned his right and title vnto the Queene: which notwithstanding the matter was much debated, many great personages partly perceiuing the great mischiefs, which by that disorder would in fine, growe vp in such sort, that the Estates agreed not therevnto, but with protestation to the contrary, in their billes which they presented vnto the king at Saint Germaines in Laye, where the general assembly was holden, the Chancellour commaunded by the king, by a long Oration perswaded the company to determine with themselues, whether it would be necessary and conuenient, that the assembly of the religion should bee holden or forbidden. And after him, Lieftenant Autun, surnamed Britaigne, speaking for the communaltie, in a large discourse, shewed the abuse both in the goods and iurisdictions of Ecclesiasticall persons: their duties, the great charges that spoyled and ouerthrew the people, required that the persecutions should be ceased against those of the religion: that promise should bee made vnto them of an assembly, and that to the same end, Churches might bee permitted vnto them: also that their principall Ministers should bee called to conferre with them of the differences of religion. Touching the acquitting of the kings debts, and ordering of other affaires, the third Estate made a large couerture, proposing diuers means to cease diuision, and to reduce the Realme into as rich estate as euer it was. But because diuers matters propounded, touched and concerned many of the greatest personages, specially the Spiritualtie, it was all but words, which likewise were the cause to hasten the principals of such Sects, to inuent their conspiracies. The Cleargie desiring to get out of the myre, made offer, that to acquit the king of his debts, for the space of sixe months, they would euery yeare paye foure tithes: at the same time likewise, the Imposts of fiue sols, vpon euery Alme of Wine entering into euery walled Towne, was raised for the terme of sixe yeares and no more: besides the eighth and tenth part beeing ordinary custome.
While the Estates were busied to dispute and determine of matters concerning the Estate,The Popes deuise to hinder the assembly of Poissy. Pope Pius hauing beene aduertised what had beene determined touching the assembly at
Poissy, sent the Cardinall of Ferrare his Legat in
France, with charge to remit all things touching religion, vnto his Councell, because that among other articles agreed vppon by the States, it had beene decreed, that the benefices of the Realme should bee conferred by the Ordinaries, euery man in his iurisdiction, and not by the Pope. Also that dispenses should more be allowed. There was likewise a question among the^, touching the reception of the Legat: who in fine made such meanes, that the Chancellour was commaunded to seale his letters of authoritie, which the Chauncellour did not, but after many commissions, adding therevnto, that it was done without his consent: the Court of Parliament would not approoue them: and touching the Courtiers, at the first the Legat was but hardly vsed by them, but he vsed such meanes by his friends, that in the end hee got the vpper hand, hauing with his assistants in France, frustrated the assembly of
Poissy.
Assembly of the Cleargie for the conference at Poissy.At the same time the Prelates assembled, for the conference at Poissy, and because some of them were wholly without learning, and the rest little studied in the holy Scriptures, they brought with the^ a great number of Sorbon Doctors and others, whom they appoynted to dispute in their presence, thereby to learne what were best for them to say. Touching those among them, that had any learning, they were suspected, so that in their particular conferences, many times there happened great strife among them, and many times blowes: whereat the Courtiers made great sport.
While they were in this debate among themselues, diuers Ministers of the Churches in France, to the number of twelue, with
22. Deputies,The Ministers came to Poissy, and present a request vnto the king, with the confession of the faith. by the kings safe conduct and commaundement, arriued at
Poissy: not long after, followed by Pierre Martir, and
Theodore Beza, whom the king of Nauarre, and the Prince of
Conde, had caused to come from Zurche and Geneua. Those that first arriued, presented a petition vnto the king, vpon the tenth of August, wherein they desired that commaundement might bee made vnto the Prelates, to peruse the declaration of the faith of the reformed Churches, presented vnto the king since the ninth of Iune then last past: to the end, that at the first assembly, they might shewe what cause they had to deny it: and vppon their obiections, to heare the defences of the said Churches, by the mouths of their Ministers and Deputies. They further desired, that the Prelates and other Ecclesiastical persons, might not bee iudges ouer them, seeing they were parties against them,
that the king and his Councell would bee present at that assembly, that all the differences might bee decreed by the onely word of God: that two Secretaries might bee chosen on each part, that euery day might conferre the notes of their disputations togither: and that those notes should not bee holden nor accounted for lawfull, before the parties had subscribed vnto them. The king receiued the confession and petition,The Kings answere. by the hands of
Augustin Marlorat, and Francis de S. Paul, in the presence of his Mother, the king of Nauarre, and other Princes of the blood, with diuers Lords of the Councell: and with a good countenance, said vnto them: I will referre your petition vnto my Councell, and you shall receiue an aunswere from my Chancellour.
The 24. of August, 1565 Th. de Beza preached at the Court. And the 24. of August
1574. the Massacre was committed against those of the religion. Conference betweene Th. de Beza, and the Cardinall.Theodore de Beza beeing arriued at Saint
Germaines in Laye, vppon the 24. of August he preached publikely, and the next day at the Castle, within the Prince of
Condes Hall, where hee had a great and notable assembly without any noyse or trouble. The same day about euening, beeing sent for into the king of Nauarres Chamber, there he found the Queene, the king of
Nauarre, the Prince, the Cardinals of Burbon and
Lorraine, the Duke de Estampes, and Madame de Crussol, where hauing made a lowe reuerence vnto the Queene, in fewe words hee shewed her the cause of his comming thither, togither with the desire he had, as also all his company, to serue God and his Maiestie, in so holy, commendable, and necessary an enterprise. Thervpon the Cardinall of Lorraine beganne to speake, charging Beza to haue been authour of the troubles, to haue dispearsed infamous libelles about the Realme of France: and to haue spoken with vnreuere^t speeches touching the presence of our Lord in his holy supper. But he hauing in fewe words shewed the vanitie of the two first articles, hee entered into a reasonable large discourse of the third: wherein hee so well satisfied all the common questions of the Cardinall, that hee said expresly vnto the Queene, that hee was very well pleased to heare him speake, and greatly in hope that the conference of Poissy wold proceed to a hat pie end, with so courteous and reasonable disputation: and with that, speaking to Beza, he said: I am glad, that I haue both seen and heard you speake: I protest in the name of God, that you shall conferre with me, to the end, that I may vnderstand your reasons, and your minds: and you shal finde that I am not so blacke as I am desciphered. Beza thanked him, and besought God to continue him in that good minde, promising for his part, to imploy himselfe for the aduancement of the good of Gods flocke, as much as in him lay.
Madam de Crussul there vppon said, (as shee was alwaies bolde to speake) that it would be necessarie to haue Inke and paper,A pleasant and notable speeche of Madame de Crussull. to cause the Cardinall to signe and avow his saying. For (said shee) in the morning hee will speake cleane contrary: and she diuined right: for in the morning, a report was spread about the Court, that at the first meeting, the Cardinall had confounded and reduced
Theodore de Beza. In such manner, that the Queene was costrained to tel the Constable, (who much reioyced thereat, as thinking it to be certaine) that hee was wrong informed. Not long after, the queen of
Nauarre arriued at the court, which made the assemblies to increase.
The second request of the Ministers.The eight of September, the ministers presented a second request, wherein they shewed a reason of the articles propounded, in their first requiring answere. The Queene mother receiued this petition in the presence of the King of Nauarre, the Prince, the Admirall, the Chancelor, and one of his Secretaries: which done, she dismissed Beza, and three others, that accompanied him, with good speeches and assurances, that the Cleargie should not be their iudges.
The beginning of the conference at PoissyThe next day about noone, the king (accompanied as his estate required) entered into the great Refectorie of the noones in
Poissy, where the Princes and Princesses beeing set on each side, and behinde him, somewhat lower, fat sixe Cardinals, 36. Bishoppes, and Archbishoppes: and behinde them, diuers Doctors, and men of the Cleargie. Right before him, at the end of the hal, stood his guard, and behinde them a great number of men of all estates, there hee made a short and small declaration touching the cause of that assembly, commaunding the Chauncellour in larger manner to make it knowne vnto them. The Cardinall
de Tournon, in the name of all the Prelates, humbly thanked the king: which done, hee desired that the Chancellor might deliuer his proposition in writing, and that leisure might be giuen them to consider thereof: which was refused them.
Therevppon the Ministers, to the number of twelue, with 22. Deputies of the Churches in the Prouinces that assisted them,The Ministers and deputies for the religion, appeared before one of the greatest assemblies that euer was in our time, and there confessed their faith being called and brought in by the Duke of
Guise that had the charge, with Monsieur de la Ferte, Captaine of the guard, were ledde vnto the barres, where all bare-headed they stayed: and Theodore de Beza being chosen by them all, beganne to speake, and first hauing made a briefe Preface vnto the king, hee began his Oration with an humble and ardent prayer vnto God, deuised and imployed to the time and occasion of that assembly: which done, standing vppe, hee shewed the most singular contentment, which al those of the relgion receiued at that time, by hauing such recourse vnto their Soueraigne and lawfull Prince, the Queene, the Princes of the blood, with all the Lords and notable persons at that time, and in that place assembled: that done, hee shewed the sinceritie and good desire of all those of the religion: which being ended, he entered into the principal poynt, making a most ample and large collection of the articles of Christian doctrine: not forgetting any poynt that is in controuersie, but hee expounded it sufficiently: withall, saying somewhat touching the Discipline of the Church: concluding, that both hee, and his companions, with all those that were of the religion, desired nothing but the reformation of the Church, which onely desires to liue and die vnder the obedience and protection of the king: detesting all those that soght the contrary: praying to God for the prosperitie of the king, his mother, his Councell, and the Estate, and therevppon hauing made a great reuerence, he pursued with his matter, presenting to the king,The confession deliuered to the king, and receiued by him. the confession of the faith of the Churches of France, requiring that the conference might bee made vppon the same.
His long Oration was pronounced with a most acceptable voice to al the assistants, and heard with a most singular contentment euen to the end, where hee spake very openly to the Prelates likings, against the opinion of the presences of the Lords bodie in the bread. For this article put them in a great murmuration, (although before hee had spoken many other things, that expresly condemned the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome) neuerthelesse, hee proceeded and ended: the king nor any of the Prelates not once offering to rise. His Oration ended, the king receiued the confession of the Churches, by the hands of the aforesaid
Monsieur de Ferte Captaine of the guard, which hee deliuered vnto the Prelates.

The Prelates behauior after the Oration, in the name of the Churches.Among other Prelates that were in a hotte case, the Cardinall de Tourno^ boyling in hotte chollour, hauing desired the King to perseuer in the religion of his auncestor, asked time to aunswere to that Oration, saying, that it should bee well aunswered, and that hee hoped that the King hauing heard the answere, would be reduced, and remembring that word (hee said) not reduced, but holden and kept in the good and perfect way: the Queene sought to qualifie his chollor. The next day, Theodore de Beza wrote and sent the Queene an ample exposition, of that which he had spoken touching the Lords Supper, to the great misliking of the Prelates: who beeing assembled to consult touching their affaires, the Cardinall of Lorraine beganne with these words: In my opinion, I would that hee (meaning Theodore de Beza) had either beene dumbe, or we deafe. And after many opinions giuen, it was determined, that the Cardinall assisted by diuers Doctors,The mean to be Iudges in their owne cause. specially of
Claude Despense, that framed the answere and serued for a prompter vnto his Disciple, should answere onely to two poynts: that is, touching the Church and the Lords Supper: not to dispute thereof, but that it should not bee thought they were without reply. For the rest, that they should frame a confession of the faith, opposite to that of the Ministers, which if they refused to approoue, sentence of condemnation should bee solemnely pronounced against them: and by that meanes, the conference would bee ended without any more disputation.
The Ministers aduertised of this resolution, contrary vnto all Ecclesiasticall conference, by request made their complaint vnto the King, which being presented to the Chancellor,A new inuention of the Cardinall to disgrace the Ministers. hee according to his wisedome prouided for it in such sort, that the Prelates proceeded in another manner. Touching the Cardinall, hee bethought himselfe of a new expedition, in his aduise very fitte, thereby to confound the Ministers, and with mockerie to send them from the Court: for the which cause hee wrote vnto Monsieur de Vieilleuille, Gouernour of Metz, that with all speede he should procure certaine Theologians, to bee sent out of Germaine, who touching the Lords Supper did not agree in opinio^ with those of the Churches of France: pretending to cause those Theologians, to striue and dispute against the Ministers, and hauing had some pastime to heare them at variance, to send them both away without any further conference. Vieilleuille vsed such diligence, that three or foure Doctors of Virtemberg, and two Theologians of Heidelberg, went presently into France: but one of those of Virtemberg dying of the plague within the Citie of
Parris, and the two Theologians of Heidelberg beeing of the opinion of the Churches of France, the Cardinals expectation therin was frustrate, and yet they offered him faire, for that they determined to aske him and the rest of the Prelates, if they ment to hold with the confession of Ausbourg, hauing called some of those Doctors, and asked them, when the Cardinall would giue an answere, who in fine, was constrained to seeke some other places of refuge.
The Cardinals Oration.The 6. of September, the Cardinall in presence of the King, the Princes, and the Councell, made his Oration, containing a long deduction of two poynts agreed vpon by the Prelates, which were touching the Church and the Lords Supper: that done, they most instantly besought the King, to continue in the religion of his ancestors, and to summo^ the Ministers to vnderwrite that which the Cardinal had propounded: which done, they wold confer vpon the rest of their articles: and that if they denied it, they shuld wholly be refused to be heard: and presently sent out of the Realme, wherein there ought to be but one faith, one lawe, and one king.
The Ministers requestsThe Ministers as then required to bee heard what they could answere vnto the Cardinall, but it was referred vntill an other time: and although that from that time foorth they vsed many meanes to be heard in open audience, they could neuer obtaine it, onely vppon the 24. day of the same moneth,
Theodore de Beza, in presence of the king and his Councell, aunswered vnto the Oration made by the Cardinall: where were present fiue Cardinals, and fifteene or sixteene Doctors. Despense and
Desanctes made certaine disputations, where vnto Beza made answere. The Cardinall of Lorraine had summoned the Ministers, to knowe if they would allowe of the confession of
Ausbourg: and they desired him first to signe it, which done, they would followe: but there hee was at a nonplus: which was done vppon the
26. of March, where once againe Despense discoursed of the Lords Supper:Diuers conferences betweene the Ministers and Doctors that spake for the Prelates. The resolution of Sorbonne. and after him, Doctor Martir in a large and ample manner: but because he spake Italian, the Cardinall said hee would not deale with any, but such as spake the French tongue. A Spaniard general of the Iesuites, wold likewise haue spoke^, whom de Beza haue refuted, he entered into disputation with Despense. The rest of the Ministers also answered vnto certaine obiections propounded by other Doctors of Sorbonne, touching the interpretation of the words in the institution of the Lords supper. After that, all was changed into a particular conference, wherein it was impossible for the Ministers to induce the Deputies for the Prelates vnto any orderly disputation, neither yet to the conclusion of any articles. That of the holy Supper was oftentimes intreated of, and sometimes it seemed that the parties were almost at an agreement: but the Sorbonne Interpreted that very hardly, which by the Doctors of the Deputies for the Prelates had beene allowed of, and made an inuection in writing against the Ministers, desiring that they might be driuen out of the Realme, if they would not approoue and allowe of the doctrine of Sorbonne, touching the
Eucharistie. The Ministers to the contrary, humbly required, that the confessions and articles of the doctrine on both parts might bee examined, by the order vsually obserued at all times in any Ecclesiasticall conferences: but their aduersaries who in most bold and euident manner shewed themselues to be their Iudges, would neuer consent thereto.
The 13. of October, the Prelates hauing thanked and discharged their Doctors, sent them away, and in the end withdrewe themselues, hauing first taken order touching their cannons, which concerned not any Christian doctrine, onely discouering certaine disorders in their Cleargie: the reformation whereof, they referred vnto the Pope, and the Councell of
Trent, that did nothing therein, because their Church cannot erre. At the same time certaine letters were discouered, written in the Kings name vnto his Ambassador in Rome, named Monsieurde l'Isle, and others from the Queen-mother, which shewed that al their conference was but a deuise, and meere inuention, thereby to intrappe the Cleargie, which agreed vnto some Tithes, to saue the rest of their stakes:The intent of the assembly at Poissy. Aduancement of those of the religion and that was it whereof they sought to bee resolued, and not of the religion, nor yet of any thing that concerneth the conscience, wherein diuers of them had in a maner playd Banckerrupt.
After the departure of the assembly, those of the religion by little and little beganne to preach openly, and in some places without resistance, ceased vpon certaine Churches, whereof ensued an edict, made by the King, bearing date the 3. of Nouember, which commanded them to leaue them, which they presently performed in the same moneth. Those of Parris beeing assembled to preach in a Garden without the Church-gate, called la Cerisaye, at their return there was some blowes giue^, but the hurt was lesse the^ it was thoght to be, because the conference of Poissy had reduced no remedie, that the parties were still at difference: and that the religion openly aduanced it selfe throughout all the Realme.Counsell giuen to assemble the chiefe persons of the realm to take order touching those affaires. The Queen was counselled to assemble the most notable persons of all the Parliaments in France, with the Princes of the blood, Lords, Councellours, and maisters of Requests, therby to aduise and make some new edict, touching the gouernment and order of those of the religion, as also to answere vnto the demand of the States, that had most instantly desired to haue allowances of Temples. The chiefe of the Romish Church, and among the rest, those of Guise, found this counsell not to bee expedient, alleadging that they ought to bee content with the edict of Iuly: and withall, they complained of the Queenes leuite, openly accusing the king of Nauarre, the Prince, the Admiral and his bretheren. The Queen that sought to assure her Regencie, would not hearken therevnto, wherby those of Guise tooke occasion to withdrawe themselues from the Court, leauing certaine seruitors and solicitors to supply their places. The Queene willingly gaue them leaue to depart, assuring them of her good will, both to them and their religion, and desired them to returne assoone as possibly they might.
They went from thence about the end of Nouember, and at the time of their departure, there rose a most horrible and extraordinary wind: aforeshewing (as some affirmed) of the te^pest that not long after ensued. At the same time likewise were brought and sold in the Court, three great Pictures, most excellently wrought, (whereof one was bought by the Prince of Conde) wherein was represented the bloodie and horrible massacres of the auncient Triumuiras of Rome, true Pictures and shewes of the cruelties exercised the yeare ensuing, by the support, and in the presence of French Triumuirat, vpon those of the religion. Not long before their departure, the Queene of
Nauarre discouered an enterprise,An enterprise of the Duke de Nemours. made to take away the Duke of
Orleans, the Kings brother, and to carry him into Lorraine: for which cause the Duke de Nemours, in all haste saued himselfe, and returned not againe, vntill the ciuill warres beganne to arise. The report also was spread abroad, that the King of
Spaine, and other Princes adherents to the Pope, made preparations to ayde their participants in France, and to dispearse the assembles of those of the religion.
The Queen inquireth what forces the religion could make.All these things, mooued the Queene to make inquirie of the forces and means of those of the religion, whereof were found 2150. Churches and more, for the which the Deputies had required Churches, offering all seruice and obedience vnto the King, both with bodies and goods at their owne charges: but shee desired to knowe it more at large, which by many of the Churches was thought to bee superstitious, and thereby they made no such certificates, because of the diuersitie of opinions, although some of them thought it both good and necessarie, to shewe the Queene the number of the forces, as well horse as foote, which by those of the religion might easilie bee raised, iudging that such a power, as it after appeared to bee, had beene the meanes to drawe the Queene, and by consequent, the Kings and all the Princes of his part, vnto them, which would easilie haue stayed those of Guise and their partakers, and in apparance haue wholly hindered the discipation of the Churches, stopping the passage vnto all strangers, other suspecting the Queens intent, and fearing least so open a discouerie should bee the cause, the easlier to expose for a pray vnto their enemies, would not proceede so farre.
The commotion of Medard.These things beeing thus imbroyled, about the end of the yeare, there happened a great mutinie in Parris, raised by certaine Priests of Saint
Medards Church, in the Subburbes of S. Marceau, which rang a bell, while those of the religion were assembled at a Sermon: from whence proceeded wounds, murthers, and imprisonments, where those of the religion not beeing the beginners, payed a fine, and foure of them, one beeing
Gabaston knight of the watch, were executed, to appease the people of Parris, and yet not presently done.
1562. The Edict of Ianuary.In the beginning of the moneth of Ianuary, and the absence of those of
Cuise, that thought vppon other matters: as also of the Constable that would not be present, a great assembly (such as the like had not beene seene in France) was made, there by to take order touching the Estate, and to ordaine an edict: wherein, after each man had said and propounded his minde, touching the which was esteemed by them to bee most conuenient and necessary for the good and quietnesse of the Common-wealth, in the end it was agreed to make that solemne edict, which vntill this time, beareth the name of the edict of Ianuary: which being a true meanes to preuent and stoppe the mischiefes which as then threatned the Realme of France, was neuerthelesse in the end, turned vnto an occasion of the greatest calamities that euer happened therein. By it, the edict of Iuly was abollished, permission graunted to those of the religion, to assemble without the Townes, and sufficient order taken, that eyther part might liue in peace and quietnesse with each other, which was agreed vpon, and signed at Saint Germaines in Laye, the seuenteenth day of Ianuary.
Difficulties in the same.The execution of this edict mooued great difficulties, specially on the part of those of the Romish Church. Touching those of the religion, their Ministers and Deputies, hauing resolued vppon certaine doubts that might be made, they ranged themseluelues wholly vnto the Kings pleasure. The Parliaments, onely two or three, made much difficultie to publish it: that of Diyon would neuer do it, and that of Parris, made great question vpon it. The chiefe President, Bourdin the Kings Atturney, held firme for the Church of Rome, assisted by
Merle, Prouost of Marchants, Marcell Sheriffe, and diuers others.
The King of Nauarre seduced by his enemies.The winds that made them turne, blew from the Constable and those of Guise: yet they had done little or nothing at all, if at that time the King of Nauarre had not suffered himselfe to be seduced by his most deadly enemies, that had for instruments of his ouerthrow, the Ambassadour of Spaine, the Popes Legat, and the Cardinall de Tournon, ayded by two of his principall seruants,
Descars and the Bishoppe of Mande.
Hee not being ambitious, suffered himselfe to bee perswaded, that if bee would but shewe him as newter, and cause the Prince his sonne but once to heare Masse, the king of Spaine would peaceably yeeld vp the Realme Sardagne vnto him: which they affirmed to bee an Iland, no lesse in valewe then that of Sicile, and foure times as much as his Realm of Nauarre: which was as much
(as a man may say) to present him with nothing betweene two dishes, and thereby to bereaue him of the certaine and honourable meanes to recouer his Realme of Nauarre, if hee would haue hearkened therevnto, and continued to haue fauoured and supported those of the religion, as he had done vntill the edict of Ienuary: neuerthelesse, the pernitious counsell of those men, was of such force, that hee fully determined to beleeue it.
By litle and litle he withdrew himself from those whom he had sauoured.Wherevppon hee sent Monsieur d'Anduze into Spaine, and Descars to Rome, from whence hauing receiued newes, hee beganne by little and little to withdrawe himselfe from those of the religion, to vse the Queen his wife somewhat hardly: and among others, to court a Gentlewoman attending vppon the Queene-mother, in such sort, that from day to day, the mischiefe increased, to the great greefe and sorrow of all such as before that time honoured him, specially of his wife, a Princesse most wise and vertuous, that sought all means to reduce him, but by no meanes could effect it: yet was shee solicited by the Queene-mother, to seeme to agree and hearken vnto the King her husbandes minde. Wherevnto shee aunswered, that before she would go to Masse, if she were able to hold her Realme of
Nauarre, and her sonne within her, hands, she would cast them both into the Sea, thereby not to impeach her, which was the meanes in that behalfe, not to mooue her any more.
The Queen mother sheweth her selfe a newter.The Queene-mother perceiuing the king of Nauarre to yeeld to the other side, determined for a time to seeme to be indifferent, that of the religion being very strong, and full of resolution, and for that cause she entertained the Prince of Conde and the Admirall with faire speeches, giuing order in Parris and other places, that those of the religion should bee maintained and vpholden peaceably, in the exercise of their religion. On the other side, couertly making certaine small breaches in the edict, by certaine modifications, termed declarations, made by the King. Those of Guise slept not, but deuised a new matter in Germanie,The Guisians faine to be desirons to be of the confession of Ausbourg. therewith to blinde the eyes of the Protestant Princes: the Cardinall hauing desired a meeting to bee made by the Duke de Virtemberg at Sauerne, there to conferre with the Ministers touching the confession of Ausbourg. Iohn Brence, and Iaques Andre the Dukes Preachers, and two principall Doctors of Germanie came thither, and there conferred with the Cardinall, who presented them with certaine vesselles of siluer, and vsed the matter in such sort, that the Duke departed with opinio^ to haue done some great matter: and by that means, those Almaine Doctors verily thought within short space to plant their error in France. In the meane time, those of Guise, that laughted at the simplicitie of the Almaine Prince, hauing receiued newes that the king of Nauarre held with them, determined in all haste to repaire vnto the Court. On the other side, the Queene aduertised by many and diuers receipts, and solicited by those of the religion,Publication of the Edict of Ianuary in Parris, A vaine disputation, vpon vanitie. came to S. Germains to
Parris, and did so much, that vppon the 6. of March, the edict of Ianuary was both allowed and published in the Court of Parliament: with protestation, that neuerthelesse, it was done to obey the vrgent necessitie of time, and the kings pleasure. At the same time, shee caused conference to bee holden betweene the Ministers and the Sorbonistes, touching the adoration of Images, whereof ensued no other thing, then onely that each of the^ remained stil in their own opinions. She likewise sent Monsieur de Cursol into Dauphin and
Languedoc, to giue order touching the troubles in those places: and
Monluc into Guyenne, for assistant to Monsieur de Burie^
she thought to haue sent the Prince of
Conde,Miseries of France. but that intent brake off: whereby those of Guyenne found themselues but in hard case, for that therein Monluc vsed great and cruell oppressions, which hee himselfe hath set downe within his Comentaries: wherein after his death hee hath spit foorth the rest of that his furie, which during his life, hee could not fully execute vpon them.
It was thought good likewise, (thereby to preuent that which not long after fell out) that each Gouernour should withdrawe himselfe into his Prouince: wherevnto the Marshall de S. Andre, well backed, aunswered, that his office bound him at that time to remaine at the Court, neare vnto the King. On the other side, the King of Nauarre shewed so straunge a countenance vnto the Admirall and his bretheren, that they withdrewe themselues into their houses.
The presumption of the Marshall de S. Andre.The Prince of Conde stayed, and to take Phisicke, went to Parris: while the King was ledde by the Queene his mother, vnto Mouceaux in Brie. Those of Guise beeing aduertised of all that passed, determined with a good troupe to ride to
Parris, where the Constable was to meet them: as hee did. It is sayd that the Queen desired them to come thither without armes, which the Duke of Guise did not, as by effect appeareth.
The first of March, hee hauing vpon the day before departed from his house of Ianuille in Champagne,A briefe discourse of the massacre of Vassy. accompanied with his wife and the Cardinall of Guise his brother, hee rode vnto Vassy, a Village not farre from thence: hauing with him, about two hundreth men armed with caliuers, pistolles, and courtelasses. And 8. daies before, his company of Lanciers stayed there for him, and as they came neare the Village, hauing vnderstood the bell to ring vnto a Sermon, to be preached by those of the religion, within a barne of the said Village of Vassy, wherein might bee assembled to the number of one thousand or twelue hundreth persons, both men, women, and children, all peaceable and without armes: as he lighted from his horse, and hauing secretly spoken with the Prouost, and the Prior of the Monastery, hee went with all his troupe, both horse and foote, vnto the barne: young la Brosse Cornet of his Launciers, marched first, and entered into the barne: seconded by foure or fiue hundreth others, where he beganne to blaspheme and sweare, that hee would kill them all. His men beganne without, hauing slaine three, and the Gate beeing forced, themassacre beganne: the Duke beeing there in presence with his naked sword in hand, followed by the elder la Brosse, Lieftenant of his company. On their part of the religion, there was no maner of resistance, but onely prayers to God, and running away, euery man to saue himselfe, as it pleased god: where, besides a great number of wounded people, there was 42. men slaine, and many that died in short space after: they killed likewise certaine women. The poores box was taken and emptied: the Pulpit broken downe: the Minister hurt in many places, was ledde prisoner: the dead bodies beeing dispoyled and stripped of coates, hoase, shooes, and all that was about them, and many men beeing stripped, saued themselues, all bloodie and sore wounded.
New matter against those of Vassy.After this valiant combatte, which beeing executed with the sound of the Dukes Trumpet, as if hee had fought against the enemies of the Crowne, hee departed with his bloodie troupes, and laden with spoyles, tooke the way that led to Reims, where the Cardinall of Lorraine stayed for him.

but not content to haue delt so cruelly with those of
Vassy, he becaused certaine informations to bee made against them: wherein the principall murtherers were witnesses. And eight daies after, the Duches Dowager of Guise, sent Monsieur de Thou thither, that made search for their weapons, and would constraine them all to go to Masse: which notwithstanding those of the religion tooke courage, comforting themselues, and assembling euery Sunday and Festiuall day, to praise the Lord, vntill such time as ciuill warres dispearsed and separated them.
The prince of Conde beeing at Parris, and receiuing newes of that massacre, hauing consulted with diuers Lords and Gentlemen that kept him company, with all speed certified the Queene and others in the Court,Iustice demaunded, but in vaine: for the massacre of Vassy: all was past ouer in words or notable preductions of troubles. what had happened and fallen out, who thereby tooke it for an alarme, and counselled him to seeke the meanes of preseruation for the Realme: and those of the religion, whom he presently aduertised, looked vnto themselues. The greatest part (as Frenchmen are alway full of hopes) imagined nothing but quietnesse, and troubled themselues to build Churches, not much thinking vppon warlike prouision, therwith to defend themselues. But by the Princes aduise, they were indifferently awaked. Much more the Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, dispearced throughout the Prouinces, which beganne to make prouision of armes and horses, staying for news both from the Court and Parris, from whence in the name of the Nobilitie and Churches of France, Monsieur de Francourt, and Theodore de Beza beeing sent to
Monceaux, to aske iustice of the king against the Duke of
Guise, because of the massacre at Vassy. The Queene made gentle aunswere: but to the contrary, the King of
Nauarre beganne to be offended: saying, that whosoeuer presumed to touch but the fingers end of his brother the Duke of Guise, should haue to doo with all his bodie. Theodore de Beza, thervpon hauing most humbly shewed him, that the Iustice which kings ought to shewe vnto their subiects, is the worke and rule of God: and that to demaund iustice, was no hurt or iniurie vnto any man. Hee replyed, that they had throwne stones at the Duke of Guise, and that hee could not staye the furie of his troupe, and that Princes are not to indure the dishonour to be cast at with stones. Wherevppon Beza very grauely, and with all due reuerence, aunswered, that if it were so, the Duke of Cuise might haue had iustice against all those, that in such vile maner had despised his estate and dignitie: and therewith, speaking vnto the King of Nauarre, hee said: My Lord, it is most true, that it belongeth to the Church of God, (in whose name I speake) rather to take, then giue blowes: but may it please your Grace, to remember, that it is an anuile which hath indured many and seuerall hammers.
The Triumuirat coaseth vpon the King and Parris.From that time, the estate of France might well bee resembled vnto a Sea that beginneth to rise and rage in euery place, for that in euery Prouince, great and wonderfull troubles beganne to rise: whereof in the end of the Historie, of the first troubles, wee meane to speake: for now wee must returne vnto the principall instruments of the most bloodiest Tragedie that euer was seene in France. Presently after the returne of Francourt and Beza, those of Guise, the Constable, the Marshall de Saint
Andre, and after the King of Nauarre, openly holding with them, arriued in Parris: from whence they constrained the Prince of
Conde beeing very weake, with a Towne beeing his enemie, and such as in short space might swallow vppe both him and his,The Prince went to Meaux, the^ to Orleans, if they had beene tenne times as many more) to withdrawe himselfe vnto the Towne of Meaux, with a good troupe of Gentlemen. It was straunge that as then his enemies fell not vppon him, but the haste they had to assure themselues of Parris and the king: and the feare that at that entrance she should bee constrained to fight, and to hazard them ouermuch, caused them to worke by great.
The Prince beeing at Meaux, wrote vnto the Admirall and other Lords, sending them word, that want of courage had not constrained him to leaue Parris, but rather want of ayde, and that with all speed they should meete him: which they did, all armed, which those of the contrary part had alreadie ope^ly discouered, and beeing in minde to withdrawe themselues and to retire, men came vnto them from all places: and the Prince determining to ride vnto the Court, to the end, that beeing strong about the king, who as then laye at Fontainbleau, hee might constraine his enemies to seeke to agree: hee vnderstood that they had gotten both the king and the Court into their power: in such sort, that the Prince rode towards Orleans, whereon hee ceased, and there beganne to take order in his affaires, while those of Guise ledde the King and Queene to the Castle of Melun: and that in the most part of the Prouinces of the Realme, they vsed those of the religion, withall the insolencies and cruelties, that possibly may bee deuised.
From Melun the King and Queene were brought to
Parris, where the Constable had ouerthrowne and defaced ihe places,Beginning of the first and horrible troubles in France where those of the religion vsed to assemble. The people beginning to mutin, and to assemble in great troupes, in such manner, that both there and in other places, where those of the Romish Church were strongest, those of the religion receiued such entertainment, as the most cruell Barbarians would haue beene ashamed to vse it: which likewise in some places mooued those of the religion, whereby the Churches, Images, some Priests, and others, bare away the blowes.
But this was little or nothing, in respect of all the mischiefe, that those of the Romish Churches indured throughout
France, in those first troubles, in comparison of the miseries which those of the religion indured, in one of the seuenteene Prouinces, as the Histories published by Iohn le Frere de Laual, Belleforest, Monluc, and others of the Guises part do witnesse, and thereat reioyce and make great triumph.
If the massacre of Vassy had not chanced, the Prince and the Admirall had bin constrained eyther to loose all, or to haue forsaken the Realme, because that before that time, they neuer thought vppon defence,The euill committed at Vassy, cause of some good. nor of any thing that after happened and fell out: much lesse to bee offensiue. The edict of Ianuary, and the Queenes promises staying their hands: but when the Lords and great Gentlemen of the religion, dispearsed throughout the Realme, had once heard of that bloodie exploit, committed by the Duke of Guise, by little and little they assembled themselues about the Prince: who beeing at Orleans, first beganne to write into all places, which caused diuers Townes to bee ceased vppon for those of the religion, the onely cause to breake diuers intents of their most cruell aduersaries.
Likewise on both sides they beganne to rayse Souldiers out of the Realme: meane time,Declarations and protestations of the Prince. meane time, the Prince published diuers declarations and protestations, for the iustification of his defensiue armes, referring his enemies (from that time named the
Triumuirat) to the edict of Ianuary, and to leaue off armes, thereby to set the King at libertie, and his Realme in peace. The
Triumuirat (that is,The Triumuirats answere. the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Marshal de S. Andre) made diuers answeres, onely tending vnto the suppression of that edict. The Emperour and the protestant Princes, were by the Prince fully certified of the whole Estate of France, who in an open assembly of the Estates, shewed the letters of the Queene Regent, expresly written vnto him, after the ceasing vppon the King and
Parris, recommending vnto him, the mother and her children. besides that, hee made an agreement at Orleans, with the Lords and Gentlemen there assembled, to vse their forces and meanes for the deliuery of the king and Queene, and for the maintenance of the edicts and state of the Realme: this agreement sent vnto the Court, the same day beeing the ninth of Aprill,A greement made at Orleans. a letter was published and registred in the Parliament, whereby they certified the King, his bretheren, and the Queene, that as then they were at libertie: also by an other, the King declared his intent to bee, that the edict of Ianuary should bee executed in all places, but onely in Parris. The Prince for his part, solicited those of the religion, to send him men and mony. The 25. of Aprill, the Counte de Rochefoucaut, with great troupes went out of Poicton and Xaintonge, and arriued in
Orleans. The next day the Prince receiued a large aunswere,Many proceedings on both partes before they proceed to armes. vnto a certaine declaration by him made and sent thither: but hauing vnderstood that the day before, in all the places of the Cittie of
Parris, both hee and his partakers had publikely beene declared and termed seditious and euill Christians: hee made a second declaration, wherein hee openly declared and described, the horrible cruelties alreadie committed against those of the religion, imploring the edicts, yeeldeth a reason of his actions: and by letters written the 27. to the Parliament of
Parris, desired that his enemies hauing first raysed armes, should laye them downe: and that for his part, he would do the like, thereby to cease the calamities of the Realme. And to the end to shewe all forraine Princes his intent, two Gentlemen were by him deputed to stay in
Almaine, to the end, that if the Triumuirat should there enterprise to leuie men, they should procure that the Prince might there bee ayded, and not others: which done, order was taken for the securitie of
Orleans, and there they coyned mony in the kings name.
The Queene therevppon beganne to solicite a peace, writing letters vnto the Prince, who vppon the first of May made her aunswere: withall, sending her a memoriall signed with his hand,Meanes vsed by the Queene. containing the meanes of pacification, as hee had declared vnto the Parliament. The fourth day after, the Triumuirat made a declaration to the contrary, requiring the abolution of the edict of Ianuary, and of all exercise of religion, onely that of Rome: and that such as bare armes, without the expresse commission and commaundement of the King of Nauarre, the kings Lieftenant generall, should leaue them off, vppon paine to bee declared rebelles, and enemies to the king and his Realme: desiring likewise the Queene-mother, to obtaine, that all the forces on both partes, might bee vnited and ioyned togither, vnder the commaundement of the king of Nauarre: and that so doing, they were readie to retire vnto their houses:The declaration of the Triumuirat. but the king made a new declaration, wherein the edict of Ianuary was still continued.
After many speeches, in the end they grewe to blowes: whereof I will speake as time serueth: and first beginne with the Prince and his troupes:Iu the beginning of the warre the Queene seeketh to accord. and the^ with a summary deductio^, of that which happened in the Prouinces. The companies of Lanciers beeing for the most part arriued at Parris, with some of the olde companies of foote: the king of Nauarre, and the Triumuirat, marched towards Chasteau Dun. The Prince at that time beeing as strong as they, determined to enter into the field: which mooued the Queene to seeke the procuration of a peace, while the Triumuirat might haue meanes to gather a greater force.
One of the principall dealers therein, was the Bishoppe of
Valence,The practises of the Bishop of Valence, and what followed. who in some sort perswaded the Prince (extreamely greeued to see himselfe constrained to enter into a ciuill warre) to offer the Queene to goe out of the Realme, with all his friends, to procure a peace. Within two daies after, he went to speake with the Queene, and shewed her his minde, which hee had no sooner vttered, but hee was presently taken at his word, the Queene making him great promises: saying, that the next day shee would send vnto him, to knowe the conditions by him to bee propounded. Wherevpon at his returne, the Prince hauing communicated his intent vnto his companie, not only the ordinary Councell, but all the Coronelles and Captaines, were summoned to giue their aduise, which was wholly and directly against that declaration, and the opinion of Monluc, and the Queene-mother. Among the rest,
Missieurs d'Andeloc, and Boucard, maruellously incouraged all the companie, by their bolde and braue resolutions: and if they had beleeued Monsieur d'Andelit, presently they had set vppon the
Triumuirats troupes. After the Truce, an enterprise of no small importance was begunne: but your guides hauing not well conducted the Princes troupes, and withall, much raigne falling, a great aduantage was lost.
Good discipline for a time in the Princes Armie.At that time military discipline among the Princes souldiers, was much to bee commended: for the Gentlemen neuer molested their Hostes: and such as had meanes, payd honestly for that they tooke. The Pesantes stirred not out of their houses: such as offended, were punished. One named the Barron de Dampmartin, that had violated a maide, by great fauour escaped death: but after, continuing his follies, hee had his head striken off within Parris: this exemption in the beginning of the warres, was taken for an euill signe. No blasphemie was heard in al the Princes campe. Among the^ you sawe neither cards nor Dice: and for women, they were from the^: no man strayed out of his troup, to forrage, much lesse to boote-halling: morning and euening, at rising and sitting of the watches, they had publike prayers, and the ayre sounded with their voyces, singing Psalmes. Diners Ministers were distributed among the troupes, that had charge to continue and procure that good order, and at one time were better heard then at an other.
This Discipline was continued almost two moneths, at the end whereof, Baugency being taken by assault, caused a beginning of disorder: from whence proceeded la Picoree, or boot-halling: which since that time became so common, that at this day it seemeth to bee chiefe Prince. The Admirall, a great enemie to boot-hallers, with stood it, and punished some of them with great rigor: but in sine, a great number got the vpper hand. The armie of the Triumuirat, committed most terrible outrages without any reproofe, and all vnder pretence to extirpe the Huguenots.

How the Prince hindred the dispearsing of his armie.After the taking of Baugency, the occasion of fighting beeing let slippe, the heate of those of the religion beganne to quench, the meanes to maintaine Souldiers, lessened, and some of the Nobilitie beganne to doubt of their iust quarrell: wherefore to preuent a total dissipation, the Prince tooke counsell to imploye part of the Nobilitie that were with him, in the Prouinces where the affaires hung as it were in a ballance, so that the Counte de la Rochefoucaut, with ceraine troupes, marched towards Poicton, Xantonge, and
Angoulmois. Monsieur de Soubize, was sent to Lyons: Iuoy with his Regiment to Bourges: d'Andelot, for the sucours out of
Almaine: and Briquemaut, into England. On the other side, the king of Nauarre and the Triumuirat, led the king with them in their armie, and being assembled at Chartoes, determined to besiege Bourges, (holde^ by those of the religion) before it should be fortified, and by so great a Towne, not aboue two daies iournie from Orleans, in their iudgement was a great helpe and furtherance to the Princes affaires: they marched towards it, and hauing besieged it,Bourges yeelded to the Triumuirat. it made no such resistance as they expected, but was yeelded vnto them by composition: for the which cause, Iuoy, Gouernour therein, was neuer after esteemed, or once accounted of, by reason of an euill opinion conceiued against him. They beeing puffed vppe with this suddaine and vnexpected victorie, which (as they said) was as it were an arme cut off, from those of the religion, they (with their armie of twelue thousand foote, and three thousand horse) were readie to march to besiege Orleans, wherein the Prince and the Admirall continued: but the daunger thereby feared to receiue more great losse, besides the shame, put them in the heads to besiege Roaue, gouerned by Monsieur the Counte de Montgommery,Roane taken by the Guise. with seuen or eight hundreth olde Souldiers: and two companies of Englishmen, vnder the conduct of Monsieur Kilgre. And vpon that resolution, about the end of September, they besieged Roane, where after diuers assaults, they tooke it by force. The Towne beeing sacked for the space of three daies, there they executed many of the best of the Cittizens. And on the other side,Death of the King of Nauarre. the King of Nauarre was wounded at the siege, and died vpon the seuenteenth day of Nouember, the towne hauing been taken 3. weeks before. The hard vsage of the prisoners of Roane, was the cause that in
Orleans they proceeded in iustice with Baptiste Sapin, Councellour of Parris: and the Abbot de Bastines, taken going into Spaine, that were hanged in Orleans about the beginning of Nouember.
The ouerthrow of the Armie of Duras.Not long after, the Prince had news of the ouerthrow of the troupes of Gascon, led by Mousieur de Duras, so that in mans iudgement, there rested no more hope vnto the Prince, but onely the
Almaine forces of Rutters, conducted by Monsieur d'Andelot, so that he tooke counsell with the Admirall, that if they were intercepted, hee would himselfe in person trauell into Almaine, with all speede to obtaine new ayde, while the Admirall should keepe
Orleans. But about foure daies after, they had newes that their Rutters were within foure daies iournie of Orleans, where the Counte
de Rochefoucaut arriued, with three hundreth Gentlemen,The Prince marcheth towards Parris. and some of the rest of the troupes of Duras. The Prince hauing his forraine ayde, was counselled with all speed to march to Parris, for to impeach them, and thereby to force them to seeke for peace, and to send into
Normandie for 150000. crownes to giue the Rutters: wherevpon he set forward, with 8. Peeces both great and small, wherwith he met the Rutters, hard by Pluuiers, which was taken by force: from thence he went to
Estampes, some being of aduise that he should march to Parris with all speed, while the alarme was in the Towne. But they determined to besiege Corbeil, which was so well defended by Causseins, Maister of the campe, and certaine forces put into it by the Marshall de S. Andre, that the Prince left to go towards Parris, and at his arriuall there, hee had a hotte skirmish giuen him: whereof the end was,A furious sirmish. that the forces that had issued out of the trenches of Parris, after some fight, were constrained in all haste to saue themselues in their said trenches, with some losse, to the great astonishing of the Parrisians.
For the space of seuen or eight daies, that the Prince remained incamped at Gentilly, Arcueil, and Montronge, Villages not farre from Parris,What was done about Parris. many conferences, or rather delayes, were holden and vsed: and the Prince perceiuing that his enemies still increased, thought to giue them a canuisado, which tooke not effect, hauing beene discouered by one of the principall of his armie, that left him to go to the Duke de Guise: whereof within three daies after hee repented, being his brother that had yeeled Bourges: and the Prince saued himself by a most straunge meanes: for that fearing that hee would make them acquainted with the defaults of his armie, the next day he dislodged.The falt of Monsieur de Genlis. The Duke de Guise beeing strengthened by certaine companies out of
Gascon, and some Spaniards, had determined vppon the next day in the morning to giue him battell, before hee had leisure to assemble his dispearsed companies. So the Prince departed vpon the tenth of December, and the thirteenth beeing in the way to Chartres, after diuers opinions of his Councell, hee resolued to march straight towards
Normandie, to recouer mony, and to meete his forces comming out of England: there to diuert the siege of Orleans. The sixteenth,
Galardon a small Towne, was forcibly taken by the Prince: and the next day he marched towards Dreux: and as hee passed ouer a small riuer, hard by the Castle of Maintenon, an olde woman stepping a good way into the water, tooke him by the boote, staying him, and looking vppon him, said: Go Prince, thou must suffer,What happened to the Prince not long before the battell of Dreux. but God is with thee. Hee made her aunswere, and said: Good wife, pray to God for me. The night before the battell, beeing in his bedde, and talking with certaine Gentlemen that were in his Chamber, he said to
Theodore de Beza, that had said prayer before him: I knowe wee are not to account of dreames, yet I must tell you what I drempt the last night. Me thought I had giuen three battelles, one after the other, and in the end. I obtained victorie: and sawe my three enemies dead before me, my selfe being wounded to death: and that causing them three beeing dead, to bee layde vppon each other, I layd my selfe vppon them, and so yeelded vp my soule to God. And being aunswered, that the things which troubled his mind, caused him to haue that dreame, and that whether he liued or died, hee could not chuse but bee victorious. Hee sayd, I pray God it may bee so. But sure it is, that time verified his vision, for that his three enemies were all slaine one after the other: as the Marshall de S. Andre the next day, the Duke of Guise before Orleans, and the Constable at the battell of S. Denis, and he himselfe after all them, slaine at the battell of Bassac.
A briefe description of the battell of Dreux.The ninteenth of December, the two armies approaching neare each other, in that of the Triumuirat were nineteene thousand foote, and two thousand horse. And that of the Prince, about foure thousand horse, and lesse then fiue thousand foote: the battell beeing very furious on both sides, continued for the space of sixe houres. Among other particularities thereof, diuers things are to bee considered on: that there was no skirmish giuen, while the two armies stayed within a cannon shot one from the other, for the space of two long houres, as wel to range themselues, as to determine vpon their fight. Another, the valiant courages of the Switzers, that sustained foure charges, before they could be broken, hauing lost seuenteene Captaines, and the third part of their troupes, beeing aboue three thousand men. As also the patience of the Duke of Guise, who notwithstanding that the Constable had been taken, the Marshal de S. Andre slaine, and part of his armie ouerthrown: yet he stayed to seethe end of his fortune: and delt in such sort, that before hee left, the Prince was taken prisoner: and in that fight were lost on both sides, at the leaft seuen thousand men besides diuers prisoners and hurt, whereof most part died. The Princes armie lost aboue 2200. foote,Notable circumstances of the battell. and fifteene hundreth horse, as wel Rutters as Frenchmen. The Gentlemen of account that were slaine, were
Arpaion, Chandiu, Liencourt, Ligneri, la Fredonniere, la Charliere, Rongnac, Mazelles, Saint Germier, and in a manner all the Cornet of
Mouy, who was taken prisoner at the last charge. The
Triumuirat, besides his Switzers, lost the most part of his horsemen: the Switzers, and a great number of other foote men. The Gentlemen and men of name, were the Duke de Neuers, slaine a little before the first charge, by one of his Domesticall seruants, that had diswaded him from the religion: Misieurs d'Ann^baut, and de Giury, with his Cornet and Harbinger:
La Brosse, principall of the massacre of Vassy, and one of his sonnes. And Aussun, a Noble man of
Gascon, hauing through feare fledde vnto Parris, died of griefe. There was likewise another notable thing to bee marked, which was the taking of both the Generalles of the armies, the one at the beginning, the other before the battell ended: whereby the field was left by both partes, but in the end, reentered by the Duke of Guise after his retrait: and the next day, reentered by the Admirall, that againe offered battell. Besides that, the retrait of the Princes armie, was done safely and in good order, being two Regiments of Rutters, and one of Frenchmen, all about twelue hundreth horse. The armie Triumuirat weake of horse, not desiring to leaue their foote, hauing marched about sixe hundreth paces after them, contentented themselues therewith. The Duke of Cuise was esteemed to haue gotten the victorie, because he stayed and lodged in the field where the battell was fought, and the Admirall about a myle from thence. The Duke likewise sent the Ensignes (take^ vp in field) vnto
Parris, and got the Princes Artillerie, who the same night supped and laye with the Duke of Guise. A maruellous thing to consider the estate of two such persons, so neare vnto each other, and eating and resting togither.
The Duke de Guise beeing declared Lieftenant of the armie, because of the Constables imprisonment,What was done by the heads of the armies. caused seuenteene newe companies of Lanciers to bee raised, besides the increasing of tenne others, each wanting twentie horse, and created twelue knights of the Order: which done hee threatned the Rutters and Marshall de Hesse, to slaye them all, if they would not ioyne with him: but the Marshall made him the like aunswere, laughing at his boldnesse. The Admirall keeping on his way, marched towards Beausse, taking certaine small places, and so that yeare past ouer.
 But to the end not to breake the thread of our discourse, I meane to proceede with that which was done by both the armies, vntill the pacification of the first troubles: and then with a summarie discription of the estate of the Prouinces during those troubles. The second of Ianuary,The Admirals exploits after the battell of Dreux the Admirall besieged Selles, in Berri, and within fiue daies after, tooke it by composition. The Counte dela Rochefoucaut, entered into the Towne of Saint Aignan, lying in the same countrie: and the prince of Portion with his troupes, into
Montrichard. The Duke de Cuise marching towards
Beausse, Duras was constrained to leaue Estampes: as also de Pluuiers: so that there rested nothing else in that countrie for the Prince, but the Towne of Orleans: the custodie whereof, was committed to Monsieur d'A'ndelot, with foureteen Ensignes of Lansquenets and Frenchmen, and foure of the Inhabitants of the Towne, with a great number of Gentlemen. The Duke of Guises campe beeing at Baugency, his light horses ranne before
Orleans:And also of the Duke de Guise. but Auaret issuing out vppon them, slewe some, tooke others prisoners, and put the rest to flight. Meane time, the King and his mother, were conducted to Chartres, with all the priuie Councell, and some of the Parliament of Parris, to frame (as they sayd) the Princes processe, kept by a company of Lanciers, and three companies of foote.
D'Anuille the Constables sonne, perceiuing the Duke of Guises meaning was, to strike two blowes vpon one stone, by causing the Prince to be executed, and so those of Orleans in exchange to cut off his fathers head, being their prisoner, tooke so good order therein, that that assembly was dispearsed. The King going to
Blois, where the Prince was brought, and from thence conueyed to the Castle of Auzin hard by Amboise.
The Admirall resolueth to goe into Normandy.The Admirall on the other side, receiued new promises and assurances of the Rutters, and withful determination to fight, marched vnto Iarqueau, which as then was in his power, and the tenth day after, tooke Sully and the Castle, by composition. Touching the Duke de Guise, beeing hard by Orleans, it was resolued, that the Admirall with the Rutters and some French Gentlemen, should march towards Normandie, thereby to constraine the enemie to separate his forces, and to giue the Rutters mony, that should be brought out of England, leauing all the footemen, with the rest of French horses, ledde by
Duras, Bouchauanes, Bussy, Saint Cyre, Auaret and others, for the defence of the Towne, vnder the gouernment of d'Andelot.The good will of the Rutters towards those of the religion. The Rutters at that time shewed themselues so voluntarie, that they left their waggons at Orleans, and caused their boyes to carry their necessaries vpon the waggon-horses, whereof they made a Cornet of foure hundreth indifferent men.
The Duke de Guise on the other side, tooke order for the defence of the Townes of Normandie, and at the same time, a thousand extortions were co^mitted against those of thereligion, specially in Parris, where diuers strange murthers were co^mitted. There was likewise a declaration sent vnto the Rutters, in the name of the King, and all the Princes of the blood, to cause them to leaue the Admirall. But that serued to as much effect, as the Queens letters to the Admirall, that answered her in other sort the^ they expected. On the other side, the Prince hauing sayled to escape out of prison, and one that sought to helpe him beeing executed, yet hee lost not courage, but to the contrary, spake with bolder courage then euer hee did: his nature beeing such, that in aduersitie he seemed most inuincible.
The Admirals voyage into Normandie.The first of February, the Admirall departed from
Orleans with foure thousand horses, better furnished then when he fought the battell: but not any carriage, only thirtie waggons, lightly lade^. The fourth of February he came before Eureux: where the Inhabitants were co^tent to suffer him to march peaceably before the Towne, the which passing through a straight hard by Bernay a smal Towne, certaine Pesants conducted by a Gentleman of the countrie, vnder colour of their great number, sought to resist him. But to theirs, and others their likes costes and ouerthrowes, who after the taking of Roanc, had committed many outrages: and at the Admiralles arriuall, assembled themselues togither, who hauing stayed certaine daies at Dines, was desired by the Inhabitants of the Towne of Caen, to ayde them against the Marquesse d'Elboeuf, and a new knight of the Order named
Renouart, who with their troupes molested the Towns-men continually, taking some of them prisoners. The Admirall busied with other matters, sent them Monsieur de Mouy, not long before deliuered out of prison, with his company, and some Argolitiers, and hauing receiued mony out of England, Artillerie, powder, fiue companies of English, and two of Frenchmen, he battered the Castle of Caen, vppon the first of March, and the next day tooke that strong place by composition.
The Duke of Guise approached to Orleans.But in the meane time, let vs returne to the Duke de Guise, that approached Orleans about the fift of February, and the next day with most resolution, and by the faintnesse of the Lansquenets, that forsooke the place, hee wanne the Pertereau, wherein they of the Towne left foure hundreth good French souldiers, some taken, the rest slaine: and without the valiant resolution of the Gouernour and the Gentlemen that were in it, they had receiued more hurt. The ninth, hee tooke the Tourelles by surprise, and caused great quantitie of Artillerie to bee brought from Parris and
Nantes, to batter the Isle and the Towne: they within shewing maruellous resolutions, to rampier and fortifie themselues.
The Duke of Guise slain by Poltrot bofore Orleans.Thursday, the eighteenth of February, hauing appoynted what order should bee taken touching the assayling the Isles, about nine of the clocke at night, hee wrote vnto the Queene, that within foure and twentie houres after, hee would send her word of the taking of Orleans, wherein hee would not spare any, man, woman, or childe whatsoeuer: and that after hee had kept his Shrouetide therein, beeing as then vppon the three and twentieth of February, hee would in such sort spoyle and destroy the Towne, that the memorie therof, should be extinct for euer. But man purposeth and god disposeth, for that the same day, as the Duke of
Guise about euening returned from the campe to the Castle of
Coruey, where hee lodged, minding to execute that which hee had written vnto the Queene, a young Gentleman of Angoulmois, named
Ich^ Poltrot, Sieur de Merey, hauing long time before determined to giue the blowe, and made his friends of Lyons and other places, priuie thereof, stayed for him in the way as hee returned to his lodging (accompanied with two Gentlemen, one going before him, the other speaking with him) mounted vppon a mule,
Poltrot, that rode vpon a Genet of Spaine, went so neare the Duke, that beeing about fiue or sixe paces from him, hee discharged his Pistolle, laden with three bullets, seeking to strike him on the shoulder, where his armour could not defend him, (as hee did) doubting hee wore a priuie coate: which done, he fled away: and the next day hauing ridden all night, hee was taken and committed prisoner,Poltrot executed. and not long after, tormented with hotte tonges, to make him confesse, and then torne in peeces by foure horses.

Diuers confessions were published to bee made by him touching this deede, thereby to accuse the Admirall and others, as if they had mooued him to do it: but besides the constant and resolute answeres of the Admirall, it was euidently knowne, specially at the execution, that
Poltrot did it of his owne motion and particular intent, thereby to deliuer France, and specially Orleans, from the violence of the Duke of Guise, that died the foure and twentieth of February, not hauing holden his Shrouetide as hee thought within Orleans, but rather in his turne, receiued another reward, then eyther hee or his expected.
The motion of peace mooued before his death, was presently renued, and after many meetings and assemblies,Motions of peace renued after the death of the Duke of Guise. the Queen-mother exceeding glad of the death of the Duke of Guise, whom shee doubted more then all the rest, hauing giuen a thousand courteous entertainments vnto the Princesse of Conde, the seuenth of March an assembly was holden in the Isle of Boeufs, hard by the Towne, whither the Prince and the Constable (as yet prisoners) were brought to make some agreeme^t. The Constable at their first enterance, said, that if they spake touching the edict of Ianuary, hee could not indure it: and in trueth it was as much to condemne him and all his partie of treason, to haue violently broken so solemne an edict.
The Prince hauing demaunded permission of conference with his Councell in Orleans, desired to haue the aduise of the Ministers, who by three of their Deputies, gaue him at large and expresly to vnderstand, that neither the Queene nor hee, by the lawe of God, nor reason, could in any thing whatsoeuer, once derogate so solemne an edict, made at the request and desire of the States, and so notable an assembly of all the Parliaments of France, and by them all sworne and pronounced. The next day at his request, all the ministers beeing to the number of seuentie two, being assembled, they made an humble request and exhortation in writing vnto him, touching the cause aforesaid: and withall,The Ministers aduise. added diuers good and necessary articles, to make an assured peace, as that those of the religion, acknowledged by the King to bee his faithfull and obedient subiects, might bee peaceably maintainted in the exercise of the religion the king declaring himself protector of their doctrine and discipline, against al Atheistes, Libertines, Anabaptistes, Seruitistes, and other Heretickes, or Scismatikes, that the Baptisme administred in their Churches, might not bee reitterated: and that the marriages therein celebrated, might bee holden for good and lawfull: that without other leaue, it might be permitted by those of the religion, to haue free exercise thereof in all places: that the religion might no more bee called new, seeing their Churches are founded vpon the ancient doctrine of the Prophetes and Apostles: that euery man might peaceably enioy his estates, offices, and goods, with perusing and recalling of processes, touching such as are interessed by suspect Iudges: that all murtherers, the eues, spoylers, exacters, and others, that without warre (their massacries and other inormities, beeing acts of hostilitie) should bee taken and punished according to their deserts.
Notwithstanding so many declarations, both by word of mouth and writing, the Prince was in such sort perswaded by promises, that after that,Peace agreed vppon. they would make another and better agreement for him, making him beleeue that the conditions as then set downe, were done only to please those of the church of
Rome, and by little and little to attaine vnto a full and perfect libertie: withall, that many of them desired nothing else, but whatsoeuer it cost them, to returne vnto their houses. That he consented to the altering of the Edict of Ianuary, suffering certaine exceptions to be added therevnto, which hee caused to be read vnto the Gentlemen, desiring that none but they bearing Armes should giue their aduise: which hee spake openly before all the assembly, in such manner, that after that time the Ministers were neither sent for, receiued, nor heard speake, or giue their aduise in any sort: nor likewise the Admirall and his company knewe nothing more thereof, then only the conclusion.
The Queene mother that was in great doubt to be reduced vnto the Edict of Ianuary, and the Constable as much or more then she, imployed all speedie meanes to conclude and set downe the Articles in manner of an Edict, agreed vpon the 12. of March, and fully resolued by the Kings Councell at Anboise, vpon the 27. of the same month, and the same day published in the Towne by sound of Trumpet. The exercise of religion was thereby restrained to the houses of certaine Gentlemen, and in some Townes, besides those wherein it had bene vsed at the beginning of that moneth: with a certaine confused remission and pardon for all forepassed matters.
Exploits of the Admirall.To returne to the Admirall after the taking of the Castle of Caen, he sent
Monsieur de Colombieres, to set vppon Bayeux, who at the second assault wanne it, vsing the inhabitants somewhat hardly, because they had abused themselues. The Captaine called Iulio, a wicked villaine (if euer there were aany) was hanged in Caen, by reason of diuers crimes imputed and laide against him. The next day after, being the fift of March, the Garrison of Saint Lo, being in feare, yeelded the place vnto the Admirall, that sent thither the Counte
Montgomimery: who from thence marched straight to
Auranches, wherein he was receiued without resistance.
The thirteenth of the same moneth, he tooke Vire by assault, and punished the principall offendors. And minding to proceed further, the packet of the peace was deliuered vnto him. About the same time that Bayeux was taken,The Admirals forces march to Orleans. Monsieur Mouy receiued Hondefleur by composition. And as he minded to reduce Ponteau de Mer, the Admirall sent for to returne to Orleans, repealed to Caen, from whence the Horsemen departed vpon the 14. of March, diuided into two battells. The Prince of Portien conducted the auantgard, composed of foure Cornets of Rutters, that marched towards Lisieux, and the 18.
^ntred forcibly into
Bernay, where certain Priests were slain and hanged, that fought, and yet knew not how to make war. The town of Aigle in the borders of Norma^die, was forced by the Vicont de Drux, vpon the 20. of the same moneth, and al such as w^^ found in armes slain in the streets. The same day the Admiral departed with the greater part of his forces, marching by Falaise and Argentan, that yeelded, hauing agreed for a ransome of a 10000. frankes: from thence he went to Mortague, a great borough Towne in Perche, where certaine Priests moued the people to do him iniury: whereby diuers of Mouies company were both hurt and slaine, that marched in winges: wherevpon the Borough was entered by force, and the chiefe offendors, specially the Priests, rewarded for their paines. Monsieur de Coignee, likewise punished the Monkes of
S. Calais, who with their Garrison had cruelly handled his houshold seruants. On the other side, Mousieur de Coruoy, tooke the Castle of Mezieres, harde by Drux, and slewe
the souldiers that were in it. The 23. of March, the Admirall arriued at Orleans, and vsed all the meanes hee could to remedie the Princes accord, hauing agreed to the breach and abolution of the edict of Ianuary,The Queene mothers pra^^^ses. vnder the shadowe and pretence of the Queenes promises, who on the other side, about foure daies before, had caused Poltrot to bee executed, with all extremitie that might bee inuented: caused a funerall pompe to bee celebrated for the Duke of
Guise in Parris, and gaue his estate of high Chamberlin, and Great-maister, to his sonne Henry, as then an infant both of yeares and vnderstanding: but aster shewed openly vnto the third king, in what schoole hee had been taught, as heereafter you shall read.
The estate of the prounues and Townes.Now I must shewe you a summarie recitall, of the estate of the Prouinces and principall Townes in France during the first troubles, from the moneth of Aprill 1562, vntill the peace.
Parris the principall Towne of the Realme, during that time committed many great and terrible spoyles vpon those of the religion,Parris. diuers therein were executed, not onely of the Towne, but such as had beene brought prisoners from other places. The people on the one side, desired nothing but blood and spoyle, and the Parliament not to spare eyther great or small that sell into their hands, taken at the returne of the Princes armie, or in any of the Townes of his resort, brought thither eyther by appeale or summons. Diuers Councellors were sent into certaine Townes, to proceed against those of the religion, among the which this Towne aforesaid vsed great means and meruellous inuentions, to extirp the memorie thereof.
At Senlis, those of the religion had therein but hard entertainment, by meanes of Claude Stocq, and Guillaume Berthaut Gouernours thereof,Senlis. who not long after, ended their liues in great misery, sustained by
Terouenne and Fauier, Councellours of Parris: among others that were put to death by sedition and iniustice, one was the wife of Iaques Reuerant, the rest Adrian le Clerce, Iohn Gouion burnt, Louys Chaunin, Iohn des Iardins, Iohn Greffin Lieftenant particular, Messieurs de Moncy, S. Eloy, de Houdencourt, d'Ardres, de la Maison Blanche, yong Gentlemen. Anthony Trappier Maister of a Schoole, was be headed at Parris, and their heads brought to
Senlis, and set vppon the Gates and other places: some were condemned to paye fines, to be bodily punished, to bee kept in prison, and put into the Galles: not sparing the simple women.
In Picardie, the first exremitie vsed against those of the religion in Amiens, was, that the thirteenth of May
1562. their Bibles,Amiens. new Testaments and Psalmes were sought for and openly burnt: then the Ministers Pulpit. And from wood and paper, the Guisians, proceeded to deale with their bodies, killing and casting into the water, Iaques Berne and Francois Greuin, Harquebused Dauid Preuost, and N. Marquant, slewe two Artificers, the one named Robert, the other
Rondelet: and a poore impotent person, named Mauguyet: and to knit vppe the matter, hanged Christ opher Riche a Draper, because hee had borne armes.
Those of Abeuille, slewe Robert de S. Delis their Gouernour, his brother and Lieftenant with nine Souldiers, two Gentlemen, and a Page,Abeuille. as well in the Towne-house, as in the Castle, in despight of the religion: whereof that Gouernour Lord of Haucourt, made open profession vppon the 38. of March, one thousand fiue hundreth sixtie three, named Louys Beliart, beeing condemned to paye a fine, (in the presence of the Iustice and Parliament) was drawne along the streets by the feete, with his face downe ward, and then cast and drowned in the riuer.
Meaux in Brie.At Meaux in
Brie, those of the religion that therein were strongest, continued their exercise vntill the end of the month of Iune, when the Images were thrown, their Priests peaceably withdrawing themselues, for the which cause they and others, by order and iudgement giuen in Parris the last of Iune, were exposed and giuen to the spoyle of such as could, or would vndertake it without further processe. Another order giuen by the said Parliament, dated the 3. of Iuly, against all the Ministers, Deacons, and other officers, could not stay those of Meaux: but to the contrary, they appeased the edict of Ianuary, not permitting that such an order condemning them to death, should once be published: wherevppon at the instance of those of Parris, Lihoux brother to
Monlue, was sent to Meaux: wherein hee entered with a small company, and by the consent of those of the religion, vppon the 25. of Iuly, the next day Masse beganne to bee vsed. The sixt of August, commaundement was giuen vnto the Inhabitants, to bring all their weapons into the Towne-house: wherevnto many obeyed, others, to the number of foure hundreth that were gone vnder the conduct of Captaine Bethune, to ioyne with the Prince of Portun, (but could not,) and so beeing constrained to separate themselues, for the most part were slaine, the rest beeing hard by Meaux, were handled in the same sort: and of all that number, there escaped but 4. me^ that went to Orleans: Monsieur de la Chapelle Aux Vrsins, successor to
Lihoux, vsed those of the religion with more fauour: but that continued not long, for that Monsieur de Boisy, Great-maister of the horse, arriuing there vppon the 21. of September, caused the walles of the great Market to be throwne downe, and the Gates thereof to be broken, beeing as then one of the fairest places for the bignesse thereof, that was in France. And not long after, there entered two companies of souldiers, led by Captains of Parris, named Gantier and
Forgeron, that committed a thousand iniuries. Many women in
Christmas time, were beaten and drawne to heare Masse: many children new christened, and diners marriages reconfirmed: and because such as had fledde, sought to haue gotten the Towne, vppon the thirteenth of February, 1563: those of the Romish religion beeing mooued thereat, that with great crueltie they murthered Gilles Cabeche the kings Atturney, Fracre Lambert, that had beene Deacon, Pierre Champenois, called Lorraine. Those of the market fled, their houses beeing so sacked and spoyled, that they tooke away the lockes, grates, boults, windowes, and gutters, and the place made vnhabitable: those that fledde, some of them died with hunger and colde. The Kings officers, and the presidents of the place, as Frolo the chiefe President, an infamous man, and Cosset the kings Atturney, were the principall moouers thereof, and had their part of the praye. Many men, women, and children, were massacred and drowned: and among the rest, a childe of one
Iohn Oliuiers, of foure daies olde, had the head striken against the walles. Denis Piero, Iohn Augrant, Claude Baillet, Mathieu Cantier, Pierre Thibaut, Guillin Rose, Nicolas Bergeron, N. Floquet: la Biselle, a woman of the age of 88. the wiues of Iohn Augrant and Pierre l'Archer: and diuers women and maides violated, both in the market and about the Towne. After that, they hanged two men of the religion, among the which, one was Iohn de la Haye, a rich Farmer: another
Fremin Cauiller, one of the Gouernours of the Towne.

The executioners running into diuers places, where they committed an innumerable number of mischiefes. In their troupes were diuers Priests, and among the rest, the Curate of Mareuil, who with his owne hands slewe certaine men of the religion.
In Champagne, at Chaalons, two men of the religion were hanged. At Troys they liued friendly and peaceably with each other, vntill the beginning of August,Chaallons and Troys in Champaigne that the Duke de Neuers, Nephew to the Prince, hauing by Desbordes and Vigenare his seruants, beene diswaded from the religion, and the Princes part. In the month of August the exercise of religion ceased, and presently therevpon,
Desbordes that commaunded in the name of his Maister (whom hee killed at Dreux, and after he himselfe was slaine in the battell) caused diuers Artificers to be co^mitted to prison: billes and other bookes of diuinitie, to be rent and torne in peeces, and the houses of those of the religion, to bee spoyled and robbed with great furie, the owners beeing murthered: many children were taken from their mothers, and new christened: and mariages resolemnised: the goods, moneable and immooueable, of 62. of the principall of the Towne ceased vppon, and whatsoeuer thereof might be sold, the mony was confiscated: and sixteen or eighteen men, were massacred and hanged by the sentences of the Iudges and at the peoples pleasures, among the which, were two or three that had denied the religion: women likewise were not spared, whereof three or foure were drawne through the streetes, and cast into the water. Besides that, the souldiers went out and slewe all that they met without companie: the Maior and Sheriffes beeing the principall ayders in those cruelties, and in a manner no massacre was done, but by the commaundement of the Maior.
Those of the religion at Bar Sur Seine, about seuen myles from Troys, hauing
^ound the meanes to be stronger then their aduersaries,Bar Sur Seinie. for a time maintained themselues in that sort: but because it is a place easie to be surprised, those that were in the Towne perceiuing the cannon placed against the Castle, saued themselues as they could. The enemies entering into the Towne, therin committed such rare cruelties as neuer were seen, specially against women and litle children, cleauing some of their breasts, and plucking foorth their hearts, bit them between their teeth, reioycing to haue tasted of a Huguenots heart. A young Councellor, sonne to Ralet the Kings Atturney, was hanged at his own fathers request. Those that were within the Castle were taken and cruelly handled, specially their Captaine, partly cause of all the disorder, whom they condemned to die, and being vpon the ladder, renounced the religio^: but his Apostacie saued him not from hanging. The Towne remaining in their hands that had taken it, and with most horrible blasphemies defiled diuers women and children. In the month of Ianuary, fortie or fiftie horses of the Garrison of Antrain, a place beeing but a myle from thence, about the breake of day surprised the Towne: and at their arriual, hauing layde hands vpon Ralet, they tyed him vpon the toppe of a house, where hee was slaine with Pistolle shotte: the rest of the massacres were likewise murthered, and their goods giuen to others. Claude Cousni d'Ay, was sore wounded within
Espernay,Espernay. and cast into the riuer of Marne, where the murtheres finished his misery: hurting diuers of the people that wept to behold the crueltie committed against him.
Monsieur de Saint Estiene, beeing returned from Orleans, to recreate himselfe in his house hard by
Reims, with two of his brethreren and others,S. Estiene. was inclosed and besieged by a company of fiue or sixe hundreth men: and although the houses were not strong, neither of walles, towers, nor diches, yet those Gentlemen, with their wiues and seruants, beeing but 25. persons, hauing gotten into a Tower, made long resistance, and therein sustained two assaults: but in the end, a part of the tower hauing been beaten downe with a cannon shot, and the besieged constrained to hide themselues within a hollow place of the wall, the women were gotten out, vppon promise to bee set at libertie, as (in regard of their honour) they were but spoyled of all they had, and ledde prisoners to Retel: which done, they sent certain Pages to cal to Monsieur de S. Estiene, and to certifie him that the Duke de Neuers sent for him, and that hee should not doubt to come foorth: which hee had no sooner performed, but his owne Cousin
German, named the Barron of Serny, killed him, his two bretheren, and sixteene others were stabbed. The assaylants lost before this place, about one hundreth and fiftie men, all well knowne. This happened in the moneth of September, 1562.
Commosion of Pesants.The Pesants of Coulours, Gerisiers, and the Villages bordering vpon them, for the most part, Tenants to the great Prior, brother to the Duke of
Guise, committed infinit murthers and mischiefes about
Troys, murthering Monsieur de Vigny, his wife, and their seruants: robbing and spoyling his Castle. But Monsieur de Cormononcle, a Gentleman of the religion, accompanied with eight men onely, finding those companions in disorder, ouerthrewe them: and slaying a great number of them, put the rest to flight: taking all from them, which they had taken and brought away from the house of Landry the Controwler, about fiue myles from Troys. But the Pesants assembling againe, and assisted by others called, bare feete, raysed at Sens, and thereabouts besieged Villeneufue, a Castle belonging to the Monsieur de Esternay: but they were speedily repulsed from thence with great losse: but to reuenge themselues, they burned the base Court, wherin stood the barne and the fairest stalles in all France, with the Mill, and a peece of a house: which was done about the end of December. Within two moneths after, seuen score caliuers returned againe to besiege the Castle, but
Monsieur de Bethincourt, a Gentleman of the religion, accompanied with nine horse, and foure footemen, set so resolutely vpon them, that some of them beeing slaine, and 25. taken prisoners, the rest saued themselues by flight.
The nineteenth of Nouember, one of the Dukes of
Lunebourg, who in Anno. 1559. had had a quarrel against the Duke of
Guise in the campe of Amiens,The Duke of Lunebourg slaine in France. being at Rameru, between
Troys and Vitry le Francois, accompanied only with 18. men, minding (as it was said) to goe to Orleans, by the commaundement of
Bussy d'Amboise, Gouernour of Chaallons, was assayled in his lodging, beeing in his chamber, where sixe of his men were slaine, and himselfe wounded with thirteene Pistolle shottes: which done, they layde him in a Horse-litter, and bare him vnto
Chaallons, where hee died. Bussyes executioner, named
Malfontaine, an Apostate of the religion, in triumph of that worthie exployt, carried before him as in triumph, eighteene horses, eighteene cloakes, eighteen paire of bootes, and 36. Pistolles.
Ceant in Othe.In the Towne of
Ceant in Othe, seuen myles from Troys, the commons hauing found the meanes to enter therein, vpon the 24. day of August, murthered diuers of the Towne, and continued therein, till the end of Ianuary ensuing. The number of those that were specially noted, besides those that were murthered in other places, were twentie persons: and a young childe of fiue yeares, burnt with his father. Many houses were burnt by them, for the space of a myle from the Towne, and about sixe score horsemen, and three hundreth foote of the religion, ledde by Monsier de Semide and other Captaines, being not able to followe the Prince of Portien, that with other troupes had gotten to
Strasbourg, about the sixteenth of September: for their retrait ceased vppon the Borough Towne Cermoise, where they maintained themselues valiantly, and ouerthrewe an armie of three thousand men that came to assayle them: and slaying one hundreth and fiftie of their brauest Souldiers: the rest fledde with the losse of three of their men onely: and not long after, they ioyned with the Prince of Portien their Generall, at his returne with the Rutters.
One of the greatest massacres committed vppon those of the religion, was done in Sens, a Towne lying vpon the riuer of
d'Yonne, whereof the Cardinall de Guise was Archbishoppe, where one hundreth prisoners of all sortes were cruelly murthered, and their naked bodies throwne into the riuer.Sens. As many houses were robbed and spoyled, and the Church for the religion defaced: the Vines growing about it being all cut vppe. This was done vppon Sunday the 12. of August, and other daies ensuing: in the which time, those of Guise hauing giuen the charge of that murther vnto
Hemard Lieftenant of Sens, published in the Kings name at
Parris, and sent word to the Prince in Orleans, that they wold haue the edict of Ianuary fully obserued in all places, onely in
Parris.
Those of the Romish Church in Auxerre, cruelly massacred one named Cosson, stabbed and cast the keepers wife of the Castle (called Aualon) into the water, beeing a faire and comely young Gentlewoman:Auxerre. beate the Kings Atturney so cruelly, that they left him for dead: killed the Iudge de Corbelin, and co^mitted diuers strange robberies and pillings both within and without the Towne, by the conduct of Geolier, and a brabling Rascall called Borgant. In the moneth of October, they were procured to issue out of the Towne, by Monsieur d'Auignau, a Gentleman of the religion, accompanied with twentie horse, who hauing slaine fourteene of them, and hurt many others, stayed their furie.
The fifteenth of the same moneth, this Gentleman accompanying one of his companions that trauelled vnto Orleans, with a packet of some importance, slewe sixteene more of those murtherers, and scattered the rest that sought to stoppe his passage. The Inhabitants of the Towne of Saint Cyre,S. Cyre. about the end of the month, hauing denied passage vnto the Rutters and Lansquenets, conducted by Monsieur d'Andelot, were set vppon by night, whereof fortie beeing slaine, the richest of the Towne were taken prisoners. The Inhabitants of the Towne and Bourg of
Issy (prouoked by a Iacopin) not beeing content to haue vsed diuers outragious words against Monsieur d'Andelot, discharged certaine muskets at the Rutters: but they for their paines, had their towne spoyled and burnt by the Rutters and Lansquenets. On the other side, the company of the Marshal of Saint Andre, ouerthrew and spoyled the houses of those of the religion, within and about
Auxerre.
Vppon Munday, beeing the eleuenth of May,Neuers. 1562. those of the Romish Church in
Neuers, hauing taken armes, brought in certaine Gentlemen of the countrie, and among others, Cheuenon and Chastillon, that ceased vpon the Gates: and within three daies after, beganne to fall vppon those of the religion: and one named la Fayette, comming thither vppon the 23. of the same month, beganne to forrage, his Souldiers openly selling their Hostes goods. Hee cast the Ministers in prison, rebaptised the children, reitzerated marriages, draue out such as pleased him, and cleansed their houses of all that could bee found therein. Besides that, hee and Cheuenon committed infinit pillages vppon the boates passing by it, and vnder pretence of a certaine commission or iudgement giuen in Parris, la Fayette ceased vppon diuers immooueable goods, and being wel laden with a praye, to the valewe of fortie or 50. Crowns, he retired vnto his house in
Auuergne. At the same time, three or foure of the religion were executed within Neuers, and one of the Ministers died miserably, (but yet co^sta^tly) in prison,Corbigni or S. Leonard. the other miraculously escaped away. The like entertainme^t was giuen to those of the religio^ in Corbigni, called S. Leonard, a towne in Niuernois, most strangely forraged by Noysat, Marshall of de la Fayettes co^pany:
Anthony Doyuet, Lieftenant of Saint Pierre le Monstier, Liefenant du Boys, and the Knight of Chastillon in
Bazois. They slewe Monsieur de Mex, a Gentlema^ not farre from thence, much affected to the religion, as hee well shewed it, dying most constantly, beeing wounded with many Pistolle shottes. Not long after, those murtherers were surprised, and the Towne taken of a scalade, made by Captaine Blanay, whose souldiers vsed the people very courteously: but brake downe the Images, and the Popish Altars: reestablishing publike exercise of the religion, which continued therein after the edict of pacification. Those of the Romish Church in
Antrain,Antrain. by the solicitation of a Priest, named Estiene Blondelet, had determined to doo woorse then their companions of Auxerre, but vppon the twelfe of December they were preuented by Captaine Blosset, who valiantly surprised the Towne, and gaue such an alarme to those conspirators, that the chiefe of them leaped ouer the walles, some hidde themselues, and the rest hauing discouered the enterprise, which was to massacre all those of the religion: Blondelet and another mutinous fellowe, named
le Dangereux, were hanged. A Bourguignon, named
Monsieur de Trouan, that came into France to fish in troubled waters as others did, thought to playe the warriour, and to assayle Antraine, but hauing lost part of his men, hee retired with shame: and not content therewith, seeking to reuenge himselfe, was slaine by Blanay in a certaine encounter.
Monsieur d'Issertieux, called by those of
la Charite, professing the religion, in the moneth of Aprill 1562. by common consent of all the Towne was established Gouernour thereof,La Charite. Cheuenon, Achon, and others, did what they could to enter therein, but they were alwaies driuen away: but in the end, la Fayette besieged it, hauing the great Prior of Auuergne for his Lieftenant, and by means of a diuision that happened among the Inhabitants, the Towne was yeelded by composition, with sufficient aduantage for those of the religion: but the first thing that the great Prior did, was to take Issertieux by the bosome, from whom was pulled the counterpaine of the agreement: his armour, and one of his horses. Which was done vpon the 10. of Iune. Certain daies and months ensuing, those of the religion were pilled and ransacked, in so many and diuers kindes, by la Fayette, that they were notable to paye any more: to whom nothing was either too hotte, or too heauie, as also by his company, the Lieftenant and certaine Councellours of Saint Pierre le Monstier, tooke their partes likewise. In the moneth of February, 1563. the Duke of Guise sent three companies of Lanciers thither to refresh them: but those of the Towne, and the theeues themselues, doubting to be pilled, shutte the Gates, which put the Lanciers in great furie: who to reuenge themselues, vsed great cruelties about the Towne, on that side that bordereth vppon Berry, against those of the religion, drawing some of them at their horses tailes.
The third of March, Captaine Boys, Blosset, and
Blanay, scaled and tooke la Charite, which the three companions aforesaid soght to relieue, but they were constrained to retire. Within three daies after, Captaine Boys staying therein, onely with sixtie seuen souidiers, kept the Towne against an armie of three or four thousand men, both horse and foote, and fixe field peeces, where he sustained the siege eight daies togither, without losse of any man, hauing slaine aboue fourescore of the assaylants, constrained the rest to leaue the siege, to their no smal confusion: in such sort, that by the edict of pacification, the exercise of the religion remained within la Charite.
Many small Townes in those quarters were much molested, specially in respect: of the religion: as Bony, Cosne, Neufui, and others:Chastillon Sur Loire. but most of all
Chastillon Sur Loire, which hauing withstood many difficulties, and spoyled of all her commodities by theeues and rouers, (beeing but poore keepers of vines) to defend themselues against the violences of such as desired the losse and extermination of their liues. And hauing fortified their little Towne (not hauing any ditches) as well as they might, vppon the fift of Ianuary they sustained an assault slew seuen or eight hundreth men of the Regiment of Monsieur de Prie, Gouernour of
Guyen, that sought to put him to the sword, hurting diuers others, the men defending themselues by throwing stones, and the women with hotte water, which they cast vppon the assaylants,
In the month of February, Monterud Gouernour of
Berry, besieged them, and with cannon shotte beate downe their feeble walles, yet could he not enter, but by warlike means, that vnder pretence of parley, he withdrew his battery, which lay in such sort, that hee could doo little good therewith, and hauing placed them in better order, he commanded a new bridge to be made, and thereat entered by force: where no kinde of cruelties was spared, neyther vppon women, nor children, olde nor young, no not so much as against women great with childe and readie to bee deliuered. The Towne beeing pilled and spoyled of all whatsoeuer it had, euen to the boltes, lockes, barres and glasse-windowes of the houses, which notwithstanding, assoone as Manteruds armie was departed, those of the religion that had escaped, returned thither againe, and reestablished the exercise of religion.
Guyen sur Loire.The Towne of
Guyen Sur Loire, maintained it selfe long time in peace during the troubles, onely by the meanes of those of the religion, being the strongest part within the Towne, but the disorder committed by diuers Captaines and souldiers, sent thither from Orleans by the Prince to refresh themselues, and the taking of Bourges, reduced things to such a stay, that most of those of the religio^, forsooke both their houses and their goods to go to Orleans, where as the^ the plague was very rife. The campe of Triumuirat, not long after arriued before Guyen, and all the places bordering on the same, vsing all the cruelties that possible might bee inuented: among the which, certaine Italians (in hatred of the religion) hauing cut the bodie of a yong Infant in two peeces, cate his lieuer: which was verified to bee most true, yet iustice for the same could not be had. Lastly: those of the religion being returned from Orleans, with Lanbert Daneau, one of their Ministers, they met another troupe of their friends, that two daies before came from Chastillon sur Loin, with the other Ministers called La Vallee, and beeing entered into the Towne, by vertue of the edict beganne the exercise of the religion,
Guyen beeing named for the balliage towne in those quarters. The Monkes of Fontaine Iohn, an Abbey neare adioyning vnto
Chastillon sur Loin, hauing abandoned their gownes, to beare armes, and to robbe and spoyle the countrie, with other souldiers, vpon the seuenth of October, were all set vppon, by Monsieur de Dampierre: and seeking to resist, were all slaine: onely some fewe that were burnt within the Cloyster, from whence it was impossible otherwise to get them foorth.
Montargis, belonging to the Ladie Renee, daughter to Lois the twelfe, Duches Dowager of
Ferrare,Montargis. was the retrait of diuers families of the religion: notwithstanding the threatnings of the Duke of
Guise, sonne in lawe to the sayde Ladie, who sent thither one
Malicorne a new Knight of the Order, to cease vppon the Towne and Castle, with foure companies of horse, who being entered into the Towne, mooued the people against those of the religion, in such maner, that at that time a poore man was slaine and cast into the water, as before that time likewise they had killed a woman, and committed certaine outrages: and
Malicorne continuing in his boldnesse, proceeded so farre, as to threaten the Ladie with cannon shotte to batter her Castle, wherein were diuers of the religion, whom hee pretended to ransome: but the Princesse made him an answere, saying: I charge you looke what enterprise you take in hand, for that there is not any man whatsoeuer, within this Realme, that can commaund me, but onely the King: and if you proceed so farre, I will be the first that shal stand within the breach, to trie if you once dare bee so bold to kill the daughter of a King: and on the other side, not so meanely allyed, nor yet beloued, but that I haue both the meanes and power to reuenge your boldnesse, euen to the very infants of your presumptious race. Which wordes caused Malicorne like a snaile to pull in his hornes, and presently after departed: the Duke of Guise beeing slaine, as you redde before.
Those of the Romish Church, within the Towne of S. Iohns de Nemours, in the mouth of Iune,S. Iohn de Nemours. did so much, that they draue those of the religion out of their Towne, not permitting any of them to enter, vntill the peace concluded, raysing of extreame impositions vppon their goods, that were openly solde for small prices. Not long before they had vsed all the meanes they could (by counsell of some Traitors) to bring certain troupes of souldiers into the towne to massacre the people,Monlius in Bourbonois. but their enterprise tooke no effect. Monsieur de Montare being come to Moulius in Bourbonnois, with commission, therein to vse all hard and extreame dealing towards those of the religion: first, without any forme of lawe or processe, hee caused two Artificers to be hanged, and perceiuing himselfe to be strong of men, draue all such as hee any thing doubted out of the Towne: which done, hee gaue his troupes leaue to issue foorth, and to slay all those that by any means were found in the fields, vsing al kind of strange dealings and extremities, vnto the houses and farmes lying about it. Captaine Saint
Auban, that led certaine troupes out of Languedos to
Orleans, failed not much to take both Montare, and the Towne of Moulius, and as he determined to besiege it, hee receiued letters, that caused him to make haste way. At his departure from thence, the Townes-men issued vpon his rereward, and tooke
Monsieur de Foulet, a Gentleman dwelling not farre from thence, and his Lacquey, with a Councellour named Claude Brisson, that were all three slaine. Not long after, foure others were hanged in
Moulius. And in the month of Iuly after, fiue others returning from
Orleans were drowned: with three Marchants of Dauphine. Besides that, diuers were put to death, the hangma^ or executioner (by
Montare, called Gossop) seruing the peoples humour, and executing either without lawe or processe, such as they deliuered vnto him to be put to death.
The leuen and twentieth of May, 1562. the Counte de Montgommery, accompanied with fixe score horses, entered into
Bourges, wherein many secret conspiracies were vsed and executed against those of the religion, and kept it for the Prince, bringing from thence great summes of mony, for the payment of the Souldiers vnder the Princes conduct: taking the great Tower likewise into his custodie. In the month of Iune after, Monsieur de Iuoy was sent thither by the Prince, with two thousand foote, to prouide for all things necessarie against the Towne shuld be besieged, as the enemie determined to do it. Three Corners of Argolitiers came thither likewise, who beeing arriued therein, they vsed to make certaine sallies: by which meanes, the Towne of
Meun sur Loire was taken, to the great periudice of the Priestes, the Monkes and Images. As likewise they forced the Castles of Saint
Florent and Coudrai, the Gentleman of the place dying with feare. Iuoy hauing made an enterprise vpo^ Issoudun, preuailed not, wherevppon his troupes beganne to mutin against him: which being appeased, the fifteenth of August, the armie of Triumuirat approaching to Bourges, Iuoy and the Sheriffes were summoned to yeeld the Towne vnto the King. The Sheriffes referring the matter vnto
Iuoy, hee made refusall, wherevppon ensued diuers issues and skirmishes, co^monly to the great disaduantage of the enemies: and there was an open combatte fought betweene Captaine S. Martin the Huguenot, and the Monke Lichelieu, Maister of the Triumuirats campe:Bourges in Berry. the Monke was thrust into the bodie with a sword, and lost his coate armour, which Saint
Martin bare away.
The twentieth day of the Month, a strong batterie was made, and in one day they shot at the least a thousand cannon shot, but because it preuailed not much, the Duke de Nemours was imployed, to perswade the besieged, and beeing at the wall to speake with them, making many goodly promises, which hee assured vppon his faith: one of the Souldiers within the Towne said openly vnto him, that the faith hee then offered, was the same which he had holden to the Barron of
Chastelnau, and had it not been for certaine Gentlemen, he had as then been slaine. That which constrained the Triumuirat to parley with the Towne, was, because the Admirall issuing out of Orleans about Chasteaudun had surprised and burnt, and the powder and munition that was sent the^ from Parris, and for that cause vsed such means with Iuoy, by the Counte Rhingraue, and the Queen-mother, that vpon the last of August, and the next day, he graunted to their request, and yeelded vp the Towne, to the great disliking of his souldiers: whereof part with the Captaines la Porte, S.
Martin (that hurt Richelieu) S. Remi, and
Brion, Maister of the campe, went to the Duke of Guise, and from thence to the siege of Roane, where they were slaine: the rest had part of the bootie. The rest of the Souldiers and Captaines got to
Orleans, with many difficulties, and losse of 30. or 40. men.

Iuoy had great displeasure at the Princes bands, both for his faintnesse and the loosing of the place, beeing of so great importance. Wherevppon, hee withdrewe himselfe vnto his house, much greeued for his misfortune, specially because hee had left great store of Houshold-stuffe and other necessaries within Bourges: and among the rest, a Chalice set with diuers rich and precious stones, which hee was constrained to giue vnto the Queene-mother, who with great deuotion receiued it of him, and kept it as a most rich Iewell: as likewise many other precious lewelles of the holy Chappel, which were kept from the hands of little theeues, to bee the better and safelier kept by her.
Monterud Lieftenant to the Prince de la Rochesuryon in Berry, hauing armed himselfe with letters from the Triumuirat, contrary to the capitulation made with
Iuoy, draue those of the religion out of the Towne, their houses beeing ransacked: and at their issuing, some of them were robbed, some beaten, and some slaine within the Gates. An edict beeing made, that forbidding those of the religion that stayed in the Towne, not to speake or assemble togither aboue two in a company: and so
Bourges remained in that sort vntill the edict of pacification.
The third of Aprill, 5562. those of the religion in
Mans, ceased peaceably vppon the Towne:Le Mans. Charles d'Agennes Bishoppe of the place, retiring vnto a Castle, where hauing fortified himselfe, he co^mitted many murthers and spoyles vppon the people. Their affaires within the Towne holding in a meane, vntill the moneth of May, that for want of a man of authoritie and well affected to the religion, and to the estate of the common and particular commoditie of the people, the souldiers beganne to fall to extremities, and in fleed of assayling their enemies in the field, they busied themselues in the Towne, to breake downe Images, and Priests Altars, to the great disliking of the Ministers, and other peaceable persons, shewing them that it was against the edict of Ianuary, the treatie of association holden in Orleans, and the declaration which those of Mans not long before had made, and sent vnto the king by
Monsieur de Mortier. From the
^hurches in the Towne, they ranne vnto the Villages bordering about it: and adding euill to euill, committed certaine spoyles, which caused the Pesants to fall vppon them, and to slaye some of them as they retired laden with their praye. Those that remained within the Towne were diuided, some commaunding in the Castle, others within the Towne. Those of the religion beeing abashed at the insolences of the Captaines and souldiers, newes was brought, that the
Triumuirats armie was as then at Blois, and that the Duke
de Montpensieur made preparation to assayle them! They likewise had intelligence, that of three Captaines that commanded within the Cittie, two of them had secret conference with the enemie, which considered, as also that the Towne was weake and slenderly furnished of men, the twelfe of Iuly, it was confusedly and in great haste forsaken, about eight of the clocke at night: at which their issuing, were found to the number of eight hundreth men, all armed, that by Captaine la Mothe Tibergeau, with great difficulties were conducted vnto Alancon. The other two Captains presently yeelded vnto the enemie: those that saued themselues at Alancon, tooke diuers parties: some not accustomed to beare armes stayed there: others went to finde the Counte
de Montgommery, or the Duke de Bouillon. For the Ladies and Gentlewomen, some withdrew themselues to Deep, or to
New-hauen, or else into England. The next
day after, the Towne so forsaken, such of the Romish religion as had absented themselues from thence, entered againe, and then beganne a terrible trouble: verie fewe of the houses of those of the religion eyther within the Towne, or in the fields, for 8. myles compasse round about, but were all pilled, and that by the neare kinsmen of such as had absented themselues. Fiue hundreth Harquebusiers beeing appoynted for the guard of the Towne, and other places bordering on the same, exercised all kindes of cruelties vpon such as stayed behind, as some poore people, maides and men-seruants, and certaine Gentlewomen of account in the Towne, and other persons withdrawing themselues into their farmes, countrie-houses, and with their friends. Presently the prisons were filled, and by decree, a iudiciall place was appoynted, and that neither kinsmen nor friends, should solicite for the prisoners, whom they termed rebelles and seditious. The Steward saying it was sufficient, hauing seene a man to enter into the Temple while the Images were throwing downe, or bearing a sword at that time when they held the Towne, to condemne him for seditious, and a rebell. Three witnesses beeing hired and appoynted for the purpose, to performe the tragedie, one called
Chouan a bookeseller, the second a Priest, called les Anges, and Bandoun an Apothecarie, so impudent in their occupation, that when their wages fayled to bee payd, they said openly, that they would meddle no more therein.
Further, the accused were not allowed or permitted to refuse any witnesse, in such manner, that thereby they put two hundreth persons to death, both men, women, and seruants: as also foure young children, whereof the eldest was not aboue seuenteene yeares of age: and two men that were madde. Such as were absent, had processe made against them, and their pictures executed: confiscated the goods of those whom they knewe to bee dead in the warres, disabled their children of all offices and estates: depriuiuing them of all possessions or inhereritances, that might by any meanes fall vnto them. Not long before the peace, they beheaded one called Rolandiere: hung a Ioyner, and massacred foure others by moone-light, and beeing halfe dead, threw them into the riuer. In the Villages both farre and neare vnto it, many murthers both of men, women, and children, were committed, to the number of sixe score and vpwards, with particular cruelties, and such horrible traiterous meanes, that I am abashed to remember, and ashamed to recite them. One named Captaine
Champagne, hauing a fish-pond behinde his house, cast aboue fiftie persons into it, and with their bodies nourished Pikes. His Lieftenant, called Boi-Iourdan, seconded him therein, for that in two ditches neare vnto his house, were found to the number of fiftie or sixtie dead bodies.
Those of the religion in Angers,Angers. beeing become strong within the Towne, with the hurt or iniurie of any of their aduersaries, about the fift of Aprill, and within sixe daies after, made an agreement to liue peaceably one with the other, vnder the obedience of the King, obseruing the edict of Ianuarie. But about the 22. of the same moneth, a Gentleman comming thither to demaund ayde of men, and money for the Prince, certaine souldiers that bare him company, in the night time brake down the Images in Saint Sansons Church: which moued the Priests, although the Gentleman, much condemned their action, and had not any part of the spoyle. Wherevppon diuers Gentleman and souldiers of the religion beeing gone to Orleans, those of the
Romish religion, perceiuing themselues to bee strong, first blinded their enemies, causing the edict of Ianuarie to bee newly published, and then beeing well assured of Monsieur de la Fancille, that commaunded in the Castle Puygallard, a Gascon Captaine sent by the Duke de Montpensier, vppon the fift of May at night entered into the Castle, followed by diuers souldiers, and the next day his watch-word being Sathan, did so much that hee ceased vppon part of the Towne: and the more to blinde those of the religion, and wholly to get them into his possession, he graunted them free exercise of the religion, and the next day caused the Gates to bee opened, that they might go to heare the Sermon, made within a house that stood vpon the ditch: and to take vp the bodie of one of their Ministers, named Charles d'Albiac, called du Plesus, who the day before had been slaine, as he went to saue himselfe by leaping ouer the wall. The next day their began a horrible tumult, for that vnder pretence of disarming those of the religion, they entered into their houses, and because two of them among the rest, whereof one was the receiuer of the talages, had shune their Gates, their enemies tooke occasion to ring a bell, wherevppon presently those two houses were robbed and spoyled, some of the seruants slaine, the rest prisoners: the kings mony taken and made prise, partly by
Puygallard and his companions. Which done, they cast both men and women of the religion, and of all sons into prison. In a Marchants house they found diuers bookes of the holy Scriptures, which were burnt openly in the middle of the Towne: and the souldiers of the Monke Richelieu hauing found a guilded Bible, stickt it vpon a holbord, and issuing from thence, went in procession through all the greatest streetes, and singing like Priestes, said: Behold trueth hanged, the trueth of the Huguenots, the trueth of all the diuelles: behold the mightie God, beholde the euerlasting God will speake. And beeing come to the bridge, they cast it into the riuer of Loire, and with higher voyce beganne to crie, and saie: Behold the trueth of all the diuelles drowned.
Within diuers daies after, and till the end of that yeare, to the number of eightie persons were executed and put to death. A Gentlewoman of the age of seuentie yeares, was beaten dead with the stockes of their Pistolles, then drawne in a sacke through the dirt, and her bodie cast into the water, with great ioy and laughter of all the people, terming her the mother of the greene diuell that preached to the Huguenots.
The wife of a Councellour named Sigongue, although shee lay bedthred, was murthered, children rebaptised, and women to heare Masse by sound of drumbe, some were abused in their bodies, many maides violated: and among the rest, two yong maides rauished in their fathers presence, whom those cruel villaines had
^yed at the foote of a bed, that he might behold the fact committed. About Angers, diuers Gentlemen and others, were massacred.
The Duke de Monpensier, hauing licence to ring a bell, and to kill all such as were suspected to bee of the religion, which done, they fell to pillage: vpon whom the Duke de Montpensier most discharged his chollor, was vpon Monsier de Marests, a valiant Captaine, who with twentie or fiue and twentie souldiers hauing taken and kept the Castle of Richefort, against the Dukes forces, and slaine aboue two hundreth men in the defence thereof: in the end beeing betrayed by two of his owne men, defending himselfe till hee remained without company, and not hauing any more powder, yeelded himselfe to
Puygaillard, who vppon his faith, promised him to saue his life: but presently deliuered him to the prouost Marshall, who hauing brought him to Angers, caused him by the Dukes commaundement to be broken vppon a Crosse, and there left aliue vpon it, liuing in that miserie vntill the next morning at foure of the Clocke, without releefe or ease of any man, by ending his paine: still tempted by two Fryers, to conuert from the truth of the religion, but hee remained constant. The two Traytours that betrayed him to his enemies, were likewise hanged, and an other that hadde opened the Gate, whereby they entred into Rochefort, was slaine: of whome they thought to bee rewarded.
Tours and the country about it.Eight daies before Easter, in Anno 1562. the Duke de Montpensier, beeing come to Tours with a small troupe, in diuers sorts discouered his euill will against those of the religion, who hauing had aduice from the Prince, how their affaires proceeded, seized vppon the Towne, without any disorder, onely inregard of the Images, that by no meanes could be releeued, what counsell or aduice soeuer the stayder sort could giue or procure. At the same time the cruell sentence giuen in the Parliament of
Parris, was published in the gouernment of Touraine, Maine, and Aniou, committed to the charge of the Duke de Montpensier and of Chauigni his Lieftenant. Which sentence, was expressely to commaund, all men of what estate soeuer, presently to rise in Armes, with permission to sounde belles in euery place, to spoyle and destroy all those of the religion, that could or might bee founde, without respect of qualitie, sexe or age, and to assaile their houses, to kill, spoyle, and vtterly subuert them. This sentence was published euery sunday in al the Parishes: and in the termes vsed by the Triumuirat. Which is, to let the greatest Gray hound loose, and presently therevppon all kinde of bad persons assembled, both pesants and Artificers, and leauing their ordinary labors, beganne in great fury to march with the rest against those of the religion. Part of them entring into Ligueul, where they hanged certaine men, put out the ministers eyes, and then burnt him with a small fier. Others entred into
Cormery, l'Islebouchart, Loches, and other places bordering vpon it, where they committed an infinit number of villanies. Among diuers other murthers, fleaing a young man named Mathurin Chaiseau of the age of
17. or 18. years. An other troupe of 6. or 700. men fel vpon the village of
Aze, foure miles from Chinon, and burnt it: massacring to the number of 25. or 30. persons, in prese^ce of the stuard
Agenois, who in stead of opening his gates to aide the poore distressed people, vnderstanding of their comming, stood at his windowes, to Iudge what blowes they had. In the beginning of Iuly, they of
Tours being sommoned to yeelde the Towne, and hauing no meanes to bee releeued by the Prince, departed from thence with their armes, making three companies of foote, and two cornets of horse, and we^t to march to
Poictiers: Ioyning with those of Chinon and
Chastelleraut. Wherby they were about the number of 1000. men or there abouts. And being followed by 7. or 8. co^mpanies of Lanciers, and some Cornets of light horse, belonging to the Count de Villards, their leaders fainted: Wherevpon they were charched by the horsemen, and ouerthrowne: some beeing slaine, the rest robbed and spoyled of all they hadde, were ledde prisoners to Chastelleraut, from whence they escaped by diuers meanes, and some got to Poictiers. Their Minister called Ihon de la Tour that had bin at the conference in Poissy, aged 75. years, was drowned in the riuer of Clain: the first that yeelded themselues in that ouerthrow, were sent to Tours, and about three hundreth of the nimblest of them, thought by running to get Tours, but at their arriuall the Towns-men beganne to ring a bell, at the sound whereof, diuers of them saued themselues, the rest, to the number of two hundreth, were taken and committed to prison: and the next day sixe or seuen score of them, were murthered and cast into the riuer of Loire. Others beeing found about the Towne, were likewise throwne into the water, not sparing man, woman, nor childe. After that, came Chauigny, with his band of Priestes, Monkes, Friers, Cannons, and their companions, and then the murthers and pillages beganne to bee renued. The President of Tours, named Bourgeau, an ancient man of great credit and authoritie, who although he neuer had made profession of the religion, yet hee was esteemed to bee one, hauing presented Clerueaux Lieftenant to
Chauigny, with 300. Crownes, and a Bason of siluer, was ledde foorth of the Gates, but beeing perceiued and discouered, by such as watched for such things, hee was murthered with swords and staues, and then stripped into his shirt, and hanged by the foote, his head in the water vp to the breast: and beeing still liuing, they cut open his bellie, and casting his guttes into the riuer, sticking his heart vppon the poynt of a Lance, bare it about the Towne, saying it was the heart of the President of the Huguenots.
Not long after, the Duke de Montpensier arriued in the Towne, causing diuers Gibbets, wheeles, and flakes, to bee set vp, and then vnder pretence of iustice, the murthers beganne again, so that the number of those that were executed, before, then, and since, amounted to aboue three hundreth persons, most part beeing rich men, and many of good account. Assoone as the Commons, or the Iustice, had put any man or woman to death, they enrered into their houses, and killing their children, tooke all they found therein, in such manner, that Richelieu the Monke, boasted to haue as much Veluet, Satin, and Taffata, (which hee had gotten in Tours) as would reach a league in length: his companions likewise had their parts, in such maner, that such as sixe weeks before, were not woorth a groate, presently after, offered to buy lands, and to paye thirtie or fortie thousand Frankes readie mony.
Let vs now see what past, during these first troubles in high and base Normandie, and first beginne with
Roane,Rome. the principall Towne in that Prouince. The fifteenth of Aprill 1562. those of the religion foreseeing some danger, ceased vpon the Towne, and fiue daies after, yeelded reason of their action vnto the Duke de Bouillon Gouernor thereof. Their declaration beeing sent to the Court, letters pattents were presently giuen vnto the Duke d'Aumale, brother to the Duke de Guise, to bee the kings Lieftenant in Normandie. The third of May, the Artificers with their wiues and children, entered into the Churches, and in lesse then foure and twentie houres, had broken downe and defaced all the Images, Altars, and other superstitious Reliques, in more then 50. Churches, as wel of Parishes, as of Abbayes and Couents: not once taking any thing for themselues, in such sort, that from that time, vntill the taking of the Towne, the occupation of Priests and Friers wholly discontinued.
Seuen daies after, the Cittizens mustered themselues, and the Court of Parliament withdrew it selfe, yet without any cause. Meane time, Villebon Bailiffe of Roan, ceased vpon Pont de l'Arche, and the Baron de Clere took
Caudebec, the one aboue, the other belowe the riuer of Siene. Whereby it prooued great discommoditie for the Towne of Roan, that by those meanes could get no victualls by water, besides the ceasing of the Courts of iustice, the staye of trade of merchandise and all sorts of handy workes: these discommodities made the Citizens to looke vnto themselues.
In the beginning of Iune, Villebon came with great troupes to besiege Saint Catherins fort: where in a fierce skirmish he lost his cornet and fourteene men, and they of the fort 8. me^. Prese^tly after him, came the Duke de Aumale,Saint Catherins Fort besieged. and gaue an alarme vnto the Towne, where presently he lost 25. of his horsemen: But for renenge, he assayd all means he could to impeach the Towne of Roan from necessary prouisions. But not long after, it was relieued by
Monsieur de Moruilliers, sent thither by the Prince from
Orleans, assisted by Monsieur de Languetot, a gentleman of great wisdome. The Duke d'Aumale, dispersed the Churches of those of the religio^ in Hafleur, Montuilier and
l'Islebonne, where he hanged three auncients, and three Gentlemen of the Religion. And not long after besieged Saint Catherins fort, with thirteene Cannons, and two coluerins: where Monsieur de Languetot had his legge shotte off with a great peece, whereof hee died. Many skirmishes beeing daylie performed between them, till in the end, the Duke left the Fort and fledde from thence: and within fiue daies after, beeing before Ponteau de Mer, faining to parley with them within the Towne, he surprised them vppon a suddaine, and so entered by force, where hee vsed all kind of hostilitie, specially vppon the Minister named
Brionne: and the third day after, hee besieged and tooke
Honfleur.
The sixe and twentieth of August, the Parliament of
Roane being at Louniers, made a declaration, whereby those of the religion in Normandie were declared Traitors, permitting all men,Declaration of the Parliament of Roane against those of the religion. that eyther would or had the meanes to spoyle and ouerrunne them, wholly disallowing the edict of Ianuary, established the Inquisition of Spaine, and appoynted the Duke
d'Aumale, Lieftenant for the King. And by that declaration and sentence, this Court of Parliament executed many of the religion, commanding all such as would not make profession of the Romish religion, to depart out of the Towne of Louuiers, within foure and twentie houres after, vpon paine of confiscation, both of body and goods. On the other side, they draue all the Friers out of Roane, and hauing discouered treason pretended by some of their companions, they tooke order therein from thence forward,The siege of Roane. giuing good eye to those of the Romish religion: whereof they thrust out great numbers. In August, Monsieur de Moruilliers withdrew himselfe from
Roane, and kept himselfe peaceably within his house, and so continued during the warres, neuer forsaking the open profession of the religion.
In the meane time, Monsieur de Montgommery was by those of Roane desired to assist them: which hee presently did, and arriued at Roane vppon the 18. of September: within rennedaies after, the Towne was summoned to yeelde it selfe vnto the armie of the Triumuirat, whose campe (wherein were the king, the Queen, and the king of Nauarre) being composed of sixteen thousand foot, and two thousand horse, besides Rutters and Lansquenets, came before the Towne, where at their arriuall, they had a hotte and fierce skirmish, which continued all that day, and three daies after successiuely.

The fixt of October, the king, armie hauing intelligence from Captaine Louis out of Saint Catherins,Saint Catherins fort taken. for they surprised it by force, wherein they slewe al they found. And Louis himselfe ayding the enemie to mount vp, was slaine by one of his Souldiers: another fort called Montgommery, was taken by the like means, where the Queene-mother ledde the king, beeing but twelue yeares of age, to see the dead bodies of the women, and made him behold them bathing in their blood. The thirteenth of October, an assault was giuen vnto the Towne, but they within repulsed the enemie: where some couragious women (bringing meate vnto the souldiers) were slaine. The next day they gaue another assault at the
Rampart of Saint Hilary, but were repulsed, and for the space of 6. houres that the skirmish indured, they lost to the number of eight hundreth of their best souldiers, and they within, foure or fiue hundreth, accounting women and children that were slaine with the Artillerie.
The same day, the king of Nauarre beeing visited by a certaine Lord, told him,Hurt and death of the King of Nauarre. that if hee escaped safely from that siege, hee would neuer beare armes againe for that quarrell: but the next day he would go see the trenches, where by fortune as hee made water, he was striken with a Harquebushotte into the shoulder: which done, hee was borne by certaine Gentlemen to his lodging at Dartenal, where the Surgians vsed all the meanes they could, to get out the bullet, but hauing deferred it ouerlong, they could not: one of the Phisitians named Vincentius, a voluptious man, entertained him with sports and companies of Gentlewome^: and among therest, a Gentlewoman named Rouet, came to see him, which was some meanes to inflame his wound, and hauing intelligence that
Roane was taken, he was borne thither, where gouerning not himselfe, as his wound and time required, it began to growe to further paine, and in the end a feuer tooke him, wherwith he began to be faint, and the^ perceiued they had deceiued him. Notwithstanding his serua^ts had so great credit with him, that they caused him to be co^fessed and to receiue the Sacrament after the Romish maner. The other of his Phisitians called Raphuel, being of the religio^, vttered many reasons vnto him, so farre that he seemed to charge him with sin against the holy Ghost: wherevnto hee answered nothing, but lay still. Not long after, the Queen (aduertised by his Phisitians, that he could not liue) being come to see him, willed some of his men to read vnto him. Shee being departed, hee commaunded Raphael to take the Bible, and to read the Historie of
Iob: which beeing done, adding therevnto certaine wordes of the iustice and mercie of God, the king beeing mooued in spirit, lifting vp his hands vnto heauen, and with teares in his eyes, hee asked mercie of God, making a large and ample declaration of his faith, protesting, that if it pleased God to graunt him life, hee would cause the Gospell to bee preached throughout the Realme of France. His disease waxing more vehement, and Raphael continually attending vppon him, hauing made his will, hee caused himselfe to bee borne into a boate, to go to Saint
Maur des Fosses, hard by Parris. But not long after his entrie into the boate, a great cold ceased vppon him, and therevppon insued a sweate, wherewith hee beganne to talke idly: and among other words, hee said, he would send Raphael to Geneue to bee a Minister. And vppon a suddaine commaunded him to praye: which
Raphael did: all that were in the boate, namely, the Prince de la Roche suryon kneeling downe, the Cardinall de Bourbon, the Prince of Mantoue, and Monsieur de Losses, withdrewe themselues apart, standing vppon their feete and their heads couered. The prayer being done, wherewith the Cardinall could not finde fault, Raphael added a certaine exhortation, and with him was ioyned another, that went like a seculer person, but some say hee was a Iacopin: who notwithstanding, vsed no other wordes but such as any minister would haue done. The last words the King spake, were vnto a seruant of his chamber, to whom he said, serue my sonne well, and bid him serue the King faithfully: and so vpon the 17. of Nouember, 1562. he yeelded vp his soule.
The 15. of October, many parlies were made, touching a composition, wherin the Queen-mother vsed many hotte and vehement speeches vnto the citize^s that issued foorth, saying: that shee knewe howe to liue,Parley of yeelding. that they were come too late to teach her, that they ought to content themselues to liue as the King did, and that if they would not yeelld by faire meanes, they should be compelled by force. Shee desired two articles: one, that they shoulde bee wholely bereaued of the exercise of religion: the other, that they should receiue the King, the Triumuirat and their troupes, into their towne. But they offered to receiue the King, the Queene, the Princes of the blood, and theyr traine: but for the rest, they craued to bee remitted. Desiring that the edict of Ianuarie might bee continued in force. Which was flatlye denyed vnto them.
The 26. of October, an assault was giuen vnto the Towne, and in the end, by meanes of a mine that wrought at the breach of S. Hilaries gate, the towne was taken by force,Roan taken by assault where the Kings souldiers beganne to kill and massacre all they met, vsing all kinde of monsterous cruelties.
Montgommerie perceiuing no remedie, entered into a Galley, and with such as coulde saue themselues therein, went to New-Hauen: others that sought to do the like without boates, were drowned: such as fledde out at the gates were spoyled and robbed of all they had, and some taken prisoners. Diuers Ministers beeing within a strong Tower, yeelded themselues vpon promise of safetie: but contrary to promise, they were kept prisoners, yet escaped onely Marolart, and president
Maudreuille an excellent man, that were betrayed by one S.
Estene, that had promised to saue them, and for his paines, he should haue had 2000. Crownes. The Constable threatned Marolart, but he indured it patiently: many English and Scottish souldiers were hanged, the rest being sicke, taken and cast into the riuer of Siene. Maudreuille, Monsieur de Soquence, and Berthonuille, Councellors of the Towne, with Marolart, were condemned to die:
Maudreuille, to loose his head,Diuers notable persons executed. the rest to be hanged, which was presently executed with many opprobrious speeches, against Marolart, both by the Constable and his sonne. They all dyed constantly in the profession of the Gospell. The next day, 5. Captaines and two others were likewise executed. The spoyle and sacking of the Towne, continued aboue
4. moneths togither, and it is almost incredible to speake, what great riches was taken and borne out of the Towne: such as came from Parris, Amiens, Beauuais, and other, places to buy the spoiles, in theyr returnes homewarde, were eyther robbed of all they hadde, or else neuer prospered in theyr affaires.
Touching Deepe,Deepe. those of the religion therein maintained themselues very well, exercising many notable exployts against those that sought to molest them. So that from the beginning of May, vntill October, their enemies lost to the number of one thousand or twelue hundreth men. This Towne serued for a retrait to great numbers of the religion, from diuers places, nourished an infinit number of poore people, ayded those of Roane with all the meanes they could, but the succors they sent to help the town, being cut off and ouerthrown, the Towne of Deep perceiuing it selfe not able to resist, in fine, by many threatnings, promises and other meanes, they yeelded the Towne vppon certaine conditions: the woorst whereof was, that the exercise of religion was taken from them: the Marshall de Montmorancy establishing Ricaruille and
de Baqueuille, with foure hundreth men to commaund therein: yet those of the religion lost not courage, but made such sute vnto the Queen-mother, (that feared the Admirall and the siege of Orleans) that they obtained licence to assemble in smal companies, which they did, hauing certain Ministers that escaped from Roane: yet there was not one Priest in all the countrie, that durst once venture to saye Masse within Deep, and although the two Captains aforesaid, kept good watch, yet they were surprised: for the twentieth of December,
Monsieur Ricaruille beeing gone out of the Castle with one of his seruants, to see his horses, in a stable not farre from it, was slaine by Monsieur de Chastiuille, and Captaine
Gascon, who presently ceased vpon the Castle,Deep taken from those of the Romish Church. and hauing intelligence with those that were in it, armed themselues and entered into the Towne, where without hurting any man, they tooke Baqueuille, whom all men had forsaken: that done, the exercise of the religion was againe publikely permitted, and the Gouernment of the Towne, giuen to Monsieur de la Curee, a Gentleman well affected to the religion.
There happened diuers exploytes of warre in many places of
Normandy, because of the Townes, but because the most part of them were but surprises, and ordinarie stratagems, we will not speake of them, but onely of that which seemeth woorthiest memorie.
The seuenth of Iune 1562. Messieurs de Houesuille, and de Cequeuille, Gilles Michant Phisitian,Valongnes. Iohn Guifart, and Robert de Verdun Counnellours, were massacred in Valongues for religion, and the houses of such as made profession, were filled with souldiers, that did what they list therein, for the space of eight daies.
In the Moneth of May,Vire. before
Viere hauing been taken by Montgommery, the Images beaten downe, and the Reliques borne away, the religion reestablished, vpon the last of Iuly, those of the Romish Church assayled those of the religion, as they came out from the sermon, whereof they slewe three men, whereof one was stoned by the women, beeing in the riuer, and hurt diuers. But about the end of August, they were reuenged thereof by meanes of
Monsieur de Montgommery, that sent them ayde, which did much mischiefe to all the countrie round about: but not long after, againe the Duke d'Estampes tooke the Towne by force, and many of them put vnto the sword.
The Duke d'Estampes hauing gotten Vire,Saint Lo. went to Saint Lo, where hauing continued siege for the space of fiue or sixe daies, in the end hee tooke it, the Towne beeing sacked and put to the spoyle.Nowhauen. New-Hauen, a Towne of great importance, hauing beene brauely deliuered vnto the Prince, by Vidame de Chartres, Monsieur de Beauuoir, and la Nocle his brother in lawe:
Vidame going into England, meaning not to leaue the place vnprouided, let the keeping thereof to one named Roquebrune, to whom hee gaue commission to raise three hundreth men for the guard therof. He presently went vnto the Cardinall of Lorraine, and after to the King of Nauarre, promising to deliuer New-Hauen vnto them, and proceeded therewith, vntill such time as he should haue executed his charge. But the enterprise being discouered to Monsieur de Beaunoir, he tooke speedie order for the reliefe thereof, causing
Roquebrune to loose his head. Meane time, Vidame dealt with the Queene of England, to aide those of the religion, vpon condition, that for the securitie and safegard of her men, she should haue the Towne of New-Hauen deliuered vnto her, without any preiudice vnto the King or to the Realme: whervpon 6000. English men were sent into
Normandie: whereof part were in Roane, where they fought valiantly till the last man: and if they had bene seconded, the issue thereof would haue fallen out otherwise. Some were put into Deepe, the greatest part staying in New-Hauen, vnder the conduct of the Earle of VVarwicke. Roan being taken, the Ringraue came before New-Hauen: where the English men and Scots gaue him many a skirmish. Many meanes were sought to corrupt Monsier de Beauuoir, with promises of fiftie thousand crownes, a coller of the order, and a company of Lanciers: But by no meanes he would consent to yeeld the Towne, nor yet in any sort blemish his honour.
Touching Britaigne, the Duke de Estampes,Britaine. a Gentleman of good and moderate nature, behaued himselfe very indifferently with those of the religion, as long as the Queene-mother seemed to hang in suspence. But warres once kindled, and his Nephew Sebastian de Luxembourg, a cruell man, if euer there were any in France, being ioyned with him for assistant, mutenous companio^s began to stirre, in such sort, that those of the Army of Triumuirat, seemed to sette one vpon the other. But yet those of the religion made good meanes to helpe themselues.
Nowe lette vs see what happened vnto the country of
Guyene,Guyenne during these first troubles. The first of Aprill, 1562. Monluc caused the towne of
Fumel to bee vnwalled: Threw downe certaine houses, and sette them at a fine of three hundreth thousand frankes: to bee payde vnto the widowe and Orphanes, of Monsieur de Fumel, not long before murthered by those of the Towne.
Those of the religion foreseeing the mischiefes that
Monluc wold worke, if he were not preuented, desired Monsieur de Duras to stay in the Prouince, where hee fonud great forces, but hee excused himselfe by the commandement giue^ him from the Prince, to lead certaine forces to Orleans, which was the means of most great miseries, and cruell massacres that happened in that countrie. Those of the religio^ in Bourdeaux, hauing let slip the means to get the Towne peaceably into their ha^ds, while Burie and Mo^luc were absent, that went about to erect their snares, and to assure themselues, they could no more attaine vnto it, for that minding to assaye it once againe, they found so many faint hearted people emong them, that they were constrained to saue the^selues in Duras: whereof the Parliament being informed, caused their houses to be spoiled and thrown downe: threatning all such as they could lay hands vpon: and among the rest, two Ministers named Neufchastle and
Grene.
Monluc had his greatest quarrell against those of
Agen,Agen. who among diuers other enterprises of that Towne, had surely been taken and spoyled by them, had it not beene for the improuidence of Monsieur de Memy, Generall for the warres for those of the religion, in
Guyenne and all the countrie adioyning, wherein hee behaued himselfe with no great honour, as beeing a man rather addicted to his studie, then vnto armes, which in the end made him loose his head vppon a Scaffold.
Burie and Monluc, knowing with whom they had to deale, sought diuers meanes to intrappe those of Argen: and to the same end, caused Captaine Charry to lye about the Towne: but an Ambascado, being set for him, hee was put to flight, leauing 45. of his men dead vpon the ground, and fifteene prisoners. Memy brought great forces into Agen, but knowing not how to imploye them, hee was forsaken by Arpaion and Marchastel: who as then (if hee would haue credited them) could haue ouerthrowne Monluc: who knowing his aduersaries weake conduction, neuer ceased to giue him diuers alarmes. About the end of three weekes, Memies troupes hauing done no good in
Agen, departed and left their companies. To the contrary,
Monluc ceased not to make diuers courses into the countrie, constraining them to supply his want of victuals and munition, his souldiers running to the gates of Agen: and meeting with any of the religion, they put a halter about his necke, and if hee continued constant, they put him to cruell death, or else ransomed, and then killed him. And such as were but weake of faith, after they had made them trot with them, they constrained them to make the signe of the crosse, to say an
Aue Maria, and to consesse and acknowledge the Masse to bee good: yet they were not content there with, but forced them to sweare and blaspheme God, at the least fiue or sixe times togither: which done, they were accounted and holden for good and sufficient Catholikes in
Monluc and Peyrot his sonnes opinions. The seuenth of August, those of Agen repulsed Captaine Bourg, that kept a passage from them full of good prouision: but hauing gotten the place, their souldiers busied themselues about harkening after the sweet wines: so that the next day againe, du Rourg surprised and slewe sixtie of them, dispearsing the rest: whereof diuers passing the riuer, dranke more water, then the day before they had swallowed wine. But the next day insuing, they had their reuenge at
Lerac, where by certaine intelligence, they slew eightie of
Monlucs souldiers: which notwithstanding within 4. daies after, those of Agen perceiuing their towne to be weake, issued out of the Towne all armed, to the number of sixe hundreth men: deliuering the keyes vnto the Consulles, desiring them not to forget the great courtesie shewed vnto them by those of the religion, when they were Maisters of the Towne. Women of good account bare their children in their armes, in a cradle vppon their heads, or else carried them on their shoulders. And in that sort hauing trauelled all night, they found themselues to bee about seuen great leagues from Agen: where they stayed for Duras, that prouided for their securitie.
The next day, those of Agen sought to kill and massacre such as they could intrappe. Burie and Monluc presently came thither, and after all the mooueables had been ceased vpon, and borne away, they ceased vpon the immcoueables, executing diuers prisoners: punishing those that were absent by their piclieres, co^fiscating their goods, as it pleased the^ to appoint. Without the town nothing was heard, but onely of horrible and cruell murthers, and that in the
Bourg of the passage, there were two young children rosted.
Duras hearing of those great mischiefes, marched towards
Lauserte, a Towne in Quercy: which vppon the fifteenth of August, he tooke by force: beeing constrained there vnto
by the braueries of those that were within it: in the Town he slew 567. me^, among which, were 9. score and 14. Priests. Part of those of Agen were within the castle of Roime, that
Duras had committed vnto the charge of Captain Lyouran, where Monluc besieged them, battering the place 3. daies togither. They within, sustaining a furious assault: but in the ende, the number of souldiers that were therein being but small, and Lyouran being slaine, the Castle was forced. Monluc hauing lost about seauen hundreth men, the crueltie he vsed was extreame, not sparing old nor young, killing young children in their mothers armes, and then the mothers. They reserued certaine women, whereof Burie would haue 2. for his part. Monluc behauing himselfe in such fort, that I abhorre to write it.
This happened to those of Agen, but that was not all: For after the ouerthrowe of the Army of Duras, diuers of those that escaped, hauing bene taken, were brought to Agen, a place appointed for the butchery, where they had erected a gybbit, called the consistory: in such sort, that from the time that those of the religion left the Towne, vntill the Edict of peace, there were abone fiue hundreth men executed to death: and the Participants of Monluc, to fil vp their iniquities, banished the women and children out of the Towne: after whom, they sent the souldiers: hanged a Counsellor in his long gowne and square Cap. Not long before this ouerthrowe of Duras, Memy forsaken of all men, thinking to withdraw himselfe into Bearn, was taken prisoner, and led to Bourdeaux. Where by sentence in Court of Parliament, he had his head striken off.
Exployts of Monsieur de Duras, tell his ouerthrowWe must now speake a word of the exployts done by
Monsieur de Duras in Guyenne, vntill his ourthrowe. Hee hauing receiued charge to raise all the forces he could to ayde the Prince, and to march towards Orleans, his intents were often times crossed by diuers meanes: and hauing begunne to rayse certaine forces, hee was put in minde, that he might bee a good meanes with them to assure
Bourdeaux: Which taking no effect, hee determined to seise vppon the Countrey betweene the two Seas, situate betvveene Gerome, and
Dordongne, there to gather his forces. But approching neere Saint
Machaire, in stead of victualls, they shot diuers Muskettes at him, whereby some of his men were slaine: which caused him to assayle and force the Towne: yet much supported by the greate humanitie of
Duras, whome Burie and Monluc then determined to inuade: assuring themselues, that hauing dispersed his forces, they shoulde easilye accomplishe theyr owne desires through out all
Guyenne.
Which being concluded, they ouertooke him hard by
Rozan: where Monluc hauing the aduantage, gaue
Duras a charge, who recouering a litle wood full of Diches, behaued himselfe so well with three hundreth pikes, the rest of his troupes hauing forsaken him, that hee constrained Monluc to retire with the losse of three hundreth men, and Duras about thirtie or more. After that, hee determined to leaue off his enterprise, hauing the conduction of many meane souldiers, and men wholely enemies to discipline: yet hauing pittie of the Country, and hoping that his Souldiers woulde doo better, hee reassembled them. Procuring others, marched towards
Agenois and Quercy, ayding them of Agen as much as possibly he might. But hauing heard what happened therein, after the departure of those of the religion, hee punished those of
Lauserte, and from thence comming to Saint Authony, hee was strengthened by two companies of footemen, led by Marchastel. And as he determined to go to Monsieur de Cursol in
Languedoc, the Counte de la Rorchefoucaut desired him to ioyne with him, and with all speed to march towards Orleans.
To the same end du Bordet, a valiant Gentleman, with
60. light-horse, 200. Argolitiers, and 2. companies of footme^, was sent fro^ Xaintonge, to co^duct Monsieur Duras in the way.
Du Bordet entered Pons, forced S. Satier, wherin were slain twelue Priests, then entered into la Linde, a Towne in
Perigort, wherein he punished certaine seditious persons, that had massacred and cut a poore man of the religion in diuers places of his bodie, filling all his wounds with salt: and hauing ioyned with
Duras and Marchastel, hee determined to punnish those of Sarlat, that had slaine two Gentlemen, and passing by
Caussade, to go to Montauban to fetch Artillerie, and to raise more souldiers, certaine Priests that did much mischiefe, were set vpon and forced within a steeple, and cast headlong out of it vppon the ground: and some others of the principall of the Towne, authors of the massacre committed in that place vpon those of the religion, being committed vnto the Marshall of Guyenne, were executed to death: they placed good Garrison in Realuille, and marching to
Montauban, leauing the conduction of their troupes to
Chaumont, Saint Hermine, and Pere Longue. This was but an vnaduised enterprise of those three Leaders, to leaue their forces in that sort, seeing Burie and Monluc were not farre of, with sixe thousand foote, and diuers horse. But the wise and happie conduction of Chaumont, mended that negligence, deliuering a fierce skirmish vnto Monluc, who for that day would not fight, although
Bury was of the contrarie opinion, considering their great aduantage.
The troupes of Duras beeing safely arriued at
Montauban, vpon the ninth of September, foure daies after,
Bury and Monluc incamped themselues, but being dislodged within three times foure and twentie houres after, Duras marched towards Xaintongue,Ouerthrow of Duras. and in the way forced the Castle of Marcues, wherein heetooke the Bishoppe of Cahors, that had certaine bookes of Magick-art about him, and many receipts to winne the loue of women, but no bookes of Diuinitie. Hee escaped well from beeing hanged, as author of the massacre in
Cahors: in his stead they executed fiue or sixe souldiers. From thence all the troupes came before Sarlat, vpon the first of October. The resistance of the Towne, and the enemies armie, composed of eight thousand foote, and diuers horse approching, made Duras to dislodge. And vpon the eight of October, being a rainie day, hee entered into a Village named Hedreux, his Artillerie and footemenlying at
Ver, halfe a league further. Bury and Monluc hauing by one of their prisoners vnderstood the whole estate of Duras campe, beeing about foure or fiue thousand horse and foote, went forward. But Duras in flead of ioyning his forces togither, and to view his enemies, supposed them to bee but certaine Curriers, and neglecting them, still separated his forces. But hauing soone perceiued his fault, hee determined to retire with a soft pace, and to set his men in safetie.
Puch a valiant Knight, was of the contrarie opinion, saying, that when two armies are neare vnto each other, the first that retireth, giueth aduantage to the other, proouing it by that which happened vnto the French
army vppon S. Lawrence day. Burie and
Monluc perceiuing that Duras began to retire, made haste to ouertake him, and gaue him a charge, where in a maner no resistance was made, whereby they entred so farre into Duras Campe, that they seized vpon the artillery and their carriages, and there the soldiers staying, greedier of praye then of honour, gaue such as had first fled to reassemble, and so to passe the water, throwing downe their arms to flye the easitier: the ouerthrow was of about fiue or sixe hundreth soldiers, and 2500. boyes and pages, with all the artilerie, some of those that were taken prisoners being hanged, specially the Ministers: who by the aduise of the Church, had followed those co^panies. I will recite one particularly. Among the prisoners, there was a Captain called
la Mothe, that fell to Captaine Bazourdans lot. Who not long after meeting with Monluc, hee gaue him diuers stabbes with a dagger, and thrust him through with his rapier, saying these words. Villain thou shalt dye in despight of God. Neuerthelesse to prooue
Monluc a lyer, this poore man, being in that sort borne away and healed, although he had many deadly wounds, woonderfully recouered his health and liued.
Laumosniere ouerthrown by Duras.Duras hauing assembled those that past the riuer, and made two retraits, being aduertised that Captaine
Laumosniere, sent by Monsierde Sansac, stayed for him at Embornet with fiue hundreth men, to make an end of an ouerthrow, not being once abashed, marched right vnto the place, where hearriued about the breake of day: and behaued himselfe so well, that
Laumosniere and all his men, onely three that bare the newes to
Sansac, were slaine in the fielde. After this conflict,
Duras men beganne to leaue him: so that hee arriued at
Orleans with a very small companie, where the peace being once concluded, he dyed.
The 10. of March 1562. Mont de Marsan was taken by certaine of Monlucs forces: those of the religion after many outrages,Mont de Marsan. being constrained to flie into some other place, and to leaue both wines and children. Not long after, sixe of the principall of them, being kept prisoners, had their heads striken off, and three or foure others executed in diuers manners. And a Lancier beeing taken after the peace of Villeneufue de Marsan, was buried quicke: and at Caseras in the moneth of August, a young woman named Ieanne de la Gora, pursued to bee violated, threw her selfe out of a Windowe, and dyed thereof.
The Hystorie of Thoulouse and other places belonging to the Parliament of Languedoc, is very long: but I wil assay to make a breefe rehearsall thereof,Thoulouse. as of the rest. The Edict of Ianuarie hauing beene published therein, things were peaceablye handled vntill the second of Aprill, when by an occasion of a Buriall, those of the Romishe Church, in the Subburbes of Sainct Michael, Sainct Steuen, and Sainct Saluador in Thoulouse, assayled those of the Religion, and hurt greate numbers of them: Killing foure outright, besides diuers more of them that were throwne downe into a well.
The Parliament fauoured this action: but to the contrary, the Capitalles sought by all meanes to represse the sedition, and layde holde vppon some of the chiefe dealers therein: but the tumult still increased, and so continued vntill night, both within and without the Towne. The next day nothing was done, but faire words to appease so great an iniurie: neuerthelesse, the Capitalles pursued the matter so well, that foure of the seditious persons were hanged, and two whipt. But the fyer of deuision began to bee so houe, that those of the religion alreadie threatned with that which after ensued, seized vpon the Town-house, and certain corners of the streetes: which mooued the Parliament in such maner, that presently they sent for al the gentleme^ therabouts to be their aydes, calling the commons to gither, causing it to bee published throughout the Towne, that all men should take weapon in hands to inuade those of the religion, who by the intermission of the Capitalles, assayed to appease that Tumult. Monluc gaue the wheele good passage, by writing to the Parliament, that the Capital de Lanta, new come from the Court lying without the Towne, had promised the Prince, to cause the Towne to hold for him.
The thirteenth of May, the Presidents and Cou^cellors comming forth in their Scarlet gownes, caused it to be cryed throughout the Towne, and in their presence, that all good Catholicques, and faithfull seruants to the King, should take armes and vse them against those of the religion: to take them eyther dead or liuing, and to kill and spoyle them of all they haue without all mercie. Besides that, fiue or six Councellors went crying throughout the Towne, that they should not spare to kill and spoyle: being lisenced thereunto by the Court, with permission both from Pope and the King. The coppie of this proclamation, was presently sent to all the Borrowes and Villages round about: wherewith belles began to be rung in all the steeples of the Towne, and presently after in all the Countrey round about, for foure or fiue Leagues compasse. Thoulonse is one of the greatest and most populos Townes in all France. At which time, there was within it, at the least 25. or thirtie thousand persons of the religion, and of diuers qualities and ages:Horrible Massacre in Thoulouse. and then began one of the most horrible massacries that can be remembred. The prisons were presently filled, and many were knocked on the head, at the entry into it, because it would hold no more. The riuer in short space was couered with dead bodies, and many were throwne out of windowes into the riuer, from whence if they seemed to escape, they were presently slaine with swordes and stones.
Those of the religion that had strengthned them within the Town-house, and in certain other places, defended themselues with great courage, and made diuers sallies, and if treason hadde not beene wrought against them by Captaine Saulx, they had gotten the Pallace, and driuen their enemies out of the Towne, but he put them from that: whereof presently ensued a totall ruine. For the next day beeing the fourteenth, those of the religion perceiuing that of force they must die, resolued to defend themselues, and besides the peeces that they hadde within the Towne-house, wherewith they abashed their enemies, they issued diuers times out of their fortes, to skirmish with the enemie, where betweene them much blood was spilt.The Citizens fight. The same day Bellegarde Lieftenant to the Marshall de Termes, entred into the Towne with his companie of Lanciers. Those of
Terrides and Monluc stayed without to hinder such ayde as might arriue to helpe those of the religion, that held but one gate, to whom about Euening, was sent a letter into the Towne-house to make an accord, where vnto they appeared, onely demaunding assurance of their liues, and the rest of their goodes: with the obseruation of the Edict of Ianuarie, which was refused them. Whervpon each prepared themselues vpon the next day after, to enter into a hotter fight then euer they did. And because the cannon in the Towne-house, did much hurt vnto the Towne, the Councellours and the Court caused more then two hundreth houses to be burnt, and in diuers other places many houses were robbed and spoyled: and among others, the houses of President Bernoy, and Councellour
Chauuet, where two yong maides were rauished in their mothers presence.
Saturday the sixteenth, they had a cruell skirmish, and then those of the Romish Church asked a parley, and had a truce, which truce continuing, it was agreed vpon, that those of the religion leauing their armor and weapons in the Town house, shuld withdraw the^selues with all securitie. And according to that agreeme^t made with the Captains and the Parliament, those of the religion hauing receiued the Communion with teares and solemne prayers, about euening came foorth, where against the faith and promise made vnto them, they tooke all they could lay hold vppon, and committed them prisoners, and those that got out at the gate, called
Villeneufue, many of the^ escaped and were receiued into
Montaubon, and other Towns that held for the religion. The souldiers scattered about the fields, and the Pesants killed and spoyled many of them. The common opinion is, that in this mutinie, there died within the Towne aboue three thousand fiue hundreth persons, as well on the one side as on the other.
The foure and twentieth of May, Burie and
Monluc determining to destroy Montauban, marched thither with an armie of a thousand horse,The first besieging of Montauban and fiue thousa^d foote, wherwith they besieged it, haning two fierce skirmishes within the Towne, in one of them Captaine Saint Michell slewe three launciers, and tooke a goodly horse. The next day the artillerie came thither, many skirmishes being made, wherein Monluc had the woorst, and hardly escaped with his life, his horse hauing been slaine vnder him: the next day, the campe dislodged and made away in great haste, but for what cause it was not known, Monluc hauing lost about sixtie men, but hee spoyled all the houses round about it, and burnt the corne beeing halfe ripe. Not long after, Captaine Saint Michael and his brother beeing attainted of treason and robberie, were slaine in the house of Marchastell within Montauban.
The enemies laye in the Garrisons round about it, which caused those of the twone to erect certaine companies, and a kinde of millitarie Discipline, and then to make issues and courses in the countrie, which fell out with good successe: but not to those of
Castres, who in one recountre, lost betweene foure score and a hundreth Souldiers, in a manner all young men borne within the towne.
The three and twentieth of August, Captaine Bazourdan sent by the Parliament of Thoulouse,Other accidents in Montauban vsed all the meanes hee could to induce
Montauban to fall to some composition, and if they would not do it, yet that at the least those that said they were their friends and could bring forces, would exhort them to make peace.
The last words vsed by Bazourdon, contained a certaine kinde of mockerie touching the confidence that those of
Montauban put in the Lord, but Constant their Minister tooke him vppe for halting. The fift of September, those of
Negropelisse, hauing beene surprised and hardly handled by Captaine Coulumbier, and the Bishoppe of Montauban, they sought to remedie it, but all too late.

The Bishoppe causing sixe of his best prisoners to bee stoned and beaten to death with staues, and their bodies cast into the riuer. In a sallie made vppon the eight of the same moneth, those of
Montauban beeing discouered by a traitor, were put to flight, hauing lost one of the Ensigne-bearers, two Corporalles, two Gentlemen, and tenne souldiers. The same day Marchastel and Duras beeing entered into Montauban, desired that they might take the companies and the Artillerie with them, hauing lodged their armie within the Towne. which constrained the Consuls to graunt to their desires. But their arriuall fell out well for the Towne,The second siege of Montauban. for that within three daies after, Burie and Monluc with nine companies of Lanciers, great numbers of Gentlemen, fiue and twentie companies of footemen, foure companies of Argolitiers, and three companies of Spaniards, each co^panie of foure hundreth men, with fiue ca^nons, three Coluerins, and fiue demy Coluerins, came to besiege Montauban the second time. At their arriuall, there happened a fierce and hard skirmish, the issue thereof being such, that the assaylants left the place which they had taken, and withdrew themselues somewhat further with great losse. Those of the towne left the Maister of the campe to Monsieur Duras, a Sergeant of a band, a Corporall, sixe souldiers, and certaine straungers, with diuers hurt. The next day, beeing the fifteenth of September, the skirmish began againe, to the dammage of the assaylantes, and foure score Spaniards that had set fire in a Mill vpon the riuer of Tar, making good cheere in a farmers house, were surprised and all put to the sword, not one escaping. The execution beeing done by fiue and twentie souldiers of the Towne, that returned laden with armors and other spoyles in the face of the enemie, wherevppon some made foorth to go on the other side of the water to ayde their companions, but their boate ouerwhelmed, and they were almost all drowned. The next day, Duras presented battell vnto Monluc, which he refused, and the next day raised his siege, hauing lost about sixe hundreth men, and the Towne thirtie.
The third siege of Montauban with diuers skirmishes, sallies, escalades, and other warlike practises, to the losse of both parts, continued vntill the fifteenth of Aprill,A third siege of Montauban. that peace was proclaimed within Montauban: and in that third siege the enemie lost (as they themselues confessed) two thousand souldiers, foureteen or fifteen Captaines, Lieftenants and Ensigne-bearers: and diuers Gentlemen of companies, besides a great number of hurt and maimed men, that died in diuers places as they retired.
The Towne lost two Captaines, two Ensigne-bearers, some Gentlemen of companies, and sixtie Souldiers at the most. The pollicie in the watches hauing beene notably well obserued, vntill the end of the Siege.
The fifteenth of March,Carcassone. one thousand fiue hundreth sixtie two, those of the religion at
Carcassone being gone out of the Towne to a Sermon, at their returne found the Gate shut against them, and the Cittizens armed, that saluted them with Caliners: and in that estate they continued vntill the nineteenth of the same moneth, that those within the Towne hauing gotten a Leader, and hauing mustered their men, which they found to bee betweene foure or fiue thousand, they beganne to shoote off their ordinance, and to sound vp drumbes in all parts of the Towne, wherewith those of the religio^ being in smal number, were much abashed, and leauing the subburbs,
saued themselues as well as they might, which those of the towne perceiuing, made after them, slaying some, and hurting others. On the other side, within the base Towne, were slaine Iaques Sabatter his sonne, and three or foure others. The 91. of May, three of the richest houses therein, were sacked and spoyled: and vpon Whitsunday, one of the religion beaten downe in the Subburbes, beeing sore wounded, they cut off his nose, and eares, and pulled out his eyes. After that, fiue prisoners were hanged, many put to great ransomes, and a Gentleman beheaded. Those of Reuel, liuing peaceably,Reuel. vntill the one and twentieth of May, hauing receiued newes of the discipation of Thoulouse, left their goods and houses to go to Castres and other places. The Parliament of
Thoulouse, seeing that, gaue out commission, that if they appeared not in Court within three daies after, their bodies should bee apprehended and committed to prison, and for want of their bodies, their goods of the Iudge and of one hundreth and twelue others of the religion, to bee ceased vpon. One of the number named Martin du Puits, a man that was rich, peaceable, and without reproach or infamie, was taken in a farme without the Towne, and shortly after hanged, his bodie cast vnto the dogs, hauing first blacked his face, hands, and feete, causing it to bee reported, that he had the diuell within him. Others beeing taken and ledde vnto
Thoulouse, were condemned to the Gallies, or else put to great fines, or banished.
Touching those that were absent, the Consuls and others, tooke their mooueables, tooke notes of their immooueables, tooke all they could find from the women, and yet constrained them to lodge and finde certaine souldiers, constrained with blowes to go to heare Masse, and their children rebaptised.
Those of the religion beeing the strongest within
Limoux, vppon a Sunday beeing the first of March, 1562. about euening, there happened a sedition,Limoux. wherein two of the Romish Church were slaine, and three more vppon the seuen and twentieth of Aprill after, the tumult at that time being raised againe. Wherevppon there fell open warre betweene both parts, those of the religion beeing strengthed with fiftie souldiers that came from Foix, withstood Pomas that came to ayde their aduersaries with tenne companies, and eight hundreth Bandoliers, most part Spaniards, conducted by a notable murtherer called Peyrot Ioupian. Presently after the desolation of Thoulouse, the Parliament sent thither the Marshall de Mirepoix, that besieged and battered the great Towne, (which was holden by those of the religion) with seuenteen peeces of Artillerie, but all in vaine. Wherevppon hee deuised another meanes, and vppon the sixteenth of Iune he entered therein: by reason whereof, he executed all kind of monsterous cruelties, violating women and children most detestably without any description of religion. The Minister was slaine, two Gentlemen and 60. souldiers taken prisoners, were hanged. A widdowe of great account hauing redeemed her onely daughters virginitie with a great summe of mony, the villaine that had sworne to defend her, violated her in presence of her mother, and then killed them both.
Those of the Romish Church were nothing spared, for that some of them were likewise slaine. The praye that Marshall de Mirepoix had for his share, was esteemed to bee at the least aboue a hundreth thousand Crownes. And the furie continued in such sort within that poore Towne, that after the publication of the peace, at one time fourteene of the religion comming thither, were all slaine: and one of Monsieur de Ioyeuses seruants hauing beene found to followe one of the iudges that was not well thought on, was stabbed and rifled in the open streetes.
The fifteenth of March 1592. both the parties within
Beziers, were readie to come to handie-blowes,Beziers. and not long after, the newes of the massacre of Vassy being published, those of the religion prouided for their safeties: and hauing brought certaine souldiers into their houses, in the beginning of May, the Images were throwne downe in all their Churches.
Monsieur de Ioyeuse allied to the Constable, vsed all the meanes hee could to suppresse those of the religion: but Monsieur de Baudine, appoynted commaunder ouer the troupes of the religion in
Languedoc, while the warres continued, interrupted him: and withall, ceased vppon Magalas a very strong place, which much annoyed the Towne, forced Espignan, and there put most part of two companies of Bandoliers to the sword.
Ioyeuse followed by fiue thousand men, foure Cannons, two Coluerins, two demy coluerins, and foure field peeces, went to besiege the Castle of Lignan, neare to Reziers, wherein were but twelue souldiers, with munition onely for two daies.
Baudine gaue Ioyeuse so much to doo, that they in the meane time saued themselues: which done, he went to Lezignan, that held against the cannon shotte, but at the second assault it was taken: and hauing by composition taken two companies of souldiers that kept Montagnac, with promise to saue their liues, falsifying his promise, hee put foure of the principall of them to the sword. From thence he marched to Pezenas, where Baudine met him, and had ouerthrowne him, if it had not beene for the treason of the Maister of his campe, who set things in such bad order, that Baudines troupes were the^selues in daunger to bee put to the sword: and there hee lost one hundreth, or an hundreth and twentie souldiers. This Marshall not long after dying in Montpeslier, confessed to haue receiued fiue hundreth Crownes of Monsieur de Ioyeuse before the encounter, with promise of twise as much more. This losse, and the separation of the troupes being much more, produced a parley, wherin Ioyeuse made so many goodly offers, that they suffered him to enter into Pezenas: but beeing entered, hee shewed them what hee ment, killing certaine hurt souldiers and Inhabitants, that could not serue in the warres. His crueltie caused him to loose Beziers, where when he thought to enter, he found a face of wood, and those of Beziers readie in field, that forced and burnt Lignan, hauing ouerthrowne two companies that kept it. The warre beeing wholly turned against Montpeslier, those of Beziers fayled to be surprised by night, vppon the sixteenth of October, their enemies hauing secretly gotten close vnder the walles. But it chanced that a Drummer of the Town being drunke, about two of the clock at night suddainly rose vp, and thinking it had beene day, beganne to sound the Diana or morning watch, which caused the enemie to flie, whose lathers in the morning were found in the ditches. Wherevppon seuen or eight traitors were apprehended, and being found guiltie, were executed for the fact. And within eight daies after, the enemie came by day, close to the Barriers: but to their losse, the principall of their troupe beeing hurt, where of he died. The second of Nouember, those of
Beziers sent two companies to ayde Montpeslier: and at the end of ten daies, those of Beziers ouerthrew Captaine
Lauragues, with his companie neare to
Cessenon. Not long after, there happened a thing worthie memorie, thereby to note the couetous desire of some men, and by the iudgement of God to shewe the mischiefe of ciuill warres. Anthony Sauin, seruant to a Cittizen of Beziers, beeing taken in a skirmish, the enemie offered to exchange him for a horse, that one of their Captaines had lost in the same skirmish. But they had rather suffer Sauin to bee hanged, then part from the horse: yet not long after, at another sallie, this horse being strong in the mouth, running with great force, bare a Gentleman (to whom it had been giuen) into the middle of his enemies, who presently killed the man, and got the horse againe.
The same month, those of Beziers beeing much troubled for mony to pay their souldiers, digging a ditch in the place where the Chapitre of Saint Nazaire vsed to melt their belles, they found a great table of siluer, which was presently broken and coyned into mony at
Montpeslier, wherewith they payed their souldiers: that done, they heard newes of the battell of Dreux, so that as then it was necessarie for them to looke better to the safetie of the place, so that hauing brought victualles out of all places into their Towne, they tooke
Seruian by assault, forced the Garrison of Casouls: by meanes of Monsieur Crussol, they tooke order within it to end certaine controuersies that rose betweene those of the Towne, and certaine strangers, wherevppon it happened, that one within the Towne, moued that they had driuen his companions out of the place, meeting Anthony Duchemin, a Doctor of Phisicke, a man of great learning and iudgement, (vppon the Rampiers) threwe him ouer the wall, whereof hee died, to the great griefe of all the Towne: the murtherer sauing himself in the enemies campe. These things happened in the monthes of Ianuary and February, and in the beginning of March vpon the seuenteenth day of the same month Captaine
la Coste, commaunding within Beziers, tooke Villeneufue les Beziers by assault. Presently after peace being made, the Garrisons that laye about Beziers retired, and the Powne remained in quiet, inioying the exercise of the religion, which not long after, Marshall de Danuille tooke from them.
Those of the religion in Montpeslier vnderstanding what had past in Thoulouse and else where, made themselues the strongest: to them came Baudine,Montpeslier Grille, Bouillargues, Thouras, and
Montuaillant, that enterprised to besiege Frontignan: but there hee found a hard partie: Ioyeuse going thither to ayde them, was repulsed by Bouillargues and Grille: but in the meane time, two fregates of Prouinciers entered into the towne: which constrained
Baudine to return vnto Montpeslier, where hee found warre, causing the Subburbes to bee raised, that in a manner were as great as the Towne: by which meanes there were 30. Churches throwne downe. This beating downe of the Subburbes was a great discommoditie to the enemie, that were constrained to incampe a French league from the Towne, where they assayled an olde Tower without flancards, and constrained certaine Harquebusiers that were within it to saue the^selues, with promise of their liues: but at their comming foorth they slewe them all. They did as much to the Captaine and twentie souldiers, that solde them the Castle of
Maguelonne: for as they issued, they were all put to the sword.
At the same time, the Barron des Adrets, vpon the thirteenth of September arriued in Baudines campe: and the same day at night, assayled the enemies campe with so great courage, that if they had pursued their enterprise vntill morning, they had ouerthrowne the whole armie: but about midnight they sounded a retrait, and three daies after, both he and his, went backe againe with as much haste as they made thither, yet he left three companies of Argolitiers hard by
Montpeslier, that made sharp warre vpon the Bandoliers. The enemies hauing taken and presently hanged two Ministers: some of their prisoners within Montpeslier were serued in the like sort.
The memorable tourney of S. Gilles.Baudine vnderstanding that Messieurs de Suze and Sommeriue principalles of the Army Triumuirat, in a part of Languedoc, had passed the riuer of Rhosne, with about three thousand foote, and foure hundreth horse, two Canons and a Culuerin, brought his Campe into Montpeslier, and sent
Grille to put certaine shot within S. Gilles, a little Towne lying vpon the Rhosne: hee hauing the conduct of three companies of prouinciall Argolitiers, with six hundreth foote, vnder the charge of Captaine Rapin. Bouillargues and Albenas, with their horse went to Nismes. All these troupes ioyned togither, minded to ayde S. Gilles, and made in all, six hundreth horse, and eight hundreth foote, and departing from Nismes vpon the 27. of September, about halfe a mile from S. Gilles, they surprised three horsemen of Prouence, whereof they slew two, and sauing the third, by him they vnderstood the disorder of the enemies Camp, by which meanes, they set forward, and beeing discouered, the army of Suze and Sommeriue, both Captaines and soldiers began to flie, with the greatest feare that euer was heard. Bouuillargues in stead of going straight to S. Gilles, began to set vpon those that fled, where hee founde no resistance, but had worke inough to kill them at his pseasure: not one of them once turning his face: Grille on the other side, charged them likewise: in such sort, that there were slain and drowned to the number of two thousand men. The boates being stayed by some of the horsemen, the rest flying as fast as they coulde towards Fourques an Aiguesmortes: where they could not safely arriue, but some of them were met withall, all the carriage and prouision of the Camp was taken, and in Suze and Sommeriues chests, were fou^d diuers strange commissions. The bootie was great, because they were furnished in all sorts as if they had gone to a wedding: and among others of theyr Armours, they found great numbers of violes, and bookes of loue, that were all broken and cut in peeces. The two cannons were taken with twentie two ensignes, and the guydon of the Coronel, and laid vp in Nismes: The Culuerin being sunke in the riuer of
Rhosne where it could not bee halled vp againe. Not one man of the religion dyed at that time by the hands of the enemie, that vsed nothing but their feete, as their best instruments for that time. Onely two of their men, slaine by their own companie, hauing forgotten the watch-word which at that time was Salomon: and to the contrary, certaine Spaniards and Italians remembring it, entred among them, but their to^gues bewraying them, they sped as wel as the rest.
An Ambuscado of importance.Not long before, those of the religion had receiued great greefe by the death of one of the Gremians, braue Captaines, and of young Maillane, hauing beene surprised and ouerthrowne in an ambuscado, by them set for the enemie: but before thy dyed, they sold their skins at a deare prise, hauing slaine a great number of those that assailed them: among the which, was Peyrot Loupian, commaunder of the Bandoliers. The first of October, they receiued an other cooling,Ouerthrow of Captaine Grille. for that Captaine Grille proude of his victorie, and despising diuers good aduises, being ouerthrowne at
Arenasses, with the losse of one hundreth or one hundreth and twentie souldiers. Baudine ranne thither to relieue him, and slaying a great number of the enemies, brought
Grille to Montpeslier, yet the ouerthrowe was so great, that some flying to Lunel, other to Maugueul, the rest to
Sommiers, hardly the third part got into the Towne, so that presently they could not assembly togither. Ioyeuse on the other side, perceiuing his armie daily to decrease, by sicknesse and other necessities, began to parley, wherby he obtained passage to retire. Yet his Garrisons in the valley of Montferrant, made diuers courses euen to the Gates of Montpeslier, yet to his losse, in hope by certaine intelligences, that hee had to get the Towne, discouered by two of the principall actors, who beeing condemned for other crimes, vppon the scaffold confessed their treasons.
The Captaines, Grille and Bouillargues, vpon the ninth of October wanne a Tower called la Carbonniere, cituate by
d'Aguismortes, and brought Barkes thither, wherewith they bare away the assalt of Requais,A good thing for the commoditie of those of the religion. wherof those of the religion made great profit towards the charges of their warres. To returne to
Ioyeuse, beeing at Perzenas, by meanes of a certaine traitor hee made a new enterprise vpon Montpeslier: but his treason beeing discouered, and Baudine hauing taken a little towne vppon the riuer of Rhosne, called le Bourg, he besieged Agde: where Captaine Sanglas commaunded.Agde.
The first of Nouember the assault was giuen, which continued 4. houres, where they fought at hand blowes, those that were besieged making braue resistance, pursuing their enemies a great way without the breach: among the which, a woman behaued her selfe most valiantly with a sword. And at the same time, they repulsed the enemie that assayled them in another place of the towne. The next day they were assisted and strengthened, by the ayde that a souldier of the towne named Trencaire, brought them from Beziers, being sixe score Harquebusiers led at a certaine houre, through water that ran as high as their horse saddles, bearing their flaskes and a bagge of powder (to srue them at their need) at the end of their caliuers.
The 3. day of the moneth, Ioyeuse commaunded to giue a second assault, but it tooke no great effect, so that such as serued therein, spedde but hardly: whereby the next day about midnight, hee trussed vp his courage, his campe beeing diuided into three parts, one of them marching towards Gignac,Ouerthrowe of one of the part of Ioyeuse. was so brauely encountred by
Bouillargues, that he slewe two hundreth seuentie foure of their men in the place: among the which, were three of the principall Leaders. But for his part hee lost not a man, onely the poore Pesant that was his guide, slaine by a souldier, because hee knewe not the watchword.
Bouillargues went to Nismes, and beeing aduertised that three hundreth men lying in Aramon, made diuers courses to the gates of Bagnols, found meanes to intrappe them by an Ambascado, where most of them were slaine, drowing a Frigat which they brought with them. Not long after, hee tooke Saint Laurent des Arbres, in
Contat, driuing thence fiue and thirtie Italian Lanciers, sixtie Argolitiers, and a companie of footemen, hauing lost seuen men at the myne, and slaine certaine Italians.
After that time, Montpeslier continued in peace, vntill the end of the warres, that Monsieur de Caylus sent by the King and Queene to proclaime the peace in Languedoc, shewing
Monsieur de Crussol Gouernour of Prouence, and all those of the religion, that the King and his mother were well pleased to pardon all whatsoeuer they had done for their iust defence, houlding them for good and loyall subiects, with thankes for their good seruices done, for the good of the Common-wealth: which done,The king acknowledgeth those of the religion, for his faithfull subiects, approuing their tust defence, and giuing them thanks. by vertue of certaine letters pattents, deliuered vnto him in Amboise, vpon the
6. of Aprill, hauing heard the declarations made vnto him by those of the religion, that besought him, that from thencefoorth their enemies might vse no more acts of hostillitie against them, and that Ioyeuse that had brought the Spaniards into the Realme, might not be their Gouernour, hee caused the edict to bee proclaimed within Montpeslier.
Touching the declaration of those of Toulouse and other places, committed infinite mischiefes after the edict of peace:
Ioyeuse was made Lieftenant of Languedoc, the principall Gouernment beeing giuen to Monsieur de Danuille, a Capitall enemie to those of the religion, and Crussol put out.
Let vs speake somewhat of that which happened in those miserable times, in Viuarets, Rouergue, Giuaudan, and the Counte
de Foix: which done, wee will speake of Lyonnois,Vutarets. Nonnay. Dauphine, and Prouence. Those of the religion in Nonnay, in the moneth of Aprill, one thousand fiue hundreth sixtie two, beeing become Maisters of the Towne, presently after, the Images were pulled downe, and a famous Chase named
les Sainctes Vertus, being opened, was publikely burnt. Yet after that, they liued peaceably vntill the end of Angust, that their Gouernour named Sarras, threatned with a siege, and perceiuing the Towne to bee vnfurnished of armes, vppon the seuen and twentieth of October about euening, issued foorth, and the next morning about the breake of the day, they were at Saint Estienne in Forest, a small Towne, much renowmed for the great quantitie of armes that are made therin: and suddainly setting fier on the gates, hee entered: which done, hee tooke and packed vppe all the armes that hee found therein, without committing other excesse. But hauing a long retrait to make, his troupes were ouerthrowne, himselfe taken prisoner, his brother fore wounded, and about sixe score slaine and hurt, and hardly handled. The poore Inhabitants destitute of armes, men, and a Gouernour, beganne to flie one after the other: but had not time to do it, for that the last of the moneth, Monsieur de S. Chaumont their mortall enemie, sent by the Duke de Nemours, who as then made warre vppon those of Lyonnois, surprised two gates, and entered into the Towne,First taking that was sacked and pilled, not leauing so much as the barres, lockes and hinges of the doores and windowes, much humaine blood beeing shedde vppon the earth, with infinite and most horrible blasphemies, spit out against the heauens.
A Locke-smith beeing willed to despight and blaspheme God, refusing to do it, was hewen in peeces with Courtlelasses: for the same cause likewise, a Pesant was striken dead with the great end of a caliuer. A poore Nayle-maker of the age of eightie yeares, because hee would not giue himselfe vnto the Diuell, was drawne about his shoppe by the eares, and after beeing layde vppon his anuile, they beate his head in peeces with his Hammer. And fire beeing set in one of the Gates, burnt two and twentie houses.
Monsieur d'Achon made also the like spoyle among the Villages, and about the latter end of December, Monsieur de Saint Martin, Lieftenant to Crussol in
Viuarets, beeing come to Nonnay repaired the walles, and made it defenceable, leauing certaine Garrisons therein, vnder the Captains
Prost, le Mas, and Montgros, that were besieged vppon the tenth of Ianuary, 1563. by 4000. men commaunded by Saint Chaumont, who not beeing very nimble at forcing of places, tooke another course, presenting composition for the assurance both of the strangers and the Towne. This composition accepted, Achon would beginne with the straungers (that withdrewe themselues) and put them to the sword: but beeing valiantly repulsed by Montgros, hee went to discharge his chollor about the Towne, robbing and killing all that hee met, not sparing sects nor age. And notwithstanding the promises giuen and sworne,The second taking. about euening Saint Chaumont let the footemen enter into the Towne, to whom for their watch-word was giuen, the double word of Gods death: wherewith all crueltie whatsoeuer could bee deuised, was then vsed. Three of the chiefe of the Towne, were cast downe headlong out of a Tower, in the presence and by the commaundement of Saint
Chaumont, diuers others were throwne downe to make sport: among the which were two young laborours, who not beeing able to furnish two Testons which the Souldiers asked of them, made that deadly leape. Some were burnt within their houses, throwne out of the windowes, others killed vppon the ground, stabbed in the streetes. The prisoners set to sale, and if they found not any to buy them, they murthered them in the place: the houses burnt to ashes, if none were found that would paye mony for them: whereof they burnt sixe score: women and maids were must shamefully handled:Extreame desolation. a poore young woman being found hidden with her husband within a house, was rauished in his presence: and then compelled to holde the Rapier in her hand, wherewith one of them thrusting her arme, she killed her husband.
Whatsoeuer the souldiers could not beare away, was broken and spoyled, in such sort, that many sellers ran full of wine let out of the vesselles, the pipes being pearsed with Pistoll shotte. Saint
Chaumont caused the greatest part of the walles to be broken, beating downe the Towers, and tooke away the Gates: which done, went to the like to Bonlieu, a small Towne, about halfe a myle from
Nonnay. But in despight of all these furies, the rest of the Inhabitants of Nonnay assembled togither, and had their Minister, and in Anno. 1564. the exercise of the religion, which continued therein vntill the yeare of our Lord, one thousand fiue hundreth ninetie foure, when wee beganne to write this Historie, the Towne being restored, and people increased by the most singular and speciall fauour of God.
In the Counte de Foix, Mousieur de Pailles commanded as Seneschall for the King of Nauarre, who ruled his actions as the winde blew:The Counts de Foix. and fedde those of the religion with faire words, vntill such time as hauing receiued newes of the desolation of Thoulouse, hee vsed subtill meanes to cause those of the religion to issue out of Foix, whom hee feared: his pretence was, that they beeing known to haue broken downe the Images, hee should bee constrained to cast them in prison, which hee desired not to doo: and as the wolfe hauing sent away the dogges, entereth into the folde and deuoureth the sheepe, so Pailles hauing made such as had both eyes and hands, to go out of Foix, entered presently into the Towne, committed (such as pleased him) to prison, and gaue such analarme to the rest, that hee made them glad to inuent the meanes to flie. Of those whom hee held prisoners, two had their armes and legges cut off, and then beheaded: two others burnt, and sixe hanged: presently after, two and twentie others were likewise executed, and tenne condemned to the Gallies. The goods of such as went out of the Towne, were exposed and giuen for a pray vnto the souldiers: these extreame rigors put all the other Townes within the Countie in such feare, that they did whatsoeuer Pailles would command, except
Pamiers,Pamiers. a Towne wherein were great numbers of the religion, who perceiuing themselues to bee exposed to the furie of the Pesants that were in armes, determined not to depart from thence. And while they expected some outcries and violences, the plague happened in the Towne, which freed them from their enimies, the crueltie of death hauing surmounted the auarice of the most mutinous.
Touching those of the Romish Church within the Towne, the richest and such as had most meanes and greatest forces to hurt them, fledde out of it, and the meaner sort was so much diminished by the plague, that in short space there died three thousand: in which number, there was not aboue fistie of the religion: and which is more, other that had beene persecuted in diuers places, came thither, in such sort, that they became Maisters of the Towne, hauing death for a rampart to their liues: for that the Queen of Nauarre to whom Pamiers belonged, was much troubled to looke vnto her selfe in her chiefe countrie of Bearn. But they did so well, that after the ouerthrow of Duras, they sent sixtie souldiers vnder the conduct of Captaine Honorat, to ayde those of Castres, about 2. daies iourney from thence.
Honorat marched in safetie, vntil he came within three leagues of
Castres, and beeing pursued and hardly charged, hauing lost tenne or twelue of his men in fight, hee tooke a house standing in the fields, where hee held himselfe from eight of the clocke in the morning, till three in the afternoone, that ayde came vnto them from Castres: whither one of the companie ranne in all haste to certifie them. Hauing behaued themselues valiantly within Castres, about sixe weeks after they returned to Pamiers, which Pailles beganne to threaten, and brought a companie with them from Castres to strengthen the Towne, which was about the eight of December: and hauing trauersed many daungers, in the end they got into the Towne. All the moneth of Ianuarie passed ouer, in deuising of meanes to surprise and intrappe them: where the end bredde mortall warre. Wherein Honorat accompanied by two valiant Gentlemen surnamed les Lombats, and eight and thirtie others, made an enterprise vppon Tarascon in
Foix.Tarascon in Foix. The Viscount
de Seres and his brother, with three hundreth men set vppon them, constraining them to take the Mountaines, wherein they that followed them, where themselues intrapped, in such manner, that not onely the Vicount and his brother were slaine, but the most part of their men, the rest beeing scattered in such sort, that Honorat returned quietly to
Pamiers, leauing the Lombats in their ordinarie place, called
les Cabanes: where not long after, (because they had forsaken the traine and companie of Bandoliers, yeelding themselues vnto the religion, by the means and instruction of two maides, rauished by them at the sacking of Montsegur, and after married vnto them) they were cruelly pursued by those of the Romish Church, and in the end saued themselues in Castres. The Priestes of Pamiers for their parts, vsed all the meanes they could to ouerthrowe and spoyle those of the religion: diuers enterprises beeing made, whereof the principall being discouered by interception of letters, the mischiefe sell vppon the inuentors: for the souldiers entring into the Cellers of foure Fryers that shoulde haue lette in Pailles and others, dispatched (as it is very likely) whatsoeuer they founde therein: for after that time, they were neuer seene nor heard of any more.
This report put the Priests and Chanons in such feare, that they fledde to the Towne of Foix, their houses, as also the Bishops Pallace, beeing sacked and spoyled: whatsoeuer the Ministers and the Gouernour could saye or doo. Wherevppon the newes of peace ensued: and in the beginning of Maye, there fell so cruell a hayle, that came three times euery eight dayes, and beare the Countrey in such sort, specially about Foix, that there could neyther fruite nor green hearb be seen in all the Countrey, no more then in the middle of winter. The Chanons of
Pamiers, to whome the common people imputed the cause of that hayle, were constrained (to shun the Commons) to goe out of Foix, and to remaine at Maugansy, where we will leaue them, to come to
Lyonois.
About the thirtieth of April, Monsieur de Tauanes came out of Burgongne,Lyonnis. and stayed within three miles of Lyons: making account to assayle the towne, but it fell out otherwise: although as then hee hadde aboue fiue thousand men, besides three thousand Italians, conducted by the Counte de Anguesole, and paide by the Pope. Those Italians beeing the greatest Brigands then liuing, brought with them diuers Goates, and vsed the carnall companie of brute Beasts, which was the cause, that in euery place where they came, men detested their abhomination.
All the Goates being killed and cast vnto the dogges,Lyons besieged. by the Country Pesants, for the space of a moneth, while Monsieur de Tauanes had that great company togither, he had many braue skirmishes about Lyons: whereby the inhabitants durst not sette their vines but in Gardens bordering vppon the Towne. But because Tauanes pleased not the Triumuirat, they sent the Duke de Nemours for Generall of the Armie, with a great number of horses, and the Rutters of the Counte Rockendolfe.
Tauanes not knowing how to discharge himselfe of the displeasure he had procured, by his affaires about Lyons, was exceeding glad of the arriuall of the Duke de Nemours: and therevppon, vnder a fained discontentment, presently withdrewe himselfe into his gouernment of Burgongne.
Nemours with all his forces, went into Vienne, which hee hadde by intelligence, and while hee soiournied there, victualles beganne to bee scarce with them of Lyons. Wherevppon
Soubize called Des Adrets, and the Prouinceaux, that thereby hee might bee strong inough to keepe the fielde. But because the hope hee expected else-where failed him, hee sent Des Adrets to fetch more ayde out of Dauphine. Which hauing done, and bringing his troupe, beeing of foure or fiue thousand foote, and foure hundreth horse, was sette vppon by the Army of Nemours, hard by Beaurepaire, and put to flight: but yet with small losse, which was done vppon thee nineteenth daye of October, whereby his troupes reassembling thither, mette altogither, and not yet beeing pursued by the Duke de Nemours, hee at that time slipt an occasion of some greate importance.

Des Adrets incamped himselfe within two myles of
Vienne, and for the space of three weekes that hee lay there, hee entertained the Duke de Nemours with skirmishes: meane time,
Soubize got victualles from diuers places.
About that time, it chaunced that a souldier bringing a packet from Orleans vnto Soubize, deliuered it into the handes of the Marshall de Brissac, who therein hauing found a letter from the Admirall, where among other thinges hee said, that touching
Adrets, as much as hee might, he must indure the light toyes of his braine, and entertaine him, least of an insolent person, they should make him to become madde and without sence: wherevppon in all haste hee sent Saint Sernin, a Gentleman of Dauphine, vnto the Duke
de Nemours and des Adrets, to practise somewhat between them,By what meanes Adrets left the partie of the religion. which at the first was secretly handled, but
Soubize going to the campe, the next day after that S. Seruin had spoken to Adrets, presently perceiued some alteration, which in time he prouided for: and from that time setting some to watch
Adrets, they presently discouered his intent, who by messengers hauing co^municated with the duke de Nemours, and then speaking with him personally, brake vp his armie. Nemours, who alreadie made account to possesse Lyons and
Dauphinois, went nearer vnto the town, and by skirmishes sought to impeach the Towne of victuals: vpon the mountaine of Tarare hee ouerthrewe 80. horse, that came from Orleans to Lyons: and on the other side, stretched foorth his armes to gripe Romans and
Valence. But because it was requisite to beare all his bodie thither, thinking to come time ynough to intrappe Lyons, seeking to gripe ouermuch in one hand, he lost that hold hee had. For marching straight to Vienne with all his armie, Soubize that slept not, presently made so many men to issue out to fetch corne from
Dombes, that hee recouered great store.
Those that Nemours had left for guard, forsooke keyes, places, and barnes, except fortie that kept the Castle of
Treuoux, who thinking to saue the honour of their companions by keeping a tower, nor being able to defend themselues, neither yet yeeld it vppe, their obstinacie was punished by a traine of powder, that made them all leape higher then ordinarily they vsed to do, and to burie their carkasses within the olde ruines of that broken Tower. On the other side,
Soubize caused Adrets to bee taken, and by that meanes the affaires and pretences of Nemoures touching Dauphine, conuerted into smoke.
But thinking to bee more fortunate by Atturneys, then in person, he sent to the Bishoppe du Puy,Escaladoes presented (but in vaine) to take Lyons. and to Saint Chaumont, saying, that seeing Lyons wanted souldiers, their men of warre beeing turned to bee marchants of corne, they should assay to enter by scalado into the towne. But Soubize that spared not mony to entertaine spies in euery place, beeing well aduertised thereof, tooke such order therein, that Saint Chaumont in steed of approaching, was forced to retire. Nemours determined to supply their default, and at two seuerall times with all his forces, vppon hope that his participants within Lyons would assist him, hee presented the Escalado in diuers places, but hee was but badly serued by his men, both within and without the Towne, and hardly repulsed by
Soubize, that gaue him occasion to seeke other meanes to get
Lyons.
He holpe himselfe with the newes of the battel of
Dreux, and about the end of December, caused the King and Queene to write vnto Soubize, to desire him to yeelde the Towne of Lyons to the Duke de Nemours.
While Soubize made answere therevnto: one named
Marc Herlin, one of the Kings receiuers within Lyons, hauing for a time entertained certaine souldiers, in the ende vsed to ride out well armed and horsed, and to skirmish with the enemie. In the moneth of Februarie 1563. hauing beene taken in a skirmish, thought vppon a deuise both to saue his life, as also to deceiue the Duke de Nemours: desiring Lignerolles whom hee knewe, to get him licence to speake with the Duke,A deuice wrought against the Duke de Nemours. to whome hee was to vtter some matters of great importance. Men that are desirous of newes, doo in a manner beleeue whatsoeuer is told vnto them: which in any sort, may bee any shewe of the effecting of theyr purpose: and so it chaunced vnto Nemours, who by the discourse that Herlin made, beleeued that Lyons should bee taken and surprised at Sainct Iusts Gate, which Herlin promised to keepe open for him.
Wherevpon Herlin was sette at libertie, as if he had escaped away: and beeing in Lyons, hauing discouered all that had past betweene him and the Duke de Nemours vnto Soubize, hee hadde more recourse vnto Nemours, with whom the day of execution was appointed to bee, vpon the 7. of March, 1563. about eight of the Clocke in the morning. Three thousand footemen, according to the signe giuen vnto them, entered without impeachment into the Subburbes of Saint Iust: which they found not strange, because they were well aduertised, that no watch was holden in those Subburbes: beeing entered, and marching towardes the Gate, Herlin that ranne before them, and was their guide, hauing entred at the wicket, presently shut it against them: and presently therevppon all the great Ordinance was discharged vppon them: besides two or three hundreth Muskettes, which in the night time hadde beene brought into the Bulwarkes, and placed along vpon the walles, with three or foure thousand Harquebusiers, discharging all togither vppon that fearefull troupe: and the more to spoyle them, they sent sixe hundreth Caliuers of the best shotte out of the Towne, ledde by Blacons, Poyet, Andefroy, and
Entrages, that made an ende of dispersing of all them.
There you might haue seene a meruailous spoile, and all kindes of death, some being slain, others smothered and beaten down: the rest throwing themselues off from the walles, or else intrapped in the snares: so that if the horsemen conducted by Poncenat, had made haste to issue at the Gate assigned vnto them, and had marched thither, not one of all those three thousand had hardly escaped. But howsoeuer it fell out, there lay foure hundreth of them dead within the Subburbes, besides those that dyed without: the hurt men beeing in greater number: which dyed as they stedde away, eyther to the Campe, or to
Vienne, or else were borne away in Waggons. Nemours was not onely auditor, but an eye witnesse of this Tragedie: whereby he conceiued such displeasure, that he thought he should haue dyed with greefe: whereby he stirred not out of his bed in two moneths after. Meane time, peace was concluded: by the which, those of the religion had the exercise of the religion within the towne, wherein they made two Churches: the armie being within and about it, retiring.

Now let vs consider the estate of Dauphine, about the beginning of the moneth of March 1562. the Parliament of Grenoble began to weake^ the Edict of Ianuarie as much as it might.Dauphine. And not long after, Des Adrets, before being Colonel of the troupes of Dauphine, Prouence, and
Languedoc, beeing by the gentlemen and notablest Personages assembled in Valence, established chiefe commander in
Dauphine, with prouision till they shoulde receiue some further and more certaine commaundement from the Prince.Des Adrets made head commander in Dauphine. Presently newes came, that the Images were broke^ down in many prouinces of France, which was the cause that they could not be warrented within Dauphine. Des Adrets aduertised those of the religion in Grenoble, and by letters full of authoritie, co^manded the Parliament to driue certaine seditious persons out of the Town, which he named vnto them, and among other, the second President: the Attourney Generall: the Aduocate of the Towne: and the fourth Consull, whome he threatned with death they neither stayed commandement, nor executioner, but presently retired only to execute an enterprise which they had vndertaken, thereby to make themselues maisters of the town, vpo^ the next night ensuing: neuerthelesse, their intent beeing discouered, they saued themselues in good earnest: Which knowne, vpon the first of Maye, those of the religion seized vpon the Gates of Grenoble, and by consent of the Deputies of the Parliament, of the Chamber of accounts, and of the Councell for the towne, entred into the Fryers Church, which they cleansed of all her Images, and Alters: therein to vse the exercise of religion, not dooing any other hurt vnto the Fryers.
After that, by common consent, they prouided for the safetie of the towne, wherein Des Adrets sent a company of footemen led by Captaine Commung: and after came thither with other troupes, both horse and foote, thereby to resist Monsier de Maugiron, that termed himselfe Lief-tenant Generall in Dauphine: Against whom he published a decree to seize vpon his body, terming him a seditious person, and one that violated the Kings Edicts. All those Souldiers assembled within Grenoble: first made warre against the Images, and then entred into the fielde, and tooke the Castles of la Bussiere, and de Mirebel. Des Adrets, hauing made a course to Lyons, vpon the fourth of Iune, returned to Grenoble, where he seized vpon the reliques, causing an inuentory thereof to be made, al being waied and valued, amounted to 260. Marks of Siluer, which was sent to Valence: and the next day, the great Charterhouse lying three miles distant within the Mountaines, in a huge and very strong place, was taken and burnt.
Massacre at Auranges.Meane time, those of Aurange were Massacred in this manner, after the Massacrie at Vassie. Those of the religion perceiuing
Fabrice Serbellonne, the Popes kinsman, to lye with his forces within Auignon, beeing but a small halfe dayes iourney from thence, seized vppon the Towne. On the other side, in the ende of May, the troupes of Prouence ioyned themselues with those of Fabrice at
Cauaillon, staying the commoditie to enter into Auranges, where they had intelligence: which those of Aurange sought to preuent, strengthening themselues with sixe hundreth souldiers. Thervpon it chaunced, that the President Parpaille comming by Boate with prouision of Armes, which hee hadde brought to Lyons, was betrayed into the handes of his enemies, in a place about fiue miles from
Auranges: which mooued those of the religion, with all speed to send thither their greatest forces, conducted by Captain Saint
Andre, to relieue their prisoner: whereof
Fabrice being aduertised, the next day in the morning came before
Auranges with his armie, and some cannons, wherewith hee beganne the batterie.
Those that were gone to the relieuing of their prisoner, hearing the noyse of the cannon, stayed their course, beeing accompanied with diuers of their neighbours, by meanes of Fabrices horsemen, and beeing surprised in the day time, they were constrained to staye at
Serignan, about a myle from Aurange. Part of those of the religion remaining in a small number, perceiuing the breach, and their Cittizens of the Romish Church readie to set vp on them in the Towne, while
Fabrice should assayle them without, forsooke the Towne, and saued themselues, with their wiues and children, within
Serignan.
Some stayed within Aurange, that determined to defend the breach, but vppon the sixt of Iune in the morning, they heard the noyse of the assaylers,They betrai^ each other in Aurange, whereof ensued a horrible murther. who by diuers waies made open vnto them by those of the Romish Church, entered into the Towne. The watch-word of those that entered, was terrible blasphemie of God, they contented not themselues to kill without distinction of sects, age, nor quallitie, but made some die by diuers stabbes with poiniards and rapiers, cast others vppon the poynts of halbards: hanged and burnt others within Churches, and cut off some of their priuie members: olde men of eightie yeares of age, bedthred persons, diseased people in the Hospitalles.
The poore men inhabiting in the Mountaines, came thither to reape, and hauing no other weapons but their sithes and hookes, were likewise massacred. Many women and maides were killed, others hanged at windowes and Galleries, were harquebused: young children sucking at their mothers breasts massacred: diuers young wenches of fiue or sixe yeares, rauished and spoyled. The woundes of the dead, were filled with the leaues torne out of the Bible.
The Towne was wholly sacked, wherein happened a maruellous iudgement of God: which was, that the authors of the mischiefe, that had caused the enemie to enter, thinking to bee safe and preserued from daunger, withdrewe themselues, with their armes and wiues into the Market-place,The traitors receiue their reward. where the enemie thinking they would haue made resistance, fell vppon them, and put them all to the sword. Those of the Castle, hauing yeelded vppon oath and promise made to haue their liues saued, were part stabbed, and part thrown headlong from the walles, to the number of one hundreth and nine men. About euening, Suze caused the Castle, the Pallace, and the Bishoppes-place, to bee set on fire, and three hundreth houses burnt, with diuers persons that had hidde themselues therein: and without an extraordinarie raine that happened in the night time, all the Towne had wholly been consumed to ashes.
The next day, the walles were beaten downe, and part of them cleane rased to the grownde. Those that were in Serignan, withdrewe themselues into Montelimart, not being able to remedie so great mischiefes: as for Parpaille, the Vicelegat of
Auignon caused his head to bee striken off, sixe weekes after the massacre.

Des Adrets mooued at those murthers, three or foure daies after, the massacre of Auranges,Des Adrets reuengeth the wrongs (...) in Aurange. ruuning about like thunder, in fewe houres battred and forced the Towne of Pierrelatte, where hee put all those to the sword that bare armes: presently therevppon hee besieged the Castle, wherein were three hundreth souldiers belonging to Suze: and while they were in parley, those of Serignan hauing ioyned with des Adrets, entered by force, killing some, and casting others ouer the walles, not suffering one to escape. Des Adrets with the like dexteritie hauing taken Bourg, and le Pont S. Esprit, that presented him with the keyes, went to force Boulene, a frontier Towne of Contat, where the souldiers of the companie of Captaine
Bartelasse were slaine. And as hee prepared himselfe to set vpon Auignon,Maugiron sacketh Grenoble. newes was brought him that Maugiron had entered by treason into
Grenoble, wherein diuers of the religion had been sacked and slaine, others cast off from the bridge into the riuer of
Iseire: vpo^ the foureteenth of Iune, and some daies after, hee stayed his course, and with an incredible dexteritie entered into
Romans, which hee held for himselfe: forced Saint
Marcellin, and there cut the throates of three hundreth of
Maugirons souldiers, who withdrewe himselfe into
Bourgongne, where hee remained with Tauanes. All such within Grenoble as knew themselues to bee guiltie, saued themselues vpon the fiue and twentieth of Iune, cursing the cowardlynesse of Maugiron.
The next day des Adrets arriued therein, and vsed both great and small with great courtesie, reestablishing all things in their estate, and holding his armie in good discipline. About the end of Iune hee marched towards Forests, where hee vsed those of
Montbrison, in such manner as I shewed before.
Des Adrets perswaded by the Marshall de Brissac, that promised him maruels, beganne to write to the Duke
de Nemours,Des Adrets wonne by the Duke de Nemours, in the end is taken prisoner. and in the end they spake togither hard by Vienne: meane ttme, certaine Gentlemen talking togither, among the which, one was merrie, surnamed Poltrot, who (because they spake of the death of the King of Nauarre) said: This death will not make an end of these warres, but wee must haue the death of the dogge with the great collor. And beeing asked whom hee ment? of the great Guisard (said hee) and lifting vp his right arme, spake in open audience: Here is the arme that shall do the deed. Aboue three moneths before, hee had many times vsed those speeches among his companions: and intrueth hee kept his promise, as wee haue alreadie shewed. Of this conference made by Adrets, ensued a truce of twelue daies, from the fiue and twentieth of Nouember, to the sixt of December: which day in the assemblie of the Estates of Dauphin, des Arets did what he could to perswade the people, to accept the Duke de Nemours for their Gouernour: but besides the particular reasons not long before by the Nobilitie of the countrie made vnto Adrets, they sayde it could not bee done, but to the vtter ruine and ouerthrowe of all the Prouince: and the letters of the Lieftenant to Nemours beeing openly red, discouered the deuise, because they contained, that the Duke de Nemours was expresly sent to punish the seditious and rebelles. Wherevpon the Estates concluded (des Adrets himselfe not being able to deny it) that before they could proceed further, it was necessarie for the Duke
de Nemours to obtaine other letters and graunts by the Kings lawfull Councell, whereof the Prince of Conde was one, as supplying the place of the King of Nauarre his brother. This deuise ouerthrowne,
des Adrets made a voyage into Languedoc, and returning
into Dauphine, Nemours to coole his courage, shewed him the Princes commissions, giuen to Monsieur de S. Auban, (ouerthrowne with his troupes at Tarare) to commaund in
Dauphine, and his commission to Adrets to goe to
Orleans: which seene, des Arets vsed many practises to establish the Duke de Nemours: and about the end of December, sought the meanes to make him Maister of Valence and
Romans.
The tenth of Ianuarie, by aduise of the Nobilitie, hee was taken prisoner, and kept in Nismes vntill the peace: when hee was set at libertie without absolution or condemnation,, and beeing at his owne house, hee left the religion: and after that, openly bare armes against all such as maintained the same: but in that alteration finding no good successe, but rather shame and dishonour, hee was constrained to with drawe himself vnto his house, despised both of friends and enemies.
The second si^ge of Grenoble.In base
Dauphine, Monsieur de Crossol recouered Serignan and
Aurange. On the other side, vpon the seuenth of Ianuarie, la Coche surprised the Tower of Lemps, and discouered a great practise of Maugiron, to enter into Grenoble, for the which hee caused certaine traitors to bee executed. Whereat Maugiron beeing offended, ouerranne the countrie of triefues, contrarie to his faith and promise. At the same time, those of Grenoble receiued certaine losses, yet they victualled their Towne with corne and other munitions, expecting a newe siege, which happened vnto them about the end of February, the enemies campe beeing eight thousand foote and horse, with two great battering peeces, whereof the bullet beeing of Brasse, wayed about fiftie pound, and three faire field peeces. La Coche had nine Captains, some Gentlemen, with sixe hundreth good souldiers, besides the Cittizens. The batterie beganne the first of March, and continued three daies and three nights: after that they offered a scalado, where they lost many of their souldiers. They within the Towne but fiue onely, with
Monsieur de S. Muris, a Gentleman much lamented. Not long after, the siege was raised and the Towne freed. At the same time, a smal troupe belonging to Captaine Furmeier, surprised Romette, a small place walled,A notable exploit of Captaine Furmeier. lying two myles from Gap, punishing certaine boot-hallers that lay in it. As Furmeier sent his footemen to enter into Romette, at the sound of the belles, which the boote-hallers for certaine houres before had rung in a steeple wherein they saued themselues, and from whence they were thrown headlong downe, the Garrison of Gap, both horse and foote issued to ayde them. But
Furmeier, accompanied with foureteene others on horsebacke, was so bolde to stand against all that troupe, marching in order of battel, which was presently separated and put to flight. The first that beganne to runne, was Captaine Andre a Piedemontois, in such sort, that Furmeier and his companions, had worke ynough to strike and laye vppon them, killing them euen to the gates of Gap, which continued with a short bridle vntill the peace proclaimed, which made those of the religion to reenter. And thus the affaires of Dauphine passed in those times.
Prouence. Sommeriue maketh war against his father and all his adherentsThe Counte de Tande perceiuing the horrible discipation of all Prouence, and that Sommeriue his sonne gaue such libertie vnto the bloodie and desolate companies of souldiers, thereby to commit the most cruell murthers and villanies that euer was heard of, whereby infinit numbers of houses and families, were destroyed and wholly ouerthrowne, came to Manosque, where hee assembled all the men hee could, vnder the conduction of Cipierre his sonne, Colonel of the horse, and of
Cardet his sonne in lawe, leader of the foote, who dealt in such manner, that all the Townes beyond the riuer of Durance, continued vnder his gouernment, onely Petuis, which they besieged: but all in vaine. Meane time, Sommeriue hauing gathered his forces, and hauing been at Aurange, by intreatie of Fabrice and de Suze, hee came to Manosque, which by Captaine Coloux was yeelded vnto him, and hauing made a muster of fiftie Ensignes of foote, and certaine Cornets of horse, the sixteenth of Iulie 1562. hee besieged Cisteron, wherein were the greatest part of all the families of the religion, that had fledde out of other places of
Prouence, with eleuen companies of foote, vnder Monsieur de Beanieu, Nephew to the Counte de Tande. Furmeier came thither likewise with three hundreth men.Cisteron besieged. Sommeriue caused the passages to be kept by one of his Captains named Bouquenegre, a valiant souldier, but verie cruell and dissolute, if euer there were any in Prouence: but hee was surprised in a village by twelue souldiers: and one of his seruants, whose wise he entertained, and not long after, found guiltie of diuers murthers and violences committed, was hanged in the publike place of Iustice, by his said seruants hands,Bonquenegre hanged. dying as hee liued.
The eleuenth of Iuly, Sommeriue caused three assaults one after the other to bee giuen vnto the Towne, which continued from three of the clocke after noone, vntil euening: but he had a most braue repulse. The next day, the town made certaine skirmishes, and about eight daies after, offered battell to Sommeriue, which he refused. And at that time, they vsed such rigor vnto each other, that no man was put to ransome.
About the end of the month, Sommeriue fearing des Adrets, that had gotten the battell of Vaureas, went to incampe himselfe within three myles of Cisteron. On the other side,
Cardet with all his forces approached, vsing all the meanes hee could to reassemble the troupes, but it was impossible: wherevppon the Counte de Tande wanting victualles, caused the campe to rise, whereof part were placed in Cisteron, vnder the gouernment of
Senas, the rest sent to des Adrets, that promised in short time to come and visit him with great forces, but hee did not.
The second siege of Cisteron.The 27 of August, Sommeriue with one hundreth and two Ensignes of foot, and great store of horse, besieged
Cisteron round about, and vnderstanding that Mombrun came to ayde the Towne, sent Suze to meete him, who vppon the second of September, surprised and ouerthrewe Mombrun, and 500. men, the Towne inclosed on all sides, but onely in one place, which lyeth vppon high and desart Mountaines, the way whereof is so straight, that two ho^ semen can hardly ride in ranke. Vpon the foureteenth of September, Sommeriue made a cruell batterie, so that about tenne of the clocke in the morning, the breach was of one hundreth and foureteen paces, without flancard or raueling to defend it. Besides that, two demy Coluerins that shotte from the Friers, strake the souldiers in the Towne when they came to the breach, which notwithstanding, although the besieged seeking to rampier the breach, were striken and hurt, and some borne into the ayre with cannon shot, both men and women, the liuing treading vppon the dead, they vsed great deligence to bring earth, fetherbeddes, dung, and other things, whatsoeuer might serue. At the same time, that assault was giuen by thirtie Ensignes of foote, and a Cornet of horse that followed them, where the fight was great, and fiue times refreshed, till seuen of the clocke at night, with such furie, that powder fayling on both sides, they fell to stones, rapiers, and other hand-blowes: in the end the assaylants were constrained to leaue the breach, and to retire with great losse.An assault fiue times refreshed. Notwithstanding Sommeriue beganne another batterie, by which means about euening, Senas, Mounans, and other Captaines within the Towne, that had lost many souldiers, perceluing themselues destitute of munition, had no hope of ayde, charged with a great number of poore people, little experienced in Marshall affaires, and considering the forces, mindes, and insolencies of the assaylants, determined to leaue that feeble place, and with al speed to saue that remnant of men that were within it: wherevppon they got the straight of the Mountaine whereof I spake, beeing the onely place whereby they might escape. This conclusion was presently disclosed to Sommeriue,A meruellous resolution of the Towne to leaue it. by one (that comming out of the chamber where they determined vppon it) went vnto him: but the matter beeing debated by Sommeriues Councell, that ment to close that passage, one named Cental brake off that determination, alleadging so many reasons to the contrarie, that it was concluded among them, that no man should stirre that night out of the campe, although that some of the besieged made shew to saue themselues that way, but that in the morning they would determine vppon their affaires.
About eleuen of the clocke at night, the besieged beganne to issue forth, in the sight of al their enemies, that might easilie discry them from two places, which commanded the Towne, and by the lights that stood in the windowes of the houses, marching in order, (you may well iudge what noyse was made at that departure among the children, sicke, hurt, and olde people, and women great with childe) and so with all their carriages followed on the way vppon the Mountain: al that night, not one of
So^meriues campe once stirring, as if those poore people had beene safely guarded, vntill morning that Sommeriue caused certaine horse and foote to passe the riuer, and to set vppon the backes of them, where they found some poore women that stayed behinde, whereof some were slaine, others brought prisoners: but they followed not long after them, as well for the difficultie of the way, as the couetous desire they had, not to leese the spoyle of the Towne, wherein Sommeriue durst not enter, (fearing some treason) before tenne of the clocke in the morning.
They beeing entered into that desolate Towne, slewe three or fource hundreth women and children, without any respect of age or religion, taking that small bootie which they could finde.Sommeriue entereth into Cisteron. If the issuing of those of
Cisteron was meruellous, so was their voyage vppon the Mountaines, which continued for the space of three weekes: in the which time, they escaped an infinit number of dangers, vntil the seue^ a and twentieth of September, that they ariued in good safetie at Grenoble, singing Psalmes and thansgiuings vnto God, for their miraculous deliuerie: knowing nothing of what had passed the same day in other places: as at Saint
Gilles,The battell of S. Gilles, Scafold of the Prouenceal murthers. where there enemies were wholly ouerthowne, and almost all slaine, as wee shewed in the discourse of
Languedoc. From Grenoble they were safely conducted vnto
Lyons, and charitably ayded in their necessities, vntill the edict of pacification.
After the taking of Cisteron, and the ouerthrow of the Prouenceals at Saint Gilles, Sommeriue continued Maister of the Prouence, continuing the battell, massacres, and great insolencies begunne before, and yet without impunitie. The principall heads of the horrible confusion that raigned therein, vntill and after the edict of peace, beeing Carces, Mentin, and Flassans, prouoked by certaine of the Parliament of Aix, as Bagarris, Chesne, Saint Margaret, and others, that ruled all the rest: and that in steede of obeying the edict of pacification, durst conclude and say, that those of the religion should not haue any exercise: that such as during the troubles had beene their Leaders, or hauing had any office,Straunge iniustice. absented the^selues, should not be receiued nor entertained: and that the wars still be followed: and that there should a stay be made of the punishments of offenders, that had committed so great insolencies during the troubles: although the wome^ with childe had bin ript open, the yong childre^ murthered, many buried quicke, others hewed in peeces, burnt, throwne downe headlong, their throates cut like sheep, drawne through the streetes, and then harquebused, beaten downe with clubbes, and wounded in diuers places. In this sort those good iudges executed so manie insolencies, that the kings Councell after the edict of pacification, was forced to send the President de Morsan, with certaine numbers of Councellors from Parris to Prouence: which did such execution vppon some boot-hallers, and other insolent persons, that from thence forward,Sound instice done vppon the offenders. although their weapons were many times in hand,
Prouence neuer mutined in such sort, as it did during those first troubles. Morsan and his companions, were determined to haue done iustice without exception: but the multitude of offenders, the qualities of some of them, the credite of others, and the maruelous practises of Carces and the Parliament of Aix, hindered those Iustices to doo as they pretended. In the end, by the solicitation of Carces, the king released diuers of them, whereof their processe was alreadie made, and that had well deserued to bee put to cruell death.
Now must we say something of the Duchie of
Bourgongne.Bourgongne. The Parliament of
Dyon did so much, that by letters of the first of March, 1562. commandement was sent by the king, to Monsieur de Tauanes his Lieftenant, in the absence of the Duke d'Aumale of the house of
Guise, not to permit any preaching at Dyon, not in the Frontier-townes, so that whatsoeuer letters and commissions, those of the religion obtained after that, would serue to no effect, as long as the Court of Parliament resited.
The eight of May,Beaune. those of
Beaune were wholly bereaued of the exercise of the religion, and within foure daies after, their three Ministers imprisoned: which done, the Artificers and others, were driuen out of the Towne, to the number of seuen or eight hundreth, with women and children. Ventoux Captaine of the Towne, filled their emptie houses with souldiers, wherein they vsed great disorders, such as were found therin being vilely abused, and so much detested, that they durst not shewe themselues in the streetes: which reduced them to extreame necessities, their kinsmen and friendes not daring to relieue them. The fines imposed vppon those of the religion, (whose goods were taken from them) was maruellous, as well in that Towne, as others in Bourgongne, as also in other Townes and Prouinces of the Realme. The one and twentieth of Iune, the house of one of the principall of the Citie was forced and sacked. In the moneth ensuing, diuers meanes were vsed, to cause such as were lest to abiure the religion: some remained firme. In the beginning of October, the Parliament of Dyon assayed to commit some of them prisoners, and summoned the rest to appeare: and such as appeared at Dyon, although innocent,
were hardly handled: others had diuers aduentures, and some (yet very fewe) wounded and slaine. So that in Beaune there were not aboue two men, and some women of great reputation, that made open profession of the religion, by the support of their assistance.
Those of the religion in Mascon, vppon the thirteenth of May made themselues the strongest, yet without effusion of blood: and three daies after,Mascon. the Images were beaten downe, as they had beene at Lyons, although the Ministers and auncients were of the contrary aduise. Mombrun hauing left Chalon, and come downe to Mascon, put the Inhabitants in such feare, that many of them were of opinion to leaue the Towne. Wherevpon Tauanes,First siege. who not long before had made them many gracious offers, came before the Towne, minding to enter, which the people denyed: which caused him to assemble all his forces, and vppon the third of Iune besieged the Towne: his armie being Bourguignons of the Counte, euery man wearing a red scarse, which was an occasion that the Towns-men shewed the Kings Councell, that it was no reason that they beeing his naturall subiectes, desiring to liue peaceably according to his edicts, should bee constrained to open their Gates vnto Tauanes, beeing accompanied with straungers, enemies to the Crowne, and for many causes suspected vnto them. Wherevppon letters were sent vnto Tauanes, who withdrewe himselfe in such sort, that not long after, hauing receiued an other packet, hee sought to cease vppon the Gates vnder the Towne, whereof hee sayled, hauing receiued a hard repulse.
And as hee made preparation for a second siege, those of
Lyons sent Monsieur d'Entrages to ayde the Towne, who by his conduction made many sallies and braue skirmishes:Second siege which notwithstanding Tauanes caused his trenches vppon the one side of the Towne, and the third of Iuly wanne the Subburbes of S. Lawrenre, the next day making such a batterie, that in lesse then two houres, all their defences lay vppon the ground. And the same day, one Mussy, seruant to
Tauanes, was hanged within the Towne, for enterprising to cause the towne to bee surprised. Not long after, Entrages beeing summoned to yeeld, made aunswere, that if hee had the Maister in his handes, hee would cause him to passe the same way his seruant
Mussy had done: which set Tauanes in such a rage, that besides fifteen or sixteene hundreth shotte made against a Tower, they shot diuers hundreth times against the breach, whereby diuers men were slaine and maimed. But the resolution of the assieged, hindred
Tauanes from approaching, and contenting himselfe to send twelue souldiers to viewe the breach, sixe of them were slaine: and about eleuen of the clocke at night, thirtie souldiers issuing out of the Towne, cut the throates of certaine Sentinelles, and entered so farre as to the Artillerie, to trie if they could stop it: which they had done, if
Tauanes in person had not come thither. The next day, although the Tower so much beaten and defaced, had opened a new breach vnto
Tauanes, yet hee stirred not, but to the contrary, making shewe in great haste to returne into Bourgongne, suddainly raysed his campe, leauing certaine thinges of powder behinde him, with an ambuscado, if those of the Town had offered to come forth: but Entrages beeing a polliticke souldier, and one that had not many men to loose, suffered not his souldiers to issue. Tauanes thereby beeing deceiued, lodged his troupes not farre from thence, and went vppe againe to Chalon, where certaine troupes of Dauphine came to meete him.

At that time, it chanced that two Sheriffes of
Mascon, hauing by their authoritie in the night time laden certaine boates, with the reliques of gold and siluer, and other ornaments of the Temple of S. Vincents in Mascon, minding to carrie and sell them in Lyons,Reliques taken for booty. beeing two or three leagues off, were discouered by one named
Saint Poinct, who being ayded by certaine Gentlemen of
Dauphine, and a good troupe of footemen, passed the riuer aboue
Belleuille, and setting vppon the boates, tooke them, and became Maisters of all that was within them, valewed at the least to the summe of thirtie or fortie thousand frankes. The Challices and Images of golde and siluer, were broken and parted between S. Poinct and his companions, although they termed themselues Romish Catholicques. Wherevppon a young Lacquey came to Gascon, who hauing falsely charged two Captaines, was hanged, but the souldiers of those two Captaines beganne to mutin, because their leaders had been committed to prison, vsing many threatning speeches. This beeing appeased, Entrages saying he would make a generall muster in a plaine hard by the Towne, caused those two companies of mutinous fellowes first to issue forth:Belleuille defended by astraunge accident. which done, he shut the Gates vppon them, by which meanes beeing constrained to take the other part, they went to Belleuille, that held for the religion, and arriued therein in good time, vppon the 28. of Iuly, for that the next morning before the breake of the day, S. Poinct with sixe or seuen hundreth foote, and two hundreth horse, and the Pesants of the countrie besieged the Towne, thinking to enter therein without resistance. But approaching neare the walles, and by chance discouered by the one that rose somewhat early, they were so hardly receiued by the souldieis of
Mascon, that they were co^strained to retire with shame and great losse: to reuenge themselues, they draue away the beastes of diuers Farmes, and sacked the house of a rich Pesant, whom they massacred, and cast his bodie into the Soane, but his bodie was taken vppe and buried in Belleuille.
How the Queene mother her Regency.Hitherto I haue shewed the estate of the particular Prouinces of France, during these first troubles: now let vs returne againe vnto the Court. The Queene beeing deliuered out of the hands of the Triumuirat, to assure her authoritie, and to hold the greatest personages in some stay, thereby to serue her turne by some of them, to checke the rest: first shee iuested the young Duke of Guise, with the estates and offices of his father, and to appease the Parisians much greeued for his death, shee deliuered
Poltrot vnto them, that was executed with as greeuous punishment, as if hee had slaine the king himselfe: which done, something was to bee done for the appeasing of those of the religion, that had been spoyled and massacred as you haue heard. The Prince of Conde being prisoner, demaunded nought but libertie, and his minde being peaceable and courteous, to such as knewe how to vse him, would not much stand (as the Queene thought) vppon certaine articles. Wherefore fearing least the Admirall, as then busied in Normandie, beeing at Orleans, should seeke the ratifying of the edict of Ianuary, that might breake the accord and renue the warre, whereby would ensue her disgrace: shee vsed all the meanes she could to preuent him, in such sort, that vppon the seuenth of March, there was a conference holden between the Queene, the Prince, and the Constable, as yet prisoners, referring their further deliberation to the next day, because the Constable hadde said openly,Subtiltie of the Constable. that hee could not consent to the re-establishing of the Edict of Ianuary, wherein hee vsed a fine shift, for that if hee should haue auouched it, hee hadde prooued both himselfe and all his partners, guiltie of treason, in hauing violated and broken the Kings Edict.
The Prince euill counselled, permitted certaine articles to be drawn, where in trueth hee should haue holden onely vnto the saide Edict: but nothing beeing resolued at that time, hee obtained libertie to enter into
Orleans, there to conferre with his Councell, where hee asked the aduise of the Ministers as then assembled therein from diuers places, beeing to the number of seuentie twoo persons,What was done by the Ministers, for preseruation of religion. who by their Deputies vsed all the meanes they could to perswade him to stand to the Edict of Ianuary, not derogating any thing thereof, shewing the daungers that might thereof ensue: that done, they presented him with certaine articles, requiring that hee would demaund the obseruation of the Edict, without any restrictions: that iustice should bee done for the massacre at
Vassy, Sens and other places, wherein there was not found the least poynt of hostilitie to bee committed by those of the religion, as also of diuers others most manifest ruptures of the said Edict, besides the exploits of warre.
The rest of the articles concerned the conseruation of the discipline of the Churches, and the reestablishing thereof, which notwithstanding the Prince was so much perswaded by the Queenes and others promises, after that, to make an other and a better agreement, shewing him, that the restrictions and moderations, which as then were set downe, were done at that time, only to content and appease those of the Romish religion, and by reasonable means to obtain a greater libertie, withal, that there were many that sought for peace, what price soeuer it cost, that hee consented vnto the exceptions contained in the new contract, causing them to bee redde before the Nobilitie, willing no man to giue his aduise therein, but onely Gentlemen bearing armes, as hee saide it openly before the assembly:The improuidence of the Prince that beleeued the promises of his enemies. in such manner, that the Ministers from that time forward, were neuer called to deale therein: by which meanes the Edict of pacification was concluded vppon the twelfth of March, drawing the exercise of the religion from the subburbes of all the Townes in the Realme, and referring it to the houses and Castles of Gentlemen, and in some small number of Baliages, not comprehending the Townes which as then held for the religion, wherein the exercise was left free, and all whatsoeuer the Prince and his adherents had done in those warres, acknowledged and auouched to bee for the seruice of the King.
The Admirals wisdom, but to no effect.Two daies after, the Admirall wrote letters from Caen vnto the Queen, touching the accusation made against him, concerning the death of the duke of Guise committed by Poltrot. He besought her to command that the prisoner might bee safely kept, that the trueth of the action might bee knowne. Meane time, hee sent her a breefe aunswere touching the intergatories of Poltrot, shewing by many and great reasons, that hee was neuer made priuie to the pretence or conceit of Poltrot touching that action, whose death notwithstanding hee acknowledged to bee the meanes to reduce France vnto a quiet estate. The Queene esteeming it not conuenient for her affaires, to suffer the Admirall to liue in peace, but by this meanes seeking to entertaine hatred among the Nobilitie, to raigne and gouerne in the middle of their deuisions, made no account of those letters.
Those that with her had the processes of Poltrot to examine, perceiuing that the dispositions of the prisoner had no apparant ground, within three daies after sent to Parris, that they should dispatch him out of the way, that it would bee daungerous to keepe him, and that hee would deny what hee had said.
Wherevppon his proces was made, hee was diuers times examined, and according to the torments giuen him, they found diuersitie in his speeches. And beeing condemned vpon the eighteenth of March, to be pinched with hotte tongues, hee openly declared, that the Admirall knew nothing of his intent to kill the Duke of Guise.
Neuerthelesse, certaine Captaines of Parris deposed, that hee had confessed the contrary vnto them, after the first drawing of the horses. But vpon his variable depositions,Proces and execution of Poltrot. the quarrell betweene the houses of Guise and Chastillon, whereof ensued the infinite mischiefes of the yeares ensuing.
The Admirall hauing ranged his enemies in Normandie, to a good poynt, as then had a stronger armie then hee had before,The Admirals meanes made frustrate by the substiltie of the Queene. wherewith hee constrained the members of the
Triumuirat to fall to reason, whereof ensued the quietnesse of
France: but the articles of the peace being almost all agreed vppon on both parts, at the Princes request hee issued out of Caen vpon the 14. of March, onely with his horsemen, the Vantgard whereof being ledde by the Prince of Portien, that tooke the way towards
Lisieux: the rest passing by Falaise and
Argentan into Perche. In the way, such as would resist his army were set vppon and punished. And the three and twentieth of the same moneth, the Admirall beeing arriued at Orleans with all his forces, found that the Edict of pacification had beene agreed vppon, signed, and sealed in his absence, fiue daies before hee arriued.
The next day hee gaue his aduise in open Councell before the Prince, and among other things, shewed, that they were to reme^ber, that from the beginning of the warres made by the Triumuirat, they had alwaies offered the obseruation of the Edict of Ianuary, Parris only excepted: and that considering the estate of their affaires, those of the religion had more means then they had before, to defend themselues from the violences of their enemies: of three authors of those warres, two of them beeing dead, the third prisoner, and a good pledge for the Princes assurance, that the Churches were restrained to one Towne in a Baliage, and other such exceptions, was as much, as if they should striue against God, and ouerthrowe more Churches by the dash of a penne, then all the enemies forces could beate downe intenne yeares space.

That the Gentlemen that would shewe their good wils, should soone see and feele by good experience, how much more expedient and commodious it will bee vnto them, to go to a sermon within a Towne or Village neare vnto them, then to receiue a church into their house: besides this, that such Gentlemen dying, would not alwaies leaue heires of their opinions.
These reasons were so firme, that besides the disliking of those that were not called to counsell, the most part of those that had agreed vnto it, could gladly haue wished it to beginne againe. But the Prince to all that opposed the promises made vnto him, that in short time hee should enioy the estate of the deceased king of
Nauarre his brother, and that then, those of the religion should obtaine whatsoeuer they could desire. Yet although many alleadged to the contrary, that all his promises were but words, and that when those of the religion should bee disarmed, and retired vnto their houses, their enemies would still deuise the meanes to vexe and trouble them, and that they should bee disgraced and nought esteemed. Yet would hee neuer apprehended it, and what paines soeuer the Admirall tooke, accompanying the Prince in diuers priuate conferences with the Queene, the Edict continued in force, as it hadde beene decreed, and nothing else could bee obtained, but onely that certaine Gentlemen procured this poynt, that some of the best Townes in certaine Prouinces, should bee nominated for the exercise of the religion in the Baliages, but this was but an accord in paper, that tooke small effect.
The Queene of England had assisted the Prince of
Conde and his adherents, with men and mony during those warres, who for assurance of her mony disboursed, and for the retrait of her men, gaue her the possession of the towne of New-hauen, wherein there laye an English Garrison.
The Prince by his Edict hauing not made any conclusion, that the Englishmen should bee payde, and peaceably sent home againe, they stayed in New-hauen, to keepe it, till they had satisfaction on the other side. The Councell of France, by letters dated the sixt of Iuly, proclaimed warre against the Englishmen: and fifteene daies after
New-hauen was besieged,The Englishmen driuen out of New-hauen. the Constable beeing Generall of the armie, wherein they drew the Prince, with diuers Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines, and Souldiers of the religion, some of their aduersaries vaunting after the siege, to haue driuen out the Englishmen by those that brought them thither.
And that the Huguenots might bee well assured, not to haue any more ayde out of England, the Earle of VVarwicke laye in
New-hauen with sixe thousand Englishmen, hauing well prouided all things necessarie for the defence of a place of such importance. But the fresh water beeing taken from the Englishmen, the plague was very rife among them, and the batterie most furious, vppon the eight and twentieth of Iuly they grew to a parley, and the next day yeelded the place, wherein aboue three thousande of them were deade of the plague. Eight monethes after
this reudition, a peace was concluded and proclaimed, betweene France and England.
The king of the age of 13 yeares and a month, declared of lawfull yeares.The Prince of Conde in the conclusion of peace, was made beleeue, that he should haue the place of Lieftenant generall, by the decease of the king, of his brother the king of
Nauarre: but after the deliuery of New-hauen, the Queen hauing no more need of him, to take all hope from him on that side, and to breed new conceits in the heads of those of the religion, published a declaration, to shew the maioritie of the king, as then entered into the 14. yeare of his age. And to make shewe the better vnto this declaration, whervnto was added a most seuere Edict against bearing of armes, his subiects leagues, and the pensions of forraine Princes, shee caused her sonne in great solemnitie to sit in the Parliament of Roane, where to shewe her child to bee sufficient and capable to adminster the affaires of the Realme, she caused him to bee taught and learned by hart, to vtter a lesson artificially deuised, thereby to bridle the Prince assistance thereat, which by many was termed his degrading. The substance thereof was, that his comming into the Parliament, was to giue his officers to vnderstand, that hauing attained to the yeares of maioritie, he would no longer indure that any such disobedience should bee vsed against him, as had beene shewed since the beginning of the troubles: commaunded that his Edict of pacification should bee obserued, threatned the breakers thereof, and such as made associations and leagues: which was done vppon the sixteenth and seuenteenth of August.
Within short time after, the Parliament of Parris sent a declaration vnto the king, touching that Edict of maioritie, which confirmed that of pacification. But the Queene caused him to speake with authoritie as hee had done before,The Queens proceedings against the Court of Parliament in Parris. declaring his mother superintendant of his affaires, and said vnto the Deputies of the Parliament, that his meaning was, that they should deale with nothing else, but onely to administer good and speedie iustice vnto his subiects: giuing them to vnderstand, that hee would haue them to knowe, that they were not appoynted by him in their offices to bee his tutors, nor protectors of his Realme, neither yet conseruers of his towne of Parris. For you are (said he, according to his instructions giuen) made beleeue, that you are such: but I mean not to suffer you any more to continue in that error, but commaund you, that as in the times of the kings my predecessors, you neuer vsed to deale with any thing but with iustice, that from henceforth, you deale with nothing else. And when I shall commaund you any thing, if you finde any difficultie therein, I will bee well content to heare your aduise, as you haue vsed to do vnto the kings mine auncestors, and not as my Gouernours, and hauing giuen your aduises, hauing heard my minde, to be obedient therevnto without reply.
In dooing so, you shall finde mee as good and milde a King as euer you had: but dooing as you haue done, since the time you were giuen to vnderstand that you are my tutors, I will make you knowe, that you are none such, but my seruants and subiects: willing and charging you, to obey my commaundements.

The Bishop of Valence checqueth the Parliament of Parris.Here you may see howe they draue the dogges before the Lyon, and the subtill practises of the Queen, to establish her Regencie, vnder the warrant of her sonne: wholely debarring the Prince of
Conde from all his hopes: and to change the Parliament of
Parris somwhat more vnto her will, she caused the the Bishop of Valence in a large discourse, to confute that which the President de Thou had propounded, touching the Kings Court: and that his mawrite ought first to haue been signified to the Court of Parliament in Parris: that the King ought not to permit the exercise of two religions within his Realme: that the inhabitants of Parris ought not to be constrained to leaue their armes. The Bishop in open tearmes seemed to charge de Thou and all his companions, to shew but small vnderstanding in those affaires, and much lesse conscience. The twentie foure of September following, by Decree of the priuie Councell, the mawrite of the King (or as some are of aduice) the regencie and Soueraigntie authoritie of the Queene was confirmed.
The Pope abandoneth the Realm of Nauarre to him that could take is by force, wherevnto the King opposeth.At the same time, an other deuise was wrought against those of the religion. The Pope faining that he could no longer beare with the reformation of religion and doctrine vsed in the Realme of Nauarre, and the Soueraigntie: of
Bearn, in the moneth of September, caused a declaration to bee published in Rome against Ieane d'Albert, Queene of
Nauarre: who as then made publicque profession of the religion, and had driuen the Masse out of her Countries. This declaration was made in forme of an excommunication, and for a dispossession of all that land, which as then remained vnto this Princesse, by whom soeuer would take it in hand, to enioy it as by conquest, and his owne proper inheritance. Shee was likewise cited to appeare before the Consistorie of Cardinalles, within sixe moneths after: for default whereof, the Pope declared her hereticke, her goods confiscate, and abandoned as aforesaid. The King formed an opposition against this papall thunder, which as then was shewed but in Rome. The King of Spaine hauing neither the desire nor the meanes to fall vppon that Princesse, and the Councell of
France, esteemed it inconuenient, to giue so manifest a shadowe vnto those that were of the religion.
The death of Charles de Cosse Marshal de Brissac, that had done great seruice for the Realm of
France, in the warres of Piedemont, made an ende of this yeare, 1563. that dyed vpon the last of December.
Ann. 1564In the beginning of this yeare, it was permitted vnto the Clergie by an Edict, to redeeme their landes that had bin alienated, to the value of a hundreth thousand crownes, yearely rent.
An Edict in fauour of the Clergie.All this was but a point of cunning, vsed to diue into the purses of those who during the warres, and that France drowned in teares had sung, and for the most part liued at their ease.
About the beginning of Februarie, the Ambassadors of the Pope, the Emperour, the King of Spaine, and the Duke of
Sauoy, came to Fountainebleau, desiring that the King would cause the Decrees of the Councell of Trent, to bee wholely obserued within the Realme of France: for the which cause,The King solicited by the Spaniard to breake the Edict of pacification. the Deputies were to be at Nancy vppon the the twentie fiue of March, then next ensuing: to reade the same in presence of the Ambassadors of all the Papisticall and Catholicque Romish Princes, assembled togither, there to make and frame a generall league, against the Realmes, principalities, and estates, that had withdrawne themselues from the obedience of the Pope. They likewise
desired the king wholly to cease the alienating of the goods of the Cleargie, alleadging it to bee preiudiciall both against him and his Realme, and contrarie to the word of God, that the king of Spaine and the Duke of Sauoy, could not bee payed the monies due vnto them by reason of their mariages, with the Cleargies mony: desired that those of the religion might bee openly punished, whom they disciphered according to their accustomed manner. That the pardon and the edict of peace should bee made voyde: that the king should doo iustice, specially of those that were consenting vnto the death of the Duke of Guise. And to effect these requests, they added most faire and great offers, thereby to cast the realme into the burning flame of a second ciuill warre.
Answere to the Ambassadors.But the Queene and her Councell perceiuing it to bee a ticklish matter, and distrusting in the promises of such men, caused the young king to aunswere them, that hee thanked their Maisters, whom hee ment not to trouble, hoping to maintaine his subiects in peace, according to the institution of the Romish Church. That hee had made the edict of pacification to put straunges out of his Realme: that as then he could reenter into a new warre within his realme, for certaine reasons, which in writing he sent vnto them: and that in those affaires hee would aske the Counsell and aduise of the Prince of his blood, and the chiefe Lords of his Councell, and of the Crowne.
The king of Spaine with that Ambassage, deuising how hee might see his kinsmans house in new troubles, tooke no order for his own in the lowe countries, where as then warres beganne to bee hatched, which not long after came foorth, and as yet continue therein, to his great shame and confusion.
In the beginning of March, the Queene beganne the voyage of
Bayonne, to speake with the king of Spaine, the pretence was, that the king beeing Maior, and about foureteene yeares of age,Beginning of the voyage to Bayonne. would ride about his Realme to visit his Prouinces, and that his presence would bee a means to remedie many complaints and discontentments, and withall, strengthen and establish the edict of pacification. But the effect that both approached and ensued, did partly shewe the intents and secret practises of that woman and her Councell.
The king beganne that voyage in Champagne and
Bourgongne, from whence hee went to Lyons,What a scita dell was built at Lyons. and to the ende those of the religion should not haue the meanes to fortifie themselues therein, as they had done at other times, a scitadell was then begunne to bee erected: and although at that time the plague raigned within the Towne, yet the Queen and her Councell would not stirre from thence, and kept the king there, vntill that scitadell was almost finished.
But in the end the plague being entered into the Queens Chamber, whereof one of her Gentlewomen fell sicke, the king was ledde from thence. While they built at Lyons, to bridle those of the religion, by that means to weaken their forces,Defacing of Townes. the Townes of Orleans and Montauban, were vnwalled: in other townes scitadels were made, which by some were called
Chastre-villaines: by others, the Nests of Tyrants.
Those of the religion indured all, contenting themselues with simple declarations in paper, and receiuing paper for payment. For that about the beginning of this voyage, the Romish Catholikes of Greuan in Bourgongne, massacred diuers of the religion, being assembled therein to exercise their religion:Massacre of those of the religion. complaints thereof beeing made vnto the Queene, shee gaue faire words, promising to send Commissioners to Creuan, such as were honestly minded, and not passionate, to inquire of the fact.
But in stead of keeping promise, at the same time an edict was made, forbidding the exercise of the religion in the kings Court,An edict derogating that of pacification. and that in the Townes wherein by the edict it was permitted, the Ministers should not preach, as long as the kings should remaine therein: all eadging for reason, that his presence might not indure the exercise of any other religion, then that which he vsed: who as then was taught to rule and Court Ladies, hauing Maisters appoynted for the purpose, the Court as then beginning to bee an example of all dissolution.
They likewise draue al ministers out of the realm, that were not natural Fre^chmen. The king being gone from Lyons, went to
Roussillon, wher he staying for a time, was visited by the duke
d'Sauoy. Ther they erected another disme^bring of the edict of peace,Another derogatiue edict. forbidding all iustices to vse the exercise of religion in their houses, freses, or Castles, other then in those that are appoynted in the edict: That the Ministers which should haue exercised their charges, in places not comprehended in the edict, for the first time should bee banished out of the realme, and beeing found therein againe, to bee corporally punished. That Priestes, Monkes, Friers, and Nunnes, that are married, should bee constrained to leaue their wiues and husbands, and to returne againe into their Monasteries and Couents, or else to go out of the realme.
That it should not bee lawfull for those of the religion to hold Sinodes, accusing them vnder that pretence to haue made conspiracies, and raised the greatest part of the realme. This edict abated somewhat of the edict of pacification. From Dauphine, the king went into
Prouence, and Marcellis, and in the beginning of winter hee entered into Languedoc: and being in
Montpeslier, about the end of December, prolonged the redeeming of the spirituall goods, for the space of sixe moneths more. This winter was extreame colde through all the realme of France.
The Cardinall of Lorraine pretending to enter armed into Parries, is repulsed by the Marshall de Mont morency.At that time, the Cardinall of
Lorraine newly returned from the Councell of Trent, hauing stayed a certain time in Champagne, rid to Parris with his guard, openly bearing armes, contrary to the expresse commaundement of the king, beeing accompanied by Henry Duke of Guise his Nephewe, as then but a child, but yet inuested with the estate of Great-maister of France.
His brother the Duke d'Aumale, lay not farre from
Parris with a troupe of men. The Marshall de Montmorency Gouernour of the Isle of France, beeing a wise Gentleman, and a friend to peace, hauing discouered that diuers mutinous companions attended the Cardinalles arriuall in that manner, to commit violence against those of the religion, that daily increased: and foreseeing that so bolde an attempt openly to ride in armes, would breed some horrible tempest, if it were not preuented, sent word to the Cardinall, that hee should not presume to enter into Parris with such a traine, nor in that manner.
And because he made no account of the kings Lieftenants commandement, the Marshall sent him word, that hee forbadde him to enter into his gouernment with armed troupes, which if hee did, hee would vse his authoritie. But the Cardinall not letting for that, about the beginning of Ianuarie assayed to enter armed into
Parris, but hee found the Gouernour and Soueraigne Magistrate, with thirtie or fortie men readie to resist him, all men of account: as Lords and Gentlemen, and the Prince of Portian. But in stead of beating down the Cardinall and his men, hee contented himselfe to put them in feare. The Cardinall, his Nephewe, and diuers of their followers, saued themselues in the first shoppes and houses they could get into. Their men of war shunning the danger with all the speede they could, but not once pursued. This chance made the Cardinal wholly confused, and hauing stayed for a time within the Towne, hee returned into Champagne, staying the Kings returne from Bayonne. The Duke d'Aumale his brother made more shewe, and for the space of certaine weekes, no other report ranne abroad within Parris, and all the Isle of France, but onely of leagues and associations, made to bee reuenged vppon the Marshall
de Montmorency, who being assisted by the Admirall and other Lords, held the Parisians in peace, and caused his action to bee approoued, both in the Parliament, and by the kings Councell. But this blowe renued the despight of the house of Guise, against those of
Montmorency and Chastillon, and because the assemblies made by the Duke d'Aumale, and the league hee made with the Duke d'Estampes, Martignes, Chauigny, and the Bishoppe of
Mans, had constrained the Marshall and the Admirall, to assemble certain Gentlemen to withstand those pretended leaguers. The Queen fearing, least that beginning wold breed some mischiefe, that might breake the voyage of Bayonne, and other expedients which shee esteemed to bee most fit and necessarie for the effecting of this Councell, presently dispatched letters pattrents, whereby the king commauned those that as yet were not entered into Parris to approach no nearer: and such as were therein, to depart from thence, referring the ending of this quarrell, vntill his returne out of
Gascoigne.
The Cardinall offended that no better remedie was taken in his behalfe touching that disgrace, beganne another enterprise, making warre against Salcede, Bailiffe de Vic,The Cardiwalles warre. and Gouernour for the king in Marsault, that had ceased certaine places appertaining to the Cardinall, alleadging hee had reason to doo it, because the Cardinall had put himselfe into the safegard and protection of the Emperour, and had caused it to bee published, without the commandement and licence of the king his Soueraigne. But Salcede beeing ouerweake for so puissant an enemie fauoured by the Queene, in the end was constrained to leaue both Vic and
Marsault.
The ninth of Iune, Henry duke of Orleans, brother to the king, departed from Bayonne,The comming of the Queen of Spaine to Bayonne. where not long before the Court arriued, and went to lodge at Saint Iohn de Lus, from whence the next day after he road to Iron, the first place in the frontiers of
Spaine, scituate vpon the riuer of Marquery, which diuided the lands of the Kings of France and Spaine. And hauing past that riuer, he went to meete with his sister the Queene of
Spaine, beyond Aruany, where, after the ceremonies and salutations ordinatily vsed at such meetings, they tooke their way to S.
Sebastians, wher the Duke of Alue stayed. Not long after, the king went forth to meet his sister, accompanied by diuers Princes and Noblemen, conducting her vnto Bayonne, where she stayed along time. The Duke d'Alua with many of the Couucell of Spaine, had diuers secret conferences with the Councell of
France. There resolution beeing (as Monsieur de Noue saith in his discourse,Councels holden in Bayonne, betweene the Spantards and the Frenchmen, originals of the mischiefes of France and the lowe Countries. The continuance of the K. progresse to the pre^udice of those of the teligion. of the cause of raising armes in the second troubles) to root out those of the religion, as well in France, as in the lowe Countries: and that it was necessary to beginne with the leaders, according to the rule of that Spanish Duke, (that shortly after, put it in practise by cutting off the heades of the Countes de Horne and Egmont, with other noble men in Brusselis) that they must not stand to looke for frogges, but first fish for the great salmons. The Prince of
Conde, the Admirall, and others in France, beeing in time aduertised by some, that were not farre from their so bloody Councels, from that time, beganne to looke vnto themselues, and to thinke vppon their affaires, aduertising those of the religion not to bee negligent.
Fro^ Bayonne the K. tooke his iourney to
Nerac, wher he restored the Romish Catholicques to their goods: repaired their temples: brought in againe the Priests and Monkes that had beene thrust out: and commaunded Monluc by his letters pattents in firme of an Edict, to see all things performed: as also to take order that the officers of the Towne might bee equally chosen out of both religions, halfe of the one, and halfe of the other, and this course he prescribed as a lawe to all those Townes, where those of the religion had gotten the vpper hand.
Hee did besides ordaine, that such Monkes, Fryers, and Nunnes, as had cast off their coules, in purpose to reenter into the successions of their Parents, should not bee admitted orherwise, then according to the ancient constitutions. Hee also gaue audience vnto the Catholicque and Romish Leaguers of Guyenne, whom he likewise iustified. Moreouer, in all places where the King made his iourney, there was in manner no other speech, but of the complaints of those of the religion, whom the peace did as much molest (and in some places more) as the warre.
The Councell stopped the plaintiues mouthes with sweet words, promising redresse in all possible loue and equitie: but their speeches vanished like smoke: for of an infinite number of murthers, from the publication of the Edict, vntill that day committed, there were scarce sixe offenders punished, and those but of the rascall sort, that else where and before time, had tenne times deserued the wheele or fire.
The rest of the yeare was spent, in the kings entries into the towns vpon the riuer of Loire, in banquets, triumphs, superfluous expenses, and ridiculous pastimes, wherin the K. and his two yonger bretheren were altogither buried, whilest the Queen with her Councellors mannaging the whole state of France, guided it in such crooked courses, as still doo remaine of the stormes, no lesse daungerous then the former.
A fained reconsiliation betweene the houses of Guise and Chastillons.Wee said before, that presently after the Edict of pacification, the Queen had giuen accesse to those of the house of Guise, to aske some new iustice of the king, touching the murther of their kinsman slaine by
Poltrot, that had beene tormented and executed by foure wilde horses in Parris. And because those of Guise had sufficiently declared, that their malice tended onely to the Admirall, and that the dissimulation of the Queene-mother, entertained the fire of that quarrell. The Prince of Conde, that went not the voyage of
Bayonne, had from that time assayed wholly to quench it, and on the one side to stay Magnanimitie of the Prince.the violence of the plaintiues, on the other side the subtiltie of the Queen, that desired nothing but the continuance of quarrels among the Nobilitie, that shee might raigne by their diuision, and crie, staye there, when it pleased her, following the aduise of her wise Councellours: braue Pollititians (if they might bee beleeued) and great friends to France. To that end the Prince had presented a declaration vnto the Councell, bearing date the fifteene of May, 1563. against those of Gusse, saying therein: that if there were any man, that would once vndertake to oppose himselfe in word or deede against the Admirall, otherwise then by order of iustice, which the Admirall himselfe desired: I will (saith hee) make him well knowne, that it shall touch mee, as much as if it were done vnto my selfe, beeing his friend, and he vncle vnto my wife, by whom I haue diuers children: besides that, hee is a braue knight, and one that is able to do the king great seruice. The Queen remembring that, and seeking to shadow her Councell of Bayonne, in the beginning of Ianuary 1566. caused those of
Guise and Chastillon, to be summoned to appeare before the king at Moulius in Bourbonnois, where likewise appeared the Marshall de Montmorency, because of the quarrell of
Parris. Shee likewise sent for du Thou and
Seguier, first and second Presidents of Parris, Dafis, chiefe President of Thoulouse, Lagebaston of Bourdeaux, Truchon of Grenoble, le Feure of Dyon, and
Fourneau second President of Prouence. The king beeing in his chamber, with diuers Princes and Lords, the Chancellour made a long Oration touching the miseries of the Realme,The Oration of the Chancellour. and the disorder of iustice and pollicie, whereof ensued certaine orders taken, which continued no longer then many other commendable ordinances, that had been made within this Realme: that done, hee beganne to touch the quarrell betweene the houses of Guise and
Chastillon, where diuers things on both sides being debated, and the Admirall by oath clearing himselfe, not to be the Author of the murther in question.
Agreement in the Court.A certaine agreement was made betweene the two houses, and therevppon they imbraced like friends, with many protestations of words and promises, neuer to renue them more. The widowes of the Duke and the Cardinall of
Lorraine, were the interlocutors in this tragedie: the young Duke of
Guise not speaking a word, as the^ lending his countenance to signes of threatnings and frowning lookes: wherof those of
Chastillon made small account, because as then hee was but a childe.
That which made them most to consider vpon the matter, was, that they perceiued the Queene-mother to leane to the house of
Guise, and the Cardinall and shee to bee as two heades within one hood, they likewise tooke vp the matter betweene the saide Cardinall, and the Marshall de Montmorencie, touching that which had passed between them at Parris, during the voyage of Bayonne.
The rest of this yeare, was for the most part spent among Courtezans, in mariages, banquets, and other pastimes, whiles all parts of the realm were plunged in great disorders.The miserable estate of France. The insolencies of the Romish Catholicques against those of the religion continued: the qualifications of the Edict, did by little and little fret it quire a way: the threats of speedie raigne to those of the religion, (whose Captaines and leaders are heere and there slaine, without iustice or any execution of the mutherers) did weakely increase: and the resolution concluded at Bayonne, grewe manifest both within and without the Realme.
The Prince neuerthelesse and the Admirall, lay still and rested quiet, being content plainly to looke vppon the accurrences, and readie to advertise their friends of all that was practised, least they should bee surprised. From diuers parts they were aduertised of the Spaniards preparatiues, who purposed a terrible destruction to the lowe Countries, and withall, they foresawe, that his enterprise would breed new troubles in France, wherby after so many stormes at
Bayonne, there must needs ensue some great rage and straunge euents.
The Prince of la Roch Suryon, also a little before his decease, had reuealed vnto them many particularities. Let them complaine of any breach of couenants, they should not want eyther sweet words, or courteous letters, to lull them on sleepe: In the meane time, in
Faix and Bearne the troubles continued, wherein the better sort were most vniustly dealt withall. There began a disputation at
Parris, betweene two Ministers and two Sorbonists, at the Duke of
Neuers lodging, which grewe into very large writings without any resolution, as indeede such parlying, do for the most part bring foorth small fruite.
The executro^ of Simon May, a thiese and notable slaunderer.About the same time, there was likewise a certaine offender, named Simon May, broken vppon a scaffolde: this man was of meane birth, and dwelt in a countrie house not farre from
Chastillon vppon Loyn, where vnder pretence of an Hostrie or Inne, hee practised his robberies. Him did Anmalle the late Duke of Guises brother, hire to watch the Admirall as hee went on hunting, and gaue him in hand a hundreth Crownes and a Spanish Genet. The Admirall before vnderstanding his wicked course of life, had sharply threatned him: and now by witnesses finding him to bee a notable theefe, he sent the informations to Parris, wherevpon hee was soone apprehended and brought into the Conciergery, where hee beganne to accuse the Admirall and some others, that they should haue conspired togither, and so promised him great reward to kill the Queene-mother: but the Councellours that were deputed to perfect his processe, presently smelling out the infection of this slaunder, and perceiuing that in the boulting out of this matter (which notwithstanding they ought to haue done) they should haue found some of the house of Guise in more fault then the Chastillons: letting fall this false accusation, and hauing auerred May his robberies and thefts, they committed him to the wheele.
During the kings voyage to Bayonne, wherein hee was accompanied only with Princes and Lords of the Romish religion,Anotable proces in Paris, betweene the Iesuites and the Vniuersitie. The beginning of the Iesuites. there happened a notable processe within Parris touching the Iesuites, whereof I will set downe certaine notes collected, verbatim out of the fourth booke of the Epistles and pleas made by me Stephen Pasquier a Councellour, that pleaded for the Vniuersitie against the saide Iesuites: his words are these. A Nauarrois named Ignace, who had beene a souldier all the daies of his life time, hauing been hurt in the Towne of
Pampelune, while hee laye to bee healed, vsed to reade the liues of holy fathers: by whose examples hee determined from that time forward to frame his life. Wherevppon hee entered into conference with diuers men, and among the rest, with one named Maister Pasquier Brouet.

They sware and aduowed a societie, and Ignace being beheaded, they made certaine voyages to Parris, Rome, and
Ierusalem, and in the end went to Venice, where they continued certaine yeares. And perceiuing themselues to haue many followers,Their profession. went to
Rome, where they beganne to make open profession of their order, among other articles, chiefely promising two things: the one, that their principall intent was, to preach the word of God vnto the Pagans: to conuert them to the faith: the other, freely to teach all christians the studie of learning: and to accommodate their name vnto their deuotionss they called themselues religious persons of the societie of Iesus: presenting themselues vnto Pope Paul the third,Their name. of the house of Fernese, about the yeare of our Lord,
1540. at the same time that the Almaines began to arme themselues against the alteration of religion, and because one of the principall disputations of the Almaines, was touching the authoritie of the Pope, whom
Martin Luther sought to deface, they with a contrary profession shewed, that their first vow was to acknowledge the Pope to be aboue al earthly powers,At what time they began. and aboue the generall Councelles, and the vniuersall Church. The Pope, who at the first made doubt to allow them, and after, had permitted them to name themselues religious, but with charge that they should not exceed the number of sixtie persons, began to hearken to this promise, and to open the gate to their deuotion: and after him, Pope Iulius the third, vntill Pope Paul the fourth named Theatin, the first Promoter of that order, authorised them fully and wholly, with many and great priuiledges.
By whom they were receiued into France.Now their affaires proceeding in this sort, it chanced that the Bishop of Cleremont, Bastard to the Chancellour du Prat, began to beare them some affection, and sought to plant that order in
Parris, whither hee brought Pasquier Brouet, with three or foure others. They at their comming, lodged themselues quietly in a chamber in the Colledge of Lombards, and after that, established their habitation in the house of Cleremont in Harp-street, by the permission of him that first brought them into France, celebrating their Masses and prayers vppon the Sundaies and other Festiuall daies, in a Chappell that standeth at the entrie into the Chartreux.How they intruded themselues. And perceiuing that their affaires beganne to take effect, they presented themselues diuers times before the Court of Parliament, that there order might be authorised by them. But the Atturney generall named Brulart,Their boldnesse. opposed himselfe against their requests: not that hee fauoured not the Catholicque religion, but for that aboue all things, hee doubted and feared such nouelties, as mother of many errors, specially in religion. Wherevppon hee shewed them, that if their hearts were wholly estraunged from worldly care, they might without induring any new order,Who withstood them. content themselues with the auncient professions of Saint Benet, Clugny, Cisteaux, Grandmont, Premonstre and others, approcued by diuers Councels, or with the foure orders of begging Fryers. The Court not content with those oppositions, wold not seem to be opinious of themselues, but for the same cause had recourse vnto the facultie of Diuines, who by their decree censured against them, partly because that some of their proposition derogated from the priuiledges of the French Churches, partly because that terming themselues religious, they weare not the habit, neyther yet confined themselues (like vnto others) within Cloysters: which censure put them by their whole intent.

Not long after, the Bishop of Cleremont died, who by his will bequeathed them great gifts, those legacies by them recouered, happened the first troubles, at the beginning whereof, the conference of the French Church was holden in Possy. From that time they began to breake their long silence, and againe presented a request to the Court of Parltament, to be receiued and approoued, if not in sorme of religion, yet as a simple Colledge.Their aduancement. The Parliament made account, that this request touched the superiors of the Church, wherevpnon they referred it to the assembly at Possy, where the Cardinall of Turnon was President, as the eldest Prelate, who had founded a company of their name within the town of
Turnon, by his means they obtained licence to be receiued in forme of a societie and a Colledge:What they obtained at the first. with charge to vse some other name and title, then that of Iesuites, and to conforme the^selues wholly to the canonicall order, without enterprising any thing, either spirituall or temporal against their Ordinaries: and that likewise they shuld expresly renounce those priuiledges that had bin granted them by their buls, otherwise for not performance therof, or that thereafter they obtain any others, this approbation should be voyde and of none effect. This decree was set downe word for word in the registers of the Court. Not long after, they bought a house within Parris in S. Ieames street, called the house of Langres, which they diuided in two habitations, the one for the religious, the other for Schollers. In this co^pany were diuers learned persons, and among the rest, Fryer Edmond Anger, and
Maldonnat: the first, a great Preacher: the second, one that had bin instructed in all kinds of learning and languages:Their supports. a great Diuine and Philosopher. They being sent to anounce their doctrine, were wel accepted, and by that means drew great numbers of Schollers vnto them, and perceiuing the wind to blow with them, they presented a request to the Rector of Parris, to be vnited and incorporated into the vniuersitie, whervpon a Congregation was assembled at the Mathurins, where it was concluded,Who stroue against them that they should certifie before they passed forward, whether they bare the name and qualitie of regulers or seculers: which reduced them to great perplexitie. For that to denie themselues to be regulers, was as much as to falcifie their vow: and to affirme it,Their deniall. would be a contradiction to that which had bin inioyned them at Possy: whervpon for that they tooke no precise quallitie vpon them, the Vniuersitie denied them their request: yet for all that, they yeelded not, but had recourse vnto the Parliament, to the end, that by force they might constraine the Vniuersitie to grant that which otherwise they would not once consent vnto. And it was agreed, that the parties shuld plead vpon the first day of the opening of the Court. These are the words of M. Stephen Pasquier, adding thervnto. The vniuersitie vouchsafed me ye honor,The Vniuersitie pleaded against them. to chuse me for their Aduocate. The cause was pleaded two forenoones, with such contentio^, as the greatnesse of the cause required. M. Peter Versoris, pleading for the Iesuites, and I for the Vniuersitie. Lowing the plea made by M. Pasquier: I will set downe some chiefe and notable poynts. The Iesuites cause (saith he) is ful of dissimulatio^ and hypocrisie: their sect is hereafter to be but a semenarie of partiallities, between the christian and the Iesuite: the purpose and intent tendeth only to desolation, and surprising of the estate both polliticque and Ecclesiasticall. They bear the name of Iesus, but with a false title. I am of opinion, that there is not any faithful christian, or good and loyal Frenchman, but that wil find the reasons and conclusions of the vniuersitie to be both iust and good:
which is,Certain allegations to be noted in the declaration of the vniuersitie. that not only this new world, which by a title, partiall, arrogant, and ambitious, affirmeth it selfe onely, to bee of the societie of Iesus, ought not to bee adopted nor incorporated into the body of our Vniuersitie, but that it ought wholly to bee bannished, tooted out, and exterminated out of France.
These new bretheren, vnder a beautifull title, and exterior shew, wold enter and make a breach into our peace and quiet estate.
Ignace a maimed souldier, not for the zeale and deuotion that hee bare to any new austeritie of life, but perceiuing himselfe to be impotent and vnable anylonger to beare armes, entered into familiaritie with certaine persons, and among others, with one M. Pasquier Brouet, borne in
Dreux, a man (certain exterior quallities excepted) that had no learning, either in humane or diuine laws. These two with some others, for a time kept themselues in Venice, a town by certain Italian authors well knowne, and acknowledged to be the receptacle of diuers and peruerse things.
There for a time they vsed a certain hypocriticall austeritie of life, and perceiuing that their superstitio^ bega^ to be followed, they were so bold as to transport themselues to Rome, wher they began to publish their sect. And althogh the greatest part of them were neither seen in tongues nor diuinitie, yet they began openly to promise two things. The one to preach the gospel to the Infidels, so to co^uert them to the faith: the other, to teach doctrine vnto al christians without any reward. For that cause taking vpo^ them the name of religious people, as if al those that cleaued not to their sect, were separated from their societie.
Epithetes of the Iesuites.In the same plea they are quallified with the titles of Subtile: Authors of a superstitious sect: vnhappy weed: A sect condemned by the facultie of diuinitie, as being replenished with all superstition and damnable ambition, inuented and admitted for the desolation of all estates, either seculer or reguler: men in state to grow great by other mens falles, aduanced by the ambitious and vnwoorthie practises of the Cardinall of Turnon their supporter: impudent: irreguler: disobedient: hypocrites: ignorant Teachers and wanderers: deceiuers: pardoners: new men patched togither of many peeces: full of ambitious superstitio. Then doth he proceed to lay ope^ their stratagems, whereby they haue deuised in short time to incroach infinite wealth, yea euen whole kingdomes and countries:Their practises to grow great. that their pretended societie consisteth of two manner of people: whereof, the first terme themselues to be of the greater obseruance: the other of the lesse. The first, besides the three ordinarie vowes of the Monkes, doo also make a fourth: and that is, that they doo acknowledge him to bee Soueraigne in earth ouer all thinges, without exception or reseruation, in whatsoeuer it shall please him to commaund.
The others of lesser obseruance, are bound onely to two vowes: the one, respecting their fidelitie that they promise to the Pope: the other, their obedience to their superior.
These latter sorts, do not vow pouertie, but may lawfully enioy benefices without dispensation: succeed their Parents: and purchase lands and possessions, as if they were seculer persons.
This is the course whereby they haue at chieued such wealth and riches in this new order: for al that falleth to these lesser obseruantiues, by succession, purchase, chace, or any other practise, is incorporate into the whole bodie of Iesuites, without repetition or reuocation: for euen they to whom it falleth haue vowed obedience. We are moreouer to note another especiall vow of these men, which importeth, that they shall in all cases and in all places, obey their Generall and superior, who alwaies is a Spaniard and chosen by the K. of Spaine, as hitherto it hath alwaies fallen out: for among other the wordes of this vow, they haue these: that setting their eie vpo^ their Geneneral, they are to acknowledge in him, the person of Iesus Christ as present. From these vows and distinctions haue proceeded terrible enterprises: year euen most heynous attempts against the liues and persons of Princes, kings, and Queens, as the Histories of the low Countries, England, and Rome, do plainly testifie: wherof also we wil speak somewhat toward the end of the raigne of Hemy ye third. As touching the disorders happened in the two orders by the^ deuised, which are termed, the one the great obseruants, the other the Iesse:Two decrees in the Iesuits sext, in fauor whereof, they may subdue all the world to the king of Spaine their Soueraigne. Maister
Pasquier discoueret it at large, and time hath veresied it, adding these words: Seeing it is so (said he) that in their lesse obseruance, there is neither vowe of virginitie, nor prouerbe, and therinto they receiue all kinds of people indifferently, both Priests and Lay-men, married and vnmaired, and are not bound to be resident with the great obseruants, but permitted to dwell among the commo^ people, only that at certain fixed daies, they assembled at their co^mon-house, to be participants with their outward cerimonies, so that according to this lawe and rule, it is not impertinent to see a whole towne to be Iesuites. The communication which they haue togither by means of confessions, serueth to find out their booties, and to discouer the secrets both of great and small, and because they are particularly affected to the king of
Spaine, their chiefe founder, for whom also they make particular, expresse, and ordinary prayers, it is not to be wondred at, if since that time, these new brethren both in France and elsewhere, haue sought and trauelled so much, to make him Monarch of all the world. Besides this, Maister Pasquier addeth, that the Iesuites alluring vs with faire promises, are ordained to gripe and lay hold vpo^ our goods, and to fil the^selues with our spoiles: that they are Sophisters, ye are entred like fearfull foxes in the middle of vs, therin by proces of time, to raigne like Lyons: that as the auncient Orators and teachers of the people, by a kind of pleasing speech, by litle and litle got credite in Rome: so by litle and litle they ouerthrew the estate, as all Pollititians iudged: we must attend and expect no lesse of the Iesuites, if in the beginning both their race and roote be not extirped.
The aduise and decree of the Sorbonnists against the Iesuites.In the same plea, he doth also insert the aduice and decree of the facultie of diuinitie of Parris, in the Colledge of Sorbonne, of the yeare 1554. importing as followeth. This new societie after a new waner attributing to it self only, an vnaccustomed title of the name of Iesus, so licentiously admitting all people, howsoeuer criminall, illegitimate, or infamous: vsing likewise no difference from secular Priests in their outward habit, in their tousure: in saying their canonical hours, either priuately, or singing the same publikely in the temples: in Cloyster, or in silence: in choise of meat and daies, in fasts, or in other the seuerall laws and ceremonies that do distinguish and preserue the estates of religions, hauing attained so many and diuers priuiledges, intelligences and liberties, especially in regard of Masses and confessions, without distinction of place or persons, likewise in the question of preaching, reading, or teaching, to the great preiudice of ordinaries, Curats, and all other orders of Monks and Fryers, yea euen of Princes and temporal Lords: contrary to the priuiledges of the Vniuersities, and to the great oppression of the people, do seem to pollute the honestie of monasticall religion, to weaken the studious, deuoute, and necessary exercise of vertue, abstinence, cerimonies, and austeritie: yea euen to minister occasion freely to shrink from al other religions: to substract and draw away all obedie^ce and subiection due to ordinaries: doth wrongfully depriue both temporal and Ecclesiasticall Lords of their rights, and breedeth troubles in al estates, eyther pollicke or religious, and many quarrels among the commons: as suites, strife, discention, enuie, rebellio^, and sundrie schismes. Al these considerations, with many others, diligently wayed and examined, this societie seemeth dangerous to the estate of religion: a disturbance to the peace and vnitie of the Church: and subuerter of all mockerie, and an inuention tending rather to destruction then edification. Now let vs see what followeth.A bitter censure against the Iejuiticall sect. There neuer was (faith M.
Pasquier, who protesteth himselfe to be of the Romish church, in the faith wherof, he voweth to liue and die) inuented so partial and ambitious a sect: neither any whose propositions imported more pernicious consequence, then the Iesuites. In her principles she is a schismatick, and co^sequently an hereticke. Then doth he compare
Ignace with Luther, and so co^cludeth, that
Ignace is more to be feared them the other: for (saith he) mens consciences may easily be surprised and made drunken with the poyson of the Ignatians, and Iesuites, in that they account them to be the principall protectors of ye Romish religion against all hereticques, whereof neuerthelesse they are the chiefe subuerters. Vnder pretence of supporting the church of God, they do subuert it, and wil at length vtterly ouerthrow it. Soone after, proceeding in his speech to the whole Court, he saith: I hope plainly to let you vndersta^d, that this sect in all their propositions, worketh nothing but diuision between the christian and the Iesuit: between the Pope and the Ordinaries, and between all other Monks and the^selues: that so long as they be tollerated, no Prince or Potentate can assure his estate against their attempts. This sect was founded vpon the ignorance of Ignace, and euer since, maintained and vpholden by the pride and arrogancie of his secretaries. After that, he reproacheth the^, terming the^selues Iesuits, do degrade the ancient christians, and blaspheme against God. Further, that in Portingal and the Indes, they term the^selues Apostles, saith: that as certain sectuaries in An. 1562. surnamed Iesuits, and others such proud persons, were ouerwhelmed by the iust iudgement of God: so we are to expect no other thing at the ha^ds of this mean sext of Iesuits, what shew soeuer it maketh: that these Ignacia^s, for attributing to themselues ye name of Iesuits, deserue a shameful death. And the^ answering to the Iesuits vow, touching the Pope: Our faith saith he is otherwise. We in France acknowledge the Pope for supreme head of our church, with all due honor and deuotion: but in such sort, that he is subiect to the decrees of general cou^cels: that he can enterprise no authoritie ouer our realm, nor against the M. of our kings, neither yet against ye authoritie of the decrees of our Court of Parliament, or to the preiudice of our diuosians in their confines and limits. And thervpo^ he saith:Iesuites chiefe creatures and right slaues to the Pope. that Iohn Gerson teacheth vs in one of his books, that we may well bee without a Pope in the church: that it is in the power of a generall Councel, to displace a Pope out of his seat, and therin to place an other, for the ordering of the affairs of the church, as in effect it was practised in the councels of Constance and
Basle. Thus hauing learnedly pleaded for the rights and priuiledges of the French church, he discouereth their subtilties, thefts, dissimulatio^s, impostures, and rauenings, shewing by diuers examples, that they are mutenous, sowers of troubles, Atheists, and mockers of God. And ending his plea, said to all the Court: You my Maisters that tollerate the Iesuits,Vertues of the Iesuites. True predition. shall one day be the first Iudges of your owne condemnations, when by the meanes of your permissions, you shall perceiue the mischiefes that will ensue, not onely in
France, but throughout Christendome.
Aduocate Mesnil, who in this care pleaded for the kings Atturney, propounded many matters against these sectaries, who hee sufficiently prooued to bee a plague to the Realme, but because of the kings voyage into Bayonne, and that the Queenes councels, and those of the house of Guise that ruled all, tender onely but to the ruine and ouerthrow of the Prince of Conde, the Admirall, and those of the religion: the Iesuites proces was for that time ordered by the Councel, that is, layd vp by the walles. Afterward the second and third troubles, togither with the massacre ensuing, the Isuites set vp their crests in earnest, and compassed the straunge practises, whereof ensued the horrible tragedies that were played about the end of the raigne of Henry the third, as more at large shall appeare: wherewith this yeare ended. Now let vs consider what happened in the yeare 1567, when the troubles and miseries of France began againe.
The king of Spaines intent against the low countries.The king of Spaine not being able to indure the increase of those of the religion in the lowe Countries, and much offended with them, for the breaking and throwing down of Images in Flaunders, Brabant, and other Prouinces, determined to proceed against them with fire and sword, not once regarding the priuiledges of the countrie, nor yet the cruel extortions and iniustices of his officers, against those of the religion, whose Ministers and principal rulers opposed the^selues by all the means the could, against the breaking of Images, thrown down by a small number of men, and such as were of no great account, and in so short a time, that it seemed they had fallen of themselues. For the execution of this bloodie councel, which had bin decreed in the League made at Bayonne, Fernando Aluares de Tolede Duke of Alua, that had been his Agent in Bayonne, was established Liefetenant General, with most ample and expresse co^mission: who in the beginning of the spring, in An. 1567. accompanied with his two sonnes, and great troupes of men, imbarking themselues at
Barcelonne, in the month of May arriued at Genes: and with an armie of 9000.The Duke de Alue commeth to torment the low countries. Spaniards, 1000. light-horse, marched towards
Millan. What followed therof, is at large set down in the Histories of the low Countries. The Q. and the Councel of France, vnder this pretence of the D. of Alues passage, made a certaine report to be giuen abroad, that it was to be feared, that the Spaniard would attempt somewhat against France, vnder pretence of going into
Flanders: and thervpon began to leuy 6000. Switzers to keep the frontiers: but not long after, they were broght further into the realme, for the Duches of Parma was alreadie gone out of the lowe Countries into
Italie, assoone as she receiued intelligence of the D. of
Alues imbarking. The Prince of Conde and the Admiral, with other Lords of the religio^,Sundrie councels holden by the Prince of Conde, before he entred into armes. calling to mind what had past since the edict of pacification, and perceiuing the Switzers to enter into the realme, and that the D. of Alue was alreadie arriued in the lowe Countries, assembled togither in small number, there they produced certaine letters intercepted from Rome and Spaine, wherein the practises how to roote out the professors of the reformed religion at one instant, were at large set downe.

In a short space they had three consultations of
Vallery and Chastillon, where met some ten or twelue of the chiefest Gentlemen of the religion, to debate vppon the present accurrences, and to seeke all lawfull and honest meanes of safterie in so many terrors, without proceeding to the last refuge. In the first two, the opinions rested very diuers, neuerthelesse, rather by the Admirals counsell then otherwise, euery man was intreated a while to haue patience, and the rather for that in matters of such consequence, as wherevppon depended so many miseries and calamities, it was more necessary to be drawne in by necessitie, then to make too much haste, or vppon a greedie desire to runne on headlong: besides that, shortly matters would bee made more apparant: but in the last consultation they grewe into a greater heate.
For besides all passed calamities or imminent daungers, also that they of the religion were openly threatned, throughout most townes and Prouinces, that they should not long beare themselues so high, and that their time drew night to an end, they receiued more aduise out of sundrie places: and both the Prince and Admirall did plainely affirme, that they had expresse aduertisement from a certaine Courtier very well affected to those of the religio^, that there had been holden a most secret Councel: wherein it was concluded, that they should bee seized vpon: that the one should bee executed, and the other detained prisoner: that at the same instant, two thousand Switzers, shuld enter into
Parris: two thousand into Orleans: and the remainder into
Pointiers: that the Edict of pacification should bee vtterly repealed, and an other made quite contrary to the same.
Heerevppon they grewe to earnest disputation: for whereas some vrged a speedie relolution of necessary defence, the rather because the forraine forces marched alreadie openly, for the vtter ruine of those of the religion throughout the realme: others that were not altogither so hotte, shewed, that albeit they perceiued the fire alreadie kindled, yet they could not see any water to quench it.
For if wee should, said they (as many times heeretofore) haue recourse to complaints, wee doo plainly finde, that so we shall sooner stirre vppe our aduersaries to more rage, then procure our selues any remedie. Againe, if we take armes, albeit it bee for our most iust, necessary, and vrgent defence, yet what obloquie, slaunder, and curses, shal we incurre at their hands, who althogh wrongfully do impute vnto vs the whole blame of whatsoeuer miseries may ensue, and will turne their rage, which they cannot inflict vpon vs, against our poore families scattered in sundrie places? And therefore sith of many ineuitable mischiefes, we are alwaies to chuse the least: it were better to beare the violence of the enemie, then by beginning with them to make our selues guiltie of a publicque and generall commotion.
Herevpon the la d'Andelot vrging the necessitie of the defensiue, amongst tother speeches, said: If ye linger and driue off, vntill ye bee banished into forraine countries: cast bound into prisons: ouerrunne with multitude of people: contemned by the men of warre, or condemned by the authoritie of the greatest, all which is not now farre from vs: what good shall wee reape of our patience and former humilitie? what profit shall wee reape by our innocencie? to whom shall we complaine? nay, who will affoord vs the hearing? It is now time for vs to bee better aduised, and to haue recourse to the defensiue, which is no lesse iust the^ necessary, neither are we to care thogh we be accounted the Authors of the warre: which is leuyed onely by tho^e, who in so many sorts haue broken all publicque couenants and agreements, and brought euen into our bowels, six thousand forraine souldiers, that haue alreadie in effect proclaimed it against vs. Now let vs likewise giue them so much aduantage, as to smite the first blowes, and so shall our mischiefes bee past all care.
And after many meetings and determinations had among them, heerevppon they resolued vppon a prompt and readie defensiue resolution, wherin there were diuers meanes disputed vpon, touching the execution thereof. In the end it was concluded, to rise in armes, and in that beginning of war to obserue foure things: the first, to hold but fewe townes but such as shuld bee of importance: the second, to raise a great armie: the third, to ouerthrow the Switzers, by whose meanes the Catholicques would alwaies bee Maisters of the field: the fourth, to assay if they could driue the Cardinall of Lorraine from the Court, because many imagined that hee onely was the man, that still solicited the king to destroye all those of the religion. But touching the two last poynts, many and great difficulties were propounded, some alleadging, that the Cardinall and the Switzers marched continually with the king, and that setting vpon the one, and seeking to feare the other, it would bee saide, that the enterprise had been made against the Maiestie of the king, and not against them. Yet in fine, they were confuted by this reply, that the effects would plainly shew, what the intent of the Prince and his associates was: as the euent manifestly shewed in the actions of
Charles the seuenth, as then beeing but Dauphine, when he raised armes, yet neyther against his father nor the Realme.
Further, that it was well knowne, that the Frenchmen themselues neuer attempted any thing against their Prince. Lastly, that if this first successe fell out fauorably, that it would be the means to cut off the course of a long and troublesom war, because therby they shuld haue means to let the king know the truth of those things which were diguised vnto him: wherevpon might ensue the confirmation of the Edicts, specially when those that arme themselues to preuent, shall finde themselues preuented.
The successe of the Princes resolutionThis (as saith the Lord de la Noue in his discourses) was the resolution of the Lords and Gentlemen, that at that time were about the Prince, who (as hee addeth) albeit they were men of great experience, skill, valor, and wisdome, yet al that they had so diligently pondered, and so well forecast, when it came to the effect, fell out wonderfull short of their expectation: whilest other things whereof they had so farre drempt, as thinking them ouer sure, or difficult, redounded to their good, and stood them in stead. A while before, they resolued vpon this necessitie, as the Switzers marched on, first the Prince, and then the Admirall, made a iourney to the Court, where they declared each after other, to the king, to his mother, and to the Councell, that there was no reason, neither any iust occasion, to make this leuie of six thousand Switzers, and to bring them into the Realme, vnlesse paradu enture they had some pretence to imploy them vpon the ruine of those of the religion, of whom there were yet remaining a greater multitude then they imagined, whereof the late warres might beare witnesse: withall, that if their enemies practised ought but good, they would stand vpon their guard, and not haue their throates cut by theeues and perturbers of the publike peace: and heerevppon also they besought the king to take compassion of so many honest families throughout his Realme: but they were denied and hardly intreated: yea, the Prince at one time was in great hazard of his life: against whom the Courtiers had incensed the Duke of
Aniou the kings brother, who suddainly entered into a sharpe braule against him, seeking all occasions to do him a shrewd turne: but the Prince both wise and eloquent, aunswered him so pertinently to whatsoeuer the questions and violent complaints of him whom hee was to reuerence, who also was at that time inuironed with those that would not sticke to strike, that the snare was broken, whereby hee escaped, and from that time came no more to the Court.
To returne to the successe of the enterprise of the Prince and his partakers, they were forced of necessitie eyther to oppose themselues against the cruell resolution of their enemirs in
France,The Princes preceedings. or else to flie out of the Realme, and so to leaue so many thousands of hou sholds and families, to the mercie of their massacring enemies. For touching the first poynt, they determined to surprise three townes onely: that is,
Lyons, Thoulouse, and Troys, all very commodious for the warres. But the meanes vsed by those that tooke the charge vppon them, were not well effected, in regard they were ouer many people, and of small experience and sucfficiencie in such affaires, who held their consultations of that which should bee done while they lay in their beddes, or sat in their counting-houses. Touching their strength in field, those of the religion had more in the beginning then the Catholicques, but sixe weekes after the raising of armes, about the end of Septemb. they found themselues the strongest, whereby they constrained the Prince and the Admirall to seek refuge in Almaine from Duke
Casimeire.
The execution against the Switzers succeeded but crosly, because it was discouered, and that the forces that should haue met in time and place sayled. The Cardinall of Lorraine saued himselfe in great haste, and fledde from the Court, and yet he kept his credite in the Court, being able to do as much absent, as present. To the contrary, the Prince and his partaker fell into great difficulties, by prouoking the hatred and collor of the king against them, because through their meanes hee was constrained to go from Meaux to Parris, with great feare, although hee had sixe thousand Switzers about him; besides horsemen the Prince at his approaching hauing betweene foure and fiue hundreth horse at the most, neuerthelesse, it was put into the kings head, that he sought to attempt against his person, so that from thenceforward, he alwaies had a secret grudge against them. This entrie into the warre hauing had but a hard beginning for the Prince, other effects recompenced the defaults of his former fortunes: but more by the particular motions and dispositions of certaine Gentlemen and Inhabitants of Townes, then any Precedent deliberation: whereby it fell out, that those of the religion seized vpon Orleans, Auxerre, Soissons, and other places. The generall leuying of armes in one day by the Prince and his participants, did no little abash those of the contrary part: as also that with so small a number of horse, he durst approach so neare sixe thousand Switzers, whom he had charged betweene Me^^x and
Parris, yea and ouerthrowne them, if the Harquebusiers on horsebacke, whom hee attended, had kept their appoynted time, or if he had bin strengthened with 150. horse out of
Picardie, that came certaine houres too late. But the Prince not daring to venture vpon so great a troupe of Switzers,The Prince retireth to S. Dennis. that seemed a forrest, therein perceiuing too much hazard, and too small aduantage for him and his troupes, went vnto Saint Dennis with his troupes, where not long after, hee had more company, so that in fewe daies hee found himselfe to be 2000. horse, and 4000. Harquebusiers strong, which not long after were dispearsed: Monsieur d'Andelot sent with 500. horse towards
Poissy, and Pontoise, to hinder those of
Parris, that haue their victuals brought them by water. Many companies of foot marched toward Argentueil, Pont Charenton, and other places bordering on the same. The rest of the troupes were sent part to meete the troupes of Guyenne, that should enter into Orleans, surprised by Monsieur de la Noue, and part into other places where need required. So that the Prince and the Admiral staying at S. Dennis, with certaine Gentlemen, could not haue aboue 800. horse, and
1200. Harquesiers. The Constable had within Parris aboue 3000. horse, 12000. foot, and the sixe thousand Switzers, with artillerie and warlike ammunition, as much as he would desire, yet stirred not, fearing the hard resolution of the Prince his traine, who by their troupes dispearsed, seized vpon the passages both by water and land, wherevppon the Parrisians not vsed to fasting, beganne to complaine. The Prince hoped to constraine them to fight, and that his forces being vnited, if hee might bee victor, to bring his enemies vnto a more assured peace, then that hee made before: and if hee were ouerthrowne, the places which hee held vppon the riuer of Marne and Seyne, would serue him for his retrait, staying for the Rutters that beganne to stirre, with his forces of Guyenne.
The Constable to the contrary, hauing taken the view of the Princes lodging and forces, determined to giue them battell, assuring himselfe to ouerthrow the^ without resistance: for that besides his number of men, being tenne for one, he had great store of Ordinance, and pikes, and a faire fielde well fitting for his troupes and cannons. All these disaduantages notwithstanding, disswaded not the Prince, but that hee, the Admirall Ienlis, and other leaders of the religion, issued to assayle them. The battell beeing giuen vppon the tenth of Nouember,
1567.The battell of S. Dennis continued almost three quarters of an houre, night separating them: the issue beeing such, that those of the religion (that had aduanced themselues aboue a quarter of a League, entering with most strauge furie vppon their enemies, wearied with striking, their horses being breathlesse or hurt, namely that of the Prince slaine vnder him, and the Admiralles horse hauing borne him twise through the thickest of his enemies forces, beeing a very strong horse in the mouth, and in the beginning of the fight had broken his curbe, and yet neither of those two leaders hurt) were constrained to recuile, but retiring in good order, most of the Constables foote did little seruice, but the Princes playde their parts, the horsemen on both sides fighting with great courage.
The Constable himselfe was wounded to death, and died within short time after: and before hee died,Death of the Constable. connielled and desired the Queene to pacifie those troubles with all the speed she might; but shee followed other counsell, whereof shee and her sonnes haue had leisure to repent them, and died before shee had reeled vp her spindle.

The Prince thinking his enemies would haue set vppon him againe, to bee reuenged vppon a handfull of men, that had held them play vnder their noses, speedily sent for Monsieur d'Andelot, who about midnight returned to S. Dennis: and it was well for those of
Parris (as their leaders affirmed) that hee came no sooner: for if hee had, it would haue fallen out hardly with them. After a little breathing, the leaders determined, that it would bee necessary for them to abate some of the Romish Catholicques pride and opinion of their aduantage, by shewing them, that those of the religion had sufficient courage, and called them to performe the battell.
Wherevppon the next day in the morning, they entered into the field with their small armie, marching towards the subburbes of
Parris, and there stood certaine owers in order of battell, burning a village and some Windmilles, in the open face of the Parrisians, that neuer once issued foorth, being busied to burie their dead, to heal their wounded, and to suruey their corners and companies: and to bee short, thought it no wisedome, to hazard themselues against those whom they perceiued to bee strengthened and so resolute to fight. But the Prince perceiuing, that the losse of one man would bee more to him, then one hundreth to his enemies, that daily increased, and that to stay longer so neare Parris, wold be the ouerthrow of his smal campe, the next day marched forward, towards Montereau, where the forces assembling at Orleans and Estampes, ioyned with him. To the contrary, the kings armie,Both the armies in the field, and their exployts till the end of the yeare. whereof was Generall, Henry Duke of A niou, brother to the king, a young Prince, beeing as then about the age of sixteene yeares, assisted with a great number of Lords, Gentlemen, and Captaines, followed after the Prince, seeking occasion to giue him battell. The Protestants troupes of
Guyenne and Poictou, composed of eighteen Cornets of horse, and three Regiments of foote, vnder seuen and twentie Ensignes, as they marched tooke le Dorat in Limosin and
Lusignan, and then tooke three peeces of artillerie out of
Orleans, wherewith they battered and forced Pont sur Yon, taking it by assault: which done, they ioyned with the Princes armie, while the Duke d'Aumalle went into Lorraine, to meet the forces of
Iohn VVilliam duke of Saxon, the Marquesse of
Baden and others, that brought an armie of Rutters to ayde the Romish Catholicques: and that young Lansac marched into
Almaine, to diuert the ayde which Duke Iohn Casimeire brought to those of the religion: on the other side, the Duke of
Alue sent twelue hundreth horse and two thousand foote, vnder the conduct of the Counte de Aremberg, that ioyned with the D. of
Aniou, notwithstanding the Prince marched towards Lorraine, constraining those of Bray, and Nogent vpon Sey^^, to giue him passage, and tooke Espernay lying vpon Mar^: where for a time he stayed to assemble all his forces. There young Lansac in his second voyage to Almaine was taken, and beeing brought prisoner to the Prince, all his businesse turned into smoke. In the moneth of December vppon some motions of peace, there were two truces agreed vpon, each for two or three daies, to the end (as the voyce went) to conferre vpon the poynts propounded. The first was neare to Montereau, and the other by Chaalons: but the last was like to haue bredde much mischiefe: for the Prince relying vppon the promises of his sworne enemies, rested in a very bad lodging out of the way, whiles their armie approached: And had it not beene for an enterprise, that the young Countie Brissac (a young Lord, by nature violent, and the Duke of Anious especiall fauoritie) had vndertaken against certaine companies of Argolets, vnder the Captaines Bois, Blossel, and Clery, who were then ouerthrowne: the Prince, who yet hoping vppon two daies respite, stirred not from that lodging, had surely beene intrapped and in manifest daunger: but Brissacks rashnesse saued him: and according to the prouerbe, mischiefe was good for somewhat.
The Prince waying the wrong that his enemies had wrought to their owne reputation, in weening to indomage him, determined no longer to trust their promises, (in which conceit notwithstanding hee did not long perseuer) vppon his conclusion in three daies space, hee made his armie to march aboue twentie long leagues, through the raine and such hard passages, that it was wonderfull that the artillerie and baggage could euer follow: and yet lost neyther the one nor the other, so good was his order, and so great their diligence.
The Duke of Aniou followed not: for some of his Councell making great haste, perswaded him that his very name had driuen the Huguenots out of France: whereas such as were indeed warriors, did contrariwise accuse the cowardlinesse of those that had so suffered the Prince and his followers to escape, as not daring to fight with them, eyther weake or halfe strong. The Prince arriuing in
Lorraine, stayed some fewe daies for his Rutters, not without some repugnancie and perplexitie of diuers.
VVarres reuiued in diuers places.This Negotiation, which was but a string to stay the Prince, that afterward they might with greater aduantage ouerrunne him, beeing vanished on the one side, they beganne to take armes in Poictou and about Rochel, which euer since hath been a refuge to sundrie families of the religion, and so hath happily continued, as a barre to blocke vppe the purposes of the Romish Catholicques, and the instrument that God hath put in vse to confound the infinite conspiracies of the enemies to the Crowne and state of France. On the other side, the Duke of
Aniou (but ouerlate) sought all opportunitie (which before hee had let slippe) to fight with the Prince and Admirall before they should ioyne with the Germaines, whom they went to meet in Lorraine, and of whom they receiued certaine aduertisement near to Pont a Mousson, from whence Duke Iohn Casimeire their Generall writ to the king, to desire him to thinke,The Prince ioyneth with his Germains that hee neuer determined to enter into France, for any his owne priuate good, or particular interest, but onely for the support of such as were afflicted for the same religion which himselfe professed, who had intreated him to ayde: protesting, that if it might please the king, to assure to them the libertie of conscience, and generall exercise of their religion, himselfe and all his troupes would presently retire.
Then fell there out great adoo about the satisfying of the Rutters, who looked to receiue a hundreth thousand Crownes at the least: heere were they put to their shifts, and forced of necessitie, to make a vertue: and when the Prince and Admirall had made vse of whatsoeuer their eloquence, both to great and small, vpon this extremitie they set all men a notable example, in that they parted with their owne siluer vessell. The Preachers in their sermons perswaded many, and the Captaines also prepared the mindes of their men.

Many Lords and Gentleme^ likewise did most readily put their hands to their purses: the rest, some for loue, and some for feare, execeeded all expectation. So generall was this liberall contribution, that the meanest Page and veriest varlet gaue somewhat: yea, in the end it was thought a dishonour to haue beene sparing, and many offered more then was demaunded. In summe, the whole beeing gathered togither, both quoyne, plate, and chaines of golde,The Rutters in some sort contented. it amounted to aboue foure score thousand Frankes, wherewith the Rutters were well quietted, and so ioyned with the Princes forces. Then was there a generall voyce, that it was best to drawe towards
Parris, which was the apparant meanes to obtaine peace: as also their Leaders were not ignorant, that for their better maintenance, it was requisite to prouide artillerie, powder, mony, and other such commodities as are to bee wrested for the Marchant and Artificer: likewise, that vnlesse they drew towards Orleans, their true nurse, they should want those aduantages. Heerevppon they set forward,They drewe towardes Beausse. and passed ouer
Marne, neare to the head thereof, not farre from Langres, and marching through Burgondie, at their passage ouer Seyne, were set vppon by certaine Italian and French, whom Schonberg with a Regiment of Rutters and French of the religion, charged and defeated, leauing the most of the assaylants dead in the place.
Hence the Prince drewe towards Creuant and
Irancie, a small village taken by assault, and so passed ouer the riuer of Yone, Loyne, and la Cure, and so set himselfe at large, maugre the many hinderances of the aduerse armie, which laboured as well to restraine him from any purchase, out of the villages and small burroughs, and to finde opportunitie to cut off part of his armie.
How they prouided for the victualling of the armie.In those daies did France abound in all sorts of victualles, which notwithstanding it stood the Prince and Admirall vppon, to search their wittes, and haue an eye, to the prouision and victualling of their armie, which consisted of twentie thousand men, vnpayed, and vnprouided of any succour or retrait into Townes: meanly furnished and marching through the middest of an infinite number of irreconciliable enemies. They tooke order therefore to lodge their horsemen scattering in the good villages: also to cause the commissaries for victualles, besides their carriages, to keep in euery cornet, one Baker, and two horses of burthen, who presently vpon their comming to their quarter, should fal to baking, and send their bread to the body of footemen.
These pettie commodities proceeding from fortie Cornets, being laide togither, was no small reliefe: besides that, they sent both flesh and Wine: yea the Gentlemen were so willing, that from their lodgings they would send them priuate carriages, to helpe to bring in the ammunition. As for the hamlets that were taken, they were reserued for the munitioners, and the rest that had no Garrisons, were threatned to bee burned one league round about, vnlesse they sent in some amunition. Thus the footemen, who lodged close, were vsually prouided for, besides the booties and other commodities, that the most aduenterous could catch fro^ the Romish Catholicques, that incroached too neare vpon them.
Their forme of lodging.Vpon two principall reasons, was the Prince forced to scatter his armie in diuers places: First for the benefite of victualling: next, to lodge them vnder
couert from the raine, snow, and other discommodities,Their form of lodging. wherewith they had beene spoyled, if they had lodged in the field. The footemen were lodged in two bodies, namely a battell and an Auantgard: and the horsemen in the nearest villages: vppon any alarme the horsemen drew to the Prince and Admirall, so that if any stragling lodging chanced to bee assaulted, it had present succour: among the cornets they had some store of Harquebusiers on horse, and presently after, the troupes were come into their quarters, the waies were sufficiently fortified, and many times they vsed both Churches and Castles, whereby to be able to hold out some two houres, that their succour might come in. The Lord de la Noue, who in this discourse of the discipline of the Princes armie, we do follow, saith: that sometimes he saw the Prince or the Admiral march with fiue or six thousand me^, to the rescue of a lodging assaulted by a contrary partie: but in such roads stil there fel out some losse on either side. Besides, for the preuenting of any notable surprise, the Prince had framed the head of his troupes towards the enemie, of fiue or six hundreth good horse, and as many Harquebusiers on horsebacke, with small store of baggage, except some horses of burthen, to the end stil to hold the enemie occupied, to hinder his enterprise, and to finde opportunitie still to giue warning to the whole campe, which bare it self vnder the discreet conduct of their leaders. While the Princes armie in
Beausse ioyned with the Rutters, making head against the puissant armie of the Duke d'Aniou,Troupes gathered in diuers places for the prince who for his part had almost all the aduantages, onely not resolued to fight, Messieurs de Acier, Sipierre, and other Gentlemen of Languedoc, Prouence and
Dauphine, gathered forces in diuers places, seizing vpon
Nismes and Montpeslier: the Gascons rose vp in armes vnder the conduct of their Vicountes, and forced certaine places vpon the Romish Catholicques, and ioyning themselues with Monsieur d'Acier for the religion, for whom likewise Poncenat and
Verbelay, assembled certain troupes in Bourbonnois and
Auuergne, which were broken by the troupes of Guyenne, marching to the Duke d'Aniou. The Duke de Neuers likewise brought out of Italie, foure companies of lanciers, 2. companies of light horse, and 6. companies of fantasins, and being arriued at
Lyons, and stre^gthened with new co^panies, with 6000. Switzers new raised, he made an armie of 14000. men, with the which he besieged and took Mascon:The Duke of Nemours for the Duke Aniou. and certaine weeks after, being desirous to go see the Duches his wife, he was set vpo^ by 80. horse, and certain foot that issued out of Autra^, co^ducted by Beaunais, and
Burgony. Between the^ ther was som losse on both sides, the D. himself was hurt with a Harquebus-shot in ye knee, yt while he liued he went lame. In Guy. Messs. de Monluc with diuers others, followed with 4000. foot. and 700. horse, enterprised vpo^ ye Iles of
Sain. surprised and killed between 3. or 400. me^: which don, they determined to besiege Rochel, but their inte^t being deferred took no effect. Mean time, the troupes of Dauphine and others, that held with ye Prince, aduanced the^selues, being vnder the co^duct of the Vicounte Mouans and others, at Ganap in Auergne, ouerthrew al the horsmen of the countrie, assembled by S. Heram Gouernor, accompanied with S. Chaumont, Gordes, and others: wherof ye boldest were slain, the rest sauing the^selues with their heels: but in their retrait they found the^selues in a new mischief: for ye hauing giuen charge and expresse notice to al strong towns, and other places therabouts, not to receiue any that fled, whatsoeuer liuerie he bare, vppon the vaine hope they had to haue the victorie. The Pesants made hauocke of the^, in such sort, that ye troupes led by the Viscountes and others, ariued at Orleans, and co^strained Martinenghe, Richelieu the Monke, and other leaders participants with the duke of Aniou, who before that, vsed to runne euen to the gates of the Towne, to seeke some lodging further off, and to keepe themselues in couert, and not contenting themselues to haue driuen them away, followed them: which done, they marched towards Blois, where Richelieu with eight hundreth men hath made his retrait,Blois taken. who at the first made some resistance: but perceiuing a breach to be made, they bled at the nose, and yeelded by composition, liues, armes, and goods saued: neuerthelesse, the Gascons not contenting themselues to vse blowes, made such meanes, that Richelieus souldiers were for the most part spoyled of all they had, what meanes soeuer the horsemen made to impeach them. The Prince vnderstanding the arriuall of those troupes from Gascon and
Dauphine, sent them word to bee in a readinesse: and to those of Orleans, that they should prouide powder, bullets, and three or foure battering peeces.The siege of Chartres. After that, he sent three thousand horse, aboue 20. leagues from thence, to besiege Chartres, a towne of great importance, and one of the barnes of the prouision of corne to serue Parris, which being taken, serued the Prince in some sort, to preserue the places that laye behinde him. Monsieur de Lignieres commaunded therein with 22. companies, that were strengthened by a regiment of foot, that lay about 4. myles fro^ thence, that got into it before the Prince had executed his pretence. The manner of this siege was diuers, because the Prince had but
5. peeces of batterie, and 4. small coluerins, which did no great matter, specially against so many soldiers as were in it. Also in two daies and two nights they made such trauerses and trenches, that no man durst force them: but it was concluded, that a batterie should be made against a place that seemed very weake. The Duke of Anious armie lay on the other side of the riuer of Seine, but would not hazard it selfe, nor once approch the Princes campe, assaying neuerthelesse to aide the besieged, who in fine would haue been taken. Therfore to refresh them, he sent M. de la Valette, a valiant Captaine, with 8. cornets of horse, with charge to surprise some of the enemies lodgings, to indomage their forrages, to cut their victuals fro^ them, and to molest and wearie the Princes forces by continual alarms. He to execute his commission,The Duke of Anious Cornets ouerthrowne. approached within 4. leagues of the campe, lodging very close, from whence he began to make his courses. The Admirall being aduertised therof, tooke vpon him to preuent it, and as he alwaies vsed to march with a good companie, fearing (as he said) to loose the praye, he chose 3500. horse, and departed in so good time, that at sun rising he found himselfe in the middle of the quarters of those 16. cornets of horse, that were charged with such force, by M. de Nouy, that marched before the Admirals troupes, that diuers of them being laid vpon the ground, and 4. cornets taken, the rest were put to flight. La Valette lodged in the town of Houdan, reassembled 4. or 500. horse, and made a reasonable good retrait: but after that, neither he, nor any of the rest of his troupes, would once approach so neare, fearing a new charge.A new motion of peace. The Q. foreseeing of what importance the taking of the town of Chartres would be, bega^ to parley of a peace, saying: that in time of neede she would do more with three sheets of paper, then all her souldiers could do with their armes. The Prince sent the Cardinall de Chastillon, with certain Gentlemen, to meet with the Q. Deputies at Loniumeau hard by Parris, where in few daies a second edict of peace was framed, whereof the first article imported, that those of the religion shuld enioy the first edict purely and simply, and that it should bee executed in euery poynt and article, according to the forme and tenor, taking away and abolishing all restrictions, modifications, declarations, and interpretations, made since the day and daie therof, vntill the publication of this second edict, made the three and twentieth of March,
1568. there were diuers other articles in this edict full of many faire words and promises. As a good peace was much desired, beeing most necessary, so in the meane time, few men considered well what this might bee:Discourse vppon this matter. but as if the name had been like to the effect, most part of those of the religion stayed vppon it, saying that it would be necessary to accept it, not considering the euill will hatched in the king against them: the subtilties of the reuenging spirit of the Queen-mother, the hopes and triumphs proposed to the Duke of Aniou, capital enemie to the Prince: the intents and deuises of the house of Guise against that of Chastillon: the furies of the Cleargie and the Frenchmen, against those of the religion: who without waying these things, with an infinite number of others, thought their sworne enemies would leaue armes assoone as themselues.
^his inclination euil desiested, constrained the Prince and the Admirall to consent to the receiuing of paper, perceiuing so great a disposition (specially in the Nobilitie) to accept it: which was as a tempest that bare them away, not beeing able to resist it. It is true, that the Prince being a friend to peace, had likewise some inclination thervnto: but the Admirall perceiued the infruction thereof, and that this edict was but a snare to intrap both great and small. For that as then certaine babling Romish Catholicques could not refrain to say, that the day of their reuenge approached. A Gentleman that accompanied the Cardinall of Chastillon, sent word that hee had oftentimes heard such speeches, and perceiued a great indignatio^ hidden in the hearts of some of the Deputies for the Queen, and that they shuld looke vnto it: as being a signe and foreshewing of some sinister chance. Likewise there were some of the Court, as wel men as women, who sometimes gathered words cast out vpon the suddain, that sent vnto their kinsmen and friends in the Princes campe, to certifie them, that without all doubt they shuld be deceiued, if they wrought not wisely, which in a maner was to waken those that desired nothing but to sleep vpon the soft pillow of peace. But what aduise soeuer was giue^, it was impossible to stay that tempest of minds, ensuing in Masse of mischiefes, shadowed with the vaile of a royall pacification.
If any man thinke it straunge, how these two commaunders that had so much credit with their participants, could not as then perswade the^ for their benefits, let them consider what voluntarie souldiers are, and the great desire man hath to returne vnto his house, and then hee shall well perceiue, that it is wholly beyond mans power, to staye such as were borne away with so impituous a storme of humane passions. Before the siege was raised from Chartres, many whole cornets, and diuers particular persons,The Prince is constrained to accept the peace. departed without leaue of their superiors, marching towardes Saintonge and Poitou. This humour entered among the footemen, specially those that dwelt farre off, and many of them said: seeing the king offered the last edict of pacification, they could not refuse it.
Some of the Nobilitie desired to returne into their Prouince, for the presernatio^ of their families sacked by the enemy. The footme^ also co^plained that they were not payd, and that they wanted victuals: so that the commanders of those of the religion, could not sticke vnto the aduises giuen vnto them, neither yet refuse the peace: because their forces beganne to diminish. Their reason was, that the body of their French forces forsaking them, they should bee constrained to put themselues to defensiue warre, which they esteemed not to be good for them, seeing as then it was in the month of March, a time when commonly all armies vse to enter into the field, to separate the Rutters, and so to distribute them in their townes, was as much as to deuoure themselues: and to incampe in a strong place, would bee a remedie but for a time. So that to conclude, they resolued, that of force they must hazard that posted and most daungerous peace, which would constraine those that as then left their campe, to acknowledge (but too late) their fault committed. Then they could well haue desired to haue had some townes of the assurance: but when they asked other assurances then the Edicts, promises, and oathes, the Queene, her sonnes, and their Councellors, cast fire out of their mouthes, crying out and saying: that those of the religion sought to despise, and not account of the kings authoritie. To be short, and euill shame caused them to receiue a peace in paper, couerture of a bloodie war, which stayed not long to shew it selfe. The peace beeing published in the Princes campe, Duke Iohn Casimeir speedily made haste to returne into Almaine with all his forces.VVhat ensued of this peace. The Prince, the Admirall, and all the Lords and Gentlemen of their side, with their horse and foote in small troupes, returned to their houses, laying downe their armes, leauing the places by them holden for the space of sixe months: those of least consideration, thinking their enemies wold do the like. They co^tented the^selues only to promise it, alleading according to the doctrine of their church, that they are not to hold faith giue^ to hereticks: for so they esteemed those of the religion. Presently therfore assoone as they had Orleans, and other towns into their possession, presently order was taken, that those of the religion should not bee able to set soot in them againe, their weapons neuer went out of their hands, but beganne to keepe the townes, to make war, place Courts of guard, and Sentinels, as in time of open war, to set Captains and souldiers at the entries of bridges and passages of riuers, not suffering any man either on horse or foot to passe, without examining him: sacked and murthered in the fields and townes, more men in the space of six weekes, then they would do during the space of sixe monthes. To be short, before the end of the month of May,Preparation for the third ciuill warre. those of the religion for the most part, found themselues inclosed within townes, or betweene riuers, expecting nothing else but when they should be murthered: and some of them that had been so instant for the peace, were then constrained to acknowledge, (but somewhat too late) that they must of force drinke the cup of their owne follies. The Prince had withdrawne himselfe to his Castle of
Noyers, a small Town weak and vnfurnished of men: where from day to day, he had intelligence from all places, that the passages of all riuers were stopped, that almost all the D. of Anious horsemen remained about Parris, with fiue or six thousand foote, vnder pretence of new guards for the persons of the king, his mother, his bretheren, and their Capitall towne: that Monsieur de Tauannes was sent with great forces to take him in Noyers, which made him to knowe, that his affaires went not well, and that there was no remedie, but of force to seek to saue himselfe in some place of better assurance. The Admirall not daring to remaine in his house of
Chastillon sur Loing, being but three daies iourney from
Parris, went to lye at Tanlay, a small Castle belonging to Monsieur d'Andel^t his brother, from whence hee went to lye nearer to the Prince, that they might cousult together what was expedient for them to do, and as hee went, there happened
(...) straunge and memorable thing vnto him: which was, that in the way to Auxerre, hard by a village called Moulin, there is a pond, which the
^dmirall approaching, a certaine olde man, one of his ancient and faithfull seruants, called
Grippier, a man that had made many great and long voyages at sea, discouering a darke cloude, driuen by the winde, and that came towards tha^ pond, perswaded his Maister to make haste,Anotable accident. and with all speed to get into the next village, otherwise, he said a storme was comming, that would ouerthrow both him and his companie: which done, and thinking hee would haue beleeued and followed him, in great haste hee went on before. And being scarse out of sight, the Admirall hauing hardly past the end of the Causies that past ouer the pond, he was taken with a tempest and force of winde, that many horsemen were ouerthrowe, and diuers horses stricken to the ground, wherewith their fell a hayle so thicke and great, that the force thereof, hurt many of them. The winde blew away the Admirals hat, which they could not finde againe, but one of his Gentlemen was constrained to send him his hat, and he himselfe was hurt, but (very lightly) vpon the ancle of his foote, with a haile-stone. So that both hee and his company confessed, that if the tempest had taken them in the middle of the Causie, they had surely bin vtterly cast away. The tempest past, the Admirall incouraged his men, giuing hartie thanks to God for his deliuerance, adding these words: Before long time be past, we shall be inuiroued with many dangers, but I trust God will defend vs. Being arriued at Noyers, although both the Prince and be well perceiued that their continuance in ye place, was a means to sharpen the euill wils of their enemies,What means the Prince vsed to staie the third ciuil warre. notwithstanding to omit nothing of their duties, they sent diuers messengers to the king, wherby they shewed themselues to be assured and certified, that his M. sought to apprehend them, humbly besoght him to haue pittie vpon his countrie of
France, sacked and desolated by the two former ciuill wars, without seeking by the ruine and ouerthrow of his realme, to quench the fire which those of Guise kindled therein, as also that it wold please him wisely to preuent the danger then approching. The Admiral likewise wrote to the Ladie Margaret of France, Duches of
Sauoye, whom he knew to be beloued of the Queen-mother, desiring her most instantly, to oppose her selfe against the desolatio^ of the realm of France. The answeres from the Court were shadowed with excuses, protestations,The Admirals Letters to the Duches of Sauoy. and promises: mean time, Tauanes an old seruant to the house of Guise, and not long after, made Marshal of France, ariued in his armie, therwith at one instant to inclose both the Prince and the Admiral within Noyers, the Councels resolution being to besiege and force them, before they could procure ayde fro^ any place, the passages being shut vp. These vnfaithful deuises being discouered vnto ye prince and the Admiral, by diuers of those yt were of the same enterprise, they determined with all speed to dislodge from that place, and in great hast to get to
Rochel, that wold not ope^ their gates vnto ye troupes which the Marshal de Vieleuille thoght to put therin, the Inhabita^ts being aduertised yt they shuld be spoiled because of the religio^ which they defe^ded, togither with their ancient rights and priuiledges,The Prince and the Admirall readie to be taken, saue themselues. which wholly exempted them from all Garrisons, and other warrelike forces, wherewith kings helpe themselues to vse other townes at their pleasures: which to doo, they were to passe the riuer of
Loyre, beeing very high, and about the beginning of Sommer, the Prince was likewise constrained to take the Princesse his wife, and sixe small children with him, among the which, one was of the age of eleuen months and certaine daies.
Their discommodities because of their passage ouer the LoirThe next day they were followed by the children of the Admirall, and Monsieur d'Andelot, who hatting trauersed the riuer of Loire in Berry, met with the horsemen, that conducted them. At which time happened a straunge thing, for the Prince making his account suddainly to passe ouer in an vnaccustomed place, with two or three small boates hired for the purpose, being come to the riuer not farre from Sancerre, his men found a shallowe foord, which he past ouer, followed by fiftie horse, the Princesse, her women, children, and seruants, passed ouer in the boates, but they were scarce gotten out, when suddainly the day beeing cleare and faire, the riuer rose in such sort, that they of Sancerie, and other Inhabitants of those countries, were constrained to acknowledge a particular fauour of God shewed to that small troupe, which had beene preuented, if the Prince had deferred his passage but two houres longer. Beeing ouer, he dispatched messengers Monsieur d'Andelot into
Brittaine, desiring him to raise all the men hee could, and to march towards Poitou.
The Queene, those of Guise, and their Councellours, vnderstanding that the Prince and the Admiral were escaped, greeued that they had no sooner sent Tauannes their Deputie in that action, beganne to send commissions into all parts, appoynting their troupes to meete in Poitou and Cuyenne, while the Duke d'Aniou Generall of the armie, tooke his leaue of the Ladies in the Court, and that preparation was made for his departure. It fell out well for the Prince and the Admirall, that they were not speedily pursued, and that they had such aduersaries, who for the first weeke of their retrait, contented themselues to laugh and iest, saying: that the Prince had no neede to make such haste to bee gone, for that their meaning was, not to hurt him. But his aunswere to such as tolde him of it, beeing vppon the way, was, that hee had rather leaue them the emptienests, then they should take the birds: and if that hee had well thought vppon the promise made by them, to be reuenged for their flight from Meaux, and to make those of the religion runne their towne, he had departed in a better time, that he might haue trauelled with ease. The collor of the Queen, her children, their adherents, and Catholicques, at the beginning of these wars, discharged it selfe vpon diuers particular persons of the religion,Hard vsage of those of the religion. who in
Orleans and other places, were pilled, sacked, and cruelly put to death. The Prince arriued in Rochel vpon the 19. of September, hauing in his way certified those that commaunded in the Townes and Prouinces where hee past, that hee ment not to vndertake any warre, but onely to stay for an answere to the petitions by him sent vnto the king: the Gentlemen of high and base Poitou, not long after, assembled themselues to ioyne with him: at the same time, the Cardinall de Chastillon was constrained to leaue Beauuaisin, and yet so swiftly followed to the sea side, that being constrained to leaue his company, he entred into a ship, that bare him safely into England. The Queene of Nanarre,Retrait of the Cardinal de Chast^lion, and of the Queene of Nauarre and her children. taking with her the Prince her sonne, and the Princesse her daughter, went likewise to
Rochel, so to auoyde the pretences and intents of her enemies, against her and hers: Descars and Monluc, that commanded at Perigord, Limosin, and Guyenne, vsed all the means they could to hinder her: but the troupes that conducted her, hauing three Regements of foote, and eight Corners of light-horse, assured her way, wherevppon shee certified the king, the Queene, the Duke of Aniou, and the Cardinall of Bourbon, of the causes of her voyage.
The deportements of the Prince at Rochel.Immediately vpon the Princes arriuall at Rochel, where his brother the Counte of Roche foucaud was come a little before, he assembled the Citizens, and vnto them represented the miserable estate of the realm, requiring their succours in defence of religion, the Common-wealth, and the Crowne of France. Withall, promising particularly to assist them against al such as sought the oppression of their liues and liberties.
The Maior in the behalfe of all the Cittizens, whose affaires hee commended vnto him, offered him their liues and goods, as also the eight and twentieth of September following, hee did to the Prince of
Nauarre, as well inregard of his Lieftenancie in Guyen, as also in hope that hee should inherite his Parents, not onely in lands and liuings, but also in the loue and fauour that they alwaies had borne to the
Rochelers, whereof hee assured them. The Lord d'Andelot the foure and twentieth of September,The aduentures of the Lord d'Andelot in comming to ioyne with the Prince. entered the confines of Brittaine and Maue, with foure Cornets, one company of Argoletiers, and foure Ensignes of footemen, where hee found many other leaders, so that his whole companie amounted vnto a thousand good horse, and two thousand harquebusiers.
With these troupes, Andelot coasted towards
Loyre, to finde some commodious passage, whereby to ioyne with the Prince. The same day that he gat to the riuers side, and within two houres after that his men had taken vp their lodgings in the scattered villages, the Duke Martiques Gouernour of Brittaine, going towards Saumur to the Duke of Montpensier, had intelligence that sundrie troupes of enemies (not naming who) had taken vp their lodging in his way. Hee had but three hundreth launces, and fiue hundreth braue Harquebusiers, with whom he passed couragiously through all
d'Andelots troupes, who in regard they lay scattered, were not able either to defeat him, or to force him to retire, so that hauing marched eight leagues, and had sundrie skirmishes, by the shutting of the night, hee gat to Saumur, hee and his men, with the losse of some twentie men, among others of his Lieftenants: but by the way slewe fouretimes as many, and carried away an Ensigne.
This was the fruite of his close and orderly march, togither with his resolution worthie a graue and wary leader: neither could this surprise or abridge d'Andelot of his hope to passe ouer the riuer of Loire: for hauing reassembled his forces into two troupes, hee caused the riuer to bee gauged all ouer, so that at the last hee found a foord, where neuer any man in our memorie had passed: there did hee and his, with great joy for this vnexspected good hap, passe the riuer the next day.
Before this foord was found, as the Lord de la Noue demaunded, in case the passage were stopped, what they were best to resolue vpon: What shuld we do (said he) but follow an extreame resolution, either to die as souldiers, or to saue our selues as souldiers?A braue resolution in necessitie. adding moreouer: I thinke it best for vs to ioyne togither, and so to retire some seuen or eight leagues into the open countrie, thence to scatter some rumours, whereby the Duke de Montpensier and Martigues, may bee aduertised of our departure in manner of a flight, euery man seeking to saue one, for this will easilie bee beleeued. In the mean time. let vs prepare and encourage our men to the field: so that if they drawe after vs (as vndoubtedly they will, in hope rather of spoyle then of battell) we may valiantly encounter them: so shal we giue them such an ouerthrow, that wee shall not need to feare any troupe, that may dare to meete vs for one months space, but that we may at ease either passe the riuers, or get into Germanie.
Martiques by this passage purchased great honour: but d'Andelot more commoditie by his, by bringing himself and all his troupes into safetie, wherby within eight daies hee ioyned with the Prince. Then was there sundrie consultations about their affaires, how to imploye both men and the time, whilest they leuyed a mightie armie for the duke of Aniou, and that the duke of Montpersier assembled diuers troupes in Anion, and the countries thereabout, to go to it in earnest. The Prince bringing some cannons out of
Rochel, set vpon such townes of Poitou and
Xaintongue,The Princes first exployts. as were but weake and meanly furnished with Garrisons: seizing vpon
Nyort, Fontenay, S. Maixaut, Saintes, S. Iohn d'Angely, Ponts and Coignac, Depuys, Blay, and Angoulesme, whereof some were gotten easily, and others by force and assault. To be short, within two months space, the Prince and his partakers, of poore vacabondes as they were at the first, became so wealthie, that they were able to continue a long war. In al these places they lodged some thirtie companies of footmen, and seuen or eight cornets of horse, which was a great sauing for the fielde, and they formed a most pollitieque and militarie order as wel for the French, as for the conduct of their armie. Thus throgh necessitie, togither with occasion, they of the religion found meanes to make vse of both: and the Admiral was wont to their aduenture, to attribute the ancient prouerbe of The mislocles, saying to his familiers: Had we not been lost, we had been lost: Meaning, that had they not committed an ouersight, they had not had so great a recouerie, as that which did farre surpasse their former condition. The delaies of the Romish Catholieques stood the Prince in great stead. But if in time they had foreseen, that those who^ he had caused to dislodge in so great hast, went to settle themselues farther off,The delay of the one, serued for the others good. and made speede to impeach them, by all apparance the Prince had remained inclosed within Rochell, and the wars had not co^tinued. But god by those obscure beginnings, made an entrie into the notable iudgements which after that appeared. It may be, that the ioy they had at Parris, to see the Townes and Prouinces left, which had made so long and hard war against the Parrisians, during the first and second troubles, made diuers of their harts so much in flamed, that they disdaind their enemies that were so far off, esteeming that Rochel alone could not resist them, but y^ within 3. month, after, they shuld be inclosed therin: which discourses are commonly made when our prosperitie is geater then we expect. The Q. and her Councelors presently caused an edict to be published at Parris,Edicts against those of the religion. by y^ which, after a long declaration made, touching things happened to the realme, by of the religion, the king among other things, declared, that the Edict of ianuary, by the which he promised the exercise of religion, was but prouisionall, vntill his Maioritie, and that hee was not determined to haue the Edict made, before that touching the religion should be any more obserued.
For which causes beeing atiained to the said age of Maioritie, hee fore bad all exercise thereof, in the countries of his obedience: commaunding without reuocation, that there should be no other exercise of religion, but onely that of the Romish Church, vpon paine of losse of bodie and goods. And vppon the same paine, commaunded all the Ministers of the religion, to depart out of the Realme, within fifteene daies after the publication thereof: commaunding neuerthelesse, that those of the religion should not in any sort be troubled for their consciences, so they would liue peaceably in their houses.
At the same instant an other edict was published, certifying, that from thencefoorth, the king intended not to bee serued with any offices, beeing of that profession, from that time forward discharging them of all their offices, commaunding them to yeelde them vpto him within fifteene daies after, otherwise hee would take some stricter order therein.
These Edicts had been long hatching: but their hope was to intrappe the Prince and the Admirall:The effects of such edicts wherein hauing failed to get mony of the Cleargie and the third estate, the Queene and those of Guise serued themselues with this deuise, which was to no great end. For that besides the great charges of the Duke of Anious armie, wherewith the most dearest Catholicques were twise greeued and offended, before the warre was halfe ended, diuers of the religion entered into the field, who otherwise would haue stayed the rest and quietnesse promised them by the king, and not haue left their houses. But at this alarme they assayed to ioyne with the troupes: further, the commaunders sent certaine declarations into
England and Almaine, to shewe, that they were not pursued as seditious persons, or such as desired a Crown, (as their aduersaries reported) but onely because of the religion, which the Romish Catholicques sought to extirminate France: which serued the^ well, for the furtherance of the leuie of Rutters, which the next yeare came into
France, vnder the conduct of the Duke de Deux Ponts. Also there were many about the king, the Queen, and the Duke of Aniou, that desired nothing else but to see all the countrie flaming with fire: some to robbe and spoyle without punishment: others to execute their vengeances and reuenges: the Pensionaries of Spaine, to cause the Frenchmen to cut each others throat, those of Guise by litle and litle to attaine to the aduancement of their deseignments, which discouered themselues in the end of the raigne of Henry the thrid, as you shall read.
After these Edicts, the Duke of Aniou made preparation for all things necessarie for his voyage, and so puissant an armie, whereof by the king hee was made Lieftenant generall. That which increased the Princes troupes, was the Regiment of foot, which Monsieur d'Acier brought out of Dauphine, Prouence, and
Languedoc, not long before the Prince had written vnto him, as also to diuers Captaines in those Prouinces, that they should vse all the means they could, to prouide him a certaine number of men, therewith to withstand the armie royall, that came to assayle him: that the Princes, Lords, and other commaunders, might not indure so great disaduantage, to bee assieged within a towne: and it fell out so, that
Acier, Mouuans and others, not neglecting this commaundement, made so great a troupe of men,Forces out of Dauphin, Prouence, and Languedoc, for the Prince. as it seemed that they had wholly vnpeopled those three Prouinces, hauing at the least sixteene or seuenteene thousand Harquebusiers marching along. Gourdes, Gouernour of Dauphine, vsed all the meanes hee could to impeach their passage ouer the riuer of Rhosne: but they hauing seized vppon diuers places that might bee commodious for them, and with ease crossing that great riuer, went to Allais, and so marched towards
Millaud to enter into Perigueux. Now as on the one side, this troupe of footemen was the strength of the Princes armie, so was it the cause of the losse of diuers places, which the Catholicques seized vppon after the departure of Acier and other commanders, whereof diuers repented themselues to haue leuyed so many men, whereof the halfe would haue sufficed, marching close and in good order: but the iealousie among the principall leaders, the staying of some, and the aduauncing of others, was the meanes that they could not ioyne with the Prince, before they had receiued a hard checke: two of their regiments beeing defeated by the Duke
de Montpensieur, because that Mouuans and Pierre Gourdes Collonels, perceiuing themselues hindered by lodging so close as they had done, till they were not farre from Perigort, sought to separate themselues and lie in a village called
Mensignac, beeing of opinion, that with two thousany Harquebusiers they might withstand a whole armie. Mouuans had both valour and pollicie, as much as any Captain of footmen euer had in his time. But his courage caused him at that time to take vpon him too great a charge: for beeing set vpon on all sides,The ouerthrowe of Mouans and Gourde. and by sixe times as many men, yet he refused not to fight valiantly: but in fine, both hee and his companions were slaine in the field, with the number of a thousand of their men, and to impeach
Acier, lodging about two small leagues from thence, with sixe thousand foote, from comming to ayde them, at the same time that
Mouuans was charged by the Dukes footemen, they sent eight or nine launciers and diuers Harquebusiers on horsebacke towards Acier, that cried battell, and made a great noyse with trumpets.A stratagem to hinder aide Whereat Acier was so much busied to looke vnto himselfe, that in the mean time Mouuans and his troupes sustained the force of their enemies, selling their liues as well as they might, in such sort, that the Catholicques lost aboue a hundreth men, and were so moyled with the fight and the trauell their horse had made at that same day, that they could not pursue nor charge Aciers troupes, abashed at the report of those that had escaped, that made the Duke of Montpensiers forces to bee farre greater then they were.
What the two armies did lying so neare togither.After this ouerthrow of Mouuans, the Duke of
Montpensieurs armie returned to Chastelleraut, as fearing least the Prince beeing growne so strong, by the arriuall of the
Dauphinois of their companions, should haue set vpon him in some place of disaduantage. There he found the Duke of Anion, accompanied with very resolutetroupes, and a great number of Noble men and Captaines greatly affectionate to this poore Prince. There had not been many daies seene two such armies of French men. The Prince of Conde, his places furnished, had eighteene thousand Harquebusiers, and three thousand good horse. In the Dukes armie they had no lesse then tenne thousand footmen, besides the Switzers, and foure thousand lances: so that on both sides there were fiue and thirtie thousand Frenchmen, all trained men, and peraduenture as good souldiers as any in Europe.
They of the religion considering their strength, endeuored to haue come to handie blowes, and came within two leagues of
Chastelleraud, but the Prince beeing giuen to vnderstand, that the other campe was lodged in a very conuenient place, and almost inuironed with a small marish, holpen with some sleight intrenchment in diuers places, would not make any rash attempt, but soght all other meanes to drawe his enemie to the field.The Prince seeketh battell, and way. Heerevnto was he especially inuited, in regard as well of his number, as their forwardnesse, withall, fearing that such armies wanting scope sufficient, could not continue or hold any long time: besides that, the winter, which this yeare was most extreame, would soone duminish the same. The Romish Catholiques were not altogither so outragious, but expected a supply, withall, thinking themselues able in time to wearie their enemie, and by litle and little to breake them.
The two leaders were very desirous to ioyne, namely the Duke of Aniou, who fretted mightily to see so many men at the Princes commaund: besides that, he heard that the Germaines were bustling and preparing in the spring to come into France for him.
Moreouer, they both had one intent, namely, each to liue vppon the enemies countrie, and so to spare their owne from the extreame waste committed by the man of warre. But the prouidence of the almightie,The purposes of both the leaders. would not permit the French to put in execution the mallice of their harts: for had they then buckeled, the sinues of the kingdome had been cut in peeces, and by all likelyhood it had been past recouery, and beene made a pray to any mightie forraine enemie, that lists suddainly to haue seized thervpon. Now let vs beholde how his wise prouidence ordered all matters at that time. Both the armies breaking vp, drewe towards Lusignan, neare wherevnto there lyeth a smal quarter most fruitfull, where each pretended to lodge:The Admirall and his brother in danger of an ouerthrow. and albeit they were so neare togither, yet did not the one know of the other, whereby it fell out, that the generall Rendez-vous of both armies, was appoynted in a great Burrow called Pampron, some fiue leagues from
Poictiers, a town plentifully prouided of victuals, where the Marshals of both the campes met in maner at one instant with their troupes, so that twise or thrise they driue and were driue^, each side coueting that lodging which at length was abandoned. But knowing that they should be relieued, neither side would flie, but took their stands, some quarter of a league off, where they put themselues in array: for the support of the one side, came the Admiral and his brother with fiue cornets of horse: and for the Duke of Anious part, some seuen or eight hundreth launces.
Now are wee not said the Admirall, to stand vppon lodgings, but to fight, and so suddainly aduised the Prince heereof, who was a long league behinde, willing him to come forward, whilest hee kept the enemie playe. Then did he set his men in order vppon a little rising, the rather to take from the Romish Catholicques the sight of a small valley, whereby they might haue had a perfect view of him, as also to make them thinke that the said valley had been full both of horsemen and footmen. Standing thus within cannon shot each of other, the Admirall commanded a Captaine of Argoletiers, to march some fiue hundreth paces, and there to stay near vnto a hedge: but as such men are not alwaies of like wisedome, courage, and readinesse, the one halfe immediately made to the skirmish, whom their Cornet followed to relieue them. The Duke of
Martigues, leader of the other side, weening that they would haue fought, stood close, and sent forth three or foure squadrons of lanciers. The Admirall and his brother greeuing that they had not foreseene the folly of this Captaine of the Argoletiers, wist not wherevpon to resolue, because they saw the enemie much stronger then themselues: but comming to giue their opinions, they both concluded contrary to their custome and nature. Andelot a knight without feare, and one that neuer found any thing too hotte,A notable example of the infirmitie of mans iudgement in matters of importance. though it best to retire a soft pace, and so giue a foyle to the enemie, that was much stronger then they, which was to bee preserred before the danger, which being once auoyded, besides the profit, they shuld also reape honour. The Admirall thought it better to staye, and with a good face to hide their weaknesse, and thervpon immediately called back his skirmishers, wherevpon the enemies lanciers made at. This counsell had best successe, notwithstanding the other seemed the better, and of more safetie. For Martiques afterward gaue out, that had hee knowne the Admirall and his bretheren to haue been so weake, it should haue cost him the liues of all his lanciers, but he wold haue had those two Lords either quicke or dead: that he tooke their fiue cornets to haue been the troupes of the Marshals of the field, whom they had charged, and so doubted they had been supported by some store of Harquebusiers, which he seemed to discerne in a village behinde them, who indeed were no other but their varlets: besides that, for want of footemen, whom he expected, hee had lost the opportunitie of a field.The Prince looseth opportunitie to defeate the D. of Anious anuantgard. Thus do the hazards of warre depend vpon very suddaine moments. Within one houre after this aduenture, they all looked for a field, for on all sides ye might discerne the footemens Ensignes and troupes of horsemen come marching on: but it was late before they were all come togither, so as they had onely a hotte skirmish, which the night brake off. There was no more but the D. of
Anious auantgard, whose leaders perceiuing the Princes campe to be too strong, deuised a pollicie to make them thinke it to be their whole armie: for they caused part of the French drummes to strike vppe the Switzers march, forbidding their souldiers not to disband, but only to defend themselues, least by the taking of any prisoner, the enemies should haue knowne the truth: for had the Prince knowne of it, this auantgard had been ouerthrown and defeated. Besides they doubled their guards, made great fires, and caused their souldiers to hang burning matches vpon the bushes. and so hauing taken their repast, they departed with small noyse, and drewe some to Iasenueil, where the D. of
Aniou lodged with his battell, and some to the borought of
Sanssay, which is within one league of it. The Prince at three of the clocke after midnight, had notice of their going, and at fiue followed with his whole armie, as doubting that theirs came not then. Thus in one day we may see two notable opportunities lost, the first by the Duke, the second by the prince: yet may we not greatly blame either ye one or the other, for such occasions are hardly found at the first, and in two or three houres they are passed. Then it is, that some small aduertisement might plainly haue reuealed them: but that is a benefit of felicitie, which dependeth not vppon the Captains sufficiencie. All that we haue spoken of the former daies work, is nothing in regard of that which happened the next day at Iasenueil, where it seemeth that God verified the saying of his Prophet: that he would subuert the counsels of men: also that al the waies of the mightie are in his hands, as well as of the meaner. For many things fell out rather by hazard, and at all aduenture, then by any counsell or aduise. The Princes determination was, to follow his enemies campe, that as then dislodged,The battelt of Iasenueil. and wheresoeuer hee found it, to fight with them: wherevpon the Admirall and the Prince pursued after them. Now comming to two waies, the one leading to the village called Sanssay, the other to Iasenueil: the Prince left the first and tooke the last, which hee did because of a mist that rose before the breake of day. The forefront which the Admirall had set before him, and was very strong, about eight of the clocke in the morning entered into Sanssay, wherein fiue or six hundreth horses were lodged, that were presently constrained in haste to dislodge, hauing lost all their carriage, and were pursued very farre. Mean time the Prince keeping on the way which he had chosen, hauing marched aboue two leagues, found himselfe in the face of the armie of the Duke of Anion, not knowing what was become of his vantgard. He perceiuing himselfe to bee so neare, determined not to retire: and because the countrie was strong, he caused his Harquebusiers to bee placed in the head, beeing aboue 12000, beginning to skirmish, sending to the Admirall, whom he knew not where to finde, to certifie him that he was constrained to make shew to fight, finding himselfe so neare to the D. of Anious campe, and that he should make all the haste hee could to come vnto him. Before the messenger was halfe way, the Admiral aduertised by the ca^non shot, doubted the woorst, and in all haste made towards the noyse, with those troupes he could assemble. But at his arriual the sun began to go down, which kept them from determining, viewing, or enterprising vpon the great armies. Al doing nothing, but skirmished in such sort, as of long time the like had not been seene: and which put the D. armie in some feare, as being in a place of great disaduantage: althogh it made a good shew, not one seeing the other: beeing hidden within the hedges and valleis, none but the Harquebusiers being scattered, could bee perceiued. The Princes side was very couragious,A pleasant conceit. but their co^duction not answerable, shooting as in a shew of pleasure very close, a whole Regiment discharging togither. To the contrary, the Dukes were separated, shooting at leisure and in small troupes, in such sort, that 200. Harq. stayed a whole regiment of ye Princes. The losse fel on both sides, and many hurt, as it happeneth in such conflicts. At the same time there chanced a merrie conceit, that put many in great feare, while they made alte, al the Princes cariage stayed along by ye wood, not far fro^ the reaward of the horseme^, wher the Pages and other Ieruants placed themselues, thinking they shuld haue camped in that place, making at the least aboue 4000. fiers: and perceiued not the armie to retire, because it was night, in such maner, that diuers of their maisters supped but sle^derly that euening. Some of ye D. armie that held ye watch, perceiuing so many fiers and great noyse, they thought verily it had bin the Princes armie, wherby they looked for battel the next day in the morning, which made them vse more diligence to fortifie their passages. Cap. Garies offered to view the^, but they wold not hazard the^selues against those braue warriors ye sat prating by their fiers. About midnight, ye Prince was certified yt al his carriages were entangled, and made account they were lost, neuerthelesse he deferred not to send four or fiue cornets of horse to fetch them, commaunding that an houre after, a thousand horse, and two thousand Harquebusiers should march thither to ayde them, if the enemie should follow. The first that arriued among them, found them in goodly ordinance, warming themselues, singing, and making good cheare, and being farre from them, you would verily haue thought they had beene aboue ten thousand men, they thinking no more vppon the matter, then if they had beene within a walled towne. They began to laugh at the behauiour of those braue fellowes, who ordinarily are as fearefull as hares, although they are in safetie, and there beeing readie to be slaine, they did nothing but hoope and hollow, because they supped well with their Maisters victuals. The first of the Princes horsemen being come to the head of this goodly campe, were not ouer courteously receiued, for that the most assured among them, had placed their guards and Sentinels, and as farre as they could discerne a man, althogh they cried at the least a hundreth times, friends: yet they aunswered not but with caliuer shot, withall, crying out like mad men, but in the end they knew each other, and perceiuing where they were, their resistance turned into feare, and dislodged themselues without any trumpet.
These two armies hauing somewhat breathed themselues, for the space of a the Prince marched towards Mirebeau, which he tooke, and the duke retired to Poictiers:The enterprise of the Admirall against Countie Brissacks Regiment. each of them lodging somewhat more at large to rest their wearied troupes. Withing 8. or
10. daies the Admirall deuised an enterprise, wherby to cut off Countie
Brissacks Regiment, which was wel lodged and blocked vp at
Ances, a village within one league of Poictiers. Now hee imagined that all the Dukes auantgard had stil lodged in that subburb of the towne that led to the said village: but indeed more then the one halfe was passed ouer the water the day before, onely the Switzers and some few horse stayed behind: and therefore he brought with him 6000. Harquebusiers, and 1500. horse, that by break of day came to the village, and after some smal resistance forced it. The Regiment, with the losse of fiftie or sixtie men, saued it selfe, by the fauour of a small valley in the campe, where they found but small support: how be it they set so good a face of the matter vpon a banke with their varlets, that the Admirall, who could not take any certaine view of them, and was loath to hazard any thing, left them, and carried away the most part of their carriages. The two armies after so me small rest, fell to their former resolution of fighting. The Duke taking the field, recouered Mirc^eau, where couenants were but slenderly kept, for after the yeelding of it, many of the souldiers, co^trary to promise were slaine: whervpon Andelot soone after, taking the Abbey of S. Florent neare Saumur, put the whole Garrison to the sword. The Duke meaning to come nearer to the Prince, tooke vp his lodgings about Monstrueil-Bellay and Thouers, for the better commoditie of victuals. Here he was aduised, that it was not amisse to seize vpon the towne of Loudun, which lay in his way, and was kept by one of the Princes regime^ts, to the end there to lodge his armie, and the^ to bear himself according as things might fall out: for by keeping of that, he should cut off his enemies from a plentifull countrie, able to feed his armie for one month. The Prince confidering this deuise, rather then to take such a scorne, as to see one of his regiments cut off before his face, and so by loosing a Towne able to hold out,
to prooue himself either faint-harted, or too feeble, resolued to march night and day towards Lodun, and so at his comming quartered all his footemen in the subburbes, fiue or sixe hundreth horse in the towne, and the rest in the next villages. The Dukes armie the night before, had incamped within a small French league of the place, in part, weening that the Prince would not obstinately aduenture his forces for the obseruation of so meane a place: but the next day the D. vnderstood that the Princes armie fell into battell array along the subburbes, wherevpon he caused his men to do the like: and the artillerie on both sides began to play euen into the squadrons, and sometimes not in vaine. There might a man haue seene aboue 4000. men, almost all French, in battell array, not far asunder, as fierce in courage, as gallant in countenance, who for the most part did all expect onely the watch word to fight. There was between both the armies onely a plaine field, without any aduantage, which might cause me^ to maruel, that for foure daies space, both the armies lying in sight, and within cannon shot each of other, they neuer came to handy blowes, neither to any skirmish of importance, and that but seldome in respect of other times. But the^ we are to remember, that ther was not so sharpe a winter in
20. yeares before,The colde kept the Frenchmen from killing one another. because that as it was a most hard frost, so the sleete that fell continually made it so slipperie, hat the footemen were not able to stand on their legs: yet much more dangerous was it for the horses, neither could a horse get ouer a bancke three foote high, so slippery was the grownd. Many such bancks there were between the two armies, which had bin cast as partitions of mens lands, which were euen so many trenches, wherby he that would haue giuen the first onset, must needs haue been disordered: and that was the cause that each stood fast, looking vppon other, to see which side would so vnaduisedly aduenture the hazerd. Thus they stood straining of courtesie and this first day there fell out onely some small skirmishes, whervpon all the troupes an houre before night retired into their quarters. The next day the armies set themselues again in battell, and saluted each other with cannon shot: some there were that as the day before went out to skirmish, but they either brake or vnioynted their armes or legges, so as there were more hurt so, then by the small shot. The third day they did the like, but could neuer find any means to ioyne without incurring great inconueniences. The fourth day the D. whose men for the most part lay in the open fields, retired a league off, to warm his troupes that were starued with colde, and in his retrait lost three companies, one of Switzers, and two of Frenchmen, that were surprised in a village: within a while after, the souldiers fell into such vehement and greeuous diseases, that in one moneth there perished on both sides some 8000. men, notwithstanding through the presence of their Generals, and their owne earnest desire to fight, they were content to beare all: but the Dukes men had the woorst, as they that were not so wel prouided either in lodgings or victuals, as their aduersaties. Some cornets of horsemen of both sides, were lodged some halfe league or three quarters asunder, but in the euening returning to their lodgings, they were so benummed with colde, that they made no great haste to molest their enemie, no not so much as with one alarme, as if they had been at truce.The gallant enterprise of the Admirall against the Dukes army
The next day after this departure, the Admirall imagining that the Dukes men, who not long before were lodged halfe vnder the hedge, after they were gotte^ a little way off, wold scatter into the good towns (as indeed they did, leauing in the bodie of their armie three or foure hundreth horse, and about twelue hundreth shot, the rest beeing gone a league or two off) about nine of clocke in the morning, when the Princes horse were come in, brought foorth twelue or fourteen thousand shot, and 4. field peeces, in full purpose to make to the dukes maine armie, which was not past a league and a halfe off. The Captaines knew of a brooke that was betweene, with certaine foords, as their guides reported, not very daungerous. The night before hauing taken the view, and tryed the guards, they found them forceable: but the Princes shot co^ming to the foord, which was within a quarter of a league of the Dukes armie, found it furnished with footemen, whom they did couragiously assault, but could not force. Herevpon the campe hauing take^ a hot alarme, shot off their ca^nons to call in their scattered troups, and as they came, sent supplies to keepe the passage: but within a quarter of an houre after, the Admirall set vpon another place, which was stoutly defended, and had they not stood fast there, the Duke had beene quite ouerthrown. For before a thousand men could come in, the Admiral had broght 1500. horse, and 6000. shot, that would haue shaken them shrewdly. Some two hours after, by that the D. had gathered almost all his troupes, and sent some pecees on vnto a little banke, after some volees on either side, thy could driue euery man away. On both sides, as well the gentrie as the common souldiers, murmured mightily against their leaders, for that to no purpose they brought them foorth into most extreame frosts and colde, complaining also, that they were in maner besieged with hunger and famine, adding withal, that vnlesse they might bee better prouided and fenced in place of safetie, themselues would go and lodge as they thought good, as beeing vnable any longer to indure such extremities. In this suite they found no co^traction: for their leaders were soon inclined to yeeld to their desire. The Duke went to winter beyond
Loire, about Saumur: and the Prince at Thouers, Monstrueil-Bellay, and thereabout. Thus did the colde scatter those that itched to be doing, and sought all opportunitie to fight.
Timoleon de Cosse, Countie de Brissac, a young Lord, couragious, and for his yeares very wise,The gallant enterprise of the Countie Brissac, against the Admiral and his brother d'Andelot. but carried away with an excessiue desire to shewe his valour: and withall, hardened on by the Duke of Anious fauour, who among all other made most of him: vndertooke a gallant enterprise, which albeit it had no great successe, doth notwithstanding deserue to be knowne. The Admirall and his brother, with their cornets, were lodged in the towne of Monstrueil-Bellay. Hard at hand in a little subburbe, laye two companies of footmen, as simple guards both to their lodgings and the goods. The Gentlemen did no more but walke their rounds at the ordinary houres about the walles, which they thought to bee sufficient, for by reason that vppon the high-way from
Saumur, in a great subburbe beyond the riuer, their lay sixe or seuen Regiments of footemen, Monstrueil was on that side sufficiently safe: On the other side, for the space of one whole league, there were great fens, not passeable but in some few places: also 9. or 10. cornets of horse lodged in the villages round about, that night and day lay bearing of the waies. Al these helpes made it so strong, as there was small apparance that it should incur any perill. Now, as in all ciuill wars each partie had alwaies good aduertisements (for co^monly the secret enemie looketh within some mens bowels)
the Countie was informed of the small guard at
Monstrueil. Next, that by going two leagues about from the bare high way, hee might get thither without danger of the Admirals strength or guard of the horse: which notwithstanding he would not aduenture, vntill for his more assurance; he had sent a French Captaine and an Italian, in the euening to take a view: these men went vnto the wall, and with a long pike, a cord, and an Iron hooke, they got vp, (for the walles were not high) and so came to the Admirals lodging about nine of the clocke at night, and then returned againe vnespied: as one of them since reported to the Lord
de la Noue, who was the^ at Monstrueil with the Admiral. The Countie glad of this report, laid his plot therevpon, as followeth. He purposed with a thousand shot, choise men and very actiue supported with 500. horse, to march at such time that he might come to
Monstrueil about 3. of the clocke in the morning, that so he might haue full two houres of the night to fauor his retrait, in case his enterprise shuld not speed: but if he got his purpose, then to raise great fires vpo^ the towers of the castle, wherby to giue notice to the dukes armie lying at Saumur, to march with all speed to his succor: as resoluing to stand sure vntill he were beaten out with artillerie, and his succor might arriue within sixe houres. Thus shuld he take two notable Captaines in the middest of their assurance, and at the least
100. Gentlemen of name: besides, he shuld vtterly breake the whole auantgard, lodged therabout, which would neuer haue stood the comming of the enemie, so great would the confusion haue beene, besides sundrie other inconueniences that might haue ensued. I haue heard the Lord de la Noue, from whom I haue heard this report, which himselfe hath put into his discourses, who was then as I said, with the Admiral, say that
Brissac might haue atchieued this enterprise: but as we are to pray to god to watch ouer such as sleep, and the conseruation of their fates: so as the Countie was vppon the way about the performance of his purpose, a small chance crossed, yea vtterly subuerted all his deuises. For comming with a dozen of lathers, and his men very reolute, being within two leagues of the place, hee met with 200. of the enemies horse: who seeing this small armie at that time of night in the field, retired in hast, and raised an alarme at Monstrueil and other places thereabout, where their horsemen were lodged, whervpon the Countie was driuen to retire: afterward the Admirall strengthened his night watches better, and beat the fields more often, yet neuer could finde any newes of the enterprise, or know how it was vntill the next peace. After this, the Prince and other commaunders withdrew themselues towards
Rochel,Other exployts to the aduantage of those of the religion. determining vpon means to prouide mony for the furnishing of those warres, and beganne to sell the goods of the Romish Cleargie, finding such as would hazard to buy them, who therin vsed the matter to their aduantage, the Rochelers lent fourescore thousand frankes. The Q. of England sent 50000. pound, six cannons, certaine thousand waight of powder, and great store of bullets, for the which she was paide in salt, woolls, and bel mettal. All base Poitou being in the hands of those of the religion, except the Abbay of S. Michael in
Loire, where laye a good Garrison of Friers and souldiers, which serued for a restraint to many courses into the countrie, but some souldiers of Poitou obtained licence of the Prince to besiege the Abbey, which sustained two light assaults. At the third assault it was battered and taken by force, and 4. or 500. men that were in it put to the sword, because of their wilfulnesse.

On the other side, Martineugue, Entragues, and la Chastre, Gouernors of Gyon, Orleans, and Bourges, accompanied with other leaders, and certain troupes of souldiers,The siege of Sancerre. besieged Sancerre, a small towne, being the refuge of diuers families of the religion, and gaue diuers assaults, which the besieged sustained and repulsed, wearying the enemie in diuers sorts, who hauing lost sixe or seuen hundreth of their best men, left that small town in peace: but after that, the Sancerrois seeking to enterprise to build a sort vpon the riuer of Loire, they were surprised, and hauing lost fiftie of their men and the fort, were content to keepe good watch within their towne.
In the beginning of the yeare 1569. the warre beganne to renue, the Viscounts of Bourniquet,  Montclar, Paulin, and Gourdon, with seuen thousand Harquebusiers, and some horsemen, made warre for the Prince against those of
Thoulouse and others, the towne of Montauban beeing their chiefe retrait. And beeing summoned by the Prince to ioyne with him,Piles punisheth the pesants in Perigord. made aunswere, that they had rather keepe that Prouince, and defend their owne Countrimen from Monluc and other enemies, then leaue them as a pray, while they bare armes in an other Prouince. Captaine Piles, that had charge to conduct them, gathered certaine troupes in Quercy, Agenois, and other places, and hauing taken Bergerac and Saint Foy, hee made a road into Perigord, where hee burnt all the villages, and slewe all those that hee suspected to bee at the ouerthrow of
Mouuans and Gourde. And not long after, hee marched with twelue hundreth Harquebusiers, and about two hundreth horse, to ioyne with the Prince.
Diuers warlike exployts.About the beginning of February, fiue hundreth horse comming forth of Saumur, surprised and defeated the Court of Bressant of
Anigeuin neare vnto Thours, and within eight daies after, Countie Brissac had like to haue defeated the troupes of
Montgommery, whose brother he tooke prisoner with some others, and slew some eighteene or twentie men.
The seuenteenth of the same moneth, the Castle of
Lusignon holden in the name of the Duke of Aniou, was surprised by intelligence, the Garrison thereof beeing for the most part gone into the towne to banquet and make good cheere. But for want of speedie ayde, the surprisers, to the number of nine or ten, were slaine: there was likewise many other enterprises in diuers places: as against New-hauen and Deepe, but they tooke no effect.
The Protestants that bare armes with the Prince, tired with the winter toyle, and so many skirmishes, found some sweetnesse in resting in Poitou, whither they were retired.
But about the end of February, the Prince began to gather his armie, report beeing giuen out, that the Duke was alreadie in field, and marched with all his forces to Angoulesme.
To armies enter the field.To whom the Counte of Tende had brought three thousand foote, and some horse: besides two thousand Rutters, vnder the leading of the
Rhingraue and Bassompierre, that were come to supply him. Whervpon he purposed to end the war, either by forcing the Prince to fight, or else constraining him to shut his men within the townes. The Prince and Admirall therevpon hauing assembled their forces, determined to march along by the Charante, a riuer in Poictou, to behold the dukes countenance, but yet not to hazard himselfe. As also to ayde their townes, which they strengthened with men, making their armie so much ye weaker. But nothing worth memorie was done, vntill the Duke came to Chasteauneuf, a town cituate vppon
Charante, where at his arriuall hee tooke the Castle kept by a Scot, and some Harquebusiers, that yeelded themselues with their liues saued, but with small honour.The taking of Chasteauneuf, occasion and beginning of the battel of Bassac. And because the bridge of Chasteauneuf had been broken in two places, the Admirall desirous to know the countenance and passage of the enemie, went thither, followed by seuen or eight hundreth horse, and as many Harquebufiers. There hee had a light skirmish with certaine troupes, that had passed in certaine barkes, or ouer certaine plankes speedily cast ouer. The Admirall thinking that the Duke would passe ouer, and thinking to haue time to aduertise the Prince to prouide for him, minded to stop that passage, vntill the next day. And appoynted two Regiments of foote to lodge within a quarter of a myle from the bridge, and eight hundreth horse somewhat further off, wherof the third part should keepe watch hard by it, as well to aduertise, as to offer fight: which done, hee withdrew himselfe to Bassac, about a league fro^ the bridge: with ye rest of the vantgard, the Prince came to Iarnac, which lyeth a league further: but this commandement was not executed. For both the horse and foote, knowing that in the places appoynted them to staye, there was but fewe houses, with lesse victuals and fourage, hauing wholly forgotten how to incampe themselues, and to be without commoditie in their lodgings, went to finde some other quarter. Whereby the most part of this troupe left that place, to lodge themselues with more ease, and left but a small number of men in place, that laye about halfe a league from it. This great fault produced another: which was, that the watch was too weake,A notable fault. which could not come time ynough to hear, nor giue alarme to the enemies troups, as they had beene instructed, thereby to make them thinke, that all the Princes Auantgard lay there. The Dukes armie beeing very strong, resolued to seize vpon the passage, although all the Princes power had opposed themselues against him, and by the diligence of
Monsieur de Biron, not onely repaired the bridge, but made a new bridge of barkes, which are carried with armies royall, and before midnight had finished it: which done, without great noyse they began to passe ouer, both horse and foote. The Princes men, that stood in gard with fiftie horse, about a small quarter of a league from the passage, in a manner could scarce perceiue them to passe, vntill about the breake of day, wherewith they presently aduertised the Admirall, who knowing that most part of his men had lodged in other places, namely, on that side where the enemies came, sent them word that they passed, and with all speed to march towards him, that they might retire altogither, and that in the meane time, hee would stay for them at Bassac.
At the same time also, hee commaunded, that all the carriage and footmen should retire: which was presently done. If then within one houre after, all his forces had beene assembled, hee had easily retired without much labor,Slacking of things, daungerous in warre. but the time (being about three houres) that passed in staying for them, was the principal cause of their ouerthrow. The Admirall would not loose those troupes, being nine Cornets of horse, and certaine companies of foot, wherof the Coronels were the Counte Montgommery, Acier, and Puuiaut. Beeing all come, onely Acier, that tooke the way towards Angoulesme, all the Dukes armie beeing past, and hard by the Admirall, the skirmish began so hot, that
each man perceiued that day would bee a battell, beeing the thirteenth of March: which made the Prince turne backe, being half a league from them, passing forward, for hauing vnderstood that hee should bee constrained to fall to blowes, hee hauing a Lyons heart, would bee one among the rest. Whe^ the Admiral for his retrait came to forsake a small chanel, which might bee passed ouer but in two or three places: the Duke was counselled to aduance the flower of his horsemen, composed of seuen or eight hundreth horse, which ouerthrew foure cornets that made the retrait, where la Noue and la Loue were taken prisoners,The Princes magnanimitie ended not but with his life. Valiant charges. hauing couragiosly sustained the fight, as also Coronel Puuiant, who not long after, reassembled his dispearsed troupe the same horsemen of the Dukes campe not long after, charged d'Andelot in a village, but he valiantly resisted them, and slew Monsalez, and diuers others of good account, to the number of fifteene or sixteene, the Prince and the Admirall ranged in two great squadrons of horse, perceiuing that the enemie went about to inclose them betweene all the Dukes forces and Charante, prepared themselues to giue the charge. The Admirall began: the Prince seconding, which was with greater force then the first, and at the beginning made al those that flood against him to turne their backs: after that, sustaining a new charge, where for a time the battell was hot and fierce, but in the end he and the Admirall hauing all the enemies armie vpon them, and the Prince being falle^ vnder his dead horse, therby ensued the ouerthrow of the horsemen, hauing lost about one hundreth Gentlemen, and among the rest, the Prince himselfe, who lying vnder his horse, could not bee relieued by his troupes, and yeelding himselfe to Monsieur d'Argences, at the report of his taking,The death of the Prince of Conde and others. a Gentleman of Gascon called
Montesqueon, Captain of the Dukes guard ran thither, and discharging a Pistoll at him, shot him in the head, wherewith hee presently died. His death bredde great sorrow among those of the religion, and much ioy to diuers that loued him not, namely to the king, the Queen, the Duke of Aniou, and all the house of of Guise, specially the Cardinall of Lorraine, who the next day after the news was brought vnto the king, (as then beeing at Metz) touching the battell (wherin the Catholicques had lost two hundreth Gentlemen, among the which were diuers Lords and men of name) comming to salute the king, after the maner of Courtiers, smiling said vnto him: your Grace as I suppose, is now better disposed then you were the other day, beeing eased of much corrupt blood. In that manner iested hee, who vpon the bodies of the Princes of the blood, and the Nobilitie of France, placed the foundation of the rule and gouernment, which his familie would after haue vsurped, as you shall wel perceiue. From Metz they sent certaine cornets that had bin taken from the Prince, vnto the Pope, whereat that good Pastor so much reioyced, that he went a foote on procession from his Castle of Saint Ange, to the temple of the holy ghost, withall the Cardinals, to thanke his Imagess with out flatterie this praise may wel be giuen vnto the Prince, of whom we will now speake, that not any man liuing in his time, did euer surpasse him in courage nor courtesie. He spake very wisely, more by nature then art, liberall and readie to all men, an execellent leader in warre, yet a louer of peace: most firme in his religion: inuincible in aduersitie: but milde in prosperitie: a great iester, subiect to vanitie, louer of women, and collor, but one that gaue place to reprehensions and aduises of such as hee loued and respected, but by this ouerthrow wee may gather, that when a matter of importance and hazard is to bee effected, it ought not to bee done by halues, for that either we must leaue it, and not be ashamed to retire, or else do it withall our forces.
If the Admirall and the Prince had had all their forces, the Duke would not haue set vpon them, also when armies lye scattered, they fall into inconueniences, which the sufficiencie of the best leaders cannot remedie.
After this battell the Duke sent to besiege Cognac, and began to imbrace diuers other enterprises, as if nothing had bin impossible vnto him,Exployts after the battell of Br^ssac. for that not long before, certaine places in Poictou had been taken from those of the religion: but Cognac stayed the course of this victorie, in such sort, as that after the Duke had lost the boldest of his footemen in that siege, hee thought to get as much by intelligence against Saint
Iohn d'Angely, where dooing nothing, hee summoned
Angoulesme, that made him no other aunswere, but with threatnings to send him away with losse and shame, if his armie came thither: while the Dukes Councell were consulting of the means to imploy his forces in other places, those of the religion had time and leisure to ioyne themselues togither.
The Admirall brought the Princes of Nauarre and
Conde from Saint Iohn to Tone Charante, where hee met the Queene of Nauarre, to incourage such as were in doubt, and to take Councell what was to bee done. Their horsemen were mustered, whereof the Prince of Nauarre was appoynted Generall, to whom all of them, being the number of foure thousand Gentlemen, made oathes of fidelitie.
The young Prince of Conde was ioyned with him,
d'Andelot went to the Garrisons to take a view of the footemen: which done, hee made a voyage into Poitou to assemble the dispearsed troupes, to prouide for mony, and to bridle the courses of the enemies: but comming from thence,The death of Monsieur d'Andelot, beeing taken with a burning feuer, hee went to
Sainctes, where hee died vppon the seuenteenth of May: to the great greefe and sorrow of all his friends and seruants. His bodie beeing opened, was found to bee poysoned: which not long after, was practised against diuers Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, by the aduise of Rene de Birague an Italian, as then Keeper of the seales, and after Chancellor of France, who vsed openly to say, that it was not necessary to make warre with so much labour and charges, but to imploy the Cookes, meaning prisoners.
The estate of Colonell of the French Infanterie was giuen to
Acier, and his company to Beauuais la Nocle his Lieftenant: but the charge of all the armie, and the care of the principall affaires fell vppon the Admirall, much respected by the Queene of Nauarre, Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines: and to bee short, of both great and small, that as then made profession of the religion.
The siege of Mucidan where Pompadon and the Countie Brissac are slaine.As concerning the Dukes army, it ouerranne Xaintoigne, Angoulesme, and Limosin, taking in some places, namely Aubeterre. The Countie de Brissac Colonel of the French footemen in that armie, and Captaine of a Regiment of fortie Ensignes, with the most part of their forces, tooke vpon him the siege of Mucidan. They that were within, after they had a while defended the Towne, set it on fire and retired into the Castle, which they held valiantly, and abide some assaults, slew the notable men of the regements of Brissac, Monluc, and
Cars, among the rest, the Vicount of Pompadou: lastly,
Brissac himselfe, who comming neare to view the breach and defences, had no sooner put foorth his nose, but a Harquebuse pearced his head, and layde him starke dead vpon the Counterstarp: hee was betweene fiue and six and twentie yeares of age, and was much bewayled of many that hoped to haue seene him in time, one of the greatest leaders of our daies.
A while after, the besieged yeelding vpon composition, to haue both liues and goods saued, were scarce out of sight of the walles, but that contrarie to faith and promise, the most part were cut in peeces by the besiegers, vpon a desperate reuenge of the death of their two Coronels, and their best souldiers that they had there lost.
The taking of the Ile of Medoc.On the other side, Captaine Piles tooke the Isle of Medoc, lying betweene Rochel and Bourdeaux, where all the souldiers inriched themselues. And the Duke abandoned Guyen, and tooke his way towards Berry, there to ioyne with the forces of the D.
d'Aumale, that togither they might stop the Dutch armie, brought in by the Duke of Deaxponts from ioyning with the Princes. The Lords of
Nouy, Ienly, Moruilliers, Fequieres, Esternay and others, soone after the beginning of this third ciuill warre,A small French army commeth in fit time to the Rutters throgh Fra^ce maugre all the enemies armies. had gathered togither some fifteene or six hundreth horse, and two thousand Harquebusiers, whom when in regard of the difficultie of the passages, they could not bring into Guyen, they led into Brabant to the prince of Orenge and Countie
Lodowick his brother, who after they had a while with variable successe continued warre against the Spaniards, passed ouer the riuer of Meuse, maugre the duke of Alue, to whom they offered battell, which the Spaniard refused, as hoping to waste them with want of victuals, which grew so short, that they were driuen to passe into France, where comming to Vitry, they consulted vpon their affaires, whether it were best to passe further into the Realm, alreadie daunted with so many armies: and to returne toward
Germanie, and so to ioyne with the armie that VVolfgang, Counte Palatine of Rhyne, and D. of Deux Ponts, leuyed for the Princes: but the second aduise tooke place. Now more narrowly to consider what a long walke this Dutch armie made, from the
Rhine euen vnto Limosin, togither with their great and continuall impeachment, it cannot but breed much maruell, that a forraine armie watched so narrowly, and hauing so many backe-friends, could thus compasse their drifts. True it is, that ciuill warres haue at al times made a plaine path to forraine nations, who otherwise durst scarce looke towards the Gates, without the support of the one partie.
But where the fauour is but small on the one side, and the resistance great on the other, we are the more to admire the exployts of those that do so aduenture themselues. It was a great comfort to the Germaine Duke, to haue the assistance of the Prince of Orenge, the Countie Lodowick, and the Countie VVolrad of
Mansfield,The description of the Dutch army. with the French afore mentioned. His troupes contained fiue thousand Lansquenets, and sixe thousand Rutters. With this small armie hee marched, publishing by writing the causes of his iourney to the Princes.
The kings Councell finding themselues to seeke, did speedily conclude of a small armie, vnder the leading of the Duke of
Aumale, to stop this succour, yet doubting of the weakenesse of such a Leader, vnskilfull and vnfortunate in matter of warre, leuied yet an other, vnder the conduct of the Duke of
Nemours, a man in manner like vnto the other. These two bodies assembled in footemen, farre surmounted the Dutch Dukes, but in horsemen hee was the stronger.
They were resoluted not to linger vntill hee entered
France, and so make hauocke, but marched euen to the borders of
Germanie, and neare to Saumur, where they defeated the regiment of Captain la Coche of Dauphine, composed of sundrie parcels patched togither, which purposed to haue ioyned with the Lansquenets. Notwithstanding this defeate, the Germaine Duke proceeded into
France through Bourgongne, where the enemie coasted him, vntill hee had gotten to the riuer of Lotre (hauing marched full fourescore leagues) they neuer left him, but were still in his flancke, or vppon the taile: yea, many times the armies were each in sight of other, and had many great skirmishes.
The Prince of Orenge hath since sundrie times reported, that he maruelled that in so long and difficult a passage, the Romish Catholiques could neuer finde fit opportunitie, considering that many occasions befell them, and the rather by reason of the impeachments of their maine carriages. For besides these great forces of the Dukes of
Aumale and Nemours, the townes, countrie, and riuers, were at their commaund: they also knewe the purposes of their aduerse armie, which consisted in making haste, and either by force or surprise winning passage ouer Loyre, whither it came maugre all their pollicies and deuises. It was said, that through some contention between them, they lost sundrie good exployts which they ought haue performed, had they beene at vnion: besides, they doubted the vigilancie of
Moruilliers: the industrie of Feuguieres: and the readinesse and valiancie of Nouy, Esternay, and other Captaines, who held them in continuall alarme: and had not the news of the battell at
Bassac comforted them, Aumale and Nemours had been either defeated or forced to licence their troupes, and so to retire into the townes.
If fell out well for the Germaines that they made such haste: for this great blocke, this riuer of Loire, would haue been a second and most greeuous difficultie to stay these riuers, as well for that it was not so shallow, as to yeeld any foord: as also for that all the townes standing therevppon were enemies, yet was the passage so necessary, that it made the^ to vse great speed, courage, and inuention: for contrary to all expectation of their enemies on each side the riuer, they assaulted a towne called la Charitee, where they had a good bridge.
Among al the ouersights of the Rom. Catholicques, who were reenforced with a supply of Italians from the Pope, of twelue hundreth horse, and four thousand foote, this was not the least, that they left
la Charitee destitute of men: wherevppon the Protestants lay so hard to that place, and terrified it with so many mines and threats, that before it could haue any reliefe, they had wonne it to their incredible ioy: which neuerthelesse was abated by the decease of Feuquieres and other Captaines poysoned by the way, according vnto Biragues precepts.
Had it not been for this prize, the Germaine armie had bin hard bestead, and their leaders forced to haue returned backe to the head of Loire, which was sixtie leagues off: yea, which was woorse, taking that course, they should haue intangled themselues in a hilly and wood countrie, where their horse would haue been but a hinderance.
The Admirall accounted this passage impossible, and still harkened after their ouerthrow,The Admirals opinion touching the passage of the Rutters. many times telling his familiars that he could not helpe this succor, in regard that the Duke of
Auious armie still lay before him, and the Rutters and French had two armies more watching vpon them, besides a most difficult passage ouer the riuer: withall, that albeit they had passed ouer, yet their enemies ioyning their forces, must needs defeate them before they could come neare them by twentie leagues to helpe them. But hearing of the successe of the siege of la Charitee, he grew againe into some hope, saying: This is a good prognostication, let vs perfect it with diligence and resolution.
The Princes with their troupes marched immediately towards
Limosin, that so they might come nearer to the Duke of
Anious power to keepe it in awe, albeit in continuall feare, still looking to heare that al the enemies armies beeing so strong, should haue swallowed vp their Rutters: which fell out contrary: for they tooke so good opportunitie, and vsed such speed, that they out went them, vnder the co^duct of the French troupes, where among the rest, Nouy bare himselfe more valiantly in sundrie roades of the enemies, whom diuers times he sent backe, and gathered to the place where the Admirall had appoynted to meet them with one thousand shot, and two thousand and fiue hundreth horse.
Thus towards the end of Iune the two armies ioyned in great ioy, albeit somewhat abated by the death of the Duke of Deuxponts, who died of a feuer a little before, into whose place the Countie
Mansfield succeeded. This iourney and fauourable passage, may put all Captaines in minde, that notwithstanding whatsoeuer great difficulties, they may bee inuironed, yet are they not to distinct: for they shall not need past one sole fauourable accident to free them, and such do commonly fauor those, that shunning sloth, doo take a good heart.
Discourse of the encounter at the Rochebelle, where Strossy was ouerthrown, with two regime^ss of foote.The two armies as then very strong (that of the Duke of
Aniou beeing aboue thirtie thousand men, and that of the Princes fiue and twentie thousand) were constrained to depart one from the other, to finde commoditie of victuals, because the countrie of Limosin is vnfertile, but they reapproched towards S. Yrier la Perche. The Admirall perceiuing that the sterilitie of the countrie made his troupes to lye scattered, and because of the hilles and woods, the places of battel were ofte^ with disaduantage, determined rather to preuent, then bee preuented. Not long before, the Princes had sent an humble request vnto the king to haue peace, but the Duke d'Anion would neuer graunt Passeport to their Deputies: whereof the Admirall made great complaints to the Marshall de Montmorencie. And perceiuing that his enemies sought nothing but warre, hee counselled the Princes to surprise the Dukes armie, not far from thence in a place named Rochebelle. To the which end, they departed before the breake of day, resolute to giue battell, and arriued in so good time, that they were within a quarter of a league from the head of their enemies, before they gaue the alarme. The strong lodging serued those that were there in guard, and stood them in great stead: and Colonel Strossy at the noyse, hasted in with 500. harquebusiers, for the strengthening of
300. of his me^ that kept the principall passage, where hee found the skirmish begun. His valor serued wel for his partakers, for that for the space of one houre, he held 4000. of the Princes shot good play, whereby the D. armie had opportunitie to assemble and set themselues in array. The Admiral wondring that they could not force that passage, sent
Brucil a wise and skilful Captaine, who immediately espied the fault. Herevpon hauing ordered certaine troups, and disbanded 4. cornets of horse to scar them, he began a sharp onset, wherin vpon the breaking of certain Pallissades that couered Strossy his regiment, his men were so disordered, that the suruiuers fled, leauing dead behind them 22. of their leaders, and fiue or 600. foot, besides their Colonel prisoner, without whose resistance, the Princes auantgard had gotten to the D. ordinance with all impeachment. But withall, it beganne to ioyne and so continued, that the victors were forced to retire. The next day they were imployed vpon alarmes and skirmishes, in one of the which, 200. Italians, with some sallies of the company of the D. of Nemours, being somewhat too far aduanced, were charged by the Lord of Mouy, who slew some, tooke some prisoners, and sent away the rest faster then they came, as in deede they were mounted to the aduantage vpo^ Spanish horses fit for such retraits. Immediately after this incounter,While the Duke tooke his ease, the Princes seized vppon sundry places the D. licensed his armie to refresh themselues vntill the beginning of Octob. putting his footemen in Garrison, in such places as bordered nearest vpon Guyenne. The Princes in the meane time kept the field, tooke Tiuiers, S. Sulpice, Brantonne, Chasteau, l'Euesque, la Chapelle, Confolant, Chabanez, and S. Genais: some by force, others by composition. The Countie du Lude Gouernour in Poictou, had promised the Duke to do wonders, and while the Princes armie lay in Limosin, followed by fiue thousand foot, and some cornets of horse, he besieged
Nyort, a town of consequence, wherein Puuiaut valiantly entred with certaine horse and foote, in despight of the assailants, that were repulsed in three assaults, and certaine scaladoes: and after in the beginning of Iuly, constrained to raise their siege, hauing lost aboue fiue hundreth men before the towne, not accounting foure Cornets of horse belonging to the Countie, which la Noue not long before had ouerthrowne at Fontenay, halfe a league from Nyort.
Terigny beeing sent to ayde the besieged, was the cause that the Countie hasted his retrait, lodging the rest of his armie at Saint Maixant, Lusignon, and Mirebean: meane time the Princes approached Poictou, and the 12. of Iuly tooke
Chastelleraud by composition, and three daies after, battered the strong Castle of Lusignon, that vpon the 21. of the same moneth was yeelded vnto them by composition, establishing the Barron
de Mirebeau for Gouernour therin, with two Ensignes of footmen, great store of cannons, and sufficient amunition to resist a puissant armie. Two daies after they marched towards Poictiers, tooke Couhe (where the Garrison of Catholicques chose rather to burne themselues in dispaire with and in the Castle, then to yeeld the^selues to Verac Lord of the place that held them besiesieged) Sanssay, Viuonne, and other little places neare thereabouts, therby to inclose those of Poictiers, and to impeach them of victuals. Before we depart from the siege of Poictiers,Diuers exployts of war. let vs adde some notable accidents that happened in diuers places.
In the month of Iuly, Castillon sur Loing and
Chasteau-Regnard, places belo^ging to the Admirall, were surprised, and the Admirals mooueables carried to Parris, where part were solde in the open outcrie, the best stoien and conueyed away, by those that finde nothing either too heauie or too hotte. Certaine horsemen to the number of fortie, departing from the Princes campe after the taking of Strossy, lodged themselues within Regeane, a Castle belonging to the Bishop of
Auxerre, but they were presently besieged, battered, and slain within it, onely captain Blosset, and some other that escaped. Amo^g those on whom they exerciled most horrible vengeance, was one of
Auxerre surnamed Coeur de Roy, who beeing taken prisoner, was ledde to Auxerre, and there presently stripped, slaine, and hewed in peeces. The murtherers pulled the hart out of his bodie, and cutting it in peeces, was layde on the coales, and eaten by certaine of his desperate enemies, that during his life, had threatned him with that canniball entertainment:Horrible crueltie. behold how zeale transporteth these Romish Catholicques.
The Lord of Terride Gouernor of Quercy, was sent into Bearne, Foix, and the la^d of Nauarrois, there to bring al into the kings obedience, in case the Q. of Nauarre and her sonne the Prince,The Countie of Montgommeries exployts in Bearne against Terride. would not forsake the religious side.
Terride accompanied with Negropelisse, S.
Colombe, and diuers others, had easily seized vpon all, and had laid siege to Nauarron in the only place that held for the Q. The Princes hauing notice thereof, dispatched away the Countie of
Montgommery to withstand him, who with 200. horse went and receiued the forces of the vicounties in Gascon, so that in the month of Iuly with a smal armie of foure thousand shot, and fiue hundreth horse, with great diligence and vnwoonted speed (which was the safetie of his voyage, as deceiuing the Garrisons of the enemie, namely the troupes of the Marchal d'Anuil^, Monluc, Gohaz and others, that with 1000. horse, and 4000. shot, marched but a daies iourney from the campe) he came safe with one daies iourney of Nauarrin, forced Terride, who had lyen incamped from the beginning of Iune, to raise the siege and saue himself in
Orthez, by reason his troupes for their more commodious victualling lay disbanded. The Countie followed Terride, and to abridge him of all means to reassemble or muster his men, besieged, assaulted, and forced the town with great slaughter: then did he as suddainly plant the cannon found in the Towne against the Castle, Terrides refuge: who terrified with such terrible charges yeelded, with the safetie of his life, togither with six knights of the Order, and many Captaines, who all enioyed the benefit of the compositio^, except 5, Colombe, the Barron of Pordiac, Gohas, Fauas, and some others that were executed, because they were found to be the Qu. subiects, and consequently guiltie of treason, for seizing vpon her places, causing the most part of her subiects to reuolt, and seeking to deliuer the land into the dominion of a new Prince. This mishap of Ter. being bruted abroad, so terrified other the towns and strong holds, that ye vsurpers making their packs in time, Na. Foix, and Bearn were suddainly subdued to their princesse, al fauing the town of Peu, the principall wherin co^manded, one named Pere, who had promised
Monluc to defend it, and had executed some officers, and slaine the ministers: yet vpon the su^mons of a trumpet sent by
Montgom. he departed with speed, leauing the town to the right owner. In the mean time, Monluc practised some trecherie with Captain Bassillon, who had born out the siege of
Nauarrin against Terride. This practise discouerd,
Bassillon was slaine, and Monluc co^ming to seize vpo^ Nauarin, was forced to retire, whervpon ioyning with la Vallete, he forced the town of Mont-Marsan, where he discharged his rage vpon the besieged, who were in maner all put to the sword.

Montgommery furnishing the places of his conquest came to Nerac. and for a fewe daies warred vppon the next Garrisons, and there with all speed returned to the Princes armie, with some plentie of quoine gathered in his conquests, and fiue hundreth horse that followed him.
The Duke d'Aniou considering how much the passage imported, which the Princes had gotten vpon the riuer of Loire at
la Charitee, not much fortified since the taking, resolued to take that place from them,The siege of la Charitee by Lansac, and the issue. which was well aduised, for that winning it, hee should bereaue them of all meanes to molest the Prouinces on this side the riuer of Loire, and reserue vnto himselfe the sinues of the warres, with infinite commodities for the refreshing of his armie. But in stead of marching thither, in all diligence after the passage of the Rutters, he contented himselfe to command M. de Lansac to take order therin. Hee neuer hauing had any commission of such importance, thought that by strength of men and cannon shot, he would do something. And vpon the sixt of Iuly accompanied with 7000. footemen, assembled out of the Garrisons of Orleans, Bourges, Chartres, Neuers, Gyan, and other Townes. With fiue or sixe hundreth horse he besieged la Charitee, charged and recharged his batterie three or foure times, sparing neither powder nor bullet: and hauing made a breach to enter both with horse and waggons, he commanded his souldiers to giue an assault, who beeing men vsed to braue it in the streets of a Towne, and to discharge their peeces in the presence of Ladies: when they perceiued that the besieged resolued themselues to a stout and bold defence, their hearts were turned to lyuers, so that their Captaines, Ensignes, Sergeants, and other officers, were forced to supply their places, of 100. of them: there returned fiue againe, but all ouerthrowne at the entrie of the breach. An other thing was, that a false report ranne in the campe of Lansac, that the Princes armie came to ayde la Charitee, and that Captaine
Blosset was alreadie in Berry with 200. horse, to marke out their lodgings, and to giue the first charge: wherewith the assailants made such an alarme, that without further inquirie, they spied their Ensignes marching day and night, to nestle themselues in their Garrisons. The siege continued almost a month, where, and in the retrait, the assailants lost almost 1000. men: the town about 100. and being deliuered from this siege, and not long after strengthened by the companies of Blosset, Boys, and others, that had left the campe to visit their houses, and to refresh themselues: the leaders made account to fourage the countrie, and to seeke aduentures farre and neare. With this resolution they tooke Douzi, Pouilli, Antrain, S. Leonard, and other small townes about the water, running into Berry Niuernois, and the countries bordering vpon them, to the great hurt and displeasure of the Romish Catholikes. The Princes beeing in possession of Lusignan and Chastelleraud,A breefe discourse of the siege of Poictiers. diuers of their Councell were bent to the siege of Poictiers. Twise they debated the matter in Councel, where sundrie were of a contrary opinion, as nothing liking of the siege of so greata town among the rest, the Admirall, who wished them rather to follow their first purpose, namely to get S. Maixaut, where they should find Onoux, Colonell of one of the late Countie Brissacks Regiments (who soone after entered into Poictiers) then to seize vpon Saumur, a towne at that time of small strength, standing vpon the riuer of
Loire, and with all diligence to fortifie the same, to the end afterward to haue a readie and safe passage in Antomne, to transport the war to Parris, the fountain of all the stormes that thus molested all France. Hee alleaged, that togither with the Dude of Guise and Maine, there were come diuers Captains and companies, both on horse and on foot to
Poictiers, which at that instant was as well prouided of souldiers as any town in France: likewise that such great townes well guarded, are ordinarily the graues of great armies: and with all concluded, that the best course was, to march to S. Maixaut which could not long holde out: but the chiefe Lords and Gentlemen of Poictou, as well in Councell as else where, vrged them not to omit so good opportunitie, withall, alleaging that the towne was of no estimation: that the more people were therein, the greater was the bodie: that getting this place they should haue all Poictou, a rich Prouince, and so defeate the Dukes armie of a verie conuenient retrait: but the authors of their Councell, had forgotten to speake the resolution of those that kept
Poictiers, the great helps that they had for their defence: their own smal store of artillery, munitition and powers to giue their assault, with many other their discommodities. For albeit the town in regard of the scituation, were wholly inuironed with mountaines, commanding in it so neare, that they might greatly annoy the defendants, yet had the Princes at that time such want, that hauing begunne in one place, they were not able couragiously to go through with their batterie and other workes, but must needes giue the enemie two or three daies respite, which was ynough to refortifie it againe, whereby they should bee forced to beginne their batteries againe in an other place, where they should incurre the like discommoditie.
The siege hauing continued some few weekes, sundrie breaches being made with some assaults, skirmishes, and sallies: lastly, necesitie set vppon the besieged, and sicknesse, togither with want of munition, the besiegers, whereby their troupes were driuen by little and little to breake: the besieged had lost diuers of their best Captaines, and a number of souldiers, and their necessitie grew to such a famine, that asses and horses grew to be good meat. The D. of
Anion aduertised thereof,The siege of Chastellerand. as also of some discipation of the Princes armie, tooke counsell to besiege Chastellerand, beeing a good means to make the Princes leaue Poistiers, if the Princes were not negligent to loose a place wherein their men were inclosed. But this resolution of the Duke serued well for the Princes, as beeing a good occasion for them to leaue the siege, which notwithstanding they had done, not hauing means to stay any longer before it. And to conclude, both defendants and assaylants were not in long time more troubled. Then those of Poictiers, and the Princes, the valiant leaders following their haughtie desires, for that hauing high mindes, they applied them to such obiects as best fitted them, but the common saying is most true: that he which gripeth too much, can neuer hold fast any thing. The Dukes of
Guise and Maine got the honour in their youths, to haue bin of the number of commanders, that kept so bad a place against their puisan^ enemies. Touching the dukes armie, it being before Chastellerand, and hauing made a breach, the Italians sent by the Pope, made request to giue the first assault, which sel vnto the^ by chance of dice, wherevnto they went with bold courage, the besieged vsing subtiltie with them, suffered the^ to mount vp, and being vpon the breach, fought hand to hand with them, and hauing slaine the leaders, and some hundreths of the most resolute souldiers, constrained the rest to put themselues in disorder,Italians beaten at Chastollerand. leauing in the breach fiue Ensignes, and aboue 250. men dead. The hurt men in great number died soone after: this happened the 7. of September.

The Frenchme^ appoynted to second the Italians, disdained to follow them, and hauing beene beholders of this spectacle, which well rebated the presumption of the remainder, determined to proceede to a second assault, but they found the besieged so well assured because of their victorie, that they durst not beginne.
The Duke of Anious retrait from before Chastellerand.The Duke not hauing all his armie togither, and perceiuing that the siege was raised before Poictiers, presently after the assault giue^ to Castellerand by the Italians, fearing to bee surprised, in all hast caused his artillerie to bee drawne away, and by mans strength besides horses to passe the riuer, thereby to set it in safetie.
The eight of September toward euening, it was resolued that the whole armie should retire into a strong place called la Celle, beyond the riuer that passeth by Haye in Touraine, six leagues from Chastelleraud. At this passage they left two thousand shot, and some cornets of horse, to stay the Princes forces from assayling the Princes armie, at that time too weake to hold out against them. The Duke with the rest of his troupes was lodged in a place of great aduantage. In this retraict the Maisters of his campe vsed such diligence and good conduct, as deserued to bee noted among the most notable feates in all this war, and was the principall meanes of the Dukes victorie, which soone after hee obtained at Chastellerand, where he had at leisure reassembled all his forces, before dispearsed and scattered abroad. The Princes aduertised of this suddaine retraict of the Duke, followed him, and marched all the night, so that beeing first passed the riuer, they drew straight to the port of Pilles, there to passe the riuer of Creuse, and so to set vpon the maine battell. But the guard which the Duke had before placed in the same place, forced them to skirmish almost all the day: the Admirall perceiuing the place too hot, seeking other passages, found one somewhat higher vppon the right hand, where all the armie did the next day passe ouer the
Creuse, betweene the port of Pilles and Haye in
Touraine, in full resolution to force the Duke either to fight, or else to retire into the Cittie of Tours, where the king then was. The Corps de Garde at the port of Pilles fearing to bee inclosed, retired in great haste to the Dukes armie, where still there arriued men from all places: both the armies set the^selues in battell array, but betweene them there ranne a brooke, inuironed with marishes and bogges, very discommodious for any generall fight: because no man could passe but by one and one, as also the artillerie could not bee brought without daunger of losse.
The Duke lodging in a village called la Celle, wel trenched, flangued, and fortified, hauing on the one side a riuer, and on the other a wood, feeling himselfe yet too weake, would not come downe into the plaine: the Princes not able to force him in so strong a hold, hauing for the space of two daies with continuall skirmish sought to bring him to the field, for want of victualles returend ouer the Creuse, and so ouer the other riuer named Vienne, the thirteenth day of September, and were lodged at Fay la Vineuse, and within two daies after, the Duke came also within foure leagues of the same place.
A traitor executed.The 21. was
Dominique d'Albe, the Admirals Groome of his chamber, put to execution, as beeing conuicted to haue promised la Riuere the
Captaine of the Duke of Anious guard, for the summe of one hundreth Crownes which hee had receiued in hand, with assurance of the place of a Groome of the Dukes chamber, and some other large rewards, to kil his maister the said Admirall with poyson, which the said la Riujere deliuered him. The Prince of Orenge departing from this place, vppon a necessarie iourney into
Germanie, passed with a small traine by la Charitee and
Vegelay: and so following on his way, arriued without disturbance at his iourneyes ende, leauing his two bretheren Lewis and
Henry with the Princes.
Eight daies before the execution of Dominique, the Parliament of Parris had published a decree against the Admirals life, accusing him of rebellion and treason, with promise of reward of fiftie thousand crownes, of the summe to bee leuyed vpon the Towne-house of Parris, to any that could bring him in aliue or dead: the same they also executed him in picture, as they did likewise the Vidame of
Chartres and the Countie Montgommery.
The battell of Moncontour won by the Duke of Aniou.The Duke of Aniou hauing gathered all his forces, and passed Vienne vpon the six and twentieth of September, came to
Loudun, within three myles of the Princes campe, which beeing in a countrie much fouraged, and of bad cituation, were counselled to go to
Moncontour, wher they might haue good lodging and great store of victualles. The carriage marched on the one side, and the Admirall and his armie on the other side, not thinking that the Duke would so soone approach, but beeing neare a village named Saint Cler, the one not knowing of the other, the Dukes vantgard conducted by Monsieur Biron, met sidewaies vppon the Princes armie. Hee perceiuing occasion giuen, gaue a charge with a thousand launces vppon Nouy, that made the retrait for the Princes, with three hundreth horse, and two hundreth Harquebusiers, this small troupe was presently ouerthrowne and put in disorder, with losse of about thirtie or fortie horse, and almost all the foote. This furious charge being done with great force and vppon the suddaine, with the noyse of foure cannon shots, bredde such feare in the Princes troupes, that euery man beganne to bee abashed, and without a certaine passage, whereon aboue twentie men at a time could not passe, that stayed Birons launciers, all the Princes armie had in a manner been wholly ouerthrowne at that first charge.
The Admirall running to that disorder, shewed himselfe vnto his men, and reassembled them in such sort, that at his comming were giuen two or three great charges and recharges, of fifteene hundreth or two thousand horses at once, and such as passed, were soone driuen backe againe by the others. There the Counties Lodowic de Nassau, and VVolrad of Mansfield, behaued themselues valiantly. The two armies placed themselues in battell, one heere, the other there, about a long musket shot distant from each other, that of the Princes, beeing soone vnder couert: to passe that place, no man durst be so bold, for the danger that might ensue, because diuers squadrons would soone haue spoyled such as had ventured. But the Dukes artillerie beeing there, and the Princes alreadie at Moncontour, his cannoniers tooke the aduantage and hurt some squadrons of the enemie, which notwithstanding brake not ranke, but held firme vntill night, by which meanes each man retired.
The next day in the morning, the Duke would visit
Moncontour, to put the Princes in feare. But hee found them in the subburbes well fortified, hauing no meanes to come at them, but by one way, where hee gaue a skirmish both of horse and footemen. The Dukes armie was composed of eight or nine thousand horse, and seuenteene or eighteen thousand foote, comprehending fixe thousand Switzers, and fifteene peeces of artillerie. The Princes had sixe thousand horse, Frenchmen and Almaines, sixe thousand Harquebusiers, foure thousand Lansquenets, sixe cannons, two coluerins, and three other peeces, hauing left therest at Lusignan.
Before the battell, two Gentlemen bearing armes in the Dukes campe, beeing strayed, came to some of those of thereligion,Notable aduertisement neglected. hauing certaine ditches betweene them, and hauing protested vnto them, that they bare no malice vnto the Princes, willed them to aduertise the Admirall to keepe his armie from fighting, because the Dukes armie was very strong, by reason of new strength, but that hee should driue off the time for the space of a moneth because all the Nobilitie had protested, not to stay any longer, but that if they were imployed within that time, they would doo their best to aduance his seruice. That it was daungerous to striue against the French furie, which in short time would be abated, and by that meanes the Duke with his Councell should bee constrained to seeke for peace, and to graunt it with aduantage to those of the religion: which aduertisment giuen, those two Gentlemen retired.
Those of the religion went presently to the Admirall, to certifie him therof, which counsell liked him well. They shewed it likewise to others of the principall commaunders, whereof some reiected it not, and desired it might bee followed: but the greatest part esteemed it to be but an artificial deuise to put them in feare, adding, that although this aduise seemed to bee good, yet it was not to be accounted of, because it proceeded from suspect persons, and such as vsually exercise deceits: commonly such as are neare to any mischiefe, despise the good counsell wherewith men seeke to relieue them. The Princes Councell assembling to resolue vpon their proceedings, some sayd it was best for them to get to Ernaux, and to set the riuer which runneth by it,Euill counsell followed. between both the armies, and to depart about nine of the clocke in the euening, and to march all night, that they might get thither in safetie, because the Duke was at hand. Others replyed, that those nightly retraits, put feare into such as make them, imbasing their reputations, giuing courage to the enemies, and that it were best to depart about the breake of day. This second aduise, (beeing the woorst) was followed.
The Admirall as then was in great distrust, fearing that the Rutters would mutin for want of pay, and that three or foure of his Regiments of far countries would leaue him: because they had alreadie asked him licence to depart.
He knew likewise that diuers Gentlemen were retired vnto their houses, wherefore to hold the armie in vnitie, hee besought the Princes (that were at Partenay) to come thither: which they did, bringing with them one hundreth and fiftie good horse. The next day in the morning, the horsemen were readie mounted to ryde to Ernaux, all in white cassockes, the better to know them, if they should bee forced to fight. But then the Lansquenets refused to march, except they might haue mony. And within a quarter of an houre after,Blind auarice cause of a great mischiefe. fiue cornets of Rutters said as much, by which meanes, aboue an houre and a hafe past ouer, before they could bee appeased, whereby the troupes could not haue the meanes to get a place, wherein they could hardly haue been fought withall.
And hauing marched a quarter of a league, they discouered the Dukes armie, aduancing it selfe in such manner, that all the leisure they had, was to range themselues in order, and to place themselues in a valley, in couert from the cannon shot. After this ensued an other mischiefe in the Princes armie, which was, that the Admirall perceiuing the Dukes vantgard to set forward, (wherein was nineteene cornets of Rutters in two squadrons) and to come right vpon him, hee sent to the Countie Lodowicke that commaunded the battell, that he should send him three cornets of horse: which the Countie did, but hee himselfe led them, and at that instant beganne the battell, hee remaining in fight: whereby the bodie of the battell remained without a head, not knowing how to gouerne it selfe: and it is thought, that if the Countie (a wise and valiant Gentleman) had beene there, the body of the battell had mades good resistance,The body of the battell without a head. seeing that being so discouered, it had almost put the dukes battell to fight.
The fight hauing continued almost three quarters of an houre, the Princes as yet very young, beeing not long before retired, and with them diuers others, vnder colour of safer conduction of their persons: the Admirall likewise beeing hurt in the face at the first conflict, in the ende the Princes horsemen were constrained to leaue the field, part of the foote beeing slaine, the rest flying to saue themselues.
The artillerie and Ensignes of the footemen were taken: Countie Lodowicke was pursued a whole league,Notable retrait. but made a gallant retraict with three thousand horse in one maine. The rest of the troupes hauing gotten away before, the leaguerors made shew many times to set vpon the Countie: but hee alwaies turned so brauely vpon them that they durst not ioyne. In this manner hee marched towards Eruaux, and from thence to
Partenay, where they arriued about tenne of the clocke at night, fiue houres after the ouerthrow, where the rest likewise came.
The Princes in this battell of Moncontour, lost four thousand Launsquenets' fifteen hundreth French souldiers, and great numbers of pages and other boyes: of the horsemen about three hundreth, and many horses dead or hurt: of men of name there were slaine Puigreffier, Autricourt, Biron, brother to him that ledde the Dukes vantgard, and Saint
Bonet Cornet of the Admirals launciers. La Noue and
Acier taken prisoners: the Rutters carriage was sacked, only the horses which the boyes saued: but the French carriage being further aduanced towards Partenay and Nyort was saued: of the Dukes troupes there was not many footemen slaine, but of horse about fiue or sixe hundreth, and twise as many more wounded, most part of them dying not long after: and of men of name, the elder Rhingraue, the Marquesse of Bade, and Cleremont of
Dauphine.
The number of slaine on both parts.The Duke caused the dead to bee buried, and commanded the villages and townes neare there abouts, to burie such as lay nearest vnto them. Such was this daies chance, whereof diuers discourses haue bin published, whose vanities I haue not vndertaken to tet downe, contenting my selfe to haue approached nearest vnto the trueth, which of it selfe will sufficiently be desended.
The Marshall de Rez was presently willed by the Duke to ride to Tours, to certifie the king and the Queene of his victorie, wherewith all Europe was presently filled, and as the report is made greater by passing through many mens mouthes, nothing was then spoken of in Italie and else where, but of the vtter ouerthrow of all the Princes armie.
Consultation in the Dukes councel, what was to be don after the battel of Montcontour.Immediately after this victorie, the chiefe Leaders of the Dukes armie were assembled to debate what was best to bee done: the opinions were diuers, and the woorst followed. Some alleadged, that since the Princes footmen were quite ouerthrowne, and that they had fewe horsemen but Rutters, who were alreadie wonderful discontent for the losse of their baggage, the best course would be with all speed to follow them, so should they compasse one of these two effects, either vtterly ouerthrow them, or force them to compound for their retraict into Germanie, which might easily be performed, by giuing them some two moneths pay.
Heereto adding, that the Admirall a wary Captaine, and one that knewe how to shift out of the bryers, had hee but euen very small leisure, would repaire his forces, adding some replies out of
Gascon and Languedoc: so that in the spring, they should be assured to haue him in the field with a new armie, wherewith hee would waste sundrie Prouinces, and transport the wars euen to the Gates of Parris. Besides, the presence of the Princes among their daunted troupes, would by little and little harten them againe, and stirre vppe the stomacks of many others that were now quailed in other places, vnlesse with diligence they were abridged from making profit of the time. In summe, they concluded that the Duke with the two thirds of his armie, shuld follow the Princes, whereby vndoubtedly he should driue their leaders for refuge to shut vp themselues in some weake place, whereby the warres might bee ended.
Others thought it better to reape the assured fruite of the victorie, by taking in the townes that were holden in the Princes names, which in this astonishment might easily bee done, but would heereafter bee harder, and in maner impossible, in case they had respite to suruay their own estates, whereby there would be new stirres: for the Protestants would neuer be subdued, so long as they had any places of retrait: but once shutte out of their starting holes, they would haue no great stomacke to bee busie. That their townes that were to be taken in
Poictou, Xaintongue, and Angoulmois, were not to hold out any long time against a victorious armie, so mightie, and euery day increasing: also that so Rochel seeing her selfe left post alone and open to them, would soone quake: as for the remainders of the defeated armie, or that the Admirall and Princes were gotten into safetie, all that would waste of it selfe: and for the hasting of the execution therof, they might send after them some one thousand horse, and two thousand shot: and withall, raise the whole power of the Prouinces where they should stay. In the meane time with all expedition to send for artillerie and munititon to performe this purpose, which beeing atchieued, would inflict a mortall wound vppon those of the religion, who alreadie halted of the one legge.
This latter aduise tooke place, yet but in part neither, namely, so farre as concerned the taking of townes, yet not of all: but as for pursuing of the Princes, the Duke and his Councell neuer thought more of it, but imployed their time in that which seemed most easie. The Admirall did since report to the Lord de la Noue, that had they chearefully pursued the Princes and him, when they transported the remainders of their armie into Gascon, they had vtterly indaungered them, considering that passing through the countrie of Perigort, and other straights, the Pesants and pettie Garrisons wrought them much trouble, by reason they had none but horsemen, and those in part tired, and in part astonished: but there sort that they had to refresh themselues, to strengthen their power with footemen, and to gather in the booties of the good countrie as they went, restored their courages, and put them in newe hopes.
The Princes hauing reassembled their forces after the battell of Moncontour, and taken speedie aduise in
Partenay what they should do,What the Prince did after the ouerthrow. presently issued foorth, and at three of the clocke after midnight departed to go to Nyort, hoping that that place would for a time stay the Dukes armie, therein leauing Nouy with his Cornet, and two Regiments of Harquebusiers, besides pikes, and the Townes-men: from thence they went to Saint Iohn d'Angely to prouide for it: wherein lay Captaine Pilles, to whom they committed the guard, giuing him more strength of fiue hundreth harquebusiers, with the cornet of
la Motte Puiols, and the harquebusiers of la Mure, and then gaue order for Rochel and Angoulesme. The Duke following the resolution of his Councell, caused his armie to march towards
Partenay, where it found no resistance, but the gates open and the Towne voyde.
The reprise of sundrie townes, for the Prince of Anion.In the meane time, the Barron of Mirambeau beeing in Lusignon, a place accounted impregnable, well furnished with artillerie, souldiers, and sufficient prouision, did notwithstanding vppon some summons and parley, yeeld vp the place to his Cousin the young Lansac, thereby incurring great mislike with both parties, and of his cowardize, reaping onely reproach, scorne, and shame.
Soone after, the Duke sent to summon Nyort, and finding part of the garrison wauering, caused his skouts and forerunners to shew themselues euen at the gates, so to terrifie them the more:
Mony who wanted neither courage nor strength, therevppon tooke the field with his cornet, and when hee had scarred away these aduenturers, sounded the retrait, wherein as hee was one of the hindermost, and called
Maureuell of the Countrie of Brye, who a litle before departing from the Dukes armie, vnder colour of beeing of the religion, had yeelded himselfe to Mouy,Mouy vnworthily intreated, and his aduersary rewarded by the Catholicques. and so was admitted into his cornet, bestowed vppon his Captaine and benefactor a Pistol-shot in his backe, whereby hee was greeuously wounded, and beeing well horsed, saued himselfe in haste with the Duke, who sent him to the Queene, where he was rewarded with a summe of mony out of the Town-house of Parris, and afterward well aduanced and welcome to the Court, afterward also imployed against the Admirall, as heereafter you shall vnderstand: and lastly slaine in the middest of his safetie at Parris, by the Lord of Mouies son, who came not behind him, but came to his face and did it with his sword through the default of his cuirats which hee vsually ware euen in time of peace.
Mouy beeing thus wounded retired into Niort, where hee thought to haue held out: but afterwise beeing otherwise aduised, hee came to S. Iohns to conferre with the Princes, and so went to Rochel, where hee yeelded vp the ghost.
Hee was a wise, valiant, and very godly Gentleman, a terror to the Romish Catholicques, and as vpright in his conuersation as any of our time. Vppon his retrait from Niort, the place was immediately abandoned, and so consequently without difficultie, was possessed by the Duke. Thither came the king, the Queene-mother, and the Cardinall of
Lorraine soone after, and ther reloiued to besiege Saint Iohn d'Angely. In the mean time Puuiaut forsook Fontenay, as not able to stand against such an armie, and so came to
Rochel, where hee craued and obtained succours to defend
Marans the keye of that countrie.
The Protestants troupes retire to la Charite.The Princes Garrisons of Chastelleraud, Chauuigny, Roche-pose, castle d'Angle, Prully, Cleruant, and other small places, departed to passe through Berry, and so with
Briguemaut to draw to Sancerre and Charite. They tooke breath at Bourg Dieu, lately surprised to their vse by Captaine Gournay, from young Monluc, for by the way, the Commons of Berry and Chastre, the Gouernor of the Countrie had greatly molested them: but Guerchy Gouernor of Charite came to free them, and maugre all the indeuors of Chastre, and the resistance or a fewe Priests of Chasteauneaf, a town standing vpon the riuer of Cher (who foolishly and with the losse of their liues, had changed their portuises into swords, and their copes into corslets) brought them into couert. Asconcerning those of
Dauphine and Languedoc,Viuarets and Auuergne. some of them to the number of sixe or seuen hundreth horse, with the princes leaue tooke their way homeward, purposing by leisure to prouide for some places in Viuaretz and
Auuergne, where after many difficulties they did arriue, loosing by the way some hundreth men, besides such as were stripped: for no sooner could any man scatter ortarrie behind, but he was presently taken vp by the Pesants, who studied onely how to robbe and spoyle.
The chiefe of these troupes that retired thus, were
Monbrun, Mirabel, and Verbelay, who afterward commaunded in
Orillac in Auuergne: from whence Saint Heran the Gouernour did his vtter indeuor to debarre the Princes entrie: for indeed there was aspeech, that they purposed to come and winter in the plaine countrie called la Limagne: but they went an other way: for hauing prouided for Rochel, Saint Iohn d'Angely, and some other places, they passed ouer Dordogne, drew towards Quercy, and below Cadenat passed ouer the riuer of Lot, from whence they followed that course which heereafter we will set downe.
Among other Townes that serued the Princes in these warres, we must not for get Rochel, a port of the sea, well knowne to all men,Rochel a great refuge for the Princes. for that among other commodities which it did for those of the religion, it rigged and prepared great numbers of shippes, that tooke many rich prizes, whereby great profit ensued for the common cause. Although at that time they tooke but the tenth part for the Admiraltie, yet the profit amounted vnto aboue three hundreth thousand frankes: and diuers courses were made by many Captains, among the which, Sore bare a great name, wherewith the Spaniards were not well content.
Nismes in Languedoc serued likewise greatly for the Prince, after they had taken it from one named Saint Andre,As also Nismos in Languedoc gotten by a notable denice. by meanes of their participants in those quarters, that got it by a notable deuice, entering by a grate of Iron, filed diuers nights with a soft file, by a souldier liuing at hazard.
This grate stood at the foote of the Town wall, shutting in a sinke, throgh the which there ranne in a fountaine out of a little spring, for the commoditie of the Inhabitants. The enterprises whereof, one named Captaine Saint Cosme was the leader, beeing entred by this conduct, were presently discouered by the Sintinell that stood vpon it: In such sort, that the fluee of a mill not farre from thence, was presently left open vpon them, and some peeces out of the Castle shot against them. Neuerthelesse they shunned it, and being entered and dispearsed in troupes, Saint Cosme went to the grate called
Carmes, where hee put a court of guard to the swoord, consisting onely of Priests: and going to the Crowne gate, hee met a Corporall, whom hee constrained to giue him the word, forced an other court of guard, and slew them all.
The gate beeing opened, certaine souldiers that stayed withour, entered with their boyes, and running with three trumpets through the streetes of the Towne, made a great noyse: Chaissi, Mingelle, and other Captaines, companions of Saint Cosme, went round about the Towne. Saint Andre and his Liefetenant, not hauing the meanes to get into the Castle, and beeing hardly pursued, (for they went to bee reuenged vpon them, because of their wicked liues, and as then also they had those of the religion, that had fledde from Nismes against them, to whom they had done a thousand mischieses) threw themselues off from the wall into the ditches, where the one brake his necke, the other his thigh, and the next day being taken was slaine. Captaine Astoul, that commanded in the Castle, held out almost three months against the Towne, but hauing lost part of his souldiers by a mine, others dead of sicknesse, and the rest poore and miserable, hee agreed to yeelde, liues and goods saued, and so this towne restored to the commandement of the Princes, did after serue them to great end in many of their affaires.
The fiege of Vizelay by Sansac, with the successe thereof.After the battell of Moncontour, the Duke of Aniou commaunded Sanssacto take from those of the religionall that they held beyond Loire. According to this commission, Sanssac with two and twentie Ensignes of foote, and eight cornets of horse, foure cannons, and two coluerins, entered into
Donzi, which beeing very weake, had beene abandoned: tooke
Noyers vpon composition, that the besieged should enioy both liues and goods, which notwithstanding the most part of the souliers were transported to Troy in Champagne, and threescore of them slaine by the people in the streets: Irom thence Sanssac mached toward Vezelay, a towne standing vpon the top of a high hil, hauing but one way to come at it, whereby the Inhabitants came in and out. All other waies are so steepe; that without many breathings, it is vnpossible to climbe to the foote of the walles, which are reasonable thicke and strong. Therein were inclosed these Captaines: Blosset, Sarasin, Besansen, and Ribourpierre, with three companies of footemen, and two Cornets of horse. Most of these souldiers were such as had come thither as to a place of resuge. The 8. of Octob.
Sanssac caused three companies to make the first approach, but the besieged came foorth very resolutely, defeated two companies; and slew their Captaines, and about fortie souldiers: the third saued themselues in a valley among Then did Sansac with greater forces make his approaches, and within two daies after beganne the batterie, which continued eight and fortie houres, then gaue the assault at two breaches and an escalado, neare the Franciscan Fryers. But hee had as sharpe a repulse with losse of three hundreth men and aboue, as also the defendants lost some thirtie men, with their Captain named
Sarazin. Then did Sansac remooue his batterie into diuers places, and gaue an assault, which the besieged did valiantly defend, and slew euen without the breaches, and in the retrait, many of his men. Then finding bis bullets and powder in manner quite spent, and his cannons broken and spoyled, raised his siege and went to setch a new supply, and so with all diligence returned with twelue peeces more: the rather for that hee was by some traitors of the Towne (of whom two were found out and executed) giuen to vnderstand of the departure of the most part of the Gentlemen that were at the first siege, who now had taken the field.
At his first comming hee beganne a long and furious battell, wherein hee inlarged the first breaches, beate down the defences, and made the rampiers plaine, then gaue he a general assault, wherin his men at length had the repulse, with the losse of his brauest souldiers, slaine vpon the breaches and in the ditch. Here vpon, considering, that three thousand cannon shotte, the death of fifteen hundreth souldiers, and among others of Foyssy, the Colonell of his foot men, could no whit abate the courage of the besieged, heretired and thought it ynough to shut them vp towards the ende of the yeare: but Briquemaut and
Guerchy found meanes to relieue Vezelay, and to send
Sansac to seek his fortune elsewhere.A notable defence of a woman besieged in her owne house. As small honor did Montare the Gouernour of Bourbonnois, Moncequie, and other Captaines obtaine, who with three thousand men, some foote, some horse, and certaine Cannons, besieged and for fifteene daies space, did beate the Castle of Bonegon, holden and couragiously defended by Mary of Brabancou, widdow to the Lord of
Neaui, with some fiftie souldiers for the guard of that her house.
The besiegers lay before it neare two moneths: so that in the end, this vertuous Ladie hauing lost the most part of her souldiers, who were slaine in the assaults and ordinarie skirmishes, was forced to yeeld to the enemie, who sent her prisoner to Moullins, from whence shee was afterward deliuered at the entreatie of such as respected her godlinesse and vertue. Her Castle they sacked and threw downe, for spite that they had lost so many souldiers, and reaped as great dishonour as might bee. This siege began about the beginning of Nouember.
The siege of Poictiers had been the beginning of misfortune of the Princes,The siege of S. d'Angely, ruine of the D. of Anious forces. but in exchange, the siege of Saint
Iohn d'Angely was the stay or period of the Duke of Anious victories. For if he and his troupes had not flayed there, but rather pursued the Princes and the Admirall, the war had soone ended, as all men were of opinion, considering the feare which those of the religion at that time had, togither with the difficulties which as then presented themselues. The Duke proude of the taking of Partenay, Nyort, S. Maixant, Fontenay, Chastelleraud, and Lufignan, sent according to their determination, to summo^ the town of S. Iohn d'Angely to yeeld vnto him. Piles that co^manded therin, assisted by la Motte Puiols, la Ramiere, Paluel called Serido, les Essars, la Garde, and Montant, to whom Monsieur de la Personne was sent with certaine horse, made answere, that hee kept the place for the Prince of Nauarre, Gouernour of
Guyenne. The Towne was presently besieged, beginning vpon the sixteenth of October, where those within, made many sallies and skirmishes to impeach the enemie from approaching: fiue daies after, the besieged with fortie horse charged the enemie, where they slew diuers of their souldies, who being surprised, were taught to runne faster. But the losse they had the next day after was greater, for then the besieged slew a great number of their me^, bare away two Ensignes and a halfe, and a good quantitie of armes, Captain Parisol slaine, and his brother taken prisoner, without losse of one man of those in the Towne.
Fiue daies after, the Queene brought the king her sonne, as then of the age of nineteene yeares, with a great traine vnto the siege, to the ende, that he might likewise haue part of the honor of so many conquests in his realm, and against his owne subiects. But not long after, hee could well complaine that his mother had brought him thither to drinke of the shame, and to fauour the Duke of Aniou her other sonne, whom she sought to aduance. It was thought as then, the besieged would haue yeelded themselues within two daies after: but those two daies continued aboue sixe weekes. Captaine la Ramiere was so sore hurt at the beginning of the batterie, that hee died not long after, much lamented by those of the towne, for his valour and resolution. At the first assault giuen about the beginning of Nouember, the kings armie loft diuers of their Captaines and best souldiers. Montesquiou, that slew the Prince, was there cruelly wounded, whereof he languished certaine weekes, and then died. Biron Generall of the artillerie, perceiuing that this resolution of the besieged would spoile the assailants, began to mollifie them by Artificiall practises, and to vse a treatie of peace, Personne hauing Pasport graunted him to go vnto the Princes. Wherevpon a truce was graunted for certaine daies, which beeing expired, although Personne was not returned, Piles was often summoned by Biron to yeeld vp the Towne, because he had conditioned to capitulate, if within the time of the truce, he had no ayde not answere fro^ the Princes. In the end it was agreed, that if the next day by ten of the clocke in the morning, beeing the tenth of Nouember, the besieged were not relieued, they should yeeld vp the place: as all the Towne was in a maze, and many weeping for greese, about the breake of day they beganne to crie out, saying: that the aide (which a Gentleman named
Fombedoucre, had gone to fetch with the great daunger of his life, and continued after that with great fortune, to hazard himselfe for the good of the towne, by dooing such speciall seruices, and in the end was taken by his enemie) was at the gate of Mattas, whither Piles presently went to receiue them. It beeing Captaine Saint Seurin, who with fortie horse was come from Angoulesme to S. Iohn, passing by the enemies campe, that lay about the towne, hauing vnder the name and pretence of a friend, finely circumuented the watch: at the time appoynted
Biron appeared, that receiued an other answere then hee expected. The hostages deliuered on both sides, the Romish Catholicke cannons beganne to play, daily continuing, wherevnto the besieged opposed great diligence, by making rampiers of earth. There Schastian de Luxemberg Duke of Martigues, Gouernour of Brittaine, was slaine with a harquebu shot, a great enemie to those of the religion, and much lamented by the contrary part. Not long before as in an interview, hee stood talking with la Motte Puiols, perswading him to yeeld, he said: trust not you vnto the Princes nor the Admirall, but remember the battell, wherein your strong God forsooke you, and that at this time you haue occasion to sing: Helpe vs now O Lord, for it is time. La Motte answered, that for the losse of such a battell, their hope in the strong God, (of whose aide they were assured) was not diminished. And the next day after this parley, was made the sallie aforesaid, wherein Partso^ was slaine, and at their returne into the towne, they sung the 50. Psalme, beginning: The mightie God, etc. And not long after, Martigues felt that the strong God is liuing, to ayde the weake, and to abate those that thinke themselues to be stronger then he.
During this batterie, la Motte Puiols, and S. Seurin, with eightie horse, and two hundreth foot, made a braue sallie vpon the besiegers court of guard, which consisted of foure Ensignes: slew fiftie or sixtie of the principall, wounded a great number, cloyed sixe coluerins, and burned fifteen barrels of powder belonging to the munition: also la Motte charged the Switzers that kept the store house, wherein were some hundreth barrels and more: slew part of the Switzers, and scarred the rest, so that had they not made speede to the rescue, all the powder of the armie had vanished in smoke. The besieged retired with two Ensignes, many dru^mes and weapons, and great bootie, without losse of any one man. Afterward the furie of the cannon was redoubled, and the besiegers resolued to abide, but not to fight but with cannon shot.
Finally the siege hauing continued for the space of two monethes, there was a capitulation signed with the kings owne hand, importing, that the besieged should issue out, with their goods, armes, and horses, their Ensignes wound vp, and that for the space of foure monethes after, they should not beare armes for the generall cause of the religion, that as well straungers as others, might retire whither they would, with all securitie: and that they should be conducted by
Biron and Cosseins. Now it remained that they should prouide to depart the next day, being the third of Decemb. which they did euery man as well as hee might. In the meane time, the sicke and wounded, the aged, impotent, and women, tooke on mightily, neither was there anything heard, but weeping and lamentation, especially at the departure, which was about noone. The Duke of Aumale was at the gate of Mattas, where the footemen were the first that came forth,The vn worthee dealing with those that came foorth of Saint Iohn d'Angelie vpon compesition. vnder the leading of Captaine Serido and other Captaines, to whom Marshal Vieillenille, said: Follow me, and let your men come after you. Beeing come to the midst of the subburbs, the Romish Catholicquesouldiers began to discharge vppon therest, and with force draue them into their lodgings, where they stripped them of their armes, apparrel, and mony: the marshal being hereof aduertised, commanded his me^to follow him with their weapons readie, but as he ran one way, there was much iniurie offered an other. Whervpon Serido went twise to complain to the D. d'Aumale, and to summon him to see the kings promise performed: but Aumale in liew of going himselfe, commanded certaine Captaines to take order for it. About 50. paces without the subburbs stood the D. of Aniou, whose countenance did somwhat represse the insolencie of ye Rutters, but so soone as they were passed him, his foot me^ spoiled their cariages, seized vpo^ their spare horses, set the horseme^ besides their saddles, and robbed them. Neither did they ye escaped this first spoyle, go scot free, for passing by S. Iulians, which was halfe a league of, they incurred greater iniuries then before. The regiment of
Sarrieu that stood there at guard, suffered not any to escape, but tooke from them all that they could finde, euen to their hose and shooes, yea sometimes to the very shirt. Many were beaten, murthered, and slaine, and some cast into the riuer. Thus were the footemen intreated, that vppon the kings faith royall, came foorth of S. Iohn d'Angely. The horsemen at their departure did Biron and Cosseyns bring foorth, which notwithstanding they were stripped by their carriages, armour, and horses: and being passed Saint Iulians, three cornets appoynted for their conduct, began to strip and iniurie any that scattered neuer so little: yea euen at Siech, whither they were that day to march, diuers were robbed, stripped, and slaine. And the next day vppon the way to Saint Cibardean, this disorder continued to the contempt and infamie of the authoritie royall, notwithstanding the kings safe conduct, his Herault and Trumpet, whom Biron had commanded to bring them to Angoulesme, where both foote and horse thus hardly intreated, arriued vppon Sunday the fourth of December, about tenne of the clocke in the morning, where they were honeftly receiued by the Lord of
Mesines, the Gonernour, and diuers other Lords and Gentlemen, that wondred at the former treacherie, and aduised to complaine to the king and other principall men, and to craue amends. Aumale and the rest made much ado, but in wordes onely: so that thus the solemne promise was broken, and the dignitie royall exposed to infamie, neither could the Captains notwithstanding their complaints, procure any satisfaction. Indeede some fewe of the veriest rascals and treachers were bannished the campe, and recompence promised for the loft baggage: besides that, the king seemed to be mightily discontent, that his name shuld be so villainously prophaned: but this second promise was as well obserued as the first.
Piles and some others, accounting themselues in regard of this treacherie, freed from their promise contained in one of the articles of the capitulation, departed from Angoulesme and went to the Princes, notwithstanding the disturbance by Vauguyon, and eight Cornets of horse, offered at the passage ouer Dordogne. In this siege the assaylants loft aboue 10000. men of war, and discharged
35000. cannon shot: 25. or 30. commissaries of the artillerie were slaine by the besieged, who for want of munition, let 12. or 15. peeces mounted vpon wheeles stand vnoccupied: many left the campe, which found it selfe diminished of 18. or 20000. men, yet litle esteemed in respect of the D. de Martigues, and other co^manders. Whilest the Romish Catholicques armie lay spending the^selues before S. Iohn d'Angely, la Chastre and others, warred vpon the religious in Berry, and the borders with variable successe on both sides. The protestants in two or three places, trusting to their enemies promises, were hardly intreated: but they had their reuenge by weapons and valiant resistance in sundrie places where they bare out sundrie assaults, and forced their enemies to retire. The kings armie by want of victuals and other discommodities, presently after, went from Saint Iohn de Angely, leauing the Princes and the Admirall to thinke vpon their voyage. And the king about the end of the yeare went to Angers, assigning the Princes Deputies to bee there in the beginning of Ianuary to intreat of peace.
The King,1570. the Queene, the Duke of
Aniou, and their Councell, thinking that the Princes had lost courage, and after the battell of Montcontour,Why a parley of peace was made about the beginning of the yeare. to be wholly destitute of all means to ayde themselues, determined to sound them, to see if they would enter into request and acceptation of peace: hoping that hauing brought them to the poynt, there could bee no condition, how hard soeuer it were, but they would gladly accept it, so they might bee assured of their liues, and the possession of their goods in their houses. And according to this aduise in the moneth of Nouember, 1569. a meeting was practised betweene the Marshall de Cosse, and the Deputies of the Queene of Nauarre, the Deputies hauing presented their articles, although the matter ought rather to bee handled by conference then by writings, which haue no replies, the meanes therein vsed, and the delaies practised for aunswering therevnto, made the Princes know and perceiue, that their enemiesment to helpe themselues by that deuice to hinder their affaires.
After the first audience giuen vnto their Deputies, they were giuen to vnderstand, that the king could not indure the exercise of their religion, and that they ought to content the^selues with the libertie of their consciences. An other deuice was wrought, which was, that messengers were sent into England and Almaine, to certifie them that the peace was made: by that meanes to stay the ayde that they might procure from thence. And on the other side, Postes went in all haste to procure money and forraine souldiers. They discouered diuers practises against them, both within and without the Realme, the effect beeing, that first they would disarme them, and then vse them and all those of the religion, as the iudgement giuen against the Admiral sufficiently shewed. Notwithstanding they determined to send
Messieurs de Beauuais, la Nocle, and Theligny, to
Angers, to enter into conference with the kings commissioners: and on the other side, to pursue their warlike affaires, and so make peace with weapon in hand.
After the battel of Moncontour, we see how the forces of the Protestants were scattered in diuers Prouinces. Such as were dispearsed in Berry, determined through intelligence with a certaine souldier that betrayed them,The Progresse of the warlike exployts in Poictou, against the Prostestants. to surprize Bourges: but missing of their purpose, by a counter intelligence, lost in that exployt some 30. men, besides as many more taken prisoners, hauing but homely entertainment, with the cannon were forced to retire from the town, wherto they had brought 1000. horse, and 2000. foot. The Countie of Lude, Puigaillard, and Sanzay, Colonel of the Arrierebands of France, after the recouerie of
Poictou, got possessions of Marans, wherby the whole Prouince round about was won for the Princes, except Angoulesme and
Rochel, where the Protestants were shut vp, after that
Sanzay had gotten the Castle of Beau^oir on the sea, from yong Rohan. Lusignon was lost through the cowardize of the Barron of
Mirambean, whom the souldiers made their scoffing stock, witnesse the scoffe of the L. of Losses, who comming to speake with the Queen of Nauarre at Rochel, saide openly, that Mirambeau came to composition, not for want of victual or munition, but be cause he could get no more mustard to eate with his poudered beese. The Councel weening to terrifie the L. of
Pardaillan, Gouernour of Blay, caused the King to write his letter vnto him importing both threats and promises, to cause him to yeelde vp the place (which gotten, they hoped to haue Rochel cheape ynogh) which he held for the Princes, into the ha^ds of Lansac, who in his letters threatened Pardaillon, in case he denied to obey. But Pardaillan answered the K. discreetly, and
Lansac as couragiously, to whom hee wrote thus. You can conceiue no greater greefe in enterprising to force mee in this place, then I should by yeelding, reape shame, losse, hinderance, and confusion, whereto I doubt not to put you, or any other that shall put mee to it. Neither am I or any vnder my charge, so base minded to graunt you any greater aduantage, then the like force as you pretend against vs.
Lansac finding nothing to bee had there but stripes, turned an other way and tried Romegou, the Gouernour of
Tayllebourg, whose aunswere was not vnlike to
Pardaillans. Then because the Isles of Xaintongne, Marennes, and Brouage, had much molested the armie that besieged Saint Iohn d'Angely, by letting their Garrisons rode vp and downe, and cut off their victuallers, they now sent the Countie of
Lude, Puigaillard, and Riuiere Puitaille, with eight cornets of horse, and twentie Ensignes of foote, who tooke all by force, and there slew the remainder of the Lansquenets that escaped at the battell of
Moncontour, so as there were left aliue, not aboue three hundreth fighting men, or thereabout. Whilest the wars continued in those quarters, in a rode they caught a souldier, whom Riutere Puitaille sought to practise for the surprising of Rochel:Sundrie warlike exployts on either part in Poictou and Guyenne. but the souldier laboured a double intelligence, whereby
Riuiere and others in hope to take, had almost been taken, but hauing warning thereof by the way, they returned to their Garrisons. On the other side, la Noue the Princes Lieftenant in Guyen, sought to recouer Brouage, a place that greatly annoyed the
Rochellers: but as hee went about it, hee discouered an other enterprise practised by the Barron de la Garde, against
Thonne Charente, so as the purposes of the one countermaunded the other. At that time, which was the beginning of the yeare, Rochel was as it were blocked vp on euery side. For towards Poictou the Countie of Lude and Puigaillard had a great armie: Riuiere Puitaille the elder held Marans and other places thereabout, and the younger commaunded in Brouage.
Landereau the Viceadmirall, a sworne enemie to the religion, which before himselfe had professed, lay in Olone: then the Brittons and Bourdelois by sea, did what they could to cut off all victuall from Rochel, wherein also the Barron
de la Gard, then Generall of the galleyes, did greatly annoy them, running many times euen to their hauen. He now to the end on all sides to blocke vp the towne, with the helpe of the yonger Puitaille, broached a practise against Thonne Charente: to the effecting whereof, he sent Captaine Beaulieus Lieftenant to make the first descent.
La Noue vnderstanding his deuice, vndertooke to keepe the place, and so ordered his Harquebusiers, that had they forborne vntill the souldiers of this Galley had landed, they had caught either dead or aliue, not onely these, but also their followers, who came on^ row into Charente, and so purposing to land, had cast away themselues in Sparte. But they forgetting their Captaines direction, so soone as Beaulieus Lieftenant was comming on shore, receiued him with such a storme of shot, that they slew him and l'Argoussin: withall, they proclaimed libertie to the Galley-slaues, who therevppon let go their owers, and so la Noue tooke the Galley and all that was in it.
The prisoners were carried to Rochel, and the Galleye to Taillebourg, wherewith, as also with an other
Romegouse, did afterward make sundrie voyages,
and tooke diuers prizes from the Romish Catholicques. The Barron retired with his losse, and broght his Gallies back to
Brouage, where he practised by pollicie, that which he could not compasse by force: but he lost both time, men, and money: to bee briefe, hee did iust nothing.
First parley of peace.The Princes Deputies arriued in Angers, in the moneth of February to parley of a peace, the king hauing vnderstood their declarations and demands, made aunswere, that for their exercise of religion, they should be permitted to dwell and liue peaceably within his Realme, in libertie of conscience, without beeing troubled in their houses. And for securitie he graunted them two Townes, which Biron should nominate, wherin they might do as they thought good, without interruption, with condition that there should bee some sufficient Gentleman appoynted, to be superintendant ouer those places, to see that nothing should bee done by them contrarie to the authoritie of the king and his Realme. Minding that in France there should bee no Ministers, nor any other exercise of religion then his owne, they should bee restored vnto their offices, except to such as by iniustice they hadde bin put from: And by the kings commaundement, who had sold them to get mony for the affaires of warre, hee demaunded to haue them disarmed, that they should speedily discharge their forraine souldiers, and yeeld vp all the towns holden by them.
The Deputies hauing other commission, hauing conferred with the Queene and the Kings Councell, at Chasteaubruiant in
Brittaine, returned to the Princes, without any conclusion for that time. During these affaires,VVar about Rochel.
Puigallard with other the Captaines thereabout, determined to inclose Rochel, and to that end beganne at Marsilli, Enandes, Noaille, and other hamlets within a league or two. But Scipion an Italian Enginer, to whom the Princes in consideration of his seruice, had giuen the reuenues of Noaille, vnderstanding what was done, with the helpe of la Noue and Puuiauts shot, surprised the enemie in the village, and slew a good number. The others that were shut vp in the Castle with condition of life and goods, yeelded to Noue, who was come with some forces out of Rochel.
The same time died Riuiere Puitaille, the Elder and Gouernor of Marans, wherevppon la Noue, Puuiaut, and other Captaines, determined to seize vpon the Burrough, Castle, and
Bastille of Marans, where the new Gouernour named
Chaperon, found as small obedience as might bee. Their enterprise they happily atchieued: stripped Chaperon, whom they sent emptie away: turned a companie of Italians that held the Bastille, and were loth to fight too long, into their hose and dubblets, and their weapons, purses, garments, and horses, furnished Captaine la Gardes souldiers.
A notable ouer throw in fauour of the Rochelers.This conquest gotten toward the ende of February, awaked the enemies Garrisons round about, whom la Noue pursued so hotly, that he draue them out of tenne or twelue fortes about Rochel. Then tooke he in hand an enterprise against the sonnes of Olone, which failing the first time, by reason of the roughtnesse of the sea, which kept away fiue hundreth shot that should haue come in Barques, Chaluppes, and other small boates, vnder the leading of Captaine
Sore, was set on foote againe the fifteenth of March, and so resolutely prosecuted, that the defendants were forced, and for the most part slaine. Landereau, who commanded in that place, carried to
Rochel, where in regard of his intollerable demeanours hee had been executed, had it not beene for such protestant Gentlemens sakes, as beeing in many places prisoners, might therevpon haue beene the more hardly intreated: the burrough was giuen in pillage, where the souldiers found a wonderful bootie, much goods and plentie of siluer readie quoined: there were taken sortie good vesselles, and many prisoners that remained of foure hundreth, slaine in fight. The Conquerers tooke also aboue thirtie small peeces of artillerie, besides what was in the shippes.
A gallant fight of an English ship against fiue gallies.About the same time the Barron de la Garde weening to recouer his losses, sought in a calme with his fiue Gallies, to inuest an English shippe of 25. or thirtie tunne, that ridde neare to Rochel, laden with marchandize. But the Englishmen bare themselues so couragiously, that the Barron with the losse of fiftie men whom the English slew with their muskets and cannons, was glad to returne emptie, with his gallies shrewdly brused. The Englishmen lost tenne men, and all his tackles which was torne: but the Queene of
Nauarre gaue him in recompence, one of the shippes that was taken from Landereau.
These fresh springs of the Rochelers procured the sending of Puigaillard, with fourteen companies of the ordenances, and ninteen Ensignes of footme^ to warre vvpon them. Fernaques, who lay in Fontenay with seuen score sallets, made an enterprise against Langon, and the foord of Velugre, which hee wonne, taking at the foord thirtie prisoners, and killing eight souldiers which cost him fifteene of his. The taking of this place, with the losse of Lucon, did greatly annoy Marans and
Rochel, and therefore the same day that the Italians came to lye at Saint Gemme, namely the seuen and twentieth of March la Noue departed,Exployts of both parties in Giuenne, Xantoigne, and Angulmois. and entering into Lucon, put the keepers to flight and ledde away their horse: but in his returne, the Italians of Saint Gemme followed him with a pretence to charge vppon him: yet seeing their leader, a man of valor named Sforce, beaten downe and slaine, they retired. Puigaillard taking the fields, surprised the Tower of Maric, the Castle of Greue, Talmond, and the Castle of Chise: otherwise not greatly regarding whatsoeuer his capitulations with such as hee besieged.
On the other side, Puuiaut Gouernour of
Marans, went forth the foureteenth of Aprill, against Captaine
Dante, who with his cornet ouerranne all the countrie of
Poic^tou. Him he surprised at Tire, flew in the place and ouerthrew his companie, which neuer after did any thing, as being for the most part all wounded or slaine. Young Riuiere, Puitaille, and
Guitiuiere Gouernour of Saint Iohn d'Angely, that came to the siege of Chise, in their returne were charged by
Chaumont and Goulene, with two Cornets out of
Angoulesme: where Guitiuiere being slaine,
Riuiere saued himselfe, their men defeated, left two auncients behinde them, which were carried to Rochel. The Garrison of
Angoulesme, that held for the Princes, hearing that Captaine
Herbelet, with his company, and two companies of Italians fouraged those parts, sent foorth the Lord de Coignees with two hundreth horse, who finding himselfe inclosed betweene Herbelet and the Italians, resolued to charge the foremost, which he so valiantly performed, that Herbelet was slaine, his corner taken, and his men either killed or taken prisoners. Then prosecuting his victorie, hee set vpon the Italians, entered their troupes, put some to the sword, led away the rest, and wonne some hundreth or sixe score horse, about the fiue and twentieth of May.
Second parley of peace.I said before, that the first aunswere made by the king to Messieur de Teligny and de Beauuais, and la Nocle, Deputies for the Princes, to parley of a peace at Angers, was such, that after it, the warre was rather increased then diminished. For those of the religion, perceiuing that they sought onely to ouerthrow and destroy them, determined to proceed, and to make of necessitie a vertue. And as time breedeth changes, those that happened were to their aduantages, in such sort, that their courages were increased, and their hopes fortified.
The king, the Queen, and their Councell, perceiuing that since the losse receiued before Saint Iohn d'Angely, they found themselues new to beginne, determined to beginne a parley of peace: wherein for their part, Biron was imployed, with charge (as like wise
Teligny, Deputie for the Princes) to say vnto the Admirall, that the king and the Queen his mother, desired more then euer they did, to receiue him into their fauours, with many such like words: whereof the effects may well bee seen in the discourse of the yeare 1572. The king was greeued that the continuance of warre bereaued him of his pleasures, ouerthrew the loue and obedience due vnto him, fouraged his countrie, diminished his treasures, and consumed his forces. His wicked Councellours ceased not to kindle in his heart the fier of rancor, and desire of reuenge against the Admirall, his associates, and all those of the religion, because of the iourney of Meaux, in the beginning of the second troubles, and of so many resistances as they had made. The Queen his mother was much offended, because that from the beginning of the first troubles, it was discouered that her intents were to rule, and to cause the one part to spoyle the other: Her chiefe obiect beeing wholly against those of the religion, specially against the Admirall and other commaunders. There was too much paine and daunger to bring them to her bow by dint of sword: murtherers and impoysoners durst hardly approach, the Princes applyed themselues to the time, and from their youths beganne to know the friends and enemies of rest and quietnesse of
France.
On the other side, the Queen of Nauarre and the Admirall, as also diuers great Lords of their part, affected to the good of the Common-wealth, and foreseeing that the ingrafted enemies thereof, desired nothing but the weakning of the same, by the meanes of ciuill warres, there to erect their practises, and to open the way to their ambitious deuises, desired by an assured peace to see some end of the miseries of France: hoping that mens mindes being somewhat cooled, good counsell would bee taken for the benefit of the Common-wealth, to the vtter confusion of the secret and open enemies thereof: the diuine prouidence of the almightie God and ruler of the world, directeth our affaires partly according to our desires, but for the most part, it guideth all things in such manner, that calling to mind that which past after, vntill the death of the Duke of Aniou, which was Henry the third, wee cannot marke nor say otherwise, but that the iudgements of God are vnsearchable, and that his waies are impossible to bee found out.
To returne vnto the Princes, they were constrained after the battell of Of the great voyage made by the Princes after th^ir tourney of Moncontour vntill the peace.Moncontour, to keepe themselues farre from the Dukes armie, to assure their troupes, to stay their enemies about townes, and so to consume them, while they strengthened themselues and became busier then before, thereby to constraine those that tooke so much pleasure in war, to seeke for peace. This counsel was good, because of the improuidence of the Romish Catholicks, who without resistance, suffering this smal snowball to retire, in time it became as great as a house, for that the authoritie of the Princes drew and moued many people.
The Admiral by his prouidence, surmounted the occurrent difficulties, and the Rutters to the number of three thousand horse for the field, gaue reputation to the armie. They indured much, vntill they entered into Gascon, where they strengthened themselues with Harquebusiers, beeing most necessarie for them, specially to defend the horsemen, nightly surprises much vsed in that countrie, because of the nearenesse of Townes and Castles. They were mingled among the Cornets of Rutters, and other French troupes: in such sort, that both plaine countries and couert, they were alwaies ready to defend the^.Staying of the Princes Armie. The longest way that this demy armie made, was towards Agenois and Quercy, where it stayed almost all the winter, and by the good entertainment it receiued there, both great and little spedde wel. In this voyage the Princes abandoned the enemies countrie, for a pray vnto their souldiers, and whosoeuer would hazard, wanted no meanes, those Prouinces were so abundant.
Monluc went about to hinder their passage ouer
Garonne, but the diligence of la Loue, that ledde the Princes light-horse, hauing taken those places that serued for resistance, forced him in all haste to retire to Agen: so that in the moneth of December 1599. all the armie passed ouer Garonne at Saint
Maries port, without impeachme^t at the second time, for at the first, Monluc had broken their bridge. The twentieth of the same moneth, Captaine Piles ioyned with the Princes armie, and hauing obtained three Cornets, made them flye that followed him so neare. La Loue and his Argolitiers, made diuers courses and picorees into
Agenois and the countries thereabout. The first forces that ioyned with the Princes, were those of the Countie Montgommery, comming from Bearn, and it is not to bee doubted, if he were welcommed at his returne.
The two and twentieth of December, Bole a strong Towne was taken: that done,Exployts of this armie in their voyage. that armie went to lye at the Bastille Saint
Surin, two leagues from Thoulouse. The next day, and others ensuing, beganne a manner of war most violent, by reason of the burnings that were permitted to be made about that great Towne, onely vpon the houses of Presidents and Councellours of the parliament, it beeing alleaged that they had been most earnest, and as it were inraged to burne and massacre those of the religion, beheaded Captaine Rapin, that brought them the Edict of peace from the king, and committed diuers insolencies and oppressions, for the which as then it was requisite to punish them: for that omitting that occasion, it would possible not be found againe.
The Marshall d'Anuille Gouernour of Languedoc, la Valette, and diuers others of account, were within Thoulouse, accompanied with fiue hundreth Gentlemen, and 9000. harquebusiers, as well straungers, as of the countrie, wherewith they made many sallies with diuers effects: yet neuer went farre from their walles, for fear of some surprise: after Thoulouse had receiued those small checkes, the armie went towards Carmaine,Thoulouse checked. a small towne which was forced, and such as resisted put to the sword. The like was done to those of
Oriac, la Faye, Lesbos, Montestruc, and other places: and no place at that time was besieged in vaine, but that of Saint Felix, where the Gascons were repulsed from the assault with the losse of fitie men, and the Vicount of Montclar wounded, who not long after died at
Castres.
The armie soiourning in those quarters of
Albigeois, was strengthened with fiue or sixe hundreth horses, brought from Rochel through many daungers, by Beaudine and
Renti, who by diligence made voyde the intents and enterprises of
Vanguiou, Descars, Pompadon, and others, who beeing followed by three thousand men, ment to surprise and hew them in peeces. The Princes commaunded Piles to enter into the Countie de Ronsillon, where they sacked the countrie although it belonged to the Spaniards: while the Princes were at Monreal, three myles from Carcassoue, the kings Deputies ariued, with Theligny and Beauuais, to parley of some pacification. The Princes, the Admiral,Deputies to intreat of peace. and the Rutters, from that place wrote most large letters vnto the king, to testifie their sinceritie in all things that had past. All the Nobilitie likewise made aunswere by word of mouth by one of them vnto the kings Deputies, most humbly thanking him for his inclination vnto peace. The ligny, Beauuais, and la Chassetiere, the foure and twentieth of the same moneth departed with the other Deputies, to ride to the king, and to make some good resolution. Mean time the Princes armie marched along by
Languedoc, and hard by Montpeslier, lost la Loue Marshall of the campe, a wise and valiant commander, but then for want of good aduise was surprised and slaine, with two companies almost all spoyled, part put to flight, and some slaine and hurt: the armie approching to Rhosne, the Countie Lodowicke with part of the forces passed ouer it, and in short time the armie had her reuenge for the losse of her Marshall, vppon diuers commaunders, and Romish Catholicque souldiers,The Princes armie still marching. ouerthrowne and slaine diuers places and encounters. The principall intent of the Princes was, to haue some Infanterie out of
Dauphine, therewith to strengthen the body of their armie, as also they thought to haue done in Gascon and Languedoc, which there they could not well effect. For when the souldiers vnderstood that they should march towards Parris, they set before the^ the miseries which they and their companions had indured the last winter, each man shunning it as a mortall poyson, and desired rather to stay and make warre in their owne countrie. Yet they assembled aboue three thousand harquebusiers, determining to trauell in all places, which disposed themselues by Regiments: but all on horsebacke. Necessitie constrained them therevnto, because of the long way, and the rigor of winter. And although that such manner of riding many times prooued troublesome, yet it procured profite herein, that occasions happening, the footmen found themselues busie and fresh, and not many sicke men among them, because they were alwaies well lodged and entertained.
Aduice of the Admirall.The Admirall beaten in those affaires, seeing well, that although a parley of peace was then in hand, that it would bee very hard to obtaine a good one, if the armie approached not to Parris, knowing also that beyond Loire,
hee should finde more strength, made him to hasten the voyage: but the difficultie to passe the mountaines Seuenes and du Viuarets, made some stay, and much more a feuer that seized vpon him at Saint Estienne in Forests, that was thoght wold haue killed him: his Phisitia^s being co^strained to let him blood three times in one day. If then he had died, it may be other Councell would haue ensued, for that hauing lost ye foot, which turned the gate of so many affaires, they could hardly haue found the like. Countie
Lodowicke was a braue Commaunder, and well accounted of among the Frenchmen, but yet hee had not obtained the authoritie of the other, nor his experience, but in the end hee recouered, to the great contentment of all the armie, which after that marched with such speed, that in short time it entered into Bourgongne, and went to Renele Duc,Encounter of both armies at Rene le 'Duc. strengthened by new forces that came from la Charitee and the Garrisons thereabout.
There it was thought a terrible sentence for the peace would haue bin giuen, which neuerthelesse serued but for the aduancement thereof. Marshall de Cosse, that commanded in the Romish Cotholicque armie, in the absence of the Duke of Aniou, had expresse charge from the king, not to suffer the Princes armie to approach neare Parris, and to fight with it if hee found conuenient time and place. And hauing found it in a place of aduantage, hee would haue put them from it with his artillerie, whereof the Princes were vnprouided, and by certaine Harquebushot, make them leaue certaine places which they held, one only was left, at the beginning there were made great charges and recharges of horsemen, each pursued in their towns. The Commanders that charged first for the Marshall de Cosse, were Valette, Strossy, and la Chastre, that behaued themselues valiantly: those that sustained them on the Princes side, were
Briquemaur Marshall of the campe, Montgommery, and
Genlis: in this encounter the Princes, although very young, by their countenances shewed the desire they had to fight, whereby many iudged, that in time they would bee two excellent Captaines. In the end, the Romish Catholicques that lost many men, slaine, hurt, and taken prisoners, perceiuing the difficultie to force their enemies, sounded the retrait. The Princes likewise considering, that staying there would be hurtfull vnto the^, not hauing any artillerie nor powder for their souldiers, marched in hast towards la Charite, and other townes that held for them, where their armie refreshed themselues, and was furnished with necessaire commodittes. This was don about the end of Iuly, the Princes hauing strengthened their troups with some new companies taken out of la Charite, Sancerre, Antrain, Vezelay, and other townes of their partie,The Princes armie marcheth to la Charite. prepared three long coluerins, certain mortiers, and passe volants, determining to march to Parris, but beeing readie to mount on horsebacke, the king sent them certaine articles of truce betweene them and Marshall de Cosse, which they accepted for tenne daies, beginning vpon the fourth of Iuly.
In the meane time weapons were walking slowly in
Dauphine, where Gordes indeuoured (but in vaine) to bereaue the Protestants of a small Towne called Loriol:Warlike exployts in Poicton. hotly in Guyenne and thereabout. The Rochelers had for their enemies, their neare neighbours, the Barron de la Garde, Puigallard, and la Riuiere Puitaille, who had resolued by new indenors to get the vpper hand in all those quarters.

Wherevpon Puitaille laide siege to the Castle of
Rochefort in Xaintongne, which stood vppon the high-way to the Isles and to Rochel: but la Noue dispatched him quickly away, killing a number of his men, and putting the rest to flight.
Shortly after, Puitaille and Puigaillard charged certaine Argolitiers belonging to la Noue, who were so scarred, that they so scarred also all the rest of the troupes, both horse and foote ledde by Noue, Soubize, and Puuiaut, that without regard of their leaders and co^manders, all the companies retired into Rochel without any losse: for at that time they shewed their heels to Puigaillard and his company, who beeing refreshed with diuers Regiments both of horse and foote, seized vpon all the strong holds that they had lost in Poictou, since the surprise of
Marans: Besides, the nearer to coope vp the Rochelers, they erected a Fort at Lucon vpon the high-way into the fennes, where they lodged foure Ensignes of footemen, vnder the charge of Captaine
Mascaron.
Then did Puigaillard with draw his forces into high
Poicton, there did hee spredde a rumour that the Princes had obtained a great victorie, also that the king had sent for him to come with his forces in all diligence. By this stratageme hee looked to haue brought
la Noue, Puuiaut, and others,Puigaillards enterprise to get the vpper hand. and others, out of Marans and Rochel, to besiege the Fort, which hee pretended presenly with all diligence to relieue with his whole armie, so to ouerthrow them, and withall, to atchiue a co^quest royal. Vpon this practise as it fel out in
Roussiere, a Gentleman of Poictou, did not thinke it much amisse, to shewe Puigaillard some sport in a hunting: and on the other side, Puuiaut hearing of the sport, would needes make one without intreatie. By the way Mascaron layde an ambush for him, but freeing himself therefro, he strooke vp to Roussiers lodging, whom he found not at home: In the returne Roussiere was met withal, and carried away prisoner with others, by whom Puuiaut learned, that the Fort of Lucon was but meanly manned, and so might be easily had, whereof withall speed he aduertised la Noue, who with greater speed marched foorth of Rochel with foure cornets, eleuen French Ensignes, and the rest of the Lansquenets, to the humber of three hundreth.The Fort of Lucon befieged. The Fort besieged Puigaillard with nine companies of light-horse of the ordenances: twentie Ensignes of light-horsemen, all olde souldiers, and the kings guard, leauing the rest of his troupes (such was his haste for feare hee should not come time ynough to shut vp la Noue betweene
Marans and Lucon) hee marched so fast, that he made his men march two daies and one night without any repast, except that they rested a while at Fontenay, almost so long as while they might leaue and lay vp their carriage to go the lighter.
Comming to Saint Gemme within halfe a league of
Lucon, the foureteenth day heetooke his bedde, giuing out that hee was sicke of a burning feuer, and vnder pretence of redeeming
Roussiere and other prisoners, hee sent a trumpet with charge to aduow his sickenesse, and withall, to take a viewe of the whole manner and estate of the besiegers. His troupes were euen tired with the way, and many compelled to rest some houres at
Fontenay.
Puuiaut beeing at Saint Gemme, suspecting the matter, finding that the trumpetter could not wel keep his countenance,Puigallards dissimulation discouered. layd hold of him, and so forced him to confesse the trueth. Wherevpon immediately the scourers were sent out to keep the waies, who toward night surprised fome of Puigaillards souldiers, whom they brought to
Puuiaut, by whom hee vnderstood of the approach of such a great power: la Noue beeing also aduertised heereof, euery man prouided for the field, by the aduise of their captains, namely of Puuiaut, who perswaded them that they were to deale with tired people, and such as came to offer themselues to the slaughter: thus humbly commending themselues vnto God, they prepared to the onset.
Soone after that, Puuiaut and all his men, were departed out of S. Gemme to ioyne with la Noue: Puigaillards footmen approached, assaulted the barriers, and without resistance entered into ye borough, but finding no bodie, some fell to sleeping, some to feeding, and some ran to tell Puigaillard yt the enemies fled: he thinking neuer to come time ynogh, entered Saint
Gemme before day, crying out in euery corner to call foorth the souldiers, and to bring them into array to pursue the runawaies, who were said to retire confusedly to Marans. Hee sent fiftie Argolets before, who tolde him an other tale, namely that the enemies were at hand, and in battell array.
The territorie betweene Saint Gemme and Lucon is a vine ground, well fenced with hedge and ditch, with some fields diuided with a high-way of reasonable bredth,The batiell of Lucon, where Puigaillard lost his footemen. on each side beset with bushes. La Noue came first, and prouided well for his troupes: Puigaillard could not haue any such aduantage, especially in regard of his horsemen, which by reason of ditches were forced to come on a row: this beeing considered by Captaine Stephen, a leader of thirtie sallets and some shot, backed with twentie horse, vnder the conduct of Bruneliere, he beganne the charge by la Noues appoyntment, and valiantly set vpon the first troupes of
Puigaillards horsemen.
Puuiaut perceiuing them on euery side to stagger, who were some hundreth and fiftie Maisters, hee brake into them, killed some, feared the rest, who fell vpon their owne footemen, and fledde with
Puigallard as fast as the horse might driue to Fontenay, which was foure leagues of: and such as were but badly horsed, were beaten downe and presently slaine.
Then were their footemen on euery side beset, and beeing in the plaine field, drawing toward the bushes, they were beaten downe with shot, neither would the horsemen let them runne farre, but cut them in peeces: but of all other, the Launsquenets shewed most crueltie, obiecting to the Kings guard the battell of Moncontour.
Had it not beene for la Noue and Soubize, all
Puigaillards footemen hadde beene quite rooted out, so sore were the Launsquenets bent against them. They tooke sixteene Ensignes and two Cornets: fiue hundreth olde souldiers slaine in the place, with many Captaines and Lieftenants of the Regiments and companies: and seuen or eight hundreth prisoners sent away with a white staffe in their hands.
Puigaillard lost but thirtie horse, the rest escaped with him. This armie thus ouerthrown, after thanks giuing to God,
la Noue, Soubize, and Puuiaut, marched to the Fort, which vppon safetie of his life, and his troupe,
Mascaran yeelded vp, whose foure Ensignes with the other eighteen, were carried to Rochel. The Co^querors following this good beginning, besieged, beat,The Fort of Lucon yeelden to the conquerers, who tooke many other places. and tooke Fontenay le Comte vppon composition, that the besieged should saue their liues and goods, and so they retired to Nyort, but la Noue lost an arme at the siege: Puuiaut, Soubize, and other the protestant Leaders continuing their conquest, chased the Romish Catholicques out of
Obiron, Marens, Soubize, and Brouage, where Riuiere Puitaille, one of their chiefe Captaines, was so wounded, that hee died immediately. To be briefe, the Protestants tooke from them all that they held about Rochel, excrept Saint Iohn d'Angely, where they nestled themselues.
The Barron de la Garde had for a while kept the sea with his Gallies, but hearing of the taking of Bronage, hee retired toward Bourdeaux, whilest Sore for the Princes scoured the Ocean, where hee daily light vppon some bootie. Among other his exployts, about the beginning of Iuly hee tooke a Portugall shippe, laden among other marchandize with some fortie Iesuites, that were trauelling toward India, but they were stayed, and the most part leaped ouer-boord.
This victorious successe of the Protestants in
Poictou and Xaintongne, were the occasion that to preuent any greater conquests, the Prince d'Auphin was appoynted to come down into Poictou, there to reassemble Puigaillards forces, which now hopped but vpon one legge,Succourd deputed for Puigaillard. and those of the Countie of Lude, to the end to come to some new practise.
The eleuenth of August after, the two great armies lying about the riuer of Loire, newes was brought vnto them of a peace agreed vpon between the king and the Princes, all precedent modifications and restrictions abolilished: the second Edict of peace confirmed and allowed,The 3. Edict of peace. this peace was receiued of all men, with hope of revnion betweene the two parties, through all the Realme. The peace published in the Campes and Townes, the armies were discharged, assoone as they had conducted their straungers into Lorraine, and the Princes accompanied with Countie
Lodowicke, in the beginning of October returned to Rochel: the king by the Edict granted foure Townes, Rochel, Montauban, Cognac, and la Charite,Townes for assurance. to bee kept in the Princes names, for the space of two whole yeares: for assurance of this third Edict of pacification, in the pursuite whereof,
Teligny, after sonne in lawe to the Admiral, and Beauuais la Nocle imployed themselues most faithfully, with great credite and reputation of all men.
Touching the Admirall, if there were any Commaunder on both sides that desired peace, it was hee, as by letters dated the second of March at Montreal hard by Carcassonne, written to the king, the Queen, and the Duke of Anion appeared. For being friend to militarie discipline (abolished in those miserable ciuill warres) and enemie of vices, oftentimes beholding such disorder, hee said: that if it pleased God to send peace in France, hee would desire to die a thousand deaths, rather then to fall againe into those confusions,The Admirall desireth peace. and once againe to see such mischiefes, leauing to all the rest of the commanders the praise which they obtained, if in ciuil wars praise may be giuen, it may be said, that the Admiral trauelled much both in bodie and mind, hauing sustained the heauiest part of ye affairs of ye wars with much co^stancie, fidelitie, and facilitie, and behauing himselfe with as great reuerence towards the Princes his superiours, as modestie to his inferiors, he neuer spake of the king, the Queen, the Duke of Aniou, and those whom hee knew to bee his capitall enemies, but with honour, without subtiltie or counterfeit speeches, beeing the man among all those of the religion, specially among the Commaunders in the warre, who in a speciall manner reposed himselfe vppon the prouidence of God.
The prisoners that fell into his hands, were fauourably vsed by him, as courteous when hee had put vp his swoord, as fierce when he held it naked in hand. Pittie by him was alwaies had in singular co^mendation: as also loue to iustice, wherein hee continued both priuate and publike, in time of peace and warre, vntill hee died: which made him both esteemed and honored by those whose part hee held. Hee sought not ambitiously to haue commaundements and honours, but shunning them, hee was constrained to accept them, by reason of his wisedome and good gouernment in mannaging armes: it might well be seene, that hee had as good knowledge therein, as any Captaine of his time, and alwaies exposed himself couragiously in any dangers: wise in counsell, and valiant in fight: in aduersities magnanimious, and adorned with wisedome to auoydethem.
And to conclude, hee was a man most woorthie and fitte to restore and re-establish a feeble and corrupt estate: but it appeared in an vnfit time, and that which after happened vnto him, she weth an exterior apparance, that vertue is but hardly assured heere on earth. Peace concluded and published, as it hath beene said, the Admirall Teligny, la Noue, and diuers others, withdrew themselues neare vnto the Princes in Rochel, there with more securitie to attend the aduancement and execution of the Edict.
They put Garrison for the Princes in the Townes of assurance, except in Rochell, which was maintained in her auncient priuiledges. The Emperour Maximilian the second, not long after, married his eldest daughter to Phillip king of Spaine his brother in lawe: So that the vncle married the Neece.The king married to Elizabeth of Austria. Elizabeth his youngest daughter was after giuen in marriage to king Charles the ninth, whom hee espoused in the Towne of Mezieres, about the end of Nouember: and the foure and twentieth of December going to Parris, at Villiers coste Rez, hee gaue audience to the Ambassadors of
Almaine, that desired vnto he made an answere that contented them, wherewith they were honourably discharged. About the same time the Princes exhibited sundrie complaints concerning the Edict, by the hands of
Briquemaut, Teligny, Beauuais, la Nocle, and Cauagnes. Teligny was the chiefe Agent, and seemed to bee highly in the kings fauour, to whom he propounded the complaints of the Protestants, wherevpon the king sent forth sundrie Commissioners throghout al the Prouinces of his kindome, among other, the Marshal de Cosse, togither with
Proutiere, Maister of Requests, who made a voyage to
Rochel, as well to conferre with the Queene and Admirall, concerning some conuenient means to maintaine the realme in peace, as for other matters, that we will shortly speake of.
The first of Ianuary there beganne a conference betweene the Marshall de Cosse,  and la Proutiere, with the Admirall, and other Deputies for the Queen
of Nauarre, and the Princes at
Rochel,Proceeding with the Q. of Nauarre, the Princes, the Admiral, and those of the religion, in the second yeres of peace that the third edict of pacification continued. touching the difficulties and interpretations of diuers articles of the Edict. On both sides complaints were made, touching the infraction thereof, with long replies, whereof ensued certaine resolutions, that were to bee sent vnto the king. I his assembly serued for a couerture, to a parley of a marriage betweene Henry de Bourbon Prince of Nauarre, and Ladie Margaret sister to the king: as also to a conference with the Admirall touching the warre, which the king said hee would beginne against the king of Spaine in the lowe Countries. And all this propounded and deuised to drawe the Queene of Nauarre, the Princes, and the Admirall, to the Court of France, with all their principall seruants: and there to giue them that entertainment which after fell out. In March the Romish Catholicques at Roane, murthered diuers protestants as they returned from a Sermon, and beate others shrewdly, meaning to haue proceeded further, had not Marshal Montmorencie, whom the king sent, made the more haste to suppresse the violence of the seditious, who after many pursuites hanged vp three or foure: the rest escaped, albeit 400. were guiltie of innocent blood. Sixe weekes before, the protestants had been most cruelly murthered at Aurange by their enemies, whom Berchon (soone after made Gouernour by Countie Lodowic, found means to intrap and punish accordingly.) Not long after, by the kings consent, those of the religion were taxed to paye the 5. part of their reuenue, towards the payment of the Rutters, which produced much discontentme^t. About the same time the king and the Queene made their enterie vpon seuerall daies into the capitall towne of the Realme with great pompe. The protestants also held a Sinode nationall at
Rochel, wherein they confirmed the articles of the confession of their faith, and discipline of their Churches, in the presence of the Queene of Nauarre, the Princes, and many other of the Principall among them. The king hauing made his entrie the eleuenth of March (the Queene beeing crowned the 25. of the same moneth at Saint Deunis, and the
29. receiued with great magnificence into Parris) hee went to sit in his place of iustice in the Parliament, where hee made a long Oration to his officers of the Court, for the obseruation of his Edicts: In witnesse whereof, in the moneth ensuing, the people of Parris beganne to mutine against those of the religion, sacked certaine houses, and began to proceed further, prouoked by their Preachers, because of a certaine Crosse placed in S. Dennis street, (in a place where in times past stood the house of Phillip de Gastines, rased to the ground, because that certaine sermons and the Lords Supper had beene made and celebrated therein, Gastines for that cause hauing been executed to death, during the troubles) that had beene carried into S.
Innocents Church-yeard. This mutinie appeased, the king that shewed great fauor to Teligny and his companions, sent them to the Q. of Nauarre and the Princes in Rochel, to assure them that all his desire was to maintaine the peace, and that for his owne part, he bare them great affection, procuring that the Q. his mother, and the Duke of Aniou his brother, should from day to day leaue off their rigors.
And at their departure gaue them diuers presents, giuing them likewise to vnderstand, that his minde was to proceede with war against the Spaniard in the low Countries, and to marrie his sister to the Prince of Nauarre. Biron was sent after to certifie the like, and men began to speake of that marriage in diuers sorts, their opinions being diuided, some esteeming it to bee a snare to intrap those of the religion, others deeming the contrarie.

The king caused certaine consultations to be made in
Rome, because of the alliance between both the parties. Pope
Pius the fist seemed to bee much troubled about the same, for that effect sending Cardinal Salutati into France, who (hauing had certaine conference by word of mouth with the king) returned satisfied.
The effect of that the king said vnto him, was, that the king would alwaies shewe himselfe to deserue the name of the eldest sonne of the Romish Church, and that all his intents tended to no other end, but only to the suretie, honour, and aduancement of the Catholicque religion, whereof the Pope should receiue great testimonies before long time should passe. But notwithstanding that diuers maruelled much at this suddaine alteration of the king, the Queene of Nauarre much sought vnto by diuers great persons of both partes, went to the king, followed by the Countie Lodowicke, and great numbers of Nobilitie. The king and the Queene his mother were at Blois, where they receiued and welcommed her with great ioy and good countenance, and after many disputations touching diuers particular poynts, specially the cerimonies, the agreement vpon the marriage of her sonne with the kings sister was concluded, and the place of the espousals assigned at Parris. Not long after the Prince her son, accompanied with fiue hundreth Gentlemen came to Blois, where the marriage of Nenry de Bourbon Prince of Conde, with the yongest daughter of the house of Neuers was agreed vpon. During these parleyes of mariages with the Princes, the Admirall that had buried Ladie Charlotte de Laual his wife, a woman of excellent pietie, that died at Orleans in the second troubles, beeing in
Rochel, married the Counties of Ancremont in Sauoy, and gaue Louyse his daughter in marriage to Monsieur de Teligny.
At the Court one named Lignerolles, a simple Gentleman, made knight of the Order, Captaine of a company of launciers, Gouernor of Bourbonnois, and one of the Duke of Anious mignions, was slaine openly in the Court, for discouering certain of his Maisters secrets,Lignerolles slaine. by the D. co^mitted vnto him, touching ye enterprise that was ment against those of the religion. On the other side,Death of the Cardinall of Chastillon. the Cardinal of Chast, being readie to depart out of England, to go to his brother the Admiral, was poysoned by one of his Chamberlains, and died to the great great griefe of all his friends and seruants. The prisoner that did the fact,  beeing after taken at Rochel was executed.
Articles of marriage betweene the Prince of N. and the kings sister.This is the yeare wherein is set downe the arriuing of the Queen of Nauarre, the Princes and the Admirall in the Court: the articles of the marriage of the prince of Nauarre and the kings sister, were made at Blois the eleuenth of Aprill. The Countie Lodowicke at the same time trauelled with the king, touching warres to bee made in Flaunders, to the which ende preparations were made at sea, by Strossy and the Barron de la Garde: but at the end of three moneths Flaunders was found to be Rochel. Long before the king had caused the Admirall to bee solicited to come vnto the Court: and to drawe him thither, hee caused those of Guise to retire, who thereat counterfetted to bee discontent.
The Marshall de Montmorency by letters assured his Cousin the Admirall, that the king was fully determined to make them friends, and to reconcile him with the Duke of Guise, the better to be serued by him and his Councell, touching the affaires of his Realme, and beganne to fauour those of the religion, and to put the Admirall out of all distrust, the king sent him letters that he might bring fiftie Gentlemen armed with him vnto the Court, whither in fine, the Marshall de Cosse conducted him with diuers Gentlemen. At his comming hee was honourably receiued and welcommed by the king, that called him his father.
Welcomes to the Admirall and others of the religion in the Cout.And when the Admirall kneeled downe to do his dutie, the king protested, that in all his life hee had not seene any day more agreeable vnto his minde, then that wherein hee assured himselfe to see the end of all the troubles, and the beginning of a firme rest and quietnesse in his Realme. And among other speeches vsed, smiling hee said vnto him: Wee haue you now heere with vs, you shall not go from hence when you would. The Queen-mother, the Dukes of Anion and
Alancon, and almost all the chiefe Courtiers receiued him with greater fauour then hee expected. All these courtesies were suddainely seconded by a great liberallitie from the king, that caused a hondreth thousand franks to bee giuen him out of his coffers, in recompence of the losses he had receiued by the forepassed wars, gaue him like wise a yeares reuenues of all the benefices holden by the Cardinall of
Chastillon his brother deceased, made him a note of his hand, to haue full power and authoritie to seeke for the mooueables, that had been taken from him at Chastilon sur Loing, and to cause them by expresse commaundement to bee deliuered vnto him againe.
Teligny his sonne in lawe, was likewise honoured with certaine fauors, Cauagnes Councellour of Toulouse, Agent for the Princes, touching the obseruation of the Edict of peace, was prouided of an office of Maister of Requests. Diuers other Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, at that time felt the liberallitie of the king, wherewith their aduersaries were much displeased, specially that the Admirall was restored to bee one of the priuie Councell, and that the king priuately asked his counsell in his affaires of importance, touching the warres in the lowe Countries, which the Admirall affected very much, as beeing one of the most assured meanes to holde France in quietnesse, alleaging, that by iust reason hee might doo that to the Spaniard, which vniustly he had done, and would doo vnto
France:War against Spaine consulted vpon. which was, to trouble him at home, to impeach him from spoyling other men, hee shewed likewise to the king, (that fained to like well of that aduice) that it would bee good for him to agree with the Qu. of England, and the Princes of Almaine, the easiler to make the K. of
Spaine beleeue by an ample discourse prooued vnto him, that the foundations of the warre in the lowe Countries is iust and profitable.
Pope Pius Quintus beeing dead, who in his life time seemed a stay and hinderance to the marriage of the Prince of
Nauarre, and the kings sister: the Cardinall of Lorraine faining to bee in great feare, tooke his voyage to Rome, about the election of a new Pope, although before his setting forward it was done, and being in his voyage, letters that were sent him by Cardinal Pelue, (who of a Scullio^ in the Colledge of Montague in Parris, afterward following his studie, varlet to the Cardinall of Lorraine, had in few yeares attained the red hat) directed to his Maister, the contents whereof imported: that in regard of the good course that hee see the king, the Queen-mother, and the Duke of Aniou take, hee could not but hope well of all the affaires. That at the Admirals returne to Court, the king shewed himself so warie, as his most inward friends did wonder at it, for thereby hee had brought the Admirall out of all suspect, so that now the matter that the Cardinal wist of, might the better be put in execution. That there was much speech of warre against the King of Spaine, whereto the king seemed to incline, the rather thereby to stay the Admirall: that such pollicies were to be practised, vntill they might find opportunitie to put in execution the secret counsell. That the king of Spaine was sufficiently informed of the whole, least he should finde himselfe agreeued at this present prouision for warres, which was neuer ment against him.
Wherevppon hee besought his Maister, notwihstanding whatsoeuer packets hee might receiue, to assure himselfe that the king would neuer vary from the resolution. That the Queene-mother and the Duke of
Aniou bent their whole indeuours to that matter.
Touching the marriage of the Prince of Nauarre, that hee hoped the same would shortly be effected: that the same was the entrie to the execution, and in the meane time, the day drew on for deliuerie of the Townes of hostage. And although the Admirall had the copies heereof sent him, hee made no great account thereof, no more then of other aduertisements, expresly giuen him both before and after. His minde beeing altered by the countenances and words of the king,The Admirall trusteth vpo^ the kings words. who in all things seemed to contrarie his brother the Duke of Aniou, for whom hee practised the voyage of Polonia, that hee might send him to play the Great-maister somewhat farre from France.
In the Admirall, who alwaies shewed to bee wise and diligent in his affaires, appeared that wisedome faileth in wise men, when it pleaseth the only wise Gouernour of the word, to dul the most sharp and excellent wittes, and make passage vnto his terrible iudgements: as not long after they shewed throughout all France, the which euer since that time, vntill this present, hath felt the waightinesse of his mightie blowes, whose hand as yet is stretched foorth readie to strike againe.
A nationall Synode at Nismes.Some men of each faction of a good meaning to the state of France, especially some protestants alreadie apprehending the terror of that terrible storme that followed, trembled, and bending their neckes, lay looking for the fatall blowe. At Nismes they held a nationall Sinode in the moneth of May. Others of a more stirring spirit (after the manner of Frenchmen, who doo performe much in prosperitie, and neuer feare any aduersitie vntil it commeth) would needes bee busie about discipline, but they were soone put to silence. Many mens consciences beganne alreadie to bee wauering, and fewe there were, that shewed themselues zealously bent to religion: but all both great and small, thinking deeply vpon worldly matters, built them goodly castles in the ayre.
The Princes trusting to an assured peace, three moneths before the time, restored the townes of assurance, wherein the king placed his Garrisons, satisfying the Princes with letters, which hee had sent to all his Courts of Parliaments, wherein he declared his great good liking of the good meaning of the Princes, in that they did him so much honour, as faithfully to relye vppon his Edict, which he wished to bee inuiolably obserued. The Rochelers, whom Strossy, Landereau, and the Barron de la Garde watched vppon, would not accept of any Garrison, but stood vpon their priuiledges, so that at length for feare of scarring of others, they were let alone. The Marshall of Montmorency was sent into England to practise a league, who returned sooner then hee was looked for: but toward the marriage gat him home to his owne house, and might hee haue beene beloued, the affaires had beene otherwise mannaged then they were.
At the same time was Captaine Minguetiere, sent away with a shippe well fraught, and a Portingall an excellent Seaman,Sundrie practises. to discouer the landing places about Perou, and to espie some meanes to molest the Spaniard. But withall, giuing notice of his voyage, hee was followed and set vpon neare the Isle of Hispaniola, where his men were slaine, and himselfe put to the Gallies. The Admirall himselfe was set on worke with the practising of a league with the Germaine Princes: and the Duke of
Florence was solicited to lend money to prosecute the warres in
Flaunders, for the which, Saucourt, Ienlis, and la Noue, leuied souldiers.
In the beginning of May, the king desired the Queene of
Nauarre to go to Parris, there to prouide for all things necessarie for the marriage. Where shee arriued the fifteenth day of the same moonth: and the fourth of Iune fell sicke of a feuer, proceeding as some sayde from her lights, where of long time certaine impostumes had bredde, which beeing mooued and stirred by great heates, and by an extraordinarie trauell, which shee alwaies tooke while shee was in health, inflamed and bredde that feuer:Death of the Queene of Nauarre. whereof she died within fiue daies after, to the great sorrow and extreame griefe of all her seruants. Three daies after she fell sicke, beeing in perfect memorie, shee made a most christian testament and last will, dying with the witnesse and testimonie of singular pietie and ioy in God.
She was a Princesse of great experience, both by many aduersities, wherein she shewed an inuincible constancie, and heroicall greatnesse of courage: most affectionate to her religion, very careful of the bringing vp of her children in the feare of God, charitable towards them whom shee often aduertised of their duties: in words most graue, and full of motherly affection: she had a readie wit and well aduised, but indowed with great zeale and integritie, pittifull and easie to bee perswaded: no offender could auoyde her censure: shee opposed her selfe against vices, and liberally maintained that which shee iudged to bee good, and conformable to the will and pleasure of God. Prosperitie hindered her, her mind much giuen to pleasant conceits, being of a leane complexion, and very agreeable with her ingeniositie, hauing great viuacite to comprehend all things, and grace liuely to represent them by writing or word of mouth: with a iesture of all the bodie, and a countenance well liked of all men: shee died in the foure and fortieth yeare of her age, vppon the ninth of Iune.
Some say shee was poysoned by the smell of certaine perfumes, and to bereaue men of that opinion, shee was opened and curiously visited by learned Doctors and Surgions, that found all her noblests parts to bee very faire and whole, onely the lights perished on the right side, wherein had ingendered an extraordinary hardnesse, and a great impostume, a disease which they all, so farre as lay in man, iudged to bee the cause of her death. They were not commaunded to open her braine, where the mischiefe lay, by which means they could not giue aduise, but vppon the outward apparance.
Certaine daies after, the king desired his brother in law the king of Nauarre, to go to Parris, there to solemnize his marriage, as it had beene agreed betweene them. While that at Blandie in Brie preparation was made for the marriage of the Prince of
Conde, that married his wife in the beginning of the moneth of August.
The Admirall at that time lay in his house of Chastillon sur Loing, where hee receiued many letters and messages from the king,The Admirall commeth to Parris. and because he stirred not, the king sent Cauagnes and Briquemaud to fetch him, to determine vppon the wars of Flaunders: and special commandement was giuen to the Prouost of Merchants in Parris, and other the chief me^, to take order that not any noise nor rumor should be vsed or raised at the Admirals ariuall in the town, who beeing prouoked by so many men, and desirous to bannish warres out of France, measuring the kings thoughts by his owne, resolued to ride to
Parris without staying, at the many and diuers aduertisments of his seruants, and other honourable persons most affected to his preseruation, that both within and without the Realme desired him, that seeing he could not conceiue any sinister opinion of the king,Confidence of the Admirall. his mother, and the rest, that at the least he would consider into what place he went about to thrust himselfe, and among so many enemies, but hee resting vppon the testimonie of a good conscience, and the prouidence of God, remitting those aduises, as if they proceeded from men couetous and desirous of new troubles, which hee abhorred woorse then death, went with a small company, and beeing in
Parris, to the great astonishing of all the towne, was honourably receiued by the king, his bretheren, the Queene-mother and others.
A little before, la Noue, Saucourt, and
Ienlis, accompanying Countie Lodowic into
Flaunders, had from the king receiued commission, to finde means to surprise some frontier towne: on the other side, the Duke of
Alue had intelligence of euery steppe that Countie Lodowic set, which notwithstanding such was his diligence, that hee seized vpon
Monts in Hainaut. Wherewith the Duke was so nettled, that hee said that the Queene-mother had sent him the flowers of
Florence: but hee would returne her Spanish Thistles: with many other threats, which vppon particular aduice of the course of their affaires, namely of Ienlis returne, of his licence to leuie men for the succour of Monts: of the time of their departure, and of the course of their iourney, were soone quenched.
The seuenth of Iuly, the King published a proclamation, tending to the impeachment of all quarrels, as well in Parris as in his Court, and commanded all straungers and men that had nothing to do within the Towne,The Princes come to Parris. to depart from thence. After the arriuall of the Admirall at Parris, so many letters and messengers were sent vnto the Princes, that in fine, they came thither almost at the same time that the king arriued, who had before lingered thereabout.
Many Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, accompanied the king of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, whom in manner all the Court went to meete.
Further, vnder pretence of the warres in Flaunders, the king at the same time sent for other Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, who otherwise would haue stayed in their houses. Ienlis marched not into Flaunders, notwithstanding hee were solicited thereto: besides the solemnization of this marriage royall, was for a time deferred, by reason of the scruples and doubts made by the Cardinall of
Bourbon to celebrate the same, without a dispence from the Hope, that would bee prayed and intreated therevnto, and in the end graunt a dispence: but because it was not ample ynough to the Cardinalles minde, counselled by men subtiller then himselfe, they were forced to send to
Rome againe.
Great was the expectation of Ienlis aduentures, who had gathered foure thousand footemen, and fiue hundreth horse,Ienlis and his troupes defeated. for the succor of Countie Lodowicke and la Noue, whom the Duke of
Alue had besieged in Monts. In the meane time commeth the new dispensation toward the ende of Iuly, wherewith the Cardinal seemeth satisfied: and the eighteenth day of August is nominated for the marriage. In the meane time commeth the news of Ienlis surprise and aduenture, whereat the king seemeth to bee much agreeued, who writeth to his Ambassadour in the lowe Countries, to procure by all possible meanes the deliuerie of the prisoners taken in that surprise: as also he suffereth the Admirall to send all the succour hee may, to ioyne with the Rutters, whom the Prince of Orenge had buried at the same time, causing him to haue mony deliuered for the footemens paye, who were thought to amount to foure Regiments, besides some thirtie companies of men at armes.
The Ambassadour of Spaine seemed to be malecontent, because the king went about to make war in Flaunders, and for the same cause withdrew himselfe out of France: the Queene-mother also played many parts in this tragedie, faining not to haue knowne the kings proceedings, and knowing them, made as though she would haue left the Court: in such manner, that the Admiral, Teligny his sonne in law, and other Lords, confirmed themselues more and more, that the kings actions were correspondant to the Admirals aduice: which was to make warre in the king of Spaines countries that had kindled it, and pretended to make warre in France, thereby in time to cease vppon it.
Rochel inuested, prouideth for it selfe.The last of Iuly, the Rochelers wrote vnto the Admirall, that the armie at sea approached neare them, and that it spoyled the plaine Countri-men, comming euery day from Xantongue and Gascon, vsing terrible threatnings against their towne, openly speaking of the spoyle thereof, sending to aske his counsell therein, specially touching the receiuing of eight hundreth men for Garrison, which they sought to put into the Towne. Hee made them an honourable aunswere, dated the seuenth of August, assuring them of the care hee had ouer them: and added, that hee sawe the king so well disposed to the entertainment of peace, that all men had cause to commend him. The Rochelers notwithstanding neglected not to looke vnto themselues, and to fortifie their Towne.
In other Townes their ranne diuers mutterings, and many were the threats of the Romish Catholicques against the Protestants, which daunted some of them. Others relied vppon the Admiralles presence in the Court, and trusted to his answere: deliuered as well by word of mouth, as by writing, vnto those that asked his aduice vppon all accurrences, whose speeches were in effect as followeth.
That as concerning the Guisians, whom they so vrged, the King had taken order by setting them at vnitie, and causing both parties to swear friendship: that the marriage of the Ladie Margaret, whom the King gaue (saith hee) not to the King of Nauarre onely, but as it were to the whole Church of the Protestants, to ioyne with them in an indissoluble vnion, was the type of their peace and safetie.
Heerevpon hee often besought such as sent him any packets, gaue him any aduice of the hatred of the King, the Queene-mother, the Duke of
Anion, or the house of Cuise, against either himselfe or the Protestants, no more to trouble him with any the passed calamities, but rather to be content with their daily prayers to God, to whom they were to giue thankes, that hee had vouchsafed to bring all matters to so quiet an end. In brief, the Admiral, euer like himselfe, stood fast in all these motions: not that hee knew not of the malice of infinite his aduersaries that inuironed him: neither that beeing at Parris, hee laye in the very goulf and deepest pit of death: but because through constancie and long continuance, he had framed himselfe to rely vpon Gods prouidence: as also for the hauing secretly layed open vnto the King the very springs of the ciuill warres in France, and most liuely painted foorth the practises of his secret enemies and treacherous seruants, that aymed at the soueraigntie (since it hath manifestly appeared) hee supposed that he had left him in a faire path to preuent them.
For sure it is, that the King, albeit as then but yong, had a very good wit, and could reasonable wel perceiue the course of his affaires: so that had not such bloodie and furious Councelles preuented and crossed his capacitie, France had not incurred those calamities, that since haue almost subuerted the whole estate thereof. For in the end he found, albeit ouer-late for his person and crown, that they that termed themselues his seruants, ment nothing lesse: but were his most cruell enemies, and such as had exiled and murthered his best subiects, to the end afterward with more facilitie to ridde their hands of himselfe, and so to seize vppon the Realme.
There happened yet an other matter, (as the waies of God are maruellous and vncomprehensible) that more and more stopped the eares of the Admirall,Negotiation of Polonia. not to way so many aduertisements as daily were giuen him, to depart out of
Parris, and to take with him out of Parris, such Lords, Gentlemen, and Captaines, as the Queene-mother, the Duke of Anion, the Guisians, and the Parrisians, most vehemently hated. For certaine weekes before, it had been determined in the Councell, to send Ambassadours into
Polonia, king Sigismond beeing dead, to desire the Estates to chuse for their king the Duke of Anion, whom the Admirall accounted an irreconcileable enemie to the Protestants.
The Admirall therefore perceiuing that the king was earnest to further that matter of Polonia for his brother, that had great credite throughout the Realme of France, iudged that the king had a good insight, and desired to reduce all things to a sure and firme peace, that the Duke of Anion confined in
Poland, his adherents would be constrained to become milder: that the house of Guise destitute of such a staye, and doubting the king, that many times looked with a fierce countenance, would bee carefull not to bee too busie: that in time and not long, the Queene-mother would bee constrained to leaue the conductions of the affaires of the Realme vnto her sonne, wherevnto hee beganne to frame himselfe, and perceiuing that the King and the Queene appoynted Iohn de Monluc Bishoppe of
Valence, a man of great iudgement, and one that had effected many serious enterprises, and at other times, had trauelled into
Polonia for the same purpose, which voyage hee beganne the seuenteenth of August, it put him in better hope.
Monluc to the contrarie perceiuing the tempest at hand, desired nothing more then to get him out of France, that hee might not bee a witnesse nor forced Councellour to the mischiefes which hee perceiued readie to fall vppon those of the religion. A little before, hee had wished the Countie of Rochefoucaut and other Lords, neuer to meddle in this imaginarie flemish war, but rather with speed to return to their houses: telling them, that they had no great cause to relie too much vpon the faire shewes of the Court, neither to soiourne long there, considering the enuie and mallice that most of the greatest, and generally the whole cittie of Parris did beare them: but God would not suffer them as then to hearken to this good counsell. In the meane time, the Barron de la Garde posting from Brouage to the Court,The Rochelers stand vpon their guarde. and returning in great haft, wrote the 14. of August to the Rochelers, exhorting them to giue credite to the king, to his mother, and to the D. of of
Anion, and not to mistrust the soldiers that lay round about: withal, promising them for his part al fauor, and intreating them to intreat his men well that came to their Towne for their necessaries. Heerevpon they grew the more warie, and with like quoine and as good speeches payd this spie, who writ himselfe their most assured friend. The 17. of August, Henry king of Nauarre, and Ladie
Margaret of France, sister to the king, in the euening were conducted to the Louure,The espoufals and mariage of the king of Nauarre and Lady Margaret. and the next day married by the Cardinall of Bourbon in the sight of all the people, vpon a great scaffold made before the gate of the great Church of
Parris. That day passed ouer in banquets, daunces, and maskes, with strange mixsture of those of the religion with the Catholicques, wherat diuers were no lesse mooued, then at the bloodie butcherie which alreadie they began to doubt, and that happened not long after. While euery man imployed himselfe to bee merrie and make good cheare, diuers that were sent for by the King, the Queene-mother, and the Duke of Guise, that they might bee the stronger part, arriued in the town. The conclusion hauing beene made not long before, and then fully performed as well in Parris as at S. Cloud, wherin the Dukes of Anion and
Guise, were the principall actors, not to suffer the Admirall to depart, but rather to dispatch him in Parris, with al such as wold defend him. The Queen-mother with two or three of her most faithful and secret seruants had a counsell a part, the end whereof, tended not onely to kill the Admirall,Counsell against the Admiral and his adhere^ts. but also to set other at strife, that they might rule with more ease. Those of Guise pretended to extirminate the Admirall, and causing those of the religion to be massacred by the people in the kings name, and to saue such as they might, to make the king, his mother, and his brother, so much more odious, and so by little and little to aduance their desires.

The Marshall de Montmorencie beeing come to the wedding, perceiuing such confusion, and doubting the Ambuscadoes of the house of Guise, mortal enemies both to him and his, vnder pretence of riding out to hunt, went home to his house, which fell out well for him, his absence beeing cause that his bretheren were not slaine.
The 22. of August, as the Admirall came out of the
Louure, where all that morning hee had beene with the Marshall
de Cosse,Vpon fryday the Admirall was hurt. and Tauanes, to end a quarrell between two Gentleme^, going to dine in his lodging, accompanied with twelue or fifteene Gentlemen, being on foote about one hundreth paces from the Louure, and reading a petition, one shot at him with a harguebuze, the bullet whereof, tooke away the forefinger of his right hand, and hurt him in the left arme. He that shot it had a horse readie at the back-doore of his lodging, whereon being mounted, he escaped at Saint Aut^omes gate, where finding a Ienet of Spaine held readie for him, he tooke poste and got him to a place before appointed for his retrait. The doore of the house being burst open, the harguebuze was found therein, with a Lacquey and an other seruant, it was knowne that one
Chally a Steward of the kings house, and a dealer in the Duke of
Guises affaires, the day before had brought that harguebusier into that house, belonging to Villemeur Tutor to the Duke, recomme^ding him most earnestly vnto the Hostes, that the same Fryday in the morning the Harguebusier naming himselfe Bolland one of the kings guard, (but it was Maureuel) sent his Lacquey to desire
Chally to prouide that the Duke of Guises Groome of the stable, should prouide the horse that hee had promised. The Admirall brought to his lodging, shewed most singular pietie, constancie, and patience, vnder his Surgeans hands, and was visited by diuers Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, the king of Nauarre and the Prince of
Coude, asking licence of the king to depart, as beeing but hardly assured within Parris.
The king complained to them of the mischiefe happened, swearing and promising to vse and execute such iustice vppon the offender, that the Admirall and his friends should thinke themselues satisfied. In the meane time, he stayed them with promise shortly to take order therein: and presently commaunded pursuite to bee made after the offendor: on the other side, willing the Prouost of Merchants in
Parris, to appoynt certaine men to bee readie prepared to execute what should bee giuen them in charge by the Duke of Aniou, caused all the gates to bee shut, swearing and blaspheming (as his manner was) that hee would not that they which had done that fact should so escape: suffering two gates to stand open for such as passed out and in, where a great watch was holden, that no man might passe through without licence: and faining to take order for all things touching that search, caused all the towne to rise in armes. As also hee appoynted sundrie Lords and Gentlemen Protestants to bee lodged in the Admirals quarter, and round about him, for feare (said hee) least lying scattered abroad in the Towne, they migh encur some danger: but there should be defended by the soldiers of his guard. Maureuel was but easily pursued, and
Chally went to the Duke of Guises chamber, where no man sought for him.
Two houres after noone, the king went to visite the Admirall, to whom in presence of the Queene-mother, the Admirall made a long declaration, wherein hee forgot not to maintaine his fidilitie to the seruice of the countrie of France, and of others miseries of the same, by reason the peace could not bee well obserued, specially touching those of the religion, whereof he specified some particularities, desiring the K. to do iustice vpon the offendors: to haue regard vnto his faith and promise, and to the quietnesse of the realm. The king made aunswere, that he accounted him an honest man, a good Frenchman, and one that loued the increase of the Crowne: that he esteemed of him as of a most discreet and excellent Captain, and that vpon that opinion he had so farre entered into his former resolutions, that his whole desire was to haue his Edicts of peace fully executed, and yet desired the maintenance thereof: and to that end sundrie commissioners did passe through al the Prouinces of the Realme, as the Queene his mother could well witnesse. And shee affirming it, saying: that the Admirall himselfe knew it full well. It is true, Madame (quoth hee) Commissioners were sent, among the which, there were some that had condemned mee to be hanged, and promised fiftiethousand crownes to him that would bring you my head. The king promised to send others, with more oaths and swearings, that hee would doo iustice vpon those that hurt the Admirall. Many other speeches hee vsed to assure the Admirall, who in the end forgot not to put the king in minde to remember such aduertisements as hee had many times giuen him, concerning the mischeeuous practises of some against his estate and Crowne, withall, exhorting him to thinke vppon himselfe, so farre foorth as he loued his own life.
Soone after that, the king departed from him, Iohn de Ferriers, Vidame de Chartres entered into the chamber, that beganne to comfort him, and in an assembly not long after holden in a chamber of the same lodging, hee shewed the king of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, with others the chiefest Lords of the religion there assembled, that their surest way was, presently to depart out of Parris, and to make their account, that that blow was the beginning of the tragedie, which would soone after bee performed, but the aduice to staye and trust to the kings promise, was determined vppon, and the other reiected. The same day the king by letters wrote to all the gouernours of Prouinces, to the principall townes of France, also to his Ambassadors with forraine Princes, aduertising them of all that had happened: withall, promising to take such order, that the authors and all that were guiltie of such a fault, should bee known and punished according to their deserts: co^manding them to make known to all the world, how much he was offended there with the Queen-mother wrote the like. And whilest the Secretaries were thus occupied, the Dukes of Aniou and
Guise, late in the night consulted togither, what they should do the next night following. Saturday in the morning,What happened vpon Saturday before the massacre, a report was spred abroad about the towne, wherein might bee a million of Komish Catholicques, that those of the religion (beeing but a handfull of men in respect of the^, and craued nothing but iustice, in almodestie without outragious word or deed) did mightily threaten those of ye house of Guise, whervpon the Duke of Guise and Aumale, in a great rage as they made shew, went to finde the king, saying: that they had well perceiued that the king bare but small fauour vnto them, and that if they thought that departing home to their owne houses would please him, they were readie to performe it.

The King seemed to shewe an angrie countenance, and with sharpe words said vnto them, that they might go whither they would, and that hee would fetch them well ynough, if hee found them culpable of the iniurie offered vnto the Admirall. They departing from the kings presence, well accompanied, about noone mounted on horsebacke, but not to go out of
Parris, where the Parliament spake as much as dumbe men. Certaine were appointed to go from house to house, and by writing to take the names of all such as made professio^ of the religion, deliuering the register vnto those that had set them on worke. Not long after, those of the religion beganne to discouer, that some bloodie counsels were intended against the Admiral and his friends. For first the king caused a gard of 50. harquebusiers to be set at the Admirals gate, vnder the charge of
Cosseins, dislodged all the Romish Catholique Gentlemen out of that street: which done, he commaunded the Admiralles familiar friends to lodge in that quarter, that they might be neare about him: caused great store of armes to be brought into the Louure, and about euening all the people in the towne beganne to be in armes. The Councell assembled for the last time in the Admirals lodging: Vidame de Chartres held his first aduice, and sought very earnestly, that they should presently assay to beare the Admirall out of Parris, and that his familiars and friends should presently dislodge: hee shewed sufficient reason for the same, which notwithstanding were not followed they stood to the first, which importeth to craue iustice at the king hand, vppon whose promise they were to relie. Vidames de Chartres counsel was most assured, but (in mans iudgement) as then impossible to be effected. And yet after that, men durst report and that openly, that at that Councell where the king of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and diuers great Lords were assembled, they had determined to kill the King, the Queenemother, and all the principall of the Court: a slaunder as false as falsehood it selfe.
About euening, certaine Protestant Gentlement offered themselues the same night to watch with the Admirall: which
Teligny his son in law would not suffer them to do, saying it was vnnecessary, and so dismissed them with very good words for their good will, so that there stayed no more with the Admirall, but Cornaton (from whose mouth I gathered the greatest part of this discourse) La-bonne, Yolet, Marlin a Minister of Gods word,
Ambroise Pare a Surgean, and certaine of his men. In the Court there were fiue Switzers of the king of Nauarres guard. Night being come, the D. of Guises Lieftena^t in this action, which at this present is to be declared vnto the Duke of Aniou, sent for all the Captaines of the Switzers,Description of the massacre of the Admirall. and companies of strangers still entering into the Towne, shewing him his commissions to kill the Admiral and all his partakers: exhorting the^ to be couragious in shedding of blood and spoyle: and appoynted their troupes to be placed where he thought meete. About midnight an other assembly was made in the Towne-house, where the Prouost of Merchants, the Sheriffes, and Captaines of euery quarter, were aduertised in like sort, that throghout the realme the like shuld be done to all those of the religion: and that the watch-word of the general massacre should be the bell of the Pallace, which should be rung at the breake of day, and the badge of the executioners, should be a white handkerchef tied vppon their sleeues, and a white crosse in their hats. If the great personages were mooued, the meaner sort were no lesse readie to exececute that cruel commandement, presently watches were set in euery street, the Duke of Guise beeing come to the
Louure had charge, with the knight of Angoulesme, bastard to Henry the 2. the D. d'Aumale, accompanied with
Cosseins, Goas, Attin, Besmes, with some of the kings Harquebusiers, and all the Duke of Anious guard, to begin at the Admiralles lodging. The noyse of armour and running vp and downe with so many torches, soone after midnight, made diuers of those of the religion that were lodged neare the Admirall, to come out of their lodgings into the streets, to aske the first of their acquaintance what that extraordinary noyse and arming ment at such an vndue houre, but beeing answered with doubtfull speeches, they went forward towards the Louure, where first they were quarrelled withall, and set vppon by the guard. The noyse begunne, they rung S. Germaines bell. Cosseines perceiuing the Duke of Guise and his troupes to come, knocked at the Admiralles Gate, betweene two and three of the clocke in the morning, vpo^ Sunday being the foure and twentieth day of August. La-bonne came to the gate, and hauing opened it, was stabbed by Cosseins: the second doore going vppe the staires beeing soone burst open, and one of the Switzers of the guard slaine with a harquebush. While
Cosseins stood iumbling at that doore, Cornaton ranne vp, and being asked by the Admirall (who had caused the^ to lift him out of his bed, and in his night gowne had assisted his Ministers ferue^t prayer, and humbly commended his soule to his Sauiour Iesus Christ) what that great tumult ment, he said: My Lord, it is God that calleth for vs, the house is entered by force, and there is no meanes of resistance. The Admirall beganne to say: It is long since I disposed my selfe to die: saue you your selues if it bee possible, for you cannot saue my life: I commit my soule into the hands and mercie of God. Presently al of them, except his Interpreter for the Almaine tongue, got vp into the top of the house, and hauing found a window to issue out vppon the roofe, and into the gutters, beganne to saue themselues, but most of them were slaine in the next house: Cornaton, Merlin, and one or two more escaped, and were miraculously preserued. There stood foure Switzers vpon the staires, wherof one being slaine, the rest fled as well as they might. The Admirals cha^ber opened, seuen or eight men all armed, and with their targets entered into it, and one named Besmes seruant to the Duke of Guise, with a naked swoord in hand went to the Admirall, offering him the poynt, wherewith he began to say: Young man, thou oughtest to respect my age and infirmitie, yet shalt thou not shorten my life: with that Besmes thrust him into the bodie, and redoubling the blowe vpon his head, euery one of the rest gaue him a blow, in such sort, that he fel vpon the ground, and so lay gasping. The Duke of
Guise and others staying below in the Court, hearing the blows, asked if they had done: commanding the bodie to be thrown out of the window, which was presently done by Besmes and Sarlaboux, who tooke him vp and cast him out: the blow he had vpon the head, and the blood couering his face, made the Duke of Guise not wel to know him, so yt stouping down, and wiping his face with a handkerchef he said: Now I know him, it is he: and therwith giuing a blow with his foote vppon his face beeing dead (whom all the murtherers of France feared so much beeing aliue) hee went out of the house, followed by his company, and beganne to crie about the streetes: Courage fellow souldiers, wee haue made a good beginning, let vs now to the rest. The king commaundeth it, repeating that with great Maiestie the king commaundeth it, it is his pleasure, it is his expresse commaundement.
Presently therevppon the Pallace clocke strooke, and then a noyse was heard about the streets of Parris, saying that the Huguenots (for so the Romish Catholicques termed the Protestants) were in armes, (they beeing in their beddes) and ment to kil the king) to whom the Admiralles head was carried and presented, and to the Queene-mother also: and then imbalmed and sent to Rome to the Pope and the Cardinall of Lorraine. The common people ranne to the Admirals lodging, where they cut off his hands and his priuie members, and drew his bodie for the space of three daies about the Towne: which done, it was borne to the Gibbet of Montfaucon, and there hanged by thee feete.
Beginning of massacres in Parris.The Gentlemen, officers of the Chamber, Gouernours, Tutors, and houshold-seruants of the king of Nauarre and the Prince of
Conde, were driuen out of their chambers where they slept in the
Louure, and beeing in the Court, massacred in the kings presence. The like was done to the Lords and Gentlement that lay round about the Admiralles lodging: and then throughout the Towne, in such sort, that the number slaine that Sunday at night, and the two next daies ensuing, within the town of Parris, and the subburbs, was esteemed to bee aboue tenne thousand persons, Lords, Gentlemen, Pages, seruants, Iustices of all sorts, Schollers, Lawyers, Phisitians, Merchants, Artificers, women, maides, and boyes, not sparing little children in the cradle, nor in their mothers bellies.
The Courtiers of the kings guard, and straungers that massacred the Gentlemen, said: that in one day, by weapon and disorder, they had ended those processes, which pen, paper, sentences of Iustice, nor open war could not finde the meanes to execute in twelue yeares space.
Thus these honorable Lords and Gentlemen protestants, slaunderously accused of conspiracie and practise against the king, being starke naked, thinking onely vppon their rest, scarce awake, vnarmed, in the hands of infinite, cruel, craftie, and trecherous enemies, not hauing so much leisure as to breath, were slaine, some in their beddes, others vppon the roofes of houses, and in whatsoeuer other places where they might bee found.
It would bee ouer long to recite at large the names and surnames of all the honourable personages of diuers quallities, that as then were slaine and massacred. It sufficeth that their names are registred in heauen: and that since that time, in that which happened to king Charles the ninth, his brother and successor, his mother, his bastard brother, the house of Guise, the Towne of
Parris, and to all the Realm of France, in the space of twentie yeares after this massacre, hath sufficiently appeared, that God reuengeth the blood of innocents, and that their death (although shamefull in the sight and presence of the children of this world) is precious in the sight of his most holy Maiestie.Some escaped The Vidame de Chartres, the Countie Montgommery, and diuers other Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, lodged in the subburbes of S. Germain des Prez, right ouer against the Louure, vpon Sunday in the morning about fiue of the clocke, beeing aduertised as it were by miracle, what had past within the Towne, minding to know if it were true, vppon the riuer discouered certaine people that came to murther them, wherevpon some on foot, other on horse backe, and most of them without either bootes or spurres, leauing all their stuffe, saued themselues as well as they could, beeing pursued for the space of halfe a day by the Duke of Guise and others. Now let the reader heere in consider, how straunge and horrible a thing it might bee, in a great Town, to see at the least 60. thousand men, with Pistolles, pikes, courtelasses, ponyards, kniues, and other such bloodie instruments, ranne swearing and blaspheming the sacred Maiestie of God, throughout the streets and into the houses, where most cruelly they massacred all whosoeuer they met, without regard of estate, condition, sexe, or age: the streets paued with bodies out and hewed in peeces, the gates and enteries of houses, Pallaces, and publicque places died with blood. A horrible plague of shoutings and hollowings of the murtherers, mixed with continuall blowes of Pistolles and caliuers, the pittifull cries of those that were murthered, the bodies cast out at windowes vppon the stones, drawne through the durt, with straunge noyse and whistlings, the breaking of doores and windowes, with billes, stones, and other furies: the spoyling and sacking of houses, Carts carrying away the spoyles, and others the dead bodies, which were throwne into the riuer of Seine, all redde with blood, which likewise ranne out of the towne, and from the kings owne Pallace.
The king of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde being called to speake with the King, and by his owne mouth were certified what had past, adding,The entertainment of the king of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde. that hee saued their liues vppon condition, that they should renounce their religion, and follow his: otherwise, that they should looke for the like punishment that their adherents had and should receiue. The King of Nauarre besought the king to remember his promise of the alliance newly contracted, and not to constraine him in his religion: the Prince of Conde more feruent, aunswered, that the King had giuen his faith to him, and to all those of the religion, with so solemne protestation, that hee could not be perswaded, that he would falsifie so authenticque an oath: In respect of the obedience which the King required of him, hee had faithfully yeelded vnto him, not minding in time to come to depart from it in any sort whatsoeuer. But touching the religion, wherof the king had granted him the exercise: and God the knowledge to whom hee was to yeeld account, for his bodie and goods, hee left them to the Kings disposition, to do with them as pleased him: but for his religion, hee said hee was fully determined to remaine constant therein, which hee would alwaies maintaine to bee true, although it were with the losse of his life.
This aunswere of the Prince set the King in such a chollor, that hee beganne to call him rebell, seditious, and sonne of a seditious person, with horrible threatnings to cause him to loose his head, if within three daies he took not better counsell, which was done in presence of the Queene-mother, the Duke of Aniou, Birague, and others of his secret Councell, whose other proceedings must bee set downe.
They perceiuing that the massacre of Parris would not quench the fire, but rather kindle it more, because those of the religion might assemble and vnite themselues togither, (as it happeneth in such miserable chances) giue them new worke: these Councellours made two messengers, the one from the same Sunday, to the Gouernours and seditious Catholicques of Towns, wherein were diuers of the religion, with expresse commaundement to massacre them. The other message contained certaine letters to the Gouernours of Prouence, by the which hee charged those of Guise with the murther committed vppon the person of the Admirall, because of their particular quarrell, and of the sedition happened in Parris, ceased the same day it began, (as those letters of the foure and twentieth of August specified) by the authoritie and vigilancie of the King, whose meaning and commaundement was, that his Edict of pacification should be holden as much as euer it was,Strange deuises to roote out those of the religion, and to couer the action of the massacre. through all his Realme. Wherevnto he added these words. And because it is greatly to bee feared, that such execution (which by other letters was published to bee made vpon a very small number) should cause my subiects to rise one against the other, and that great massacres should bee committed within the townes of my Realme, which would bee great griefe vnto me: I pray you to publish and make it knowne in all the places of your Gouernment, that euery man should liue in peace, without raising armes, nor offending each other vpon paine of death: causing our edict of pacification to be carefully obserued and kept, and to punish the contradictors, and ouerrunne those that would seem to rise and bee disobedient to our will: you shall presently assemble all the forces you can make, as well of friends as of your ordinarie companies, aduertising the Captaines of the Townes and Castles of your gouernment, to looke well to the safetie and preseruation of the said places, that no fault may bee escaped, aduertising mee assoone as possible you may, what order you haue taken therein, and how all things passe within your gouernment.
Other notable practises, but all to the eternall confusion and reproach of the authors.The same day were likewise dispatched other pattents, prohibiting the carrying of all forbidden weapons, all fraudulent assemblies, orrepugnant to the Edict of pacification: vnder the benefit whereof, the king commaunded all his subiects to liue in quiet and peace each with other. The Queene-mother likewise wrote her letters to the Gouernours and Ambassadours in like substance as the king.
It was agreed betweene the King, the Queen-mother, his brother,
Birague, the Duke of Neuers, and the Countie of
Retz, and other the Guisians, should auoyde Parris, and immediately after the deaths of the Admirall and his partakers, withdrew the^selues in some of their houses, that so the French and their neighbours might the rather think it to be some particular reuenge, that bred also the tumult in Parris.
Vppon this counsell the King had in his Sunday letters, layd the whole rage vppon the Guisians, who considering more deeply the inormitie of the act, wherein they had not spared an infinite number of learned men, honorable olde age, honest Ladies, chaste matrones, women with childe, young schollers, virgins, sucking babes, but most cruelly cut their throates: perceiuing that so they should bring vpon themselues and their posteritie, the indignation of all men indued with any sparke of vertue, or that had any regard of humane societie: and consequently, make themselues the marke for euery man to ayme at, as the sole authors thereof, and men guiltie of the most wicked action that could bee deuised: refused to forsake Parris. But contrariwise, insisted and most earnestly laboured, that the king should aduow all that had beene done.
This did they and their Councell so cunningly mannage, besides that they were very strong and greatly in the peoples fauour, who had been followers of the Duke of Guise in this execution, that the king with the aduice of his Councell, soone after writ other letters to his Ambassadours, Gouernours of Prouin ces and chiefe Townes of France: wherein hee gaue them to vnderstand, that whatsoeuer had fallen out at Parris, was nothing concerning religion, but was done onely to preuent the execution of a cursed conspiracie, practised by the Admirall and his confederates against him, his mother, and bretheren: and therefore commaunded that his Edict of pacification should bee most firmly obserued: But if it should fall out that any Huguenors, incensed with the newes of Parris, should gather in armes in any place whatsoeuer, hee commaunded his said Gouernours to assist the scattering and dispearsing of them.
Also to the end the studious of nouelties should not commit any sinister practise, his meaning was to haue the gates of all his Towns wel and diligently kept, referring therest of his minde to the credite of the bearers. According to the purport heereof, at Meaux in
Brie, Trois in Champagne, Orleans, Bourges, la Charite, Lyons, Thoulouse, and Bourdeaux, those of the religion were handled as they were in Parris: not speaking of those that were sacked in other Townes and Villages of the Realme, as also in the fields, when they thought to saue themselues by going out of the Realme, so that in fewe weeks, aboue thirtie thousand persons were massacred in
France, because of the religion.
The king aduoweth the massacre to be done by his commandement, but specifieth no cause why: and the next day writeth contrarie letters.Vpon Tuesday the six and twentieth day of August, the king accompanied with his bretheren, and the chiefest of his Court, went to his Court of Parliament, where sitting vpon his bed of iustice, all the chambers assembled, hee declared in expresse termes, that whatsoeuer had happened in Parris, had been done not onely by his consent, but also by his commandement, and of his owne motion: and therefore that his meaning was, that all should bee attributed to himselfe.
All which his speech was approoued and allowed by
Christopher de Thou, chiefe President, in the name of the whole companie. The next day letters were sent to the Sheriffes and other the kings officers in the Townes, giuing them to vnderstand, that to his great greefe, his Cousin the Admirall, and others his partakers, besides sundrie particular parties in sundrie parts of Parris had beene slaine: whereof hee thought good to giue them notice, to the end they might represse all commotion and murther, which might breed his incredible greefe and sorrow: enioyning them in his name to make proclamation, commanding euery man to remaine at home, not to take armes, nor any to offend other vnder paine of death: also to take order that his Edict of peace were well and diligently obserued. Thursday the twentieth, in Parris was celebrated an extraordinary Iubile with generall procession, wherein the king was assistant, and whereto hee had (but in vaine) solicited the king of
Nauarre with sweet words and flattering speeches, and the Prince of Conde with threats.
The kings new declaration.The same day hee made an other declaration, importing that by his own expresse commandement, the Admirall with his adherents and confederates had beene slaine: not vpon any cause of religion, or breach of his Edicts of pacification, which hee alwaies had, and still ment to haue obserued, kept,
and continued: but thereby to preuent the execution of a damnable conspiracie contriued by the Admirall, the chiefe deuiser thereof, and his adherents and confederates against the said king, his estate, the Queene his mother, his bretheren, the king of Nauarre, and other Lords and Princes his attendants.
Withall, that hee tooke into his protection all other the protestants: but forbad them all assemblies or preachings, vpon whatsoeuer occasions. To this declaration were there soone after added sundrie restrictions, qualifications, and amplifications. Such of the protestants as in sundrie places relyed vpon them, had but bad successe. The wiser sort ffed out of the realm, which notwithstanding their goods were seized: their mooueables partly solde to the most giuer, and partly stolen, and their immooueables put to the crie.
There was a long Commentarie made and added to the same declaration, by one Gui de Fuur, Lord of Pibrac: as it was auouched before that of religion, who durst affirme that witnesses had been examined before the kings Councell,Commentaries vpon this matter. that affirmed a conspiracie made by the Admirall, not naming who, neither yet specifying any circumstance of apparance of trueth, for the which cause, certaine sharpe aunsweres were made therevnto, wherein all the cauillations of the said Commentarie, were amply and particularly resuted.
Within Parris it selfe, all men that had any wit or vnderstanding in their common and ordinarie talke, touching this horrible and cruell iniustice, said, that there was neither shaddowe nor any apparance of trueth in this accusation, and to thinke to make men of any iudgement to beleeue, that the Admirall had wrought any thing against the king and his adherents being within Parris,Defence made in the Admirals behalfe. were vaine, it beeing a thing which all men knowes, that in the Court there is an ordinarie guard of Gascons, Switzers, and Scots, both for day and night, besides the other companies, specially then, when the most part of the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of
France, were there to honour the marriage, that in lesse then three houres within Parris, they may assemble and gather at the least sixtie thousand men well armed, who at the first word had deuoured the Admirall and all his friends, and if they had been sixe times as many more: that the Lords and Gentlemen that had accompanied the king of
Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, bringing thither their wiues, seruaunts, and kinsmen, brought but their swords, and thought but to run at the ring, and to shew their braue apparrell. That the declaration did neither specifie the time, place, adherents, nor meanes of this coniuration. Before the Admirall was hurt, as he receiued all fauour of the king, so he held and accounted him for one of his most faithfull seruants, whereof the Admirall made proofes with all sinceritie. Being come to Parris vppon the word, and iterated commandements of the king, where no man liuing euer vnderstood other thing from his mouth (what aduise soeuer was giuen him to issue out of Parris) because he was hated, euill willed, and inuironed with enemies, but onely that hee trusted in the faith and promise of his Prince, that heedemaunded nothing but peace, wherevnto he perceiued the king to bee inclined, and to lay the war vpon the shoulders of the hereditarie enemie of France, which is the Spaniard: if this conspiracie had been made after hee was hurt, how durst a ma^ being cruelly wounded with two dangerous wounds, about Fryday at tenne of the clocke, and flaine vppon Sunday at two of the clocke in the morning, of great yeares, troubled in both his armes, whereof one, the Surgeans were in counsell to cut off, accompanied with three hundreth Gentlemen vnarmed, all naturall Frenchmen, most affected seruants to the King, hauing neither goods, parentage, alliance, pleasure, nor contentment with their families, but in France, bee so bolde, or could set vppon sixtie thousand men, prepared to fight. Nay, were it onely against the Priests and Fryers of Parris ayded by their seruants, onely with fagget-sticks in their hands? or how could hee haue leisure in so short a time, or would haue bin so mad with his adherents (vnwise onely in this, that they trusted the kings word, and beleeued not the aduice of those that counselled them not to put themselues into the Lyons clawes, that watched for them vnder that great hedge) to consult vpon an action so important, execrable, and of the greatest consequence that possible may bee? Besides this, after he was wounded, the Phisitians and Surgeans had inioyned him silence, and all the Councels holden in his chamber, tended resolutely to expect iustice to be done vppon those that had hurt him, as the King and the Queen-mother had sworne and promised. The King of
Nauarre and the Prince of Conde were alwaies at those Councels, and to conspire against the King, was as much as if they had soght to stab the^selues, and to stain their house with the most detestable ignomie that could bee deuised. And to be short, it is as much as if they should transforme the Admirall and his friends into brute beasts, as to attribute such consultations vnto them in such a time and place, and against so many good Frenchmen: and againe, if he were suspected of such a crime, was it not in the kings power (seeing so many armed men about his lodging held him inclosed, and at the first word could haue seized vpon him) to cause him to bee poysoned presently vppon the suspition, without daunger of tumult by those of the religion, whose weaknesse was well knowne at the time of the massacre?
The number of those that were termed adherents to the Admirall, beeing nothing in comparison of the murtherers, and of women, maides, and yong children cruelly massacred, that neither knew where the Admirall lay, nor yet what hee said^, holding him prisoner, they might without resistance or daunger haue made information, and so haue proceeded against him according to the lawes of all Nations... If there were witnesses, they might haue maintained and affirmed their depositions before the Admirall and his adherents, which by Pitrac is written to haue beene reported to the king: further, if it should bee so, that the Admirall and his adherents, after his hurt, did vtter any angrie speeches, hauing knowne the cause, he might haue contented himselfe with his owne house and familie, and not in a tumult and barbarous furie, by sound of bell to mooue the people to assemble all the Towne, hee ought to haue hindred the massacre of so many Ladies and yong Gentlewomen, and of so many Gentlemen, wise, learned, and reuerent olde men, of so many little children, that conspired not but against their mothers breasts, or else to get out of the wombes. It may bee asked of the Councellours of this inhumane iustice, why so many women great with childe and halfe dead were thrown into the riuer? wherin so many thousands of honorable and innocent persons were massacred, without inquisitio^, co^demnation, forme, or figure of processe? and which is more, if the Adm. had neuer so litle attempted against the person or life of the K. and his two bretheren, who is he that knoweth not, that al ye Prouinces, towns: and to be short, al sorts of people and of
all estates would speedily haue taken weapon in hand, in a moment without difficultie had put the culpable and all his adherents to the swoord, with all strange motio^s, wold both approoue and allow, as most expedient and necessarie? And touching the king of
Nauarre, euery man detested the imposture of the declaration: Was he not in the Admirals hands for the space of foure yeares? did hee not professe the like religion? who is ignorant of the humble and sincere respect which the Admirall bare vnto this Prince, and the great affection hee shewed vnto the Admirall? could those of the religion get any thing by the death of the king of Nauarre? was hee not loued as well of the Catholicques, as those of the religion? Could the Admiral hope for a Prince more fauourable then hee, or that could better reuenge the outrage that had been done vnto him?
Other circumstances touhing the massacre.Now let vs returne to other circumstances and the course of our Historie. By an other declaration of the 30. day of August, the king gaue to vnderstand to the Gouernours of his Prouinces, that the Admirall and Gentlemen of the religion that were with him in
Parris, without expecting the iustice that he had promised to execute vpon the wonder of the Admirall, had conspired against his Maiestie, his mother, his bretheren, the king of Nauarre, and other the Lords and Princes about them, and against the estate: yea, that some of the chiefest and adherents to the conspiracie, acknowledging their fault, had confessed it.
These principall adherent confessors hee nameth not: as indeed there were none, vnlesse he meanes Bouchauanes of
Picardie, who vppon Saturday had been present at one of the consultations, wherein the Vidame of Chartres the second time with vehement speeches in the pesence of the K. of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and many others, had vrged the remooue of the Admiral out of
Parris, wishing his friends and familiars to follow after: as hourely discouering many things that put him in more doubt. Hee was in manner the onely man that was of that opinion: for the rest, they stood vppon it, that so they should doo the king wrong, in that they should call into question his faith and sincere meaning: that it might suffice quietly and modestly to craue iustice at his hands: that the matter was yet fresh, and therefore it might bee feared, least the king should bee offended if they proceeded so hotly. Other report could not Bouchananes make in honour or with a safe conscience. Concerning Briquemant and
Cauagues whom they ment to vse, wee will speake heereafter. Onely I will heere adde one note taken out of the seuenth booke of the remembrances of Monluc one of the Marshals of France, and a sworne enemie to the Protestants.
He speaking of the murthers, saith: Albeit I was then Maister onely of my owne house,Monlucs testimonie. yet the Queene did me that honour to write vnto me, and to send me word that they had discouered a great co^spiracie against the king and his estate. I wot what I beleeued: but it is not good to anger a mans Maister. The king neuer forget the chase that the Admirall gaue him from Meaux to Parris swifter then ordinarie. Wee forget our selues when wee come to the pinch: and neuer thinke that kings haue greater stomacks then wee, and withall, that they can sooner forget a good peece of seruice, then any offence.
These bee Moulucs words, who a little before had said, that the Admiral was vnwise to thrust himselfe into Parris, to the end, to make the world to thinke that he ruled all. I wonder how a man so wise and polliticke in worldly matters, could commit such a grosse ouersight. But hee payde well for it: for it cost him his life and many more.
Why the defence of the massacre is here set downI haue drawne the declaration or defence afore saide out of diuers treatises, at that time imprinted, without ouermuch thrusting mine own iudgeme^t into such discourses. And also the innocencie of the massacred, might wel maintaine it selfe, and enioy an assured reward, much better then the iudgement of humane sence can comprehend. I thought it no preiudice to these recuiels, to insert this extract of their defence.
Touching the particularities of the massacres in other Townes of the Realme, they hauing beene set down and particularly noted in other books as yet extant, I mean not herein to present this sea of innocent blood, which beeing hidden in the ground and mixed with the waters, hath cried vnto heauen, and procured so many blowes from thence, vppon the authors and adherents of so many murthers.
Diuers cou^cels to surprise Roche.Now there rested no more but one small moate within the eies of the king and his Councell, which was Rochel, to the Inhabitants whereof, Strossy and Poulin, surnamed Barron de la Garde, wrote certaine friendly letters, dated the last of August, offering them men to keepe their Towne, and asking them great store of victuals to furnish the kings Nauy by sea: but the Rochelers hauing good cause to furnish themselues by a letter dated the second of September, aunswered with all modestie, that they had no neede of men to defend them, desiring to liue peaceably in their auncient priuiledges, and that they wanted victualles, whereby it was impossible for them to helpe others.
Montpesac Seneschall of Poictou sent them a long letter, wherein he mocked the Admiral, and sought by long preaching to perswade them, but by silence they abated his babling: by letters dated three daies after they sought to pacifie Strossy, perceiuing that the enterprise of Flaunders was found to bee but a smoke. After the newes of the massacre, they withdrew themselues into
Rochel, with their armes and furniture, wherin after that, they did good seruice. Fiftie Gentlemen, one thousand fiue hundreth souldiers, fiue and fiftie Ministers, as well of Poictou and
Xaintongne, as of other Prouinces, saued themselues therein, and a publicke fast was solemnized among them vppon the ninth and eleuenth of the same moneth.
The Councellours of the massacre perceiuing that
Strossy did nothing, appoynted Biron Great-maister of the artillerie, to bee their Gouernour, by commaundement from the King, vsing many faire speeches, and promising much vnto the Rochelers, to whom
Biron, that during the massacre had been in daunger, wrote very fauourably. The Rochelers spared neither paper nor Inke, holding them close and in couert.
And against Sancerre.An other Towne namnd Sancerre vppon Loire, not farre from Parris, serued also for retrait to diuers of the religion, escaped from the sword of the massacres of Bourges, Orleans, and other places.
The Inhabitants behaued themselues with all good wil towards such poore fugitiues, notwithstanding letters of the 3. of Septemb. were sent vnto them, by the which it was inioyned them to receiue of their Captaine, him that should bee sent them by la Chastre Gouernour of Berry, and into the Castle such troupes as hee should thinke conuenient. In the meane while, the Romish Catholickes triumphed in Parris, thinking to haue gotten al the world, in the middle of their triumphs and feasts, about the first of September, certaine good persons by night went to the Gibbet of Montfalcon, and tooke downe the Admirals bodie, which they buried in so secret a place, that what inquisition soeuer his enemies could make, it could not bee found.
They neuerthelesse loth to loose such a Relicque, which they daily visited very deuoutly (whom the king himselfe went to looke vpon, saying to a certaine Lord that wished him not to go neare, that the sauoring carrion of a dead enemie was most sweet) had rather hang vppe a bottell of haye in forme of a man, then haue nothing at all.
A Minister named du Rosier, a man of a readie wit, but turbulent and insolute, beeing cought as hee was flying from
Parris, began to halt, and soone after reuolted from the religion which hee himselfe had maintained in his sermons and writings, and seduced other prisoners: for being brought to Parris, he ioyned with sundrie Sorbonnists, and beganne to oppugne the profession of faith of the king of Nauarre, of the Prince of Conde, and of diuers Ladies and Gentlewomen.
In the meane time, in the prisons they murthered such as continued constant in their religion, whose bodies they cast into the riuers by night. I told you before, that the king had sent a precept or large declaratio^ to the Rochelers, also that Biron their appoynted Gouernor,The proceedings in the expeditions, to catch the Rochelers. had written to them very fauourable letters.
Audeuars the king of Nauarres Steward, charged with such packets and very ample instructions, ariued at Rochel the seuen and twentieth day of September, where hee forgat no part of his charge, as well to the Maior and other Magistrates, as to sundrie particular persons, for the most part of the religion, and incouraged by a number of their bretheren commen to them for refuge. A few daies after
Audeuars comming, hauing deliberately and at large, communicated of their affaires in ful assembly, they made an ample answere to the commandement vnto them inioyned in the kings name, concerning the admission of Garrisons: saying that they could not aduow that commandement to proceed from the king, to the testimonie of whose letters dated the 22. and the 24. day of Aug. they appealed, wherin he layeth the whole burthen of the sedition and massacre vpo^ the house of Guise, protesting that he had much ado to keep himselfe safe in the castle of the Louure with his guard.Their defenses. Further, that they could not possibly beleeue that ye K. shuld be so far deuoid of counsell, as to cut off his own armes: to pollute the sacred marriage of his sister with the effusion of so much noble and innocent blood: defame yt French nation, and his royal name with so cruel an actio^: either Minister an argume^t to al historio graphers: to write so tragical a Historie, as neither antiquitie of time hath seen yt like, or posteritie can hear of without horror. That this co^spiracie was co^tinued in Rome, and hatred in
Parris, by the rage of ye Guisians, who prete^ded to seize vpo^ the kingdome. Withal, they defended the Adm. innocencie, and craued to be permitted to liue in their priuiledges. Other remonstrances they made to Audeuars, co^cerning some poynts of his co^mission: as yt exercise of religio^, etc. and as he clawed the^ with infinite flatterings, so they returned him more Court holy-water then he was ware of, and in this necessitie wanted no polliticke wisedome. Biron in the mean time gathered towards them, and the Barron de la Garde beganne openly to threaten them, which caused them to looke better to their businesse.
The kings excuses to his friends.The king sent his excuses to the Pope, and to the Duke of Alue, touching the rumor of warres in the low countries, he called the Spanish Ambassadour and shewed him, that all the former counsels tended onely to the rooting out of the Huguenots, and that hee ment to continue in peace and good correspondence with the king of Spaine, to whom he sent a Gentleman purposely with letters of his owne hand, to assure him of his intent. On the other side, vpon the foureteenth of Septemb. there was a precept sent to the Gouernours of the Prouinces to inquire of al such protestants, as during the troubles had borne any office in the armies or townes of warre. In Prouence,Precepts against the Protestants. through the discretion of the Countie of
Tende there was no murther committed: neither in Bourgondy through the subtiltie of the Guisians, who purposed to lay all the hatred vpon the king, notwithstanding themselues were the executioners in
Parris, and that their seruants, Troyes in
Champagne had shed the blood of sundrie innocents, as also in sundrie other Townes. Some murthers, but indeed but few, were committed in
Auuergne and Dauphine: Picardie and Brittaine were reasonably quiet.
The two and twentieth day of September, there was a new precept sent to the Gouernors and Lieftenants of Prouinces, for the disgrading of all protestants from their estates and publike offices which they exercised, notwithstanding they were content to renounce their religion, except such as had inferiour offices, whom the king permitted to enioy them, in case they would abiure according to a forme deuised by the facultie of
Sorbon, and adioyned to the same precept..
Excusers of the massacre.Besides all this, they hired certaine writers to excuse the massacre, and thereof to publish their bookes both in Latine and French. Some Lawyers were dealers that way: but they met with those that so tooke them vp, that afterwards, a hundreth times and a hundreth, they condemned such purposes. The Rochelers spent the whole moneth of September in consultations vppon new letters from the king, the Quesne-mother, the king of
Nauarre, the Duke of Aniou, and Biron: also vpon sundrie negotiations for the receiuing of the said Biron for their Gouernour, who to that end was come within halfe a daies iourney of their Towne. Their finall resolution was this: not to accept of
Biron before the whole armie at hand were cassuered and quite scattered, retaining the free exercise of religion, and that Biron should not bring them any other troupes.
In the beginning of October, those of Sancerre were inuested by certaine Garrisons that beganne to molest them: but they made so braue a sallie, that hauing forced the barricadoes of their enemies, slaine 45. of them in the streets and houses, scattered the rest, and taken some prisoners,What entertainment the King of Na. and the Prince of Conde had after the massacre. they were released of the^ for a fewe daies. The Rochelers at the same time were su^moned either to accept of Biron, who wold haue entered with certain troups, without causing the armie to retire, or else to accept the war, while they consulted therevpon. Let vs see what entertainment the king of N. and the Prince of Conde had within
Parris, their enemies not co^tent to haue led the^ to ye Masse, after abiuration of ye religion, made the^ be assistant at the ceremonies of S. Michael, published in their presence so many precepts and libels, made and deuised against the innocencie of the massacred, constrained them to heare the means deuised for the extirping of therest. Besides, their said enemies ayded themselues by the Cardinall of Bourbon, vncle to those two Princes, to induce them to acknowledge and do homage to the Pope: in such sort, that messages dated the third of October, were sent in their names, whereby they desired to bee receiued into the bosome of the Romish Church. The Pope sent them his pardons vpon the first of Nouember.
To returne to the Rochelers, that persisted in their determination. About the beginning of October, the enemie beganne by sundrie means to cut off their victualles and prouision, vnder pretence of relieuing the Nauy that might depart farre ynough from them: but they soone blew vp that myne. Then was there an other aduise, which was this: Diuers Gentlemen and good souldiers were withdrawne thither for succour, who purposed to set a large price vpon their skinnes to any that should assayle them: and many others likewise were departed the Realme. Heervppon the king by his letters pattents of the eight of October, saith: that as a good housholder he pittieth his subiects that liue in penurie out of their own houses: and so emoyneth his Gouernors of Prouinces throughout their iurisdictions, by publike proclamation to call home such as were absent, whose goods hee decreeth to be confiscate, in case they returne not within a certaine time limitted them. The same day the Barron de la Garde, intruding himself by letters to threaten the Rochelers, had his aunswere: That they were the kings faithful seruants, though hee were none, who wrongfully molested them with his Gallies, and would not retire: That they prayed God to mollifie the Barrons heart, that hee might not trouble them, but set them at libertie: That they were resolued to maintaine themselues in their priuiledges: to keep their towne safe from like murther as were committed in other Towns, which they accounted innocent from the crime of rebellion, wherewith the Barron charged them.
That so long as they heard and beheld such and so horrible nouelties, and were by the Barron so boldly intreated as they had beene, they might and would, iustly poure foorth their complaints to God and the King. Whilest Biron and others did thus, but in vaine, solicit the Rochelers, there was at Parris contriued an Edict of the tenth of October, in the name of the king of Nauarre, wherein he prohibited all publike exercise of any but the Romish religion throughout his countries.
But his subiects of Bearne, euen at the first discouering manifest falshoods in that writing: withall, knowing that their soueraigne was in his enemies hands, neither had about him any seruants, but such as were foisted in by the Queene-mother, or the house of Guise, made no account of that paper: but vsing all lawfull meanes to auoyde surprises, did with many difficulties beare themselues in that estate wherein the Queene had left them: hoping if their king might once escape prison, he would tell them another tale. The one and twentieth day of October,Troubles befallen the Rochelers, and how they remedied the same. Biron writ by du Vigean to the Rochelers, who would not graunt this Deputie entrie, albeit hee came vppon safe conduct to Tadon, a village neare vnto the towne, when he had his answere in like terme as the former.

He going the next day to lye at Sigongnes, which was three leagues thence, certaine souldiers of the companie of Saint
Stephen forced his lodging, slewe three of his houshold seruants, gaue him fiue woundes with their swoords in his bedde, carried away his horses and best stuffe, which the next day they sold to the most giuer, in a village where Captaine Saint Stephen was lodged. This scandall troubled the Rochelers, who ended it thus. That
Stephen and Guymeniere should depart from Rochel: Besides the aunswere expresly giuen to Biron, the Rochelers by seueral letters did greatly excuse the^selues of this mishap, which fell out without their notice, and to the great griefe of their Deputie, beseeching him, as also they did du Vigean, not to impute vnto them such an action, whereto they had giuen neither counsell nor consent: but were wonderfully sorrie, that Vigean should bee so wronged at his returne from his Ambassage.
Many misliked that Vigean a Gentleman of the religion, and a man of calling, should take vpon him such a commission: but his reward caused him to bee afterward better aduised. Now the Rochelers beeing diuersly aduertised, that shortly they should see an armie before their walles: also that their Towne was the marke whereat their enemies aymed, gaue a new onset vppon the Countrie of
Montgommery, the Vidame of Chartres, and other Noble men fledde into England, to craue some succour at their hands. Their Deputies set saile in the euening, the fiue and twentieth day of October. Thus was it open warre: for so many as were known to be Rochelers, were euery where taken prisoners and put to their ransome: all vessels sayling towards their hauen stayed: all marchandize found to belong to any Rocheler, seized and confiscate: to bee short, all actions of hostilitie put in practise against them.
Neither were the Sancerreans at that time much quieter: for
Cadaillet one of the Groomes of the chamber, and the kings Hunter, sometimes seruant to the Earle of Sancerre, a man well knowne in the Towne, was sent to confer with them.
Hee played the cunning Courtier, setting debate among them that before were good friends, wherof ensued a tumult, whilest one would grant, and an other would denie the comming in of the Lord of
Fontaines, who was sent to roote out the protestants. Hereof grew murther and confusion, wherof wee will speake heereafter.
For the aduancement of the Bishop of Valence, Negotiation in Poland, where the French name was miserably rent in peeces, and to cut off the deuises of the protestants, both within and without the Realme.
Diuers deuises to extirpe those of the religion, and to roote out their memorie.The king was perswaded that it would bee good to take some of them that were found to haue escaped the massacre, and as then kept in prison, and to make processe against them in forme of iustice, and to put to the torture some of those that had escaped the massacre, and beeing fetched out of their corners, had beene committed to prison, that they might be condemned by sentence of certaine Iudges appoynted for the purpose, and so executed in the presence of the people: and to the same, to adde a sentence against the Admirall, of whose bodie (taken away as I said before) they should make a similitude or image, which the executioner should drawe along the streetes, and then hang it on the Gibbet.

Then that there might bee published the kings letters pattents, wherein it should bee decreed, that the protestants should bee preserued both in body and goods, and suffered to liue in all libertie of conscience, so to allure them peaceably by this declaration, that afterward they might speede as the rest: besides, to publish many bookes in excuse of all that was past, and the same to dispearse in all places, especially in Poland and Almaine: and withall, to charge the Ambassadours in England, Suizerland, and other forraine countries, to iustifie the king and the Romish Catholicques. All this was diligently put in execution.
Notable persons executed vnder colour of iusticeTouching the first poynt, Briquemant the father, a Gentleman of the age of seuentie yeares, one that had valiantly imployed himselfe in the seruice of the kings of France, hauing beene found in the house of the Ambassadour of England, wherein hee had saued himselfe while the greatest furies of the massacre were executed: was put in close prison, with Cauagnes, Maister of the Requests.
These two bare great affection both vnto the religion and the Admirall, and otherwise were of great reputation in France, they were threatned to be torne in peeces vppon the racke, if they would not write and signe with their hands, that they had conspired with the Admirall to kill the king, his bretheren, the Queene, and the king of Nauarre: but they hauing constantly refused to auouch so horrible a lye, against their innocencies and themselues, they were racked and cruelly tormented, and by sentence of the Court of Parliament in Parris, dated the seuen and twentieth of October, were declared guiltie of treason, and condemned to be hanged vpon a Gibbot: which was executed. The Queen-mother leading the king, her two other sonnes, and the king of Nauarre her sonne in lawe to see the execution. Her Councellours thinking that at that last exployt it would bee wrought, if Briquemaut in presence of all the people would aske pardon of the king, sending some vnto him to certifie him, that so hee might easily saue his life: that the king was mercifull, and that hee should haue pardon if hee asked it, confessing this fact wherewith hee was charged. Briquemaut aunswered boldly and with a good courage, that it belonged not vnto him, but to the king to aske pardon of God for such an offence: that he wold neuer aske pardon for a fault wherin hee had not offended, but knew himselfe to bee innocent, whereof hee called God to witnesse, desiring him to pardon the kings so great disloyaltie. Cauagnes did the like vntill hee died: in such sort, that this execution serued to no other ende, but more to publish theiniquitie of so many pernicious councels.
Asnare discouered and anoyded.With these two notable persons, they hung a man of haye made like the Admirall, against whom also was pronounced a smal sentence of death. Touching the declarations in fauour of those of the religion, the Duke of Guise discouered the snare, so that fewe of them were taken. For that by letters sent by his mother, the same day that
Briquemaut was executed, shee wrote vnto him, that the king had the said day, determined with his Councell, wholly to roote out those of the religion, whom hee termed seditious vermine, not sparing the children, nor straungers, that had giuen them ayde, therein discouering enterprises against the Prince of Orenge and others: which vanished like smoke. Among the Ambassadours that excused the king, Monluc was one, the easiler to aduance his affaires of
Polonia, whereof we meane not to recite any particularities, as not pertaining properly to our intent.The beginning of open war against the Sancerrans. Yee heard before how Cadaillet had sowen diuision among the Sancerreans, now shall you see the haruest of that graine.
The ninth of Nouember, the Lord of Fontaines brother, surprised the Castle by intelligence, with some of the Inhabitants that inclosed themselues therein with him: albeit through the valour and resolution of the rest, namely of the protestants, he was forced to auoyde againe within foure and twentie houres after, euen as
Fontaines was comming with a strong succour. After this, the
Sancerrcans beganne to stand better vpon their guard, hauing about
650. souldiers vnder diuers Captaines and Lieftenants, and Martignon, Pilard, Martinat, la Fleur, Chaillon, Montauban, Buisson, Paquelon, la Minee, Doriual, whose Generall was Andrew Ioanneau, Bayliffe of the Towne. They had moreouer one hundreth and fiftie labourours in their Vinyeards, who vppon necessitie bare themselues very well, either vppon the walles at the assaults and scalings, or in the sallies, with their slings, which were termed Sancerrean Pistolles. Neither were their women slacke during this siege, which beganne about the twentieth day of Nouember: but now for Rochel.
The seuenth of Nouember, the Barron de la Garde sent two Gallies to take a view of the Towne, vnder pretence of sending his letters. But the Lord of Essars, whom the Rochelers had made their Generall,Also against the Rochelers. sent the next night after, the Barrons two Gallies, whereof the one was taken, an Inginer slaine, and an other taken, and the other hardly escaped. Heerevpon ensued the publication of the Kings letters pattents, dated the sixt of that moneth, but not yet published, wherein hee denounced open war to the Rochelers. Howbeit before any defie, there rested yet the last stratageme to bee put in practise, because the king was loth to enter into armes, as doubting least so hee might fall into new troubles, which he hoped to bee now quite quenched.
The King, the Queen-mother, and others, had earnestly sa^luted la None, (whom the Duke of Alue after the taking of Montz in Henaut, had sent backe into France) to labor that the Rochelers (who in regard of his vertues both loued and honoured him) would grow to composition: hee after many excuses, as well in regard of the impossibilitie, as also because in conscience hee could not counsell the Rochelers to yeelde their throates to their enemies, vppon commandement accepted the message, rather in purpose to serue the Rochelers as hee did, and so to get from the Court, then to hurt the professors of the religion, which himself most constantly professed euen to the death.
For after he had performed his commission in the companie of the Abbot of Gadagne, and giuen account of his Ambassage to the Lord of Biron, who lay at Saint Iohn d'Angely, hee returned straight to Rochel, where hee so bare himselfe, that he was one of the chief instruments that God vsed for the preseruation of the Towne during the siege. Wheras contrariwise, Captain Saint Stephen, withdrew himselfe to his owne house, and his Lieftenant
Guymeniere, who had a long time made profession of religion, went to Landereau and others, to helpe to warre vpon the Rochelers.

Sundry places of refuge for the Protestants.Besides Sancerre and Rochel, the Inhabitants of Montauban, Nismes, Milliaud, Aubenas, Priuas, Mirebel, Anduze, with other hamlets as well in Viuaretz, as in
Seuenes, began to helpe themselues, yet not without many impeachments, euen from those that ought most to haue encouraged them. For at that time throughout all those parts, it was a question whether it were lawfull for the subiects to stand vpon so iust and necessarie a defensiue. Some wished patience, others fight, and the rather for that they could not possibly resist: that euery thing seemed to bee past hope: that there were not left either great Lord or famous leader to gather in the protestants: also that there was not any forraine Prince, that made any offer to stand in their defence. Neuerthelesse, the resolution of the two first named Townes, drew diuers to breath vppon the matter, namely those of Montauban, who shutte their gates against the murtherers.
Nismes stood in a mummering, but through the wisedome of Clausonne, (a man of great credite in those parts) vppon summons to accept of a Garrison, the Inhabitants with common aduice made answere, that they would not open their gates vntill a more quiet season: they were threatned and intimidated, but that made them in the end but the more valiant. Other Villages at the beginning diuersly espied, were in great daunger: but the carriage of some Captaines, men of small account, and many particular persons, the king and his officers were brought into other conceipts. Mombrun also, a wise and valiant Gentleman of
Dauphine, was ridden vp and downe in diuers wise: but he defended himselfe, and afterward stood the protestants in good stead.
The ninth of Nouember there was a blazing starre seene in the ayre, as great as the day starre, hard by Cassiopee, hauing a forme of soure corners like a lozenge.A new and wonderfull starre in the ayre. Cornelius Gemme and other learned Doctors in Astronomie, that imprinted bookes thereof, said that it stirred not from the place for the space of three weekes, esteeming it to be like the starre that appeared to the wise men, that came to worship Iesus Christ in Bethlehem presently after his birth. It continued in the ayre for the space of nine monethes togither or thereabout.
The ninteenth of the same moneth, the king published an Edict, repeating the former to reuoke his subiects to their owne houses, vnder paine of losse of goods, yet to small purpose: for all men were before so scarred, besides that, they now saw such prouisions for warre, that this reuocation was in vaine.
Such Cantons of the Switzers as made profession of the religion, were solicited to bannish out of their Territories such as hadde there saued themselues, but they would neuer consent to the Ambassadours petitions in that behalfe.
Sommieres besieged and yeelded.Toward the end of the moneth, Marshall d'Anuille Gouernour of Languedoc, besieged Sommieres, holden by the protestants, and at foure moneths ende tooke it by composition, hauing dispearsed an armie, whereof men spake diuersly. In the beginning of December, Gordes the kings Lieftenant in Dauphine, by friendly letters solicited Mombrun, Mirebel, Diguieres, and other Gentlemen, to forsake their religion, and to turne to the Romish, withall adding, that the king was resolued to suffer no other within his dominions.
The fourth of December, by the kings commandement,
Monsieur de Biron, with seuen Cornets of horse, and eighteen Ensignes of foote, entered into the countrie of Onis to inclose the Rochelers: and as then beganne open war. All the rest of the month was imployed in skirmishes, with some losse to those of Rochell, onely in one, wherein they lost Florac, a Gentleman of
Xaintongne, much lamented for his valour.
1573. The siege of Sancerre.Most part of the yeare 1573. was imployed in the sieges of
Sancerre, Rochel, and other places, in molesting those of
Languedoc, and more and more to trouble the poore countrie of
France.
The principall circumstances wee will set downe, beginning with Santerre, that wee may end in order, and then consider of the Rochelers and others.
In the beginning of the yeare, those of Saint
Sancerre beganne their courses, to furnish themselues with corne, but not so well as they should haue done, vpon the opinion that some of their principall Townes-men had, that the Catholicques would go to some other plaae. This vaine imagination procured great miserie to those of Sancerre, who beside the famine, looked not vnto their fortifications as need required.
The ninth of Ianuarie there appeared some troupes of horse, to the number of some foure hundreth Maisters, and the next day fiue Ensignes of the old bands of the Regiment of Goas, with sundrie other troupes gathered thereabout.
The same within fifteen daies after, were refreshed with eight Ensignes of the olde bands of the Regiment of Sarrieu, and fiue other new companies, some bands of the countries therabout, vnder the leading of certain Gentlemen enemies to the Sancerreans: besides also diuers Pesants that gaped after the ruine of that small receptacle of the Protestants. There came also sixteene Ensignes of Pioners, so as the whole armie amounted to some foure or fiue hundreth horse, and some fiue thousand foote, besides the Pioners and Pesants.
The Lord of Chastre Generall of the armie, sent a drumme with letters to summon the besiegers to yeelde vppon composition, which hee promised should bee reasonable. His drumme they stayed and made no other answere: which afterward prooued very preiudiciall vnto them, albeit in the beginning they made many gallant and profitable sallies. In the beginning of Februarie, the besiegers erected a Fort within foure hundreth paces of the Towne towards Fontenay, and bringing their artillerie by boates vpon Loire, namely twelue cannons and foure coluerins, they made a bulwarke of earth vppon the highway to Saint
Thibaut, also a Pallisade in Saint Ladres field, and cut off the highwaies and pathes round about the Towne, planting ten peeces in the said field of Saint Ladre, and sixe more vpon
VVolphes elme, which is a high mountaine on the South side of
Sancerre, and commandeth the town, as afterward they found by experience. In foure or fiue daies space they discharged aboue three hundreth cannot shot, wherein fell out sundrie things woorthie memorie.
All this thunder hurt not any of the Inhabitants, but one maid, who was slaine with the breath of a bullet, at one of the foure first shotte: so fierce was the storme, that the stones of the towne-wall, the pauing stones, and shiuers of the timber of such houses as the cannon came vnto, flew whistling in the ayre, broke the stockes of the harguebuziers in their hands, and vppon the shoulders of the besieged souldiers, rent and pierced their mandillians, hose and hattes, yet neuer touched their bodies. Namely, one bullet carried from a souldier, named Pauilloy, the crest of his murrian, but otherwise hurt him not.
An other cannon shot piercing cleane through the wal, came with such violence, that lighting vppon a barne, it bare away a great quarter of stone, which fell vppon a woorthie mans backe named Petit Boys, yet hurt him not. An other shot lighting vppon the Courtin and Parapet of the Towne, cast down aboue a Cart-load of stones and brickbats, hard by the Minister of la Charite, named Iohn de Lery, (from whom we haue the whole discourse of this siege, whereat hee was from the beginning to the end) so as some flew betweene his legges with such violence as any man may imagine, yet hit him not. As an other Minister named
Molet, was in the Pulpit vpon Sunday the eight of March, both he and his whole auditorie were in manner ouerwhelmed with the stones of a house, which a cannon shot had beaten downe, yet not any man slaine or wounded, onely some fewe as it were a little scratched.
Now albeit the like batterie was still continued so suriously against the wals, that were but weak before, wherin the besiegers discharged aboue six thousand cannon shot against the Town, yet of the besieged there were not fiue and twentie slaine by that meanes.
About the end of Februarie, the besiegers laboured to surprise a rauelin, where they were fiersly repulsed, and lost Captaine Diuory, with fiue and twentie souldiers of the olde bands that mere slaine in the place, besides a number of wou^ded that they caried away. Of the besieged, Buissiere la Flews Ensigne was hurt with a Harguebuze shot, and died scone after. In March a souldier comming from the campe into the Cittie as aspie, could not counterfeit so well, but the Gouernour tooke him in many contrarieties, wherevppon putting him to the torture, he died in prison. The continuall raine and snow did wonderfully annoy both parties, especially the besiegers, to whom the besieged with artificial fiers burned a wooden bridge couered with hardies, wher vnder they vsed to come safe to the foot of rauelin without disturbance, and it was thought that they should haue either stopped or myned that rauelin and therefore the besieged did immediately dig Wels to countermyne that side.
Also because the besiegers had immediately made a stronger bridge then the former: withal, that they hallowed the Rauelin, in the euening the besieged caused Captaine Montauban to go foorth with fiftie shot, who brake through a Corps de guard, and slew thirteene or foureteene souldiers, and brought in two prisoners, who assured him that they myned vnder the ranelin, and in an other place, wherevpon in the morning they began 7. wels in sundrie partes of the Town ditches to blowe vp the said mynes, as also they looked to other their fortifications according as necessitie commanded and appoynted.

Three dayes after, towards nine of the clocke at night,The first assault comming vndesired through their trenches, entered the ditch, not farre from the breach of Londis, which they found so welkept, that with the losse of sundrie of their men slaine, and a number of wounded, they were forced to retire. During the whole conflict, which was both long and sharpe, the besieged continually sung Psalmes, wherevppon the besiegers discharged some shot, from the artillerie that lay vpon the hill called the VVolphes elme, which sel into the rampier, euen vnder the feete of the besieged souldiers, which was therewith shaken, yet had no farther hurt or harme. Hauing likewise learned by certaine Pioners taken in a sallie, that the besiegers went about to sappe the Ranelin of the olde gate, in one night they cut intwo, and thereof made as it were a second and new one, which by the next morning was made defenceable.
Vppon the seuenteenth of March, there sallied some fortie souldiers, who surprised a corps de guard, slew some eighteene or twentie souldiers, and brought in a prisoner, who assured the^ of that besell the next day, namely that they should bee beaten with sixteene great peeces, which indeede made a great breach.
The next day, the besiegers hauing with all their peeces planted in three places, namely in Saint Ladres field, the
VVolphes elme, and the Smithes Carroy, battered and beaten downe all the towers and walles of the towne, and continued and made plaine the breach, which was aboue three hundreth paces wyde, their white Ensigne Colonel, followed by the rest, shewed it selfe in order of battell, all their men comming vnder couert,A generall assault in sun drie places. through their trenches euen to the edge of the Towne ditch, where they gaue the assault as followeth.
Sarrieu his Regiment strooke in at the ende of the breach towardes the Goose-gate, in a place called Londis Grange, where the fight was greatest, and to second him, came in the Lord of
Chastre Generall of the armie, with his men at armes, who with other Maisters alighted, and that day fought on foote.
This first assault was famous, for the assaylants came in good order and verie resolutely to the breach: wherevpon they cambered, and seuen or eight of the best armed and couered came to handie blowes: namely, Captaine Ri^ Sarrieu his Ensigne, who carried his Ensigne and brought it backe againe. After their repulse, the Lord of Bonniuet, the Gentlemen of the countrie, and Captaine Cartier, gaue the second charge, whereto they came with such resolution, that some of them twise entered the breach: among others, Fontain Carters Ensigne, one that was reuolted fro^ the religion, who was there hurt, and so returned lame and halting. In this second onset, four Ensignes acco^panied with four or fiue hundreth souldiers valiantly entered the ditch, but in liew of marching straight to the breach, they ioyned close with the corner of the wall, which they did still beare with the ordinance, where they stayed with their Ensignes, and could not bee indammaged by the Townsmen, who were not able to stand vpon the wall that parted them, by reason of the volies of cannon shot.
Easily might they haue beene beaten away with muskets and harguebuze-shot, out of some flanquers that yet remained toward the Goose-gate, but at that time there was neither muskettier nor harguebuzier there about. Yet sel there out one aduenture to the preseruation of the besieged, and that was this. As the cannoniers did without intermission, continue the batterie from a place called the
Smithes Carroy, thinking to lay the wall flat, and so to discouer the patforme, wherevppon the besieged did fight, they followed their purpose so obstinatly, that with the dischrarge of two or three vallies of cannons, they beate down so many stones vpon the foure Ensignes and their souldiers, that they were forced to retire: as also it fell out well with the besieged, that the cannoniers in this batterie wanted powder: for had they beaten downe sixe or seuen foote more of the wall, the platforme from whence the besieged fought in flancke, and was their chiefe defence, had been layd open and made a bridge for the assailants, without let to haue entered the Towne: for this platforme beeing made on the suddaine, was not behinde cut off from the side of the Towne, and in other places they could not haue resisted.
The sixe Ensignes of Goas Regiment, assaulted the Rauelin of the olde gate, and Boudins platforme, supportee by the Lord of Montigny, Liestenant to the Countie of Brienne, and some other Gentlemen: there was Cabassoles, a Captaine of one of the companies of the olde bandes, a valiant man and greatly bewailed among the besiegers.
The new companies, except Tessiers set vppon the great breach, and gaue the assault from the platforme of the olde gate, euen to the other ende of the breach toward Saint Andrewes gate. Captaine Tessier presented the escalade to Caezars gate, which was at the other end of the Towne, that so the assault might bee generall, and the besieged busied in euerie corner. Of the Sancerreans, Captaine Flur, his Lieftenant Chaillou, and
Montauban, his Cornet defended the breach of Londis, but before they could come to it, or set their soldiers in array, two of their men were carried away with a cannon shot. The rest of the Captains, had euery man his quarter appoynted, where they all bare themselues most valiantly: and the walles were euery where furnished, besides a number left in the principall places, to serue for accurrences. During the assault, the fifteene hundreth labourours in the vines before mentioned with their slings, furnished with stones by the women and maides, wrought wonders, and wounded many of the enemies: Euen in the chiefed of the fight a woman caught hold of a souldiers pike, and stroue to wrest it out of his fist.
A young man of the Towne named Ialot, being in fight taken by a target-man, and ledde away, as hee descended into the ditch, called to his companions rather to shoote at him, then to suffer him to be carried away: wherevppon one of them lying on his face, aymed so right, that hee killed the target-man, and then Ialot with his dagger slew an other that had hold on him, and so escaping returned through the breach to his fellowes. The defendants had no other fence but their small shot, swoords, and slings: neither could they make vse of their other Engines, in regard that this general assault was giuen sooner then they expected, by reason of the batterie that had continued all the morning.
The Sancerreans in this assault had seuenteene souldiers either slaine or wounded to death, beside a wench that was carried away with a cannon The assailants left in the ditch some threescore of the valiantest: besides some two hundreth that hauing their deadly woundes, died in their tents and lodgings, and as many more wounded, who albeit they did in time recouer, yet carried the markes to their graues.The assaila^ts determinatio^ to famish the Towne. Thence foorth the assaylants vnderstanding the state of the Towne, resolued to shut vp and starue the Sancerreans, through the multitude of forts that they erected hard by their wals: which being made fenceable, notwithstanding whatsoeuer the defendants skirmishes, they planted two coluerins in the greatest, and so returned the rest of their peeces to the towns where they tooke them, alwaies leauing sufficient strength round about to stop the besieged from comming forth, or receiuing any reliefe out of the countrie. In the beginning of Aprill, one of the towne souldiers slipping downe the Towne-wall, came to the greater fort, and assured them that the defendants began to famish. Within two daies after, the besieged in a sallie slewe some of their enemies, who the surer to girt in the Towne, erected fiue new small forts, and nightly stood very carefully vpon their guard, so that the defendants perceiued that they ment to take them rather by the throats then by the fifts. Heerevpon they sent abroad for succour: but some of their messengers wer take^ prisoners, others put to death, one Cap. Fleur, others came no more again, or could not reenter, neither could they whersoeuer they became, get any such succor as they pretended, neither in deed was there any meanes by mans helpe to relieue them. Beeing thus euery way shut vppe by their irreconcileable enemies, from the beginning of Aprill the want of flesh had in one moneth dispatched all their asses and moyles.A note of the famin in Sancerre.
In the end they were constrained to eate Horses, Cattes, Rattes, Moles, Mice, and dogges: hides of oxen, calues and sheepes skinnes, parchment, horsehoues, hornes of lanterns, halters, and furnitures for horses, girdles of leather, hearbs, and wilde rootes: and in the end of Iune, the third part of the besieged eate no more bread, such as could get linseede and other seedes, which they neuer thought on, caused them to bee ground or beate them in morters, and made bread thereof, as also of all sorts of hearbs mixed with a litle bran, if they could get it. They eat bread of straw-meale, of powder of nutshels, and of slate: suet, olde oyntment, and other olde greace, serued to make pottage, and to frie the excrements of horses and of men, and the filth in the streetes were not spared. And the twentieth of Iuly, a poore labourer and his wife were taken and executed, for eating the head, the entrailes, and the braines of their daughter of three yeares of age, that died by famine and miserie: hauing dressed all the rest of the bodie to eate it at other times: an other olde woman lodged in their house, and that had eaten part of that costly banquet, died in prison not long after her apprehension. There were that were found guiltie of other faults, but that which agrauated the latter fault, was, that the same day when they did the fact, they had bin comforted with certaine pottage made of hearbs and wine, which might well haue satisfied them in that time of necessitie. Such as went and were put foorth of the Towne to seeke reliefe, seeking to passe, were either slaine by the enemie, or constrained by blowes with staues to turne backe againe. And staying without, as not being able, or else wold not enter into the towne, they liued of the sprigs of vines, blackberries in hedges, of red snailes, and of hearbs. And most of them died betweene the trenches and the ditches. Among other pittifull spectacles, the bodie of a laborour and his wife, were found dead one hard by the other, among the vines, and two of their children weeping by them, the lesser being but sixe weekes olde, which a reuerent and charitable widow in the Towne tooke home to her house. If many died among the vines hard by the trenches and in the ditches, there died many more in the houses and streetes, where they fell downe in euerie place, and some daies they buried fiue and twentie or thirtie that died for hunger: almost all the young childre^ vnder the age of twelue yeares died: great pittie it was to heare the poore fathers and mothers lament and mourne: the greatest part of them neuerthelesse strengthening themselues with the assurance of the grace of God, of the which I will recite two notable accidents. A young boy of the age of fiue yeares, hauing languished certaine weekes, running along the streets, in the end nature failing, fell down before his father and mother, who at that instant perceiued the sinues of their infant to shrinke in, as if they had been cut, and presently the body died. An other young boy of tenne yeares of age, lying at the poynt of death, hearing and seeing his father and mother weeping and lamenting about him, whom hee felt vppon the armes and legges, that were as drie as wood, said vnto them. Why do you weepe in this sort to see me die for hunger? I aske you no breade mother, for I know you haue it not: but seeing it is the will of God, that I should die in this sort, I must take it thankfully. The holy man Lazarus had hee not hunger? haue I not red that in the Bible? and saying so hee yeelded his spirit vnto God. Vpon the thirtieth day of Iuly, the meanes that stayed the death of all this people, in the end of Iuly was certaine horses of seruice reserued for the extremitie, and six kine kept, to giue milke for certaine young children, which beastes were killed, and the flesh sold to comfort those that liued, with a little corne, which some by stealth brought into the Towne, cut and gathered by night, wheres pound of corne was sold for halfe a crowne, but this meanes continued not long by reason of the watch, which the enemie kept straight. The warre killed but eightie foure persons within Sancerre, but famine killed both within and without the Town, aboue fiue hundreth, besides those that languished: who hauing escaped, had much paine and labour to recouer themselues. During these miseries, diuers souldiers and fugitiues in Sancerre, got out by seuerall meanes, shunning the famine, desiring rather to die by sword: some of them being slaine, the rest kept prisoners, and some executed. So all hope in mans iudgement failing to those of Sancerre, the king hauing sworne that hee would make them to deuour each other, the prouidence of the king of all kings holpe them by a straunge meanes. Through the endeuours of the Bishop of Valence,By what meanes they were deliuered.Henry Duke of Aniou brother to the king, and his Lieftenant generall in France, had been accepted for king of
Poland, by the states of the realm, as hereafter we will more at large declare in the siege of Rochel. It fel out well for those of
Sancerre, that the Ambassadours of Poland came into
France during their extremitie of famine, to fetch the Duke of
Anion: for they vnderstanding that Sancerre was yet besieged, solicited the Bishop of Valence and Lansac his associate, to keepe the promise they had made and sworne vnto them, in the name of the king their maister, to set at libertie all the towns and people of France, that were molested for the religion, which not being wholly to be denied, the poore Sancerreans half dead for hunger (as yet al resolute to end their daies in that sort, one after the other, before they would yeelde vnto the enemie, that had so oftentimes threatned them with a generall massacre) were deliuered by means of those good me^ y^ came out of so far a countrie, and as it were fro^ the end of the world, their neighbours and those of the countries next adioyning, not hauing the meanes, neither once seeking to aide them. So that in the end,Composition with Sancerre. after certaine conferences meeting and iournying too and fro, hostages beeing giuen on each side, it was agreed that they should issue with their armes and goods, and such as would stay, not to bee called in question for any thing past: permitting the^ to dispose of their goods as they thought good, with promise to preserue the honour of women and maides: vppon condition, that the Inhabitants and other fugitiues, should pay the summe of fortie thousand frankes, to Monsieur de Chastre, who by that agreement entered vppon the last of August. The Ministers, diuers Inhabitants, Captaines, souldiers, and refuged persons retired with pasports, with safe conduct, some to one place, some to an other. Not long after, Sancerre was wholly vnwalled, some houses throwne downe, the clocke, the belles, and other furnitures of the Towne taken away, the Bailiffe Ioannean massacred by night, within one hundreth paces of Monsieur de Chastres lodging. The twefth day of Septemb.
la Chastre being retired to Bourges, the Bailiffe of
Berry was left gouernor of that desolate place: with two co^panies of foote, and some other troupes, there were made diuers straunge sackings and pillages, in such sort, that it is wonder that
Sancerre should stand vpright, and bee inhabited as at this day it is, and besides the restoration of the walles, buildings, and repeopling, it hath the free exercise of the religion in this year 1595. when we finished this collection or recueil. Now consequently according to our purpose, let vs consider of the siege of Rochel, togither with the end thereof, in the yeare 1573. At the beginning,A discourse of the siege of Rochel, euen from the beginning vntill the peace graunted to the besieged. the Lord of Biron tried againe to finde some meanes of agreement, but could not compasse any: for the Rochelers could not perceiue anything but danger in all their negotiations, as deeming their best safetie at ye time to rest in mistrust. In the mean time, it chanced that two soldiers verie forward to the field, not regarding that the Councell vpon good considerations, would not at all times suffer such to go foorth as would, gat downe by a long lather into the ditch, in a place since that time very famous, and named the
Bastion of the Gospell. These hauing passed the Counterscarp, found playynough, for one of them was slaine, the other escaped, but gaue so hotte an alarume at the gate, that they could not possibly retaine the souldiers or their Captaines.
La Noue vnderstanding that many were in danger, did suddainly gather his forces both on foote and horesbacke, and made haste to the succour: the skirmish begunne in sundrie places, continued aboue fiue houres. Of the towne, three or foure were slaine, and twentie wounded: but of the campe, they lost one hundreth, and fiftie wounded, besides two Captaines carried prisoners into the town. Among others, to the skirmish came a certain yong Gentleman, Nephew to Puigaillard Gouernor of
Angiers, who with horrible blasphemie, boasted that he was one of the Ad. murtherers, and shewing anaked curtelasse, which said he, he broght fro^ so famous a co^flict, he threatened to make a butcherie of ye Rochelers flesh: now being in place of triall, his heart failing him, and seeking for his feete hee was taken prisoner. Herevpon all the sence of his tongue failing, hee could neuerthelesse vse any wit, but seeking to escape lost his life: for finding some that could outrunne him, hee was ouertaken, slaine, and stripped, and so left naked in the fields, where in the night the dogges had torne his face: how be it in the morning at the intreatie of the L. of Floyacs widow, a Gentlewoman well bent to the religion, his wretched carkasse was brought and buried in the Towne, which in his life time hee had so threatned. After this skirmish, Biron beganne to renue the negotiation committed to the Abbot of Gadaigne, who was deputed to bring the Rochelers to some composition: but it tooke no effect, because that daily they detected some newe conspiracie. And in deede at the same time, a Gentleman in Rochel reuealed to the Maior and chiefe of the Councell, such intelligence as Biron and others had continued with him for the surprize of the towne.
Hee wished to allure into Rochel the stoutest Captains of the campe, with some good number of souldiers, where they might bee easilie put to the swoord, whereby the assaylants might bee so much weakened. Besides that, hee was at the poynt to haue receiued some good some of money. Heerevppon the seuenteenth and eighteenth day of Ianuarie, there came in diuers of the companies of Puigaillard and of
Martin, surnamed the Lutherian: but the Maior conferring with foure or fiue of the principall, in their resolution found it better to performe some small assured execution, then to aduenture vpon any dangerous enterprise, and therefore without further delay, thought it good to ridde those that were alreadie entered, and not to stay vntill either they had gathered more strength, or corrupted others. Of these traitors alreadie inrolled into one of the companies, fiue were slain the same night, and their bodies cast ouer the wals beneath the new gate, and three were committed to prison, who after they had disclosed the particularities, passed the Hangmans hands.
Thencefoorth the Rochelers spent some daies in burning such farmes, houses, and milles without their towne, as to their annoyance might haue stood the assaylants in great stead.
A pleasant aduenture The Towne had bestowed vpon Captaine Normand a certaine mill standing very neare, whereof hee tooke some small rent, for the preseruing all that might bee woorth the taking in the said Mill. There did Normand in the night leaue one souldier. Thither came the assaylants with the choise of their footemen, the three and twentieth daie of Ianuarie, and brought two coluerings to force the same, which by moone-light they planted verie neare, and discharged sixteene shot. The souldier likewise discharhed some small shot, whervpon his Captain hearing the alarme came to the rampier on that side, and called to his souldier, as if there had bin some number in the Mill: Courage good fellowes, courage, yeeld not, yee shall haue helpe by and by.
But at the last this souldier craued parley, and compounded for all that were in the Mill: howbeit when the enemies perceiued that hee was alone, and spiting at his resolutenesse, they kept him prisoner, and afterward seeing him vnable to pay the ransome that they desired, they co^cluded to send him to the Gallies: but being powled and in his slauish attire, hee found meanes to escape, and so returned safe into the Towne.

La Noue they chose for their Captain in armes, without preiudice to the Maiors liberties and authoritie in all other matters.La Noue made Generall of the warres in Rochel. They also sent new Deputies into England for succour, which the king hindered in all that he could. And among all other deuises, hee caused the Queene of England, with the Empresse, and the Duke of
Sauoy, to christen his daughter, who being borne the seuen and twentieth day of October, was baptized the second of Februarie, and died young.
The Earle of VVorcester addicted to the Romish religion, comming into France about this ceremonie, had like to haue been robbed by certaine rouers, who slaying some of his men, rifeled one of his shippes, but there vppon such French and Wallons as could be caught in any English Hauen, sped but euill fauoredly. The daily skirmishes continued between the Rochelers and their enemies, wherein as wel the sufficiencie of the leaders,Continuall skirmishes. as the courage of the Souldiers did euidently appeare, yet not to the hurt of the Romish Catholicques, against whom their enemies made many prosperous sallies, beeing alwaies prouided of a neare and sure retrait. In the beginning of Februarie, the Duke of Aniou, Generall of the armie royall, beeing come to Saint Maixant, sent his letters to la Noue, to summon him to deliuer vppe Rochel, with promise of life and goods: withall importing, that if within three daies after his appoynted arriuall in his campe, this were not performed, he was resolued with his whole forces as well in camped, as to come after him, not to linger any minute, but to besiege the Towne, to force it, and so to punish those that should be taken, that their execution might bee an example to all others. Now did the Rochelers beginne better to consider of the defensiue, and to labour about their fortifications: but because the campe vsually hindered their men from cutting and bringing in of faggots and other conuenient stuffe, La Noue informed of their ro^des, vpon the sixt of Februarie layd an ambush both of horse and foote so fitly, that suffering their skirmishers to come well forward, hee inclosed them between his troupes and the towne, and then cut in peeces all that were so insnared. Besides, not so content, hee set vppon the lodging of Captaine Portes companie, where he slew sixtie souldiers, and without losse of any more then one, that day he returned with fortie prisoners, who the next day were sent backe without ransome, in regard that al the mony that wold be made of the^, would neuer counteruaile their expe^ces for a few daies: yet such as were found to be murtherers, were woorse entreated. In the towne there were at that time a good number of Gentlemen and horsemen: eight companies of the Inhabitants, nine of strangers, besides the Maiors companie, and one of Voluntaries, formed by la Noue, and consisting of twentie Muskettiers, fiftie fiue Pike-men, each in his corcelot at proofe, and 30. harguebuziers: of this companie two parts were Gentlemen, and such as had born office in the wars. The D. of Aniou arriued within 7. leagues of Rochel, wrote vnto the Nobilitie and Inhabitants two letters, dated the 10. of Feb. wherin he exhorted the^ to yeeld,A notable skirmish. The Duke of Aniou his letters with their answers and threatned the^ in case they refused. Herevnto did ye Rochelers answer in al humilitie, declaring the necessitie of their defensiue, and intreating the D. to prouide for the tranquilitie of ye realm, and to take such order, that they might serue God in ye exercise of their religio^. As for ye gentleme^, their answer imported, that albeit they were affected to the kings seruice, yet that through the malice of flatteres and as could brooke no peace, they were brought into his disgrace: withall, they shewed a reason for their taking of armes, which was not voluntarie, but necessitie that inforced them thereto, as finding no better meanes to preserue both spirituall and temporall, but to retire into the Forts and places of defence, their liues, vntil it might please the king to take some order by a lawful assembly of the Estates and generall Councels.
They also besought the Duke of Aniou to consider of their iust complaints, and not to impute vnto them that which proceeded of other mens faults, and so offered to the king and him all obedience and seruice. The next day the Duke arriued in the campe, accompanied with his brother the Duke of Alencon, the king of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde and Dauphine, the Dukes of Longueuille, Bouillon, Neuers, Aumale, and Guise, the young Countie of
Rochefaucaut, the great Prior, and other great Lords, who tooke their lodgings at Nieul, a long league from Rochel, where they remained vntill the peace. This one thing stood the Rochelers in good stead, that in the enemies Councell they had many heads, that shewed as many and diuers imagations and purposes.
Monlucs iudgement of the siege of Rochel.Heereto will I adde the same that Monluc toward the end of his remembrances, hath written to this purpose, and of this whole enterprise, in these words: See, all the world is come to Rochel, my selfe among the rest am bidden to the banquet: but when I resolued to go, I made account to die, and there to take my graue. Beeing come, I wondred to finde there so many people of so diuers humours, that would haue been loth it should haue been taken.
The siege was great, long, and gallant, well assaulted, and better defended. I will not stand to write all that was there done: for I was but one, neither will I speake hardly of any. Monsieur, who after was king, and was General in that siege, so far honouring me, as to vse some conference, wherby to gather my aduise, knoweth well ynough I told him frankly what I thought. This siege may teach all that were then present, or that shal come heereafter, that in those daies, Towns of such importance must betaken by famine and inclosing: by little and little. One great ouersight was there committed, and that was the aduenturing of so many men in the assaults: and a greater in keeping so bad watch to keepe the towne from succour of powder, which came in by sea.
For to say my minde as others, whatsoeuer shift the Rochelers could haue made, wee had had them, they cannot denie it: I say with the halters about their neckes: for the succours that the Countie
Montgommery brought, was retired, and wee readie to buckle with them: for all things failed them: but at the same time my brother the B. of
Valence was in Poland, to procure the election of
Monsieur for their King, which hee archieued, and the glorie thereof I thinke due to him alone: but that caused all men to thinke vpon capitulation, which at the last was compassed. The Polonians Deputies came thither to salute him for their king. All the troupes retired, and leauing many dead, and the Rochelers Lords of their Towne, prepared to come to the feast of this new Crowne.
By Monsieurs speeches, at his departure it seemed he had no great liking of this kingdome, yet do I thinke it was a great honour to him and vs, that so remote a kingdome should seeke a king from vs. This is Monlucs iudgement. Now let vs co^sider some particularities of this siege,Continuatio^ of the siege of Rochel. so far as the purpose of these collections may bear. The town besieged both by sea and land about the middest of Februarie, continued her skirmishes vntill all was readie for the batterie:
^he assailants from the Carraque discharged many cannon shot into the Towne and straight, in case any vessell offered to passe in the night or mistes: but of many hundreths, none took, either to kil or hurt, except some two or three persons. The 23. day of February, after many consultations and messages, the Lords of Byron, Strossy, Villequier, and the Abbot of Gadaigne, held a parley at Coignes gate, with la Noue the Lieftenant generall, Mortiers and Morisson Deputies for Rochel.
The Abbot discoursed of the kings intent and clemencie: alleaging that heereafter there would bee no hope to mooue him by any intreatie or praier: that hee had done more then beseemed his greatnesse: that all other his subiects of the religion would thinke themselues happie, if they might obtaine but halfe of that hee offered to the Rochelers: and so exhorted the Deputies well to consider of it, and not to let slip such an occasion. La Noue and the other three, giuing their aduise as particular persons, answered: that as concerning their commission, it extended onely to receiue such articles as the king should send: to take notice of Gadaignes authoritie, and to referre the whole to the Councell of the Town, which was composed of one hundreth men, Sheriffes, and Peeres, whereof the Maior was chiefe. The same time the Duke of
Aniou caused Captaine Cadet, a Turke by nation, to be executed at at Nieul, for the manifold robberies and spoyles whereof hee was conuict, albeit many great Lords and Captaines laboured mightily for his life, whom the D. denied, and therefore of all good men was well thought of, and feared of the wicked.
The articles which Gadaigne deliuered, in number seuen and twentie, conuined a protestation of the kings sinceritie, both in the olde and new profession against the Admirall, whose remembrance written with his owne hand (neuer before spoken of) were then alleaged. Next, he summonned the Rochelers to open their gates to Biron, or any other that should haue commission to enter their Towne as they ought: (that is to say, with such troupes as hee should thinke sufficient) to maintain the authoritie royall, and to take order that it might come no more in the hands of seditious persons. In so doing, they should enioy the exercise of their religion, in like libertie as was graunted by the Edict of pacification, without alteration or diminution: and to that end should haue whatsoeuer letters they should thinke good. Withall, hee cut them off from all hope of succour out of England. The Rochelers declaring the equitie and necessitie of their defensiue: the iniquitie of the Barron de la Garde and others, do like of the kings declaration concerning his Edict of pacification, and desire that the same may bee maintained not onely to them, but for the ease and quiet of all other protestants throughout the Realme.
Three daies after this parley, the Rochelers vnderstanding of two and thirtie battering peeces within halfe a league of them, withall, that their enemies ment to skirmish after dinner, and to emptie their forces, resolued also to do somewhat, and so sallied about noone. This conflict continued aboue sixe houres, and la Noue had two horses killed vnder him, besides some small shot that light vppon his cuirace, but hurt not his bodie: hee lost one chiefe Captaine, two Captaine Ensignes, and fiue souldiers, and brought home twentie wounded. The dead hee also carried away and buried in the towne. In the campe were slaine and wounded some hundreth and fiftie, among them diuers Captaines. The women that day bare themselues wonderfully, in carrying wyne and comfits to the souldiers, relieuing the wounded, and putting themselues very forward in the fight. Among the rest, one aduentured to strip one of the dead enemies, whose harguebuze and swoord she carried away, and made thereof a trophee. The ba^^ell begunne the last of Februarie, with eight cannons and two coluerins, seemed to haue heate and incouraged the besieged, who most chearfully followed their fortifications. About three of the clocke after noone the batterie ceased, and they made a sallie, wherein Captaine Normand slew a great number of assaylants, with the losse of one souldier, and two that he brought home wounded. In the beginning of march, for three or foure daies togither, they had many parleyes, to the end to get the Towne without fight.
They offered the exercise of religion in the Towne, which was abolished in all other Townes of France: and the Duke of
Aniou conceiuing the succour out of England to be but a vaine imagination, spake more sharpely then euer before. The day before,
Claud of Lorraine, D. de Aumale, and the Duke of
Guises vncle, beeing behind a Gabion, was slaine with a shot from a peece planted vpon the Gospell Bulwarke, which pierced the Gabion and the Duke: who looked for nothing lesse then what befell him. Hee was greatly bewailed in the campe: but the besieged praised God, who weakened their enemies, and in him punished the other murtherers that expected their course.
The fift of March, the whole Councell of the Towne was assembled, wherin after sundrie opinions, it was resolued that they shuld abide al extremities, rather the^ to yeeld to any vnreasonable demand: also that they shuld send no more Deputies, but returne their answere by a drumme. The whole beeing imparted to the people,The resolution of the besieged. assembled to that end, they wholy answered, that a iust warre was to be preferred before a shameful and suspected peace: that yet they had meanes ynough to hold out: and that one day of parley did them more hame, then tenne yeares of warre. Sixe or seuen daies after, the batterie beeing againe begunne and continued,
la Noue finding his presence to be vnprofitable to the Rochelers, vppon diuers occasions withdrew from them, and departed to the Dukes campe with Champagny, la Roche Esnard, la Salle,The retrait of the Lo. de la Noue. and diuers souldiers. As his presence had hitherto stood the Rochelers in great stead, so beeing without, did hee continue with great pollicie, and did them better seruice farre off, then nearer at hand, as the besieged afterward verie well perceiued.
In this months space, the enemie discharged aboue thirteene thousand cannon shotte, besides sundries skirmishes and surprises, wherein the assaylants still had the woorst, who in a few weekes lost aboue twentie Captains. The 16. day of March towards euening, Captain Fond standing at watch at a Casemate without the gate, chose aboue a dozen of his souldiers, and marched straight to the Spittle-house, where hee surprised nine or tenne Gentlemen and Captaines at the table, that were all slaine. Foure daies after, about
tenne of the clocke at night the Townsmen made a sallie: passed euen to the enemies Gabions, ouerthrew all, wonne the first trenches, slew some sixtie men, wounded twise so many: put the rest in disorder, and had done more, had not succour come in of all sides.
The batterie hauing continued the sixe first daies of Aprill, the seuenth day about six of the clocke in the morning, beganne more fierce then before, and with such violence, that along wall from the olde fountaine to the Gospel bulwarcke was layd flat: the bulwarcke dismanteled, and the Cognee tower the assaylants came to the assault, cast a bridge ouer the ditch, which they stretched euen beaten downe.The first assault. Towards fiue of the clocke at night against the bulwarcke, and tooke two Casemates, which they held but a small while: for with one cannon shot into the Casemates, some were slaine, others being speedily charged by resolute souldiers, were in part cut in peeces, and the rest saued themselues by flight.
During this conflict in the Casemates, the enemie came forward couragiously ouer their wooden bridge, with two hundreth targets and corcelets, who were as valiantly withstood by the besieged, notwithstanding the cannon plaied continually, which slew fifteen of their men, and hurt diuers. This notwithstanding the women and Maidens deuoide of al feare, as if they had neither seene nor heard any thing, ranne resolutely vp and down casting out their scalding water, circles, stones, and such like, which slewe diuers assaylants, who were forced to forsake the ditch with the losse of diuers Captaines, Gentlemen and souldiers. Of the Towne there were slaine in this assault about sixtie: among others, Captain Fronsac, the Ensigne of Riuiere Lis, and Captaine Normands Lieftenaunt, and the enemie discharged aboue two thousand fiue hundreth cannon shot.
The second assault.The next day about nine of the clocke in the morning, they came to the second assault, which was valiantly sustained by the Rochelers: and the enemies forced to retire into their trenches. Towardes the euening they set a face if they would haue returned:The third. but seeing the resolution of the defendants, they did no more. The tenth of Aprill by sixe of the clocke in the morning, the enemie returned with great furie to assault the aforenamed bulwarke, as also at the gate of the two mils, there appeared a great number wel stored with lathers: likewise towards
Tadon, the Countie de Lude came with his regiment to the windmil tower, but no further for feare of the small shot that rained shrewdly in those quarters.
As for those that brought the lathers, they had leisure ynough to reare them, and to climbe vp: but so soone as they were vp, the Townsmen ouerthrew them with such force and actiuitie with pikes and hallebardes, and in such number, that breaking armes, legs, and heads in the ditch, their fellows were forced to giue ouer and flie in such sort, that some cast themselues into the fennes, which the women had taken to keepe, who with fire-forkes and spits made an end of the wounded and stripped them. Those of the bulwarcks and Casemates, who neuer lost shoote, with the women, maides, and seruants, with their cauldrons and artificiall fire, so bestirred them, that the assaylants were forced to retire with the losse of three hundreth men and more. poure daies after, about foure of the clocke at night,The fourth* the companies of the assailants standing readie in array to come to the assault, discharged almost all their peeces, and immediately in great resolutio^ came to the breath, wher they foght valiantly on both sides, vntil the night parted the^. The besieged were shrewdly annoyed with the cannon, which ouerthrew the fore-part of the bulwarke, that slew many of their souldiers, and hurt others, to the number of fiftie, yet the assaylants lost more, namely one of their Captaines. But the next day they began againe to beate most fiercely, and about fiue of the clock at night, they blew vp their first myne at the bastion or bulwarke of the Gospell: and withall, gaue a most fierce assault, which they stil renued fiue times on a row,The fift assault fiue times renued where they had as friendly entertainment as in the rest with great losse, besides three hundreth men caught in their mine, which played cleane contrary to their expectation, and fell especially vppon themselues. Two daies after, about eleuen of the clocke at night, the besieged made a sallie, slew a great number of men, and carried into the Towne great store of murrians, cuiraces, partuisans, halbards, and courtelasses: and burned a wodden bridge: in reuenge whereof, the enemie discharged certaine cannon shorte, which with the breaking of the stones hurt fiue or sixe: besides Captaine Musse, who had don great seruice in that siege, was that day so wou^ded with three small shot, that hee died soone after.
The sixt.The fiue and twentieh and seuen and twentieth daies of the same month, they parleyed againe: but all was but delaies, vntill the next day, when very early in the morning the assaylants approached to Saint Nicolas gate, where some of their Captaines did very well: for passing the Counterscarpe, they entered the ditch, but were repulsed with the losse of many souldiers. The next day before sunne rising, their ordinance played vppon the Bulwarke, and toward eleuen of the clocke they redoubled their batterie: besides, their troupes came in on all sides:The seuenth. yea euen out of their Carriques and Gallies they shot lustily, which caused euery man to runne to armes: namely, the women with mens hartes on their heads, marched in haste with pikes, halbards, and Iauelins in their hands, fully resolued rather to die in the place, then to suffer the enemie to enter.
The assault continued fiue houres, wherein the defendants lost some twelue or fifteene men, besides fiue and twentie or thirtie wounded: but the assaylants a great number in the first charge, so as they durst no more come in small troupes: and the most resolute retired, because the companie of Captaine Bobineau a Rocheler, garding the Casemates neare the bulwarke that flangued iust vpon the enemies bridge did mightily annoy them, as beeing within two pikes length each of other.
The nine and twentieth of the moneth, the besieged made a sallie, where in a Casemat that they forced, and in part discouered, they slew a great number.
The same day the Maior sent to the Duke of Aniou, the articles which the Rochelers, with the Gentlemen and souldiers straungers desired to be granted them, whereof they had aunswere six daies after, besides sundrie vnprofitable parleyes. All this was done about the beginning of May, of what time the Polonians elected the Duke of
Aniou to bee their king: for the estates accepted of him the ninth of May, vppon which day the Rochelers, who from the 7. assault had neuer missed either night or day to giue ye enemie some foyle, made asallie through the countermine of the Gospell bulwarke where they surprised those that were next at hand, slew some pioners, and about thirtie souldiers, and carried away foure prisoners, without any losse on their side.
The next day at tenne of the clocke at night, about foure hundreth smal shot, and fiftie horse, sallied foorth at Maubec gate, and neare to Cognee gate surprised a corps degard, and with the losse of one horseman slew fortie or fiftie of the slowest. In the morning they vnderstood that the loosers pretended to haue their reuenge: And indeede the next morning an houre before day, sundrie Targetiers gat vp by their bridge vnto the toppe of the Gospell bulwarke, where they tooke away the Ensigne of Captaine Riuieres Lis, and so returned without more adoo: albeit they might very well, for the most part of the corps degard were a sleepe. The next day thinking to haue gotten the like occasion at the breach of the old fountaine, finding those that waited for them, they returned faster then they came.
The same day toward fiue of the clocke at night, the Sarreant Maior of the Towne made a sallie, and fired part of their wodden bridge, and foure and twentie houres after, returned to burne the corps degard that was hard by the sald bridge. About this time at three seuerall courses, certaine of the enemies horsemen sought to keepe the poore people of the towne after the tide, from gathering of Muscles, Shrimps, and such like: but some of them lost their horses and Petronels, and some were taken and carried away prisoners, as vnable soone ynough to get forth out of the bogges, where their horses sunck vpto the shoulders.
The eight assault.The sixteenth of May, a little before day the enemie gaue the eight assault to the afore named bulwarke, which was very sharpe, yet had the repulse on both sides. The same day and the two next follwing, the Cannon playing vppon the Towne, made no spare of powder or bullet. The twentieth day came in a small vessell loden with powder and corne, sent by the Countie
Montgommery, vnder the conduct of Captaine Arnaud, who passed in spire of the enemies fleet and forces, who discharged many a shot at him, but hurt him not.
A notable sallie.Three daies after, some foure or fiue hundreth men after noone sallied foorth of the towne, and surprised and mightily amazed the enemie that lay toward the
Cognee gate, whom they killed without resistance, to the number of two hundreth both Captains and soldiers, besides a great number of wounded. The whole campe taking the alarm, many came in, so that the Rochelers lost 20. of their men, but carried into their towne eight Ensignes with many cuiraces, Halbards, Targets, Harguebuzes and guilt swords. They did greatly bewaile Maronniere, a braue Gentleman, who died of his wounds within two daies after, as a little before they had done the death of Vergerbeanlieu, a Poeteuine Gentleman, highly esteemed for his valour, whereof be had made proofe, especially in the eight assault, where hee tooke his deadly wound. The fiue and twentieth day of May, the batterie beganne very furious, and lasted till nine: the reason was, that fiue mynes which the enemie had digged, were shut and readie to play.
The next morning by breake of day, the batterie beganne againe as wel againe the bulwarke, as against the defences, and so continued vntill night. The next morning about seuen of the clocke, all the companies of the campe were mustered. The Switzers being new come, to the number of 16. Ensignes in a great battaillon, were by the Rochelers welcommed with cannon short, which fell so iust among them, that they made a great lane, and forced the rest to go further from the Towne.
About eleuen of the clocke, the regiments of the campe beeing readie to the assault, discharging their artillerie blew vp their mynes, wherein rested their whole hope,The ninth assault. but all this stood them in no stead: for some of their mines did greatly helpe to fortifie the besieged, and to flancke the breach from the olde fountaine to the Gospel-bulwarke: a fatall and vnhappie name for the enemie, who were expected and repulsed by the women, maides, and seruants, who that day did incredible things. The assault was fiue times renued, and lasted vntill sixe of the clocke at night, alwaies more fierce and greater then any of the former. And indeed the enemie lost foure hundreth men that stayed in the ditches, and carried away sixe hundreth wounded. The Rochelers lost thirtie or fortie souldiers and women, and three or foure Captaines: among the rest, one very valiant, named
Blays, who was slaine with a peece of a stone.
The Countie Montgommery did his endeuour to succour the Rochelers by sea, but in vaine, in that he was ouerweake both in shipping and men, to fight with the fleet royall,Murmurings in Rochell. which was verie strong. Towards the beginning of Iune, victualles beganne to grow short with the besieged: wherevppon some considering that the enemies cannon plaied continually, also that some souldiers fledde the Towne, began to doubt and haue some speech of composition, so that some of the most apparant were imprisoned, for that togither with some three hundreth, they had signed a bill that imported the making of peace vpon whatsoeuer conditions: for their parts, they were weary of the warres, and the great want of corne would shortly breede a famine. Others had in open street consulted vppon taking of the gates, whereby to go foorth at their pleasures. Of these murmures ensued new parleyes, which the Duke of Aniou solicited, that so hee might depart thence: for the newes was come that he was chosen king of
Poland, and that the Ambassadors were comming to him.
In the meane time, vpon Fryday the twelfth of Iune, the enemie gaue a suddaine escalado at the little breach neare to the old fountaine, some hundreth, or sixscore Gentlemen gat vppe, and some vnto the Caualier, where they stayed long ynough to take a view of the inward trenches and counterscarpe, that was fortified within the retrenchment, and so beganne to retire neither escaped they al the greeting of the smal shot, which diminished their number, and slew some fifteene or twentie in the place. The next day they returned to their parleyes, and because the Rochelers had counsell to send their Deputies to the Duke of
Aniou, at whose hands (as they were told) they might obtaine more then they demaunded, they stayed for a pasport, which they found so badly penned, that they might well perceiue that it stood them vppon to beware, and therefore they caused their Deputies to retire, which so netled the D. that he resolued before the co^ming of the Polonian Ambassadors to trie all meanes: and to the same end, came in person to take a view of the mine by the old fountaine,The Duke of Anious aduentures. where one of the Towne souldiers discerning him, shot off a harguebuze charged with a bullet and some haile shot: but his great Esquier named Deuin, perceiuing the match, stepped before him and was slaine: the Duke reserued to an other end, was slightly touched with some of the haile shot, but not hurt. After this, notwithstanding their shooting and sallying on both sides, yet was it nothing in regard of that which was past. But vpon the 17. of Iune, the Polish Ambassadors being arriued in France, truce was made, and lastly the articles of peace agreed vpon and sent vnto the king, which hee approoued, and framed them in manner of an Edict, graunting to those of the religion, Rochel, Montauban, Nismes, and other Townes, wherein the free exercise of religion was permitted: and to others, permission to liue without trouble in their houses,An Edict of pacification, for Rochell and all those of the religion. therein to solemnize baptisme and marriage after their manner, without greater assembly besides the Parents, then the number of tenne: except in the Court at
Parris, and within tenne leagues round about it, hee restored those of Rochel to their rights and auncient priuiledges, disanulling all Edicts made against them, approouing their defensiue war, and consenting that the keeping of their towns, towres, and fortresses, should remaine vnto themselues, according to their auncient priuiledges, receiuing such gouernours as were not by them to bee suspected.
And by vertue of this Edict, vpon the tenth of Iuly, about tenne of the clocke in the morning, Monsieur de Biron entered into the Towne at Coigne gate, with a Herauld at armes, and four of the kings trumpets: at which time hee caused the peace to bee published in the principall places, accompanied by the Lieftenant of the Towne, and of
Monsieur de Villiers, and then dined at the Maiors house: which done, presently after hee returned conducted out of the Towne.
End of the siege of Rochell.The same day, diuers barkes and other vessels laden with bisquet, corne, meale, fish, and other ammunitions, entered into the Towne, as they did before the siege: which we haue briefly discribed in the principal circumsta^ces thereof. The enemie had both by sea and land, between fortie and fiftie thousand men, whereof more then the halfe of them died before
Rochel, as well in skirmishes, encounters, surprises, and assaults, as of wounds, miseries, and diseases: sixtie peeces of artillerie, great, middle, and small, shot into the Towne, and against the defences, rampiers, and wals thereof, at the least two and thirtie thousand times. The bulwarke of the Gospel, because of the surname, was least spared. The enemie lost therewith the Duke d'Aumale, Cosseins, Maister of the field, that entered by force into the Admirals lodging in Parris, and began the massacre.
Ligardes his brother, Goas and Poilac, Maisters of the campe, diuers great Lords and Gentlemen, aboue 60. Captaines and co^manders, as many Lieftena^ts and Ensigne-bearers: most part of the massacres of Parris and other places, being come thither to receiue their reward, either present death, or wou^ds which speedily cut off their daies. The co^ming of ye Polish Ambassadors, was the means ye defended Rochel, which began to want both victuals and ammunitio^ of war, and that had lost many hundreths of soldiers in ye skirmishes and breaches. Another means serued: which was the diuision in the Duke of
Anious campe, and the friends which the Rochelers found therin, from whom they receiued many good aduertisements, which greatly relieued them during the siege: the end wherof, made the king to call to minde many great faults by him committed, which hee had beene aduised and counselled vnto, and to inuent the meanes to preuent them: 

but too late, for beeing imbarked and in the middle of the sea, then when he discouered a desire to see the port of his arriuall, not long after hee found himselfe to bee fallen into the deepe gulfes of death, and with most great grief vnto his heart, was constrained to behold the fire in his Realme, which some perswaded him to be quenched, and to haue recouered an euerlasting peace vppon Saint
Bartholomewes day. But in his mischiefe hee sound this comfort, that many others that thoght themselues very nimble, in their turnes, found themselues no lesse deceiued, then they wickedly abused the youth and boyling passions of this poore Prince. I must not forget to set downe the prouision of victuals that God sent vnto the besieged in
Rochel, which was an infinite number of small fishes, neuer before that time seene within that Hauen, and that euerie day came in, and as it were yeelding themselues to the mercie of the poore people of the Towne. And presently after the publishing of the Edict and libertie graunted to
Rochel, at the comming of the Polonians retired againe.
Now let vs see how sundrie others of the religion in other parts of the Realme,The estate of the churches in Quercy, Langucdoc, and other places. bare themselues this yeare 1573. The Barron of Serignac with other Lords and Gentlemen both of Quercy, Foix, and other Prouinces adioyning, beeing aduertised of the intent of the Romish Catholickes, repaired to Montauban, where they held a common Councell, and after sundrie conferences resolued, as well the Inhabitants as strangers refugied, to take armes: which they did in warre like manner, and thereof aduertised those towns where the religious were any thing strong. The Inhabita^ts of Chastres in
Albigeois, slacking and refusing the succours of Vicountie
Paulin and the Barron of Panas, were surprised, and some slaine, and the Towne brought into the subiection of the Romish Catholicques. They of Montauban sent foorth their troupes into the field, vnder the leading of the Lord of Serignac, a man zealous in religion, discreet and vertuous, and a wel-willer to millitarie discipline. They placed a Garrison in Terride, whereof
Serignac chalenged the Barronage, and by escalade tooke
Buzet vpon Tar, within three leagues of Toulouse. They also strengthened Villemur, surprised diuers other places, fortified such as they held in the former troubles, placed garrisons at the passages, and appoynted a day of meeting at
Realmont in Albigeois, to consider of their common affaires. There made they a diuision of their gouernme^ts. Vicountie
Gourdon had one part of Quercy toward Cadenac: Terride or Serignac had the other part towards Montauban and Gascon. To Vicountie Paulin fell Lauragais, and in Rouergue they established the Vicountie of Panas, with his brother the Barron. The Counte of Foix, with the hilly countrie, was alotted to the Vicountie of Canmont.
There they decreed, that if one stood in necessitie, the other Generalles should repaire to him with all their forces and be vnder his obedience, so to auoyde all iealouzie that might otherwise take hold of such as were of like authoritie,Sundry warlike exploits. euery man returned into his gouernment. Serignac by compositon tooke Villedieu, Chasteau Vasin, and the Towre of
Orgueil, places neare to Montauban, encamped with two thousand small shot, and some horse, before Mo^ricou, maketh a breach, giueth the assaults and one escalade, but taketh the repulse, as also from before Real-ville and Vioule, at which places many of his men were hurt and slaine.

In his return from an other assembly holden at
Realmont, for aduise vpon the Rochelers affaires, who craued succour, but could haue none in regard of such difficulties as befell them.
Serignac passing by Puylaurence, vnderstood that Captaine
Angely with eightie souldiers, was besieged in a village three leagues of, and therefore with all speed marched thither with one hundreth and sixtie men: and thus hee on the one side, and the besieged on the other, so charged the enemie, that they slew two hundreth of their men, and scattered the rest. About this time the Inhabitants of Bearne sent to Nismes and Montauban, a coppie of the letters sent to them from the Court in the name of their Prince, to recall them to the Romish Church: togither with their excuses and aunsweres to the same, protesting to perseuere and abide in the religion. In Aprill, the Countie of Villards newly made Admirall of France,Admirall Villards warreth vpon the Protestants with small success^ and Generall of an armie against the protestants in Quercy and the countries round about, gathered his troupes dispearsed in Garrisons, besieged and tooke Saint Gemmes in high Quercy. The Lord of the Towne, notwithstanding his composition for life and goods, was carried prisoner to Cahors, and there executed at the instance of many his enemies whom hee had hardly intreated. His men saued themselues in a rocke, where they could not possibly bee indammaged, and after ioyned with succours that came from Montauban.
A fewe weekes after, the Admirall besieged Brifenel, a small Towne in high Rouergue, wher Montilliere gallantly withstood him, and slew some hundreth of his men, but at the last departed with life and goods. Albeit in exchange the Adm. in May lost
Soreze, surprised by escalade, and Montesquiou within two leagues of Thoulouse. Also toward the end of Iuly, the Barro^ of Fougeres took L^desue a Bishops sea, and a rich Towne scituate in the mountaines of Languedoc, at the same time that Captain
Graue seized vpon Mas Sainctes Puelles, within one league of Castelnau Darry. The Duke of Aniou had before solicited those of Montauban, to send him their Deputies with articles for peace, intreating them in the meane time, to desist from all hostilitie. This was one meanes to disvnite the Prouinces, and so to get them one after an other. At the first this seemed to grow to some course: but it was easily remedied, and the siege of Rochel togither with the election of Poland, made voyde many of their deuises. Marshall d'Anuille Gouernour of Languedoc, tooke armes also against the protestants, assembled six Cornets of horse,Marshall d'Anuille besiegeth Sommieres, wher he looseth his Armie. fiue thousand harguebuziers, besides the companies of Lyonnois and Volunatries: his footemen amounting to ten thousand, that led foureteen battering peeces, wherewith hee pretended to besiege Nismes. But Sommiere a small Towne neare to
Bezieres and Montpeslier, wonne from the Barron of
Ioyeuse by Captaine Gremian, brake this purpose, and an other enterprise of the Marshals against Vzes: so that seeing himselfe frustrate before hee came to Nismes, hee besieged Sommieres: both the Towne and Castle, made a reasonable breach and gaue an assault, repulsed by the besieged, who slew aboue one hundreth of his men, and wounded many more. But in his second assault hee had yet woorse successe. Herevpon came to him his brother in law the Countie of Candale, with his company of one hundreth horse, and twelue companies of Gascons, who gaue the third assault, wherein three hundreth of the hottest left their liues.
The besieged stood in want of many things, but their neighbours sent one hundreth and twentie souldiers, who with much ado got in, and brought all that they could to succour and strengthen them. One of the hundreth and twentie beeing lag, was taken and brought before the Marshall, to informe him of all that he knew. Albeit they racked and tormented him, that he grew as bigge as a tunne and so died vppon the torture, yet could not his tormentors wrest out of this souldiers mouth, any word preiudiciall either to the besieged or to the protestants. The besieged hauing holden out foure months, suffered fiue thousand cannon shot, that had beaten downe all their defenses, and layde their wals in the dust, craued composition: but the Marshall would haue them by force, and to that end gaue foorth a general assault, committing the leading to Candale, whom hee exhorted to reuenge the death of his Captaines and souldiers.
This young Lord, who before had seemed desirous that matters should haue been otherwise ordered, marched resolutely to the breach, where hee performed the dutie both of a valiant Captaine and couragious souldier: but after a little fight, wherein hee saw a number of his souldiers ouerthrowne, himselfe was slaine in the place.
The besieged hauing performed all that was to be desired in valiant men, in Aprill did accept of composition for life and goods, and so the Marshall sending hostages to Nismes for their safetie, they came foorth with the drum sounding, the Ensignes displayed, their matches lighted and in the cock, hauing seuen daies respite to carrie away their goods, and to retire where they list. The Marshall vnderstanding that Mismes in great resolution expected his comming, and withall, considering that hee had lost two thousand fiue hundreth of his best men, cashiered the rest of his troupes, who scattred euery way. The Admirall warring in Gascon, had other successe: for he took
Terride, Flaugnac, and all that the protestants had gotten in
Gascon beyond Garonne. Then did hee besiege
Caussade, a small towne kept with sixe hundreth small shot,Caussade subuertech al Admirall Villars purposes. vnder the co^duct of Puiols, who forced the Admirall after great losses to forsake the place: after which repulse, he did nothing woorthie memorie. The Vicountie Gourdon vnderstanding that part of the Adm. troups after this siege, marched towards
Rochel, watched them at the passage ouer Dordogue, cut in peeces one company, and made the rest to runne. On the other side, the Barron of Grandmont, whom the king of Nauarre had sent into
Bearne to replant the Masse, was taken, and most of his men defeated by the countrie people.The estate of Viuaretz and Dauphine. In the meane time, the estates of Languedoc met at
Anduge, where they formed an order and rule for the warre and administration of iustice. In May the protestants chusing the Lord of Saint Romain for their Generall, surprised Villeneufue in
Viuaretz. Marshall d'Anuille vnder colour of iustice, seizeth and selleth all the protestants goods that he may. In
Dauphine the protestants took Orpierre, Serres, and other places in the Bishoppricke of Die: also Meuse and other villages in the mountaines, vnder the leading of Mombrun, who with his courses and exploi^s driue his enemies to feare him. The K. hoping by the peace granted to
Rochel, Montauban, and Nismes, to take some rest, hauing reuoked the edict of 1570. and sent his brother into
Poland, found al new to begin: for those of Quercy, Lanquedoc, and their neighbours, did immediately protest against this edict,Complaints against the pacification granted before Rochel. which they termed captious, and a preamble into new massacres: considering that their capitall enemies and authors of all disorders, remained sole Councellours and Gouernors of the K. and his estate: that all the French Churches were debarred the publike exercise of religion, to them so solemnely graunted by the Edict of 1570. that al the contents of this pacification of Rochel, and whatsoeuer was otherwise promised, was but a collection of words without effect: that there was no speech of iustice against the massacres, but an abolition of all that was past, which was the absoluing of ye threatned: that all Ecclesiastical discipline was taken fro^ the protestants, whom thereby they ment to plunge in all Atheisme: that this treatie was formed with some particulars without their commission, whose aduice could not preiudice the generall cause of al the Churches, to whom they had promised not to do or graunt any thing without the common consent of all. After these protestatio^s, with the consent of the new king of
Poland, (whom his brother and the Ambassadours hastened into that farre countrie) they assembled at Millaud in
Rouergue, after at Montauban, where they diuided
Languedoc into two gouernments, the one at Montauban, the other at Nismes, to serue for the bordering countries of
Seuenes and Viuarais. For the gouernment of the quarters of
Montauban, they chose Vicount Paulin, and Saint
Romain at Nismes, who had the charge of all mattters of warre, yet were accountable to the estates of the countrie that furnished the^ with counsell and quoyne. These estates in euery gouernment were co^posed of the chiefest of the prouinces, yet so as in matters of importa^ce ther were particulare states in euery Dioces, that ment to confer by one or more of ye Deputies, with ye estates of ye gouernment, by whose aduise ye gouernor was to take his directio^s, and at their ha^ds to receiue his pay. For the countenance of this order, they decreed ye the souldiers contenting the^selues with their pay, shuld not forrage nor waste ye plain countries: and to that end they taxed the aduersaries Townes and villages, forcing the^ to contribute toward the maintenance of the garrisons. Such as voluntarily payed, were eased as in time of peace, and in many places the Pesants followed their labours without daunger: which caused many townes and boroughs, otherwise enemies to the protestants, to paye the contributions for feare of woorse. Besides this order, to furnish the maine charge, and at all times to haue a stocke readie for all accurrences,The want of discretion in the kings Councell. they seized vpon the Church reuenues, establishing their commissaries to that effect, and all this had they leisure ynogh to do, whilest the kings and their Courtiers were busie in their bankets, dances, and other vaine pastimes for the K. of Polonds farewel. Thus in Languedoc in a short time they furnished many places, from whence they might bring to the field vnder the conduct of their Gouernors, very neare 20000. persons, still weakning their aduersaries with the collection of the reuenues of the benefices and contributions that they gathered in euery quarter. Likewise following their example, sundrie of the Romish Church, otherwise discontented, grew to be more affable to the protestants, and to take their parts, so to procure some quiet in the state of France. The protestants in the gouernment of
Nismes, twise assembled togither, resolued to craue at the kings hands a more sure peace, and vpon better conditions then the edict of
Rochel, which they found very faultie, and not to be admitted in many the articles. They sent therefore their Deputies to giue him thanks for the good affection that he protested to the restoring of peace, adding, that the same is the most necessarie remedie for the reforming of the estate alreadie decayed and lost, without speedie prouisio^.The magnanimitie of those of Languedoc. That in hartie good wil they are most affectionate to yeeld him al obedience: but that the massacres do euidently declare the daunger, where the Prince is gouerned by the pernitious aduice of his wic^ed Councellours.
They besought the king not to mislike that they hauing an interest in this action, had assembled themselues to the end with deliberation to consider of the surest meanes to establish a sound and good peace. That through the pollicies of wicked Councellours, the king was induced both by word and publicke letters pa^rents, to declare himselfe to be the author of the massacre at Parris, which some fewe daies before hee had disaduowed, wherin his reputation was greatly impaired with forraine nations. That they could not thinke his will to concurre with such bloodie effects as lately appeared, yet they feared least his wicked Councellours were still like affected, and therefore they could do no lesse but take order for the safetie of Languedoc and themselues, and by the example of their fellowes, so hardly intreated, looke to themselues.
They did therefore for the establishment of peace, desire that the protestants might in their townes haue their Garrisons maintained at the Kings charge:Their petitions. that besides those Towns, the king in euerie Prouince of his Realm, should deliuer two such as by soure Deputies should be chosen, which also should bee kept by the Protestants at the kings cost. That the free and publicke exercise of religion should be permitted in all parts of the Realme, and to all that would require it.
That for the admistration of iustice to the Protestants, there might be in euery Prouince erected a new Court of Parliament, composed of protestant iudges. That the protestants for the maintenance of their Ministers might be discharged of such tenths as the Priests did demand. That the authors, Councellours, and executioners of the massacres, might bee punished as theeues and disturbers of the common quiet.
Those of the gouernment of Montauban, sent likewise their Deputies to demaund besides the premisses, that the Admirall and all the Protestants murthered the foure and twentieth of August, 1572. as also they that yet liued, might be deemed to haue been and to bee, most faithfull subjects to the king and his estate, and innocent and cleare of all spotte of rebellion. That all arrests, edicts, and deedes to the contrarie since published, might be reuoked and declared to bee of no force, as slaunderously graunted, defased, and rased out of the records: the goods, honours, and offices, restored to the heires of the murthered: all defamatorie monuments taken away, and all processions instituted in honor of such cruelties, abolished. They farther also demaunded free exercise of their religion and Ecclesiastical discipline in all poynts: Buriall without limitation of time or Church-yard: exemption from all contribution to the ceremonies of the Romish Church: admission of their children vnto Colledges vnder protestant Regents, and legitimatio^ of Priests marriages to such as should frame themselues to their religion. Many other articles they propounded concerning gouernment, and sent their committies toward the end of August, with whom neare vnto Lyons ioined the Deputies of Prouence, Dauphine, and Nismes, who all by the mouth of one, propounded great declarations vnto the king: who returned them to conferre with certaine his commissioners, promising after he had broght his brother the king of Poland out of the Realme, to take aduise for all that should bee requisite for the satisfying of his subiects. Vppon the Deputies report in the beginning of Nouember, the protestants renued their association throghout the Prouinces aforesaid, where they held many places, as also a very exact course for their conseruation.
The Ambasladours of Polonia beeing entered into
France about the end of Iuly to fetch their king, they bare him companie from Rochel to Parris,What passed since the comming of the Ambassaders of Polonia, vntil their departure. where vpon the foureteenth of September he made a roy all enterie, nothing wanted to make him happie, but the prosperitie of the Rochelers that had slaine part of his seruants.
In the Court there were some that reioyced at the dishonour hee had receiued before it: others took his departure vnpatiently, specially the Queen-mother, and her most secret Councellours, those of
Guise, and the spiritualtie. All of them feared the king, that began to change both countenance and speech, specially hauing fully vnderstood the trueth of the resolution and meanes of those of the religion in Languedoc, and the countries thereabout. The spiritualtie had made a present of three hundreth thousand crownes to the king of Polonia, for the good seruices hee had done for them against those of the religion, and would haue done twise as much more, if hee had ouercome the Rochelers. The Bishop of Valence and
Lansac being in Polonia, to obtaine that which they pretended, graunted diuers articles touching those of the religion in
France, vnto the Nobilitie of that countrie, wherevppon the Ambassadours made instant meanes and requests vnto the king touching the same, which in effect were almost agreeable to the conclusion of those of Languedoc: they spake likewise for diuers particulars: many subtilties were vsed to diuert the Ambassadours from that pursuite, busying them with bankets and shewes of no small charge and expenses. Their new king was not greatly desirous to make that long perigrination, and would gladly haue staed till the next Sommer: and some of his most trustie friends assayed to cause some hard answere to bee giuen vnto the Ambassadors, to the end that either they should returne discontented, or that the time might by that means passe away. But the kings seruants caused him to make faire promises to those Ambassadors that were remitted vnto the Towne of Metz, there to vnderstand what or how much should bee done for them.
Among these serious matters, the King could not content himselfe, but twise or thrise cast out certaine threatning words against those that had abused him, making him beleeue that after the foure and twentieth day of August, hee should bee absolute king. But to the contrarie, hee perceiued his subiects openly to reproch him, with the vnrecouerable wrongs that he had don both to himself and the^. To accuse him, that in stead of being father of his people, he had bin both the butcher and the executioner, or at the least had resumed the title, by the induction of the principal authors of such confusions, but his complaints and threatnings were but of hard disgestion for himselfe, and in those troubles hee found not one faithfull seruant that taught him to bee patient and to content himselfe, in time to find the meanes to execute iustice vpon such as had committed so many iniustices and furious executions, vnder the title and pretence of his name,The kings sicknesse. whereby a strong feuer seized vpon him in
Champagne, in such manner, that it was thought hee would haue died beeing at Vitry, whither hee trauelled to bring his brother on his way to Polonia, that could not dissemble the greefe hee had to depart out of France, to go among such people as would preuent him from making any massacres, and by the long delaies of his affaires, made men to iudge that more then two expected the issue of the kings sicknesse, whose seruants as then spake much against the Queen-mother and that new king, as also of their practises, for the which some absented themselues from the Court and went into Brittaine. But the kings sicknesse hauing taken other effect then was expected, hauing by liuely force of his ardent youth, repulsed and driuen out the disease at his head, necke, and face, the report went, that it was the small Poxe, whereat most of the Courtiers smiled, not daring to speake one word, but shrinking in their shoulders.
And being somewhat amended and recouered of his strength, he ceased not to procure and hasten his brothers departure, that issued out of France about the end of October, leauing all the charge vnto his mother, who openly shewed to beare him greater affection then to her other two sonnes. The King beeing doubted of by her, because of his threatnings and alterations, and the Duke of Alencon loued not the house of Guise.
The estate of France after the departure of the king of Polonia.Presently after the departure of the king of
Polonia, new practises were inuented, whereof I will make a briefe discourse, because those of Languedoc daily strengthed themselues more and more: to appease them, an assembly of the estates generall was appoynted to be holden at Champagne, and truce was made for two monethes with those of Languedoc, with permission to assemble themselues to consider what could bee necessarie to bee propounded and agreed vppon in the estates, for the good and profite of the Common-wealth and Realme of France. Meane time, an enterprise is practised to surprise Rochel, and men were sent through all the Prouinces of the Realme, secretly to discouer what friends and enemies they had, to cal the particular estates to frame the bookes, and to put their enterprise in practise with as litle rumour as possible might bee.
On the other side, the Queene-mother fained to bee verie carefull touching the election of the Lieftenant generall of the Realme. And beeing at Soissons, desired the king not to graunt that charge to the Duke of Alencon his brother, alleaging that that young Prince that would not approoue the massacres, being followed by diuers discontented persons, might mooue some troublesome matters, if he once perceiued the forces of the Realme to bee at his commandement. Therevppon newes came, that the Deputies of diuers Prouinces came from many places to assemble the estates, with notes and commissions to speake boldly, namely against the Authors and Councellours of the massacres. For which cause the estates beeing assigned to bee at Champagne, was reiourned, and yet diuers Deputies beeing come to Parris, asked and obtained audience, wherein after many and diuers earnest complaints and declarations made touching the publicque confusions of the Realme of
France, and particularly in the Prouinces, they besought the king, that in consideration of the mischiefes supported by his subiects for the space of many yeares, by the euill gouernment of his principall Councellours, it would please him to giue some comfort to his subiects, and in the meane time to call an assembly of al the estates of his realm, to foresee and prouide for those disorders, otherwise it was to be feared the people would rise and breed some mutinie. The Queene-mother and her adherents hardly pushed at by such complaints, where with the king seemed to bee mooued, sought by faire speeches to appease the Deputies: and presently after changed countenance, vsing threatnings in such sort, that the Deputies returned without any reliefe, but onely that the king would shortly take some order for them, wherewith they were exhorted to maintaine the prouinces in peace, permitting those of Languedoc, whom they doubted to make new assemblies, thereby to frame large articles, which not long after they did in the assembly holden at Milliand in Rouergne, where they forgot not any any thing requisite for them and their associates.
The mischiefe by the which an entrie was made for the ruine and ouerthrow of those of the religion, was, that diuers Catholickes that termed the^selues polliticques and discontented, thrust themselues among them. And comming in credite, made themselues companions with them: in such manner, that if those of the religion had kept themselues a part, the king had bin constrained to graunt them peace, and by that meanes their affaires had fallen out happily, which they did not by reason of this mixture, whereof inuited by the course of yeares wee will now speake somewhat. Certaine polliticque Courtiers to bring the matter to a better poynt, esteemed it necessarie to haue a Lieftenant generall, nominating the D. of Alencon as most fit for that place: they set before him the little estimation made of him: his small meanes: the inquisitions made of his seruants: the distrusts that were had touching his fidelitie: the refusall of graunting him the Lieftenancie generall: the kings sicknesse, and the meanes that offered it selfe vnto him to restore the estate of the Realme, counselling him to withdraw himselfe from the Court, and so beginne to mooue the matter.
While this was doing, where the Queene-mother was presently certified, and could serue her turne, thereby as you shall see the practises to surprise Rochel, wherein Puigaillard, Landereau, the Barron de la Garde and others, were dealers,Enterprise vpon Rochel. beganne to worke, but in such sort, that by little and and little the Rochelers discouered the deuise, whereby they intrapped certaine principalles of the enterprise, who about the end of the yeare they caused to be executed. Presently after, the king wrote letters vnto them, saying: that the execution pleased him well, and willed them to looke vnto themselues: which was the occasion that after many disputations, to cause the^ to enter into consideracie with those of Languedoc and others, to defend themselues, staying till some leaders were raised vpon vnto them, as hope was giuen them. That which made them stay, was that they perceiued diuers men of good quallitie enemies to the religion to ioyne with them, to aske reformation of thee-state, which made many good men to presume, that some peece of cunning was in hand to bee wrought, and that the Queene-mother and her Councellours caused this tragedie to bee playde, to entertaine a mutinie during the Kings sicknesse, that they might crie hola when it pleased them, and in time to ouerthrow the one by the other.
Those of the religion vnderstanding the deuise against the Rochelers, and the practises inuented to surprise them in
Languedoc, and all the while the truce indured,Beginning of the fift troubles in Fra^ce and the raising of men to runne vppon them suddainly, determined (truce beeing expired) to prouide for themselues: and first published an ample discourse, of the causes and reasons that mooued them to defend themselues, wherein they shewed an infinite number of wrongs done vnto them within the space of sixe moneths, without any hope of iustice: perceiuing a manifest apparance of their totall ruine and destruction, if they opposed not themselues against it. Further, they set forth certaine aduises and humble declarations vnto the Princes, Nobilitie, Parliaments, and third estate, thereby to stirre them vp.
The Duke of Alencon, that had been solicited by his most faithfull Councellours to looke vnto himselfe, was put in minde to seeke for the place of Lieftenant generall, and if hee obtained it to keepe himselfe aloofe: or if they sought to imploy him against those of
Languedoc, to thinke vpon the meanes to restore the affaires of the Realme to some better estate. His mother was perswaded that the Marshals de Montmorency and de Cosse were dealers therin, at the instance of the king of Nauarre and the Prince of
Conde: wherevppon with her Councell shee determined to assure her selfe, and to ridde her selfe of those that seemed to take other part then hers, which was the entrie into diuers strange alterations, wherin those of Guise holpe with both their hands: wherevppon it happened, that the Court beeing at Saint Germain in Laye, the Duke Alencon made request vnto the king, to graunt him the estate of Lieftenant generall, to represent the kings person throughout the Realme. Whervppon the Marshall de Montmorencie entering into speech thereof, with the king and the Queen-mother, shewed them, that if they graunted not that request vnto the Duke, they should do him wrong, for that it would be an occasion for euery man to iudge of his vnsufficiencie, for that the same estate had been giuen vnto the Duke of
Aniou without his request: alleaging other reasons as the desert of such a place might mooue him for the quietnesse of the Realme.
How the Lieftenants place was graunted to the Duke of Alencon.This request was in maner graunted, but in stead of letters pattents, certaine priuate letters were made and sent vnto the Gouernrs, besides a declaration made by the K. by word of mouth vnto the Deputies of the Prouinces. The Duke of Alencon not content therwith, pursued his request, which made his aduersaries thinke, that hee vnderstood somewhat of his mothers meaning, which was to put the estate of Lieftenant into the hands of the Duke of Lorraine, who not long after came into the Court, whither hee had been sent for by expresse messengers.
They proceeded further, for that at the same time a report beeing sowen abroad, that the Duke of Alencon secretly held certaine men about him, therby to effect some bad exployt, the Queene his mother went personally to search within his chamber: and not long after, putting I know not what feare and distrusts into the kings minde, counselled him to approach nearer to Parris, that hee might lodge in more safetie at Bois de Vincennes, a strong and pleasant place.
Before hee dislodged happened an other matter: the Duke of
Guise making a quarrell in the Court yeard of the Castle of Saint
Germain, against one named Ventabran, (in time past one of his seruants) layd ha^d vpon his sword, Ventabran fledde and got to the staires, running to the chamber of the Marshall
de Montmorencic, which beeing shutte, hee ranne higher to the chamber of the Ladie, widdow to the Constable: and finding Monsicur de Thore, the Marsha^s brother, stayed there, where hee got certaine blows, but yet without hurt, the Duke affirming that Ventabran had conspired to kil him: and that hee would plague him for it.
This deuile thus wrought: the Marshall being a wise Gentleman, fought to finde out the trueth, and caused Ventabran to be committed to prison, who within two daies after, was set at libertie, which was the occasion that the Marshall by licence from the king departed from the Court. This was done in the moneth of Februarie, at the end whereof, newes came to the Court, that on Normandie side, about a daies iourney from thence, there lay two or three hundreth horsemen, that were said to been assembled by the Duke of Alencon, to fauor his retire from the Court, Others bearing him no great affection, spred foorth a rumour that they were in armes prepared to kill the king, the Queene, and his Councell. The first aduise tooke place, neuerthelesse to make the latter seeme likely (yet vntrue) euery man (except it were the king,Praclises of the Court, whereinto sundrie not able to penetrate at the first, the gentry of Normandy found themselues deceined, whereof ensued the destruction of the Countie of Montgommery. perswaded to stay with his traine) in great haste dislodging from Saint Germains, where they stayed till the lodgings of the Castle of Blois Saint Vincennes were prepared, and rid to Parris, from nine of the clock till midnight, with most great noyse and tumult.
I must tell you that the Duke of Alencon was in minde to haue departed from the Court, and to take the king of Nauarre with him, and that this troupe composed of the Gentlemen their seruants, came to bring them to the places appointed by them: but imagining many difficulties in the executio^, hee tooke aduise of la Mole a Gentleman of
Prouence that gouerned him, who gaue him counsell with al speed to aduerise the king his brother, and his mother, what his meaning was: which was the cause that the king remooued not: neuerthelesse the mother that had som greater matter in her head, made that voyage by night, and went to the house of the Marshall de Retz, in the subburbs of S.
Honore. The Parisians beleeuing whatsoeuer was told them touching those horses, in short time made a great and puissant armie, as they said.
The next day the king went vnto his mother, and within eight daies after, they went to Blois Saint Vincennes, hauing holden diuers councels to deuise the means to intrap the Marshal
d'Anuille, that gaue them worke to do in Languedoc. Meane time, the Duke of Alencon and the king of Mauarre, vppon the foure and twentieth of March, published a declaration touching the matter of Saint Germains, protesting their good wils towards the king, and that they were resolued to oppose themselues with all their meanes, against such as would rebell against him, which was an occasion to bring the Marshall de Montmorencic vnto the Court: who being come was arested, as also the Marshall de Cosse, and both most shamefully led prisoners to the Bastille. On the other side
la Mole Coconnas, and Tourtay, seruants to the Duke of
Alencon, were committed within Parris, and not long after executed, hauing onely confessed to haue been of their Maisters counsell to depart out of the Court. Diuers Lords and Gentlemen intangled in this processe, saued themselues as well as they could: the Duke of
Alencon and the king of Nauarre were kept more straight, and twise examined touching that action.

The estate of Dauphine, Languedoc and poictou.These troubles in the Court, hindered not those of the religion and their associates to looke vnto themselues. In
Dauphine, Mombrun tooke Loriol, Linron, Alet, Graue, and
Roinac, and ouerthrew fiue companies of footmen that sought to impeach them. Those of Villeneufue in Viuarais, not long before had put certaine troupes to the swood, that came against those of the religion, without losse of one man, and tooke Aubenas, a Towne of great importance, hauing cut the throates of all the Garrison, for the most part composed of the massacres of Lyons. The gouernment of Languedoc and Dauphine hauing bin committed to the Prince
d'Auphine, and Monsieur d'Acier ioyned with him, the Marshall d'Anuille by letters intercepted, discouered what was pretended against him, by which meanes hee beganne to draw to those of the religion, consulting with Saint Romaine Gouernour of
Nismes, seized vppon Montpeslier, Beaucaire, Lunel, and Pezenas.
In Poistou the Polititians ioyned with la Noue, tooke Saint Maixaut, Melle, Fontenay, Lusignan, and other places. In Normandie about the beginning of March,What happened in Normandie to the Countie de Montgommery taken prisoner, and after executed. the Countie Montgommery accompanied with Lorges and Galardon his children, departed from the Isle of Gerze, and arriued at Rades, where
Colombieres and de Fey, with fistie Gentlemen came to meete him: from whence hee went to Saint Lo, and then with in three daies after, assieged and took Carentan by compositio^. Within a month after, a strong armie of the enemie, commaunded by Matignon and Feruaques, set vppon him and inclosed him with a little weake towne and ill furnished, called Danfrone, accompanied with sixtie horse, and eight harguebuziers, conducted by Captaine la Touche the younger, resoluing vppon a valiant defence, euen in the beginning of the siege sent foorth siue and twentie horse, and some small shot, who giuing a sharpe onset, slew seuen Gentlemen assaylants, and nine horse, and soretired with the losse of the Lord of
Friaize, who was slaine, and two prisoners that they left behinde. This was the eleuenth of May.
The next day the besieged cut in peeces one Corps de garde: but soone after, some either for feare, or won with faire woords, forsooke the Countie and yeelded to the assaylants, who in reward, stripped and put them to their ransome. The Queen-mother vnderstanding that the Countie whom shee hated to the death, was in her nettes, sent forces day and night to strengthen Matignon, as also the armie that lay before Saint Lo, was commanded with all speed to march to
Danfrone, where they had in the beginning of the siege six thousand small shot, and fifteen hundreth horse. The king being very sicke, vpon the 23. of May the Castle was battered with six peeces of cannon, that in fiue houres shot aboue fiue hundreth times, and made a breach of fiue and fortie foote broad.
Then did most of the Counties men forsake him, and in liew of entring the Castle with him, fled out of the Towne into the campe, where they receiued their deserued entailment as their former companions. About two of the clock at after noone, the assay lants came fiercely to the breach, where they found the Countie on the right side, with the lords of
Brossay, Chauuiny, Cornieres, Tere, yong Touche, Mahiliere, Crosse, Oulfe and others, to the number of twentie.
On the left side were the Lords of Sey, Hayes, Vaudore, Sanssaye, Villenenfue and others, in like number of twentie. All togither fell vpon their knees to hear the prayer which one of the three Ministers there present made in the presence of the assay lants, who when it was done, came to handie blows in the order following. Out of tenne companies of men at armes present at that siege,
Matignon and the other Captains chose one hundreth Gentlemen, even ten out of euerie companie, well armed: followed with 600. small shot, with murrians, and 100. pikemen with their corselers. These 800. men, with some 200. voluntaries mixed among the^, were led by the LL. of Fernaques, Villermois, S. Golombe, Raberprey, Lauerdin and others. The fight lasted siue hours, neither did the cannon cease, which indomaged the defer dants with stones, wherewith also the Countie was wounded in two places on his sace, but slightly. He was also strucke with a harquebuze vpon the right arme near the shoulder, which throgh the goodnesse of his vambras prooded but a bruse. Thus hauing obstinately co^tinued the fight on both sides, the assailants were putto retire, with the losse of
Doily, S. Colombe, and sundrie other Captaines, Gentlemen, and souldiers, slaine in the breach, to the number of 60. and about
100. led away hurt and maimed. On the Counties side were also slaine,
Brossay, Tere, Mesnil a Minister, Vandore, Saussey, Nohe, and 6. soldiers, and 12. wounded: namely the Countie,
Villeneusue, Riutere, Ousse, Gros a Minister,
Maimberte and Courton, captains, and 5. soldiers. Two daies after, seue^ or 8. of the besieged got forth and fled to the camp. The 26. of ye month, Vassey thrise spake to the Countie, inducing him to enter into compositio^, as also they had done the day before. Loth he was to consent, as knowing the hatred of his enemies, accounting it an honor to die vpon the breach with weapon in hand: but seeing his men thus cast away themselues, leauing him in maner alone, with the wounded and a few others ye likewise fainted: withal, that al munition of war and water failed, he was inforced to hearken to composition, rather to saue ye remainder, the^ of any regard to himself: yet making of necessity a vertue, he held off, and obtained ye himself with his assistants shuld depart with their liues and some garments, but no weapo^s but sword and dagger. That himself shuld remain in the ha^ds of Matig. and Vassey, but with good entertainment and safetie of his life. This co^positio^ they sware to keep inuiolably: and Vassey who was his kinsma^, made great protestatio^s therof. Some hours after towards midnight, these 2. Cap. went for the C. who came forth in the co^pany of Chauuiny. And about 7 of ye clock in ye morning, Mat. returned to bring forth ye rest. With him entred the soldiers lodged in the town, and the camp by the breach. The co^mposition was so holde^, yt in the presence of
Ma. they slew part of the besieged, stripped the rest, and offring them great indignities, forced them to fine and pay ransome. Three or 4. yt fel into the ha^ds of a Lord, yt made accou^t of ye law of arms, escaped safe. A Mini. named Bute, they put to death, and ha^ged Cap. Touche ye yonger. The Co. was soone after, co^trarie to faith and promise, broght prisoner to Paris, and lastly put to death, as we wil more at latge note in due time and order. The D. of
Montp. very affectionate to the Ro. church, with anarmie took the field in April, to war against the protesta^ts in Poictou,Warres in Poictou, against Protestants. fro^ who^ the L. of Biron had practised to take To^nay Charante, but could not archieue it. In May, the D. besieged the castie of
Talmo^t, which yelded: but in the mean time his co^pany was surprised in a village near to S. Hermine, many slain, 12. or
15. Gentlemen caried away prisoners, and som 60. horse, much baggage, and the D. cupboord of siluer plate, by Cap. S. Stephen, who lay in garrison in Fontenay, which the D. immediately besieged, and gaue two assaults, wher he gained nothing, but lost the most resolute of his troups. Wherevpon hearing of the kings mortal sicknesse, he retired, attending new supplies and commissions.

At the same time the Prince of Conde beeing gotten from the Court, and retired into Picardie, receiued aduise of diuers practises wroght to seize vpon his person:Retrait of the Prince of Conde into Almaine. but notwithstanding the the snares that were layde for him, hee got into
Almaine, followed by Thore, whom they likewise sought to intrappe, because of the Marshals of Montgommery and
d'Anuille his bretheren, and for his counsels giuen to the Duke of
Alencon. This retrait was diuersly spoken of: some esteeming that the Prince was let go to keepe the water in trouble, and to finde other practises: others accounting it a great deliuerance of those of the religion. Time made knowne what fell out thereby: but whatsoeuer it was, the Prince arriued at Strasbourg, and hauing acknowledged his fault in the French Church, there assembled touching his conuersion after the massacre to the Popish Church, hee detested it, resoluing to imploy himselfe to maintaine the estate of France, as his father had done, and there finding the Deputies of Languedoc practising a leuie of Rutters, wrote vnto the churches, exhorting those of the religion to bee couragious, and to make account of his good will for their comforts.
By the same messenger Thore writ to his brother the Marshall d'Anuille, perswading him to looke about him, and to take the offered occasion. This Marshall was the same time at great strife in himselfe, seeking to assure himselfe on both sides: on the one side hee doubted the king and Queene-mother: on the other the protestants meanes to ouerthrow him, if hee should intreat them hardly.
Heerevppon hee resolued sometimes to haue an eye to the Court, sometimes to the contrarie, and according to the Prouerb, to watch how the market went. On the one side writing to the chiefe Captaines of the protestants: on the other, sending the Lord of Rieux to Boisde Vincennes to the king, with ample instructions dated the eighteenth of May, therein protesting of his affection: declaring his former seruices, intreating after account yeelded of his administration to bee discharged of his office, and to withdraw to any place that the king should appoynt. The same day hee wrote to the Parliament of Thoulouse, to excuse himselfe of that he was accuse of a desire to rebel against the king, and to surprise Narbonne. These proceedings stayed the Queene-mother and her Councellours, who did well perceiue that
d'Anuille would set them worke ynough, if they should deale otherwise then well, or touch his brother Montmorencies life, whom in the meane time they caused to bee kept, so to bridle d'Anuille, and to take some course in their affaires, as heereafter wee shall well perceiue.
The kings sicknesse.The sicknesse wherewith the king was troubled, not long before the departure of his brother to go into Poland, had a little rest for the winter time, but the hidden disease about spring time beganne againe to reuiue, in such sort, that hauing bin sicke in the months of February, March, and Aprill, hee was counselled by his Phisitians, that hee should bee purged and let blood, which were meanes altogither vnprofitable, because it was openly seene, that hee began to fade euen in the flower of his age, to the great astonishing of the ignorant.
Those of least iudgement, esteemed that hee had eaten or drunke somewhat that disiested not. Some superstitious persons imagined some witchcrafe or coniuratio^, and because la Mole had bin found seized with a litle image of wax about him, (which he affirmed to be the picture of a Gentlewoman) pricked in two places by a witch, they made certaine reports to be spredde abroad, that it was a certain charme vsed against the life of the king. Althogh la Mole sustained the co^trarie, vntil the last point of his death, affirmed it to be made only to continue him in the loue of that Gentlewoman whom he ment to marrie.
The king vsed all the meanes hee could to surmount and ouercome his sicknesse, and as his yeares gaue him, assayed diuers times to shewe his courage, but all in vaine. After the departure of the king of Polonia, they perceiued him to bee more changed in minde then in bodie. If he had liued longer, it is without all doubt, that the Councellours of the massacre had receiued their reward from him, his heart was so much mooued against them, so that he could not chuse but vtter his mind therin to some about him in the Court, whom hee knew to bee vtter enemies to such iniustice: and thereof wrote letters out of the Realme. So that to conclude, hee was determined to haue made some stirring among them, vntill that finding himselfe to bee seized vppon, and that hee had not the meanes as then to execute any thing, beeing inuironed by men that helde him as it were bound both hand and foote, his seruants slaine, disgraced, or banished from him: wherein in time he thought to take order, that might procure an ouerture to his haughtie desires, not once thinking vntill hee was so weake, that hee had beene so neare his death.
His letters to the Gouernors of Prouinces.In the end of March, hee wrote vnto the Gouernours of the Prouinces, saying, that seeing the discontentment of his subiects, and the common cause of the religion, produced so many troubles within his Realme, hee desired them to vse peaceable meanes with those of the religion, declaring that hee would not that any wrong should be done vnto them, nor other dealing vsed towards them in their affaires, then the other Catholicque subiects of his Realme: hee commaunded that those of the religion should bee safegarded by those of the Romish Church, to assure and defend them from the violence that was to be done against them: where any such should bee enterprised, hee commaunded all his Officers, to vse the speediest and readiest iustice that might bee, willing them to looke vnto it, calling God to witnesse, that his onely intent was, to see all his subiects liue in peace. Hee likewise desired the same Gouernours to prouide, that their companies should not in any sort bee chargeable to their subiects, but should paye according to the order therein taken: by the same letter also shewing, that hee had been sicke of a quarterne ague, hee was as then somewhat recouered, so that the reports spred abroad of his death, were wholy vntrueths.
The fourth of May, hee aduertised the said Gouernors of the imprisonment of the two Marshals, that were accused of conspiracie against his person and the estate, inioyning them to ouerrunne all those that were vppe in armes, to put them to the sword, but the poore Prince as then was neither respected of friends nor enemies. Euery day he receiued packets of new commotions, that bredde nothing but discommodities, wherein a firme peace, and faithfull maintenance of those of the religion in the exercise thereof, and in that which they had desired for the conseruations of their persons, goods, dignities, rights, and priuiledges, had beene the onely remedie which his mother and her Councellours abhorred.

Hee perceiued the beginnings of new troubles, in the captiuitie of his brother, and his brother in law, and the two Marshals: as also in the exile of the Prince of Conde, and of diuers great Lords: his subiects armed one against the other: and to bee short, the fire of diuision kindled more then euer it was.
Wherevpon ouercome with the euill that raigned in his bodie, and with so many horrible tempests in his brains, he was forced to keepe his bed and yeelde to his disease. For the space of certaine daies hee stroue and struggeled against nature, not yeelding therevnto by extreame force. The nine and twentieth of May, letters were written in his name to the Gouernours of Prouinces, to whom hee sent word, that during his sicknesse if he chanced to die, vntil the comming of the king of
Polonia his brother and successor, they should obey the Queene his mother,Letters in fauour of his mother. whatsoeuer shee would commaund: shewing that his bretheren the Duke of
Alencon and the king of Nauarre, had promised him to do the like in her behalfe: in the two last weekes of his sicknesse hee lost much of his blood, that issued out of many places of his bodie, and once rowlde himselfe therein, falling downe by weaknesse, many times naming diuers Lords, whom he particular hated, and that till then had kept themselues out of his hands.
The thirtieth of May, which was the day of his death, the Queene-mother perceiuing that the simple letters made the day before,The day of his death, and what passed as then specially touching the regency. touching the charge to her committed, sufficed not to strengthen her authoritie during the absence of the king of
Polonia, whom shee feared could not so soone returne againe into
France, determined for his sure establishment, to cause her selfe to bee declared Regent in the absence of the king to come, and to cause letters pattents thereof to bee sealed by the Chancellour
Birague, who with the seales was wholly at her commaundement: which was as much as to ouerthrow and subuert the fundamentall lawes of the Realme, to abolish the right of the first Prince of the blood, to lessen the authoritie of the estates generall, to rule the Parliaments, and to raigne in straunge manner ouer France.
Neuerthelesse, the better to binde the hands of the two first Princes of the blood, and the two Marshals whom shee held prisoners, to beate her enemies, to extirminate the Countie de Montgommerie, kept prisoner against faith and promise made, to sowe new diuisions in the estate, and so to maintaine her selfe in those confusions, without foreseeing the great disorders whereof shee should bee cause, by that meanes giuing libertie to those that in the ende would bee her ouerthrowe, as heereafter you shall heare: her ambition blinded her eyes, shee entered into the kings chamber with Birague, by whom shee caused to bee shewed vnto him, that seeing his sickenesse hindered him from dealing in the affaires that required his presence, it should be good to giue the regencie of the Realme vnto the Queen his mother, and commaunded that letters pattents to the same end should be giuen vnto her.
The king that was at his last houre, by their aduise caused the Secretaries and Captaines of his guards to bee called in, to whom hee saide: Doo all that which the Queene my mother shall commaund you, and obey her as my selfe. The Duke of Alencon and the King of
Nauarre were likewise called, that they might knowe that the Regencie was committed to the Queene-mother, and were expresly named in the letters that were presently dispatched for the same purpose. One that published a discourse of his last speechs, saith, that not long before hee died, hee desired his mother to pursue his enemies to the vttermost, and that with great vehemencie he reiterated his speeches, saying: Madame, I pray you heartily do it. And in those combats of minde, hee died at Blois Saint Vincennes, vpon the
30. of May, 1574. in the presence of his mother, set vpon a chest, accompanied with the Cardinals of Bourbon and Ferrare, the Chancellor Birague, Lansac, and other Lords that beheld ye end of the tragical life of this Prince, that was born the 27. of Iune 1550. and began to raigne the 5. of Decemb. 1560, and had a raigne which all posteritie will admire and abhorre. So this Prince liued not till hee attained to the full age of foure and twentie yeares, of nature beeing very actiue, vnconstant in his cogitations, rash in his enterprises, impatient to attend, diligent to looke into other mens natures, prompt of conceit, of good memorie, extreame colloricke, secret, a great dissembler, and one that easily framed his countenance,Description of Charles the ninth. which his Tutors many times put him in minde of, for in the beginning hee was courteous, and easie to bee ruled.
They likewise made him become one of the greatest blasphemers in France, wherein he became so expert, that that euill quallitie in him, conuerted to bee his ordinarie speech.
Martigues, Losses and others, taught him that corruption by his mothers consent: specially after the first troubles. They contented not themselues with those corruptions, but inticed him likewise to Courtizans, to whom of himself he was not much adicted: and to conclude, to make him the capitall enemie of the religion, both shee and they which ought to haue had more care of conseruing the honour of this Prince, left nothing omitted, wherby to push him forward to all vice, and to cause him to wallow in the filthinesse that couered him on all sides: hee vttered his words in good termes, with a readie and pleasant speech: loued Musicke and Poetrie: wee haue seene reasonable good verses of his composing. But his principall exercise was in hunting, the pleasure whereof, made him forget all other pleasures, and in the end hee gaue himselfe so much vnto it, that the blood of wilde beasts, which to shed hee tooke a singular pleasure, hauing ript vp their bellies, and pulling out their intrailes with his owne hands, made him in a manner to become furious, so that many times at his returne from hunting, hee entered into such furie, that none of his seruants durst once appeare in his sight, vnlesse would receiue some blows. In his Anagranome, which was deuised by certaine persons after the massacre, was found out these two words:
Chasseur, Desloyal, wherein are as many letters, and the same that are in Charles de Valois.
Hee had composed a booke of all the parts of bunting, which till this time neuer was extant: hee was sober, drinking no wine, slept little: his visage long, pale, and swart: a long nose: sharpe and quicke sight, specially after the second troubles: of bodie well proportioned, but beginning to stoupe. Hee tooke pleasure to taunt great men, not sparing either mother or bretheren, specially the Duke of
Aniou, whom hee railed at, and diuers times vsed him most vnwoorthily: but aboue all, hee had a great quarrell to the Parliament of
Parris: to the officers whereof, in one of his Orations made touching the complaints of the neglecting of his commaundements, hee said:
I will that from hencefoorth you shall obey my commaundement, without any more disputation touching their merites, for I know what is to bee done for the honour and profite of my realme, better then you do. And I will that from hencefoorth you shall not loose any time to write, or frame your declaration vnto mee, neither yet to moderate, correct, nor interpret my commaundements. For my meaning is, that all whatsoeuer I say and do, shal presently bee executed. Three daies before hee died, his mother hauing shewed him of the taking of the Countie de Montgommery, hee made her no aunswere: and when shee told him that hee ought to reioyce at the taking of him that had killed his father, I care neither for that (said hee) nor for any thing else in this world.
Hee likewise reioyced that hee left no small children behinde him, because (said he) that leauing them in their minorities, they should haue ouer much to suffer: adding, that France as then had neede of a man. Now wee must speake of his successour, and see what maner of man hee was.
Heere endeth the Historie of the last troubles that happened in the raigne of Charles the ninth.



A BRIEFE DISCOVRSE OF THE GREAT AND WONDERFVL EFFECTS THAT HAVE ENSVED THE KINGS CONVERSION: Collected out of a certaine Oration made touching the reduction of the Cittie of Lyons vnder the kings obedience, and sent to Monsieur de Reuol, Councellour and Secretarie to the King.
THere was neuer any straunge or new accident, how acceptable and pleasing soeuer it might bee, that in all places or with all men was esteemed and holden in admiration, for that euery man therein will giue censure according to his owne affection. I speake this in respect of the mournfull silence which the reduction of the Cittie of Lyons hath inserted into the mindes of many men; and the ioye it hath infused into the hearts and very entrailes of others: for that therein I neuer spake with any man, that would once conceiue the true cause and reason thereof, which forceth mee at this present to enter into this discourse, wherein so fit occasion beeing offered, if it please you to giue me audience, and permit me licence to speake, I will in briefe most plainly shew, that it is onely the miraculous and mightie worke of Gods hand which hath wrought the same: although per aduenture this kinde of argument pleaseth not such men, as are onely pleased with our displeasures, and in a manner faint and are ouercome with the meere ayre and sweete sauour of the flower de luce.
It is long since agreed and consented vnto, that Henry de Bourbon, chiefe Prince of the blood royall, and principall Peere of
France, by true discent, by order of succession, by right of blood, and by custome and law of the Realme, is called to the Crowne and gouernment of France: which first quallitie is in him so true and perfect, that none or fewe of his famous predecessors euer had more euident titles therevnto. He is a Frenchman, from his Grandfathers in both families, and not onely a meere Frenchman, but on his fathers side, of the first branch of the blood royall: the like on his mothers side; by his father, not onely descended from Saint Lewis, or Hugh Capet, but from
Charles and Dagobert, of whom the Capets descended, contrarie to the wilfull ignorance of such as would prooue his familie to bee meere straungers: and by his mother, from the
Alberts kings of Nauarre, who successiuely were of the house of France, and by the marriages of daughters, capable by succession to the kingdome of Nauarre. And for such hee was esteemed and accounted, vntil the death of the Duke of Alencon the kings brother. VVhen presently the good olde Cardinall of Bourbon was titled in the head, and made beleeue, that in the age of sixtie yeares hee should liue and succeede a king (who beside his yong yeares and strength of bodie, liued not in any such disordered maner, whereby hee should once haue occasion to thinke vpon his successor) for it was shewed him, that hee was the first Prince of the blood, and that the right of inheritance and succession consisted in his person. But when this deuise was found too weake, and the absurditie too much discouered, thereby seeking to impugne or deny the king of
Nauarre to be the chief and eldest branch of his house, in the right and title of his father, who in a manner liued in him, (besides the reuocation by his vncle made vnto him, of all rights, names, voyces, and actions whatsoeuer, both present and to come, that might appertaine or belong vnto him, as beeing issued from the house of Bourbon, expresly acknowledging the said king of Nauarre his Nephew, for the true sonne, heire, successor, and representation of the chiefe branch of the said house) they inuented other obiections and subtile pollicies, that vnder those pretences they might bleare the eyes of the common and simple people: affirming the Crowne of France to bee vacant, and so belonged to the first Conqueror: a^leaging for reason, that as in the populer successions of common people, such as are of the kindred and familie of any houses, beeing in the tenth degree of consanguinitie, cannot bee heires of their kinsmans lands, so farre in discent from them, and therby the inheritance falleth into the Lords hands, and that so the house of
Bourbon had no title or any right to the Crowne of France, as beeing in the tenth degree of consanguinitie from it, wherof they caused diuers discourses and whole volumes to bee written.
But that not beeing able to bee beaten into the heads of true Frenchmen, nor once set footing or enter into the opinions of the commun people, altogither incapable of such Sophisteries, they beganne to enter into an other course of iniuries, accusations, and inuections: wherein they contented not themselues, onely to crie out and make war against the said king, and to produce and cause to bee published a perpetuall incapacitie in his person, and that without the Popes consent, but they accused him of treason, they condemned him, they named him vnwoorthie and incapable to rule in France: they assembled all the estates of
France at Blois, wherein a manner they vtterly reiected him: euery man shewed to bee his enemie, if not in his right and title, yet touching the religion which hee then held, and finally went about to frame his proces. But to the contrarie, those that pursued him, were themselues executed, before they heard their condemnation or iudgement.
In this maner the fire beganne to bee kindled in all the foure quarters of the realme, and the blow was of such force, that all neighbour Princes were mooued there at, such as were offended arming themselues to bee reuenged, and the people in a manner led by a furie, helping them, and with them turned their faces against the king: whereof the Towne of
Parris was the first, and by example therof, all the Towns in lesse then 6. weeks, made that great and strange co^motion, that continued for the space of fiue whole yeares ensuing. Shee mooued them to this dissention, by the smooth and speciall reasons by her alleaged against heresie, periurie, and tiranny: coniuring them by dutie to their countrie, and by the loue they ought to beare to the preseruation thereof, to ioyne with her in so iust a cause, and to passe one of these two waies, (hauing no other meanes) either to bee vanquishers, or die in the quarrell, rather then to submit themselues to the king. And among the rest, the Cittie of Lyons, (neuer inferiour to any Cittie in the world, touching fidelitie and obedience to their kings, that had no other obiect then onely zeale of religion, in the defence whereof, it espied many euident and mortall signes) suffered it selfe to bee borne away among this troupe, not once considering or apprehending the multitude of miseries by her after that indured.
And in this manner the warres beganne with so straunge an alteration and motion of all estates, yea euen of the very pillers of the land: and the reuolt was such, that in fine, the royaltie of the king was reduced to a small corner of the countrie about Tours and
Blois, where without doubt the league had buried it, if suddainly the king of Nauarre had not ayded him: who therevpon tooke courage againe, hauing on his side the Hercules of
France, and scourge of rebels to their Prince: but when this disordered and great mutinie beganne somewhat to decline, and that the presence and authoritie of the Soueraigne Prince, held the most assured within the bounds of their duties, and that Parris perceiued it self in way and course of extreame desolation, suddainly the king was slaine. And then (O the great and deepe iudgements of God) hee that about three moneths before, had passed ther riuer of Loire onely with foure hundreth horse, a thousand shot, and certaine pikes, was presently made chiefe soueraigne and commaunder of a most faire and great armie, to whom the Magistrates and Officers of the Crowne, and all the Nobilitie, yeelded their obedience, thereby seeking to impeach the desolation and ouerthrow of the whole estate, and to preferre the dutie of naturall fidelitie, before the vaine hope of straungers, and the last hazard of the rest and suretie of their liues and goods. And so behold him king, that not seuen moneths before had been depriued of the title of the first Prince of the blood, and of the hope of the name, Sacrying, and Crowne of the Princes his auncestors, that had so many times beene driuen from the Court: that in foure yeares had seene tenne armies, and tenne Generals to a king, marching (before the heads of the forces of the greatest Prince, of the most warrelike nation in all the world) against him: that after the ouerthrow of a great forraine power, had withdrawne himselfe into a corner of the Realme, without land, men, or mony: and a Prince altogither poore, vnlesse it were in hope. He that had been declared vnable for the Crowne, that had beene made one of the Cardinall of Bourbons retinue: that was no more acknowledged to be of the race or progenie of S. Lewis, as beeing ten degrees in consanguinitie from it: he that the countrie of
Spaine esteemed the subiect of all our miseries, who in the life of ^ur kings was the only argument of all the tragedies that had been acted in the countrie of
France: he that thought not to haue succeded a king, being in the flower of his liuely and gallant youth: that had bin an occasion to the contrarie, if age, and not a most cruell and poysoned knife, had not borne him to S. Dennis: he I say was king, in the middle of all his troupes, in open field, and by sound of trumpet proclaimed king of
France. And the Catholicque Nobilitie, who by reason of their diuersitie of religion, it was thought wold haue separated themselues from him, were so much mooued at the detestable murther so disloyally committed against the sacred person of their most Christian, Catholicque, and religious king, abhorring that part from whence so miserable a monster had his issue, that they chose rather to preserue themselues by keeping togither, then to destroy themselues by disvnion: that it remained constant and faithfull to the successor of their king, not once disputing of the lawful vocatio^ of his Maiestie, and so much the rather that he imbraced the preseruation of the Cal^olicque, Apostolicke, and Romaine religion, and promised to reciue instruction, and make profession thereof. No other meanes resting, whereby to knit and ioyne that which by disvnion had been separated, and nothing but the newe opinion of religion, was the cause to place a barrier between them, and the meanes that the poore people did not most willingly cast themselues into his armes. And to the contrarie, the feare of the alteration of religion, putteth the^ out of their bounds, and as the waues that breake into a breach, hauing gotten through, do runne with more noyse and force then before. So he was esteemed for an hereticke, his goods confiscate, and his bodie punished, that had not halfe a dozen of maximes or princples readie, thereby with tooth and nayle openly to maintaine, that
Henry de Bourbon might not be king, although he were a Catholicke: and that the power of the Pope stretched not so farre as once to vndertake the hearing of his excuses, much lesse to absolue him. In this general licenciousnesse of all things, whereby euery man is permitted both to speake and thinke euil, which filleth France with barbarisme and monsters, which maketh the Citties and Townes the gulfes of ciuill furies, wherein it is easie to fall, and impossible to get out againe: it seemed that a whole world, neither yet the raignes of foure kings, would euer haue ended so great adesolation. For thereby is seene the deluge of all afflictions fallen vppon the people: confusion and disorder rampeth and entereth into all places: councels are weake: iustice despised: the foote commanding the head: the treasurescconsumed: the estate becommeth sicker then sickenesse it selfe: and which is more, religion, for the which they take weapon in hand, looseth more in one moneth, then it getteth
intenne, hauing nothing more contrarie to the increasing, restoring, and beautifying therof, then the insolencie, crueltie, disobedience, and impietie of ciuil wars. And should wee suppose, that during these monstrous and mad rebellions, the obedience we owe to God can long continue? VVhat is he that knoweth not how many iniuries religion hath sustained, as well by the defendors, as enemies thereof? both of them esteeming it a glorie, to violate, blaspheme, and in a moment to destroy the forepassed labours of so many yeares, and in two houres to saw downe the tree that hath growen vp and prospered for
1500. yeares. The people by long draughts swallow downe the sweete breath of libertie, they terme disorder reason, they admitte no lawe, but what they like best, and will by no meanes heare speaking of superior. Of the despising of the Prince, proceedeth disobedience to God: and from that impietie springeth the disobedience we shew vnto each other. For that long sufferancealtereth custome, and formeth immitation, and the example of one that escapeth vnpunished, mooueth others to commit the like offence. So that among so many crimes, disorders, and confusions, it is not straunge vnto vs, to see our actions haue so hard successe. For as the horse that hath newly cast his Maister to the ground and broken his bridle, ceaseth not to runne till he commeth to some place, where with great furie he killeth himselfe: so the people abandoning all dutie and respect of gouernment, ouerthrow themselues at the end of their most furious course: and are like a ship in the middle of the wanes, which beeing neuer so well rigged and furnished with warlike ammunition, hauing neither saile nor rurther, is readie to sincke, and stirreth not but at the pleasure of a feeble blast of wind, which vseth it as it list. To the contrary, the kings armie (that as a rocke resisteth the proude and raging waters) like agreat riuer passing her boundes to ouerflow the medows, assiegeth Townes, winneth diuers battels, beareth all before it, and triumpheth in all places. And Spaine, which ought either to vnburthen it selfe, or at the least be content with the great number of roabes which it daily weareth, and with so many Scepters, that impeach it, and rest it selfe: riseth vp to put vs in feare. She that feareth least our prosperitie would bee her ruine: our peace, her wars: and that our nayles should grow so long, therewith to pull that from her, which she and hers hath forcibly taken from vs, she bendeth her cannon shot against the battered wals of our estate: and she that seeing vs transported with furie and collor, ought to hide the knife, and quench the fire, putteth it into our hands, therewith to mooue vs to destroy our selues. And addeth oyle and wood more to increase the fire of our diuisions, yet all in vaine, for that against good Frenchmen, shee sendeth Spanish shadowes. But after the losse of a great battell, and the long and extreame induring of miseries by the assieged townes, euery man beginneth to detest wars and to seeke peace. And the ordinarie meat wherewith the people were vsually serued, beginneth to faile and be disliked: the goodly and beautifull pretence of religion, that had giuen so great an appetite to the common people, to disiest arms, looseth credite: and it is euidently seene, that the war hath more respect to the altering of estate, then preseruatio^ of religion. And in fine, when at the assembly of the league in Parris, the D. of Ferrare vnder pretence and couer of religion, had propounded the means to shake and vtterly ouerthrow the salique law, not any good Frenchman but detested the deuise, as athing more cruel then death it selfe. And the Court of Parliament did most vertuously resist the lamentable subuersion of that law, which hath maintained this monarchie, and continued so many yeares: and in defence wherof, our forefathers died the plaines of Poctiers and Cressy, with their liuely and masculine blood. And in the mean time, when euery man cried out, and openly said: the king was no king, that they were earnestly busied to find an other, that euery man would be, and yet durst not: his Maiestie by reuelation of the holy Ghost, and for his owne saluation, turned to the sacred and holy bosome of the Church, leauing the error and new opinion, that from his cradle he had alwaies holden, feeling in his soule a strong and firme resolution, to abiure his former impostures. He did it not at randon, neither as constrained by necessitie, by feare of forraine vsurpation, for the onely inioying of a temporall peace or Crowne of
Charles, but of a holy and most diuine inspiration which entered into his soule, from the day and time that the death of the K. left the Scepter of France, and yeelded it vnto him: from that time he made knowne to our holy father Pope Sixtus the fift, by M. de Luxenbourg, to Pope Gregorie the 13. by
the Marquesse of Pisani, and since that, to him who at this day sitteth in S. Peters Chaire, called
Clement the eight, by the Cardinall de Gondy, that as he was lawful successor to the Crowne, he desired also that the succession of the Catholicke, Apostolicke, and Romane religion, be obserued in his realme, submitting himself to his authoritie and instruction touching the saluation of his soule. And perseuering in his so holy resolution, he banished from the Court, those that had made him beleeue that the world had continued in darknesse from the death of the Apostle S. Paul, to the time of Caluin, and that the splendant sunne of the truth, had been eclipsed touching the preaching of the Gospell, and shut vp within the territories of Bohemia and
Saxony, vntil the seditious preachings of Iohn Hus and
Martin Luther, caused it to shine with greater clearenesse: and being instructed in the truth of our religion, by the most learned Prelates in all the realme of France, he presented himself in the temple of the chiefe Apostle of France, euen in the middle of the shadows of his predecessors, and ther, and vpo^ their Tombs detested his heresies, the only causes of his troubles, and originall of our mischiefes. There is no reason what soeuer to be obiected, that can deny this action to be most holie, most admirable, and most miraculous, whether you consider the happie disposition and aboundance of the yeare, the victorie against the Turkes, or the suddain conuersion of our rebels. For first you haue seen how God guided this Prince through the middle of so many laborinths and dangers of fire and flame, to the throne of royall Maiestie: how this Ioseph persecuted by his own kindred and familie, triumpheth in Aegipt: and how this Moyses, exposed and abandoned to the mercie of ciuill tempestes, becommeth not onely Coronel of an armie of 600000. men, but king of a great Realme, and of so many millions of people. And the king, to giue a taste and feeling vnto his subiects, of the contentment and quietnesse that his soule inioyed by his new co^uersion, and therof to giue euident testimonie to all the world, graunteth a truce euen at the verie instant when his enemies were readie to yeeld: and sendeth the Duke de Neuers to his holinesse, submitting himself to his commandements, and offering his conscience (the subiect of a goodly conquest) giueth him to vnderstand, thot hee desireth but one religion in his Realme: that he knoweth well that the Church is one, that faith is not diuided, and that as the bodie can indure but one head, the heauens but one sun, and religion but one God: so the Realme of France ought to haue but one Church, which cannot bee one, where God is diuersly serued. So if our miseries are not incensible vnto him, if it pleaseth him not speedily to imbrace the occasions offered, and mittigate the rigor of formes, not onely our religion, but also the estate, will bee a pray to long and cruell diuisions, which continually afflist the countrie of France. It is said, hee is one of the most woorthiest successors of Saint Peter, that for the space of one hundreth yeares hath sit in his chaire, which increaseth our hopes, and lightneth our mindes, in a maner cleane abated: for that one of the best comforts that man can haue in the middle of the waues and surges of the sea, is, when he is assured that his Pilot is an expert man, and knoweth what to do. And so we hope, that to preserue this French vessel from ship wracke, he will rise vp against the tempest which daily threatneth the same: and we know what winds and waues do blow and push it forward: and that he will imbrace the conuersion of so importunate a soule: for the preseruation whereof, all Europe ought continually to wade in teares, vowes, and prayers. But when the delaies of the Popes Consistorie were perceiued, togither with the oppositions and trauerses made touching the Ambassage of the D. de Neuers, when it was well wayed and considered, that it were very hard and impossible for those in
Rome to iudge of that which is done in France: that their opinions and wils were forced and constrained, and that it was knowne, that in the extreame necessitie of taking order for the Co^mon-wealth, in so vrgent a cause they must stay and attend vppon processe, peace beeing broken, and the people longing after the first morsels of the truce, they ceased not till they were wholly franchised from the tirannie of wars, specially the townes that at the beginning were the first that tooke weapon in hand, and from thence proceeded the reduction of the Citie of Lyons vnder the kings obedience, being not able any longer to continue in her vnconstant estate, nor to subiect her selfe any more vnder her ruines, fenses, and distrusts, as things most doubtfull, and mischiefes most vncertaine, so that she opened and vncouered her eyes, to know what shee should do, and vnder whose protection she might best be preserued. Shee knew that the soueraigne and last remedie of her calamities, was to bee vnder one, and no more to slote vncertainly in the waues of diuers protections which haue been causes of these ciuil warres.
Shee found that shee ought to haue a king of France, and in the familie of Saint Lewis, from whence descendeth Henry de Bourbon, king of France and Nauarre, whom she had sooner acknowledged, if it had pleased him sooner to make profession of the Catholick, Apostolicke, and Romaine religion, as at this day he doth.
Lyons resisted against her king, and ramped against the gate, and will you haue it still remaine couered in the brakes, that she should alwaies be at the poynt of death, in the middle of the waues of her rebellions? it was at the poynt to become a desart, and the fable and common marke to be laughed at by al her neighbours, and in the end their conquest, alreadie her trafficke (which is her Indes or Perou) her rents, her pensions, and her principall reuenues were cut off and taken away. And no other occupation bare sway, or was in request with her, but the art of souldiers: her Citizens were slaine before the gates, and her naturall forces began to faile, wherein she seeketh for redresse, and knowing no better Phisitian, then hee that loueth his Patient: she cast her selfe into the armes of her king, and drowning the remembrance of her follies past, in the seas of his great clemencie: she desired him, from thence forward to accept and receiue her Cittizens, for his true, faithfull, and naturall subiects, and not to put any difference between them and others, vnlesse it were in this poynt, to haue in remembrance that they were the first, who without constraint acknowledged him for their king, and by their example haue gotten vnto him the best part of his flowrishing Scepter. Behold the iust reasons and causes of this so suddaine change, if the obedience which the subiect draweth from the yoake of strangers, to yeeld it vnto his owne superior, may be called a change. And the more commendable it wil be, in so much as that the seruice of the king is not contrarie to the commandement of God: that religion remaineth firme within her franchises, shining in her glorie, and inuiolable and vnexpugnable in her forces. As long as the wars were wholly for religion, they contributed whatsoeuer they had, but when they once perceiued that the holy conuersion of the king made this war, no more war against religion, but onely against the estate, they could not longer delay, nor withdraw out of their mindes, the feare and reuerence they owe to the true image of God, which is the king, beleeuing certainly that those beare armes and fight against God, that rebel against a most Catholicke and Christian Prince. In this so great disorder, great wisedome and good order hath bin seene, for that the most aduised and best experienced, concerning matters of estate, iudged this quotidian feuer, could by no meanes bee healed, but by some strong and violent remedie. But by the prouidence of God, the disease that in mans iudgement seemed incurable, hath been healed without shedding one drop of blood, by the constant and firm resolution of those that rather desire to die, then not to see themselues franchised from this gouernment, which is contrarie to the royall estate, and losed from the middle of so many protections, which how holy or iust soeuer they be, are altogither dangerous, and the best title they can bear is of no value. To be short, this towne which hath alwaies made shew of pure religion towards God, and fidelitie to her Prince, hath well shewed that the flower de luce, which for the space of so many hundreth yeares had been grauen in her heart, could not be pulled away but by cleauing and renting in peeces the hearts of all her Cittizens: that she could not brooke nor once indure, such Frenchmen as are transubstantiated into Spanish minds, that gape onely to see this Scepter broken, this crowne in peeces, that they might gather the remnants, and plucke off the flowers. Thus much I thought good to speake, before I enter into the Historie.




THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF the last troubles of France, vnder the raignes of Henry the third, and Henry the
fourth now liuing.

M.D.LXXIIII.

I Am not abashed, if such as at randon discourse and speake of our great miseries, do so oftentimes run into fond opinions,A Historie ought to be without passion. because that to get out of so great a laborinth, they followe not the right way of the trueth, but rather taking the crosse-path of their own passions, they leaue the high-way, and approache the ditches. Their writings are of blacke and thicke cloudes, which neuer appeare without some thunder of euill reports, iniuries, and slaunders: Tables representing nothing but infamous pictures of Monsters, and Arches of imperfections. And when they enter into the deepe consideration of the Authors of our euilles, they throwe the fault and mischiefes of these deuisions, sometimes vppon one, and some times vppon an other, their opinions beeing furred onely with the drugges of hated, or of zeale which transporteth their mindes. Such people, that like serpents nourish themselues by poyson,The causes of the troubles of France, imputed to diuers things. and that are better pleased with the darke Eclipses, then with the bright shining beams of the Sun, and do more reioyce to shewe some execrable action, then to speake of any memorable and woorthiething, haue in this season raised most straunge mutinies, mooued the people, armed the greatest cowards with their seditious writings: troden the Maiestie and reuerence of Princes vnder foote: bannished modestie: in her place, established insolencie, despigh, and confusion. Therefore to make knowne Against such as say, that the King of France and Nauarre are the causes of the troubles.through all the parts of the world, the beautie, excellency, and woonders of the royall actions of their liues, to drawe so many Princes and great and valiant Captaines out of the circle, wherein by these diuisions they are compassed, to shewe the Maiestie of our King to bee farre distant from the many vnworthy slaunders, of those that affirme and accuse him to bee the onely motion of our countries troubles, to declare in this discourse, the royall vertues that shine through the thicknesse and obscurities of impietie and rebellion: and to disswade mens mindes from so many false perswations, I haue drawne out of the most staied and certaine opinions, the truth concerning the beginning, and proceedings of the last troubles, that haue vexed this Realme, by the renewing of seuen most cruel and bloodie warres: Fra^ce hath indured seue^ warres, and hath seene 6. Edicts of pacification. God grant that the
7. peace may be the last, and the end of ciuil miseries. The peace for forraigne warres was made in Ann. 1559. There is no opinion that is deeper with in the hearts of men, then the opinion of religion. by the hazard of so many battailes: the ruin of so many people: the taking and spoyling of so many townes: and the death of so many Princes: that the only remembrance, taketh away my sences, stoppeth my speeche, and maketh my pen to stay^ therefore to begin this matter, and to voyde the spindle, we must first finde the ende of the third: and by the ende of forraigne warres, weaue this cloath of ciuill Commotions.
All war is cruell, and endeth with more difficultie then it is taken in hand: but those diuisions that happen in any estate touching the point that ought to knit and vnite the spirits of men, are more bloodie, their beginnings more terrible, and their endes more dangerous: and the more the pretences are large and faire, the more men enter into the sustaining and defending of them: for there is nothing that doth mooue them more, then the defence of their religion: nor any thing that doth more animate, nor sooner put them in obliuion of the consideration of respect, dutie, and obedience, then the quarrell concerning the saluation of their soules: and the manner of the seruice they ought to minister vnto God: euery man esteeming that religion he followeth, to bee the true, and purest manner of woorshipping: condemning and reiecting all that which is not conformable vnto it.n="b" The Oracle of Apollo, gaue answer to the Troia^t that their towne should neuer be take^ as lo^g as they kept that image of Pallars. This is the Paladium of Troy, our rest and welfare consisteth therein, and her assurance is our securitie: hee that straineth this corde, breaketh the hermonie of the Common-wealth, and induceth the dissimilitude of religions: which presently openeth the gate to murthers, enmities, and seditions, and from thence to persecutions, both publike and priuate: for that neither the old can be reformed, nor the new established, without contradiction and violence. From thence it proceedeth, that when in one Nation, there are some that remaine constant and firme in the faith and tradition of their forefathers, and that others do reprooue it, and inuent certaine doctrine which they preach, and affirme to be the pure, true, and onely rule for men to learne: it cannot be remedied, and of force it must be so, that this diuersitie of religion, bringeth with it a diuision of minds, and of enmities, which are not appeased, but by the ruine of the one, or the other part: the triumph of Israel, is the losse and hinderance of the Aegyptians.
The first motion of religio^ in Bohemia, by Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prague.France that had seene the strange furies, which this apple of discord by the Hussites had sowne in Bohemia, at Munster by the Anabaptists, and in Allenmaigne and Suisse, and that ought to beware by other mens harmes, and looke that the fire of their partialities, take no hold in her towe, hath most miserably abandoned it selfe vnto this schisme: and more overrun, sacked and troden vnderfoote, by the great faction of Catholiques and Huguenots, in thirtie yerres, then it indured
The death of King Francis, at Rombouillet.in the space of 6. yeares, vnder the long, variable, and cruell wars of the two houses of Orleans and Burgonge: factions more fatal and miserable in France, the^ that in
Italie of the Guelphes and Gibelins: or in
England, of the long wars between the houses of Lancastre and Yorke. It had the beginning from the death of King
Francis the first, which graine of diuision (wherewithall the Prouinces of this Realme is sowen) was bought in Geneue, of such as brought it from Saxony, where they had great store, out of
Luthers Warehouses.  Luther began to preachAnd the most curious, who at the first thought to enter into those vesselles of new sects,
 The assembly of Lutheria^s dicouered in Parris in S. Iames street, before the colledge du Plessis.but onely to shake them, were carried away by impetuositie of wind, and the goodly apparance of her opinions, which were said to tend onely to the reformation of the abuses of pride and luxurie in the Cleargie, thereby to reduce it into the estate of the Leuites, without lands or possessions.
France, that at all times hath beene the nource of fine wittes, both subtill and curious, was the most fit and apt Prouince, wherein to make this Noueltie spring: and therein became so fruitefull, that in lesse then two or three yeares, there was found more
Lutherians within the Capitall Cittie of Parris, then Prelates or Doctors to oppose themselues against them.
The Duke of Saxon, the Counte Palatin, the Marques of Brandebourg, the Duke of Witenbourg. The marriage of the Dauphine with the Queene of Scots.But the king that sought to quench this fire by the rigor of lawes, at the first entrance of those Nouelties, spared neither authoritie of Edicts, seueritie of punishments, nor executioners to extirpe them. Whereat certaine forraine Princes beeing mooued, besought him to moderate his publike persecutions: and the great Potentates of the Realme rose vp, and put themselues in armes: and among the rest, Monsieur d'Andelot, a man whom the king loued, both for the honour of his house, and valour of his person, and many Councellours of the Court of Parliament, found to bee inveloped with this cloude, wee cast in prison.
The Cardinall of Lorraine, and the Duke of
Guise his brother, that practised the marriage of the Queene of
Scots their Cousin, with the kings eldest sonne, and were the greatest next the king, who for counsell put his whole confidence in the Cardinal, and his forces into the Duke of Guises hands, making him Lieftenant generall of his Realme, that had all authoritie ouer the people, that esteemed them no lesse faithfull to the Crowne, then zealous and religious towards the Church: that honoured them as the most affectioned to the Common-wealth, and that were his Druses, Marcels, Dions, and
Phocions, mooued the king to the extirpation of those Heresies: and without doubt, hee had surely done it, if the splinter of
Mongommeries launce had not beene, which although it brake not, yet it stayed the furie of those publike executions.
The death of King Henry the second.This great king that promised his people a long and continuall peace, beeing dead, his Scepter remained to Francis, but the royall authoritie with them, that as then had the possession, and that vaunted themselues to deserue it, in respect of their seruices done to the king, their countrie and religion, in such manner,The sacring of Francis the second. The Constable withdraweth fro^ the Court. that before Anthony de Burbon king of
Nauarre, and first prince of the blood, arriued at the Court, his place was taken vp, and the royaltie diuided and put into the handes of a king of fifteene yeares of age, an Italian woman, a Cardinall, and a Prince of
Lorraine. The kings auncient seruants beeing separated from the Court, namely the Constable. Like as the sunne is in heauen, the same should the king be on earth, and what effect the sunne worketh with the Planets, the same should the K. vnto the Princes of his blood: the sun neuer withdraweth his brightnes That was ordamed at Tours, Ann. 1484. and at the same time obserued by Charles 8. son to Lewis the 11. that raigned 14. yeares. Malecontent: in An. 1560.from them, no more should the king deny this fauour to the Princes of his-blood, that are about him. Which not being don, it ca^not be but there must be disorder, Eclipses, and obscure confusions. The Princes of the blood, perceiuing themselues debarred from their guard, that the king was in the custodie of stra^gers, contrarie to the ancient priuiledges of France, wich ordaineth that the minoritie of the K. shall be assisted by a councell chosen by al the Estates of the Realme: wherein the Princes of the blood ought to beare the principall place, and straungers excluded, vnited themselues togither, in the middle of a thousand deaths, to preserue their degrees and dignities. This discontentment opened the caracters of diuisions, that after caused a deluge of miseries in the realme of France. And the Malecontents, eyther because they were excluded from publike charges, or beeing tormented in the libertie of their consciences, agreed togither to vnhorse the house of Guise, that aspired so neare the king: minding neuer to leaue armes, before his Maiestie should be deliuered out of their hands, and the estate reduced vnder a lawfull gouernment: promising neuerthelesse not to attempt any thing against the person of the king, his authoritie, nor the Princes of his blood. But God shewed that he loueth not disturbers of the estate, nor such as bath their handes in their owne blood: that take courage by the indiscreet opinions of certaine pretences,The enterprise of Amboise ciscouered in Ann. 1560. and the enterprisors pursued by the Duke de Nemours. The gate of Hugon in Tours, by the which they assembled: or of the first accords of the declaration of protestants made in Latin: which are, Huc nos venimus. and that vse remedies crueller then the disease it selfe. For that he ouerthrew this first enterprise, and the actors thereof beeing taken vppon the suddaine, obtained paine and punishment for reward: and so were hanged in their bootes and spurs at the castle of Amboise. But the sparks that issued out of this flint, after that set fire to the ciuill warres of
France, and because the greatest part of those alterers of estates, were of the new religion, that as then were called Huguenots, of the place where they first assembled themselues in Tours, the Cardinall of Lorraine beganne to crie out against Hereticques: and to make them more odious, he caused it to be reported throughout the Realme, that their enterprise was against the king: wherein they induced the Prince of Conde: who to iustifie his innocencie, and to shewe the integritie of his heart to the seruice of the king, in his presence, and others the Princes, Lords, and Officers of the Crowne, spake openly and said. That his Maiestie excepted, and with reuerence to the Princes his bretheren, the Queene his mother, and the Queene then raigning, those that had reported him to bee of the enterprise of Amboise, lyed falsely: and if they would seeme to iustifie it, hee offered to fight with them: and that if they were not comparable vnto him for degree, hee would imbase himselfe for that time, and make them either by sword or launce, confesse themselues to bee vilaines and traitors. And thervpon this Prince not induring to liue among so many suspitions and distrusts, as beeing the But and marke of his enemies, left the Court, and went vnto his brother the king of Nauarre, whither such as professed reformation withdrewe themselues. This disease increasing more and more, and the corrupted humors therof breeding to a dangerous and mortall palsie, the Queen-mother that knewe better the disease, then the cause thereof,The assembly of Fontainbleau, Anno.
1560. the 21 of August, where the King, the Queene and diuers Princes sat, there the Admirall presented a Petition, and said that he would cause it to be signed by 50000. men, and the Cardinall of Lorrain said, the King should oppose 100000. against it. They were not permitted to alight (as the manner is) at the kings Pallace. She said that no man euer bandieth against the blood of France, with out repe^ta^ce. Iustification of the Prince of Conde. Agreement made betweene the Prince of Conde and the house of Guise, the 14. of August, 1561. La Popelimere saith, that the king of Na. promised the am bassador of the K. of De^mark to cause the religio^ to be preached throughout France, within one yeare after. perceiuing that by sharp and bitter remedies it was nothing healed, beganne to vse gentlier and more easie: and to the same end, she caused the most learned and wisest men in al France, to be assembled at
Fontainbleau, there to debate the causes of religion. Where the Admiral presented the request of those who^ he supported, which was, to haue libertie of churches, and freedome of conscience: wherevnto the Cardinall opposed himselfe. And the Lords of
Monluc and Marillac, were of opinio^, that the most assured means to stop those new sprung sects, was to submit themselues to a generall Councell: and in fine, the conclusion of this assembly was, that a Parliament of the generall States should be holden at Meaux, in the moneth of December after: and a nationall Councell the tenth of Ianuary then next after ensuing.
The Parliament was holden at Orleans, and the king sent for the king of Nauarre to come thither, and to bring the Prince of Conde his brother with him, that there hee might cleare himselfe of the hard report that ranne against him: to the which end, they set forward, and arriued at Orleans, presenting themselues vnto the king, that intertained them not as their qualities and nearenesse of blood required. For the Prince of Conde was committed prisoner, whose deliuerance was sued by the Ladie Renee, duches of
Ferrare, neuerthelesse his processe was framed: wherevnto hee pleaded not guiltie: yet in fine, hee was condemned to haue his head striken off before the kings Pallace, and at the entrie of the States: vpon the which iudgement, he continually expected the houre of death. But by Gods prouidence, the death of the king procured both his life and libertie: for king
Charles iudged him to be innocent. At the same time, the Court of Parliament in Parris made an Edict, the Parliament of Estate continued, and the difference of religion was appeased, by staying for a generall Councell. Meanetime, Messieurs de Guise, being in hope that their greatnesse would still increase and spread abroad, were much abashed to see it shortened by the death of the king their Nephewe: and thereby to be constrained and put in minde, to thinke that they were no more as they had been. So that they yeelded their place to the King of
Nauarre, but not the opinion, nor the hope to recouer it once againe. By that means their great affaires left off, but they forsooke them not, seeking by all meanes to be reconciled to the Prince of Conde, alwaies keeping their owne, (like the Maister of a shippe that hoyseth and pulleth downe his sayles as time serueth) and alwaies stopped the holes wherein they foresawe the round world enter: ceasing not to speake most assuredly and openly against heresie, which they so much the more detested, as that they perceiued the Princes of the blood, to lend their helping hand towards the aduancement and establishing thereof: and that the king of Nauarre that made account thereof, began to like it, hauing more desire to the Realm of Nauarre, that was promised to be restored vnto him, and to that of Sardaigne offered him, if he would separate himselfe from the Princes reformed, and the protection of the protestants Churches, then to the consideration of the quarrell of his house. The greatnesse of those Princes could not continue equall, by reason of the vnequallitie of their houses. Yet they sought to go all in one ranke, whereby the kings fauor could no sooner giue countenance to the one, but it mooued the other. His fauour is like a faire Ladie, euery man seeketh and courteth her, and if she smile more vpon one then vppon the other, it breedeth but iealousie, despight, and quarrell: and she cannot diuide her heart in two, without a a mortall diuision. Euery man hath his turne, and both Catholicque and Huguenot, vnder pretence and zeale of religion, seeketh to get the good wil of the king, his mother, and his bretheren. But the freedome of the Ministers, being impatient to staye the resolution of a Councell, made them to preach openly, whereby they so much tempted and altered mens consciences, that suddainly the ceremonies and traditions of the Church, were abated, and the temples seased vpon and destroyed. And the Constable beeing descended of the first Barron and first Christian in France, opposed himselfe against this diuersitie of religion in one realm,The Edict of Iuly made at S. Germains in Laye, 1561. The assembly at Poissy. The murther of Vassy the 1. of Mars.
1562. The battaile of Dreux the 19. of Dece^ber,
1561. The Constable was first taken then the Prince of Conde. The king of Nauarre was slaine at the siege of Roue^. 1562. The Duke of Guise slaine before Orleans, the 24. of Febru. 1563.
1. Edict of peace. Anno. 1563. Reconciliatio^ betweene the D. of Guise and the Admirall 1566. Counsell of the Duke of Alue. The enterprise at Meaux, at the feast of S. Michael* 1567. The battaile of S. Denis, on S. Martins euen, 1567. VVhere the Constable was slaine. The second Edict of peace at Lo^iumeau which from the time of king Clouis had bin holden and maintained in paritie and integritie, vnder the ancient faith of their forefathers. The Cardinal of Lorraine on the other side, tooke the matter in hand, and counselled the king to make an Edict against those of the religion, and the presumption of certain men was such, that they co^sented to the disputation at Poissy, wher in place of remedie, we found but an increasing of our miseries. After that, the Edict of Ianuarie so much renoumed in all the troubles, and solemnized by the Huguenots, folowed: the breach whereof, by the means of Vassy, caused both parts to fall to armes vpon the plaines of Dreux, which gaue the name to that me morable battell: not onely for the number of men there assembled, being
1900. foot, and 2000. horse for the kings part, and 4000. horse called White-coates, and 6000. foot of the contrarie: as for diuers other accidents that therin were marked, besides the taking of two of their chiefe leaders. For the Prince of Conde that imputed the first motions of his imprisonme^t, and of his separatio^ fro^ the fauor and presence of K.
Francis the 2. to the practises of the Duke de Guise, that euening of the battell, was his prisoner, and accepted the halfe of his auncient enemies bed, that was offered vnto him: a right discription of this variable world, wher you see one triumphing, and the other captiue. Among so many prosperities, that inuironed the Duke of Guise, (by the death of the king of N. Generall of the kings armie, followed by all the Catholicque Nobilitie, and Tutor and co^ductor of the king and Queen-mothers whole affaires) death being iealous, that the Capitall citie of the realme, at his arriuall had cried: Viue Guise, Viue Guise: with as great ioy and gladnes, as euer they cried, Viue le Roy, dispatched him out of the way by Poltrots means, that slew him at
Orleans, and therby finished the first ciuill war: at which time, the Prince of Conde was deliuered out of prison, and the Constable brought the first Edict of peace. By this peace France had means to breath, and her subiects to liue in some assurance, but the corrupted humours, that caused the disease of the estate, were not so wel disiested, but that ther rested some remnants, whereby it might be feared, it would fall into a much more dangerous sicknesse: which happened 3. years after, whe^ the most troublesome alterers of estate, renued the fire, which although it were not vtterly quenched, yet it was half co^sumed. The Queen hauing performed that generall visitation of all the kings Prouinces, and at Moulins taken vp the quarrel between the houses of Guise and Chastillon, and made the^ friends, caused 6000. Switzers to be sent for, vndera fained sear of the D. of Albes passage throgh France, with whom she had conferred at Bayonne: wher they concluded, that to liue in peace, it was best for her to fish after great Samons, and to leaue the frogs. The Admiral perceiuing it, determined rather to saue himselfe by his armes, then with his legs, and went so near vnto the king, that he had almost taken him at Meaux, and so caused him to retire to
Parris, being conducted by Pfiffers regiment, And the Prince of Conde tooke the town of S. Dennis, assieged
Parris, and burned the milles. And in fine, the two armies met, and fought before S. Dennis, wher the Protestants retired, and the K. had the victorie: but it cost him the life of the Constable, beeing one of the valiantest Captains in al Europe: who hauing commanded in
7. battels, died in the sight of the citie of Parris, and of his king, at the head of an armie, victorious by his co^duction, and hauing cut his enemies in the cheeks, that had wounded him in the face, he was by a Scot shot into the raines with a Pistolle, and so died of the seuenth wound he had receiued in that seuenth battel: being of the age of 60. and 7. yeares. This death procured an other little peace, co^monly called the lined peace, which continued but 6. months, and made a war that The Prince of Conde slaine at Bassac the
21, of March, 1569. The battaile of Montcontour the
3. of October, 1569. The 3. Edict of peace, An.
1570.indured for the space of 2. whole years, wherein the Prince of Conde died: and where the Princes of Nauarre and
Conde, and the Dukes de Guise and Maine were Captains: the one of the protestants armie, vnder the conduct of the Admiral: the other for the defence of Poictiers, vnder Monsieur the kings brother, General of his Maiesties armie, whereby the battell of
Moncontour happened, where all the protestants footemen were slaine, and the Rutters spurs were not sharp ynough, to make their horses flie: but Monsieur not pursuing his victorie, suffered his enemies to range and meet togither again, who in short time were fou^d strong ynough to constrain him to the wars, or else to make another Edict of peace, with more aduantage then the two first. This peace being sworned by al those that had any publike authorite therin, caused the Frenchmen to feele the sweetnesse of tranquillitie, to be much different from the sharpnesse and bitternesse of ciuill diuisions. Therein the king, the Queen-mother, his bretheren, and the Princes, did nothing but breath, and aspire vnto contentment: nothing was spoken of in France, but only assurance, and of remoouing their wars vnto the frontiers, or within the bowelles of forrain countries, and euery place was filled with marriages, bankets, etc. But this goodly shew was put only a presaging of the torment that ensued: and Saylers iudged that those great calmes, would in the end cause some great tempest. For presently after, ensued the great and terrible day so full of blood, teares, and sorrow, where without respect,The massacre vppon Bartholomewe day, Ann.
1573. so many French men had their throats cut, and wher the king of N. doubting himselfe not to be secured in the chast imbrasings of his first nights espousals, was constrained to alter the forme of his religion. And because he had escaped that danger, (and finding himself healed of his continuall fears and distrusts, he said, that in changing of religion, he had done it by constraint) hee was oftentimes accused of Apostacie. At that time, Rochel ye bega^ to refuse the Garrisons which the K. would haue placed therin, was the refuge of the Huguenots:Rechel besieged, Anno.
1573. whervpo^ Monsieur besieged it: and in 6. months brought it to such extremitie, as that if the planting of the flowerdeluce in the furthest parts of Septentrion, had not diuerted him, he had been Maister therof, at such co^position as had pleased him.The King of Polonia Sigismod, when he died, left
5000. horses in his stable. For the Polonians sent Ambassadors vnto him, to offer him the Crowne of Polonia, and to inuite him to the possession of a great, rich, and puissant Realme: great, because it is in compasse twise as much as France: rich, by reason of the abundance of all things necessarie for mans life: renowmed, for armes and horses: and puissant, for the honour of the Nobilitie, being most valiant and braue warriours: hauing more Gentlemen therein, then are in France, England, and Spaine. Thither he went, being accompanied by the king himself, as far as Lorraine, from whence for his better assurance,Coronation of the K. of Polonia. Letters of regent granted the Queene-mother, till the K. comming out of Polonia. In Parliame^t the 3. of Iune
1574. he passed through the territories of the Princes of
Almaine, (that were much greeued and offended at the murther co^mitted vpon S. Bartholomewes day) and from thence he arriued at
Cracouia, and there vpon the first day of Penthecost he receiued the Crown, and the next year after vppon the same day, hee was crowned king. Meane time, king Charles his brother, that died in the flower of his age, declared him to be his successor, and his mother regent till his returne: commaunding the Duke of Alencon his brother, and the king of Nauarre, not to alter any thing in the state: and to perswade themselues, that kingdomes are onely gotten eyther by vertue or succession, and not by reuolting or tyrannie. As this great king of two great realms, as earnestly looked for of the Frenchmen, as lamented of the Polonians, was desired of the Catholciques, for the effects
The returne of the king of Polonia into France. His nature. The warres for the common-wealth, vndertaken by Monsieur and the malco^te^ts. An increase of Monsieurs reuenewes the 28. of May, 1576. An agreeme^t with Monsieur, made at Ioinuille. The K. made this peace to seperate his brother from the Princes. The 4. Edict of peace in May. 1576. Aiguemortes. Beaucaire. Perigueux. Le Mas de Verdun. Nions. Serres. Yssoire. Seine la gra^d Tour. The king called this peace his peace. D. Casimire wold not dislodge, without assurance of paiment, and the obseruation of peace. The league of Peronne.they had perceiued to be in him touching the religion, so was he also loued of the protestants, that knewe him of nature to bee a true Frenchman, estranged not only fro^ cruell actions, but also from most seuere intents: and hoped vnder his raigne, to finde a more moderate and peaceable season. But God to punish our sinnes, had otherwise ordained: for at the kings returne, the wars likewise returned, which began to flame and burst our vpo^ the frontiers, against the Marshall of
Amuille, who perceiuing himselfe altogither frustrate of any hope of euer being reconciled to the king, practised with the towns of
Longuedoc: seduced Monsieur, that made himselfe Generall of this new confusion, vnder pretence of a quarrell for the Common-wealth, and vsed the forces of both the religions. The king of
Nauarre, that could not forget the bloodie day that had consumed so many of his seruants, and perceiued not himselfe so much imployed as his inferiours, in matters of estate, abandoned the honorable captiuitie of the Court, and those that had followed him, with all the Princes of his house, ioyned themselues togither for his protection. Whereat
Monsieur was greeued, and perceiuing himself to be left alone with his Catholicques, he had recourse to the kings fauour, by the increase of a new degree of honour and reuenue, giuen him by the king. The king of
N. and the Prince of Conde, procured stra^gers ayde, not as they protested, therby to shake off the yoke of the Monarchie, or to deuide the^selues into as many Co^mon-wealths, as ther are Prouinces in
France: but to liue in obedience vnder the king, and freedom of conscience, and thereby to obtain a peace: which was made between the king and Monsieur his brother, the K. of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, whereby the free, publike, and generall exercise of the religion, was permitted vnto the Protestants, in all the places and Towns, which as then they held, they being declared capable, to haue their places in Parliaments and chambers of iustice seuerally: all iudgements being made against them for any enterprise whatsoeuer, declared voyde: the memorie of the heads of their part taken away, and the cruell day of S.
Bartholomew disauowed. And for the better assurance and performance of the conditions, they had eight Townes deliuered vnto them, with the conditions of their gouernments. This peace which was thought would haue long continued, beeing made with so greate solemnitie, not with dissemblers, but with a king, that as yet had giuen no occasion of distrust, was soone weakened and shaken, for that the same conditions that had made it, were the means to vnloose it. For the Prince of
Conde perceiuing that he reaped not the fruit of his desert, and that the gouernment of Picardie was denied him, was the first that found himselfe offended, and that shewed himself discontent: desiring the Duke Cazimir, not to abandon the frontiers of Lorraine, vntill hee perceiued that peace to be wel confirmed and obserued. The Catholicques to the contrary, being greeued at the libertie which the Huguenots had obtained, thereby to make their religion increase and fructifie, and that the Rutter had not as yet put vp his Pistolle into the case, besought his Maiestie to restraine that pernitious licence of the Edict of peace: but perceiuing him not to be sufficiently moued to cut off that which as the^ bega^ but to spring vp, nor to take knife in hand, therewith to shed his owne blood, they began to assemble at Peronne, and to moue all the rest of the towns, vnder pretence of diuers occasions, not litle wondred at of the people:  which were for the honor and increase of the Catholike religion: for the suretie of the estate and Crowne of his Maiestie: the vtter extirpation of Heresies: and for the reuocation of the Edict of peace, wherein they swore obedience and seruice to the Generall that should bee appoynted ouer this fellow shippe: ingaging their liues and honours, neuer to separate themselues for any commaundement, pretence, excuse,The originall of the league in An. 1576 or occasion whatsoeuer. Behold the conception of the league, which will bring foorth most prodigious effects. The Huguenots had wonne their sure, for till then, they were often accused of rebellion, as hauing shaken off the yoake of Soueraigntie, beeing separated from that faire and vnexpugnable maxime, that the power of the Prince proceedeth from God, and that it is not lawfull to resist against it, for any excuse, cause, pretence, or reason whatsoeuer. Pardon mee I beseech you, mightie Princes, Prelates, Lords, and Gentlemen, that are Catholicques, if I tell you, that this fortresse which you builde, will bee your ouerthrowe: this fire you kindle, will burne you: these kniues you forge, will bee tempered in your entralles: and that thereby, you will leaue neither of your selues, nor your league, but a most pittifull and shamefull memorie. What thinke you to do? O you leaguer for God, for the faith, and for the king?The league is not for God. You vndertake armes for God, who desireth nothing but peace: you publish rebellion, hee commaundeth obedience: you trouble the rest and quietnesse of a Christian king, hee willeth vs to indure at the hands of a Prince, although he bee a Pagan. You do it for God, whose name you call vppon, and deny his power: you doo it for God, that detesteth your actions, and knoweth your thoughts: and you do it for that God, who will confound all those that breed confusion among his people. You vndertake warres for religion, and nothing hindereth it more then warres: you fight for holinesse,Nor for religion. and your weapons destroy the Churches: authorise blasphemers, and plant Atheisme, impietie, and despising of deuotion in all places. You march vnder pretence of the Churches cause, and you ransome and spoyle the Cleargie by tithes and impositions. If it bee for the spiritualtie, wherefore do you bring in the Rutters, that haue ouerrunne the Priests, burned the Churches, robbed the relicques,Nor for the Church. and polluted the Altars. You said it is for the king, so said the Huguenots at the enterprises of Ammboise, of Meaux, and of S. Germaine in Laye, and you will not beleeue him, for the king had disauouched them. If it bee for the king, where are his commissions? If it bee for his seruice, where is his commaundement? If it be for him, wherefore do dou it without him? If it bee for his obedience,Nor for the King. wherefore sweare you to obey the Head of your league? Can you bee bound by one oath, to two co^trarieties? This new faith and promise which you giue, is it not to obey a new Lord, seeing you cannot serue two Maisters? If it be to maintain his kingdome in the Catholicque religion, cannot hee doo it without you? What shame will you procure vnto him, to atribute the honour of the glorie of so happie a conquest vnto your selues, and not refer the triumph vnto him? What blasphemie and reproach do you induce into his honour and reputation, both among his owne people, and with straungers? Will they not say,The subiect ought not to bind himselfe by oath of fidelitie, to any but to his soueraigne. that a great king, and a wise king, with the aduantages of his Maiestie, and his powers, durst not enterprise that which the subiects vndertake to doo. Know you not, that all leuying of armes is treason, without the kings authoritie? that the subiects cannot make any league, without the Prince? that leagues are not made betweeene Subiects, or equall persons: and that the Courts of Parliament, are the foundations of the seueritie of lawes, both humane and diuine? But let vs heare what your pattents of the league containe.



The first league made at Peronne without naming the Head. For religion. For the seruice of the king.
IN the name of the holy Trinitie, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, the onely true God, bee honour and glorie for euer. The association of Princes, Lords, and Catholicke Gentlemen, ought to bee, and shall bee made, to reestablish the lawe of God in her pristinate estates, to retaine and holde the holy seruice thereof, according to the forme and manner of the holy, Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romaine Church, abiuring and renouncing all errors to the contrarie. Secondly, to preserue king HENRY, the third of that name, by the grace of God, and his Predecessors, most Christian kings, in the estates, glorie, authoritie, dutie, seruice, and obedience, that is due vnto him by his subiects: as it is contained in the Articles which shall be presented vnto him in the Councell of estate: which at his sacring and coronation, he promised and swore to obserue: with protestation not to do anything, to the preiudice of that which shall bee ordained by the States of his Realme. Thirdly, to restore vnto the Prouinces of this Realme,
For the people.
and Estates thereof, the auncient rights, preheminences, franchises, and liberties, such as they were in the time of King CLOVIS, first Christian King, and better and more profitable, if they may be any wayes inuented, vnder the protection afore said: and if in case there happeneth any impeachment, opposition, or rebellion, to the contrary of that which is aforesaid, by any man, or from what part soeuer it may bee, the saide associates shall bee bound and holden therein, to imploye all their goods and meanes whatsoeuer: yea, and their owne persons euen to the death, to punish, chastice, and ouerrunne, those that seeke to contradict, hinder and resist: that all the things aforesaid, shall not bee really and effectually put in execution. And if in case that any of the associates, their subiects, friends, and confederates, shall bee molested, oppressed, or pursued, for the cause aforesaid, by whomsoeuer it may bee, the said associates shall bee bound to imploy their bodies, goods, and meanes, to bee reuenged on them that shall haue done, or caused the said oppressions and molestations, bee it by way of iustice, or by armes, without exception of any man. If it happen,
Against such as appose the^selues against the deuises of the league. Against such as shall leaue or abandon the league.
that any of the associates, after that they haue taken their oathes vnto the said associates, would withdrawe themselues, or depart out of the same, vnder what pretence soeuer it shall bee, (which God forbidde) such breakers of their consents, shall bee hurt and offended both in their bodies and goods, by all meanes possible, as enemies to God, and rebels and perturbers of publike tranquilities, without reuenge to bee taken against the said associates, either publikely or priuately. The said associates shal sweare all readie and willing obedience and seruice, vnto the Head and Geuerall that shall bee appoynted: followe and giue counsell, comfort and ayde, as well to the entertaining and conseruation of the saide association, as to the ruines and ouerthrowe of the contradictors thereof, without acception or exception of persons: and the failers and delayers therein, shall bee punished by authoritie of the General, and as hee shall appoynt: wherevnto his said associates shal submit themselues.


Practising with townes.
All Catholicques of Townes and Villages shall bee aduertised, and secretly summoned by the particular Gouernours, to enter into the said association and dutie, to furnish men and munition for the execution thereof, according to the power and facultie of euerie man. That such as will not enter into the said association, shal be reputed as enemie thereof, and be pursued by all means and sorts of troubles and molestations:
Contribution of men and mony.
and it shal be forbidden vnto the said associates, to enter into debates and quarrels one with the other, without permission of the Generall, at whose arbitrement the contradistors shall bee punished, as wel touching reparation of honour, as for all other causes.


If for fortification or greater assurance of the said associates, there is any appoyntment made with the Prouinces of this Realm, it shalbe made in forme aforesaid, and vpo^ the same conditions, whether the said associations be sought for by the said Townes or Prouinces, or that it bee offered vnto them: if it bee not otherwise ordained by the Generall. I sweare by God the Father, touching this Ghospel, and vppon paine of cursing and eternall damnation, that I haue entered into this holy and Catholicque association,
The forme of the leaguers oath.
according to the forme and manner of the extract that hath been presently read vnto mee, faithfully and sincerely, whether it bee therein to commaund, or to serue and obey, and promise both vppon mine honor and life, to continue therein, as long as one drop of blood last within my body, without resisting or withdrawing my selfe from the same, vnder pretence of any commaundement, excuse, cause, or occasion whatsoeuer.

The instructions of the Aduocate Dauid.About that time the Aduocate Dauid was taken, with certaine aduertisements and notes about him, concerning the meanes whereby to authorise this league, and to breake the ordinary course of the succession of France, by impossible meanes, which ought neither to be known, nor be beleeued, and wherewith I meane not to dishonour this discourse.
Packets of the league of Peronne cast about the streetes. Nature of the people.Meane time Postes were sent into all places, to spread the newes and first aduise of those pretences, masked with faire and shining vizardes of holinesse, thereby to bleare the eyes of the people: and libels were cast about the streets: diuers men of good account trauelling about the countrie, to serue for bellows to this new forge, made to kindle a great warre.
And the people that ranne from one extremitie to another, which loue changes: a troupe that followeth such as lead it: a sea that neuer riseth without winde: and a Monster with many heads, suffered themselues to be borne away with the first waues of this tempest.
The Parliament at Blois,
1576Meane time, the king minding to put cold water into the boyling pot, and to cut off the meane to this new motion, caused the Parliament to be holden, which by the last peace he had promised, thinking, and certainly perswading himself, that not any one in his Realme, but loued rather to entertain a sworne and solemne peace, then to seeke the continuance of warres: the ouerthrowe of Townes, and the desolation of the people: or that the Rutter should once againe return to sucke the blood, gnawe the bones, and eate the marrowe of their childre^. At the first assembly of the Parliament,An Oration of Henry the third, at the Parliament in Blois. and after he had saluted and welcommed all the Estates, with a most heroyicall and Princely grace, he made an Oration vnto them concerning the miseries and afflictions of his Realme, and the hope he had, that so great an assembly, beeing the very quintessence of the finest wits in al France, wold prouide some remedie therin: shewing that the minoritie of himselfe and his brother, at the beginning of those ciuill wars, was reason sufficient why they should not be esteemed, or once thought to bee the causes therof: commending the wisdome of his mother touching the gouernment of the Realme: protesting, that for his own part, he had no other care, desire, nor intent, then only to procure the rest and welfare of his subiects, whose miseries he wold be alwaies readie to relieu with the price of his dearest blood:The Crowne of France layde to pawne for
100. millions of gold. charging al the assembly to ayde and assist him therein, and to deuise the means to release his Crowne, at that time pawned for aboue the sum of 100. millions of golde, to vnite themselues togither, thereby to puck vp the seeds of partialities, to reforme abuses, and to restore iustice to herintegritie, and to reduce it into the pristinate holinesse and splendure. That don, Pierre d'Epinac Archbishop of Lyons, rose vp, and before them al, declared his reasons touching the Clargie. The Lord of
Senscey, with a militarie, franke, and true French tongue, spake for the Nobilitie: and Versoris for the common. The two first, by a multitude of reasons and wonderfull speeches, concluded that it was most fit and conuenient, that there should bee but one religion in the Realme. The third, shewed that the people wholly desired the revnion thereof, so it might bee done by peaceable and quiet meanes without warres. But the Cleargie and Nobilitie, after many difficulties, caused the Parliament to breake vp, so that vnder the ashes of the last warres, which as yet were hotte, there might be found the sparkes of a great fire. For after many messages (although in vaine) sent by the king to the Protestant Princes,Protestation of the Prince of Conde, in Ann. 1577. vnder which was placed, Deo and victricibus armis. the warre beganne againe. For the Prince of Conde rose vppe in armes, and swore not to leaue them, vntill he had brought the realme into her pristinate splendure and dignitie: restored libertie to the Estates: eased the poore people of insupportable tributes, inue^ted by the Italians: deliuered the Frenchmen from the seruitude and tyrannicall infamie whervnto they were subiected, not onely by their owne carelessenesse and disvnion, but by artificiall practises of such as would rayse the foundations of their greatnesse, with the blood of the true Princes of France, and of the Nobilitie, to the great disaduantage and ouerthrow of the auncient lawes and customes of the realme. Wherevppon the king hauing enterprised those warres, the rather because his Estates shewed him the reasons,VVarre beganne about Easter, 1577 necessities and commodities, (although of his owne nature he rather desired not to haue broken the peace, but onely to abridge it of certaine particular articles, by the Huguenots esteemed most aduantage for them) caused two great armies to be leuied: wherof Monsieur was Generall of the one, that marched towards
la Charite and Issoire, and the Duke Demain, commaunding that which went for Poitou, where hee assieged
Bar,Taking of la Charite and Issoire, Anno.
1577. and tooke diuers Townes. His Maiesties armie incamped at Brouage, and costrained it to yeelde. And Lansac Gouernour thereof, would haue gone into the Isle of Re, but hee could not. And to conclude, the warres were so long and tedious, that the Generalles wel perceiued themselues to bee too olde, to liue to see the end thereof. And the king that neuer had tasted the sweetenesse of peace, beganne to dsire it, hauing first prooued so many troubles and vexations of warre, therevppon hee determined to establish a good and holy peace,Reason to induce peace, and against warre, in An.
1577. Great numbers, are not the cause of victories. God is the God of battelles. A discourse polliticke and military. The chance of warre vncertaine. which should bee well obserued: to the which end, hee heard debated, examined, and considered, diuers and all the reasons that could bee alleadged, both for the establishing and dissoluing thereof. Those that desired no peace, deuised many arguments which they framed for the purpose: as first they sayde: That the king ought not to make peace, hauing meanes to make warre, with more men and aduantage then his enemies. But they were aunswered, that the multitude of men, is not the cause of victorie: and that a smal handful of desperate souldiers, had ouerthrowne a great armie. The kings cause is more iust. The Princes shrowd themselues vnder a iust enterprise when God is offended: and that the war is not made for the defence of his quarrell, but for particular reuenge. The Huguenots haue neither mony nor credite, for the souldier himselfe among them, is constrained to contribute mony to pay forraine ayde, instead of receiuing his own wages. With a little, they do much: necessitie is their vertue: and the ground of their cause is so deare vnto them, that they will rather fight without mony or meat, then liue without their libertie, or preaching of the Gospell. There needs but one battell to ouerthrow and destroye them. Victorie resteth in the hands of God: it is a both doubtfull and vncertaine, and battels in these daies are prolonged, and neuer giuen without aduantage of the one side, or the other. And again, it is impossible with an armie of
10000. men, to roote out a 100000. Huguenots. The K. wil neuer hazard battel, but he is assured to haue the victorie, and to triumph ouer his enemies. This is as much to say, as he reckoneth without his Host: for it co^sisteth in God: there needeth but a small matter to put all your forces in disorder, and make them a praye to their enemies. For if in times past, 500. Actolians,Iustin. lib. 24. X^nop. hist. lib.
7. Bap. Egnat. The battell of Poictiers. Lois the last Earle of Flaunders. Froisart li. 2. cap. 95.96.97.98. better shepheards then souldiers, put 900. Lacedemonians to flight? If
Epaminondas with 4000. men, ouerthrew the Spartans armie, beeing sixe times as many? If among the Christians, Baudonin brother to Godfrey of Bullon, with 300. horse and 900. foot, all Frenchmen, caused the Caliphe to yeeld and leaue the field, being inuironed with 9000. horse, and 20000. foot? If a litle troupe of English souldiers halfe in dispaire before Poictiers, triumphed ouer a great armie of the most puissant and warlike Nation in the world? Is it not a most foolish temerite, to put confidence in the doubtfull chance of a battell? It is neuer good to assayle those that hope for nothing but dispaire. The last Earle of Flaunders hauing brought the Towne of Gaunt to an extremitie of victuals, would haue them to present themselues before him bare-headed and footed, with halters about their necks: and so to aske pardon for their liues, without any assurance thereof. But 5000. of those miserable people, that had nothing left but their armes, and in dispaire,He was constrained to hide himselfe in the strawe of a poore womans bedde, where he saued himselfe, and the next day went out disguised. The peace of the low countries. issued out vpon him, and like hungrie wolues fought so desperately, that in fine, they ouerthrew his whole armie, co^posed of more then fortie thousand men. There is no peace to be granted to heretickes. It is done continually, for it is not yet a yeare, since the king of Spaine granted peace to the Islands of
Holand and Zeland, not only giuing them the libertie of their religion, but withdrawing the exercise of his owne. Peace giueth that to the Huguenots, which warre taketh from them. And what? the libertie of conscience. Many polliticke and wise men, haue acknowledged and confessed, that force constraineth not mens consciences: that sword and fire, haue not power to extirpe the opinions of religion, that are once entered into the mindes of men: that such victorie ouer mens consciences, belongeth onely to God, the father of light and trueth: and that force may well make Hippocrites and Atheists, but not religious or christian people.
If the king suffreth this libertie of conscience,1576. Libertie of conscience. Catholicque religion will bee cleane consumed vnder these nouelties: and all his Realme wil be poysoned with sects, Schismes, and errors. The free exercise of this new religion, will be lesse aduantage to the perticipants thereof, then it would be if it were but secretly vsed.Religion increaseth more being persecuted and forbidden, then whe^ it is permitted. Read a booke touching this point, imprinted at Antwarpe. An. 1579. Dialogus do Pace. For the people are light and impatient, with long rest and quietnesse: and to the contrary, things least permitted, and vneasie, are most pleasant and agreeable. And therefore desire nothing but change, and dislike nouelties, with more disdaine then euer they had affectio^ or vehme^t desire to see the^ adua^ced. They alwaies fal headlong into that which is forbidden the^. The more they presented, torme^ted, and troubled the hereticques at
Prague, and in Ausbourg, and the more they were forbidden to assemble and meet togither, so much the more they in creased and had assemblles, and with fiers, whippings, hanging, and prisons, became innumerable. And when they haue the free libertie of that they desire, when rigor is layde aside, the thing becommeth so common and discouered, that many refuse it, entering againe into the great and broad way which they had left. And therfore diuers men haue thought, that there is no better means to shake, Apollitike maxime. Vnitie of the sectaries, in matters of pollicie.and in the end to ouerthrow a new religion, then to permit the free exercise thereof. For as a man of great iudgement in our time, saith: As much as man loueth his libertie, and yet abuseth it, so much the more hee hateth seruitude and constraint, wherin notwithstanding he behaueth himselfe better, then in the enioying of his freedome. There ought to be but one religion in one Realme. It is well said: but when a king findeth more, it is very hard for him to roote them out. Would you haue one eye thrust out the other? the greatest Princes in the world are much troubled thereby, and yet constrained to indure it. The Princes of Almaine haue this diuersitie in one Towne: yea, in one Host, and in one familie, without either trouble or diuision.
The interim of the Emperour Charles the fist, 1530. Confirmed 1555.The Emperour
Charles the fift, was constrainsd to passe that path, and his brother Ferdinand, a man most affected to the Catholicque religion, consented to the same libertie in his kingdomes of Bohemia, Hungaria, and Austria. Pietie is the foundation of all estates,
which cannot be in all places where God is diuersly serued. It is so, and you finde many that complaine thereof, but fewe that seeke the remedie: we knowe but two, that is, rigor, and peaceablenesse, either by a generall Councell, or by armes. For the first it needeth not, because the trueth once knowne and determined, ought not to be brought in question or disputed of againe. The latter is altogither straunge, and it was neuer heard, that men were put to death, to force them to beleeue. To kill, burne, and massacre, are words neuer vsed but in seditious enterprises: those of the new opinion, that liue among the Catholicques without preaching or open exercises, are content to seeke no further freedome then the libertie of their conscience without being troubled. A King cannot refuse his subiects the libertie of not speaking, for that mens tongues and consciences, are not vnder the Soueraigntie of his Scepter.Tacere liceat, Nulla libertas minor a rege Petitur Senec. O ed. Lictance li. 5. cap. 14. God is the God of mens soules: Kings may constraine mens bodies, and force them to say that outwardly, which inwardly they deny. For as he (that is called the Cicero of Christians) saith: Who can constraine me not to beleeue that which I will beleeue? or to thinke that credible, which seemeth incredible: there is nothing so voluntarie as religion: but if the minde be separated from it, it is no more religion, but hypocrisie and dissimulation: force will do that,Purpure cultores efficies non Dei. which should be done onely by loue, for by it men respect more the penalties of the lawe, then the lawe it selfe: they will reuerence the Iudges scarlet gowne, not for the loue of the Iudge, but for feare of the executioner, that attendeth on him:^ides suadenda non imperanda. Bernard. and when they are gone, their courages are found to be strongerthen their torments, and their constancie greater then their cruelties: peaceablenesse is more conuenient, and hath more force. Faith commandeth not, but is taught: the strongest or roughest bits, are not fit for good horses. Our co^sciences are the like, for force breaketh sooner, the^ bendeth the^. If the Lute bee not well tuned, or if the Meane do not agree with the Base, we must not therefore breake it,About the end of Iune,
1574. the king called him his father. but winde it softly vp, and you shall make them accord. The Emperour Maxemilion, that said, that no sinne could be greater, then to violate mens consciences, answered the king of France returning out of Polonia, (proposing the ruine of the Huguenots, and the restablishing of the only religio^ of his forefathers in his realm) that those wich seek to rule ouer me^s consciences, supposing to win heauen, do oftentimes loose their possessions on earth.To obey God and serue the king. Two religions cannot command in one Realme. It is true, but that is no consequent why there should not be two: for the subiect is not bound to follow the religion of his Prince, as long as he permitteth him the libertie of his own: he must obey and serue: hee giueth to God, that which is Gods, and to Caezar,In the time of Clouis a Pagan, there was Christians in Fra^ce that which is Caezars, and confoundeth not the difference between those two seruices and duties. He that hath one religion, cannot haue two, and hateth and detesteth that which is the contrarie. Clouis our first christian King, being a Pagan, tollerated christians in his Realme: and so did our King being in Polonia, permit Latin and Greeke Churches, with the confession of Ausbourg, Lutherans, and Caluenists, to liue togither in
Muscouia, and other countries belonging vnto the Emperor: the prince of Greece and a great part of his subiects, are different fro^ him touching religion. And although the Turke receiueth not the Crowne, yet he constraineth them not to leaue their christianitie. The Frenchmen could not indure Iewes in France. They bannished them not because of their religion, but for their Barbarous cruelties, wherewith they crucified young children in dispight of the sonne of God: and for their extreame vsuries, wherewith they consumed the common people. The king suffering Heretickes, doth wrong to the Catholicques. The king is Common-father to them, as well as to the others:Iewes banished out of France, and for what cause. as there is no reason to prooue the ingratitude of the sonne towards the father, so all lawes detest the inhumanitie and impietie of the father against the son. Those whom the king so oftentimes proclaimeth rebelles, and his enemies, are his children, his subiects, and his seruants. God neuer prospereth the enterprises of the subiect against his Prince, and very sildome haue kings had great triumphs by wars ouer their subiects. It belongeth to a
Vittellius, and not to a king of France, to walke along the fieldes, his garments all died with the blood of his subiects,Vitellius said, that the body of the enemie slaine, sauoureth well, but that of the citizen beeing dead, is better. Tacit. lib. 17. Suet in the life of Vitellius. Cap. 10. The people neuer die. The 5. Edict of peace, An. 1577. made at Poictiers in the moneth of Septemb. Conference at Nerac, the last of Februarie.
1579. The 6. Edict of peace in An. 1581. and to delight in the sauour of their dead bodies lying slaine vppon the ground. VVhen the Huguenots shall be ouerthrowne and consumed, the king shall liue in peace. Suppose he putteth them to death, and that at one time, hee cutteth off a hundreth thousand heads. The General seed is immortall by the succession of euery particular familie, kindred, and seuerall man, which still increaseth one after the other, although euery particular man of himselfe is mortall, the bodie of the people in general neuer dieth. The K. may wel destroy al the particulars of this new opinion, but they will leaue as many children, whose innocencie God and nature will not permit to touch, that will succeed not onely in their goods, but in the humors, quarrels, and passions of their fathers. In fine, those that perswaded peace by their reason alleadged, got the vpper hand of those that desired warre: and there vpon it was concluded, with great concontentment on both both parts, that the Prince of Conde the same night he receiued it, caused it to be published by torch-light, although with lesse aduantage on his side then the first. For it restored the exercise of the Catholicque religion, in the places where it had been prohibited, continuing and commending it to bee vsed in all places: it suffered mens consciences to bee free, yet without publicke exercise, but onely in the Townes and places, where as then it was openly preached, and to Gentlemen of quallitie and degree, in their own houses: yet there was some difficultie in the execution and obseruation of this peace, which the conference at Nerac betweene the Queene-mother and the King of
Nauarre, soone auoyded: but the wound not well healed, did still bleed, by meanes of the furious disorders of those that were his chiefe doers: but in the yeare one thousand fiue hundreth eightie and one, it was wholly ioyned and drawne vnto a scarre. Peace being made, what became of those that desired nothing but warre?

Monsieurs voyage into Flaunders.The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, withdrew themselues. And the Queene-mother caused her title which she pretended to the Crowne of Portugall, as onely heire of the house of Boulongne, to be discided. And Monsieur the kings brother, after the example of the Arch-duke Matthias, went into
Flaunders, there to make worke for the king of Spaine, where he made a goodly entrie, but an euill retrait. Mean time, what did the king? he to ouerthrow impietie by godlinesse, and heresie by trueth: and to shew by all his actions, that he desired nothing more, then the ending of all diuisions in his Realme: and knowing that the Prince is as it were a spring, from whence there issueth either vice or vertue, that the people follow his steps, and that they do more by example then by commaundement: hee shewed himselfe the mirrour of deuotion and christian reformation:Institution of the order of the holy ghost
1579. hee ordained many holy Congregations, true Schooles and Gardens of pietie: he built Monasteries: he frequented religious persons: he ware the order: and by the example of Lois the eleuenth, to vnite great persons in concord and inuiolable amitie, both for the benefite of the estate and Countrie: he instituted the order of the holy Ghost, as an authentike declaration, that he neither could loue nor do good to hereticques, binding al the knights of the Order by a solemne oath, vnto such conditions as only pleased Catholicque mindes: hee esteemed that by spirituall remedies, hee might heale the disease of the spirit, and frenzie of new opinions: that force or mans pollicie, could not constraine mens consciences: that we must not kill, to make men beleeue, that the conuersion of such as are strayed out of the way, is the onely worke of the hand of God: and that the wisest Princes had bin constrained to giue ouer violence and terrour of warres, and haue recourse to catechisings, for the reducing of the consciences of their subiects: hee bestowed Bishoppricks, and spirituall promotions, vpon such as hee knewe to bee no lesse learned then religious: hee caused all sorts of bookes of pietie and deuotion to be printed: forbidding and defending the impression of heretickes writings. And to conclude, he liued more like a Capuc in the^ a King: he desired no more war: his Diana, was the singing of the Foueilantins: his Campe-royal a Cloyster: his armour,Maners and fashions of Henry the third. An Anagramme made of the king. Henticus ter^ius: inte vere Christus. a Penitentiaries sack: he liued continually with a Crucifix in his hand: and if he liued, it was no more he, but Iesus Christ that liued in him. Such witnesse of his actions was giuen by the Capucins of Parris, such was the commendation he had by Father Bernard Fueillantin, and Father Edmund Anger, that had well searched, tried, sounded and tasted the conscience of this Prince, both publikely and priuately, assured and perswade euery man, that France in long time before, had not any Prince more religious, nor more humble, as hauing no other care, then onely to keepe and maintaine his subiects: first, in their obedience to God, and next vnto himselfe. Neuerthelesse, he that in a litle booke, intituled
Francophile, sheweth the greatnes of his spirit: and as the common Prouerb is, maketh the Lyon known by his feet, writeth cleane contrarie of the actions of this king, while he led that sollitarie life. Whose proper words I will rehearse, and ioyne them to this treatise: either in trueth they are of greater eloquence and copiousnes of matter then mine own, which areas followeth. He was soon wearie of wars, and as of nature he was sost and delicate, his spirit weak,Francophile imprinted at Chartres. Anno. 1591. F^l. 31. and 32. lowe, and impatient to indure trauel or paine: and all his complexions vnequal differing, and too base for a souldier: he sought a peaceable and quiet life. And so hee soone turned to delight in weddings, dauncings, and all ordinary pastimes, which procured long peace. But the Queene, and those of the house of Guise, perceiuing him to take that course, thoght to vse him as a sipher, and while hee busied himselfe with deuising of measures, and concordes of dauncings, to hold the rule of the Common-wealth, and to dispose the gouernment thereof: but they found themselues soone frustrate of their intent: for as a fore eye desireth shad dowe, and cannot indure the light; so the spirit of this Prince alreadie molten, and in a manner mollified in this profound rest and quietnesse, could not indure the presence of great persons: whether it were because in his delights hee feared their checkes, or that hee more desired the priuitie of meaner men, in such maner, that finding themselues farre out of their accounts, they had recourse to wicked practises and inuentions, wherewith in time they filled all the countrie of
France.
Meane time, certaine yeares past ouer, wherein to furnish the superfluities of the Court, the Commons of France were so straungely oppressed, that they knewe not what course to holde, wherein those of Guise were not ydle. And as the hunter watcheth in narrowe places for the Quailes, which the rigor of winter season driueth into more temperate and pleasant countries: so among so many publike disorders, they were alwaies watching in the Court, to take vp and entertaine male contents, where no houre in the day passed ouer their heads, but they cought a new Pigeon. And this hunting was not only holden in that place, but in all the Townes of France, where the people were so hardly pressed and beaten down with the waight of those burthens, that all the hopes and comforts of better intertainment by the Guises offered, they presently imbrased without iudgement or discretion. And among all these discontents, of the subiects, oppressed with great taxes, of the Clargies impatie^ce at the increasing of their enemies, and of the Princes of Lorraine,The faith and obedience of the people, began to decline 1582. restrained from the kings fauour, it was an easie matter to renue the league of Peronne, and to animate their hearts, that were disposed to reuolt, in disobedience, to maintaine religion, and the easing of the people. Nor better nor fairer pretence to open the eies, hearts, and purses of such men to enterprise warre, could not be found. At the same time, the king had sent vnto the Princes for the restitution of the Towns, which they held for the obseruation of the last edict of peace, which they were to yeelde vp at the end of 6. yeares. But because the king of Nauarre sent word vnto his Maiestie,Prolongation of the time, of the townes of assurance. 1582. that the peace hauing so often been broken by surprises and open warres, the termed of 6. yeares was too short a time for the execution of the Edict, and abollishing of wars: he agreed to the prolongation thereof. Wherevpon all the Princes of the league, tooke occasion to say, that the king fauoured Hereticques, and that he would indure heresie, and considered not that those Townes were inhabited by Huguenots, strong of scituation, and hard to be won by force. When the king of Nauarre perceiued those motions, and that some matter was breeding, he foresawe the tempest wold light vpon him, what pretence soeuer was made: therevpon he besought the king, to call to minde the intelligences hee had giuen him, in Anno. 1576. sent expresly by a Gentleman, concerning the treatie and handling of the league in Spaine and Italie, and that he shuld looke to the profite of the myne, seeing it was discouered. And perceiuing the enterprise euery day more and more to proceed, he began to take care of himselfe, and sent the Lord of Pardillan to the Queen of England, the king of Denmarke, and the Princes and Electors of Almaine, to renue amitie with them: desiring their aydes touching the preuenting of new troubles, that began to rise in France against the edict of peace: and to appoynt a good sum of mony to bee sent vnto some Towne in
Allemaine, to bee imployed for the leuying of certaine forces against the enemie. In the mean time, for the aduantage of the league, but to the great trouble and mischiefe of all the Realme of France:The death of the Duke of Alencon in Iune, 1584.
Monsieur the kings brother (eyther by his riotousnesse in the lowe countries, for greefe of the hard successe of his affaires, by hazard, or by Salcedas means, that was executed) died at Chasteau Thierry. His death awakened the most drousie heads, it brake all the bandes that stayed the proceedings of the league, and caused it presently to roare, at Chaalons, Rheims, Troye, Dyon, and Mezieres. It had alreadie found credite ynough in all the other Towns, specially at
Parris, wherein they were diswaded from the yoake of the Huguenots, and the hope of the king of Nauarre to rule ouer them. The first point of the loue to the king, was alreadie foundred in her hart: she spake not of him but with al kinde of disdaine, and euery day presented him with the opinions and censures of Pasquils indiscreet ieasts, and libels without names, wherein corrupt minds alreadie stuffed with the disorders of the Court, swallowed vp the poyson of their mutinies, vnder what pretence I knowe not, speaking of the king as of a
Sardanapalus, or one that did nothing:The kings deuise. Manet vltime Coelo. Qui dedit ante Duas vnam abstulit, alcera nutat, Tertia tonsoris nunc facienda manu. of a Prince, drowned in his pleasures and delights, whom alreadie they placed like a Chilperic in a Monastrie: and in stead of the third Crown, which by his deuise was reserued for him in heauen, they promised him one, made with a raisor in a Cloyster. But hee that would knowe the first conception, birth and infancie of the league within Parris, hee must beleeue that which Manant saith to Maheustre, that speaketh like a wise man, and by the propositions and answeres, representeth all those that deale therein: and for the first, hee nameth him that was the secret Minister of the leaguers intent, to make it known to three Preachers, that tooke seuen or eight Coaintors with them, thereby to make a small Councell: which was oftentimes holtors within the Colledge of
Forteret, where they beganne to chuse sixe others of the most faithfull,The Colledge of Forteret, was the cradle of the league. The sixe first confederates of the league. to watch at all the sixe quarters, to report what was done in those places: to sowe this new graine within their heads, to sound the affections of the most feruent Catholicques, and to dispose them to a resolution against the king, the world and death. Those sixe Arch-leaguers, in the beginning made a faire and great Haruest, and as with the number, courage increased. The principall leaguers were assured, that those new confederates would ingender others, presently therevppon the two pillers that sustaine and vphold the Prince, (which are the most faithfull Archers of his Court of guard, that is, good will and authoritie) were thrown downe, hatred and despight entering into their places. Of those two plagues, as of a monsterous blood, was conceiued and brought foorth most disloyall rebellion, and the despising of the lawe and the authoritie of the Prince, mixed with the euill minde which the people bare to their king, his Councell, and his fauourers: hatched this great Erynnis and furious mischiefe in France, that hath entered into all the vaines of our bodie. But alasse poore people, what will you do, what example, what commandement, what iust reason, mooueth or assureth you to arme your selues against your king? What lawe approoueth the rebellion of the subiect against him whom God hath appoynted your king? If there be any imperfection or disorder, are you to correct it? or can the foote ordaine a lawe for the head? It is no more lawfull for you to resist against the faults or imperfections of your Gouernours, then to despight God, and aske him the cause of the frosts and hailes, that beat and spoyled your vines. Stay you little snayles within your shels, come not foorth you torteaux out of the cases, vnder them you are assured: for you shall no sooner put forth your heads, nor stretche out a foote, but presently be assayled, and lie ope^ to your enemies: readie to receiue the first blowe that shal be giuen. Assoone as the league perceiued that diuers townes had made great fires for ioy of her birth, it was presented to the Pope, that he might giue it his blessing, auouch it for his, and declare it to bee for the Catholicke, Apostolike, and Romish Church. But Gregory the 13. desiring to shewe himselfe to bee the common father of all Christians, and Pastor and not dispearser of his flocke,Pope Gregory would nener consent to this raising of men. The answere of the Pope vnto the league. considering that the raising of armes against a most Christian and Catholicque king, was wholly contrarie to the doctrine of the Gospell, the examples of Christ and his Apostles, and the lawes of pollicie and state: certified the leaguers Deputies that he could not approoue their inuentions: and to conclude, sent them backe againe without an answere. And not long before he died, sayd to the Cardinall of Est, that the league shuld neither haue bull, letter, nor commission from him, for he knewe not what they ment: and that hee would not serue for a firebrand to kindle a warre, which he could by no meanes quench. The impatience of the league, that would by no means stay the resolution of the Court of Rome, publikely manifested her intent, making it selfe so much more plausible, as the pretences thereof made it seeme admirable and faire, in that the name of one of the first Princes of the blood, stood written in the forehead thereof. A Prince in all other respects olde and decayed, wholly without hope euer to marry, to haue issue, or to suruiue a king both young and lustie. The people on the other side, were all disposed to rebellion, so that there wanted nothing but the watch-word. Mean time,The Cardinall of Burbon. The Astronomers assured the duke of Guise of the short life of the king. euery man looked into the royaltie, they reckoned the kings age, they would make him a king like to the King of our Stageplaies, who while he is apparelled, is called most noble king. It was openly sayd and spoken in euery mans mouth, that the King dying without issue, he had no other successor, then the Cardinall of Bourbon, and yet in the meane time, the people were couertly put into the heads, of the vaire vsurpation of the
Capets, vpon the heires of Charlemaine, whereof there was diuers bookes printed: and then the Pasquils ran about the Court: and I haue noted some of the best, which will not be amisse to be set downe herein:





The King.
I desire peace, and for sweare warre.


The Duke of Guise.
Peace beeing made, my hope is cleane gone.


The Duke de Maine.
By warres we obtaine both credite and riches.


The Cardinall of Guise.
Time offereth it selfe couertly vnto vs.


The King of Nauarre.
He that reckoneth without me, thinking I will indure it, let him assure himselfe to reckon twise.


The Cardinall of Bourbon.
Euery man may reckon that which he thinketh to be his owne.


The Queen-mother.
This disputatio^ is of no force as long as my son liueth.


The Duke of Lorraine.
Let vs neuerthelesse follow the league and her pretences.


The Duke of Sauoy.
Then the king will loose both France and all his subiects.


The King of Spaine.
If France be lost, I will soone finde it.


France.
Soft and faire, there needeth not so many dogges for one bone, such as by ambition seeme to trouble me, did neuer prooue my force.







AN ARGVMENT BOTH WITH and against the league.

The King he hath no children to succeed,


His successor, a Catholicque must bee:


The Realme is taxt with imposts euerie day,


And people mooued do seeke for vengeance still.


Two, three, or foure minions possesse the wealth:


The Parliament was holden all in vaine,


The holy league will now redresse these wrongs,


Thereby for to reduce our hope againe.




The King hee hath no childe, but hee may haue,


Rebellion ought not to redresse our right:


The King can ease our case without constraint:


His mignons two or three are not so great,


And Parliament will end all difference,


VVhich may cut off the way vnto the league.




I must, I will, it pleaseth mee to thinke,


So many reasons cannot bee but good:


But such confused mindes haue no restraint,


For thou preferst degree and honour high.


Its true, they Princes are most fortunate,


Comparisons with them may not bee made,


But they set fire in their dwelling house,


VVhich is an act both pittifull and straunge,


They are disdainde, but knowest thou wherefore?


I dare not speake, I leaue that to the King:


If hee say nought, God knoweth what hee thinks,


I will not vtter word for feare of blame,


Onely it greaueth me, so many wise

And learned men in France, do hold their peace.



The victorie is for them, each man doth say,


Such as haue interest will them resist:


All is now free with horror and with death,


And our afflictions mortall are.


Behold the foolish toyes of ydle braine,


To thinke our wrongs proceed from wicked men,


And he that saith our king is fast a sleepe,


If he a subiect be, then let him showt:


For mee I dare not speake, in thes straunge time,


Least that our Courtiers ketch me by the backe:


I am too weake my countrie for to helpe,


But to destroy the subiects of our King,



Orit desire, sheweth a want of faith:


For hee that honoureth not his lawfull Prince


May well bee said, hee feareth not the Lord.




I am not borne a King, my fate most hard


Permitteth not such glory to my race:


But if I were a King, such dignitie


VVould cause me make my name for to bee fearde:


I would march foorth in armes most terrible,


VVith Maiestie most like for to commannd,


And dumpting pride of subiects
^utime,


Immort allize my name for euer more:


God should mee guide, faith should be my shield,


The people my support, the lawe my strength,


To die the earth with blood of traitor vile,


Opposing strength and force, them to resist.


But I am not a King, my heart doth faile,


I loue to rest, and hate most bloody warre.




Perceiuing in our time the inconstant state,


VVhich giueth cause still to expect a change:

VVe may compare France to a Table square,

VVhereas foure sit, primero for to playe:


The King, on whom the losse must wholly fall,


Saith passe if I can, and yet he hath gard game:

Bourbon he saith, this game is tedious,

It werieth mee, and throweth off his hat.


Not thinking what his l^^ter card might bee.

Nauarre holds play, and likest for to winne:
But Guise in hope to haue some little flush,
Ve^^eth at all, Nauarre he doubleth it.

The Spaniards standing to behold their play,


And bearing part with Guisert couertly.


Supplyes his want with mony, that he may


In th'end haue all the gaine vnto himselfe.




To flatter, lye, dissemble, and betraye,


By subtill meanes the trueth for to disguise,


To playe the foxe, pretending holinesse,


To seeme denout, and yet an Hipocrite:


To please great
^e^, and follow at their heele,


Of earthly
^^ul^ to faine a deitie,


To respect state and now religion:


To forge a God of mans in^^^tion:


To aske for peace, where peace cannot be had:


Readie to runne at euery little call,


Still to bee armed, and saue the hereticque.


In stead of Catholicque, Machiauel,



Not to regard the world that is to come,


Are signes of such as liue by pollicie.




To speake of God, and yet a diuellish minde,


To make great shewe of rede, and yet no faith,


To playe the polliticque, despising lawe:


To promise rest, and seeke to tyrannise:


To seeme an innocent, and yet vniusts


To shewe pittie, yet filling all with blood:


To seeme subiect, yet seeke the King to spoyle:


Do you call this a seruant Catholicque?


If to bee holy, we must seeke to range,


In euery place to massacre and spoyle,


And put both liues and goods in stra^ngers hand,


And to our countrie furious Tigers seeme.


If leaguers lawe hath so ordained it,


To drowne my selfe I rather would desire,


Then for to liue an Vtheist in my heart,


And outwardly shewe a christian.


Although this age hath much abridged the libertie and freedome of writing, which appeareth in our ancient Hystoriographers,
Prossart, Monstielet, and Phillip de Comines, yet wil I neither for feare nor flatterie, (two Historicall plagues) seeme to couer the trueth of this discourse. I confesse that in such places, as of themselues are discommendable, I haue added of mine owne, to make them more notorious: and in such actions as are woorthie praise, wherein vertue, co^science, and valor consisteth, Ispare no co^mendation but in things indifferent: I am constrained to suspend my iudgement: rather then to enter into many vntrueths: wherin if I should vse partiallitie, I could not chuse but varrie from the matter. My squadron is the trueth: Plato and Socrates are my friends, but I esteeme trueth before all things.
This Historie is a plea, neither with not against the league: I will not set roses among thornes, there is neuer any vniuersall plague, but some escape it: and among so many and diuers actions, it is impossible but there must be seuerall colours.
I will report the problemes debated on both sides: I will shewe you their propositions, which are neither so cleare nor apparant, but there is alwaies some contrarietie: I will set foorth in open shewe, the occasions of the league, the kings reasons, and the king of
Mauarres defences, which I will declare without choise or difference; and you shall consider of them without partiallitie, hatred, fauour, or selfe will, and esteeme them as a meate rather prepared for your health, then for your taste.
Two things gaue a hotte alarme to the league: one, the assembly at M^^^auban: the other, the voyage of the Duke
d'Espernon to the king of Nauarre: which it tooke as brands to kindle her fier, and beganne to send out commissions in all places in the kings name, who disauouched them, and prohibited the raising of souldiers. The first poynt of their dislike,The kings Edict of the 28. of march
1585. against the raising of men. shewed the reason which mooued the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Princes, Lords, Townes, and common people, beeing Catholicques, to oppose themselues against the Hereticques. Secondly, because they were offended, that the Parliament which they would haue had to bee holden concerning warres, to be made against the Huguenots had been reuoked. Thirdly, to breake the Edict of pacification. Fourthly, because they stood in feare, that if the king should die without children, there would rise great trouble for the succession of the Crownes:Reuocation of the edict of peace. whereof the king of Nauarre had great hope since the death of
Monsieur the kings brother, by the practise of his friends and fauourers about the king. Fiftly, because of the great preparations for warre, made both within and without the Realme, that should bee readie by the fifteene of Aprill then next ensuing;Nominating of associates to the crowne beeing in Anno. one thousand fiue hundreth eightie fiue, to execute that, which they said had beene concluded in an assembly at Magdebourg, the fifteenth of December, one thousand fiue hundreth eightie foure, agaist religion, the king, and his subiects: by the which it was agreed, that the Queene of England should furnish fiftie thousand Rutters, foure thousand Switzers, and twelue thousand Englishmen. The Counte Palatin, Prince
Casimir, and the Duke of Pomeranie, each of them foure thousand Rutters. The Langraue of Hesse, two thousand and fiue hundreth. The Duke of VVitemberg two thousand. The Lords of their league, besides the Queen of Engla^ds forces, fiue thousand Switzers. The kings Protector and Councell of Scotland, two thousand Scots. The king of Nauare, the Prince of Conde and their associates, fiue and twentie thousand Harquebusiers, and foure thousand horse, that had sworne neuer to make peace with the king of
France, but with all their consents, to maintaine the Prince of
Orange in the lowe Countries, against the king of Spaine: to helpe the Emperour by all the meanes they could, to get the Demaines of the Empire, witholde^ by the Pope, and to send their deputies from all places in the month of March to Basill, and Switzerland, thereto determine the differences concerning the Lords Supper. Sixtly, because those of the religion wold not yeeld vp the townes by them holden, for
ye assurance of yt execution of the edict of peace. Seuenthly, because of (...) vniuersal abuse suffered in placing of officers, in leuying of monies, and by inuention of excessiue oppressio^s laid vpo^ the co^mon people. And lastly, against such as abusing the K. fauor and authoritie, had in a maner ceased vpo^ his person, impeached the ordinary accesse of honest me^ vnto him, by that means, to keepe from him the knowledge of disorders that are in them: disposed gouernments to their fauorers: consumed the kings treasures: molested the commo^ people: braued the Nobilitie: cut off the libertie of Iustice: spoyled the Clargie of their tithes and extraordinary benefits: and perswaded the king, that it was necessarie for his seruice, to weaken and dimininish the authoritie of the Catholicke Princes and Lords. Vpon those iust occasions, they sayd they were forced to meet in armes, not hauing meanes (by reason of the suddainenesse of the thing, togither with the little credite they had with his Maiestie) to stay for his Commission, neither yet to proceede by any other waye, to make him knowe their greefes: assuring him, that the ende and purpose of their pretence of raysing of armes, was onely for to reestablish the Church of God in her true and ancient dignitie: vnder the exercise of one religion throughout all his realme: to restore the Nobilitie to their honor and franchises:Pretence of the League. to ease the common people of the impositions inuented and deuised since the raigne of Charles the ninth: and not to imploy the treasures that shall be leuied, but for the kings seruice: to procure that from thencefoorth, the Parliament should bee holden euery three yeares: to desire the king to take order touching the differences of the succession of the Crowne, to the end his realme shuld not be diuided into as many factions, as their are titles pretended. For the suretie and preseruatio^ of their own persons, among so many publike and priuate calamities: to bannish from the Court, such as abused the fauour and authoriof the King: protesting not to do any thing against the seruice of the king, neither yet to leaue armes, before their intents were fully executed: and that his Maiestie had procured meanes to shunne the daunger: which to auoyde, they had taken armes: with promise likewise, that their souldiers should bee payde.
The king thinking by faire meanes to retaine them in their duties, and to exhort them to an vnion,The Kings letters to the king of Nauarre. wrote to the King of Mauarre, that hee should not mooue at those actions, but content himselfe with patience: the people might perceiue and iudge the pretences of the league, and knowe on whom to laye the blame: praying him to assure himselfe of his good affection, with promise that he would not forget his interest, more then his owne, and that he would not be vnmindfull of him, as being his good brother: withall, discouering vnto him the iudgement hee had conceiued touching those new troubles, which was in these words. That hee knewe, that those of the league, what shewe soeuer they made, pretended onely against his person and his Crowne: minding to rise and become great at his costs, seeking nothing else but the vtter ruine and dssipation of his estate.
While the flame issued out of this fornace, the league made warre against the Huguenots, ceasing vppon the best Townes of the Catholicques in all the realme. Religion was preached in Guyenne, and they went to driue it out of Picardie:Marceille taken the 9. of Aprill, 1585. by the league but presently againe, reduced to the K. obedience. the Hugnenots were in
Rochel, and the leaguers armie marched straight to Parris: they are at Montpellier, and the league set vppon
Marseille: which by means of the second Consull of the Towne they tooke, who afterward was hanged.
The taking of it againe out of their hands, liked the king so well, that as the messenger brought him news thereof, into the Hall whereas then he was, leauing his companie, hee went vnto them, and commending their resolution, esteemed them for his faithfull and good subiects, in that they had hanged the leaguerer Daries, saying vnto them: My good friends, I am co^tent to grant to your request, and more if need require, assuring you that my liberallitie shal neuer bee wanting, to acknowledge your great fidelitie.
But in the mean time, he tooke no order for his affaires: he was on foot, and the leaguer spake on horsebacke: he ware the Penetentiaries sack, and they armour on their backes: and leauing armes, which nature and necessitie presented vnto him,The K. zeale to religion, cause of the peace, in An. 1577. hee had recourse to penne and Inke, and made his declaration, but in such cold manner, that you would say he durst not name his enemies: and seemed like a man, that complained hee had been beaten, but shewed not by whom. hee said, that both before and since his aduancement to the Crowne, hee had sufficiently shewed his zeale and affection towardes the Catholicque
religion, whereof the onely conseruation was dearer vnto him, then his own life or royall Crowne. That he had been constrained to make peace, when he perceiued that hee wanted meanes to continue the warres:Fruits of peace to all estates. specially when he knewe and well perceiued, that all his Realme was wearied with their continual calamities. That peace was the readie remedie to bring his subiects to one religion: to establish iustice: to correct abuses: reforme manners: comfort the Cleargie and the people: reuiue the qualities and horrors of his Nobilitie, in a manner imbased by those diuisions. That the peace being well holden and obserued, it would procure an entire and ful contentment to al estates: And thereby iustice would bee in force by authoritie of the lawes. The Cleargie reformed, and that in all places there was no other but learned and godly Prelates. The Nobilitie reconciled, leauing hatred, distrust, and the people deliuered from the insatiable troubles of warres. That diuers neuerthelesse, both impudent and bolde, more hypocrites then religious, had taken pleasure to interpret that peace to a secret fauour and loue hee should beare vnto the Huguenots, thereby to aduance them, a thing which neuer once entered into his mind. That the feare of troubles ye might arise after his death,The disputation of the Princes succession, is odious while the Prince liueth. was not a sufficient cause to torment and trouble him in his life, and as it were to condemne him, not to bee any more the person that God and nature had ordained him. That he neuer fauoured the succession of a king, that should be to the disaduantage of the Catholicque religion: that it was in a manner to constraine nature and time, so much to distrust the goodnesse of God, as to vndertake a quarrell touching the succession of the Crowne, during his life, beeing healthfull and strong of bodie, his Queen the flower of her age,This is spoke^ for Monsieur de Guise, that was Great-maister of France. and euery man in hope that God would send them issue: that the Princes which complained to bee out of his fauour, had receiued as great fauour and rather more, then euer they deserued, hauing honoured them with the greatest and most honourable offices of his Crowne, which in times past were not giue^ but to the Princes of the blood. And in fine, hauing promised to restore the Church to her splendure, the Nobilitie to their contentment, iustice to her authoritie, and comfort to the people, hee prayed, coniured, exhorted, and commaunded, all Ecclesiasticall persons, Gentlemen, Parliaments, and Townes, to separate themselues from all such meanes, as might impeach the effect of so holy an intent: and to leaue all leagues and assosiations, vniting themselues vnder his obedience, as by nature, dutie, and their owne welfare they were bound. The king of Nauarre, who to obey the king, had not as yet taken armes, and let passe all the occasions that might excuse him, thought that of all insensible creatures, he should bee most insensible,The king of Nauarres declaration, made at Bergerac the 10. of Iune,
1585. and presented to the king, by Monsieur de Cleremont. if hee should bee so simple as not to perceiue the many slaunders raised against him: and that if seeing an arme lifted vp readie to strike the king, hee would not stay it, and shewe the generositie of the house of Bourbon: vnder the promise of his Maiestie, made a declaration, which he presented and sent to all christian Princes, and chiefe companies of France, to make them capable of his actions.
Wherein hee fully discouered his religion and manner of faith, shewing that hee had been borne during the Schisme and permission of two religions in France, that he neither could nor would leaue that, wherin he had bin brought vp and instructed, if by a lawfull Councell hee were not otherwise conuerted: and that still then they could not hold him for an hereticque, much lesse as one that had falle^ from the church: affirming that he had neuer bin hereticque, nor contrary to his first opinion: and that they thought rather to destroy, then instruct him: and to ouerthrow, then vnite him. That euery man knoweth whe^ he yeelded to heare Masse, after Saint Bartholomewes day. That both age, force, and feare, made him consent to that, which in minde he neuer thought: and that assoone as hee was at libertie, hee returned to the exercise of his first religion. That in all the warres which hee made, hee neuer had any other respect, then only to God, and seruice to the king. And that assoone as his Maiestie by his Edicts, had consented to the libertie of mens consciences, he presently left armes, and countermanded his troupes, togither with the forrain aydes of his friends and confederates. That for that cause, hee is not enemie to the Catholicques as the report goeth. That hee maintaineth those of Bearn, in the small libertie they had when the Queen his mother died, and so in all places of the kingdome of Nauarre then resting vnto him, where hee found the exercise of Catholicque religion, he neuer permitted any change. That the consultation in
Magdebourg, which the league so much spake of, that they caused it to bee preached openly in the Churches, was an imagination and woorthie such reports, for that it would be found, that neither there, nor in any other place, it was euer holden. And that in the extract of forces, by them therein set downe, they induce the Ambassadors of the Elector
Palatin, and of the Prince of Orange, the one beeing dead aboue a yeare before, and had left a sonne within yeares, vnder the wardship of the Duke Casimir: the other, about foure moneths before that, was slaine at Delft, by Balthazard Girad. That the declaration by them made of his incapacitie to the succession of the Crowne, was the thing that touched him most: yet vntill then, hee had least minde of it, contenting himselfe with the hope, that God would long time preserue his Maiestie, for the good of his Realme and Common-wealth, and would in time giue him issue, to the great greefe of his enemies: not seeking to iudge the king or Queene to bee barren in the flower of their ages. That those which in their declaration and protestation, named him to bee desirous of the kings death, a perturber of the State, and sworne enemie to all Catholicques, had falsely and wickedly lyed, and therevppon besought the king, that the quarrell might bee descided betweene him and the Duke of Guise, one to one, two to two, or tenne to tenne, without troubling himselfe, or suffer the people to indure any longer vexation.
The Queen-mother, that held with the Duke of
Guise, more to crosse and trouble him, and to make an entrie into the disorder and confusion of all affaires, then to aduance him,Princes fauourers of the league. gaue the king to vnderstand, what power the league was of, shewing him, that therein hee had to do with the Pope, the Emperor, the king of Spaine, the Duke of
Sauoy, certaine Princes of Germanie, the Catholicque
Cantons of Switzers, all the house of Lorraine, and all the chiefe Towns in France that had entered therin, al resolued to expose their persons in ye middle of all perils, as the last anker to preserue religion fro^ shipwracke. And shee gaue him so hotte an alarme with those first assaults,The surprising of the Citadel of Lyons, the 2. of May, 1585. and knew so well how to vse the occurrence of the taking of the Citadell of
Lyons, (wherof the Captain had bin driuen out) vnto her purpose, that the more the king thought vpon it, the more hee perceiued himselfe to bee weakned, and the leaguers aduanced. Hee thought that the ramparts and defences of his Estate, were alreadie abated: hee beleeued that alreadie, the Duke of Guise held him by the collor: it seemed
vnto him, that his Pallace of Louure was besieged, with great paine they could hardly make him come foorth of the Capucins sell: it was no more he that wan the battelles of Iarnac and Moncontour, generositie wanted, and his heart began to faile. Herein diuers Polititians noted a great fault in the Estate, which after produced great accidents.Many imbarked them selues with the league, being made beleeue it was for the kings person, but perceiuing the contrary, left it. Caezar onely opposed but the authoritie of his face against his mutinous legions, but it was with a liuely and bolde assurance, not doubtfull nor trembling. If the king had shewed himself to the league, not couered with a Penitents garment, or habit of an Hermit: not by faire and plausible meanes, but with constancie, courage, and resolution woorthie a Maiestie royall, hee had well made them knowe him to bee king, the true and onely Image of God, that had thunder readie in his hand to consume and confound such as rose vp against him: the warre would bee ended. The armie of the Duke de Guise, which at his first rising and in the flower thereof, was but a thousand horse, and foure thousand foote, had been dispearsed in lesse then a month: and the Cardinall de Bourbon had confessed to the Queene-mother, that if the king had banded his authorithie against him, all his attempts had been cleane ouerthrowne. Feare is a plague to valiant mindes, but when the heart of the chiefe commander is possest therewith, his authoritie is abated, it dimisheth, falleth, and vndermineth it selfe: for feare in flameth the courage, and causeth men so much more boldly to enterprise their wicked actions, as that they are assured they shal not be punished. Also the king letting slip this reuolt, rather speaking faire, then commaunding: and yeelding, rather then opposing: thereby drew all the mischief of those toubles vppon his owne head. He desired the Queenmother to beare some of his blowes,This is the opinion of the Author that made the tiberal and excellent discourse. fol. 22. The last request of the Princes of the league. The Edict published in Parliament, the king being present, the 18. of Iuly, 1585. The K. fearfull, disarmeth himselfe, to cause the league to disarm them selues. and to procure the Duke of Guise to leaue off his armes, and to assure him of his fauor, and that he would giue him what part of his Realme soeuer hee would aske, to let him liue in peace. This Prince of great hope, wise, and valerous, and one of the greatest Captains that
France in long time had bred, perceiuing that so hardy an enterprise had alreadie taken so good effect, and made so great a change, pursued it, and perceiuing the king to yeeld vnto him, hoped more then he either thought or ought to do. And there vppon presented the king with another request, wherein very wisely hee motioned his owne interest, togither with the common cause, signed by himselfe and the Cardinall of
Bourbon, tending to this end. To desire him to make and sweare an vnreuocable edict for the extirpation of heresies. To take by force the Townes holden by those of the new religion. To reuowne the protection of
Geneue: to authorise their warres: to reconcile them vnto him: to be of their league: and of a king to become a participant.
Therevppon with all speede the peace was made, and cast into a mould, the king suffering himselfe by that feare to bee so much carried away. And by the edict, hee prohibited the exercise of the new religion, reuoked all other edicts that fauoured it: commaunded the Ministers out of the land: and all his subiects within sixe months after, to make profession of the Catholicque religion, or to depart out of the Realme: dispearsed the tripartite chambers of Parliaments: ordained that the Towns giuen in hostage to those of the religion, should bee yeelded vppe: and not onely commended, but approoued the warre by the Princes begunne, acknowledging it to bee done for his seruice.

This edict authorised them,Articles drawne at Nemours, the 7. of Iuly, 1581. but the articles that were secretly drawne at Nemours, were not altogither for their aduantage, and yet there was nothing in them, that displeased them, but onely the condition, that bound them presently to leaue the league. And although they demaunded no other sureties then his Maiesties word, yet they asked the Townes of Chaalon, Thoul, Verdun, Saint Disier, Reims, Soissons, the Castle of Dyon, the Towne and Castle of
Beaune, Rue in Picardie,Townes giuen in assurance to the League. Dinan and Conq in
Brittaine, to bee deliuered vnto them. And the king payde 2001006. Crownes, and two thirds, for the strannge forces leuied by the^, discharged the^ of one million, sixe thousand three hundreth and fortie eight Crowns, three deniers, which they had taken vp of the kings receiuers, and
100000. Crowns to build a Citadel in Verdun, besides the wages of their guards of Harquebusiers on horsebacke, which he gaue to al the princes of the league. Consider now I beseech you, if these great comfortors of the people, these Timoleons, and these Arates, that caused their defence of the Common-wealth, to bee published in all places, that detested the great increase of tallages and inuentions of imposts, in these affaires did once thinke vpon the people. See how in three moneths they made the people so leane, that they left them neyther flesh, blood, nor bone, and oppressed them more in that time, then euer they were in three whole yeares before, by ordinary charges, besides the violences, pillings, burnings, and many other insolences incident to warres. For the poore Pesant, that knewe not what the league ment, that neuer came at
Peronne, nor at Nancy, where it was first deuised, was forced to pay the millions of golde, which that three months warre had prodigiously spent, and to support the seuen and twentie Edicts, that by that meanes sprung vppe, to the great disturbance of polliticque gouernment and iustice, and to confirmation of the kings treasures. And yet in the meane time, all their Orations, and their great and long discourses made vnto the king, tended to no other end, but to renue the wars. But I would to God, that most christian kings had answered them, with the same words that Cleomenes vsed to the Ambassadors of Samos, who by along and vehement Oration, exhorted him to make warre against
Policrates.
After they had made him wearie to heare them, and their owne tongues to speake, hee answered them in fewe words, which made them much abashed, saying: I remember not what you said at the beginning of your Oration, much lesse in the middle: and as for your conclusion, I will not graunt vnto it: there needeth not so many words: I can do nothing touching your demaund: I will haue peace, and neuer make warre, but against those that refuse peace. Thus should a king of France haue said vnto his French subiects, and not suffer himselfe to be consumed by them, in such sort as you shall heereafter heare.
Heere endeth the first Booke.




THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE last troubles of Fraunce, containing that which passed from the beginning of the wars, after the Edict made in Iuly, 1585. vntill the Barricadoes of Parris, and the Kings retrait to Chartres, in the Month of May. 1588.
There are degrees to ascend vnto the royaltie, and not to descend without falling.NO man can mount and descend both at one time. There are some high places wher you cannot descend, without falling. The kings authoritie neuer faileth without his ruine and decay. Assoone as the king bended himselfe and the honour of his Maiestie to the leaguers desires, hee perceiued his authoritie, ingaged to the pleasure and will of another, by the edict of Iulie: which of a king as hee was, made him a participant: and in estate like a scipher, which of it selfe is nothing, without it bee ioyned to other figures. And to the contrarie, caused the league to bee of more account then before: so that the light hee gaue vnto it, was the losse of his owne.
From that time, his respect, power, and feare, vanished, he spake no more to the league, but as equall to equall, and receiued the lawe of those that ought to receiue it of him.
The league did not any thing without the King.This peace made a great and vnreparable breach in his honor, by the which, all the impunities of the league passed with great assurance: and her bold enterprises, (which of theselues wold haue bin ouerthrown, became more assured. For assoone as the fauourites thereof, perceiued themselues to bee feared, that their first sailie had gotten credite in the hearts of good Townes, put feare into the kings minde, procured fauour with his Councell, that the zeale of religion kindled the most colde mindes, and that the thing which deserued punishment, had obtained recompence. They determined from thence to vndertake their first enterprise: but knowing well, that in a manner hauing pulled it forcibly out of the kings hands, it hatched but a rotten egge, who by that leuie of men at armes being much offended, wold neuer cease vntill he were reuenged, that so great a wound would neuer be so well healed,It was impossible that the king should forget the leaguers enterprise. but there wold be a scar: specially because it was in a maner but three or foure daies since, that by so many Edicts hee had declared them rebelles, and manifest traitors, they determined not to assure themselues, but in and by their armes. But armes are nothing without mony, and mony cannot bee had but by leuying it vppon the common people, to whom there rested nothing but their tongues and voyces to complaine: to constraine them, was the meanes to bring vppon the league the same furies and imprecations, wherewith the Husband man, the Marchant, and the Artisicer, detested the enterprise and pretence of the first troubles, and make their quarrelles most fearefull and odious, for no other reason then onely because of the greefes and oppressions which they receiued, to send into Spaine, the spring was not stopt: but that liked them not so well, so that there rested no other means, then onely to serue their turnes with the kings commissions, and to make him chiefe author of the warres, and the means of entertaining thereof.
Therefore presently they caused him to determine warres in all places of the Realme against the Huguenots: hee was not onely aduised of the importance, but of the facilitie thereof, affirming it to bee but three daies workes, and that the strongest places would parley for a peace, assoone as hee sounded vppe the drumbe, and the king of Nauarre would yeeld at the onely report of their enterprise.
They brought this poore king a sleepe with many chimers, foresaying he should haue forraine ayde: which was as true as the sea burneth. It was tolde him, that all Christian Princes would helpe him: that the Queene of England should haue so many Chastillian forces against her,Many chimeres. that she should find ynough to do, to defend her selfe: that the Princes of Germanie would neuer stirre for the king of N. being a Prince poore, both without mony and credite: and that all would in a manner melt at the apparance of those new sonnes.An army by sea prepared in Portugall of 30000. men, against England. An. 1587. So that the warre was sworne to bee made in all places of the Realme: and as then there wanted nothing but mony. To the which end, the king in his Pallace of Louiene, caused the principall of the Cleargie, the Parliament and the Cittizens of Parris, to bee assembled, shewing them, that as by their aduise hee had broken the peace, so hee desired to bee holpen by their meanes to the maintenance of his warres: the charges whereof (hee said) amounted to the summe of foure hundreth thousand Crownes a month,The Kings Oration to those of Parris, the eleueth of August, 1585. for the entertaining of three armies, one in Guyenne: the second, about his owne person: and the third, to impeach the enterie of straungers.
And speaking to the principall President: he saide: that hauing perceiued so much zeale and affection in him, to haue the last edict of peace reuoked, he doubted not but hee would bee able by sufficient arguments, to perswade his equalles, that as long as the warres indured, they should not looke for any stipendes.
To the Prouost of Marchants in Parris, hee said: that seeing the Towne He commanded him presently to call the Towne togither, to leme vpon them, the sum of
200000. Crownes.was so much affected to the breach of peace, it ought to bee as well disposed to contribute to the warres. And then turning to the Cardinall of Guise, he said: that as the heads of the Clargie were those that had most stirred and prouoked him to warres, which could not bee made without great expenses, they ought not to spare their armes to helpe him, considering it was not reasonable, that his Maiestie should onely beare the charge of that which would redownd to the benefite of the Common-wealth.
But when they made certaine difficulties, and that alreadie euery one confessed, that there is no peace how little aduantage soeuer it bringeth, but is much better then any warre, how triumphant and victorious soeuer it be:Pax vel iniusta vuhor ius^^ssimo bello. Cic ad Artic. that the apprehensions of publike calamities, opened the eyes, and mooued the sences of the most insencible: that euery man would gladly haue warre without feeling the discommodities it bringeth with it.
With an angrie countenance hee said vnto them: Then I thinke it had beene better to beleeue mee. I am in doubt, that in seeking to be ridde of preaching,Speeches of K. Henry the third. wee doo not greatly hazard the warre. But the Cleargie, whose hearts more then their purses, were opened to that war, and considering that all the aydes which the kings of France at other times had from the Spiritualtie,Read the oration made by the Cardinall of Lorraine to Charles the 6. at Fontainebleau the
28. of May. 1573. The Clergie in lesse then 15. yeares furnished 60. milions of Frankes. The Clergies declaration made vnto the King the 19. of Nouember, 1585. in their greatest and most vrgent affaires, was out of the tithes of their reuenues, that since it had ingaged in the Towne-house of Parris, the one hundreth thousand Frankes of yearely rent, and thereby consented to the alienation of the free farme thereof. That at the kings returne fro^
Pologne, it had alreadie co^tributed 60000000. Frankes, that since that, it was bound for the space of sixe yeares, to paye yearly the summe of one million and three hundreth thousand Frankes, for his seruice, with condition not to bee charged with other tithes.
That now the king hauing declared that this warre, mooued by the solicitation of the Cleargie, ought to be followed and supplyed at the charges of the Church, the ruine thereof was most euident: they thought good to shew the king their impossibilitie to satiffie the same: the iust complaint of the great charges it had borne in the last leuying of armes, besides the loosing of their rights and franchises.
To the which end, the Bishoppe of Brien spake for all them vnto the king, shewing that vntill that time, the Cleargie had not spared the riches of the Alter, to maintaine the honour of the sacrifice: but now that their meanes were so drawne out, their rents ingaged, and their free farmes alienated, that they could doo no more: That it would bee a most erreligious thing, that religion should bee defended by people without religion: and that the Church nourisheth and entertaineth such as committed so many rapines, sacriledges, blasphemies, pollutions, and vnreuerent dealings towards it.
They besought his Maiestie, by the memorie of his father, by the honourable name of most christian king, the goodnesse of his nature, and the liuely comiseration of his spirit, to be protector of her priuiledges, and for a time permit her to breath. Meane time, hee animateth him to the execration of the Edict of Iuly, which could not bee done without warre: the warre not without mony: and the mony could not bee leuied but by suppression of the Church, or of the common people.

But that serued not, the league would haue warres, and of force the foure elements, whereof the Monarchie consisteth: that is, the king and the 3. Estates, must bee reduced into the auncient confusion of a Chaos, and that they whose fathers vsed to haue warres in
Affrica, Asia, and in the furthest parts of all the world, must entertaine and hatch it among themselues. Meane time, the King of
Nauarre beeing aduertised that preparation was made,Letters of the King of Nauarre to the King. to war against those of the religion, complaineth vnto the king, touching the peace hee had made with the league: shewing him, that vppon commaundement receiued from his Maiestie, to bee patient, and not to stirre against those that had risen against him: hee to shewe dutie, had so much bridled his nature, that in a manner it stained his reputation: and according to his Maiesties pleasure, reiected the occasions, which from day to day presented themselues vnto him, whereby hee might reuenge the leaguers attempts: and that notwithstanding his Maiestie forgetting the consideration of the particular interest which hee had in his last raysing of armes, had made peace with his enemies, and armed them with his forces and authoritie, against the Estate, his blood, and his own person.
And hauing repeated his offer in all his declarations, for the ceasing of troubles (touching the difference of religion, if there were no other passion that touched his enemies at the heart) he added, that if the king would not accept his fidelitie, hee can do no more, but content himselfe with his owne innocencie and affection towards his Maiestie and the State.
Declaration and protestatio^ of the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde.In his declaration, hauing disciphered the cause of leaguers taking armes, the vanitie of their pretences, and the fruites that all the Estates of France may reape by the conclusion of the treatie of Nemours, by breaking the peace, and beginning warre. Hee protesteth, and with him the Prince of
Conde his Cousin, the Duke de Mommorency, the Lords, Gentlemen, Prouinces, Townes, and common people, as well of the one, as of the other religion, to oppose themselues against the Authors of those troubles, in a lawfull and necessary defence, therby to conserue the lawes, which are the foundations of all families, and to maintaine the estate and libertie of the King, and of the Queene his mother.
Sixtus 5. excommunicateth the king of Nauarre and the prince of Conde, in September,
1585.This Prince had need to bee a strong Bulwarke, thereby to defend himselfe against so many assaults, on all sides made vppon him. For hauing both the king and the league, as enemies on the one side: on the other side commeth the Pope, with his thunderboults of excommunication, declaring him incapable to the succession of the Crowne of France: abandoning his person and his countries for a praye, to such as could obtaine it.
Touching this Bull, many whole bookes both with it and against it, were written and set foorth: to the which I referre the curiositie of such as desire to knowe whether the Pope hath any authoritie ouer the estate of France: for which consideration,The King of Nauarres letters to the States. the Court of Parliament would not allowe it. Therevppon the king of Nauarre complained to all the Estates of France, in that they had caused the succession of a king beeing yet aliue, to bee decided in the Court of Rome: made the title of a Prince of the blood, to be iudged by the Pope: and suffered the Consistorie to giue that which belonged not vnto them. And hauing particularly represented vnto them the mischiefes which thereby might arise, togither with the shame and perpetuall reproach vnto this Nation, in hauing To the Clergie.produced monsters into the world, and rebelles among a most obedient people: hee endeth his letters, with reiecting the mischiefes of those miseries, vppon those that are the authors. In his letter to the Cleargie, hee said: If war bee so acceptable vnto you, if a battell liketh you better then a disputation, a bloodie conspiracie, more then a Councell: I will wash my handes, and the blood that thereby shall bee spilt, be vppon your owne heades. I am assured that the maledictions of such as shall thereby indure great miserie, will not fall vppon mee, so that my patience, my reasons, and obedience, are sufficiently knowne. Meane time, I hope God will blesse my iust quarrell, to whom I commend you.
To the Nobilitie.To the Nobilitie hee writeth, and saith: The Princes of France are the keyes of the Nobilitie: I loue you all: I feele my selfe perished and become weake in your blood. The straunger hath no interest in this losse: I haue good cause to complaine of some, but I rather bewaile them: I am readie to imbrace them all. That which most displeaseth me, is, that those which I most esteem of, whom I knowe haue been circumuented: I cannot distinguish them being in armes: but God knoweth my thought: their blood be vpon the authors of these miseries, to whom we praye, etc. To the Commons, after he had deplored their woundes, and scarres, and assured them of his readinesse to shed his blood, if his enemies would by a combat of two and two, end the warre,To the Commons. which would be the death of so many thousands of men. He saith: I am a Frenchman borne, I will bee partner of your miseries: I haue assayed all meanes to exempt you from ciuill discordes: and will neuer spare my life, that they may be abridged: I will not impute the fault vpon you: you are Frenchmen, but rather esteem of your good willes: I demaund nothing else of all you (that according to your vocations are most subiect to indure mischiefe, then to doo it) but onely your vowes, prayers and good-wils. But because hee feared the sword of Saint Paul, more then the keyes of Saint Peter: and that the Gold of Spaine is more daungerous, then the Lead of Rome, he sent his Ambassadors to the protestant Princes of Germanie, to craue their aydes. Which the king perceiuing, sent the Cardinall of Lenoncourt, and the President Brulart, vnto him, to assure him of his Maiesties good-will, of the great desire he had to see him vnited to the Catholicke Church, not onely for the safetie of his conscience, but also for the easier establishing of his succession to the Crown, to declare the causes that had moued him to breake the peace, and to desire him to yeeld vp the Townes which he held for his securitie. The king of N. hauing yeelded most humble thankes vnto them, for his Maiesties good will in his behalfe, aunswered, that without instruction he could not change his religion, for the which so much time and blood had been shed. And that those of his side, were so farre from yeelding vp the Towns, giuen to them for their securitie, that following the example of the leaguers, they had cause rather to aske for more. The Ambassadours perceiuing that neither the one, nor the other poynt of their Ambassage tooke effect, ended their commission by desiring the king of Nauarre to enter into a treatie, wherein the Queene-mother would labour to his contentment,Conference agreed vpon. and trauell as farre as to
Champigny, if in the meane time it pleased him to staye the forraine armie. Hee willingly accepted of the conference: but to the other poynt he said, that he neither could nor ought in any sort, to stay or withdraw the good willes of those who in so much important an occasion, yea and in so extreame necessitie had entered into the field, that by restoring the authoritie of the king, troden vnderfoote by the breach of his edicts, they might defend him from the forraine inuation of the league.
The Electors, Palatin, the Duke of Saxe, the M. of Brandenburg, the D. of Brunswick the Lantgraue of Hessen, sent Ambassadors to the king in Parris. The Kings answere to the Protestant Ambassadors.The Princes of Germainie, that sought to ayde such as were of their religion, perceiuing France to bee a bodie in a manner wounded to death, thought good to procure the remedie thereof, rather then to helpe to giue the mortall blowe, and to prooue if by intreatie and faire meanes, they might cease the causes of their diuision, and procure the tranquillitie of the common-wealth, by the obseruation of the edict of peace. To the which, end they sent their Ambassadors to the king, to desire him to open his eyes to the teares, and his eares to the complaints of his poore subiects, and to vouchsafe the hearing of the humble requests of his neighbours, for his owne good, and the quietnes and honour of his faith, his Crowne, and reputation. But the king thinking it straunge that forraine Princes should deale with his affaires, answered them, that hee knew what was necessarie for his subiects, and that according to the cause, for their good and tranquillitie, he had made and changed his ordinances, as all soueraigne Princes in Christendome vse to do, to whom he referred the care and charge to gouerne their subiects, as they thinke good: and that for his part, hauing the feare of God, and the loue of his subiects liuely ingrauen in his heart, hee would do nothing against the honour of his conscience, nor the fatherly care he had vnto his people. With which answere, the Ambassadors returned not well pleased: and the king that had giuen sixe moneths respite to those of the new religion, eyther to leaue it or depart out of the realm, perceiuing that by delayes they had meanes to arme and put themselues in defence, thereby at the end of the said terme, to rise vp against him, vnder the assurance of forraine ayde, sent to the Gouernours of his Prouinces, and the Ministers of iustice to execute the edict. The king of N. for his part, declareth the^ enemies, in whose townes the said Edict was published, causing the goods, rents, reuenues, and debts, to bee ceased vppon and solde. He lost no time, all his friends were readie, and the
Sieur de S. Mesmes with standeth the Marshall de Matignon. The Sieur de Laual had the charge of
Xaintonge, and raised the siege of Taillebourg, where the Ladies de la Trimouille, both mother and daughter were assieged. The Viscount of Thurenes, with three or foure thousand Harquebusiers marched in Limosin, and there had taken the Bishoppe of Tulles.
The D. of Guise being aduertised of the dislike the Ambassadors of the princes of Germanie had, touching their answer, counselled the king to set vpo^ the Huguenots, before the Rutters entered into France. So that in lesse then eighteen moneths, the king of Nauarre sawe himselfe assayled by fiue campes royall, vnder fiue seuerall Generals:The Duke de Mercure in Poictou. where the Duke de Mercure thinking that the conquest of the Huguenots in Poitou, would bee as easily executed as enterprised, left Brittaine, not considering the common maxime: that hee that will breake, must bee stronger then the thing which hee mindeth to breake,  and that there must bee a proportion betweene him that inforceth, and him that is inforced: for if the weaker part bee his that will force, his owne violence ouerthroweth him, and spoyleth it selfe.
Hee thought with two thousande men to doo a great acte.
But the Prince of Conde meeting with him, caused him to remooue, not onely from Fontenay, but cleane out of
Poitou. And from thence, the Prince besieged Brouage, and hauing reduced it to such necessitie, that hee weakened the most hardie, he receiued newes of the taking of the Castle of Angers,The taking of the Castle of Angers. vpon the Sieur de Brissac, by three Captaines: one named du Halot, Parrisan to the king: the second, Fresne, enemie to the Counte de Brissac: and Rochemorte, affectioned to the king of
Nauarre, that agreed togither to take the Castle of Angers, one of the strongest places in France. Brissac therein had a Lieftenant called Captaine Grec, with twelue souldiers, whither
Fresne went to visite him, and beeing inuited by him to dinner, in company of Rochemort and others, went thither, who wrought so brauely, that as they entered, they slewe all the souldiers that were not of their faction: at which noyse Grec comming foorth, was met by
Fresne, that stabbed him with a Poinyard. Du Halot beginning to enter into the Castle, and perceiuing the execution, stepped backe into the Towne, and protested that hee had caused the place to be taken for the king, notwithstanding he was kept prisoner.
Rochemort presently aduertised the Sieur de Clermont, who by post sent word to the Prince of Conde, to certifie him thereof. Those of the Towne besieged the Castle, and all the countrie ranne thither: in the euening they desired to speake with
Fresne, who minding to issue, and being vpon the Drawe-bridge among diuers harquebusiers, one beganne to discharge his peece, and seeking to reenter, Rochemort and his fellowes perceiuing the daunger, drewe vp the bridge, and Fresne being shut out, hung vpon the chaines, where the Townsmen cut of his hands: in such manner, that hee fell into the ditches: where a Hart that was bredde vp in the Towne, with his hornes made an end of his life, by tearing his bodie in peeces. Du Halot was presently executed in the Towne: and Rochemort being demaunded for whom he held, answered that he held for the king of
Nauarre: at which answere there was no need to bid them make trenches, and to keepe watch, attending the comming of the Duke de Ioyeuse, that not long after arriued in the Towne. Certaine daies passing in that order, one day after dinner, Rochemort leaning in a windowe of the Castle, and falling a sleepe, was shotte with a harquebuze, wherein there was two bullets, the one cut his throate, and the other his tongue, and so was slaine. Whervpon 16. souldiers that were therein, being deuided, because there were but seuen Huguenots, began to parley, which indured certain weekes. The Prince that lay before
Brouage, hauing about the beginning of October, Anno. 1585. receiued newes of the surprising of the Castle, and of Rochemorts answere, not knowing what had happened since that time, determined with all speede to drawe thither, because that seruice would be a stay to the leaguers forces: and a great meanes of aduantage for them against the league. And hauing considered how it might bee possible for him to make that voyage, being in those earnest affaires, which as then held him, in the end he ventured with 700. or 800. foote, and 1000. or 1200. harquebusiers on horsebacke, wherewith (not without great discommodities) he passed by boates ouer the riuer of Loire to Rosiers, between
Saumur and Angers, being as bold an enterprise as euer was in our time. For the voyage in truth, was enterprised with too much courage, and litle co^sideration, to passe ouer a great riuer betweene two armies, and to runne into a straight, not knowing on which side to issue, without any boates that stayed for him, for that those wherewith hee passed, lay readie by chance: neuerthelesse, hee entered into the Subburbes of Angers, and within the Barricadoes, where he spent a whole day in skirmishing, and hauing prooued if hee could haue any newes from the Castle, he vnderstood it was no place for him, for they made him no signes, although his trumpets sounded for the purpose: for the composition was agreed, wherevppon there was no neede to bidde him stirre, and as then it was a great victorie to saue himselfe, and a great praye to bring the rest of his troupe to
Rochell, and not to Parris.
The ouerthrowe of his armie, and the doubt of the safetie of the Prince of Conde, bredde great feare to the Huguenots, and eleuated the leaguers buildings, at the least two or three brases higher. For presently therevpon, the king caused his second edict to be published, full of confiscations of goods, banishments, and corporall punishments of such as abiured not their errors, declared them traitors: and the terme of sixe months, which the first edict graunted vnto them, to withdrawe themselues out of the Realm, alreadie reduced to three months, was limited to fifteene daies, after the publication of the second edict. A great cause of extreame desolation vnto diuers families, and of strange murmuring and mutinie in the Townes, wherein those poore people remained in couert after so many broyles.
The edict of the seuenth of October,
1585.The Prince hauing past the riuer of Loire at
Lude, not without great difficultie, three daies after, he vnderstood that the Duke de Maine had past towards
Orleans, with fifteene hundreth horse, both Frenchmen and Rutters, to stoppe his way, if he repassed by the riuer of Loire. The Duke d'Espernon, and the Marshall Biron, with diuers Cornets of horse, and certain Regiments of foot, were about Bonneual in Beausse, to meet him: and the Sieur de la Chastre, had the charge to let him of hauing bridge, mill, boate, or passage ouer
Loire.
The Duke Ioyeuse was at his backe, and all the Pesants held watch, readie to rise at the first call: and the Princes troupes were so wearied, as they could not possible bee more. The meanes whereby he thought to passe the Loire, in two or three places betweene Blois and Amborse beeing cut off, his feare increased, and his troupes being but small beganne to diminish. And yet there happened two difficulties more in his campe: the one, that such as had friends in Beausse, Perche, Vendosme, and Maine, stale away from him, in such maner, that in some of his Cornets hee had not twentie strong: the other was, that the Sieur de Rohan, and diuers Lords of his troupes, beeing of aduise not to passe any further forward, and that if they did, it would be a means to run head long into euident danger, tooke leaue of him, and turned towards Brittaigne, where they escaped many dangers: neuerthelesse, in time they passed couragiously ouer Loire, and entered safely into Rochel. This separation was the cause that the Prince had no more but his own Cornet, the company of the Sieurs de la Trimouille, and
d'Auantigny, certaine light-horse, and harquebusiers on horsebacke, belonging to the Sieurs de Clermont, and fiue and twentie or thirtie Gentlemen of Poicton, that marched before, with the
Sieur de S. Gelais.
About the end of October, 1585. the Prince being aduertised that he should presently haue so many seuerall forces of his enemies vpon him, that he could not escape if speedily hee prouided not for himselfe, beeing alwaies of a good courage, at his departure hee prouided for the retraict of his companies, as also for his seruants and housholde, leauing the principall charge to Monsieurs de Clermont, and de S. Gelais, and so about eleuen of the clocke at night he departed, accompanied of the Steurs de Trimouille, d'Auantigny, certaine Gentlemen, and some of his principall officers, but very fewe, and passed many and strange waies, which hee was constrained to make, to recouer the I sle of Greneze: and from thence hee was got into England, where the Queene receiued him with great honour, and with certaine Noble men: and vesselles well furnished for the warres, conuayed him to Rochel. The Sieurs de Saint
Gelais, de Bois Dulie, d'Aubigny, de Tifardiere, and other Gentlemen, saued the rest of the troupes, hardby the Forrest of
Marchenoir, where they receiued diuers seuerall aduises of the daungers like to ensue. For they were of aduise to separate themselues into small troupes, of twelue or fifteene in a companie, the easilier to saue themselues, for it was not possible for them beeing all togither, to indure aboue an houre, perceiuing their enemies to make towardes them so fast: therefore hauing left their carriage, discharged their booties, and for the most part became better Christians, then they were at their departure from the siege of Bronage, they saued themselues, and although the Townes of Orleans, Blois, Ambuse, and Tours, were straightly guarded: neuerthelesse, diuers of them being armed, passed the bridges of the same Townes, each man sauing himselfe as well as hee could.
Saint Gelais beeing so escaped, made towards
Orleans, and trauersing by Ianuille, by the great waye to
Parris, hee passed through many companies dispearsed in
Beausse, and then entered into the Foreest of Orleans, where hauing trauersed the Forrest, in the end with great paine hee got to
Loire hard by Gien: and hauing stayed some time in
Berry, repassing Creuse, Vienne, and le Clain, hee got to Rochel, where hee found the Prince and all the heads and principall Captains of the armie.
As touching the siege of Brouages, the Sieur de Saint Mesmes, hauing stayed there about a month after the Princes departure, was constrained to retire, and to separate his troupes.
The Prince of Conde beganne the warre so fresh againe, by the Sieurs de La^al and Saint Gelais, that the newe conquestes made them forget the griefe of their last misfortunes, he tooke the Castle of
Dompierrie, hard by Saint Iohns, belonging to the Marshall
de Rez, where the souldiers refreshed and payde themselues for their former losses: therein finding a most rich bootie.
Plassac Gouernour of Ponts for the king of
Nauarre, in the night-time by scaling lathers, vpon the three and twentieth of Februarie, 1586. tooke Royan, a very strong place hard by Brouage: and the sixteenth day of March following, the Prince of
Conde beeing in Taillebourg, married the sister of the
Sieur de Trimouille, by whom hee had a sonne: but hee liued not long after his second marriage, as heereafter you shall reade.
Meane time, the Sieur de Laual tooke
Soubize, and draue out the leaguers: and after that, Mornax, and Alleuart. S. Gelais for the Princes part, tooke
Mondeuis, and Chizay, vppon Boutonne. Ranques draue the Albanois out of the Castle of Sasay, which afterward was taken againe, by composition made with the Sieur de: Malicorne Gouernour of Nirot.
About the beginning of Aprill, the Sieur de Saint
Luc, Gouernour of Brouage, hauing a certaine enterprise to make vppon the Isle of Oleron, sent for ayde: and among the rest, Tiercelin with his Regiment, composed of foure hundreth
Harquebusiers, fiftie Muskettiers, and about two hundreth pikes, all resolute souldiers, hauing but one colours, which was the Collonels Ensigne. Which the Prince vnderstanding, determined to visite them, but finding them not where he thought they had beene, he withdrew himselfe to Taillebourg, with the Sieurs de Laual, Boulaye and others: who presently after, hauing receiued intelligence that Tiercelin was come from Oleron, to go to
Marennes, and so to returne to Sainctes, he went to watch him on the way, very neare to the plain, where certaine horsemen would haue issued out of Sainctes, but they were set vppon and dispearsed by Cargrois, that ledde the Argolitiers of
Monsieur de Laual. After this skirmish, the Prince returned to
Taillebourg.
As for Tiercelin, although he knew that his enemies watched his returne, hee made no account thereof, trusting in the strength of his Regiment, and so resolued to fight with them wheresoeuer they should assayle him: and vppon the seuenteenth of Aprill, he marched towards Sainctes in very good order. Which the Prince vnderstanding, mounted on horse bocke, with his brother in lawe the Sieur de Trimouille, la Boulaye, Auantigny and others, to the number of thirtie persons, with as many Harquebusiers, and so made towards Tiercelin, whom he found about a thousand paces from the subburbs of Sainctes, where hee set vppon his reareward, and slewe about thirtie or fortie of them: the rest of the Regiment, ranged themselues in order of battel vnder the hedges, and in the high-way. In that first charge, the Sieur de Trimouille had his horse flain betweene his legges, and without speedie succour had, been in great daunger.
La Batarderaye, Ensigne-bearer to Boulaye, was there slaine: Chanterelles and Captiane Nauarre wounded to death: Auantigny hurt both in the hand and the knee: and notwithstanding the Prince perceiuing the Sieur de Lanal to bee gone to fetch his company not farre from thence, and that in great haste came golloping with about fiue and thirtie horse, commaunded him to set vpon the enemie, where that yong Lord readier to execute the charge, then the Prince to commaund, leaping ouer hedges and ditches, made right vppon the Colnelles Ensigne, being as then guarded with a battell of pikes, which he braste, fighting with him that bare the Ensigne, and put him with all the pikes to flight: whereof there were flaine to the number of sixtie men, and tooke the Ensigne with him.
Tiercelin beeing hurt in the arme, saued himselfe, with a great number of hurt men. There the Sieur de Laual lost Sailli called Tanlay, (because the other died not long before at Saint Iohns) and Rieux his two bretheren greeuously wounded, one in the head, the other in his groyne, whereof they dyed within two daies after. Cargrois was shot into the knee, and the Prince himself gaue two braue charges to the horsemen of
Sainctes, that thought to ayde Tiercelin, and put them twise in disorder, bearing with him their armes, and other furnitures, togither with the Collonels Ensigne, but it greeued him much for the mortall wounds of those two young Lords, that were followed by the Sieur de Lanal their brother, that died within eight daies after.
The armie of the Duke de Maine in Poitou.The Duke de Maine minding to make his profit at other mens costes, and thought by the ouerthrow of the Prince of Condes armie, to spoyle the rest of the forces that were in Guyen, departed from Poictiers with a faire and goodly company of men.

This Prince valiant and wise, that hath alwaies holden his reputation, by keeping promises both with his enemies and friends, neuer knewe what is ment by ioyning a peece of a Fox skinne, to the skinne of a Lyon, not being large ynough.
But as there are many, who not withstanding they haue contrary windes, yet doo arriue in safetie at their desired port: so diuers men receiue so many crosses in their enterprises, that fortune neuer fauoureth neither their valour, nor their vertues. In times past, hee had done many valiant acts in Dauphine, and now hee imployed time, mony, and great labour, to do no great matter in Guyen.
His armie was of fiue hundreth French horsemen, eight hundreth Rutters, foure hundreth Lanciers Albanois, and about fiue thousand foote, with diuers peeces of artillery. Hee made his account, to force Townes not so much by fight, as by famine, wherevnto the season of it selfe was sufficiently disposed, which should sooner bee ouerthrowne, then fought withall, and sooner fought withall, then assayled.
At his arriuall, Xaintonge and Poitou trembled, being as then afflicted with three poynts of Gods horrible punishments, plague, famine, and war: where the souldiers found no other booties, but famished rattes. Hee imployed them first in the taking of
Montignac, Beaulieu, and Gaignac, small Towns, and the^ to the impeaching of the passage of the riuer of Garonne, wher he thought to surprise the king of Nauarre, and alreadie had written vnto him, that hee could not shunne his nettes.
Saint Bazeille lying vppon the same ruier, was taken by force and spoyled: and Mont-segur taken by composition. The Duke de Maines ficknesse at that time bredde great disorder in his campe, and want of mony weakened the courages of the resolute: neuerthelesse hee tooke Chastillon, a place fortified, by the valour of the Barron de Sauignac Gouernour thereof, and after that, Normand in Perigueux.
But their want was so great in the armie, and the extremitie so much, that it fluttered but with one whing.
And the chiefe Generall, that looked for nothing but a reuolt, and perceiuing that where he thought to winne in Guyen, hee had lost Aussonne in Bourgongne, gaue the king to vnderstand, that it was more then a yeare since his souldiers were forced to march on foote, alwaies fighting in the enemies countrie, with men and with the ayre, the difficultie of the passages, the ouerflowings of riuers, the coldnesse of the weather, and the long raines, without being once succoured, neither with new forces, mony, nor amunition for the warres: and sayde that of seuenteene hundreth and three score thousand crownes, wherevnto the wages of the armie amounted vnto,Read the declaration of the Duke de Maine, touching his exployts in Guyenne. hee had receiued but three hundreth and foure thousand Crownes. From that voyage hee brought with him the daughter of Madame de Chaumont, beeing of the age of twelue yeares, to marry her to one of his children.
Behold the triumphs of the league in Guyenne: in an other place I haue said something touching the king of N. voyage out of Gascongne into Poitou: which requireth a larger discourse: which is, that in the moneth of Febr. 1000. fiue
hundreth eightie sixe, the Marshall de Matignon hauing besieged Chastelles, the king of
Mauarre accompanied with two or three hundreth Gentlemen, and about eighteene hundreth Harquebusiers raised the siege,What the K. of Nauarre did to impeach 4. armies of the league. and determined to diue within the Castle. Then he made a voyage into
Bearn, there to take order for his affaires: which done, he returned towards Nerac, and passing at Lanse, a Towne belonging to himselfe, hee had intelligence that the Duke de Maine marched forward to impeach his passage ouer Garonne. Notwithstanding hee went to Nerac to fortifie the place: and issuing out, he marched to Barbaste, and held on his way towards Chastel-Ialoux, and being about two myles neare the middle of the landes, hee shewed his company what hee purposed to do, and with twentie Gentlemen well mounted, and tenne souldiers for his guard, he rode towards Chaumont, leauing the conduction of the rest of his troupes, being about foure hundreth Argo litiers badly mounted and disarmed, and about fifteen Harquebusiers of his guard to the Suur de la Raque, to passe at S. Bazeille, which hee did without resistance, although the armie of Matignon lay not aboue three myles from thence.
The king of Nauarre beeing at Chaumont, dined there at his ease, and yet the Duke de Maine was not aboue two myles from the place where he pasted: and after dinner hee went ouer, without impeachment or losse of any of his men.
Arriued at Poictou, vnder marshall Biron.The next day going to Saint Foy, with all his company, where he continued for the space of three weekes, hunting at his pleasure: and from thence hee retired into Poitou, where the Marshall
Biron with a thousand or twelue hundreth horse, and three or foure thousand foot, besieged Marans: but the agreement made betweene the king of Nauarre and him, made him raise his siege, and
Marans continued quiet, vsing both the one and the other religion: the Duke Ioyeuse brother in lawe to the king, brought a new armie, and with it besieged Mexeut, which hee constrained to compound. And from thence went to Niort,Exployts of the Duke Ioyeuse in Poictou. battered Tonnay-Charente, and set vpon the Rocheliers heeles, but as then his armie was so afflicted with the plague, that hauing made a little troupe, vnder the conduction of
Lauerdin, he retired in great poste vnto Parris,  ^o prouide a new armie: at the ouerthrow whereof, he was despatched at Coutras, as heereafter I will shewe you.
The Marshall Ioyeuse tooke Montesquiou in Lauragois, and lost thirtie two Captaines, and fiue hundreth Harquebusiers at the siege of Mas Saint Puelles. The Marshall
de Mommorancy caused the league to flie in many incounters in
Languedoc: as at Lodeue, and Saint Pons: the
Sieur de la Valette aduanced the kings affaires in
Prouince.
The Duke de Espernon Generall of the armie, by the king sent thither, arriued at Lyons, with about eight hundreth horse, to cause his foote to passe through the Towne: but the Lord of
Mandelot, who from the first moouings of the league, had alwaies bin vpon his guard, to shew himselfe rather newter then participant, fearing least with these troupes, the D. of Pernon should take occasion to remember the throwing down of the Citadel: was counselled by
the Bishoppe of Lyons to looke vnto himselfe, hauing both securitie and aduantage. The Towne of Lyons being surprised in the first troubles, by the Earle of Saux then Gouernour, and yeelded vppe againe by the Edict of peace.The last of April. 1562 Peace, in an. 1593. K. Charles the
9. at Lyo^s 1564. A Citadell in Lyons. After that, the Duke de Nemours had vsed all the meanes hee could, both by practise and armes to get it againe.
The king went thither, and by his Enguiniers, drewe out a goodly and strong Citadell, by that bridle to restraine the ouer prompt and readie affections of the Cittie, to those new alterations, and would not depart from thence, before hee had seene a great part thereof finished. It being accomplished with all conuenient things belonging to such a Fortresse, both for forme, greatnesse, Bulwarkes, trenches, munitions, and commodities.
Hee made it the terror of the Huguenots, while those that commaunded it, affected the defence and protection of the Catholicques: but after that, in the said kings time, the fauour of the Duke
d'Espernon withdrew la Mante,The taking of the Cuadell in Lyons. therin to place le Passage. Mandelot not beeing able to dissemble the disliking he had to the great aduancement hee had of that Duke, deuised the means to cease vppon it, and so thrust out the Gascons, by him placed therein. 
The newes of this surprising in so daungerous and suspicious a time, abashed the king, thinking it to bee one of the first effects of the league, but beeing assured of the inuiolable affections and fidelitie of the Cittizens of Lyons, that would neuer yeeld as long as his Maiestie liued,Fortresse, generally, are more hurtful then necessary. hee agreed to the throwing downe of the Citadell, for the summe of fiftie thousand Crownes to him offered for the same.
But his Councell found that throwing downe of the Fort to bee very daungerous, saying: that a Towne composed of so many humours and seuerall motions, inhabited by people of both religions, stirring and desirous of change, the keye and rampart of the Realme, ought not to be without a Citadell.
Wherevnto the wisest Polititian aunswered, that such fortifications serued onely, eyther for the defence of the subiects, or offending of enemies, and that in the one they were daungerous, and in the other not necessarie.
Meane time, the king desired his mother to bee a meanes and instrument, of a good and continuall peace in his Realme: and shee beeing greeued that shee could not warme her selfe but with embers, and sorrie that the miserie thereof, surmounted the meanes that she could vse therein, vndertooke a voyage into Poitou, there to parley with the king of Nauarre, who of his owne nature, and by the aduise of his friends, was more disposed to a good peace, then to a simpletruce.
Meeting of the K. of Nauarre, with the Queene-mother, the 13. of December, at S. Bris.And after they had both freely passed all the doubtfull scruples that could bee alleadged vnto them, thereby to reuerse their good intents, the place of meeting was appoynted at Saint Bris, and truce agreed for fifteen daies, whereat the Switzers and Almaines were much offended.
The first and second enterviewes, were passed ouer onely in complaints, excuses and goodly reasons. The Queene-mother bathing them with her teares, reproached the disobedience of the subiect to his Prince, detested the stubburnnesse of newe opinions, represented the necessitie that constrained the king to make peace, and vndertake warres, sweetly excusing the burning affection of the house of Guise, that had raised the same, thereby to preuent the mischiefe, which the succession of an hereticke Prince wold bring into the estate: besought and charged the king, to yeeld to the Catholicque Church and faith of his Maiestie, to leaue his errors, and not bee condemned.
Cause of the troubles.Wherevnto hee aunswered, that in his soule hee felt a most great torment of impatience, in that the league made him the onely argument of those tragedies: that his Maiestie esteemed him the subiect of his diuisions: that all the mischiefe, by the Realme of France indured, and which in the end would ouerthrow it, proceeded only from the breach of the Edicts of peace, wherein depended all the welfare and felicitie of this estate. Hee complained of the wrong, that he himself in particular, his house and al
France in generall, receiued by that bastard peace made at
Nemours, with the heads of the league, and of the good entertainment they receiued, after they had been proclaimed rebels and traitors to his Maiestie. Hee said, that to strengthen the league, the king had commaunded him not to stirre, nor prepare himselfe to warre, that the people might euidently see who were the first perturbers of the peace. That the permission by him giuen to them, to in croch so much vppon his authoritie, was the onely continuall feuer of this estate. That hee sawe no more but by the leaguers eyes, nor vnderstood any thing, but onely by the eares of his enemies.
Exhortation to the king of N. to become Catholicque.And as the Queene sought to assure him of the kings and her fauour, and that both of them had more desire to see him conuerted, and protected vnder so faire and assured hope, of the chiefe Crowne of all Christian Princes, rather then any longer to shrowd himselfe vnder protections of warres, dispised of the greatest part of France, and to be the principall occasion of his friends, griefe. He said againe, that by the kings commandement, not to arme himselfe against those ye soght to fight with him, he had hazarded his life to keep his promise, to satiffie those that soght to reduce himto extremities, and neglected the care of his owne preseruation, saying: Madame, you cannot accuse mee but of too much fidelitie, I complaine not of your faith, but of your age, that (doing wrong to your memorie) hath made you forget what you promised me. The sharpenesse of wordes, was somewhat asswaged at the third meeting, wherein the Queene-mother strained the corde, that brake both the accord and harmonie of their conference: for she tolde him, that the last and onely resolution of the king, was, neuer to make peace, nor take truce with him, if hee became not a Catholicque. Wherevnto hee answered, that he would neuer haue thought, that a Princesse of so good iudgement, wold haue taken so much paine, to come vnto him onely to propound that, wherewith his eares were continually filled, beeing meanes of more honourable troubles, if it were not ended in manner by him required, which was by a generall Councell, to whose iudgement hee submitted himselfe: promising also to cause all the rest of his friends to doo the like.
As they continued in this proposition, euery man giuing his censure, there passed many words, whereby to perswade him happily to returne to the Church of God. The Queene-mother shewed him how much that change would make his estate more free, more assured, and more conuenient for his It is said that the Duke de Nemours said vnto him, that there hee could not raise any impost, It is true said hee, and so there are no Italians among vs.degree, that his conuersion would drawe him into his Maiesties sauour, without longer seeking to court the Maiors of Rochel, where hee could not doo as hee would. Wherevnto hee answered, that the consideration of his particular contentment, yea and the winning of thirtie Crowns, should neuer cause him shamefully to leaue the religion, which for the space of thirtie yeares hee had professed: and that hee did what pleased him in Rochel, because that therein he did nothing but what hee ought to doo.
In the end, their discourse changed to the propounding of a truce, that stayed vnresolued for diuers difficulties therein found, as also because of the aduise the Queene had receiued, that her presence was necessary in Parris, to quench the fires, which the Archleaguers (wherof we spake in the first booke) beganne to kindle, grounding the alarme vppon conference had with the king of Nauarre. Both of them agreed to a peace, confessing that both the Catholicques, and Huguenots, were wette with the ship wracke they had indured: that it was not conuenient to drawe them into it again: that their wounds were not as yet healed: that they ought not to bee set togither by the eares: and that it was requisite to haue a peace.
The Queen-mother wold haue a truce, the King of N. a peace.The Queene-mother would haue no truce that should promise a peace, vnlesse the king of Nauarre would assure them of his conuersion. The king of Nauarre would haue no truce, that produced not the effects of a peace, and the ruling of his conscience by a nationall Councell. She would no truce, if the king of Nauarre did not countermaund his forraine armie. Hee would not agree to the second poynt of a truce, if hee were not assured of a good peace. In respect whereof, hee offered that great assembly and raising of Rutters and Switzers vnto the king, to helpe him to recouer the obedience and authoritie due vnto him.
In this maner their interview ended, without any resolution: and the Queene-mother in all haste tooke her waye to Parris, vppon the aduise giuen vnto her concerning the last poynt of dispaire, that was to be executed therein. For the Duke de Maine, being aduertised that she went to the king of Nauarre to make peace, made haste to
Parris, to shewethe king that her trauell to that end was against his edict: that such peace could not bee good: ingendring in religion the effects that are contrary to the tranquillitie of Catholicque consciences. He found the Parrisians more mooued then euer they were, to rise vp in armes: he sawe the secret articles of the sixe Archleaguers, to fight against heresie,These secret articles were sworne in the house of Reims neare the Augustins. to reforme the Court and the insolencie of the kings minions. They enterprise, they sappe, they myne, they beate downe, but all in words: their counsels are euill grounded: their daungerous attempts are more difficult to execute, then to resolue.
The Rattes found it expedient, that to preserue themselues from the Cat, they must hang a bel at her eare, but none of them durst vndertake to do it: they must cease vppon the king, but who would bee so bolde?Read the Dialogue of Manant and Maheutre. Fol.
104. They sent vnto the Townes some of their consort, who vnder certaine secret pretences, went from Towne to Towne, to see the leaders of the league, and to discipher the secret meanings of his intents.
Manant saith, that at that time among them, they spake not of that enterprise, but onely tending to their defence, if in case they were assayled: and that the inuention of Barricadoes was resolued vppon, aboue a yeare before they The first resolution of Barticadoes, about Easter.
1587.tooke effect. But hee that wrote the treatie of the causes of the troubles of the moneth of Ianuarie, 1589. saith, that the league perceiuing, that if the Huguenots were driuen out of France, and the onely Catholicque religion maintained therein, it should haue no more cloaks to couer her shame: they thought it good to let the Huguenots remaine on the one side, and on the other, to torment the king. For (said they) if our ground bee the royaltie, wee must haue the place voyded, and such as would place themselues therein before vs, must bee remooued.
If warres bee continued against the Huguenots, the end cannot bee but to our ruine, it will in the end produce a peace, which will send vs naked without armes vnto our gouernments: liuing betweene feare and dispaire, that the oppressed oppose not themselues against the oppressours, that the offence returne not vppon the authors, and that the king call not to minde the treaties of Peronne, Nancy, and
Chalon. If they be vanquishers, their victorie is our losse: their life, our death: their greatnesse, our imbasing: and their rest, our torment.
The strongest support of their enterprise is vppon a piller of Castille, olde and rotten: that is, not sustained but by hope of our ruine: that feareth no other shaking, but the ceasing of our ciuil warres, which will not bee ended but by straungers, from whence they are deriued.
This Prince knoweth well, that as long as the diuersitie of religions parteth our mindes, there will neuer bee peace among vs, although the zeale of religion doth much trouble him, that hee is the sonne of the great scourge of the Almaine Protestants: and that he hath drowned heresie in his own blood, yet hee desireth to inuade vs, eyther by one means or other. The Ramme desireth to eate the Bat, whether it be because it is a bird, or because it is a mouse. If the Edict of Iuly bee put in execution, if heresie be pursued in so many places, it will bee very hard for it to resist: the king will alwaies bee Maister, hee will alwaies stand vpright, hee will resume the authoritie and power that hee seemeth to haue left, to retaine vs: and perceiuing himself (like
Lewis the eleuenth) vntangled from so many leagues and parties, he would liue like a commander, destroying both Huguenots and Leaguers, take the raisor in hand to both their beardes, and driue all partakings out of the Realme, onely his owne.
The fiers made for ioy of his victories, would bee the obsecquies and funerals of our partakers. The king of Nauarre shall die, or else hee must conuert, or bee cleane spoyled and ouerthrowne. His death will strengthen the first article of our league, and the feare of altering of religion shall vanish away. His conuersion, will pull the weapons out of our hands, and the wordes of faction and disorder, (Huguenots and Nauarrois) will no more bee heard among vs. His ouerthrow shall not bee so much aduantage vnto vs, as to the king, he will haue the flowers and the fruites of this victorie, and wee nothing but the leaues.
A great army
^^dermineth it selfe, and there is too gr^^^
^^^ger to fight.But to ouerthrow him will bee no small labour, armes are not continuall. We thinke to constraine them to fight, and they wil not but defend themselues: they will shut themselues within their Townes, that braue all our forces, and make vs madde, as if wee stood barking at the moone, and fighting with the cloudes. Many times men hazard all they haue in the strength of a battell, and when it is lost, to get a thing of no moment, there is no meanes to raise it again. To looke for it out of Spaine, is to reckon mens charges of another mans purse. Promises are feminine, and effects are masculine, this nation is vsed not to say what it will do, nor to do, that it saith it will do.
And further, wee haue to do with a Prince, that is alwaies first at giuing blowes, and last in retiring: it is not a hart that leadeth Lyons. Hee sayeth not go thither, but hee goeth himselfe, like vnto
Caezar: hee heareth assoone of our discipation, as of our comming: hee hath learned to bee a Captaine at our costes: hee holdeth thirtie Townes in France, which to ouercome, wee had need to haue the forces of thirtie leagues such as ours is: and when he should haue nothing left but his sword, it is very much with the lawful right he hath to the succession of this Realme.
Aut Caesar aut nihil.Therefore seeing the die is cast, that wee haue imbarked our selues in this rough sea, that the end of our league is either to make vs a king, or else nothing, let vs take the shortest course. There is no apparance to attaine to the royall seat, before so many Princes of the house of
Bourbon, wee should neuer haue done: he that wold rule ouer them all, must first pull the king out of his chaire: when it is emptie, there will be meanes to sit downe: if he raigne longer, our winter is come, the seruants of our hopes will withdraw themselues, beeing deceiued. The king is lustie and gallant of bodie, if hee haue any children, our sute is ended, and not hauing any, we are likelier to die before him: wee must play open play, let vs deale with him, as his father dealt with our Grand-fathers: and let vs do the like to the Capets, as they did to the heires of
Charle-Maine. Of this ensued the conspiracie made at
Parris about Easter, in Anno. 1587. which was not executed by the vncertaine resolution of the heads, that left the Parrissians in the middle of so daungerous an enterprise, wherof the K. was aduertised, and from that time determined to punish them. But his authoritie was alreadie so much weakened, and his Maiestie so much despised, that but for feare to be reproued, the hooker had taken and drawn him through the myre of his infamous slaunders and mockeries. The Preachers tongues serued for rules to these seditions, they detested the life, pleasure, and dissolution of the Court, and spake not of the King but in dirision, publikely condemning his actions, hee caused them to be counselled and diuerted from those passions, and of a chaire of trueth, not to make a place of babling: but the more he sought to turne that chollor into fleame, the more it increased and rose vp: in the end hee was constrained to threaten them with imprisonment. Whereof grew the meeting of Saint Seuerin, where certaine excommunications were pronounced in S. Benets Church, against the Commissaries and Sergeants, that would haue layde handes vppon certaine Preachers.Wedensday the second of September. 1587. The bookes that were published at the beginning of these disorders, were the wood, strawe, and brimstone, that long time maintained the embers of those rebellions: there was not any meane Fidlers boye, but that like a crowe vpon a steeple, pronounced the tempests and calamities of those furious mutenies.Infamous libels. There was nothing seene in the Hall of the Pallace, but onely discourses, aunsweres, aduertisements, and Apologies.
He fayled to surprise Mets the
26 of May.And in the meane time, that warre was made with pen and inke within the Townes, the Duke of Guise made it with Iron and steele in open field, he held his armie in the frontiers of
Lorraine, and made warre vppon those of Iamets,
which hee had begun against the Duke de Bouillon, from the first day of the birth of the league. And perceiuing himselfe to bee Maister of Douzy and Rocroy, and by that meanes of the passage of the riuer of Meuze, hee caused his troupes to enter vppon the lands of the soueraigntie of Sedan, vexing the poore countrimen that dwelt in the villages, with al kinds of warlike cruelties. Mean time, that famine plagued them within the towns, the D.
de Bouillon, to diuert him from thence, sent the Lord de Schelandre Gouernor of Iamets, to make an attempt against
Verdun, which is the first towne lying in the frontiers of
Champaigne, and most tumulteously entered into the coniulation of the leaguers pretences.
The Duke of Guise followed him, with the most part of his forces, which his departure gaue time and leisure to the Duke
de Bouillon to victuall Sedan: and the Queene-mother in the meane time, disposed the two Dukes to make a truce, first for fifteene daies: in the which time, the Duke of Guise practised certaine souldiers, (more for gaine then for conscience) to surprise the Castle of Iamets, but the enterprise failed, and the instruments therof were punished: and from that time, they began againe to renue their courses and spoylings, more then they did before.
The Queene layde an other plaister vppon this sore, by a second truce of a month, which the Duke de Bouillon imployed in
Alsace, with foure hundreth horse, and eight hundreth Harquebusiers, therby to aduance the armie of Germains, that were to meete in the plaines of Strausbourg, there to bee mustred. And the Duke of Guise had leisure to go vnto the King, to receiue his instructions and commaundements, vppon so great and vrgent an occasion. Hee found him at Meaux, where hee shewed him, that since the Edict of Iuly, and the resolution taken by his Maiestie, to make warre against the Huguenots, it had been so coldly begunne, and pursued with so many wants, that it was not to bee found straunge, if the issue had been as vnfortunate, as the cause iust and woorthie to bee done by a king of
France: that contrary to the edict, they had let their hereticques continue in their houses, enioye as in a publike peace their lands and goods, that ought to be imployed for their destruction, and to the taking away of the means that continued their crimes towards god, and their rebellion against the estate. That in stead of selling and confiscating thereof,Borne in France, and spaniolized in Rome. the reuenues of the Cardinall of Pelleue were ceased vppon, because in open consistorie hee had most vertuously sustained the iust occasion of the leuying of armes, by the Catholicke Princes against Hereticques. That in those warres the Cleargie had indured most, and receiued least profit or aduantage, hauing continued more for the aduancement of Mignons, then for the ruine of Hereticques, and that so great summes of money cut off from the possessions of the Cleargie, from the nourishing of the poore, from the reliefe of Pilgrims, from the ransome of captiues, and other necessities of the Church, had serued to no other end, then onely for the entertaining of the enemies of the Cleargie.
Hee complained of the contradictions of the edict, and among other things, in that the kings Councell, the Court of Parliament in
Parris, the Iustices, nor the Prouost in Parris, had not sworne to the edict.
Of the hard measure shewed to the Townes that had desired the exterpation of heresies, and the reuocation of the last edict of peace. Of the ouerthrowing of the citadel of Mascon, of surprising ye of Vale^ce, of ye disgrace of the
Sieurs de Brissac, Crusilles, Gessan, and Antragues, and of the countermaunding of the assignations giuen vnto him, for the restoring of the charges by him made in that last raising of souldiers.
The king to the contrary, had well considered how the insolent passion of the league, could not finde a firmer footing within all the articles contained in the treatie of Nemours, and that it aspired to some greater matter. Hee knew well it had demaunded Townes for assurance against the Huguenots, in the Prouinces where they had no cause to feare them, neither in soule nor bodie. That ye surprise made by the D. d'Aumalle of the towns of Dourlan and
Pontdormy, and the intelligence discouered at Bollogne, were som of the operations of the medicine which they had take^ to auoyde this monarchie of vigor and strength. That for to fortifie themselues with numbers of Townes and participants, it had caused a Citadell to bee erected at Vitry le Francois, therein to place an Italian, in whose countrie a Frenchman cannot so much as obtaine the base office of a Sergeant. That the Duke of Guise would not receiue the gouernment of
Raucroy, vntill his Maiestie had promised him they should hold it in his owne name. That it had prodigally spent the 100000. crownes, raised for the building of the Citadell in Verdun, not desiring other fortresse thererein but the hearts of the people, abused with pretences and goodly apparances of the intents of this conspiracie.
The contrarieties of the edict being well wayed and debated on both partes, the Duke of Guise turned his pursuites vppon the meanes to assayle the Huguenots, in the same places where they had receiued the foyle, in Poitou, Dauphine, and in the countries of the Duke de Bouillon, desired the king to cast his eyes vppon decaying religion, if the armie of straungers should beare the triumph into
Allemaigne, both of France and of the Catholicke Church, and to imbrace the conseruation thereof, without esteeming any thing to bee difficult or daungerous for so memorable a victorie, calling to minde, that he was a king of a people, that neuer feared any thing but the falling of heauen, and assured the^selues to ouercome all whatsoeuer that durst assayle or set vpon them heere on earth.
The King, whose intent was onely to liue and raigne, could not consent to warre,The Kings oath the 10. of Ianuary. 1587. notwithstanding the oath hee made when hee instituted the order of the holy Ghost, nor the last resolution sent to the king of Nauarre, by Monsieur de Rambouillet, that hee would not permit or suffer other religion in his Realme, then the auncient Catholieque faith, and abolish that which they called reformed: yet he desired most earnestly to haue had a good peace, therby to diuert the miseries which the armie of strangers would bring with it, but when hee perceiued himselfe not strong ynough,The kings resolution. to make the King of Nanarre and the Duke of
Guise to consent, by reason of their differences, and that hee could not sustaine the one, without oppressing the other, that hee had not the courage to bee indifferent between both, without leaning to the one or to the other, and to bee short, that hee durst not vse the authoritie of a King, hee was constrained to suffer all the heads of the league to counterfeit with him.
If hee consented to the libertie of reformed religion, and restored them the Edict of peace, hee thought hee heard all the mutenous leaguers continually about his eares, if hee made warre against the
King of Mauarre, he had fiftie thousand straungers vpon his backe, that would constraine him to ouerthrowe the league.
Wherevppon hee desired the Duke of Guise to yeelde to a peace, not to abandon the Estate of the Realme for a praye vnto straungers, to procure the ease and contentment of his king, the comfort of the people, the freedome of the Cleargie, and the dignitie of the Nobilitie, by other meanes then by such as would ouerthrow the honour of his soueraigntie, bring his subiects in dispaire, robbe Churches, and sucke the blood of those fewe Gentlemen, which forraine warres had left within the Realme, to desend it from ciuill warres. To the which peace, hee mooued him by honourable promises and aduantages both to his house and partakers, but hee found his heart altogether resolued vnto warres, rather desiring a battell, then a disputation, and neyther minded to indure miserie, nor yet to procure the remedies thereof. So that to conclude, the Duke of Guise would haue warres, and aunswered the king resolutely, that hee was not in the minde to haue any peace: adding further,The Duke of Guise would haue warre. that if hee were constrained therevnto, it should alwaies bee done with exception of the religion, and the assurance of him and his. Whereby peace for that time was vtterly bannished, yet Priam for all that, issued not out of Ilion, before hee sawe the Grecians vnder his walles, and then hee beganne to stirre himselfe, and to resume the generous courage which hee had lost among the pleasures of Vincennes,The state of the Court in An. 1586. and
1587. at the marriage of Monsieur de Ioyeuse: since which time, the Courtier had not striken one blowe with his sword, but onely in quarrell of Arioste, and had rather spend one hundreth Crownes in dauncings and in Maskes, then one one hundreth solz in powder and in flaskes.
The long rest, had made the most valiant like vnto a horse, whose warlike courage abateth by lying long vppon the litter, but necessitie founded them an alarme, and made them perceiue the blacke cloud that began to fall vppon the state.
For the King, that should haue beene very incensible, if hee had not had some feeling, marched in proper person, and diuided his warre into three parts: that is, to Chaumont in Bassigny, to Saint Florentins hard by Troye, and to Guyen.
Foure hundreth launciers, and two hundreth foote, all Italians.The first armie beeing composed of fiue and twentie companies of men at armes, twelue Ensignes of footemen of the Regiment of Escluzeaux, sixe of Ioannes, and sixe of Gie, with diuers blankes for commissions at the Duke of
Guises pleasure: troupes of strangers sent vnto him by the Duke of Parma. The second was ledde by the Duke de Montpensier: and in the third that went for Guyen, the king himselfe was in person, which three armies in all, might comprehend the number of sixtie eight companies of men at armes, tenne thousand foote, twelue thousand Switzers, and foure thousand Rutters. The Duke de Ioyeuse ledde an other armie into Guyenne, against the King of Nauarre: and the Duke of Lorraine had braue and goodly forces vppon the frontiers. The Duke de Bouillon was Lieftenant for the King of Nauarre, in the armie of Rutters and Almaines,Duke Cazemire excuseth himselfe. that were conducted by the Barron of Othna, and composed of nine and twentie Cornets of Rutters, three and twentie Ensignes of Switzers, and fiue thousand Lansquenets, armed with corslet and pike: besides eleuen Cornets of French lanciers, and tenne companies of Harquebusiers on horsebacke, so that the armie might be in all, about thirtie thousand men, not accounting
the fifteen hundreth harquebusiers, and foure hundreth horse brought by the Lord of Chastillon. Beholde poore and miserable France, couered with the haire of afflictions, and charged with a heauie burthen,Miseries of France. vnder the which it must eyther languishor die. Beholde it readie to bee a pray to a people different both in manners and speech: all the furies of hell raunged in her fields. and horrour, confusion, and impunitie, thundered and battered in all places, which euery man iudged to bee a scourge, for the great and horrible crimes committed therein. Hee that seeth France troubled and vexed in that sort, may well say, that the iust iudgement of God, hath brought it to so great desolation, through the aboundance of sinnes that fill vp the measure of her iniquities, for which causes the scourge of God hath discipated and seduced into ashes, many more flourishing estates then euer it was. Lust and desolatenesse ouerthrew the first Monarchy of the world: prodigallitie tooke away the life and force of the second: ambition and discord dismembred the third:The ruine of the 4. Monarches, Assiria, Asia, Persia, and Rome. impietie and iniustice vnfeathered the fourth: and impietie, iniustice, and desolation, will reduce France into a fatall and certaine destruction. The Ministers of pietie are no more chosen as they ought to bee, and it is no maruell why there are no more Athanasians and Hillarians therein, seeing that the spirituall liuings, which are the Schooles and fountaines from whence godlinesse should spring, and examples of the true seruice of God, are holden by men of armes or Courtiers, and which is woorse, by women and childre^. This impietie which hath slidden into religion, hath formed many Atheists, that speake disdainfully of godly prouidence, that flatly deny it, that by beleeuing ouermuch, beleeue nothing at all, whereby the souleresteth in their bodies without any apprehension, either of the second life, or of the latter death. Others serue God but for a fashion, and by maner of acquittance, and curiously forge diuers sorts of errors, and vnder I knowe not what kinde of hypocrisie and dissimulation, suffer themselues to be borne away by superstitions, which traungely abuse and offend the most holy Maiestie of God: it is the monster with sixe hornes, that hath gotten so much credite among the common people, and that thrusteth it selfe into the Pallaces of Kings: it is the means to trafficque and deale with the diuell, to giue vs the detestable fruit of the Cupidits: which torment those miserable Sorcerers, who most easilie deface the diuine caracke out of their soules, and prostrate the same at ye pleasure of the stinking gate of hell. This vermine that remaineth free without looking into, in the time of Charles the 9. had attained to ye number of 30000. as their chief leader co^sessed, but since that time it hath had so great ascope, that such as deal with it in great houses, are called Philosophers and Astrologiers: and now Almanackes serue as rules and cannons for mens actions. To this impietie we must adde the most execrable blasphemies, which proceed fro^ the mouths of great men, yea and from the poorest Pesants in France, that haue euery day new words to spit out against the heauens, and to despight the iustice and prouidence of God. The Pagan sweareth very sildome, the Sarazin knoweth not what it meaneth, the Turke abstaineth from it, and the Huguenot detesteth it: but our Catholicques are Maisters of the Art, and make account to ride vppo^ diuinitie. The second branch of our mischiefs is iniustice. The first foundation of an estate and authoritie of a Realm: yea, that which giueth it forme and being, is iustice.
Vertue which maketh kings, and without it they would change their royalties, Iniustice is the roote of miseries in France.into tyrannies. It is the feare of the wicked, and the encouragement of the good, and because it is the principall office of aking, when the Hebrieux desired Samuel to giue them a king, among other points of their request, they added these words, to
Iudgevs, and to doo iustice as among other people. All the world complayneth of the peruerting thereof: estates are no more giuen by Geometrical proportion: France maketh lawes of waxe, to be tempered with mens hands, and subiect to melt at the warme fauors of great persons. There are lawes ynough to gouernall Europe, yea and all the pluralitie of epicures, but they haue their vertue onely in paper, and some seeth them both published and violated. Now there is no conscience made to sell that which is bought of the king, and most commonly iustice is diuided to such as haue no mony, but this iniustice is much more to bee deplored, for the heauie and insupportable burthens it layeth vpon the poore people, and maketh them not onely a medowe which is cut thrice a yeare, but a bodie that is fleane, or rather an anaotomie.
Theking which hath tenne millions of golde for his reuenue, liueth by impositions and new dances, wherewith hee deuoureth his people, he bloweth their noses so often that hee maketh them bleed, pulleth vp both hearb and roote, cuttes the feathers so neare, that they can growe no more, putteth his subiects out of breath, and constraineth them to hate and detest the Authors of these miseries.
Iniustice is yet more seene in the disorder and crueltie of souldiers, that are without discipline, rule, feare of God, respect of the good, compassion to the miserable, and that afflict and torment the friend as much as the enemie: persecute both masse and religion, kill Priests assoone as Ministers, robbe Churches, burne Temples, spoyle Merchants, torment olde men, violate virgins, cause women with childe to bring foorth vntimely fruite, ransome Pesants by cruelties, which in times past were neuer known but of Scithians, Lestrigons, and Turkes, but none vnwoorthily practised among vs, to the great dishonour of the courtesie and fauour that hath so much beautified our nation. But the desolation which entereth into al the members of France, maketh it another
Babylon, a puddle of filthinesse, and a sinke of all sorts of corruptions, whereof the wounds are so old, that they are in a manner become naturall, desperate, and incurable. The Court of our kings, which in times past were wont to bee the seed of the vertues of French Nobilitie, did neuer abound in more disorders, lusts, and excesse, then vnder the raigne of Henry the third, specially in the yeares 1586. and 1587. So that it may bee sayd of some Townes, as it is reported by straungers, that all things are printed therein, only not to be vertuous. The kings Court is like a Theator, which the people sta^d to behold, it is a fire which transformeth such as approach it into her nature: the most modest come foorth insolent: the most chaste Lucresse, becommeth
Faustina. From the disorder of great persons, proceedeth the misbehauiour of the meaner sort, and there hath bin carters, that haue beene so superfluous in their vanities, that there wanted nothing in their houses but a chappel of musicke, and to serue them by quarters, to counterfeit little kings. I must confesse the truth, and not make you beleeue that a ma^ with a crooke shoulder is of goodly proportion. The K. gaue a great furtherance to these desolations, his exa^ple was a directio^ to all his subiects: as the influctio^ of ye head runneth into al ye me^bers. Men do not only imitate, but approoue ye actio^s of great me^,
and according to their humours, voluptuousnesse, disorder, superstition, molestation and crueltie, enter into credite. The people suffer their mindes to bee cut and cautherised at Princes pleasures, as the greater the authoritie is, the more affectionate is their immutation: euery man taketh that colour, men perfume themselues with those drugues, and the example of the Prince is so contagious to the subiects, that they receiue it, entereth sooner into their eyes then their eares.
Alexander cast his head a side, and all the Court held their neckes awry: Denis was purblind, and his Courtiers stumbled at euery steppe, and iusteled each other, as if they had beene euill sighted. Plutarke telleth, that Courtiers put away their wiues, following the kings example that loued not his wife. Lewis the eleuenth, would haue Charles his sonne to learne but one word of Latine, and all the Court despised learning. King Francis established learning, and all the Nobilitie caused their children to bee instructed. Henry she third loued ryots and pleasures, and al the Court abounded in desolation. He considered not, that the vices which ranged in his Realme, are the same that caused the whole world to bee drowned, ouerthrew fiue Townes, caused the tribe of Beniamin to bee slaine, destroyed Sparta, Carthage, and Athens, spoyled Troye, and procured the Cicilian euening prayer. He considered not, that this voluptuousnes which maketh him swallow poyson in his milke and Ippocras, maketh him fitter to bee a woman then a man, that to maintaine it, all France is rent in peeces.
The treasures that Caligula found after the death of Tibera, being 1800. horse load, nor the nineteene millions of Crownes that the Vitellius spent in one yeare in making of banquets, will not suffice, that from thence spring the new impositions, wherereof the monies proceeding, are died and tempered in the blood and teares of the poore people, that aske vengeance of God, and that in the end, deal to ease their oppressions, and ouerthrow the oppressors.
Prodigious sights seene in the raigne of Henry the third.If the complaints of the people, cannot pearse the eares of the king, yet let him looke vnto the effects of Gods iudgement: as strange signes, monsters, comers, and earthquakes, which are the messengers thereof, let him consider, that these leagues and partiallities, are the windes that rise before a tempest, and the shipwracke of this estate. And that with a little push this edifice which hath been built so many hundreth yeares, will in a moment be ouerthrowne.
But not to prolong our Historie with many tedious words, let vs return to the armie of Protestants which were left in Lorraine. And there we shal see great wants, which soone produce many infalliable faults, without remedie and reparations that are presently made, to the ruine and confusion of such as commit them. It was destitute of a Generall, capable of so dangerous a iourney. The Duke de Bouillon was therein but a learner, and those that assisted him, were more fit to go of an Ambassage, then to giue a charge vpon the enemie. The Barron of
Othna had lesse experience then courage, all his sufficiencie consisted onely in the report and commendation, giuen of him by the D.
Casimir. For about the beginning of the month of August,Neither the Rutters nor Switzers would fight with so faire an occasion. consusion and necessitie (two dangerous plagues to a great multitude) entered among them. There was diuision in their intents, some of them would spoyle the country of Lorraine, others would stay their vengeance and furie, vntill they were in the heart of
France.

The Duke de Bouillon by meanes of that armie would refresh his Towns, that as then were vnfurnished: the Generall of the Almaines would not doo any thing before hee had a Prince of the blood to direct him. The Frenchmen said, they must go straight forward to passe the riuer of Loire: the Almaines wold march along by the riuer of
Seine, and from thence into Picardie. But the passage of the riuer of Loire was resolued vpon, after they had let slip a goodly encounter at Pont Saint Vincent, where all the troupes of the league made shewe to set vppon them, but the necessitie of victualles procured by the Duke of Lorraine, by throwing downe milles, and ouens, made them leaue that bone, and passe further forward in this manner. The Duke de Bouillon, Liestenant Generall, the Counte de la Marche his brother, led the Vant-guard: Cleruant the Switzers: the Barron of Othna the Rutters: Guitry Marshall of the campe, and Mouy ledde the French footemen. And as they passed
le Barrois and leinuillois, newes came of the arriuall of
Monsieur de Chastillon, at Gresille, neare to la Mottes in Lorraine, both the armies made thither: that of the Duke of Guise to intrappe him: and that of the Duke de Bouillon to defend him: in which effort, they trauelled so much, that both the one and the other, wearied and weakened themselues.
The Earle of Marche fell sicke and died, leauing his charge to Nonsieur de Chastillon, whom hee had ingaged. That done, long raines, want of victualles and sicknesses, beganne to torment the armie: which notwithstanding all discommodities, made right to
Chaumont in Bassigny: passed the riuer of
Marne: placed their artilllerie, (but to no purpose) against the Abbey of Clernaux: burnt the corne vppon the ground about the countrie: crossed l'Aube a^ Montigny, and Seine aboue Chastillon, where Monsieur de la Chastre laye, passed hard by the Duke
de Maine, and the troupes of Bourgongne lodged at
Leignes, and Ansile Franc, passed Cure aboue
Vermenton, and Yonne hard by Creuant, and so made a halt towards the riuer of Loire.
The cause of the overthrow of the Switzers.There beganne the complaints of the Switzers, and the mutinies of the Rutters, because the King of Nauarre came not to them, and that the King was at the side of the riuer of Loire, either to fight with them, or to staye their passage. A stratageme woorthie of a King and Councell, no lesse commendable then admirable, beeing the true and onely cause of the victorie. For hee considered that the onely meanes to breake this armie, was to impeach their ioyning with the king of
Nauarre, and so to let them consume of themselues, as not hauing victualles to suffice their wants, nor retrait for their aduantage. That the necessitie of their bellie would cause the head to rebell. That famine would cause disseases among them, and lessen their troupes. From this Councell proceeded two great effects, but different in execution: hee commaunded the Duke Ioyeuse,The battel of Coutras. to keepe the King of Nauarre in Poitou, and rather to hazard battell, then suffer him to passe the riuer of
Loire, as hee determined to do at the head thereof: assuring him, that the ruine of the forraine armie depended there vppon: to the which end, the Duke de Ioyeuse that had anarmie fortified both with men, munition, artillerie, and meanes, marched towards Coutras, to passe la Drongne at Gue: and vpon Tuesday the twentieth of October, stayed with all his forces, between la Roche, Chalais, and Coutras, the king of Nauarre made towards him, fully resolued to fight. And his troupes, not mercinarie but chosen souldiers, not constrained but free, that desired rather to sweate in a skirmish, then heate themselues in a Tennis-court: rather to pursue a flying enemie, then staye to drinke sweet and pleasant maluesie at a bankette, that feared nothing but the losse of their reputation, stayed onely but till they had the word to giue the onset. And after they had bin long encouraged to fight, and greeued with outrages and threatnings, they sell to blowes. And about eight of the clocke in the morning, the king of Nauarres artillery began to play, and that of the Duke de Ioyeuse to aunswere them, but not very luckely, for that eyther the ignorance or the mallice of the Cannonier had placed it so low, that the mouth of the cannon shot right vpon a litle hill of earth, wherein the bullet stayed without pearcing further.
The battell was so soone descided, that in tenne houres this great armie of the king (that had the aduantage, both for place and number, beganne to retire) was sooner broken then fought withall. The king of
Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and the Earle of
Sotssons, behaued themselues most valiantly, executing the offices both of Captaines and souldiers, and gaue thankes to God in open field, all died with blood, and hilled and couered with dead bodies: and among the rest, with the bodies of Duke de Ioyeuse, Monsieur de Saint
Sauueur his brother, and fiue and twentieth other Gentlemen of name. All their Cornets were taken, with the artillerie and baggage, and foureteene Gentlemen of account taken and put to raunsome. That done, the king of
Nauarre beeing eased of so many nettes that were set vp to catch him, marched forward to ioyne with the forraine armie, and to passe the riuer of Loire: but the king lay incamped at a little Village called
Lere, between Cosne and Neusuy, impeached him by the aduise of Monsieur de Neuers, causing the guets betweene
Pouilly and Dony to bee broken downe, filling them with thousands of trees, stones, and chaines, to entangle the feete of the Rutters horses that should passe. And intrueth, the letting of that passage, next to the helpe of God, was the second cause of the aduantage the king had of the victorie. For the Duke of Guise that followed the armie, durst not set vpon it, nor hinder it from spoyling villages, therewith to refresh it selfe. But assoone as it perceiued it selfe to be in that inclosure, and that they must of force recule, to take the left hand, and enter into a countrie wherein the Rutter had neuer hunted the Hart, and considring the scituation, it beganne to be abashed and fall into a mutenie, and loose courage: and hauing failed of their enterprise at la Charite, it entered into the way of
Beauce, drawing towards Montargis, and so stayed at
Vimori, or thereabouts. Where the Duke of Guise that followed, determined to dislodge them, and tooke them so suddainly, about seuen of the clocke in the euening, that they sooner heard the cries of the dying and hurt men, then the Qui va la of the Sentinels.The 27. of Octobr. The Rutters were readier to place themselues in order of battell, then to saue their baggages, or impeach the spoyle made by the souldiers. There the Barron of
Othna shot two Pistolle bullets into the Castle of the Duke
de Maine: and for exchange, he got a great blow with a courtlasse in the forehead. The Rutters in that skirmish lost 50. good souldiers,
100. Pages, 300. horses for waggons, 2. Chaumeaux, and the two Attabales, which are drumbes of leather for the Generalles Cornet, being a Turkish inuention: and the Duke of Guise, 40. Gentlemen and 200. Souldiers. I call not that a victorie which costeth the blood of so many braue Gentlemen, but rather an vnrecouerable losse. And the Duke of
Guise might say as the K. sayeth* of those whom at this day we call Albanists, (after he dispersed the armie of the Romains) were vtterly spoiled if we obtain such another victories against the Romanes.

From thence the Duke de Bouillon marched to
Chasteau-landon, which he battereth and taketh by force, and by the Rutters pilled and spoyled, beeing moued with impatience, to haue neither mony, nor the sight of the King of Nauarre, which mutinie had beene much more greater, if the assurance of the arriuall of the Prince of
Conde had not ceased it, that met them about Chartres, where the Duke de Bouillon yeelded him his charge, togither with the white Ancient.
The king beeing at Bonneual, had intelligence of the diuision and mutenie, that hatched and beganne to breed in the straungers armie, and therevppon vsed all the meanes he could, by wise and polliticque practises, to sound the hearts of the Switzers, to see if he could procure their separation from the armie, and so to perswade them (by the remembrance of the fidelitie and allyance of their nation vnto the Crowne of France) to leaue their armes and retire.
Those that confessed themselues not to bee borne but with the marke of a flower deluce, and not to bee entered into France, but to restore it to the pristinate splendure, obeyed the king, and vpon agreement of foure hundreth thousand Crownes, payde them in readie mony, hee sent them backe againe into their countrie.
Surprising of the Rittersat Auneau.The Duke de Guise perceiuing the armie of Rutters to bee as a bodie dispearsed, hauing nothing left but the legges and the armes, executed vppon them, that which he had determined from the first day of their entrie, which was vpon 'the Generalles lodging, and so by striking the Shepheard, diuided the flocke: as Caezar did at the battel of
Pharsale. He shewed therin, that there is nothing more necessary for a great Captaine,Fortioribus Superatis aliis concidit ^nimus. then speedily to take occasion when it is offered: I say speedilie, for that in seleritie and vigilent care, the art of warre consisteth. And hauing espied the enemies campe at
Auneau, hee entered into it with all his forces, and chose his field neare to the Towne, to sustaine such as issued foorth, or those that should come to ayde them within: his footemen entered the streetes about the time that the Cartes and baggage were readie in the morning to issue out. And so surprised the Rutters at their breakefast, when the trumpetres beganne to sound a chiual, and set so brauely vppon them, that hauing not the meanes to issue foorth, they were constrained to retire into their lodgings at the pleasure of the assaylants. The bootie was great, beeing eight hundreth Chariots, Iewels, and Chaines of Golde, and two thousand horse, both for the field and waggons, so that in one night, all the footemen of the Duke of Guises armie were on horsebacke, and rich of spoyles and prisoners. For the Gates being ceased vpon, and the streetes chained, there was no meanes to saue themselues, but by the walles: which the Generall leaped ouer, passing by night through a marrish ground. Those that knowe the manner of the Rutters forme and order vsed in the warres, may wel suppose how easilie the Duke of Guise obtained his purpose, for horsemen are of no force, beeing in a streete that is chained: but of force they must light off their horses to come to hand-blowes,This is contrarie to the opinion of Monsieur de la Noue. but in that case the Rutter hath put a Pistol against the hayles of the bullet, of musket and caliuer shotte, and whensoeuer they should meete in open field, one Cornet of French horsemen would bee strong ynough for two Cornets of Rutters.
The Frenchman is very expert in his launce, and the Almaine in his Pistolle: the force of the launce is furious and striketh farre off: the pistolle hurteth not but beeing neare, and yet there is no assurance to hit right, when men drawne suddainely and without foresight, it is composed of many peeces, and often times either the stone, powder, wheele, or bullet, maketh them loose their shotte.
The sword is the best weapon of a souldier.The force and strength of the great horse, maketh a maruellous encounter, but the weakenesse of the Almaines horse is nothing like. The Frenchman setteth furiously vppon the head of his enemies squadrons, and when his launce is broken, hee taketh his sword, which is the most assured weapon a souldier can beare. The Rutter neuer fighteth with his face forward, not knowing whether his blowe tooke effect or not. And when he shotte, and that one ranke thrusteth forward vpon the other, he goeth no further, but turneth to the right or the left hand, as the place serueth, vntill he hath charged againe, and so commeth to shoote. The launcier passeth forward, followeth on his course, breaketh and scattereth al whatsoeuer he meeteth, with certaine petrinelles, that are mixed among the launces, the feare and scattering abroad assureth not the Rutters hand to charge readilie againe, and while he doth it, halfe dead and trembling, there needeth no great labor to breake and enter the rankes that are disordered. Wherby it happeneth, that the Rutters did neuer obtaine any great victories against the Frenchmen, although they bragge and say they will soone vnsaddle a launcier, that commeth to assayle them, and take his horse.
Such as are expert in the effects of nature, affirme, that there is not any passion which sooner maketh the liuelenesse of our sences to faile, then feare and disorder, which so much troubled the armie of Rutters, that it nayled their feete form passing forward, and gaue them whings in their heeles, to make the more speed. Neuerthelesse it was in such estate, that by reason of some small assurance they had of the King of N. arriuall, that it was likely to haue ouerunne the Duke of Guises forces: and as it was at the poynt to retire backe againe, the Prince of Conde, the Duke de Bouillon, and the Lords of Chastillon, and Cleruant, promised to pay them all their wages, so they would passe forward.
The hope of their paye, made them to march in a time not much conuenient, towards the forrest of Orleans. The King perceiued that the longer their armie kept the field, the greater would bee the ruine of his countrie, and that being ioyned to the King of Nauarre, it would doo much hurt, caused the Sieurs of the Isle of Cormont, to certifie the Coronels, that if they would yeeld vppe their colours, and sweare to beare no armes in France, without the expresse commaundement of his Maiestie, hee would giue them assurance to retire in safetie: they perceiuing themselues farre from the king of
Nauarre, hardly handled by the Frenchme^, beaten by the league, pursued by the king,Capitul ati^ the 20. of December.
1587* and forsaken of the Switzers, assembled themselues togither at Marsigni, and accepted his Maisties offers, sent by Monsieur d'Espernon, that feasted them, and made them drinke new muscat their bellies full.
Monsieur de Chastillon laying holde vppon the occasion of a safe retrait, and for his purpose, protested not to yeelde vppe his colours but to the King of Nauarre, and so tooke his way towards Roane, to retire with a hundreth good horse, and certaine Harquebusiers.

The Gouernour of Lyons, entered into the field to impeach his passage, but the little children of Coindrieu, easilie iudged of his fortune, and the effect of that expedition, which they called not the iourney of spurres, but the battell shewing the backe, and bring newes thereof before it was fully done. For there they fought like the Scithians, and they that had their heeles best armed, were most valiant.The Scitheans fight flying. The consideration of this encounter, and the inequallitie of the forces and leaders, maketh me beleeue, that which many haue perswaded themselues to bee true: which is, that wisedome in warre is of little force. For fooles commonly beate vvise men. Beholde an olde Captaine armed with so many examples,Olde Captaines commit young faults. Paradoxe. and glorious exploytes of war, that had sharpened his iudgement by so many practises, findeth himself contrained to yeeld the place to a small handfull of men, halfe wearied.
It is said, that good wines are best in the latter part of the yeare, when time hath purged them of their fire and made them mylder, but regard must bee had that they become not sowre. Age causeth strange Metamorphoses in vs, it breedeth euill fauored wrinckles in our hearts, and alwaies there is somewhat that tasteth sharpe and mustie, and beginneth to be faint or ranke. Old men should sit in Councell, and young march in the fielde: olde men feare blowes. The boyling and couragious heate of youth (mother of braue exploytes) is extinguished in them, there it is too hotte for them. They neuer sleepe without curtins and fire: I make more account of a young Captaine, whose vertue and valour groweth vp with his age, and such (as without dissimulation) France hath found in
Monsieur de Chastillon, who in lesse then 4* moneths, compassed a great part of France, trauersed a hundreth daungers, passed many places, where hee found any thing either before, behinde, or on his sides, but that opposed it selfe against him. And like a braue Gentleman, hauing separated himselfe from the mutinie of the Rutters and the leaguers forces, although the Counte de Tournon, and the Lord of
Mandelot, bereaued him of all means to passe away, but onely by armes, yet he passed through them, like thunder that teareth and scattereth all whatsoeuer lyeth before it, and made them know, that the valour of a couragious heart, is not subiect to long and tedious resolutions, which are not executed but in words. This place hath somewhat separarated me from the banket made by Monsieur d'Espernon to the Rutters, and of the treatie that followed, which gaue them libertie and assurance to retire. They went vnto Geneua, where diuers of the heads (whether it were for griefe, with languishing, or by blows of musket) yeelded vp the ghost. There the Duke de Bouillon being in the fiue and twentie yeare of his age, died vppon the eleuenth of Ianuary, hauing made his heire the Ladie Charlotte de la Marke his sister, charging her to alter nothing in the state, nor the religion of the soueranties of
Sedan and Iamets: nor to marry without the aduises of the king of N. the Prince of Conde, and Monsieur de Monpensier, whom he appoynted his heire with his sonne, the heire dying without children: with the same charge not to alter any thing in his lands, in the which case he substituted the king of Nauarre, and after him the Prince of Conde. Assoone as the Duke of
Lorraine vnderstood of this Princes death, hee sent his armies into his countries, in defence wherof, la Noue his executor entered into armes, with protestation, that the promise he had made (for his deliuery) vnto the king of Spaine, not to beare armes against him, bound him not to refuse his ayde in defence of a young childe, against the vsurpation of the Lorraines.

The Marquesse du Pont, eldest son to the Duke of Lorraine, and the Duke of Guise, against their faith giuen, they followed not the armie, but the miserable troupe of Rutters, to the Mountaine of Saint Claude, where they gaue thankes for the good successe of their company: and from thence to please their hungrie troupes, they trauersed the Counte of Bourgongne, entering into the Countes of Mombeliard, and Hericourt, where his men vsed diuers great cruelties, and spared not the lands of the Bishoppe of
Basle, the example and ornament of the good Prelates of
Germanie.
After the bloodie ceasing of so lamentable vengeance, vppon a poore innocent people, which as yet do feele the losses and destructions of two hundreth Villages, the violence vsed to a number of women and maides, the massacre of so many olde men, the furious and beastly inhumanities of the league, they bare the signes of their spoyles into Lorraine, where they erected the great confusion that dispearsed it selfe, through all the vaines of the estate, neuerthelesse it was the glorie of the league, and the last poynt that ambition hath learned.
Time and humours are meruellously disposed therevnto. All France shewed it selfe much bound vnto it, that had deliuered them from the furies of straungers, and assured all Catholicque minds. The victorie of Auneau,Maruaile that a king should be tealous of his vassall. is an ordinary song among the people, the reioycing of the Cleargie, the brauerie of the Gentlemen. Of the league, the iealousie of the king, that knew wel that this Lawrell was not giuen to the league, but to disgrace his Maiestie, although it was commo^ in the mouth of honest men, that his Maiestie had co^strained his enemies to yeelde.
There was no Preacher but spoke openly in the pulpet, and said: that Saul had killed two thousand, but Dauid sixe thousand: the frends of Marcus Crassus could not indure that
Caezar should bee beloued of the people: this iealousie sought to eternise the Dictators office, with his reputation in the opinions of the commons, made it to be proclaimed in all places, that the Rutter had beene raised, payde, and sent away by the King, and that without the prowesse and constancie of the Duke of Guise, the Arke had fallen into the hands of the Philistines, that heresie had triumphed ouer Catholicque religion.
The Pope, the King of Spaine, and the Duke of
Sauoye, made fires of ioy, and pronounced the praises of the Duke of
Guise:It is said that the Pope sent the Duke of Guise a sword, ingrauen with burning flames. All estates shooke and wauered. the Prince of Parma had sent him his armes, saying: that among all the Princes of Europe, it belonged only to
Henry of Lorraine, to beare armes, and to bee a commaunder in the wars. The league by this meanes beeing in so great appparance and likelyhood of aduancement, pushed forward rather by insolencie of good fortune, then of iudgement, sailed in the maine sea of her pertences, and imbraced the occasion for the which long since it had alwaies had the nostrelles open, the eyes watchfull, the eares hearkning, and the foote stirring. And to conclude, it became very faire. The Cleargie with full sayle pusht forward the intent of the Duke of Guise, to bande against the Huguenots, diuers Gentlemen wondring at his fortune, vnder vaine hopes that hee would once bee king, ranged themselues to his will, beleeuing that most daungerous attempts and easiest to be achiued, is vnder a Prince full of valour and courage. The people that are not nourished but with the praises of the house of Guise, and the disorders
of the king: held on that side which they esteemed most sure and strong.
The Towne of Parris, that perceiued the king to haue forgotten the Edict of Iuly, that he had returned to his first humours of pennance, that he is iudged by Ioubert and Miron, neuer to be a father: that his fauour, his libertie, her heart, and his soule, depended but vppon two of his creatures, and that the charges and impositions renued and redoubled, began to dislike of things present, and to imbrace all whatsoeuer offered it selfe vnto them, how little apparance soeuer it had, not to chaunge or decay.
Some of the busiest, which after that time were named the sixteen, beganne to vtter their deuises, and secretly to vent their false monies, filling the hearts and eares of the common people with feares, by consideration of the vnrecouerable fall of the Church: of secret fauours and intelligences with the King of Nauarre: of despising the Catholicque Princes: of aduancement of Migrons:Murmurati on against disorders. of desolation of lusts and pleasures: of hypocrisie in the Court: and of the resolution of the Parrissians, to reuenge the conspiracie of the yeare past.
This moued the most assured, dimmed the eies of the most cleare sighted, and heated the courages of the most lukewarme. These consciences trembling more for feare to loose the bell, then the steeple, suffered themselues to bee ledde away without conduction or thread into his laberinth, and most foolishly ranne one after the other, into the preace of this furie. The Duke of Guise, that thought not of any tempest, the shippe beeing yet in the hauen, and feared not when hee perceiued it to bee in the middle of the raging seas, imbarked himselfe therein, in hope of those populer windes, and built vpon the quicksands of
Parris. And if you would knowe what parts were in him, to vndertake so hautie an enterprise, hearken what a great personage of our time writeth thereof. Hee onely is all the league, the rest of his house are not like him, and all of them togither cannot furnish the least part of that which by him is taken in hand:The Duke of Guises nature in the liberall discourse. a great dissembler well aduised: very wise, and wiser then all his faction, which all the world well perceiueth by his actions. I haue seene by writings vnder his owne hand, in an enterprise of great importance, where the greatest person of his house, next after him, without his aduise went about to commit a great and notorious fault. Hee is indued with much vertue, certain effects take good successe, and with the name and memorie of his father: by ciuill warre, he presently became the chiefe commanmaunder of the Catholicque faction, specially seeking to get the fauour of those townes, that feared a Prince of the religion, whom he flattered by many priuate meanes, chiefe and cettaine signes of a minde aspiring vnto tyrannie. Hee is diuers, and corrupted without measure, secret, close, craftie, patient, (euen to the poynt of being blasoned) dissembling, proceeding in his intents, with long detraction. Seeing farre off, and not enterprising any thing, but hee is well assured to effect it. His father and his Grand-father withstood the King of Spaine in Italie, and hee will do it in France. He saith it is the zeale of religion that prouoked him.
And God knoweth, there are yet so many Turkes and Sarrasins in the world, that withhold his inheritance of the kingdome of
Ierusalem, why doth hee not rather turne his pretences vppon them, then against France? When he perceiue the greatnesse of the soueraigne Maiestie decreased and imbaced: that his enemies were retired vnto Rochel: that England had a proude Spaniard vppon her backe, (meaning the great Spanish armie by sea) hee assured himselfe to take the king without daunger: hee leaned his eare to the aduise of the sixteenth Archleaguer of Parris: he aduertised the Cardinall of Bourbon, (that went not but as hee was ledde) not to refuse so good an occasion, and passe so faire a time without some exercise, gathered an assembly of his principall friends at
Nancy, there to aduise the meanes to passe forward: constraine the king to make his will: bannish his Mignions, and to be content to bee ruled by his house. And so that assembly concluded, that hee should bee summoned to ioyne his forces vnto the enterprises of the league: his authoritie, to her pretences: his fauour, to their will: leaue and refuse the counsell and amitie, of such as should be named vnto him: driue and bereaue them of their offices: establish the Inquisition in euery Towne, to publish the Councell of Trent,The effect of the articles made in the assembly of of Nancy, in Febr.
1588. touching the ordering of things that derogated the priuiledges of the French Church. To consent to the restitution of the rents and goods, that it had been alienated and sold for the charges of his warres. To giue them Townes wherein they might place men of war, and to make such fortifications, as the necessitie of time and affaires would permit. Ordaine the sale and confiscation of Huguenots goods, also the disabling of their persons, and entertaine an armie vppon the frontiers of
Lorraine, against the returne of the Germaines, that would come to haue some recompence, for the cruelties by the league committed in the Counte of Mombeliard. These articles were sent vnto the king, mean time,This warre continued till May 158^. the forces of
Lorraine continued warres against the Princes of Sedan, a warre that raised a thousand curses against the league, the thing not beeing so well iustified, as the consideration of an innocents case, made it seeme execrable, and detested such as enterprised the same, for entering vpon other mens bou^ds. The king stayed for a time, to resolue himselfe vppon the intentions of the Princes of the league, and made shewe to consent vnto them. And to say the trueth, he was not in estate to oppose himselfe against them, for that in the beginning of the league, hauing permitted them to strike their hatchet into the florishing tree of Saint Lois, the blow entered, and made so great an ouerture, that all fell in peeces. Hee acknowledged the perilous consequence of his first fault. And that hee agreed to the treatie of Nemours, and to the breach of peace, so to approoue the league.Prognostications of de Mesnil Aubri, 1560. He verified that which the Cassandrian Huguenots had so often sung: hee sawe that the great credit which the Duke of Guise had goten among his subiects, to the great diminishing of his owne, did more increase, that since he had left disobedience vnpunished, rebellion was auouched, and that from it would proceed some straunge change, to shake the estate. As many sillables as hee pronounced in reading those articles, so many times his heart beat, and moued in his bodie with an extraordinary feare, saying in himselfe:Considerations by the King had, touching the articles of Nancy. The league will haue me to bannish my seruants, that are most affected vnto mee. So the wolues desired the sheep to driue away the dogges, that they might worke their willes.
That I should binde my selfe to their deuises: and why? to serue them for a bridge to enter vppon the royaltie: that I should hatch the vipers within my bosome, that should knawe my enteralles, and vnder the flower deluce, I should couer the crosses of
Lorraine: that of a king, I become Generall of an armie: that the people may know, that seeing I haue not the courage to bee a Maister, it is reason I should bee a seruant: that if I haue not the stomacke to punish such as enterprise vpon mee, they neyther haue shame nor feare to proceed therein: it will haue mee ouerthrow and destroy those great persons that I loue, and that belong vnto mee: which beeing done, what aduauncement would it bee either to mee or to the Common-wealth? what is a forrest when the fairest trees bee cut downe, but onely a place full of fushes? what is a Realme when the greatest houses are ouerthrowne and impouerished? onely a desart.
That I should agree and consent with them to make warre against such as are not of their league. Who euer heard that any estate could long endure when it is diuided in two parts, that haue weapon in hand? and what will become of mine, induring three or foure? and that these two words of leaguers and Pollititians, shall be as contagious therein, as those of Guelphe and Gibelin, that first sprang out a little Towne betweene two bretheren, and spredde all ouer Italie, among all the Princes? Who shall defend mee vnder his partialities, from the same slaunders that our neighbours of England and Germanie haue receiued? I will haue no other part but mine owne, and finde there is no better nor fairer, then to bee a king, I meane a king of France. That I should cause the Councell of Trent to bee published, I am content: but this publication must not bee made by sound of trumpet, or noyse of Cannon-shotte. Hitherto my soueraigne Courts of Parliament neuer counselled mee vnto it, for the preiudice I might induce into, the liberties of my Crowne, and franchises of the Cleargie of this Realme: and fortaine Princes haue not receiued it, but as farre as it was conformable to their willes, and haue taken out of it the thornes that pricked them. That I should establish the Inquisition at the least in all my Townes: this word breedeth a feare in euery man. The Inquisition was not inuented but against Infidelles, for that after my auncestors had reduced
Spaine to the Christian faith, and that Pelages King of
Castille, perceiued himselfe not strong ynough to constraine Infidelles in their consciences, hee permitted them the libertie thereof, for certaine yearely tribute. Long after, Ferdinand of
Arragon, perceiuing that by the patching of so many superstitions, both of the Sinagogue, and the Alcaron of Christian religion beganne to be corrupted, he determined to constraine the^ to be Baptized, or to leaue the country, such as to stay and that made more account of their liuings then their consciences, purged not themselues so well of their errors, but that there rested some dregges of their first opinions, which they held by succession from their auncestors, and desired rather like the Duke of Friezland, to go to hell with their sects, then to Paradice without them. For men do hardly forgo the religion by them learned from their cradles, and the more they are afflicted to make them leaue it, so much the more they harden their mindes against torments: the more the exercise is forbidden them, the more they seeke it: and the more they are mooued, the more they stirre: they began to informe against them, whereof the Iacobins as then newly produced into the Church by Saint
Domenicke (ful of doctrine and religion) had the charge, who imployed prayers and exhortations, and would not vse violent purgations, thereby not to stirre vppe an aboundance of humours, that might stop
the heart or the liuer, this peaceablenesse and toleration being daungerous in the Church, they beganne to vse rigor against those miserable Marians, vnder the name of Inquisition: and since that, it hath been exercised against such as are not sound in Catholicque religion.
The formes since that time added therevnto are very straunge, as the length of proceeding to aunsweres, the voluntary confessions of those that are accused: the slaunders and boldnesse of their officers called Flyes: the prison vnder ground, soule, obscure, and fearefull: the punishment with trochelles and wheeles, the sinewes, the water, and the fron, the yealow Casocke without sleeues painted full of diuels, which they call Saubenite, the myter, gagge, and the cord, and that which is the last part of this pittifull tragedie, the fire haue made this inquisition (which I thinke necessary in Spaine) so strange vnto the Flemmings, and so detestable to the Frenchmen, that the Frenchmen will rather a thousand times indure that which the Flemmings haue suffered, then subiect themselues vnto it, to establish this inquisition, among the light toyes of the Frenchmen, the liberties we possesse within these thirtie yeares, and the curiosities that are naturally in vs, there would not be wood ynough to burne my subiects.
I will not doo it, I had rather haue a sicke then a dead bodie, I will not make religion a Butcherie, or the alter of a sacrifice which is not bloodie, a pillorie or place of execution: no, the king of
France will no more cause his subiects to bee slaine, to make them beleeue hee will neuer vndertake to constraine mens soules, as long as their bodies are obedient vnto him. It belongeth vnto God to accord these false notes, that are heard in the harmonie of his Church.
They would likewise that I should consent vnto the Cleargie, that they may purchase in fee farme such goods as heeretofore haue beene aliened from their Churches, and constraine the possessors thereof to sell them againe: that is as much to say, that I should fight for the Church, and the Cleargie shall keepe their temporall goods, while the people playe the Alkamists with their teeth. They will giue the alarme, and neuer come to battell. All the rest of their articles touching the sale of Huguenots goods, and of their disabling, are alreadie ordained, men are imployed therein, all my parliaments are troubled therewith. What do they demaund of me, which I haue not agreed vnto not beeing able to refuse it? and how many things haue I graun-vnto the^, which I could refuse, because I ought not so to do it? There is no sinewe in his polliticke bodie, but it is wrested, nor any member which doth not languish. They haue constrained mee to playe and hazard my estate by chaunce of warres: I haue alreadie lost the halfe, let them suffer me to withdrawe my selfe into the other halfe and liue in peace.
Such were the obiections of this Prince, at the motions of the leaguers articles, but because of nature hee was fearefull, feeble, and light, hee neuer had firme resolution within his minde. Princes most commonly do faile by not beleeuing counsell, but hee deceiued himselfe by too much crediting.
The first poynt of this mischiefe was, that trueth was kept from him, and that men followed his humors.
Hee was perswaded the strongest part to bee that of the Duke of Guise, that all the Townes and Prouinces had their mindes set on him, that if hee entered not into it, he would bee left alone, at the mercie both of the League and the Huguenot.
Yet he firmly resolued to bee Maister, and to range both the one and the other vnder his obedience: but it was by a weake meanes, imbracing the Duke of Guises part, and made himselfe principall of the one side, with all seueritie to make warre against the Herereticque, speaking of nothing but of a voyage into Poitou, to besiege
Rochel, and to take the Isle of Rhie. And that which most fauoured this enterprise, was, that the Huguenots had lost the Prince of
Conde, vnder whose valour and generositie, they conceiued great hopes, and without doubt, as being indowed with all the quallities conuenient for a valiant Captaine, and otherwise an vnrecouerable enemie of their enemies. His disease was violent, procured by a nosegaye giuen him by some of his housholde seruants, for that vppon Thursday beeing the third day of March, halfe an houre after he had supt, a great paine in the stomacke, shortnesse of breath, hardnesse of the bellie, and continuall vometing, with extreame paine and thirst, tooke him.
And the Saterday after, when his Phisitians and Surgeons had imployed all Art, experience, and fidelitie to heale him, growing sicker, a generall sufforation of all the powers of his bodie ceased vppon him, whereof within an houre after hee died. His bodie was opened, wherein they found all the nether part of his bellie blacke, and burnt, the guttes full of reddish water, the stomacke aboue the orifice,The death of the Prince of Conde, saterday the 5. of March. pearced cleane through and round about, and the vitall powers (that of themselues were very helpeful and well composed) by reason of the great quantitie of poyson were all vlcered.
The king of Nauarre at his returne out of
Gascongne, commanded expresly, that all those that were suspected to bee necessarie to the poysoning of the Prince, should bee punished, for the which some were executed. Meane time, the King that had the enterprise of the League rather then that of the Huguenots, more imprinted in his minde, knowing that all their demaunds tended onely to this end, to make a perpetuall warre, prepared himselfe to preuent it, and caused certaine forces to bee assembled vnder the conduct of the Duke
d'Espernon, against whome all the league discharged their chollor, making him the onely argument of the confusion and disorder of all his affaires, their iealousie more increasing by the succession of the place of the Admirall, and of the gouernment of Normandie, which hee had newly receiued after the death of the Duke de Ioyeuse. This poynt deserueth to passe two steps out of my matter, the Admirall in
France is the name of one of the chiefe Magistrates in the Realme, Generall and Prince of the seas belonging to the countrie: as
Eghinard called Ruthland, that was Admiral in the time of
Charles the great. The like authoritie the Marshall of
France beareth in an armie by land: the same doth the Admirall in a Nauie of ships on the sea: but these offices are distinguished, for that the subiect is different and diuers. There is paine and diligence to bee vsed to place an armie by land in order of battell. The like must be vsed to conduct a Nauie of shippes vpon the sea. At al times the most warlike countrie of France, (both by sea and land) hath had her Admiralles, and the Frenchmen of Brittaine, Narbonne, and
Prouence, are much commended for their practises and greate dexterities in warres Voyages to the holy land, vnder Lewis the 7. and Philip Augustus, and Philip le Bel.vppon the sea: neuer thelesse this office was neuer in so great glorie and estimation, as it hath been since the third line of our kings, beeing that which brought pollicie and gouernment into this Monarchie (as the first had established, and the second increased it, by victorious conquests) then it was, that the names of Constable, Great-maister, Marshall, Admirall, and other such like dignities were ordained, but that of the Admiral remained vnprofitable, while our kings trauelled into the Leuant seas, to fight against the Infidelles, for in those expeditions they supplyed their wants with vessels which they found nearest to the countrie of Iudea, and many times with their Admiralles, which they had from Genes, Pise, Venice, and
Luques. But the Frenchman that neuer continueth long vnder the yoake of any stranger, would no more bee gouerned by straunge Admiralles, if they bare not the name of Admirall of France, although for the most part they were no Frenchmen. As in the time of Francis the first,
Andrew, and Philip Dorie Geneuois, were made Admirals of the
Leuant seas, and after left him to serue the Emperour
Charles the fift. There hath bin diuers braue and expert Admiralles issued out of France, as Enguerrand de Coucy, and
Hugues Quieret, Lewis of Spaine, vnder Philip le Bel, A^ory Vicount de Narbonne, and Iohn de Vienne vnder King Iohn: and
Charles the sixt, in whose time the Admiral of France furnished the great armie of twelue hundreth sayle of shippes against the Englishmen, Cliret of Brabant, Lewis de Coulant vnder
Charles the seuenth, and Lewis Bastard of
Bourbon,Iohn of Vienne Admirall, and since Constable. 1586. Anne de Ioyeuse, Admirall, 1582. The Duke d'Espernon, made Admirall of Fra^ce, by Parliament, the 11. of Ianuarie, 1588. The Duke d'Espernon Gouernor of Normandie, entred Roan^ the fourth of May. Earle of Rossillon, vnder Lewis the eleuenth, and vnder king Frances the Lord of Brion, d'Anebaut and
la Trimouille, for whom the Admiralles of Brittaine and
Guyenne, were ioyned and made one.
Gaspart de Coligny was Admirall vnder the same king, and confirmed by Henry the second and his children.
Honorat de Sauoye, Marquesse de Villars succeeded him, and caused it to bee giuen to Charles de Lorraine Duke of
Mayenne, that resigned it to Anne de Ioyeuse, and after his death, the king gaue it to the Duke d'Espernon.
And to establish him therein, presented him in the Court of Parliament, and putting off his sword, bare-headed, and kneeling on his knee, hee tooke his oath before the chiefe President, where the eloquence of
Monsicur d'Espesses the kings Atturney much commended and set foorth the prayses of the Duke. Hee succeeded likewise in the gouernment of Normandie, and made his entrie into Roane, nine daies before the Barricadoes at Parrs. Not long before that, hee had sent the Regiment of Picardie to lye about Bullen, and caused certaine small English boates to descend before the Towne, so to impeach the enterprise of the Duke d'Aumale, and to preuent that which the said Duke intended against the Towne.
When the Duke of Guise vnderstood of those troubles in Picardie, hee thought the time as then to bee fitte for him, to constraine the king eyther to bow or breake, to confirme the articles drawne and deuised at Nancy and Dyon, and to helpe the weakenesse of the Parrissians, that without him would haue lost courage.
And for the same cause hee arriued at
Soissons, where his Maiestie by Monsieur de Bellieure gaue him to vnderstand, that he should do him apleasure if he wold abstaine fro^ co^ming to Parris, in so troublesome a time, wherin so many factio^s raigned, and that if he came thither against his wil, he wold lay ye cause The arriuall of the Duke of Guise, at Soissons: The king prayeth him not to come to Parris vntill the distrusts were laid.of the troubles (that might arise by his presence) vpon him.
Monsieur de Bellieure, who by reason of greatnesse and soundnesse of his iudgement, concerning matters of estate, and the execution of wise and notable charges to him committed, held one of the chiefe places of Councellor about the king, vsed many and great reasons to restraine the impetuositie of that prince: and to conclude, departed from him, assuring himselfe that hee had fully disswaded him.
But his heart attainted with a burning Feuer, could finde neither appetite nor pleasure, but in that which liked his stomacke: beleeued that nothing could hinder him: that the heaue^s oght to giue him place: that striking with his foote vpon the ground, he would make a 100. legions of men to rise: and that without fear of Iupiters thunderbolts, he could rule ye chariot of the sun.
The Parissians had sent for him.Left no meanes between the two extremities of his firme resolution, but whatsoeuer fell out, hee would see the Louure, or die in the way. And therevppon mounted on horsebacke, with eight Gentlemen, about nine of the clocke at night, leauing his brother, the Cardinall of Guise, and the Prince de Iuinuille his sonne at Soissons, desiring the Archbishop of Lyons to follow him in the morning. And so within three houres after the arriuall of
Monsieur de Bellieure, and about Monday at noone, beeing the 9. of May, he entered into Parris,Sunday the 8. of May 1588. and lighted at the Queen-mothers lodging, the
Filles Repenties, where in great feare half trembling she receiued him, and led him to the Louure. If the streets of Parris had bin as broad, as the way of Appie^. they wold hardly haue contained halfe the quantitie of the people that followed this Prince: euery man thought himself happy, that might put off his hat, and kneel on his knee for to salute him,The Duke of Guise arriued the Kings not knowing onit. all being full of ioyfull cries, clapping of hands, pleasures, and wishes, to welcome him. He for his part, holding his hat in hand, answering by his countena^ce to those populer reioycings, marked the most prompt affections to his desire, they striuing among themselues, who should begin to crie: Viue Guise, Viue le Pillier del'Eglise. Which being heard into the street called S.
Honnore, where a Gentlewoman sat in a shop, she pulled down her maske, and spake aloude vnto him, vtterring these words: Good Prince, now you are here we are al safe. That done, he entered into the kings chamber, where he did his dutie to the king, but with lesse assurance then ordinary, knowing the King would not like well of his comming: and in trueth, he shewed him no great countenance, answering him (vnto the reasons hee made touching his iourney to Parris) that by M. de Bellieure he had desired him not to come. But dinner time approaching, they left off, and the D. of Guise departed to his lodging. After dinner he went to visit the Q. in her garden: where the king finding him, as well as he could dissembled the exterier apparance of y^ suspition he had conceiued in his heart: and the D. of Guise iustified his actions with a braue and bolde courage,He went to visit the Queen-mother. by so much the more as he perceiued thesecret fear of the Kings trembling mind, his seruant and followers, one after the other still entered into Parris: for the Archbishop of
Lyons being the principal Agent of his Councell, arriued vppon Tuesday about dinner time, and came not out of the house of
Guise, vntill the next day, that he went to see the Queen-mother being at Masse, and from thence went with her to her garden, where the K. found them: he stepped forward to kisse the Kings hand, who receiued him with pleasant and chearefull countenance, hauing alwayes discouered a certaine inclination that hee had to loue him, as knowing him to bee one of the woorthiest Prelates of his order, of a prompt and readie witte, and wonderfull eloquent, and withall, remembring that at all times when the stormes of words and reasons were vsed in any matter of estate, hee surprised all his Councell. Wherevppon hee willingly desired, hee had been as much affected to his seruice, as to the league wherein hee had entered, as alalso in an assured enmitie towards the Duke de Espernon. While the king, the Queene-mother, and the Duke of
Guise, were speaking togither, the people spake among themselues, euery man gaue him his iudgement, what would grow thereof, whispering each other secretly in the care. But secrets, loue, and wine, are nothing woorth when they are opened and perceiued.
The king caused foure thousand Switzers to enter at foure of the clock in the morning, the eleueuth of May,
1588.The Duke of Guise feared to bee preuented, and the Kings eares were filled with nothing but with the pretences of the Parrissians against him, hee knewe the practises that would trouble the braines of the ambitious head of the Duke of Guise, the manner of his arriuall, and the fauour of the people increased his distrust, so that hee resolued to preuent the time of his enterprise, and commaunded the Marshall Biran, to cause the Switzers and Frenchmen to enter into the Towne, and to lodge them in diuers quarters thereof, thereby to restraine the people, that prepared themselues to the execution of that whereof a yeare before they had fayled.
The feare of the Persian.Captaine
Gast with his company, ceased vppon the little bridge hard by
Nostre Dame: Captaine Grillon lodged at Pont Saint
Michael: the Marshall d'Aumont placed a ranke of Harquebusiers on each side of Pont Nostre Dame.
Whereat the people beeing abashed, shutte vppe their shoppes, which they had begun to open, expecting a furie, wherin
Monsieur de Villequier vsed all the meanes hee could to diswade them, praying them not to stirre, or feare any thing.
But all in vaine, they had no eares, they would not heare, the artificer left his tooles, the Merchant his traficque, the vniuersitie their bookes, the Councellors their pleas, and the Presidents themselues take halberts in hand, whereby nothing was heard but fearefull cries, straunge complaints, mournings, and dispight.
The fearefull day of Barricadoes in Parris.And God knoweth if in that publicque rising, such as would take vpon them to exhort and set the rest togither by the eares, might not easily do what they list. Among the which, one of those audacious, mutinous fellows, spake vnto them and said: How now companions, shall not wee this day shrowd our selues from the shoures of raine, and pull our heads from vnder the axe, which the kings arme lifteth vp against vs, thereby to preserue vs from thunderclaps and furies of euill counsell, that seeketh the meanes to make pray of vs, our wiues and children? Perceiue you not that the King seeth onely outwardly, vnderstandeth but with his outward eares, and stirreth not but by the means of such as support heresies,Seditious words to mooue the people. and that fill their chests with the treasures that are exacted from the Cleargie, and the common people? Shall wee staye till they come to binde our hands and feete, and draw vs to the Greue, there to serue for tapistrie to the gibbets, that are prepared in the Town-house?
What further aduise needeth to bee had, to put our selues in a iust and naturall defence? Haue wee not alreadie heard Curtisans in the streete making partitions of our goods?
Did they not say, that fro^ henceforth the K. shal no more be a Page, yt he shuld commaund like a Maister, and that hee would be reuenged for the attempts made against him by the league.
Shall wee abuse our selues? shall wee not thinke vpon neighbours, our wiues, our children, and our selues? These words were presently carried and approoued with common consent. And although the Duke of Guise, knewe by the report of the Archbishop of Lyons, (whom hee had sent vnto the king) that the placing of men of warre in the quarters of the Towne of Parris, was not against him, yet hee would not trust in any thing but his sword. And with that, the Barricadoes (a fatall and seditious inuention of the league; and the onely instrument to ouerthrow her tyranny, in such Townes where the people are of courage) were made distant each from other thirtie foote, and reached almost to the Sentinels of the Louure.
The Switzers were set vppon, and they yeelded, crying:
Viue Guise, and Monsieur de Brissac caused them to bee disarmed, and lodged in the Butcherie or new market. The Sieur de Saint Paul, caused the kings guard to retire, holding downe their armes, with their hats in hand. The Queene-mother got into her Coach in great feare, and went to seeke the Duke of Guise: and after her,
Monsieur de Bellieure, thereby to appease the commotion. But this burning Feuer being but in his prime, and like to bee much more violent, the Duke of Guise said hee could not hold those Bulles that had burst foorth. Meantime, the King was aduertised that the enterprise would proceed further. That the Duke of Guise had not pretended so hautie an enterprise, to faint in the middle thereof. That to make his victorie full and accomplished, hee must of necessitie cease vppon the person of him, that might either impeach it, or make it infamous to the victors.
Aduise giuen to the King, concerning the Duke of Guises inte^t.Vppon these considerations, there arriued a Gentleman, a familiar and domesticall attendant vppon the Duke of
Guise, that assured him of the resolution that was taken to enter into the Louure, and to cease vppon his Maiestie, which was confirmed by three other, and very true. For that seeing the Duke of
Guise had proceeded so far, the time serued not as then to dissemble, as likewise his Councel found no better, more assured, nor expedienter means. And to conclude, hee bragged seeing hee had him there, to holde him fast: where vppon a certaine Author hath written, and saith: How now! what sayest thou straunger?In the liberal discourse. to slaye a King of France, it is more then all
Europe can doo: it is an enterprise (and yet very daungerous) for an Emperour, if thy Grand-father had thought, thou wouldest euer haue vttered such proude speeches, hee would surely haue strangeled thy father, thereby to impeach thy enterance into the world. In a peaceable estate, in a quiet Realme, this onely would haue cost thee thy head, but because it is in such estate, therefore thou troublest it.
The King, that could hardly beleeue it would proceed to that poynt, assured himselfe, and made no account of that aduise, thinking the people would alwaies range themselues vnder the clemencie of their king. But those of his Councell that desired to bee farre from Parris, and that knew the mutinies of the people, shewed his Maiestie, that there was nothing more vnconstant then that multitude, which in times past had constrained Philip le Bel, in great haste to saue himselfe in the house of the Templiers, and the Duke of Normandie, sonne to King Iohn, prisoner in England, to weare a hood halfe
redde, halfe russet, thereby to defend himselfe from their insolencie. And desired him to remember the reuolt of the
Maillotins, Caboches, and of those of Saint Andrewes crosse, of the disposition of Salcede, the letters of the King of Nauarre, the conspiracies made the last yeare about Easter, and the many aduises and prognostications he had receiued, by the singes hee had seene. The Queene-mother was not of that mind,The
13. of May. 1588. and promised to perswade the Duke of Guise, and for the same cause went to find him out, desiring him to quench so many fiers alreadie kindled, and to come and speake with the King, of whom hee should haue contentment at his pleasure: and thereby let him see, that in so vrgent an occasion, hee had greater desire to serue, then to ouerthrow his Crowne: to repaire, rather then throw downe the edifice of the estate, which that commotion had most mischieuously shaken.
The Duke of Guise betweene hope and feare, that neuer esteemed man to bee greater then himselfe, as long as hee held his sword in hand, making shewe of innocencie, and laying the fault vppon the people: said, that he suffered himselfe to bee borne in that sort by them, rather by force and necessitie, then that he had any desire so to do. That touching the Louure, it was but athing falsely deuised against him, that it should be a great folly for him to go thither, things being in such hatefull estate, and so to cast himselfe weake and in his dublet, into the mercie of his enemies.
The Queenmother aduertised the King by Secretarie Pin^rt.The Queene marking the stubburnnesse and resolution of the Duke of Guise, concerning her requests, caused the King to bee aduertised, who desiring not to stay any longer in that trance, issued out of Parris by the new gate, and that night lodged at Trappes. It is said, that being at
Mon-martre, he turned towards the Towne, and cursing it for the infidelitie, ingratitude, and disloyaltie thereof, in respect of all the benefits it had receiued at his hands, hee sware hee would neuer enter into it againe but by a breach: his seruants, the companies of his guard, and men of warre, with the Switzers, followed him, and left their lodgings to those new Kings of Parris. The Duke of Guise that had written to the Gouernour of Orleans,The Duke of Guises letters to the Gouernor of Orlea^s. that he held the Louure so close shut vppe, that hee would giue good account of that which was within it, knew well the victorie was not performed, and that his reputation would be stained, if the newes of the Kings retrait were carried out of the Realme, by other meanes then by him selfe, hee considered that whatsoeuer is attempted against the Kings person, toucheth and concerneth all his equalles, that as the Prelates, the Officers, the Senators, and Knights, and all Kings are bretheren: that one blood royall calleth the other: that all soueraigne Rulers, do blason rebelles and disturbers of estate, although they helpe themselues by the same meanes.
He thought it good, to send Monsieur de Brissac, to the Ambassadour of England, to shewe him the cause of the erecting the Barricadoes. I make no difficultie to write whole leaues of a discourse, when it is not out of purpose, neyther any disgrace to the matter propounded: therefore I haue set downe the same words, that passed betweene the Ambassadour of England, and the Counte de Brissac, which were faithfully reported vnto me.
The Counte de Brissac accompanied with certaine Gentlemen, went to visit the Ambassadour of England at his lodging (in those commotions and populer insolencies) to offer him a safeguard or protection, and to desire him not to bee abashed, nor to stirre, as beeing assured of the protection of Mensieur de Guise.
The Ambassadour made him aunswere, that if hee had beene in Parris, as a particular person, he would fall downe at the feete of Monsieur de Guise, and giue him humble thankes for his great and courteous offers, but beeing there hard by the King, and for the Queene his Mistresse (that had peace and amitie with the King) he neither would nor could receiue any protection but from the king himselfe. Monsieur de Brissac shewed him, that the Duke of Guise was not come to Parris, to enterprise any thing against the king or his seruice, but that hee had onely put himselfe in defence, that there was a great conspiracie made against him, and the Cittie of Parris, that the Town-house, and other places, were full of gibbets, whereon the king had determined to hang diuers of the Town and others: and that the Duke of
Guise desired him, to aduertise the Queen his Mistresse thereof, to the end it might bee known. The Ambassadour aunswered, that he beleeued the Duke had willed him to say so, that the highest and hardiest enterprises often times lye hidden and secret in the minds of those that vndertake them, and that (when they thinke good) they make them knowne with such colour and shewe, as they thinke best for their purpose, that he could not chuse but tell him plainely, that that which passed in Parris, would bee found very straunge, and euill thought of by all christian Princes hauing interest therein.
That no cloake or couer, how faire soeuer it might bee, could cause it to bee liked of, it beeing the dutie of a subiect to continue in the iust obedience of his Prince. That if there were so many gibbets prepared, it would be the easilier beleeued, if the Duke of
Guise would cause them openly to bee shewed. And againe, if it were so, it is a most odious and intollerable thing, that a subiect by force should seek to impeach the iustice that his Soueraigne would execute against offendors. That hee would promise him, that most willingly and with all speed, hee would aduertise the Queene his Mistresse of that had passed, but to bee his Interpteter vnto her, of
Monsieur de Guises intents, and those of his confederacie, it was no part of his charge, the Queen his Mistresse beeing wiser then himselfe, both to beleeue and iudge what she thought good.
Heere endeth the second Booke.



THE THIRDE BOOKE OF THE LAST troubles of France, containing that which passed after the Barricadoes in Parris, and there trait of the king to Chartres, vntill the Edict of pacification, and assembly of the generall estates at Blois, in the moneth of September.
Barricadoes the 12. of May.
1588.O Accursed and fatall day, that haste defaced the beautie and pleasure of the twelfth day of May, which euery yeare vsed to put vs in minde of the solemne and triumphant enterie of Charles the eight, into the Realme of Naples, what coale can bee blacke ynough, to note thee in our Ephemerides, and so leaue to our posteritie the rememberance of the shame and reproach of the rebellio^ which thou breedest vp, by driuing the king out of Parris, and making knowne the hideous spectacles of the tyrannie of the League.
There is no memorie that forgetteth the remembrance of thy ingratitude: no abolition, that defaceth thy felony: nor any defence to bee sought, that might hide thy shame: and there is not sufficient water in the riuer of Seine, to wash away the filthinesse of thy vilany: nor wood ynough to burne the Registers and memories of this sedition.
But can we speake of the Barricadoes, without remembring this incomprehensible motions of Gods prouidence, which doth equally shine and appeare as wel in ye establishing, as pulling down of Empires, and dealetha swel with their fall, as with their continuance? And who will not say,Read a notable discourse vppon this matter, in the 2. Booke, intituled the constancy and consolation of publicque calamities. Henry the third, a most religious Prince. He led rather the life of a Monke, then of a K. He hated the Huguenots. that this great motion (the spring of all the miseries ensuing) was not a blowe of the hand of the inscrutable wisedome of God, to punish the king and his Realm?
Hee that would debate this proposition by the circumstances of the kings person, needeth not to seeke the causes thereof, neither in the East nor in the West, but onely to ground them vppon the eternall wheele of Gods iudgements.
What apparance was there, for subiects to arme themselues and reuolt against a king? what pretence could bee so close, but in the end it would open and bee discouered? The cause of religion, which is one of the most violent passions of the people, and the most assured meanes to alter an estate, was so cleare and pure in him, that many iudged his life to bee religious, blamed his actions, which was fitter for an Hermite then a Prince. He kept more in a Monasterie then with his Councell, he spake oftner with Iesuites, Capucins, and Fueillantins, then to his Secretaries.
He detested nothing more then Huguenots, and there was not any Huguenot in France, that had receiued any commaundement at his hands, he was more spoken and disliked of among them, then any of the house of Lorraine: they beheld him not, but as the commet of their miseries, and neuer remembred him, but when they spake of S.
Bartholomewes day: that which they had indured at the hands of the duke of Guise, was but roses, in respect of that they had suffered at Iarnac,And the Huguenots declared his life. Moncontour, Rochel, and Parris, in such manner, that it were an extream absurditie, to beleeue that he fauoured Hereticques, and that hee would ouerthrow that religion, whereof hee made so open profession.
He was assisted by the Princes of his house.Therefore hee had no cause to feare any thing to bee done against him by the Catholicques: and yet those are they that in the Capital Towne of his Realms, Barricadoed themselues against him. He had all the Princes of the blood for the defence of his Crowne: for when the King of
Nauarre, for the libertie of his conscience had taken armes, it was no longer but while they would constraine him, and breake the decrees of peace, that permitted him to bee free of conscience, not to oppose himselfe against the Monarchie, nor to an Anarchicall confusion of this estate.
The rest of the Princes, that knew well that the reasons of the league, were not so much to reforme the Realme, as to ouerthrow it, and therewith to bring them within the compasse of those ruines, held themselues near vnto his Maiestie, all the Nobilitie of France, at the least nine of ten partes, more particularly bound vnto his seruice, for their honours, dignities, offices, and benefi^s, as also the iustices of the Realme, not beeing of the minde to accomodate themselues to the humors of the Princes of the league, and esteemed the essentiall forme thereof to be opposite, and an ouerthrowing to the estate. The Gentleme^ of France foreseeing that the royaltie cannot be ouerthrown, but that the Nobilitie must likewise beare the same burthen: and that the subiect that refuse the obedience and faieltie of his Prince, will not bee long before hee seeketh to free himselfe of the rents and reuenues hee oweth vnto the Lord of the soyle.
The greatest persons of the Cleargie, consented not to those new mutinies, acknowledging that their profession is more honoured and beautified vnder a King,The chiefe of the Cleargie. then by the confusions of a democration estate. The king likewise had named and chosen them at his pleasure, so that the obligation of his fauour, retained them in his seruice.
Learned men published his prayses, and in his raigne there were more bookes printed and dedicated to his Maiestie,Learned me^. then in the raigne of the great
King Francis and his successors, although most iustly hee was named the father and restorer of learning.
Some Preacher onely flattered sedition, thereby to winne estimation among the commo^ people desirous of a change. In all the towns and throughout euery Prouince there were officers, who besides their naturall subiection, were more bound to him by oath that he had taken of them, giuing them charge of his treasures, the power of his lawes, and administration of his iustice, with the order of pollicie, and they desired nothing more then the greatnesse of their King, his rest and quietnesse beeing their onely preferment, for that without libertie and peaceablenesse, with his long life and prosperitie, their offices were of little force, as hauing exposed their fortunes to the hazard of the terme of his life.
IAnd yet he was not well assured in Parris.n such manner, that his Maiestie had not any thing more at his commaundement, then men of that quallitie, that only feared the perill of his holy and sacred person, and the changing of this Monarchie. Who would then beleeue, that a king, yea and a king of France, in the middle of so many assurances, in the brauest time of his raigne, in the Capitall Cittie of his Kingdome, among so many Princes, Knights of the Order, in the face of a Parliament, (the thunder against sedition) and colonie of iustice and royaltie, hauing in his power the Bastille and the Arsenal: at his deuotion, the Prouost of Merchants, the Sheriffes, and the Colonnelles, and sixe thousand men of warre, placed in the streetes and quarters of the Towne, where hee desired should bee besieged in his Pallace of Louure, by a people whom hee had so much cherished and inriched with the spoyles of his other subiects, and by himselfe stirred vp, vnder the false alarme of a Garrison, sacking and spoyling, constrained to saue himselfe by flight from the furie of his mutinous subiects.
Incluctabilis fatorum vis cuius fortuna^ mutare constituit, consilia corrumpit. Velleius lib. 2. de Caesar es varo.And can wee that haue seene and beheld it, remember it, without considering that the eternall power of him that ruleth all the world, made the Spirits, iudgements, counselles, and conductions of those that might diuert the mischiefes, proper and fit to aduance them, and suffered them to take effect, to shewe his wrath, striking the head, to make members languish. O fatall, and once againe accursed day of Barricadoes, the birth day of our miseries, and funeralles of our ioys, that vnloosed the windes to those stormes of blood, that haue drowned our companions, that made libertie captiue, trueth criminall, rapin, iust: and tyrannie and inuasion lawfull:See heere the first beginning of the troubles of France, 47. slaine by Brisson, the President. that pulled the Crowne from the head of the King, and the lawes from the heart of the Realme: that put the weapon in the hand of a President, to raise the people in his quarter: that kindled the courage of the most coward, to fall vppon the kings guard: that lifted vppe the chin of most vile persons, and caused the League to triumph in the strees of Parris, as an Image accomplished with all wickednesse: that put pen in hand of the sixteenth, therewith to publish this wicked commotion, and to qualifie that with a iust defence against the kings aduertising all the Townes of their conspiracie: that God had preserued that holy and religious Cittie from a great massacre and fearefull spoyle: that the Duke of Guise had turned the counsell of Polliticians, specially the Duke
d'Espernon, that had wonne so much fauour in the kings heart, that it caused him to determine the ruine and ouerthrow of the principal and most Catholicque Sedition called the image of all euill.families in Parris, to restraine their libertie, and dispoyle them of their religion, esteeming no better nor readier meanes to make his people to obey him, then to weaken, beate downe, and spoyle them of that corpulent fatnesse, which made them insolent, mutinous, and rebelles, and that they should not beleeue the Historie of their tragedie, from any but their owne lying mouthes. Assoone as the Kings seruants knewe that his Maiestie was gone,The Court dislodgeth from Parris. The Duke of Guise is sory for the kings retrait. the Huguenots neuer dislodged with more haste out of the subburbs of Saint Germaine de Prez, at the dolourous day of S.
Bartholomewe, then they did to saue themselues, some on foote, some on horseback, out of Parris, flying in great haste: many had no leisure to put on their bootes, the furie of the people beeing such, and so straight, mooued against them, that it was a great escape made, to returne from the house of Guise to the Louure, and no man might passe if hee held not for the Duke of Guise.
Illia cos intra muros peccatut and extra. Horatius.His Lacqueys serued for Pilots and conductors of the Kings chiefe Councellours, to bring them safe to their lodgings. That this accident procured not most straunge corosiues to the kings heart, it is not to be doubted. His Maiestie hauing assembled his men at Saint
Glaude, hee went to Chartres, where the league had alreadie sounded so many mens hearts, that there they spake not of the king but in disdain, that his Maiestie was greeued at the hart, to see himselfe in a manner bannished in the middle of his estate, and spoyled of his authoritie. The Duke of Guise was much more greeued, when hee knew the king was gone, that suddane blowe so much abashed him, that hee would willingly haue taken poste to followe after him, imputing it a great imperfection of nature:The Duke of Guise repenteth his hardinesse, but faults are neuer knowne vntill they bee done, and then wee may looke into the cause, and attribute it eyther to our owne opinion that opposeth vs against the rules of reason, or to our weaknesse, which abateth both our courage and resolution. Both of them (although too late) giuing vs wisdome and meanes to repent.
It is very hard in these commotions that are sooner seene then conceiued, and where we must take counsell and armes both at one time, to retaine consideration, respect, and necessary wisedome, or that a mans minde can continue firme in one resolution.
This commotion of Parris was followed with great imperfections, both within and without, as well on the kings, as on the Duke of
Guises part: hee fayled by letting the king escape, for that holding him, the tragedie of Chilperic had bin acted, and the instructions of the Aduocate Dauid accomplished: he failed likewise herein, that hauing passed the bounds of dutie and fidelitie, and vsed his Maister in that sort, he beleeued that playing the part of a diligent seruant, he should win fauor againe: that his boldnesse wold be forgotten: that a Lyon roused in that sort, and so cruelly, wold become tame or meek at the first morsell of respect, seruice, and obedience, that should bee offered vnto him: that hee should haue his will of the king sooner by flattery and seruice, then by pursuing and forcing him: for that not knowing how to vse his aduantage, nor in what sort to behaue himselfe in the highest step of the lather of his enterprises, wherevnto hee had mounted with so long and secret pretences, hee fell downe all the steppes at one time.
When he saw all France disliked the kings departure in that forcecible maner out of Parris, hee beganne to protest his innocency, and the dutie hee had shewed to restraine the furie of the people, trauelling in the kings behalfe to saue his honour, so straungely blemished.
Fault in the King.The king for his part failed, and his fault was so much the greater, then that of the Duke of
Guise, as there was inequalitie between them. The forme, order, and means he found to rebate the credite of his enemie, and the reputation hee had gotten among his subiects, was as vnaduisedly pursued as begun. He sought to purge the bodie, before he had well disposed the humors: some of his Councell said, it was best for him to let the Duke of
Guise rest, as being alreadie mounted so high, that he could not bee brought downe, but that it would be good to breake downe the steps whereby he mounted, and withdrawe those that serued him for footestooles.Counsell to abate the greatnesse of the Duke of Guise. The magnanimious resolution which the King should hold. Wholesome Councell to reduce the people strayed, into the right path of obedience, loue, and feare, which they owe vnto their king, and win so many hearts againe by the same meanes, that the League had vsed to seduce them: that is, by peaceablenesse, by a vniuersall reformation, and by reliefe of miseries. The king should haue said: I will do as the League desireth, I wil performe that which it promiseth you, I will performe deedes and not wordes: wherewith shee abuseth you: she taketh the disorders of times, for the subiect of her mutinies: I will establish order in pollicie, in my treasures, and in my Court, the shortest way had been so to preuent him, by little and littled iminishing the vniuersall fauour of the Parrissians towards him, but to do it vppon the suddaine, at one blow, and in one houre to repaire the destruction and ruines, so long bred and inuented, it was a great folly, and seeing by so many signes and distrusts, he feared the comming of the Duke of Guise to Parris, and that hee had discouered his pretence. Why did he not cause him to go out again assoo^^ as he came? he ought to haue spoken vnto him like a king. Francis the second his brother,Francis the second cast the Prince of Conde into prison. beeing younger then hee, vsed the like speech to the Princes of his blood: if he had commanded him to depart, without doubt he had gone, because as the^ he would not haue begunne his tragedie, and thereby haue borne the report of so manifest disobedience.
And in truth assoone as the king spake vnto him and said: Cousin, wherefore do you come? his aunswere was giuen in faintnesse and trembling, his visage pale, and the Maiestie that God imprinteth in his Samoris, his Lieftenants, and his liuely Images, ceased and changed, as if from that time he had feared that the king would dislike the breach that hee had made of his commaundement, and say: And it liketh your grace, I am heere present, to aunswere to the slaunders that are raised against mee, thereby to bring me in hatred to your Maiestie. But (said the king) I sent you expresse word, not to come hither in this time so full of troubles and distrusts, and that you should stay for a time. My Lord (said the Duke) I was not so aduertised,The Indians call their kings Samories: that is to say, god on earth. Speeches betweene the King and the Duke of Guise at Louure. that thereby I did in any sort beleeue, that my comming hither would bee offensiue to your Grace. Wherevpon the king turning to Monsieur de Bellieure, asked him and said: Did not I commaund you to tell him, that he should not come hither at this time? But as Monsieur de Bellieure began to certifie the king of his message, the Duke of
Guise entered between them, wherewith the Queene-mother drewe the king aside, and so mittigated that first quarrell. They ought not to haue mooued this contention, and leaue dispight and disdaine in Monsieur de Guises minde: nor leaue the knife in the vaine which hee had
opened, hee ought to haue giuen feare and punishment both at one time, or to haue done neither the one nor the other, but it is a most strange thing, that men do alwaies faile in doing their authorities, and in the principall poynt which is the cause thereof.
It was vainly done of the king, to cause himselfe to be esteemed a good penitent, a good Hermit, a good versefier, a good discourser, and a good Orator, if hee remembred not himselfe to bee as hee was, and to bee knowne for king, and speake like a king: I say like a king, for this word of King, containeth all whatsoeuer belongeth to his charge.
Senec. Epist. 77. Id in quoque optimum est cui cascitur cui con setur. Maximoimperio maxima cura in est. Sallu.Hee ought to haue spoken to the Duke of Guise like a king, and haue made him depart out of Parris, with his adherents, and hee ought to haue stayed therein like a king, for if his actions bee not performed like a king, they are of no account. Euery thing (saith
Seneca) is commended for that which is proper vnto it, and for the principall part that giueth it the forme and being. A Vine is praised for ye fertilitie: the wine for the liquor, and the Hart for his swiftnesse. In a dogge wee commend a good nose, to smell, finde out, and follow the beast, his lighnesse for running, both to approach and assayle, and his heart and courage. And to conclude, the speciall vtilitie and proper vse of euery thing belongeth to it selfe.
The Kings of the Sabans publikely durst not come abroad because of an oracle that forbad them.The shippe is called good, not because shee is painted with diuers faire and costly colours, his stearne all gilt, her boords inlaide with Iuorie, or that it is laden with treasures and Princely riches: but because the seames of the plankes are well closed and calked, that it leaketh not, that it is strong and firme against the force of the waues, easie to stirre, and swift of sayle. Likewise you will not saye, that a sword is good, because the hilts and handle are gilt, and the sheath of veluet, set with precious stones: but you say it is good if it hath a good edge, and the poynt sharpe to enter well. So the king should not make himselfe knowne by the Crowne and Scepter which hee beareth, but by the actions that depend vppon his royaltie, and that make him to bee esteemed for a king, alwaies remembring, that great offices require great wisdome. Among the carters and waggoners hee is esteemed most vnfit for the charge, that knoweth not how to behaue himselfe therein.
If your grace will take away the pendants that trouble your eares, you are a king, and not king of Denmarke, or of
Arragon, to be both Maister and seruant all at one time: nor king of Saba, not daring to be seene publickely, but king of
France and of Frenchmen, a people gentle, tractable, and obedient, that did not disobey nor retire from you, but when they knew you wold not bee King: and that there was one of your subiects that prescribed you a lawe: in this case, the sun rising, is alwaies fairer then descending. And as a wise polititian once said vnto you, when a king maketh it knowne, that he feareth some one man within his Realme, that there is one that may be greater then hee, there is no more Maiestie, hee is no more that hee was, but all the world runneth to the other.
The nature of Henry the third.If wee cannot bee free, yet will wee haue but one Maister: if that Maister haue an other Maister aboue him, wee presently leaue the first to runne to the last: it is the nature of man.
There is this fault in you, that if you finde no resistance, if you bee in peace, you commaund absolutely, and you speake like a king, but if you finde neuer so small difficultie, you alwaies preferre a gentle and fearefull, before a bolde and seuere remedie: God graunt that in the end you seeke earnestly and effectually to be that which you are, that is, Maister and the greatest Lord in your Realme, which cannot bee, if you bee not king.
Beholde the opinion that the wisest Pollititians had of the king, see how they lamented the fal of his authoritie, the spawn of his forces, and the dazeling or rather astonishing of his sences: I shall neuer bee no more a king to counsell nor disswade him, my ambition clymeth not to that degree, yet I will neuer counsell them vnto mildnesse, and to simplicitie without wisedome, that pardoneth and suffereth all.
There is nothing so royal as Clemencie, and nothing that more winneth the hearts of men, or that maketh a Prince more reuerenced and beloued, then affable and courteous nature.Antonius, surnamed the curteous It is that (said the Emperour
Antonius to Faustina his wife) that placed Iulius Caezar among the number of the Gods, that consecrated
Augustus, and that gaue the title of Pius to thy father. But when this Clemencie is superfluous, that it changeth into a soft and peaceable nature: that this softnesse is not mixed with vigor, nor this peaceablenesse with austeritie: I esteeme it a poynt of meere carelessenesse, which althouh it bee not to bee blamed, yet it is not found to bee good in a Prince.
For it prouoketh men to enterprise against a Prince, that is so readie to pardon, and the suffering of one fault that is miserable, draweth on another, (saith the Consul Fronto) to liue vnder a Prince that will remit no part of the tigor of his lawes.
But it is much more miserable to liue vnder a Prince, where all things are lawfull, and that by a kinde of faintnesse or carelessenesse, without discretion, pardoneth all whatsoeuer is done, both against lawe and reason. Clemencie is commendable to an enemie that is ouercome and submitteth himselfe, but while hee shaketh and feareth in our presence, this weaknesse, this disquietnesse, and this feare, is a signe of doubting, and he will reuenge himselfe. But some will say, this seueritie is odious in a king, intollerable to the people, and cause of rebellions: and in trueth it is to bee vsed with moderation, and then when wee see that mildnesse and mercifulnesse is not preiudiciall vnto vs. If it bee called furie or rage, what need wee care, so that furie maketh fooles and rebelles to become wise. Wee must do as Sabaque king of Egypt, and Antigonus king of
Macedonia did, the first caused the gowne and not the shoulders of the criminal to bee beaten and punished: the hatte for the head: the other hearing the souldiers speake hardly of him, hard by his tent, he contented himselfe with saying vnto them: What? can you go no further but vnder my nose to speake euill of me?
The kings letters at Chartres 17. of May, 1588.The king sawe the prankes the leaguers had played with him, he heard them rent both his name and his authoritie: he sawe that the Louure was not safe ynough for him against their violences: in steed of saying to these vngratefull wretches: get you from hence, or to strike such as serued them for gownes or couertures: hee excused the authors of the mischiefe, desireth their reconsiliation, and dareth not say, that he had bin constrained to go out of Parris, remitteth the pacification of his troubles to the Queen his mother, because hee knewe his owne weaknesse, and distrusted the affection and fidelitie of his subiects.

Hee aduertised the Lieftenants and Gouernours of his Prouinces, of the occasions that had mooued him to depart out of
Parris, and writeth vnto the Capitall Townes, not to forme their hearts in the moulds of those of Parris, and to beleeue that hee desired no other Garrison, nor fortresse among them, but publicque good will and confidence from them.
He caused his letters to bee made and framed not like a Prince or Captaine, but like a man that fled and trembled, that defended himselfe more with his holds then his armes, that durst no more commaund, but intreated his subiects, and a Prince that had forgotten himselfe to bee a Prince, that hee was Gods Lieftenant, arbitrator of the life and death of his subiects, iust distributer of the greatnesse of estates, that of some can make vesselles of no valour nor substance: and of others, vessels to honour, and serue in a rich and goodly Pallace: that hee is not onely the sinewe that giueth moouing to the common-wealth, but the heart and the head, that maketh it liue, and the vitall spirit, that quickneth so many spirits. I must confesse a trueth, the King committed a great fault: but because mine eyes haue too many lets to marke it, and that it belongeth not to meane persons to mount vpon the Theators whereon great persons play their tragicall actions, I will set downe the Kings letter to the iudgement of the Reader, yet will I adde something of mine owne vppon the backside, and in the margent, leauing place neuerthelesse for such as will write after mee, and beleeue that such men of iudgement as will vndertake this most sharpe and bitter Theame to write vpon, shall yet finde something therein, whereof they may make hony.





By the King.
TRustie and well beloued, being in our Towne of
Parris, where we thought an intent was, to cease al kinds of iealousies
 The first fault, and one of the oldest, partiallities are fatal to estates, and a Prince neuer indureth them, but they make him indure the disipation of his Prouinces, and despising of his authoritie. The King not desiring to stop them when they began, but to peep out of the earth, could not abate them being grown great and high branches. The simple iealousie of two Noblemen, is the sparke that finding the disposition of the matter, maketh a great fire, the factions of Princes drawe the people vnto them. and impeachments, as well in Picardie as else where, which made vs reiourne our trauell into our countrie of Poiton, there to pursue the warres begunne against the Huguenots, according to our determination. Our Cousin the Duke of Guise arriued vnlooked for, vpon the ninth of this month, whose comming in that sort, did in such maner increase the said distrusts, that we found our person in great perplexitie,
 The Duke of
Guises comming to Parris deceiued the King, and with so small a company it made the Kings mind to bee diuersly. His suddaine arriuall caused him to remember the effects of the aduises giuen him, and the small number of his company withdrewe him from it, and made him iudge wel of that Princes meaning and intent. But he deceiued him, for that ought to haue made his comming more suspitious, for if it had been simple without deceit, the participants would not haue stirred so soone, Publica expectatio magni secreti impatients. because not long before, we had been aduertised from diuers places, that hee would arriue in that sort, and that certaine of the Inhabitants of the said towne, such as were suspected to be the causes of the said distrusts, stayed and daylie attended his comming, and for the same cause hauing him to bee certified
 Oftentimes a man thinketh to withdrawe and stay a conspiracie, that ad^anceth it, it is daungerous to dissemble it, and more to discouer it, we must neuer make shewe of any distrust that we haue in our enemie, but then when we are vppon the poynt to bee reuenged. There are some bodies so weake, that if you giue the^ any Phisicke, they will bee sicke, and if you tell them they are sicke, they wil presently fall into a feuer. Herein you must vse the prudence of dissimulation: that serued for aduise to King Lewis the eleuenth: for counsel to Sigismo^d: for a lawe to
Frederic the Emperour: for a vertue to the vertues of
Tiberius. Also it is no daunger to dissemble, so farre foorth (as Plato saith) that this subtiltie do redownd to the profit of the subiects. that wee would not haue him to come thither, before we had taken order for the affaires in Picardie, and reuoked all occasions of distrusts: neuerthelesse knowing him to bee come onely with 14. or 16. horse, wee refused not to admit him to our presence, to prooue if with him wee could end and cease those causes of distrusts and troubles in Picardie. Wherein perceiuing that wee could not preuaile, and that our said Towne euery day more and more increased and was filled with strangers, that followed and attended on The king had giuen too much libertie to secret assemblies, wherein vnder pretence of reestablishing good order, rest and quietnesse to the people, and of greeuing at publike calamities, that notable deuise of Barricadoes, was determined in their heads and hearts, capable of all liquors wherein they distilled the despising and disdaining of the Prince, contrary to the respect and dutie to a Magistrate. Periculum est si coetus and consilia and secretas consultationes esse sinas. Tit. Liuius. the said Duke, that the searches wee had commaunded to bee made through our said Towne by the Magistrates and Officers of the same, were in a maner but half done, for the fear they were in, as also that the hearts and mindes of some of them, were more altered and hardened,
 The king did all by halues, he commaundeth the D. of Guise not to come, and yet hee commeth: hee is offended at his comming, and yet he letteth him stay: and the Duke of Guise perceiuing that the king commaundeth him no more like a king, obeyeth him no more like a subiect: hee enterpriseth his pretences, because sufferance giueth courage vnto his enterprises.
Quis eum metuat, qui per segnitiem patitur hebescere aciem suae authoritatis. and the ordinary aduertisements day lie brought vs, that there would bee some great matter effected in that Towne. We determined to cause the said searches Those searches were necessary, but they were not made in time, seeing things had proceeded so farre, that a king of France had his hart free of iealousie and distrust in his Capitall towne, against a Duke of Guise, he ought to haue dissembled or discouered the mischiefe. This search discouered the fire couered vnder the ashes of desire of peace, and whe^ those wounded hearts knewe the myne to bee discouered, that the kings distrust suspected their pretences, they iudged that hee which first began the mutinie should be maister, and therefore it had bin better for the king to haue dissembled and withholde^ his seueritie. Res enim monebat cauere magis qua^ quod in illos statueret consultare. Salustius. to bee more exactly done in all the quarters of the same, the^ before they had bin, to the end we might bee truely certified of the true estate thereof, and cause the said straungers to auoyde, that were not auouched as they ought to bee: which to effect, wee were determined to make certaine Courts of guard of the Citizens and Inhabitants thereof, which we appoynted to bee erected in foure or fiue places of the Towne, with certaine companies of Switzers, and those of the Regiment of our guard, that were lodged in the subburbes of the Cittie.
And also to command certaine Lords of our Councell, and knights of the order of the holy ghost,
 The King being aduertised that at the noyse of the Duke of Guises arriuall at Parris, that diuers souldiers and men of factions came thither to bee readie at the sound of the basen, that the name of that Prince was the Load-stone that drewe the Iron hearts of the league vnto it, caused his guards to be strengthened, and searches to bee made. But as if he had not bin assured without the aduise of the Duke of
Guise, he aduertised him therof, who fearing to bee preuented, tooke that search as a pricke to hasten his pretence, hee spake but the word, and presently Parris bended it selfe against the
Louure, as if it had beene against the fort of an enemie, and they went with their heads bended against the kings forces, as in times they did against the Englishmen and Bourguinions.
Quo quo scelesti ruitis?Furorne caecus, an rapit, vis acrior? An culpa?Horat. to go into each quarter, with the Quarter-maisters and other Officers of the saide Towne, by whom the common custome is, to make such searches, the better to ayde, authorise, and assist them therein, as it hath been done diuers times heeretofore, whereof wee aduertised the said Duke, and all the Inhabitants of the Cittie, to the end they should not sound alarme, and so doubt of our meaning therin: which in the beginning the Inhabitants and Townes-men made shew not to dislike. Neuerthelesse not long after, things fel out in such sort, by the prouocation of certaine persons The king esteemed not of the conspiratie, pretended the yeare before within Parris and those that perceiued their boldnesse as then vsed to be without censure, and their crime without punishment, began to kindle the fire that hatched vnder the ashes of their rebellion, and first cried in the streetes, Laye hold on the Tyrant, the Huguenot and the Pollititian, words sufficient to moue the most modest, and stirre the slowest vnto fury in such attempts: wher the respect of the Prince or the vncertaintie of the euent, retaine the generall, there must alwaies bee some seditious fellow, that crieth and beginneth the play: for the people are like a sea, that neuer stirreth without winde, and therefore in their commotions there must bee men purposely appoined,
Qui imperitos animos impella^t, libertate^ ac speciosa nomina praetexantur.
Tacitus. that sowed and put into the harts and mindes of the said Inhabitants, that wee had caused the said forces to enter into the Towne, there to establish a Garrison of straungers, and to do them further wrong, in such manner, that in short space they had so animated and mooued them against our said Souldiers, that if we had not expresly commanded their Leaders, not to attempt any thing against the saide Inhabitants, and rather to indure and suffer all the extremities of the world, the^ to commit any trespasse in that behalfe: wee are certainly perswaded, that it had been vnpossible to haue shunned a generall spoyle of the saide Towne, with a most great effusion of blood.
 The kings meaning was to distribute his forces in the towne, not to hurt it, but to holde it in obedience, and to hinder the pretences that beganne to bee practised vnder the conduction and fauour of the Duke of Guise. But the distribution was not well ordered, and the places of most importance were not speedily ceased vpo^ by the kings forces. Maubert one of the most important places in the Towne, able to commaund the rest, and that ought to haue beene first entered into, stood voyde, and serued the Towns-men as a campe, therin to raise the most beastly troupes of their mutinie, both to defend and assayle, in such manner, that assoone as certaine of the rebelles had entered into it, they were presently followed by those that respected nothing but the present time, not co^sidering the miserable end of their sedition, so that
Vnde plures erant omnes suere. Tacitus. Which we perceiuing, determined not to proceed any further with those common searches, and presently to with draw our said forces, which we had caused to enter only for that purpose, it beeing very likely, that if wee had had any other intent, wee had attempted, and it may bee fully executed the same at our pleasures, before the raysing of the said Inhabitants, and that they had drawne chaines or set vpon their Barricadoes in the streets, which they beganne presently after noone: at the which time, there beeing in all the streetes of the said towns certaine Gentelemen, Captaines or other straungers, sent by the said Duke of Guise, and appointed for the purpose, that in short time had dispearsed the^selues in euery quarter,
 The Switzers were charged, they not once seeming to resist, to auoyde danger, for that finding themselues strangely compassed, by that multitude of furious people, without head, conduct, or assurance of the Kings intent, they turned their backs, perswading themselues, that to be ouer valiant, it may be thought they were too rash, so that they rather chose to leaue their pikes, then once to vse them in so violent an occasion. A litle more vrgent courage and resistance, had sent the Parrissians back to the deepest places of their houses, euery man would haue remembred his wife, his children, and his shoppe, for that armes vsed by Cittizens in Townes, commonly beginneth with more boldnesse then it is performed, and causeth more noyse then mischiefe. Ferocior ad rebellandum quam ad bellandum. Tit. Liu. and forcing the said companies of Switzers and French me^ to retire: to our great greef there was certaine caliuers shot, and some blowes giuen by the said Inhabitants, that hurt some of the saide Switzers, whom we caused to retire, and yt euening to be lodged about our Pallace of Louure, to attend the end of the commotion made by the said Inhabitants, doing all we might to pacithe same; the next day causing them to issue out of the Towne, reseruing those that before their comming wee had placed for a gard about our castle
m of Louure, it beeing shewed vs, that it would bee the means to pacifie the said Inhabitants.

Wee caused likewise to bee stayed certaine foote companies of the Regiment of Picardie, that were at the least seuen or eight myles fro^ thence, as also certaine Lords and Gentlemen our seruants that came vnto vs, perceiuing their comming to be put into the peoples heads, and made a shadow of the said Inhabitants, rising neuerthelesse,
 At all times kings haue greate guards, not so much for the assurance of their persons, for that in an estate well gouerned, and obedient, they are not necessary, but to shew the dignitie of that excellent Maiestie which separateth the^ from the company of other people: Salomon had thirtie thousand souldiers for his guard: Romulus three hundreth
Celeres: the kings of Persia 365. Ge^tleme^ of one liuerie: the Princes of Greece were serued by the Scytes and Danes:
Iulius Caezar had Spaniards: Caracalle, Almains: the kings of France, in the beginning had their subiects, that watched at the gates of their Pallace, and the Captaines were called Magistri Ostiariorum: after that, Scots and Switzers, and since, they haue added one hundreth Gentlemen, and to them the fortie fiue. But all they could not assure the king in his towne, his Pallace of
Louure, nor in his house, but hee was constrained to double his forces, against the mutinie of his subiects. Three things make a Prince passe through the middle of al mutinies and conspiracies. Vertues and the constant resolution of friends: The gouernment of subiects: And the prouidence and foresight of the Prince. in steed of seeing it take effect as need required, for their good and our contentment, they ceased not to make more Barricadoes, and to strengthen their watches both day and night, approaching them nearer our said Castle of Louure, so farre foorth as that they seemed to set vpon our ordinary Sentinelles, and likewise to cease vpon the keyes of the Town house, and of It is a folly to looke for respect, reason, and obedience, in seditious persons, and to beleeue that the people will be appeased by flattery: such burning feuers are not healed by plaisters, but they must haue purgations and letting of blood: the credit of the Queen-mother, the valour of the Marshals of France, the prudence and long experience of Monsieur de Bellieure, the faire speeches of M. de Villequier, nor all the kings Councell could do nothing therein. The mad man reiecteth his medecines, and driueth his Phisitians from him, Superfluum suadere quid fieri oporteat cum audientium assensus in deteriora rapitur. Egesippus. Saint Anthonies, and other Gates of the Cittie, in such manner,
 The people followeth the first, that assureth them it is a vessel that suffereth it selfe to bee stirred by him that first layeth hand vpon the rurther. VVithout a head, it was Princeps, pauidus socors. Tacitus. that vpo^ the thirteenth of this month proceeded so farre, that it seemed not in the power of man, to impeach their great and violent commotion, which beganne to proceed euen to the walles of our Castle, which wee perceiuing,
 The king counselled by certaine fearfull mindes, not to fall violently vpon that mutinous company, commaunded his souldiers not to stir. A councell most sit for the debonaritie and goodnesse of his nature, but contrary to the necessitie and importance of those affairs, for that as we must first threaten, and then arme: so there is daunger in wholly withdrawing our armes. He himself ought to haue mounted on horsebacke, with all the Noble men of his traine, and entered into the Town-house, a refuge for the most seditious, and when the people had seen that the cloude had burst out on that side, and that the king would not deale but with the first authors of the faction, their chollor would haue consumed into smoake, and they would haue withdrawne themselues peaceably without stroke striken, and the boldest of them wold haue bin well content to bear the news of their dispersion vnto their own houses, Ex ferocibus vniuersis singuli metu suo obedie^tes fuissent. It was necessary in that great te^pest to vnlade the ships to keepe the^ from sinking, and prefer a generall before a particular, for that all is of greater moment then a part, and the Citie more then the Cittizens. desiring not to imploye our said forces against the said Inhabitants, the conseruation of the saide Towne and good Cittizens thereof, hauing alwaies bin as deare vnto vs, as our owne liues, as they in many sorts haue well tryed, we determined the same day to depart, and rather to absent our person from the thing we so much haue and as yet do effect, then see it runne into greater hazard, and thereby receiue further displeasure, hauing desired the Queene our deare Ladie and mother to stay there, to see if by her wisedome and authoritie in our absence, shee could pacifie the same tumult, which wee beeing present she^ could not do, what meanes soeuer she vsed.
 The king should not haue gone out of Parris: a great light dimmeth the lesse, those little facts had neuer shined in the darknesse of Parris, if the sunne of the royall Maiestie had not bin eclipsed. He ought to haue shewed himselfe among those madde people, like ablazing starre, like thundring
Mars, like him that obtained the victories at 16. yeares of age, before Iarnac, Moncontour, and at Rochel, at the only word of king: those strayed soules hadde yeelded themselues to the poynt of obedience, the apprehension of the paine that followeth those mutenies, the consideration of the Maiestie of the king, the confidence of his mildnesse, and the proofe of his pietie, had dispearsed those disorders. And the good Frenchmen that were in no small number, that in their mindes lamented the iniurie done vnto the king, the Realme of
France, and their posteritie, would haue risen vp to maintaine his authoritie. Those great blowes are not giuen without hazard, and where necessitie presseth a great courage, death is more acceptable then a shamefull flight. And wee arriued in this towne of Chartres, from whence wee thought it meet presently to certifie you by these our letters, to desire you to consider of this action, and to iudge how much it preiudiseth and disaduantageth the Commonwealth, specially our holy Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romaine religion, if it should passe further, seeing that those which rose to fight for the aduancement thereof by this accident, if it bee not repaired, will bee separated to vse their armes, one against the other, wherein we desire you to be perswaded, that for our part, wee will vse all meanes we can, not to fal into that inconuenience, so much power hath the zeale wee beare (to our religion) ouer vs, which vntill this time wee haue alwaies shewed,
 The many words that end this letter, issue from a trembling voyce, vppon the which, a great Pollititian in his discourse, maketh this Apostrophe vnto the king: Great Prince, what haste thou done with thy wisedome? who hath perswaded thee that those people that onely desire thy death, or rather thy Crowne, will laye downe their armes, coniured and raised against thee, onely to make thee more sharpe, and to deale the hardlyer against those of the religion? They haue driuen thee out of Parris, which the Englishmen, Spaniards, nor Almaines, neuer did vnto thy auncestors: and by thy letters pattents thou shewest to thy people, that in steed of being reuenged, thou seemest to thinke the time long vntill they pardon thee: thou commaundest that they should pray vnto God for that reconciliation: the^ there is no danger to lift vp the hand against the Prince. Beleeue therefore, that seeing it is so, hee which hath this day made thee flye, will to morrowe boldely vndertake to make thee die. And is not this great king, a hazarding of thy selfe, to shewe vnto thy subiects, that it is easie to attempt against thy person, when in steed of reuenging thy selfe, thou prayest that thy subiects would appease those, whom thou oughtest to punish? Who perswaded thee that the remedie of thy mischiefe is ciuill warres, that by that meanes thou shalt recouer thy authoritie ouer thy subiects? Alasse, how thou art deceiued? There is nothing woorse for a house, then fire: for a mans bodie, then a continuall feuer: nor for an estate, then ciuill warres. If thou wilt remedie these mischiefes, quench the fire that burneth thy house: driue away the continuall feuer from the bodie of thy estate, and giue it peace: for it is is the onely meanes to preserue thy Realme. praying and exhorting you, as much as possible wee may, to pray in your Churches for this vnion, and that the obedience due vnto vs, may bee obserued as it ought to bee: and suffer not that the Inhabitants of our town, etc. to stray out of the right way of the same, but admonish and confirme the^ to remaine constant and firme in their loyalties towards their king, and in vnion and concord to maintaine and preserue themselues vnder our obedience, and not to fall into the inco^ueniences prepared for them, if they hold on their course. And further, if you do any other thing, therin shewing your wisdomes, fidelities and duties, for examples to all our subiects, we will not be vnthankfull for it, but haue it in remembrance. Giuen at
Chartres, the day of May, 1587.






The phrase of the letters the Duke of of Guise wrote vnto the King, is much brauer, haughtier, and bolder, shewing the affection of a man, that hath not faintly thrust his bodie into a prease to saue his life: but that wil stand in the view and face of al the world: he likewise sent his declaratio^s throughout all the Realme of
France, to iustifie himselfe concerning the commotion in
Parris, which I will orderly set downe, and in the end shew you the common aduise, leauing the Readers iudgement to himselfe.

The Coppie of a Letter vvritten vnto the King, by the Duke of Guise, the seuenteenth of May, 1588.
SIr, I am very vnfortunate, that those who of long time, by many deuises haue sought to separate mee from your presence and great fauour, haue had sufficient meanes wholly to frustrate all my good indeuours, vsed to win your liking, and by my seruices make my self agreeable to your Maiestie: which not long since, I haue well prooued, to my no little greefe.
For that being wearie of so many false reports vsed, thereby to make your Maiestie continually to distrust mee, I determined with the hazard, wherewith I was threatned, to iustifie my life, hauing resolued to come vnto you with so small a troupe, and with free trust and confidence, as I hoped by that meanes to let all the world see, that I was farre from that, whereof my euill willers sought by so many deuises to yeeld mee culpable. But the enemies of publike quietnesse, not beeing able to indure my admission to your presence, esteeming that in short time it would soone discouer the impostures vsed to make mee odious, and by little and little giue me place in your good fauour, rather wished by their pernicious counsels, to bring al things into confusion, and your estate and town of Parris in hazard, the^ to indure me near vnto your person. Their euill wils is manifestly knowne in the resolution, (that without the Queen your mothers knowledge, and against the aduise of your wisest Councellors) they causedyour Maiestie to take by an vnaccustomed means, and in a time full of suspition and partiallities, to place forces in your Towne of Parris, to keepe the publicque places thereof, and the commo^ speech giuen foorth, that they hoped being Maisters thereof, they should bring you to many other things, whollycontrary to your good nature, and such as at this time I had rather keepe silent, then once to vtter. The feare therof, constrained your good and loyall subiects to arme themselues, by reason of the iust fear they had that by such means the thing was inte^ded to be executed, wherwith long before they had bin threatned. God by his grace hath holde^ things in better staye then wee could wish, and hath as it were miraculously preserued your Towne from a most perilous hazard. And the beginning, pursute, and effect of those affaires hath in such manner iustified my intents, that I esteeme your Maiestie and all the world, doth thereby cleerely perceiue how farre my actions are separated from slanders, the pretences wherof my slanderous enemies would accuse me.

The manet how is thus: First, I came voluntary vnto your Maiestie, and put my selfe into your power, I shewed the confidence and trust I had in your good nature, and the sinceritie of my seruice. The estate wherin I was found when I receiued the first newes of that enterprise, which diuers of your seruants can witnesse, sheweth that I doubted not any iniurie, nor haue any desire of enterprise, being with lesse company, more disarmed, and in my house, then one of my quallitie either may or ought to bee.
The respect then that I haue vsed, containing my selfe within the simple bounds of a iust defence, are witnesses sufficient vnto you, that no occasion can make mee fall from the dutie of a most humble subiect. The paine I take to restraine the people, and hinder them that they might not proceed to the effects, which oftentimes such accidents do breed, dischargeth me from the slaunders heretofore imposed vpon me, that I would trouble your towne of Parris: the care I should haue taken to preserue them, whom I knewe by the craftie meanes of my enemies, had giuen me bad report vnto your Maiestie, maketh it euident vnto all men, that I neuer intended to attempt any thing against your seruants and officers, as I am falsely accused. The manner of my behauior to your Switzers, and the Captains and souldiers of your guard, are sufficient assurance that I feared nothing more, then to displease you: if your Maiestie knew all the particularities, as I think the greatest part of your good seruitors louing publike peace, that are witnesses, haue not hidden them from you: I am perswaded it remaineth cleared by that means. That I neuer had the least of the mischeeuous intents, for the which my enemies by false reports would make me odious.
I hope the end will yet giue more assured testimonie, hauing receiued one of the greatest displeasures that could happen vnto mee, when I vnderstood your Maiestie had determined to depart, because your suddain departure bereaued mee of the meanes, as I pretended, to pacifie and effect all things to your liking, and sawe them well disposed therevnto, at such time as the Queene your mother, vouchsafed me the honour to come vnto mee: whereof I gaue her so good liking, that I thinke she might be assured thereof. And although I could not as then shew it, I will not cease to continue the same good will, and doubt not but to behaue my selfe in such sort, that your Maiestie shall thinke me a most faithfull subiect and seruant, and one that desireth nothing so much, then that in doing seruice, and purchasing the benefit of your Realme, I may obtaine the good fortune of your fauour, which I will neuer cease to purchase, vntill it pleaseth God to graunt meethe meanes: whom I beseech to giue your Maiestie, etc. from Parris this 17. of May,
1588.



An extract of other letters written by the sayde Duke of Guise.
VVE haue sufficient labour to withstand the deuises that are day lie inuented against vs, to find means to let vs from going into
Guyenne against the Huguenots: we sought to please the King touching his Garrisons in Picardie, and although that Regiment had not marched, but onely to renue olde quarrels, and seeke new contradictions, yet we constrained our friends for the space of a month, to endure Espernons forces against them. As touching new matter of impeachment, the said Espernon sought to make some controuerfie in Normandie, which hee had found hard ynough, if for the desire we had, to see wars begun against the hereticques, wee had not dealt in his affaires, and procured our friends to content themselues, and not once to trouble or molest him, but the more to entangle vs, both by those superfluous Garrisons, and lost voyage, wholly to breake the course of warre, and to turne it against vs, they deuised a means to impeach our honour, causing certaine leuies to be raised, thereby to cause vs to bee more feared then the hereticques, which are, that wee desire a massacre in Parris, that we would take the king, and sacke the towne, thereby to procure mony, wherewith to make warres against whom wee thinke good: with other such like things put into his Maiesties head, with the greatest shewes of sinceritie in his behalfe that may be deuised, therby to procure them more credite, which hath been the deuise that hath most put vs in dispaire, thereby perceiuing the king more bent to prouide for his owne defence, then to continue warres against the hereticques: and that we are so vnfortunate, as to be so hardly esteemed of by some, and so farre, that his holynesse himselfe hath by his letter seemed to perswade vs vnto fidelitie to the king our Soueraigne. This dispaire lastly procured (I say) did cease so much the more vppon me, whe^ as I vnderstood that the king would strengthen his guard with source companies of French men, and three of Switzers, in such manner, that not desiring to stay longer in suspition of so vile actions, within 12. houres after, I arriued in Parris, accompanied with 8. Gentlemen, and in the middle of al the guards aforesaid, I went to kisse the kings hands, hauing no other safe conduct but my seruices, and the confidence that a good subiect ought to put in his king. This free accesse, sinceritie, and open heart, me thinketh ought to be a cleare iustification of me touching al false reports. And in truth, there was no horest man but reioyced in his heart, as euery man well perceiued. The next day, beeing alwaies assured in my conscience, I stayed all day with the king, somtimes in one place, sometimes in an other, deuising of the voyage into Guyenne, and touching that war which I so much affect. Mean time, (as I presume) the king made inquirie in all places, if I were not followed by greater troupes, then that where with I entered. And hauing known (as true it was) that I came with so fewe, and not one souldier neare me by
40. myles, the next day being the 12. of May, very early in the morning, there entered into the Tovvn at S. Honores gate, 12. companies of Switzers, and 8. companies of Frenchmen, besides the companies of the guard, the king and all his Court being on horsebacke to receiue them. The Maister of the field, and regiment of the guard, and the collonels of the Switzers, hauing commaundement to cease vpon all the places of the Cittie, but the Inhabitants of one part of the Towne fearing some matter, were appoynted to keepe their quarters, minding to withstand them, for the care they had of their wiues and children in such an accident: while that was done, I beeing a sleepe in my chamber with so small a company, for that my houshold was not as then come from Scissons, as God would, when the said forces were diuiding in that manner about the cittie, I was aduertised by certaine Gentlemen my friends, that as then werein
Parris about their affaires: and which is more, God most miraculously stirred vppe the people, with one consent to enter into armes, and without any conference, beeing assured of my presence, and of certaine order that I presently tooke among them, of themselues they began to make Barricadoes in all places within ten paces of those fortaine forces, and that with such dexteritie and vehemencie, that in lesse then 2. houres they certified the saide troupes, that they wold presently haue them depart out of the Cittie and subburbes, at the which time, some one of the Switzers hurt an Inhabitant of the towne, wherevpon they charged the Switzers, and slew 12. or 15, hurt 20. or 25, and disarmed therest. On the other side, certaine companies of the kings guard were likewise disarmed and sent into houses, where with their Captains they were forced to saue the^selues: which caused me to enter into the streets of the Cittie, and presentlv deliuered 900. Switzers, that were holden prisoners, and many of the guard, which I sent safely into the Louure, this day shining with yt infallible protectio^ of god, being ended, I went throgh al the streets, vntill 2. of the clocke after midnight, praying, desiring, and threatning the people in such sort, that by the grace of God, theresollowed not any murther, massacre, spoyle, nor losse of any penny or drop of blood, more then I spake of before, although the people were most extreamly animated, because (as they said) they vnderstood that there were 20. gibbets, with certain scaffolds prepared, and the executioners readie to execute and put to death 100. persons nominated by them, whose names I had rather let gesse then set them downe. You will not beleeue, what great contentment this gracious goodnesse of God procured in my minde: first, in that I saw mine honour so clearly discharged of the suspitions of spoyle and massacre, that had been put into the heads of many honest men against me, for that hauing seene all the proceedings, and so happily impeached the same, I made all mine enemies mute. Secondly, hauing giuen proofe of my zeale to the seruice and honour of my king, so far, as to restore the armes that had been borne against me, with the drumbs and fyfes conducting the prisoners sending them their colours, deliuering the besieged, and not omitting any respect, which the most constant would haue done.
But they did so much, that they perswaded the king to depart out of Parris, 24. houers after, that I would he should haue stayed: But Cod defend that ever I should thinke it. Since his departure, his Maiestie hath had some other sharper counsell, I haue receiued the
Arsenal, the Bastille, and other strong places, into my custodie, I haue caused the coffers of his treasures to bee sealed, to deliuer them safely and peaceably into his Maiesties hands, as wee hope likewise to procure him vnto peace, by prayers to God, intercession to his holinesse, and all other Christian Princes, for the speciall and not commo^ proofe of fidelitie, he hath alwaies had of me, but if the mischief co^tinue, I hope by the same meanes to preserue religion and the Catholicques, and defend them from persecution: which the confederates, with hereticques about the king, had prepared for them.


Another letter of the saide Duke of Guise, to the Lord of Bassompierre.
I Writ a lettervnto his highnesse, which I pray you look vpo^, although the Baily of S. Michaels (an eye witnesse) wil iustifie all my actions, whose presence, vntill this time, hath hindered mee from oftner sending, beeing assured hee will not forget any thing: the termes whereon we stand, are, that this morning we present our request: which is directly against Espernon, wherein all his perfections are well set down, not omitting any thing. Yesterday I was in the Towne-house, to admit la Chapelle, that hath bin chosen Prouost of Merchants, and the Generall Rolland, Compan, and other persons and good Catholicques for Sherisfes, the Prouost of Merchants,
Perreuze being in the Bastille, and the traiterous Sheriffes fledde, there was neuer seene so great an obedience of the people in such a commotion: for it cannot bee said that there happened any disorder or wrong, euen to the swords, morions, pikes, caliuers, of 1200. Switzers or Frenchmen taken away, which I caused to berestored. You neuer sawe stranger accident, we were most wrongfully assayled, and that by pernicious counsell couertly deuised by hereticques. God of his grace hath preserued vs, by the resolution, obedience, and courage of those of
Parris, which they continue more then euer they did, with most braue resolution, to shewe all dutie and obedience to the King: but aboue all, to preserue their zeale to religion, and the suretie of their Towne. The king raiseth forces, and we also, hee his at Chartres, and we at
Parris, thus stand our affaires: the Gouernour of Haure C'est brauely withstood Espernon, and would not allow him: the Gouernour of Caen would not receiue him, specially into his Castle. This is that which he hath done in Normandie, from whence he is come without establishment of himselfe, or any of his, beeing yesterstay come to the king, although hee had sent foure Posts to will him to stay, as beeing abhorred of all the Princes and officers. Those of
Orleans, Amiens, Abbeuille, Bourges, and manygreat townes, haue driuen the Pollititans out, and taken diuers prisoners. All the little Townes send hither to craue the ayde of vs and the Towne. Iustice is peaceable, and no ma^ can speak hardly of all these things. You must make a voyage hitherto see your friends, who^ God be thanked you shall not finde vnprouided of meanes nor resolution: wee must bee well aduertised out of
Almaine, least we be preuented: we want neyther force, courage, friends, nor means, nor lesse honour, respect, and fidelitie to the king, wherein we will inuiolably continue, shewing the duties of men of honor, and good Catholicques. These are the termes wherein your friends remaine, that commend themselues vnto you, this 12. of May.

L'Amy de Coeur.

Monsieur the Counte, shall finde his most affectionate commendations. His Highnesseshall see this word. L'Amy de Coeur.
Come with speed.




If trueth bee alwaies found in faire words, we need not seeke it in any other place then in these three letters, but if wee take a spunge to wipe them cleane, that wee may see the bottome, we shall finde that the exposition followeth not the text: hee beginneth the letter to the king with an vnfortunate clause, saying: (Sir, I am very vnfortunate) and truely if the felicitie of this life consisteth in contentment, contentment in quietnesse, and quietnesse in a good conscience, how can wee call a Prince fortunate or happy, that is not content with his estate,The miserie of great men. that findeth no peace but in troubles? assayled with the violence of passions, like a tree blowne with two contrary windes, tormented by so many strange accidents, that abounoeth in the excesse of greatnesse of courage, that hath no other life, the^ the miserable death of his quietnesse, that nourisheth the brimstone, which will consume him in his vaines, that penetrateth his bones, and sucketh out the moyst humor that giueth him life.
Vnfortunate, and thrise vnfortunate, to liue in this sort betweene feare and distrust, and then to haue an account to make to that great God, that reuengeth the iniurie of Kings, and of the people, and that throweth downe such attempts as passe beyond reason. Misfortune alwaies hayleth vpon such proude heads, as desire to clime vp to the Moone, and with their feete to touch the very intralles and bottome of the earth: that seeke to administer lawes to heauen, earth, and hell. It is most infallible truth, that such as seeke their owne glorie and profit, by the hurt and dammage of their countrie, and the subuersion of publike peace,The miserable end of disturbers of an estate. This doth shew, that it was printed without the Authors name, in the yeare,
1562. will be mischieued by the mischiefes that they themselues procure, and ouerthrow themselues in the storme of their outragious passions. All our Histories are full of the violent deaths of those that sought to thrust their nayles into the woundes of the Common-wealth, to make themselues great, for that God, which imbraceth the quarrelles of an innocent people, that detesteth rebellio^s, that hath particular care of kings and their estates, dispearseth the scourges, and casteth away the rods wherewith he whipped the shoulders of those that shake off the yoake of his commandements. It is holden, that the trouble of Vassy kindled the fiers of the first ciuill warres. And therefore Ronsard in his Demonstration directed to the people of France, desireth that the authors of those new troubles, may perish with the spring time of the yeare next ensuing after hee wrote: and in trueth the Duke of Guise died not long after, in the same season: his verses are these.

O God most high, that dwellest in the cloudes,
And knowest well the authors of our warres,
God that all scest, behold and vnderstand,
Graunt I thee pray, that with the next sweete spring,
VVhich shall bring foorth the pleasant blooming flower,
The author of our troubles manifold,
May die in combat, and his life yeeld vp,
By force of pike, or bullet fatally.

Also there is no sin, which God doth lesse dissemble with, nor wherein his wisdome doth vse shorter tolleration, or his fury greater and sharper to punish it, then the sin of great men, which dispearse, ouerthrow, and trouble the lawes of a Realme: he addeth, that to quench the false reports that ranne of him, that with the perill wherewith hee was threatned, hee would iustifie his life, comming vnto his Maiestie with so small a company,A great person o^^ht to purge himselfe. it is a poynt of generositie to put innocencie out of hazard. A great man is blamed for dissembling the slaunders made against him, and the haughtier the heart is, the greater is the feeling. Nicyas was despised, as beeing so timerous, that hee gaue mony to such as accused him falsely, to leaue off their accusations. Lucius Posthumius fled by reason of an Ambassage, and for that hee would not bee at an assignation made by
Marcus Cantius Tribun vnto him, to appeare before the people. To the contrary, they are commended,He disposeth of their offices. that offered to purge themselues before their enemies, as
Caius Menenius Dictator, and Marcus Follius his Constable. The Duke of Guise perceiuing himselfe so neare the King, and beeing aduertised of the accusations made against him, touching his pretences, had reason to go to Parris in that manner, and with so small a company,The life of an honest man, ought to be seene of all men. for that the subiect ought not to approach the presence of his Prince with any forces, nor in that sort to present himselfe vnto his Maiestie, for the interest he had to be once iustified, for that a man of honor, and careful of his credite, that respecteth not the common brute, but the integritie of his co^science, that maketh his house (like y^ of Iulius Drusus) in such sort, that his neighbors on al fides may see into it, neuer suffreth himself to be so wholy born away, for the conseruatio^ of his proper life, that he neglecteth his reputation. And so he assureth the king, that nothing but that, made him come to
Parris: desiring rather to disobey, then languish in such distrust. His goodly reasons are not without replie: gardiners are of opinion, that they make roses and violets of a sweeter sauor, if they sowe or plant them hard by onyons or garlick. Let vs see, if whether that, whereof the Duke of Guise is reproached, or his allegations be most sauerie. I wil herein set downe a peece of the Apostrophe of the most excellent and liberall discourse, and the intent of the author was, that such as would write the Histories of our time, should serue themselues therewith. Gold is good in all places, this gilding will beautifie our workmanshippe: Thou complainest sayth hee, that euill reports were made against thee, and thy honour, which God be thanked thou hast defaced by this last act: thou art a maruellous Rethorician, certainly it is true: thou art well purged: thou art accused to haue caused the people of certain towns in this Realm, to haue risen against the Gouernors that the K. wold haue placed therin: and thou hast defaced that blot, by causing
Parris to rise against the K. himself: thou art accused, that at Chaalons, Reims, Soissons, and other places where thou camest, thou didst cease vpon the kings treasures: and thou hast purged thy self by taking those he had spared and kept in his capital cittie: thou wert suspected to enterprise against the estate, and to aspire vnto the crown, and yt for the same purpose, thou haddest alreadie ceased vpo^ certain good townes holde^ by thee and thy partners, wherein the K. is not obeyed: thou hast made this false report to vanish, co^ming in person to make thy self Maister of Parris, and in driuing the K. out, after thou haddest forced, slain, and disarmed his gard, and made the common people of the town to rise vp against him, in which sort thou doest most wisely couer a theft with a sacrilidge: a murther, with an homedice: and a sin with a crime: thy simplicitie is too grosse: thou triumphest that thou wast so hardy to enter into
Parris, with no more the^ 8. Gentlemen, a signe of thy simple innoce^cie. A great matter surely, but go thou into Rochel with al thy new Courtiers, thy followers and thy guard: the king of N. wil enter therin but with 4. men only: and if at thy going out, thou runnest not away-he will make thee be shrew thy selfe.

It is easie to bee said in base Brittaine, but those that know that all the kings Councell are on thy side: that his mother fauoureth thee: that all the mutiners and crocheters of
Parris, and all the common inhabitants thereof, are at thy deuotion. We say that thy simplicitie was verie subtill, and thy innocencie much to bee suspected. How wilt thou haue vs beleeue, that thou did-dest put so much trust and confidence in the king, seeing that after the league, and the capitulation of Saint Maur, thou wouldest neuer come thither, vnlesse thon wert as strong as hee: yet during his beeing in his armie against the Rutters, thou neuer settest foote within it, onely once by surprising it, and that for the space of a quarter of an houre: No, beleeue me, it is thy exercise to play these feates, and not to excuse them, thou art better acquainted with the one, then the other. Hee saith that the distrust which ceased vppon the people of
Parris, when the kings forces entered into the publicque places of the Towne, constrained his good and faithfull subiects to arme themselues, and without conference, togither, assured of his presence, and of certaine order by him suddainly taken among them, they Barricadoed themselues on all sides.
Barricadoes, the inuention of the Duke of Guise.Then the Barricadoes are the inuention of the Duke of
Guise, and without his presence the people had not stirred, taken armes, not banded against the thunder that descended from heauen. This is confirmed by the declaration made by the Parrisians, the words whereof are these: Aduice was giuen, that the Regiment of Picardie was sent for in great haste, as also the Sieurs de Mer^ and de Thore, bringing more then three hundreth horse, which could not be prepared, vnlesse that matter had beene purposed long before.
The occasions of the Barricadoes.The newes of those troupes made the Parrissians to suspect, and the insolencies of those alreadie established, made vs as then to inquire of the preparation made by the Duke de Guise, and vnderstanding that neither hee nor his were armed, euery man thought to ayde himselfe, so that as it were by one generall consent, euery one in lesse then an houre, vnited and placed them in the streets for their defence, which is a thing natural to al liuing creatures: so the Parrissians mooued not, but for feare of a Garrison, this foundation is not well laid, for that all sedition and rebellion is euill and pernicious in kingdomes, although the cause bee good and commendable.
As the Prince should cut off the meanes to the first motions of those troubles, and quench the fiers, that beeing hatched in a particular house, would enter into the Churches, Pallaces, and publike houses: so the people ought to suffer and indure al extremities, rather then to rise against their soueraigne, although hee were a Tyrant, cruell, inhumaine: for like as all that pleaseth a Prince, is not permitted to be done by him, so al ye is permitted vnto ye people, is not profitable: and oftentimes it happeneth, that the remedie is more cruel then the disease it selfe, and that seeking to shunne one calamitie, we intangle our selues in an infinite of miseries. Experience setteth before our eyes, the enterprises and successe of coniurations:Defence is not permitted to subiects against their King. the beginnings haue beene impiteous, and the ends miserable.
The tyrannie of one man is euill, that of many is woorse, but the worst of all is an vnbridled power, and an absolute libertie that hath cast off the yoake of lawes. When a people arme themselues against a Tyrant, it must take heed, that of one, it maketh not fifteene, or that in seeking to shun tyrannie, The words of K. Francis.it indureth not confusion and disorder, which from the royaltie proceedeth to the populer estate. You my Maisters of
Parris, alleadge, that the armes you beare, are not to offend any man, but onely to defend themselues that is good against a straunge Prince, but against the king and your Soueraigne, it is most execrable: God detesteth and forbiddeth it, and whatsoeuer he doth, bee it right or wrong, it is no more lawfull for you to stirre against him, then for a childe to mooue against his Parents.
Causes of sedition.The life of man is the vnion of the bodie and the soule: the life of a Realme, is commaundement and obedience, if the one bee separated from the other, that the soule tyrannizeth the bodie, and that the bodie will not receiue the lawe of the soule, that is of reason, it is a death. When the Prince commaundeth vniustly, and when the subiects will not obey, the Realme falleth to ruine, her temperature altereth and resolueth into the first matter, loosing her forme.
It was to that end, that wise King Francis the first said, that euery estate of Common-wealth, or Monarchie, consisteth but in two poynts, in the iust commaundement of a Prince, and the loyall obedience of the subiects. Let vs now see why so many euilles and disobediences haue issued from this pandore: all commotions such as that of Paris, do commonly growe vpon one of these poynts.
When the people are charged with supportable exactions, by the auarice of the Princes that raiseth them vpon the people by inhumaine and infamous waies and impositions: as Calig^le raised impositions vppon common Stewes, Heliogabalus vpon mens vrin, and Alexander Seuerus vpon Hot-houses, there is alwaies mutenie. And therefore the Parrissians vnder Charles the sixt, tooke occasion to mutin, because the Gabelliers asked a halfe-penny of a poore woman that solde Cresson.
When the King giueth estates and dignities to vicious, rather then vertuous, and vnwoorthie, rather then woorthie men. For as in a consort of musick, the different voyces are ruled by one tune, from the which they cannot once so litle varrie, but they make a discord in the ears of the Musitians: Likewise the Common-wealth composed of men of high, meane, and base quallities, that are vnited by Harmonicall proportion, according to the which proportion, in the distinction of persons, and their merits, publicque charges ought to bee supplyed. And when honours (which is the most daintie morsell of vertue) is conferred to colde and rawe stomackes, it becommeth contemptible. The estate of Barron was renowmed in France, but it was afterward imbased, when
Charles the sixt, at the siege of Bourdeaux, created 500. at on time.
The order of S. Michael. instituted by King Lewis the 11.The order of Saint Michael continued in his glory, vntill such time as our Kings gaue it indifferently to all degrees, without exception of persons, or quallities, and that they bestowed it vpon such as were rather Knights then Noblemen. The Queene-mother shewed her selfe therein to bee a woman, when shee called all sorts of people to that degree, without discretion, making one collor for euery mans head, receiuing into that order (of the greatest Monarches in the world) such as meane Princes, would not haue bestowed better places in their houses, then to make them Groomes of their stables, what order soeuer they weare about their neckes.

The first article of the institution, co^taineth, that the number of knights shal be of sixe and thirtie Gentlemen, both of name and armes, without reproach, whereof the King shall bee one, that should be called bretheren and companions of the Order. In the 48. article it is ordained, that at the disease of any of the bretheren of the said Order, there shall be an election made of another knight, of the same conditions as aforesaid, and that by the greatest numbers of the voyces, of the Soueraigne and bretheren of the Order, and that the Soueraignes voyce should bee counted for two. When Princes are too much addicted to such as they fauor, that they thrust their meanes ouer liberally into their owne pleasures, those that perceiue themselues eleuated into such authorities not to descend, but therein to maintaine themselues, do willingly conspire against the Prince himself, raising the subiects, and seeking to get al that,Ambition and Iealousie, two plagues among great men. wherof alreadie they haue obtained great part, thinking they can haue no better nor sufficienter lodging, then the place of those by who^ they were preferred. The aduanceme^t of the Maiors of the Pallace, caused great mutations in the estate of France, about the end of the first geneologie of our Kings. Seian perceiuing himselfe so strong, enterprised against Tiberius, Perennius against Commodus, Eutropus against Theodosius, Belissairius against Iustinien, and Artaban against Xerxes: desire to commaund is an ouer daintie morsell, which to taste, wee tread vnderfoote and suppresse, both respect, dutie, honour, and conscience, such disorders arme mens hearts to resolution, their weapons to mutinies, and their armes with Iron. Lastly, when a king without reason, putteth great Princes and Noblemen of his Realm to death, bannisheth the honest and wise men of his Councel, nourisheth partiallities and diuisions, fauoreth warres, to impouerish his people, loueth none but strangers, and distrusteth his subiects, suffereth the peruersion of his lawes, the corruption of iustice, the inuention of new subsidies against the ancient form and equallitie, without doubt he giueth the first shaking and ouerthrow to his estate, and prouoketh his subiects to conspire, rise, and mutin, but whatsoeuer may bee said, the principall motiue to sedition, is iniustice, which is a great crime. Whe^ kings or their Lieftenants conuert their Soueraignes authorities into iniuries, insolences, and iniustices, and reward the good wils of their subiects with outrage and violences. The Switzers rose vp and slew Grisler, and Landberg their Gouernours,The sure guard of Princes. in the house of Austria, for their violent behauiour, wherin they were esteemed the first scourges of Tyrants. When the K. despiseth great personages, to fauor men of base condition, or when he oppresseth and altogither ouerthroweth the meaner sort, to eleuate the greater, it is a fault both in the one and the other, the remedie is equallitie, the mother of peace and nurse of co^cord, not that which maketh a platonical co^munion of al things, but that which iustly considereth and ballanceth the merits and qualities of euery man. The K. should cause himself to be beloued of al, without despising or hatred of any man, if it be possible. Such as perceiue kings to be like figtrees, that grow vpo^ the top of an vnaccessable hill, and that the fruits thereof serue onely for food vnto crowes, kites, and other foules of the ayre, and that they are put from publike charges, by such as are not capable thereof, doo willingly rise, and such as haue great authorities to commaund, despise the meaner sort, in such manner, that the despight of the first, and the insolencie of the last, stirreth vp seditions. But tell me, if it pleaseth you, my Maisters of Parris, vppon which of these causes do you begin your rebellion, or whether it bee of pride, that you raised your reuolt?
Tarquin. Neron. Demetrius. Ptolomee. Lucullus. Muleasses. Phocas. Heliogabal. Vitellius. Gallus. Gallien. Roboan. Cofroas. Iul. Apostat. Chilperic. Thomas. Lewis. 11. Poptelking of Polonia. Maximin. Caracalla. Perseus. Lewis de Bauiere. Pertinax. Isaac. Frotho. Ferdinand King of Naples. Berot a Span yard, Maior of the Pallace. Iean. Constance. Ladislaus. Lewis. Plaints of the Parrisians. Disorder in iustice and promises.Hath the king rauished your wiues, like Tarquinus? hath he burnt your houses, like Nero? haue you seene in his apparrell, the supersluities of
Demetrius king of Macedonia: in his recreations, the pleasures of Ptolomee: at his table, the disorders of
Lucullus: and in his pastimes the luxuriousnesse of
Muleasses king of Tunnes? haue you marked in him the miserablenesse of Maurice and Phocas, the confusion and monstrous prodigallitie of Heliogabalus and Vitellius, or the toyes of your Emperors, Gallus and Gallien.
Hath hee ransomed his subiects, like Roboam? despised the seruice of God, like Cofroas? renounced Christianitie, like Iulien the Apostate? pilled Churches, like
Chilperic? abolished holy ceremonies of diuince seruice, like
Thomas Emperour of Constantinople?
Hath hee driuen away and displaced his fathers seruants, like Lewis the eleuenth? hath hee tormented his subiects and the Suffregans, like Popiel, that was eaten with rats?
Hath he put any of his subiects to death without iusticie, like Maximin? hath hee falsified his faith, like Bassianus Caracala? hath hee broken the treaties of peace, like
Perseus?
Hath hee despised learning, like Lewis de Bauiere? or men of warre, like Pertinax?
Hath hee raised Subsidies and impositions vpon the fruites of gardens, like Isaac Emperour of Constantinople? vpon beasts and members of men, like Frotho King of
Denmarke? or vppon vrines, like Ferdinand, King of
Naples?
Hath hee giuen great offices vnto straungers, like
Ochozias King of Iuda, who to please Athalie his mother, being a Samaritane, filled his Court with Samaritans? or like Lewis le Debonnaire, that made a Spaniard Maior of his Pallace?
And among so many examples of a iust distrust, to mooue your commotions, hath hee built a Tower for his dwelling place, inuironed with profound ditches, full of water, not to enter therein but by a Draw-bridge, like Denis the Tyrant of Sicile?
Hath hee done nothing woorthie memorie, no more then the two last kings of Constantinople and Hungarie?
And if hee hath done nothing proportionable to so strange defections, tell mee you Parrissians, wherein hath hee so much displeased and mooued you?
I vnderstand you well, he hath made intollerable leuies of monies, and straunge subsidies: hee hath placed men of ignorance and anarice in the seat of Iustice: hee hath oppressed his subiects by a thousand means, to inrich his mignions: hee hath subuerted the order of his treasures, and inuented the practise of present receipt, thereby freelier to exercise his prodigallities: hee hath giuen the honorable offices of the Realme vnto the mignions, and hath desired nothing more, then to throw downe and loppe the foundation of the holy League.
Is there no other thing? tell all: shewe foorth your publication: let reason rather then words bee wanting with you: for that in populer commotions, fained things set out with faire words, are holden for trueth. Now I will plainely let you see, that your complaints are without reason, and your Ciuil wars breedeth necessitie and redoubleth it. More fooles then states men. A small greefe.reasons without sence: and yet to please you, say that your dreams were true, that the king in his new leuying of monies, his new Edicts, and his new creations of officers, doth oppresse his people. Necessitie constraineth him, but from whence proceedeth that necessitie? from ciuill warres: who maketh this warre? the League.
The cause then of these disorders, proceedeth from the graft of our miseries, and from such as vppon the firme land, expect the shipwracke of our French vessels. I aduouch the great leuyings, the excesse of impositions, the Edicts, the offices, the spendings of treasures, and the rapine of receiuers, and am assured, that there commeth not one crowne out of the pesants hands, that is woorth a Teston, when it is payde into the kings cofers, it is so much shortned by passing through so many hands.
The people haue been strangely oppressed by new inuentions, there was somewhat to say to the Edict of Courtiers, the tenne Sellers of fish, the 12. sellers of beastes within Parris, the receiuers appoynted for spices, the commissions sent to all Courts royall, to collect great treasures in euery place of the Realme, the making of so many Gentlemen, the allienation of demands, with many other corruptions to get mony, the numbring whereof would be more odious, then the charge hath bin excessiue: but vpon whom may the fault bee layde, whether vppon the king that graunted, or those that first inuented them, therby to finde means to fill their purses, whose auarice resembleth the dog, that swalloweth a morsell of meat cast into his mouth without chawing, hoping presently to haue another: for that all whatsoeuer proceedeth of a new imposition, was deuoured, the sooner to swallow another. But if a great part thereof hath passed into the great and gaping throate of the insaciable auarice of the league it selfe: if many, to haue a part therein, haue giuen their consents: if the relieuing of the poore people hath not beene so much considered, as religiously it ought to bee: if the importunitie of those that say, there is alwaies more fooles then estates, haue had it, wherefore do they charge the king, that onely receiueth the griefe at his heart, the ruine vppon his shoulders, and haire vppon his raines, that since these disorders, neuer hath had good day, sweet slumber, nor ioyfull repast? The displeasure hee receiued at the continuance of such new charges, caused him to desire Monsieur de Birague his Chancellour, to deliuer vp his seales, which he bestowed ouer liberally vppon the approbation of his Edicts, and caused a roule of the most pernicious to bee shewed him, which he toare, detested the authors, and lamented the oppression that his people indured: and as yet wee may see the edict that was made for the suppression of the wicked deuises of new Edicts.
The same incrochers put into his head, the inuention of
Petite Espargne, of commaunding his treasures vnder an acquittance of his hand, to deliuer as much mony as they would haue, without knowledge to the Secretaries or Receiuers, what he gaue, to the end, that being ignorant of the disorder, and the instruments of that deuise, no man should bee blasoned but the king: and that their impudencies in asking such excessiue summes of mony, shuld not bee discouered. VVhatsoeuer it be, content your selues you Parrissians, that all the profit of their exactions and subsides, hath entered into your coffers, that your own is inriched, that it was neuerricher, then vnder the raigne Alienation of admonitio^. Meanes to maintaine the greatnesse of the Prince. Tributes. Traffiques. Forraine treatises. Sale of offices. Duke d'Alua. King Lewis the 12.of him whom you haue driuen out, that all the great ponds of royall fauours are fallen into your milles, his liberalities are returned into your purses, and the mignions haue beene but the conducts, whereby those great prouisions were transported into your fountaines, as touching the doubling of the charges, much more then euer they were heeretofore, in the raignes of Lewis the eleuenth, Charles the eight, and Lewis the 12. and the multitude of offices: it is well knowne that the demaines which onely maintained the honour and royall estate of his Realme, is nothing like as it was in their times.
The continuance of warres hath ingaged it into many hands, the increase of our diuisions hath scattered, alienated, and dispearsed it in such sort, that there must bee had at the least fifteene or sixteene millions of Frankes, to redeeme that which is woorth aboue fiftie millions. The kings of Europe haue sixe waies and meanes to maintaine the greatnesse of their estates. The king of France hath nothing thereof: he hath no more demaines, the sacred Patrimony of his auncestors is gone, hee maketh no more conquests nor spoyles vppon straungers, all the bootie hee hath is of his owne, and all the losse of his subiects falleth vppon him: hee hath none that payeth him tribute, as the Prince of Asia doth to the King of Persia, the Indies to the King of Calicut, and he of Calicut Malach, Cambarre and
Canor, to the King of Portugal. There is no trafficque, negotiation, vnder the name of his Maiestie by factors, as
Alphonsus K. of Naples, the King of Portugal, all the Common-wealth, and most part of the Italian Princes: as the Duke of
Florence for silkes: and the Duke of Sa^oy for bookes, ordinarily vse. The two last which are the refuges and forraine passages and the aydes of his subiects, haue of long time bin conuerted by his auncestors, into charges, impositions, and ordinary tallages. These sixe means fayling, and not beeing proportioned to the charges of the crowne, the King hath been constrained to finde a seuenth extraordinary in deed, of great consequence, and most dangerous, but couered with necessitie: which is the creation of new offices, and the practise to drawe mony, a means fit and to the purpose, to supply the kings wants, to fill the pipes of the springs of treasures almost dried, to ease the people oppressed with wars, and with the sterilitie of times and seasons, for that such as had to deale with receipts of the monies proceeding therof, make account that in twentie yeares, the king hath receiued 139. millions, a certaine meanes whereby mony from all places is brought into the kings Coffers, without constraint, violence, and as it were by degrees, a hundreth times more tollerable the^ impositions and other inuentions, to charge the poore Pesants, and wherein there is much more conscience, then in that which
Phillip le Long demanded of all his subiects, of what estate soeuer, beeing the fift part of their reuenue, and more reason then that tyrannicall extortion of the tenth part of all the expenses of seuenteene great Prouinces, whereof the Author boasted to haue found a fountaine, that wold yeeld golde in peeces as big as a mans arme.
This sale of offices is not so new, but that it hath been vsed long since, in those estates that are thought to bee most polliticque, the Venetians hauing so great and enemie as the king of
France, made a great breach in their treasures to resist him, his entrance into Italy, cost him aboue fifte millions of duckets, which to recouer againe, they inuented the meanes of selling the offices of their Common-wealth, whereby they pursed one hundreth millions.

Offices for the imployment of the youth of France.And the French king perceiuing it to be a continual spring into their coffers, brought it into his Realme, to support the necessitie of the most oppressed, and the same necessitie hath constrained his successors to continue the means to resist the same, and to honour the best families among his subiects: who without this splendure would bee hidden among the rest, and youth without imployment, would fall into those vices that are incident to that age: but let vs now returne againe to your complaints.
When you are forced to confesse, that other causes made you to enter into the course and sauor of these rebellions, you say, that the king did neuer approoue nor aduance your league. Hee hath loued it too much. If hee had choaked this Monster of diuision, if hee had not by his authoritie strengthened the furious temeritie of the Leaguers pretences, hee would liue like a king, command like a king, and be in the Louure like a king, and had not gone out of Parris like a Gouernor of a countrie, that issueth out at one gate, when his enemies entereth at the other. Did you neuer heare, that a king that had two factions in his Realme, bending more to the one then to the other, hath in the end beene a pray to one of them? What ouerthrew Carthage? two factions, Barchinienne,Ruine of estates by ciuil warres. and
Hannonienne. What nourished wars in France of sixtie yeares long, and made it a praie to the Englishmen? the quarrell of the house of Bourgongne and Orleans. What troubled England with so many mischiefes of seuen great battelles, wherein aboue sixtie or eightie Princes of the blood royall of England were slaine? the factions of the house of Lancaster and Yorke. What impeached the Empire of Constantinople, but the great faction of Prusins and Venitiens, which at one blowe spoyled fortie thousand men? What ouerthrew the pollicie and tranquillitie of Florence, but the faction of white and blacke? To the contrary, what maintaineth the Empire of the Turkes? their concord enemie of ciuill descention: they make their profit of our losses, they aduance themselues vnder the couerture of our warres, grounded for the most part vpon the foote of a flie, and there is nothing that hath so much increased, nor as yet doth more increase their alcaron, then our diuisio^, which euery day giueth them sufficient christians heads to triumph vpon, in stead of stones or other spoyles: as Thuracan did with the heades of the Albanois.
League a continuall feauer to an estate.To be short, that hurt which a continuall feuer is to a mans bodie, the same are Leaguers vnto a Realm: the Prince that nourisheth and entertaineth them, is no lesse odious then the Phisitian, that hatcheth and couereth a disease.
The Common-wealth is a ship, the Leagues and factions are the holes and leakes, by the which, while those that are in the ship are at strife, the water entereth in such aboundance, that it causeth the ship to finke, and all that are within her. A wise Pilot shuld calke and stop those leakes and diuisions, reseruing the rurther for himselfe, without trusting to any other, neuer being factious, nor head of any parties, but all king, and alwaies Maister of the ship: and doubt not but these drone Bees, that eate vppe the honie of all the rest, and these composers of the league, which make so great a ruine for two or three months of spring-time, had ouerthrowne themselues, if the king had not nourished them,Machiauille chap. 20. of the Princes. with the fairest flowers of his authoritie.
And who euer counselled a Prince, common father of his subiects (vnlesse Machiauel chap.
20. of the Prince.it were Machiauel) to entertaine partiallities among them? You are sorrie that the king doth not as willingly imbrace the pretences of your League, as you do, and that hee hath not suffered you to make a table of his backe, whereon to playe at dice for his Crowne. You haue somewhat to say to those whom the king hath aduaunced: so the heeles murmured because they had not the place of the head: the Asse would clime vpon a cushen of veluet, to faune vppon his Maister like a Spaniell: puppits would play vppon kings cabbins. Know you not, that they are like counters in the kings hand, whereof hee maketh one to bee a hundreth, some a thousand, and others tenne thousand? Do you not shew more fauour and credite in your bankes towne of your seruants, then to an other? and vse you not to say, that you may doo with your owne as pleaseth you? is the king countable to your humours? If he holdeth the Crowne of God and the auncient lawes of this Realme, wherefore seeke you to bee his Tutors, and to hinder him from distributing the honours and recompences thereof, at his pleasure? It is no reason to prescribe or limit him, whom or what hee shall cherish, loue, and aduance: if you conferre things present, with those that are past, you shall finde no Prince but hath had some whom hee specially fauoured, and that the iealousie nor enuie of others farther from his fauour, hath not beene strong ynough to erect Barricadoes against them, as you haue done.
The League hath no iust cause to take armes.But seeing all your complaints are ridiculous, your reasons without foundation, and your discourses without assurance: what inchantment hath made you to rebell? Say that this great disorder knowne to bee in the Court of your king, hath put that wilde fire into your heads, which hath mooued and tolde you, therefore to remedie it, you must driue him our, you must assayle the Louure, or torment his seruaunts to reuenge your selues against the Duke of Espernon, being at
Roane. I will not so much excuse the king, or think that hee hath not committed some faults, nor say as the Parasite Anaxarchus, that Alexander had reason to kill Clytus, or that the two Goddesses Dice and Themis, are alwaies at their sides, to keepe them from committing iniustice: certainly there were many faire and shining vertues in this Prince,Optimum est pati quod emendare non possis. and many humaine imbisilities, yet tollerable. And seeing we must indure that mischief which is not to beeremedied, the people ought neuer to haue recourse to armes, but to petitions and humble requests: as during the excessiue exactions in the time of Paillip de Valois, they sued to the estates. If dutie, reason, and loue, mooue not your brazen hearts, the apprehension of the paines and punishments which god prepareth to discharge against your rebellions,Punishments of rebellion. Bodin. lib.
3. of his Common-wealth. ought to restraine you. God will neuer leaue those iniuries vnpunished, that are done to his annoynted: your fathers haue repented it in the other world: and you, before you die, shall pay the vseries, besides the principall of your commotions. Turne ouer your olde registers, and you shall knowe what profite rebellion will procure you: enquire of those of Milan, Gand, Bourdeaux,4. Of kings, chap. 25. Qu. Curt. lib.
9. Poli. lib. 10. Liu. dec. li. 3.
Poictiers, and Rochell, if they remember it. And to the ende you shall not thinke that the paines are new, Sedechia because hee seduced the people to reuolt against Nabuchodonosor, had his eyes put out, and cast into perpetuall prison: after that, for his last spectacle, he had seene his children slaine and murthered at his feete, and so lost the vse of their light.

Looke vppon the great multitude of the Iewes, that were made slaues by that meanes. Behold what rigor Alexander vsed against the Musicans, a people of India. And the Romanes against those of Rheggio, and of Capoue: how the Authors of those mutinies were tyed to a Crosse: how the Senators were publikely whipped, the Gentlemen solde like flaues. Our Kings, that let your first rebellion to passe by sufferance, haue presently after, seene a second. And yet would not vse those vengeances that appertaine onely to
Barbarians.
Zonar. in the third tomb of his Annals.Basil Emperour of Constantinople, caused the eyes of fifteene thousand Bulgariens to be put out, and left one eie to each of their Captaines, that they might leade them. Amurat taking the Towne of Dymothicon, that had rebelled against him by force, caused the Inhabitants to bee bound two and two togither, and so threwe them ouer the wall into the riuer that ranne at the foote thereof, commaunding the fathers, or for default of them, the nearest kinsmen of those that had rebelled against him, to massacre them in his presence. Our Princes co^tented themselues with milder punishments, by drowning the paines of a multitude, in the blood of the Authours of the euill.
Sometimes they haue appoynted the defacing of Townes that haue rebelled, taken away their belles, and reuoked their priuiledges: but alwayes the punishment hath beene much lesse then the mischife: those great crimes, haue alwaies found great clemencie. So likewise in that day of your Barricadoes, there was nothing that preserued you from the paine due to so terrible rebellion, but the bountie and mercie of your king: and when I remember your straunge dealing, you put mee in doubt whether you be the sonnes of those, that so brauely and valiantly exposed themselues for the seruice of their kings, and that deliuered Lewis the eight, father to Saint Lewis, out of the danger wherin the disloyaltie of his enemies had brought him, between Parris and
Monmartre.
But let vs seeke for the end of our spindle, when those great Phisitians that sought to remedie the sicknesses of this estate, perceiued that they had not vsed such medicines as were conuenient for the diseases, that their plaisters were too little for the greatnesse of that wound, that to bring those humors down, they had rather haue applyed Iron and fire, then any oyntments, that to saue the members they had beaten the head, they were much abashed to see that bodie without a head: that royall authoritie was turned into the distaffe: the royaltie into an estate democrature: that none but the Qneen mother was present in their assemblies, and that the Duke of Guise held the soueraigntie of all affaires. The king for remedie of the disorder, imployed the Queen his mother, a spirit louing trouble and seeking disquietnesse, vnreconcileable, as touching the hatred she bare to the Princes of the blood, and carried away with the loue she had to the children of her daughter, Duches of Lorraine: It suffiseth, the king sent a woman with teares and complaints against the armes and brauadoes of a Prince of courage, resolute, couragious in his resolutions. And it was not likely she would vndo that which she had don, nor hauing counselled the K. to indure the boldnesse of ye league, and end those differences by peaceable means, that she wold more defire the aduantage and quietnesse of her son, then the increasing of the hopes of the Nulla diu faemina pontus hab^t. Proper.Marquesse du Pont.
I perceiue to what end it will come, they will make such an other treatie as was made at Nemours, the Elixir of the Queen-mother: wome^ should neuer meddle with any thing, but onely to knowe their husbands shirt from his dubblet. Francis Duke of
Brittaine vsed to say, following (the aduise of an Emperour) that it is daungerous to referre the deciding of great affaires vnto the iudgement of a woman, and that how great experience soeuer they haue, they neuer attaine to the soundnesse of a firme wit.
That fantasticall appetite, which maketh them haue more pleasure in coales and sand, then in Grayhounds and Partriges, that sicke and vnbridled taste which they haue at such time as they are great with childe, remaineth continually in their minds: their brests are stuffed with subtilties and craft, but strength and courage wanteth: they haue neither constancie nor steadfastnesse, and their counsell is alwaies woorse.
Plerumque muliebre consilium deterius
Tacit.The next day after the kings departure, the first Senate of this new commonwealth, was holden by the Queene, wherein shee that with her eyes could doo what she list, lamented the mischiefe of the day of the Barricadoes, coniured the most busied heades to shewe their duties, promising all the effects of a more peaceable and assured life in the fruites of the religion, distribution of offices, moderation of taxes and tallages, suppression of offices, and to the contentment of those that dealth therein, a vniuersall reformation. She exhorted them to leaue their animositie, and not mingle their particular reuenges with publike offences: for it is a vaine thing to be angrie with the sea and the waues, after a man hath past the stormes and shipwrackes thereof: shee besought them to preserue that faire and laudable reputation,The Queen mother trauelleth to appease the Parrisians. which their long and constant fidelitie had gotten them, to reconcile themselues to the king, that could not be without some boyling motion or feeling, to haue seene so suddaine a rising in the Towne that hee most loued, and where hee thought to haue most assurance, and that his most affectioned subiects, (the rule and example to others) are proceeded within two fingers neare to an infamous and woorthie rebellion.
The Duke of Guise protesting his innocencie, and imputing all those mischiefes not to the will of the king, but to the force and violence of his euill Councell, saith that hee was extreamly sorrie, that the king by his departure out of Parris, had made him loose so good and happie an occasion,The Duke of Guise his protestation. thereby to let him see, what his zeale and will was for the seruice of his Maiestie, that hee was readie to make proofe thereof in his absence, resolued with his life to redeeme the authoritie which his Councell had taken from him, with the quietnesse and comfort of the Towne, for the suretie whereof, hee besought the Queene-mother to bee a meane.
The election of the prouost, for the marchants.That done, they proceeded to the election of a Prouost of Merchants, and Sheriffes, in places of those that are lesse affected to the intents of the League, then to the aduancement of the kings affaires: and their oathes were taken by the Queene-mother, against whose will they discharged diuers Collonelles, Captaines and Quarter-maisters, the litle troupe of zealous Catholicques, called the sixteene, busied themselues much in those publike actions, eyther to shew the excesse of their ouer boyling loue, or violent hatred.
They tooke order for the assistance of the places adioyning to Parris, and among others, Meux and
Melun, they aduertised forraine Princes, and the good Townes of all that had passed, still iustifying themselues: they made searches in
Parris against all those that were not of their conspiracie, the Pollititians and good Frenchmen, such as foresawe the inconueniences that threatned this Monarchie, by the impetuositie of her mutenies, were sifted and cast into the ashes of their hatred. This monster with sixteene heads, that should teare the authoritie of lawes, began to cause it selfe to bee feared, neuerthelesse, the least aduised, that knew that Parris without the king, is a bodie without strength, lamented his departure.
The Capueins finde the King in their processions.They sent the Capucins in procession to
Chartres, thereby to defend the blows of the kings chollor, to put water into the fire that others had kindled, and to reclaim the tempests of his iust indignatio^. And therwith they sent some of the most account of all the Orders in the Cittie, to desire him with all humilitie, not to remit the innocencie of the Citizens of Parris, to the iudgement of their enemies: to consider the iust causes that had constrained the people to defend themselues: to bannish from his eares all contrary reports and aduises: not to deferre his returne to Parris, wherein hee should bee receiued with as many applaudings and reioycings, as his subiects had greefes when they vnderstood of his departure, and where he should finde better seruants, then those that had counselled him to destroy them and so to depart.The Queen-mother present deputies to the King. The Queene-mother was the head of this message, and when the Deputies arriued at Chartres, shee presented them to the king, that heard their Oration, wherein they acknowledged their fault.




And falling downe at his Maiesties feete, spake as followeth.
An Oration of the Deputies of Parris made to the King at Chartres.SIr, the dutie, honour, respect, feare, and obedience, that wee owe vnto your Maiestie, maketh vs desire not to come before your presence, but onely in all humilitie and submission, to craue the happy continuance of your Graces good fauour, without beeing so bolde as once to open our mouthes to vtter any complaint, or daring (although in a iust cause) to hazard the vsing of free speeches, that might neuer so litle be offensiue vnto your Maiestie: and for this cause, those that sent vs, had determined, that wee intercession for vs, and for more dignitie and reuerence, to interpose her selfe between vs and your Grace.
But it hath pleased you, to will her to send vs vnto you, promising to giue vs peaceable audience: which hath caused vs not onely to continue the submissions due vnto your Maiestie, but to satisfie your commaundement, to appeare before your presence.
Then one speaking for all, saide: Sir, I will not rehearse the protestations by the Princes made vnto you, as well of the honour, which they do beare you, as of their greefe for your Graces absence: neither will I preuent those which the Deputies of
Parris heere present will shewe you, but onely certifie your Maiestie, that wee are the bearers of the memoriall which it hath pleased you to send for, chosen to that end, not that wee esteeme of our own sufficiencies (specially my selfe) or for other considerations, but onely as being men notoriously exempted from any suspitions of particular passions, in that which concerneth the principall poynts of this request. Where, if in the generall and common greefe, your Maiestie findeth any proposition somewhat freer and bolder then ordinary, wee beseech you most humbly to remember your commaundement, the proper interest of your seruice, and the sorrowes of your poore subiects: your clemencie permitteth vs to shew our greefe, and that which most oppresseth vs, is the dammage and preiudice that these last accidents (among others) haue procured to the seruice of your Maiestie: in such sort, that if wee speake otherwise then becommeth vs, wee shall resemble him that hauing beene dumbe all his life, beginneth not to speake, but when hee seeth the sword drawne to his father, and his king.
For then nature breaketh the obstacles, and cryeth out, saying: Hurt not the king. The passion and desire wee haue to your seruice, as our father, our King, our Maister, and our Lord, causeth vs for that purpose to breake our long silence, and to vse the like crie, saying: Hurt not the king: separate him not from his good subiects, his Nobilitie, the Officers of his Crowne, his Princes, his Courts soueraigne, his treasures, not his greatnesse.
Take not from him the honour of his zeale, his pietie, his iustice, his Clemencie, his mildenesse, his goodnesse, and his humanitie, so much renowmed, experimented, and commmeded.
For if at any time heeretofore it hath been done, surely by this last accident of Parris, it was in more daunger then euer it was, which causeth vs to speake with much such affection, in that it threatned vs with the like daunger: And in such manner, that if your Maiestie had knowne the sequell thereof, you might haue seene sufficient, whereby to discerne what cause wee haue to mourne: but for that you knowe it not, wee are in greater hope your Maiestie wil the better accept the humble petitions of your poore innocent subiects, which appeale and inuoke your ayde, in this world, onely next after God, against those who abusing your authoritie, wold so shamefully destroy and massacre vs. The thing I haue in charge to present vnto your Maistie, in the behalfe of the Princes, is so true, that they offer to iustifie the same, when it pleaseth you to commaund.
In this concurrence of so many iust complaints, wee most humbly beseech your Maiestie, to accept our declarations in good part, and beleeue, so that wee may liue assuredly vnder your protection, in the religion whereof you giue vs so good examples, that there is nothing heeretofore happened, that can take away the deuotion which is in vs, for the executing of all your pleasures, and the intire obedience of your Graces commaundements: and that there is not any kinde of humilitie, submission, or satisfaction, that wee are not readie to yeeld vnto you, not onely in word, but indeed, protesting in trueth, both before God and man, that in that which is past, wee haue not sought to offend your Maiestie, or any of your subiects, and that our onely desire is, to seeke all the meanes we can, to liue in your gracious fauour, and to please you.




A request presented to the king at Chartres.Wherein when you shall haue satisfied the expectation of all the world, yet we shall not satisfie our selues, by reason of the insatiable desire that burneth in our harts, to continue still more and more agreeable vnto you. The Oration ended, they presented their petition to the king, containing fiue specipall poynts: that is, the extirpation of heresie, by leuying of armes both by the king and the League, giuing it the name of the holy vnion, the bannishment and proscription of the Duke
d'Espernon, and Monsieur de la Valette, the performance of the kings voyage to Guyenne, and a voyage to be made by the Duke
de Maine into Dauphine: the forgetting of the commotions of
Parris: the confirmatio^ of officers chosen for the ma^naging of the affaires of the said Towne since the Barricadoes: the reestablishing of the good and auncient ordinances of the Realme, leauing the verification of the new edicts, and the declarations made vppon the same to the Court of Parliament, abolishing the pernicious vse of parties, defending the acquitting of gifts, but onely in the end of the yeare, wholy abolishing and that vpon greeuous punishment, the suppositio^ of names, that had bin practised the easlier to ratifie gifts, made contrarie to the ancient lawes of the Realm, altogither forbidding the practise of Receiuers, and all the abuses indured by meanes of the Duke d'Espernon, and
Monsieur de la Valette. The longest articles of their request, tending onely to that end.
Now let vs see how the allegations made by the League against them, are confuted by their aunsweres: and first you shall heare what it saith to the King against them, and what they aunswere against it. Sir, (faith the League) the Duke of Espernon, and
Monsieur de Vallette his brother, whom your Maiestie hath eleuated and inuested with the greatest offices and dignities of this Realme, are known not onely throughout France, but in all Christendome, to be the principall fauourers and supporters of hereticques in this Realme.
The aunswere of the Duke de Espernon. Your Maiestie may now wel perceiue,Apologie of the Duke d'Espernon to his enemies. that at this present the league (pretending their quarrell against vs) doth beginne their processe against you, and hauing failed in their last enterprise at
Paris, to bereaue your grace both of your authority and liberty, (which God graunt may neuer be effected) they would now spoyle your most faithfull and bounden seruants, and make them the excuse and whole pretence of their so late commotion, but the thing is so euident, that this their deuise deserueth not any aunswere, seeing your Maiestie and all the world haue manifestly seene it.
What parance should they haue to beginne an enterprise in
Parris, to take the Duke d'Espernon, who as then was resident in Normandie? And what cause mooued them to erect Barricadoes, euen to the Gates of the Lounre, to arme and raise the people in a mutinie, and to cease vppon all the keyes of the Cittie, thereby to driue Monsieur de Valette out of Valence and
Dauphine, where as then hee continued?
These are the effects of the confession of
Salcede, which onely are pretended against your Maiestie, and not against the Duke d'Espernon, nor Monsieur de la Valette his brother, who since it pleased your Maiestie to giue them any charge within this Realme,Confession of Salcede. haue most faithfully and worthily acquitted
themselues, therein immitating the steps of their deceased father,The house of the Nogarets hath well deserued in the Realme. Monsieur de la Valette, one of the greatest Captains in our time, whose seruices done for the aduantage of this crowne and dignitie, are yet so fresh, and imprinted in the hearts of all Frenchmen, that their enemies cannot chuse but confesse, that hee hath deserued a recompence therein towards his children, whom it hath pleased your Maiestie to chuse (as children worthie of such a father) and in them to acknowledge the deserts of his seruice and victories against the heriticques of this Realme.
An example whereof, the Duke of Espernon in lesse then sixe months,An explort done by the Duke d'Espernon in Prouence. hath clensed all Prouence (which it pleased your Maiestie to commit vnto their charge) of all whatsoeuer the Hereticques for the space of twentie yeares hath holden therein, and from whence they had not been driuen, by all their predecessors Gouernours of the same: and hauing bannished the Ministers and principall Leaders from
Seine, they haue so well pacified and gouerned that Prouence, that euer since it hath remained in the entire obedience to your Maiestie.
The taking of Sorgues. The Duke d'Espernons voyage to Guyenne. His fanour to the enemies of the league. His enterprise vpon Cambray. His deeds in Dauphine. The reason for which the league doth band themselues against the Duke d'Espernon.The taking of Sorgues in Dauphine in winter reason, by those two bretheren, witnesseth what mindes they beare. And since the ouerthrow of Huguenot Switzers, spoyled by Monsieur de la Valette, sheweth the intelligence and conference they are likely to haue with hereticques. The League specifieth the places where they shewed those fauors, as the Duke of Espernons voyage into
Guyenne, the treaties there by him made, the counsels that hee gaue, the fauour hee shewed to such as hee knewe to beare them affection, the hatred hee shewed towards all good Catholicques, (specially such as hee esteemed to hold with the League) the intelligence hee had with the affaires that Cleruant followed for the Huguenots in Metz. The enterprises he made vppon Cambray, a towne belonging to the Queene. The suspition hee hath giuen to all honest men. The ayde hee gaue to the Rutters (beeing ouerthrowne) concerning their returne seruing them for a guard. The counsell by him giuen touching the last troubles happened in
Parris. The secret conferences hee hath had with
Chastillon, the actions of his brother, as the taking of
Valence, Tallard, Guillestre, and other places which he hath taken from the Catholicques of Dauphine, the meanes hee hath vsed therein, to aduance the power of the hereticques, by the destruction of that Prouence, and the subtilties hee vsed, to impeach the reducing of
Ausonne, do sufficiently discouer their pretences.
And when it pleaseth your Maiestie to haue further declaration hereof, with the generall consent of all your subiects, wee will bring diuers sufficient proofes, which at this present would bee ouer long to set downe, and which for diuers good causes wee will now omit.
This common opinion of the intelligence that the said Duke
de Espernon and Mousieur de la Valette, haue with the Hugunots, and the high estate whervnto it hath pleased your Maiestie to aduance them, maketh your good subiects to feare (specially the Catholicques) that if your fauor should once bee withdrawne from them, (as it is impossible that their insolent behauiors can long time be indured by so great and wise a King) not finding any entertainment among the Catholicques, they will take part with Hereticques, and thereby deliuer all the Prouences and strong places that are in their possessions,
into their hands, whith whom alreadie they haue so great intelligence, in such manner, that France (that may shortly be deliuered of heresie) should become more subiect to their tyrannicall dominion then euer it was.
The Dukes answere Vpon the taking of Dauphine.The Duke de Espernon replyeth by his Councell, and saith, that hee tooke Valence and other places in Dauphine, and put out those of the league, (that had no authoritie therein) to place his Maiesties souldiers: if that deserue not an excuse, I referre it to the iudgement of all honest men. I would to God he had also taken
Chaalons, Dyon, Montreuil, and all that acknowledgeth not your Maiestie, within the heart of the Realme: and yet hee hath not done it without cause and lawfull excuse, which hath beene often debated before your Maiestie and your Councell.
The fauour which he bare to hereticques.As touching the other poynts of their accusation, touching the fauour which the League saith the Duke d'Espernon beareth vnto Hereticques, your Maiestie knoweth, and can disprooue their vntrueths: if they bee so in this, that as touching the ouerthrow of the Rutiters, there was not any man that trauelled so much therein, as the saide Duke d'Espernon, who onely by your Maiesties good pleasure and authoritie, hauing effected the disvnion of the Switzers,The King of Nauarres complaint against the Duke de Espernon. caused their confusion, and by that meanes gaue the Duke of Guise occasion to set vppon them at Auneau, for the which hee is so much commended, to the disgracing of your Maiestie, and the honour of that victorie that is due vnto you. By this your Maiestie may iudge the truth of all their accusations, that knoweth the particularities of the voiage to Guyenne, what was done by the Duke
d'Espernon, and what followed, all contrary to their declarations. Whereby I dare say, the King of N. was so much displeased at the said D. of Espernon, that there is not any man in
France, with whom he is more offended. The League addeth, that the D. of Espernon and his brother, are the authors of the disorders in all the good gouernments and pollicie of France: that they haue gotten into their Coffers, all the treasures of the Realme: that they haue aspired to the principall offices of the Crowne, separated from it, diuers of those that would serue it both well and wisely: and besought the King, seeing he knew them to be the cause and original of the mischiefe, that it would please him to bannish them both of his Court and fauour, and discharge them of all the gouernments and offices that they hold within this Realme, without any desert. The Duke d'Espernon saith, that all whatsoeuer they say, are but chimeres and inuentions, maliciously deuised: for the iustification whereof,The Dukes offer, to testifie the truth of his innocencis. hee will gage his head to bee layde at the kings seere, if it bee found that hee once so much as dreamed thereof. And to the contrary, hee reputeth all the causes of miseries vppon the heads of the house of Guise. Who hath brought disorder (saith hee) in the treasures (whereof you make so great a matter) but your predecessors, and you that follow their steps? Who constrained the king to exact vppon his people, but onely the warres, which the vnmeasurable ambition hath renued, and put them vpon the Kings charges? let the chamber of accounts be examined, and there it shall be seen: who without contradiction hath handled and gouerned the treasures of the late kings, Henry and Francis the second: let the most auncient Histories be pervsed, to see what house in France hath risen from a most meane beginning, to a high and great estate.

I will name no man, euery man knoweth sufficiently what house it is, that would thrust his head into the cloudes,Gifts of the king, without importunitie, and with his foote spurne off the kings Crowne: wee most humbly call his Maiestie to witnesse, as our king, the author of our beeing, our Protector, and our good Maister, if wee euer were importunate with him, for any benefit we haue receiued at his Graces hands, and whether all whatsoeuer wee haue both riches and honour, haue not proceeded from him of his free and voluntarie libertie.
Wee praise God, that wee cannot bee accused to bee Pensionaries to the king of Spaine, or to haue receiued mony from him, to make war against our king, and impeached him from taking into his protection, the gouernment of the lowe Countries, nor by force to haue taken the monies of his generall receipts, robbed the waggon of Bourges, and in time of open peace, constrained the mony of Normandie, to bee conducted by a hundreth men of armes, euen to the Gates of Parris.
It shall not bee long of vs, that this reformation should not bee performed in France, wee will absent our selues from the Court, and from the presence of the king. Now my Maisters the reformers, let vs see some goodly beginning of your policie: Is your ambition, deuises, practises, or inuentions,The Duke d'Espernon is forbidden the Court. to attain to the highest dignitie, therby any thing ceased? Haue you left Paris, and restored it into the hands of her naturall king and Princes? No: but to the contrary, you haue made
Melun and Corbeil, to reuolt in the very sight of his Maiestie, and all the best townes in this Realme, which by false perswasions you haue ledde out of the right way.
And to conclude, wee will refuse no condition, that may restore and establish this Realme to peace and tranquillitie, and as wee do most willingly craue your Maiesties presence (in a time wherein wee ought not to doo it) thereby to giue no cause of dissiking to our enemies: so will wee bee alwaies readie to yeelde vnto your Maiesties hands, both liues: and goods,The Kings answere to the request of the league. with all estates, charges, gouernments, places, and Castles, that it hath pleased you to commit vnto vs, vppon condition that our accusers will doo the like. And if any man finde this proposition and reciprocall submission between persons, which they may terme vnequall to bee straunge, let them remember, and receiue this for satisfaction, that all whatsoeuer the one and the other hath, is by your Grace, and which they cannot iustly hold, longer then it pleaseth you.
The king that sat as vmpeir in this contention, by their answeres and replies still receiued some blowes, yet hee knewe that their declarations were not so smooth, but that the accusations in his behalfe, would easilie bee aunsered: and beeing pressed by the League to yeeld to their request, he giueth the Cardinall of Bourbon, and all the rest of the Princes (in whose name it was presented) to vnderstand, that both in peace and warre, hee had sufficiently shewed the proofe of his good will, to the preseruation of the onely Catholicque religion in his Realme, and to the extirpation of contrary sects, without sparing his own person, euen at the last ouerthrow of the Protestant Rutters entered into this Realm,The victorie of the Rutters. which had not happened without the presence and good conduction of his said Maiestie, that stayed them vppon the side of the riuer of Louure, which they had gotten with little losse and weaking, as euery man knoweth.

That iealousies and distrust had hindered him from reaping the profite of the aduantage which hee had against the Hereticques, hauing sought all meanes hee could, to impeach the motions of those diuisions, as namely to forget that which had happened at Parris, as long as the Cittizens behaued themselues like good and faithfull subiects, trusting in the bountie and clemencie of their Prince, whereof they haue so many times had sufficient proofe, that they neede not doubt thereof.
That hee lamented the disorders that haue crept into the affaires of this estate, as also the contentions that brake the last peace: that he desired nothing so much, as speedily to see a present reformation, and that to the same effect, hee would assemble the third estates of France, as the most assured remedie, which his predecessors in such occasions haue alwaies vsed. That hee was resolued presently to reuoke diuers edicts and impositions wherewith his people were charged. That in the assembly of the estates, his Maiestie would take order for the doubt the Catholieques haue to fall into the gouernment of hereticques: and that touching the particular complaint made by the saide Princes against the Duke d'Espernon and his brother, he would make it known, that both in that, and all other things, hee is a Prince both equall and iust, hauing speciall regard not to doo iniurie or wrong to any man. And withall, that hee preferred the publike vtilitie of his Realme, before all other things. The Court of Parliament, who by their wisedome that knewe that the absence of the sunne which giueth it light, would from thence forward make it become obscure and without light, by reason of the thicke cloudes of diuisions, would not withdrawe their helpes from that trouble and disquietnesse of the estate, nor turne their backe to the king, neither bring vpon themselues the infamous markes or rebellion, or permit that his Councellours should be termed ouerthrowers of their Princes:The Court of Parliament sent the Deputies to the King. but sent their Deputies to his Maiestie, to shewe him of the greefe they had conceiued at that accident, and at the mischiefe that had constrained him to go out of Parris, to reclaime his bountie and clemencie, to diuert his iust vengeance from the heades of his subiects, excuse his officers, if in so great a commotion, imbisilitie and feare, had made them bend their necks, to desire him to come thither againe, to restore quietnesse and contentment to his Maiestie, order in his affaires, credite to their purple robes, authoritie to their estate, and by his presence to dispearse mutenies, which by diuision had beene raised.
The Kings answere to the Court of Parliament.The king answered therevnto, that he neuer doubted but that they would continue in the sidelitie and affection, which they had alwaies shewed to his auncestors, that if it had beene in their powers, to haue taken order touching the disorders in Parris, hee was fully perswaded they would haue done it: that he had conceiued a most extreame greefe thereat, although hee said hee had not beene the first that had fallen into such misfortunes: that notwithstanding all that, he would alwaies be a good father, to such as shewed themselues good children: that in the quallitie of a father, hee would vse the Parrisians as his sonnes, that had fayled in their duties: and not as seruants, that conspired against their Maister: hee commaunded them to continue in their charges, according to their duties, and from the mouth of the Queene-mother, to receiue the commaundements and executions of his will and pleasure.

The King sends for the Deputies of the Court.Wherewith the Deputies of the Parliament withdrew themselues, and when after dinner they were readie to depart, the king sent for them, and said vnto them: I haue once againe sent for you, that before you go, I might let you vnderstand, (besides that I sayd vnto you in the morning) that I haue beene aduertised of the allegation vsed in my behalfe, that I would place a Garrison in my town of Parris: I am much abashed how that entered into their heads. I knowe what Garrisons meane, they are eyther placed to destroy a Towne, or else because of some distrust that is had in the Inhabitants: they ought not to thinke that I would ouerthrowe or destroy a Towne, to the which, I haue shewed so many signes of great good will, and which I haue inriched by my long continuance therein, as hauing stayed there more then tenne others of my predecessors euer did, which hath procured, yea euen to the meanest Artificers therein, that great trafficque which at this day they haue: and so much, that it might haue benefited tenne or twelue other Townes, which would haue been glad thereof: and where my officers haue had cause to vse my helpe, as likewise Merchants and others: I haue not denied it vnto them, so that they may iustly say, I haue alwaies shewed my self a good king in their behalfes: lesse cause should I likewise haue, to enter into distrust of those whom I loued, and of whom I might haue assured my selfe, as I verily thought. So that the amitie I bare vnto them, ought to haue bereaued them of this fond opinion, that I would place a Garrison among them: and it is wel knowne, that not one souldier set foote or entered into any house, to looke eyther bread or prouision whatsoeuer: but to the contrary, I sent them mony and other necessaries, and they had not stayed there aboue foure and twentie houres at the furthest, which had been till the next day, but they should haue lodge else where. I determined to haue made an exact search, for diuers straungers that as then were in my Towne of Parris, and not desiring to offend any man. I sent to the Lords of my Court, namely to the D. of Guise, to the end they should giue me a roll of their domesticall seruaunts, and to send the rest away, whom I vnderstood to be in great numbers, at the least fifteen thousand, which I did for the preseruation of my good Town of Parris, with sureties of my subiects. And therefore I will haue them to acknowledge their faults with greefe and true contrition: I knowe well that they are put in minde, and made beleeue, that hauing offended mee in that sort, my indignation is vnreconcileable: but I would haue you to let them know, that I am not so disposed to loose them, and as God (whose Image although vnwoorthie I beare heere vppon earth) will not the death of a sinner: so I desire not their ouerthrow. I will trie the gentillest meanes, and when they shall confesse their fault, and shew by effect what sorrow they haue, I will receiue and imbrace them as my subiects, shewing my selfe like a father to his children: yea a friend to his friend: I will haue them to acknowledge mee for their good King and Maister, which if they doo not, but rather feede me with delayes, withdrawing my hands, as I can well do, I will make them know their offences, whereof the memorie shall remaine to all posterities: for it beeing the chiefe and principall Towne, honoured with the Supreme Court of my Realme, and other Courts, Priuiledges, honours, and Vniuersities, I can as you know, reuoke my Court of Parliament, Chambers of accounts, aydes and other Courts and vniuersities, which would turne to their great decay.

For that ceasing, their trafficques and other commodities would decrease: yea, and wholly decay, as it happened in the yeare 1579. during the great plague, by reason of my absence, and the discontinuance of the Parliament, a great number of my Councellours beeing retired, so that the same yeare, many of the shippes stood shut vp, and the people liued idle, spending their time in playing and walking in the streetes.
I knowe there are many honest men within my Towne of
Parris, and that of foure, three parts are of that number, which are greeued for the mischiefe that is happened: then let them with speede procure my iust contentment, that I be not constrained to vse rigor, which to my great greefe I would bee loth to doo. You know, that patience once mooued, turneth into fury, and what a king that is displeased may doo. For surely I will imploye all my power, not leauing any meanes vnsought, to reuenge my selfe on them, although my minde bee not reuengetiue, but I would that they would know, that both my hart and courage, is as great as any of my predecessors euer was: I haue not as yet, since my aduancement to the Crowne, after my brothers death, nor my returne out of Polonia, vsed rigor to any man, which you both knowe, and can well witnesse: neither I will that any man should abuse my clemencie and long suffering.
I am no vsurper, I am lawfull king by succession, as you all can testifie, and of a race that hath alwaies commanded with benignitie. It is in vaine to speake of religion: I must take another course, there is no Prince liuing in the world, more Catholicque and desirous of the extirpation of heresies, then I am, which both mine actions and life hath shewed vnto my people. I would it had cost mee an arme, that the picture of the last Hereticque, were painted here vpon my chamber wall. Now you may returne to execute your charges, and alwaies be of good courage, for you need to feare nothing, if I stand by you, and I commaund you to let them vnderstand what I haue said. Not long after, the K. determined to go to
Roane, where the Inhabitants receiued him with great ioy, shewing so many signes of their great desires to liue in his obedience, that their fidelitie and loue, mittigated the griefe of the reuolt and murenie of others:The king goeth to Roane and not long before, the Town of Lyons had expresly sent vnto the king, to desire his Maiestie to come thither, and to acknowledge that their long and continuall fidelitie, should appeare so much the firmer, as by how much the more it was continually sought to be detected.
When the Duke of Guise perceiued that
Parris in great haste returned vnder the kings obedience, from the which it had so suddainely reuolted, that the shame to bee without him, made the boldest of them holde downe their heads, that the violence of rebellion beganne to lessen, by meanes of naturall reason, that the sonne of the kings authoritie beganne to waxe hotte, and that there was not any desperate leaguer, but acknowledged that the absence of the Court would bee a hinderance to his purse, his shop, and his affaires: hee determined to winne the kings fauour,The Nobles of the league findes the day of the Barricadoes very greeuous. thereby not to loose the ayde of those that found the action within Parris to bee ouer hardie. All his seruants (himself beginning) returned to the wearing of their old cloaks of the K. authoritie, which by their Barricadoes they had wholly troden vnder foote: the third word that issued out of their fained and dissembling mouthes, was, the seruice of the king, the obedience of his Maiestie, the preseruation of the The Nobles of the league finds the day of the Barricadoes very greeuous.estate, there formations of disorders, and the reliefe of the people, beleeuing that this second enterprise would succeede with as much contentment and impunitie as the first, and in steed of maintaining himself in the degree whervnto by so many paines, daungers, and troubles hee had as then attained, he descended of a suddaine, and went to finde the Queen-mother, and with her to make some euill shapen coate, the king reapeth more profit by his enemies then hee looked for. Plutarche saith, there was one, that giuing a thrust with his sword into his enemies bodie, by chance pearced an impostume therein, which without doubt had killed him shortly after, if that new Surgeon had not broke^ it. And so if the great mutinie of Parris had not suppressed the great aboundance of colde and heauie humours, that long rest and pleasure hadde bredde, and constrained the king to rise and bestirre himselfe, hee had returned to his solitarie life, and so most certanly had lost his Crowne, before he could perceiue it. The boldnesse of this enterprise filled his courage, and from that time forward, hee determined either to liue like a victorious king,The profit which he hath of his enemies. ordie vanquished. But hee perceiued himselfe to bee reduced into two extremities, both very daungerous, in the middle whereof, there stood a deep and profound pit, the anker of his safetie is peace, he could not make it both with the league and Huguenots togither: if hee turned to the one side, hee was assayled by the other: if hee stayed in the middle, hee was charged by them both, that of force he was constrained to take part with the one,The king resolueth to be reuenged of the Duke of Guise. because hee had been so imprudent to suffer them both: and that of a King hee must become the Generall of a faction. And in this manner, beeing driuen heere and there, by the incertitude of his conceptions, feeble, vnresolued, and inuironed with so many distrusts, by the apprehension of the mischiefe, he suffered his minde to bee ledde away from the boundes of his nature: And beganne to be very chollericke against the Huguenots, to haue the League on his side, so to ayde himself with their forces against them. But those in whom hee ought to put most credit, that lamented the diminishing of his authoritie, and the weakning of his forces, and that perceiued him bent to procure his owne destruction, counselled him to make peace with the king of
Nauarre,Councels of peace. An edict of peace,
1576. and not to breake the edict of pacification, which he had (worne, not in the field by force or imbecilitie of infancie (as king Charles his bother did) but after so many victories, in the flower of his years, in the strenth of his wit, and in presence of all the Realme of
France, putting his faith into the handes of God, who is a iust reuenger of such as breake it, although it be giue^ vnto their enemies. They propounded the same reasons wherewith in the yeare 1577. they defended the libertie of consciences, inforcing them with diuers examples and most certain arguments. Others, that for ye most part are creatures of ye league, co^demned ye counsell, at euery word they spake, crying: Set vpo^ the Huguenot: religio^, the church, and the truth, wil alwaies remain:The league will haue warre. they braued in their discourses, they perswaded the K. to continue wars, and to acknowledge that God had sent him those Machabes of Lorraine, to resist Infidels: those Herculeses, against monsters: that race of Monfort, against the relicques of Albigios. Sir, (said they) you shall loose the name of most christian king, if you yeeld vnto these heresies, that draw the sap out of religion. You shall be the only king among 60. of your predecessors, that hath so faintly permitted and suffred so pernicious and detestable a mixstur of truth and lies: and it wil be said, that vnder your raigne, Temples were without Altars: Altars without sacrifices: Churches without Ministers, and God without seruice.

The gainsaying of those of the league. Godlinesse desireth not warres.The others knowing well, that those faire and goodly couertures, hide and keepe close most infamours rebellions: and to put both fire and sword into the deepe woundes of the League, said: That as then it was no more requisite to decide religion by armes: pietie is not ioyned to weapous, men speake not of God but in blasphemie and cursing, they worshipped him not but in vanities, entered not into Churches but to prophane them, laye hand assoone vpon the Priest and religious persons, as vppon the Minister or Deacon, and the fury and blindnesse of the souldier, doth not distinguish that in his eye, which in heart hee well discerneth. And to bee short, warre vndermineth religion, as woormes consume trees, rust eateth Iron, and a feuer weakeneth mans body, it ingendreth Atheists, Libertines, and Epicurians, it maketh Cittizens of one Towne, such as drinke of one fountaine, and that liue vnder one ayre, to become so wilde and vncourteous each to other, that of men they become wolues and Tigers, such as desired that the leaguers sword should driue away the Huguenots, as the Englishmen were driuen out of
France:Zozomen lib. 3. Hist. tripart. chap.
11. say to the contrarie, that there is no warre more iust, holy, nor necessary, then that which is vndertaken onely to procure the seruice of God by one religion, saying: that Constantine with weapon in hand ouerthrew the Paganisme of his Empire, extirped the assemblies of hereticques, Nouaciens, Valentiens, Marchionists, and Paulianists, not leauing them any means whereby they might offend the libertie of the religion that hee held.
Theodozius the elder, made warre against the
Arrians: Theodozius his son, against the Nestorians, Marcians, and Manicheens. And that our kings had not attained the name of christrian Princes, but by most vertuously sacrifising their liues for the defence of religion. You take not the Historie (said the defendants) as it is to be vnderstood:Warre was not made against heretiques, til after they were condemned of heresie. you read not, that wars were made against the Arrians, Nouatians, Manicheens, and other hereticques, vntill the Councels of Nice, Ephese, and Calcedonia, had confuted their errors, and condemned their opinions. Wee haue not to doo with such people, they are called members of one church like vs: they confesse one redemption with vs, hoping for their saluation therein, as we do: there is neither Infidelitie, nor Idolatrie in their maner of seruing God: they blaspheme his name lesse then we do: punishing such as offend his lawes, more then we: and there is nothing in their doctrine, that shaketh the foundations of our faith. You call them heretiques, it is long since they affirme this word not to be agreeable to their doctrine: ther is no sentence nor iudgeme^t pronou^ced against the^: such as er, are not therfore to be accounted heriticques: heresie is the folly of an opinious minde, so that false opinion and obstinacie, are the two poynts that make an hereticque: the one depe^deth of the vndersta^ding carried away with errors and falsehoods: the other of the obstinate minde, perseuering in those errors. If the Huguenots knew they erred, or if they were wilfull in their ignorance, why would they haue suffered themselues to bee slaine and massacred in that hotte caniculer month of August, in the yeare 1572. If they were obstinate, would they so often aske Councels, eyther generall, or nationall, to instruct them? as for vs that haue this blessing of God, to be christians, instructed in the Catholicque Church, which wee beleeue to be Romaine, we know that Huguenots haue more need of pietie, the^ paine: of doctrine, then destruction: and of Catechising, then imprisonment.

Wee take compassion vppon such as wee perceiue to bee out of their wits, and that runne headlong into mischiefe: and why should not wee haue the like feeling towards those that are mortally wounded with those errors, that in a whole and liuely bodie, beare a weake and paste soule, lanquishing and spoyled by the poison that hath so long consumed it. The Catholicque calleth the Huguenot an hereticque, because hee beleeueth not ynough: the Huguenot calleth the Catholicque hereticque, because he beleeueth too much. The Hoguenot beleeueth not euill, in that wherein hee agreeth with vs, but he beleeueth not ynough, and wanteth in that which he beleeueth not: hee hath nothing but it commeth from vs, but there is a fault committed in the alteration, and not in the essence: and I say following our instructors, that heresie is rather a want of good, then possession of euill.
The difference in religion, should mildly be agreed vpon.Hee is not euill instructed in the principals of faith, but hee is not sufficiently informed touching the Ceremonies: he beleeueth constantly in the onely word of God, contained in the booke called cannonicall: the Catholicque taketh the interpretations of the word of God made by the Church, for an infallible rule of his saluation, and not like the Huguenot, by the particular sence, but by the vniuersall consent of the Church assembled togither, vnder a legitimate head, which is the Pope: accord these two tunes, and make them beleeue in the traditions that since the time of the Apostles haue beene brought into the Church, our Ceremonies in the administration of our Sacrament, and in the election of Ministers, and they are pleased, and wee shall haue no more neede of warres. If they say they will haue no other Iudges to determine their differences but the holy Scriptures, which of it selfe is easie ynough without interpretations or Commentaries, and that if it bee darke in one place, it is opened in another, tell them, that it is not so easie, plaine, nor open, but that diuers men do stumble in the vnderstanding thereof: that it is not so cleare, as that without interpretation it can discide all the controuersies of our faith: that as God in the old lawes would haue a
Moyses to iudge the law, so he wold haue Ministers his successors, yt they shal determine difficulties of the doctrine of the Gospell. Make them to agree with vs therein, your difference will soone be ended: and you shall bannish wars and schismes in France. To those reasons the league opposed theirs, and said: Your arguments are of no consequent: you say, that the Huguenot is not to bee pursued by armes, because hee is not declared hereticque by cannonicall proceedings: that hee is no hereticque because hee is not stubborne: that hee is not stubborne, because hee desireth instruction: turne ouer the lease, and you shall finde that the Huguenot ought to bee pursued by armes, in that he hath beene condemned for an heretique by all the Councells, specially of that of Trent: that all nouelties are odious to the Church: that he is an heretique, for that knowing, and as it wer with his finger touching his error, he sta^deth stubbornly in defence. Obstinacy and sence reprooued, is the punishme^t of his infidelitie: it is then to no end that he should aske instruction, when there is no hope of amendment: it is a tree without fruite, and good for nothing but to bee cast into the fire. To this poynt, those that loued peace,The warres for religion, cons^steth of a great number of Catholiques. how deare soeuer it were, cried out and said: Will you then haue a new recourse to fiers, punishments, and remedies, which wee haue alreadie tried to bee more proper to kindle and spread abroad, then to quench and stop the euill?
Do you not as yet perceiue, that God detesteth the terrible persecutions vsed against them in all the Courts of
Parris, that the Princes, Gouernours of Townes, Magistrates, and officers of iustice, haue with their owne bloods payed vserie for the vnmeasurable shedding of Christians blood, that since the Magistrate left punishing, and that the Prince hath pursued them by armes, there hath died at the least a thousand Catholicques, to kill a hundreth Huguenots.
The king is become a Captaine at his owne costs in the battels of Iarnac and Moncontour, hee hath continued for the space of tenne or twelue yeares togither, to make warres against them, and in the ende, after hee had vsed all meanes, and attempted all extremities, hee perceiued it was in vaine for him to kil, to make men beleeue, that the Gospel is not planted with other tooles, then the word and peaceablenesse, that it increaseth by suffering, and not by persecution.
Iesus Christ planted his Church by miracles. Mahomet by force and violence. Religion is not the cause but the pretext of the warre.The Talmud with her toyes, and the
Alcaron with her impostures, detest the Christians furie, that kill each other: the first saith, that Iesus Christ increased the Church by vertue of miracles: and Machomet, by force of armes. Wee know well, and if wee confesse it not, wee are traitors to our countrie, and of all others, the most incencible: that religion is not to be preached by drumb and fyfe: and that of a hundreth that beare armes, there is not tenne but haue an other intent then onely religion. We know that this warre is a meere war against the estate, that nothing was said touching the king of
Nauarres conscience, vntill it was euidently seene, that by the death of Monsieur the kings brother, hee was the next in succession to the Crowne: and that it is most certaine, that the League buildeth the assurance of things present, by those that are to come: that vpon the imaginatiue feare and of the succession of a Prince of an other religion, (the king beeing in the flower and strength of his age) they dispute of the right possession, and establish their vsurpation. The Monarchie passeth to an other branch of the blood royall,The Cardinall of Bourbon. because the king hath no children, and because we should haue some, they present vs an olde Prince, an olde tree without fruit, a hollow oake, which serueth but for a support to the iuyce of the League, and to the hopes of the Duke of
Guise, that climeth vnto the royaltie by his meanes. Duke of
Guise, who vnder colour to powre water vppon those flames, to place order in disorder, and reformation inabuse, suffereth men to burne in flame, and ouerthrow all things. Wherefore from hencefoorth, the king must looke vnto that which as yet resteth whole and intire within his Realme: that hee should make peace with the Huguenots: that he should help himself with their forces which are Frenchmen, against those Hispaniolized mindes, that will eyther vsurpe the Soueraigntie of this estate, or else conuert it into cantons like the Switzers. To giue peace to the Huguenots, to ayde himselfe with their forces, to ouerthrow the Catholiques, to stirre vp the Pope, the king of Spaine, and all
Italy, and in a word, to constraine France to reuolt. The king ought not to doo it, and it is too much perill for himselfe,Obiections against the League. too much miserie for his people, and too much iniurie to the Church, whereof hee is the eldest sonne: hee should call wolues to helpe, which in the end would deuoure the sheepe: hee should serue himselfe with foxes, that in fine, would kil thee geese: the king should bee Lent, and the king of Nauarre the enterance into Lent: or as we say, Caresme prenant: and then Huguenots would be ledde in triumphs through the Realme. If the king should do it, it would bee openly said, that hee supporteth and aduanceth hereticques, that seeking to do for himselfe, hee doth for them: hee will put Catholicques in dispaire, and his crowne in hazard.
Venceslaus King of Bohemia and Emperour, was exposed only because he suffered the Hussites to haue the free exercise of their religion.Defence for the Edicts of peace. The league was deuised only to breake the Edict of pacification: which don, it left armes: when it saw it should haue bin subdued, it rose vp againe, and made that commotion in Parris. The Kings Edicts of pacification concerning the libertie of conscience, are not made but with prouiso, this age is so full of all corruptions, that whosoeuer seeketh to purge them, the healing would be more daungerous by the remedies that should be ministred,Medici plus interdu quiete, quam moriendo atque agendo prosiciunt. Tit. Liu. then the paines and langures of the disease it selfe. God will raise some great Monarch, that will vse remedies altogither different from those, which passion, vengeance, and chollor, putteth into our hands. We must let this fistula remaine for a time within the bodie, if you stop it, the vicious humors that abound therein, will sufferate and choake it vp. The disease must haue her course, and in the end it will cease: this heresie will vannish away as all the rest haue done, whereof by the grace of God, there resteth nothing but the memorie: the question is, to thinke vppon those that seeke to sucke the sap of this estate, and vnder the ruines therof, to ouerthrow the pietie and the Monarchie.The leagues answere. In the affaires of the K. and of religion, all delay is daungerous. To feare the mischiefes and chances that may fall out on both sides, or to stand with armes crossed, attending till God lendeth ayde from heauen, is temerite, foolishnesse, and crime.In rebus fide periculosa cunctatio. Catholicque religion is sicke, it is in great extremitie, and the Phisitian stayeth to consult of her disease, and to apply the remedies, while she is readie to die: it is great foolishnesse not to cut off inconueniences at the beginning, but much more folly to neglect the mischief, vnder pretence of hauing taken too deep roote: it is better late then neuer: it is a kinde of desperation not to know the disease, and a franzie, knowing it, not to seeke a remedie.
You haue been so oftentimes tolde, that two religions cannot be suffered in one Realme, that this diuersitie causeth quarrels in particulars, and then seditions, mutinies, and ciuill warres, which neuer end but with the subuersion of the estate. This diuersitie neuer suffereth the estate to liue in peace, and alwaies furnisheth sufficient courage, to the most busie and troublesome, vnder that large pretence to mooue their ambitions.
Religio and timor dei solus est, qui custodit hominum inter se socie, tatem,
Lactant.Alcibiade serued his turne there within
Grecia, Sertorius in Rome, Ennus in Siria, and
Selurus in Italie. The tranquillitie of the Common-wealth, consisteth in the vnion and accord of the Cittizens, take away this concord, and it is but a piracie, and a retraict of robbers and theeues: the strongest band that vniteth mens minds, is religion: it is an adament that draweth a ring, and that ring draweth an other, vntill at last your chaine is fully accomplished: it is the wood that entertaineth the fier of our amities: it is the ciment that ioyneth the peeces of the building of our estate: it is the heart of the Common-wealth: take the brandes out of the fire, and it will bee quenched: the morter and stones from a house, and it will fall: vnloose the boordes of a ship, and it will sinke into the water: take the heart out of this bodie, and it dieth. And God who is trueth it selfe, saith: that kingdomes diuided, shall be desolate, dispearsed and ouerthrowne. This ciuill life will sooner leaue the most necessarie elements, fire and ayre: and liue rather without life, then voyde of religion.Thr first fou^dation of the estate and ciuil societis, hath bene religion inuiolably obserued.
We finde people that neuer had kings, and can well liue without them: there are some that haue liued without lawes, without warres, and without learning, but there is not any people that can maintaine or continue their estate, without a certaine rule of the seruice of the God whom they adore: the first foundations of Townes were placad vppon this rocke of religion, and the Pagans with it had not had one foote of land therein to establish their lawes, if religion had not first beene harboured among them. In vaine Deucalion had planted his ordinances among the
Grecians, Licurgus among the Lacedemonians, Yon and
Solon among the Athenians, and Romulus and
Numa, among the Romanes, if they had not made the people beleeue, that they came from heauen, and that the Gods had written them: and
Moyses had neuer retained the people in their duties, among so many trauerses and changes, if he had not spoken of Ego Dominus: and therefore Princes that desire to liue in peace, and cause their estates to flourish, neuer feared any thing so much, as that their people should leaue their opinion once conceiued of the seruice of God. He that remooueth this stone, shaketh all the building.
An answere to the reasons of the league.This is good before the people haue entered into a doubt of the religion which they followed, but after they haue taken more liking in the new then in the olde, what will you do? There are certaine things that neuer go without shame and disorder, that is naturally in them: there are others, which neuerthelesse are tollerable and reputed for iust, because of the miserable vtiliue they breed to the Commo^wealth, adulteries, periuries, thefts, and oppressions, are things that are alwaies euill. These euils causeth common bordels to be permitted within Townes, to obey tyrants, to contribute to the enemie, to receiue such lawe as pleaseth them, to suffer iniuries, and consent to robbings and ransomings, and yet either not to falcifie our oathes and promises, vnder the which those things are permitted, or to shun and auoyde greater dangers and inconueniences, men allowe, commend, and authorise them. It is well knowne why the Curtizans vnder the Popes nose, are so great profit to the Cittie of Rome, sinne or the nature and fragilitie of our sences, doth push vs forward, and that it is not so execrable as their brutish horror that filled the hospitall of Saint Iaques with incurable people, at such time as the Pope Pius Quintus sought to put downe the bordell in Rome.
To shun the renuing of massacres, whererin pesle-mesle, the fury killeth and destroyeth both Priest and Minister, and to restore quietnesse to France, which after two or three droppes of colde sweate, which shee is readie to yeeld with her last effects for a peace for a Common-wealth: a Prince may permit the diuersitie of religio^, which without these considerations, would not bee tollerable.
Iustin draue the Arians out of
Constantinople, and all the East parts, but Theodoric king of Italie, sent Ambassadors vnto him, to shewe him, that if he restored them not vnto their libertie, hee would destroy and ouerthrow all the Catholicque Churches in Italie. The feare of this mischiefe caused him to tollerate an euill, otherwise vntollerable and pernicious: necessitie to haue peace, is the most straight band of humane commodities, thereby to shunne warres, that maketh fathers without childen: children Orphans; women widdowes, Churches without exercise of religion or godlinesse, and the world without God, without lawe, or without faith: to bannish warres, that change a most christian Realm into a Commo^wealth of Atheists: Fre^chmen that are peaceable and tractable, into Scithians and Canibals, liuing only by blood: this bloodie ciuill warre, that maketh the earth a hell, and men the diuelles: it is most iust and reasonable to appease the differences of religion by peace, seeing warre cannot effect it. That ancient world of the church, which in respect of ours beeing of Iron and brasse, might iustly be called golden, permitteth this libertie. Peace accorded such false concords, and made good musicke: diuers Princes and Estates which at this day flourish in great honour, suffer euery man to liue according to his conscience and manner of religion, without any alteration of their estates by such discipline.
Detestation of massacres.They consider that the schisme is begunne, that the greatest part of
Europe is diuided, that diuers good Towns in France, make profession of this religion, there is no more remedie, that wee must leaue this conuersion to the prouidence of God.
They content themselues, that their subiects obey them, and that they vse their religion according to their mindes: they doo not therefore make a barbarous galemawfre of the members of their subiects, they massacre them not, they kill them not, and beleeue that whatsoeuer wee haue done heretofore, is not lesse horrible to the minde, then cruell to the will: the League replyeth and said.
Trouble not your selfe so much with tying these examples togither, they serue for nothing, there is no proportion of one Realme with the other in this poynt: that which is good for the Frenchmen, is not good for others. We must not so much stand vpon the consideration of things that are alreadie done, as of those wee should doo. France neuer had two religions, shee could neuer indure them: Arians could not dwell therein: the Alligers were not tollerated with them: and the
Lutherians and Caluinists would not long continue among them, if the League bee in force. Let your Grace remember what a
Chrisostome of France said vnto you at the last Parliament holden in Blois, and now giue the like authoritie to his arguments that they then had, when they made you take armes, to purge the heart of Europe of the poyson of heresie.
France (said hee) hath beene such, that after it had publicquely receiued the Christian faith vnder Clouis, it hath alwaies maintained it in one course immutable and iuuiolable:
France neuer indured the peruerse opinions of faith within her brest: France while all Christendome was moued by the pernicious diuisions of so diuers opinions, and with so many and different sorts of heresies, that vntill this time haue raigned, hath alwaies continued constant and vpright, not once bending it selfe to any false doctrine:
France hath been the succor and defence of christian faith, and the terror of the enemies thereof. And to conclude, France hath beene like a rocke, or vnexprignable sort of christianitie. And how much should it now bee fallen from his auncient honour, how much reputation should it loose? how much should it want of her first fidelitie towards God, if changing her firmitie and constancie touching faith, it should liue long in such diuision, and indure before her eyes, (in times past) so iealous of the vnion of christian beleese and libertie, but rather an intollerable libertie, to liue vnder diuers religions.
Your Maiestie looking into the memorie of things past, may sufficiently perceiue, that as long as France hath been vnited vnder one christian religion, shee hath made her glorie and renowne spred through all countries: shee hath caused her valor in armes to be prooued and felt in all places of the world: shee hath alwaies beene victorious ouer all the enemies of Catholicque religion, and hath done so many honourable actions, and achieued so great and happy conquests against Insidels, that it wanne such glorie among the Asians, Africans, Indians, Persians, Tartarians, Moores, Sarrazins, and others, that all the christians in Europe, are by them called Frenchmen: for that because those strange nations haue onely felt the armes of Frenchmen, they haue also comprehended all the Latine churches, vnder the name of
France and Frenchmen. But since France hath been diuided and rent with two religions, let vs see how much it hath loft of her auncient renowne: shee that commaunded a great part of Europe, that conquered countries farre distant from her: that at her onely name, made diuers warrelike nations to tremble, is found since this vnhappy and vnfortunate diuision, to bee reduced into such extremitie, that in the middle of her brest, she hath receiued forraine powers: shee hath in a manner receiued the lawe of her neighbours, and of her enemies, and that cruell, turning her sword against her owne intrailes: and although shee was inuincible in respect of all other nations, she is now her self so imbased, vanquished, and ouerthrowne: which is the fruit that this venemous plant of new opinion hath induced, which seemeth to be at the poynt readie to giue more daungerous thrusts, if according to the expectation which your obedient people haue conceiued of your wisdome and pietie, it pleaseth not your Maiestie speedily to take order therein.
Remember that your Grace beareth the Scepter of the great king
Clouis, that first ruled this Monarchie vnder the publike profession of this religion, which at this present is put in question within this Realme. Remember that you are successor to that great
Childeberg, that being able to indure such persons about him, that had any wrong opinion of christian religion, made wars vppon the
Visigots, that were infected with the heresie of the
Arrians, and in the end, constrained them to ioyne and vnite themselues to the holy and Catholicque Church. Remember that you beare vpon your head, the crowne of that Charles, who for the greatnesse and valor of his actions, deserued the name of great, and by the vertue of his armes aduanced christian religion, and defended the authoritie of the Apostolicque sea, against such as persecuted the same. Remember that you hold the place of that most woorthieking Philip Auguste, who with so much zeale and affection, imployed his armes against
Albigeois hereticques, that had sequestred themselues from the Catholicque vnion. Remember that you sit in the seate of that renowmed Prince Saint Lewis, that spared not his treasures, his forces, nor his own person, for his desence and aduancement of the faith of Christ, and by his christian actions, deserued the crowne and surname of Saint, and without prolonging time, to rehearse them all. Remember that you are Nephew to that great king Francis, the light of the pietie of
France, son of that victorious Henry, whose memorie shall liue for for euer: and brother to those two Catholicque Princes,
Francis the second, and Charles the ninth, whom God hath taken to his mercie. (But But yet againe, that which toucheth you nearest, remember that you are that renowmed Henry, that being but Duke of Aniou, and brother to the king, did so valiant an act in the defence of the Church: wonne so many great battels, and so many times daunted the enemies of the Catholicque faith, that you haue filled al Christendome with the wonders of your victorious name. And we think (if that like your Grace) that your M. hath not so soone forggotten, that great and solemne oath, that you made at your coronation, not onely to maintaine christian and Catholicque religion, but to aduance it as much as possible you might, without tollerating any other. And if euer any oath lid binde a Prince to maintain and keep his faith, this hath so straightly bound you, to the defence of this religion, that you cannot permit any other, without breach of conscience: and paraduenture make a doubt of the right you haue vnto the Crowne. For you know well, that you haue agreed and contracted with Iesus Christ, that you accepted the Scepter vppon this condition, to be defendor of his Catholicque religion, and in that solemne oath as a gage and earnest-penny, you receiued his holy bodie, and dranke his precious blood. And now fayling in this religious oath, thinke you he hath not good cause to be offended against you? knowe you not, that all the euils wee haue suffered, proceeded onely from his iust wrath? and see you not, that hauing giuen you this Scepter vppon such conditions, hee threatneth to take it from you, if you keepe not the holy promise you made so solemnely vnto him? And euen as God summoneth you to the obseruation of the faith that you haue giuen him, your subiects by the same meanes, solicite and inuite you to obserue the conditions wherevppon you were made king, and which you cannot infringe, (breaking your oath) but if you must also loose the title of most christian King: and wee doubt not, that setting these things before your eyes, that reuiuing the memorie of your predecessors, and continuing the first prudence and vertue, but you shall haue that great good fortune in your time, to see your people reduced to the sheepfold of the holy and Catholicque Church, whereof you are as a father and protector.
By this meanes, those great Kings of Ierusalem, Dauid, Salomon, Abis, losaphat, Ezechias, and Iosias, obtained the blessings of God, and a happy successe in all their affaires: hauing with so great care and dilligence, restored the puritie of religion, and reeftablished diuine seruice that was neglected. And wee also hope, that following their steppes, you will reduce all France to the Catholicque religion: and for the recompence of your holy intent, you shall haue that blessing of God in your time, to behold your Realm as flourishing as euer it was. And as it shall bee most acceptable vnto God, so will it be most honourable to you and to your Crowne: and you shall sufficiently perceiue, that at this day there is no King, Prince, Potentate, or Common-wealth, I except certaine Barbarians and the Turke, (whose detestable manners and customes ought to bee so odious, that the onely name should bee a horrour vnto vs) that suffereth their subiects to liue in any other religion, then that which the Magistrate by the disvnion of the Church, holdeth for onely good and holy. And surely such are not woorthie to bee heard, that will so much restraine the power of the Prince or Magistrate, to say that hee cannot constraine his subiects to the faith, but that hee ought to suffer them to liue in libertie of conscience (as they say) for this opinion hath alwaies generally been
condemned and reprooued by all Christians, but only by the Manickiens and Donatists, that were of opinion that wee must not constraine any man for his religion, but suffer euery man to liue in libertie, and after his owne santasie: and those which at this day, in a manner by force, pull from you this libertie of their religion, permit it not to others. For in the places of Christendome, where God permitteth that they should bee Maisters, and hauing the authoritie in their hands, they are so farre from permitting Catholicques, freely to liue in the libertie of their consciences, that to the contrary, the diuers sects that are among them (for that alreadie they are banded and diuided among themselues, an euident signe of their ruine at hand) cannot indure each other. And there where the Caluenist is Maister, the
Lutheriau dareth not liue freely: yea, and when they change Magistrates of diuers opinions, religion changeth according to his pleasure: as we haue seene sufficient of such changes in England, and in many places in Germanie. And what? should not this bee a shame and too great a slaunder to a good christian and faithfull Catholicque, to bee found lesse affected in his religion, that is approued by so long and continuall succession, then these new christians in their opinions, that are as it were but one night olde? It is then a generall and certaine maxime, and approoued by the Church, and by all Common-wealths, that the Magistrate ought and may continue his people vnder one faith, as it is sufficiently seene by so many godly lawes and constitutions of Christian and Catholicque Empires: and by the kings your predecessors: whose examples ought to bee holy and inuiolate, vnto your Maiestie. Such were the reasons of the League, by the vehemencie whereof, the king disposed himselfe to warre, reseruing alwaies a continuall thought, to rid himselfe thereof. But the Queene, that sawe so many accidents to hang like leade ouer his head, that thought the great and proude Spanish armie would land in Brittaine, and that all the territories of
Italie would fall vppon him, to defend the Catholicqueleague, did so much, that the king dissembled the wound in his heart, and said: that hee had no more remembrance of the hard dealings that had past: that he had no other intent but that of the League, which was to extirpe heresie.
Vppon this assurance, the Duke of Guise caused his merchandises to bee liked, and to bee more esteemed then they were woorth, or then hee hoped. Wherevppon hee entered into a treatie with the Queen-mother, and with her resolued vppon certaine articles, vppon the fifteenth of Iuly, which the king approoued, receiued, and signed, within three daies after, which were as followeth.


THe Articles agreed vppon and signed at Nemours, the seuenteenth of Iuly, 1585: the kings edicts made touching them, and the declarations his Maiestie hath since made vppon the edict, shall inuiolably be kept and obserued according to their forme and tenour.
And to cease, and for euer to take away the distrusts, partiallities, and deuisions, betweene the Catholicques and the Realme, there shall bee a perpetuall and vnreuocable Edict made, whereby the king shall ordaine an intire and generall revnion of the same with his Maiestie, where hee shall bee and remaine the head, for the defence and conseruation of the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romaine religion, by his said Maiesties authoritie.
To the which end, by the said Edict it shall bee promised and sworne, as well by his said Maiestie, as by his said vnited subiects, to imploy their treasures and persons: yea, and their proper liues, wholly to extirpe the heresies of this Realme, and of the countries vnder the obedience of his said Maiestie.
Not to receiue nor shew obedience after his Maiesties descease without children, to any Prince whatsoeuer, that is an hereticque or fauourer of heresies, what right or pretence soeuer hee may haue.
To defend and conserue the person of his Maiestie, his estate, crown, and authoritie, and of the children which it shal please God to send him, with and against all men, none excepted.
To protect, defend, and conserue, all those that shall enter into the said vnion, and namely the Princes, Lords, and other Catholicques, heeretofore associated from all violence and oppression, which the hereticques with their fateurs and adherents would vse against them.
To leaue all other vnions, practises, and intelligences, leagues, and associations, as well within as without the Realme, contrary and preindiciall to this present vnion, and to the person and authoritie of his Maiestie, his estate and crowne, and the children that it shall please God to send him.
His Maiestie shall promise and sweare the obseruations of the said Edict, and cause it to bee sworne and obserued by the Princes, Cardinals, Prelates, and others of the Cleargie, Peeres of France, Officers of the Crowne, Knights of the holy Ghost, Councellours of his Maiestie, Gouernours, Lieftenants, Generall of Prouinces, Presidents, Councellours of Soueraigne Courts, Bailiffes, Stewards, and other his Officers, Maiors, Sheriffes, and bodies and communalties of Towns, of whom oathes, acts, and verball processes, shall be taken, made, and registred by the Clarkes of the said Courts, Baliages, and bodies of Townes, that when need requireth, they may bee seene.
And to execute the said Edict, and proceede to the extirpation of the said heresies, his Maiestie with all conuenient speed, shall raise two great and strong armies, to send against the said hereticques, one into Poitou and Xainctonge, that shall be ledde and commaunded by whom soeuer it shall please his said Maiestie: the other into Dauphine, which hee shall commit to the charge of Monsieur de Maine.
The Councell of Trent shall bee published with all speed, without preiudice neuerthelesse, to rights and authoritie of the king, and the liberties of the French Churches, which within three moneths shall bee more amply specified and layde open, by certaine Prelates and Officers of his Court of Parliament, and others whom his Maiestie shall appoynt therevnto. It shall bee agreed (for the suretie of these present articles) that the keeping of the Townes graunted by the Edict of Nemours, vnto the said League, shall yet continue for the space of foure yeares longer, and more then the two yeares that rest to bee expired of the time agreed vppon before, and likewise of the Towne of
Dourlans.
The said Lords, Princes, and others, that shall haue the custodie of the said Townes, shall promise vppon their faiths, honours, and losse of all their goods altogither, and euery one in particular, to deliuer into the hands of his said Maiestie, or to whom hee shall appoynt, within sixe yeares, without delay or excuse, staying ordifficultie whatsoeuer, for what cause or pretence soeuer it may bee, the said townes and places that are giuen in keeping for the suretie aforesaid.
Further his said Maiestie (for the saide securitie of these present articles, and the said time of sixe yeares) that if the Captaines and Gouernours of the Townes of Orleans, Bourges, and
Monstreuil, die during the said time, his Maiestie during the said time of sixe yeares, shall commit the gouernment of the said townes, to those that the said Princes shall appoynt.
But the said time beeing expired, the said townes shall no more remaine ingaged for the said securitie, but shall bee left off and maintained in the same sort and manner as they were before.
The Towne and Citadell of Valence, shall bee deliuered into the hands of the Sieurs de Gessans, therein to commaund for the seruice of his Maiestie, as it did before.
The Sieur de Belloy shall also berestored to his charge and Captains place of Crottoy, to enioy it as hee did at other times.
His Maiestie shall cause le Bernet to issue out of Bullen, and giue the charge to a Gentlemen of
Picardie, such as hee thinketh good: which being done, the said Princes will cause their forces to withdrawe themselues from about the Towne, and wholly dispearse their souldiers that are there: and as touching the Townes that are declared, and shall declare themselues before this present conclusion, to bee vnited with the said Princes, they shall continue in the protection and sauegard of the king, as other townes, and left in that estate wherein they are, without any innouation nor putting of Garrisons or surcharges, in considerations of things forepassed.
The Captaines and Gouernours of the places that haue beene dispossessed of their places since the twelfth of May, shall bee reftored to the same on all parts, and the Townes shall bee discharged of men of warre, that haue bin placed in Garrison therein since the said day.
Processe shall bee made and executed touching the sale of hereticques goods, and of those that beare armes with them against his Maiestie, by the best, readiest, and certaine meanes that may bee deuised: to the ende, that his Maiesties meaning and intent, may in that poynt bee executed, according to the edicts and declarations aforesaid: and that hee may bee better ayded with the monies that shall proceede thereof, to make war against the hereticques, then it hath beene heeretofore.

The Regiment of footemen of Saint Paul, and of
Sacremore late deceased beeing in armes, shall be payde like others that shall serue, and when they are in Garrison within the Prouinces, assignation shall be giuen to the Treasurer of the warres, from the beginning of the yeare, to paye them for foure months at the least, which may not bee denied.
The Garrisons of Thoul, Verdun, and
Marsal, when they are imployed for the kings seruice, shall bee vsed as well for musters, as for leadings, in the same sort, and like to those of Metz.
When the king shall imploy his companies of horsemen, hee shall imploy those whom the said Princes haue required, to bee vsed and payde as others are.
Those who at this present execute the charges of Prouost of Merchants and Sheriffes of the Towne of Parris, shall presently remit their said charges into the hands of the king: who hauing regard to the declaration made vnto him, touching the necessitie the said Town hath of their continuance in the seruice of the same, shall ordaine, that they shall bee reestablished and placed therein, not onely till our Lady day in Haruest next ensuing, but for the space of two yeares after.
And as touching Brigard, that hath been chosen to the office of the kings Atturney, they shall likewise put it into the kings hands, who shal ordain, that hee shall vse it till the middle of August next, beeing in Anno. 1590. Meane time, Perrot shall receiue the ordinary stipend giuen by the Towne, and the pensions it hath pleased the king to graunt vnto the said office. And then there shall bee payde vnto him, by him that shall bee chosen to execute the said office, after the saide middle of August, 1590. the sum of 4000. crowns: if it bee the kings pleasure to continue the said office and pension, vnto the said new elected officer, and if his Maiestie will continuie the saide pensions, the said Perrot shall haue but three thousand crownes.
The Castle of the Bastille shall bee remissed in to his Maiesties hands, to dispose thereof as pleaseth him.
His Maiestie shall make election of some man whom it shall please him, within the said Towne, to haue the office of knight of the watch.
The Magistrates, Councellours, Captaines, and other officers of the bodies of townes, that haue charges in the Townes within this Realme, that haue followed the part of the said Princes, shall likewise put them into the kings hands, which shall presently bee restored to them againe, for the good and tranquillitie of the same.
All prisoners that haue been taken since the twelfth of May, by reason of the present troubles, shall be set at libertie on both sides, without paying ransome.
The artillery taken in the Arcenac, shall be restored into the same place againe, and remaine as it was: if after the conclusion of this present agreement any man of what estate or condition soeuer hee bee, do enterprise any thing against the Townes and places of his said Maiestie, they shall bee holden for infringers of the peace, and for such taken and punished, without fauour or assistance by the saide Princes, or any other vnder any pretence whatsoeuer.
Likewise, if any of the townes or places, that are giuen for securitie, shall bee taken by any man, those that shall haue taken them, shall be punished as aforesaid: and the said townes being recouered againe, shall be redeliuered into the said Princes hands, for the time graunted vnto them.
The taking of Marrans.Vpon these articles the kings Edict was published, not so much against the king of
Nauarres religion, as against his interest, and to debarre him from all that, which none but God could take from him: who while they were agreeing vppon these articles, and that in lesse then foure daies, the declaration and execution were both proclaimed, touching him, he made himselfe Maister of the Isles of Charron and
Marrans.
The Edict was ratified in the Parliament at Parris, vppon the 21. of Iuly, the substance thereof beeing, that his Maiestie would renue the oath made at his sacrying and annoynting,The second edict in Iuly for the league. to liue and die in the Catholicque religion: to imploy his life and forces for the conseruation therof: to extirpe heresie: neuer to make peace nor truce with the hereticque, nor to fauour or aduance the succession of any Prince that is an hereticque or fauorer of them: to imbrace and receiue all those that are ioyned in league against them: not to place in any office of iustice or estate, any other then men that are of the Catolicque, Apostlicque, and Romane religion: that his subiects so vnited, should sweare to leaue all sorts of association and intelligences, as wel without as within the Realme, and to defend each other against the oppression and violence of hereticques: freely to expose both their bodies and goods,The subiects oath to their King. for the conseruation of his authoritie, and of the children which it should please God to send him: hee abolished, and as it were wholly buryed in silence, the furie and ingratitude of his subects, declaring them guiltie of treason, that should refuse to signe to that vnion, or that hauing signed, should leaue it: in respect and fauour whereof, he remitted the disorders of the league since the Barricadoes, which he declared in the end of the edict in these words:The kings declaration against the disorders of the league since the 12. of May. We declare that no inquirie or search shall be made, of any the intelligences, associations, and other things, which our said Catholicque subiects may haue done togither, as well without as within our realm, for that they haue informed vs, that whatsoeuer they haue done, was onely but by reason of the zeale that they haue borne to the conseruation and maintenance of Catholicque religion. All which things shal remain extinguished and quenched, and by these prese^ts we declare them, and all whatsoeuer is happened and past since the 12. and 13. of May last: and since that time by reason thereof, vntill the publication of these presents, in our Court of Parliament of Parris, extinguished and voyde, as well in our said Towne of Parris, as in other Townes and places of our Realme, as also all acts of hostilitie, that may haue beene committed, as taking of our treasures, in our receites generall, particulars, or elsewhere, victuals, amunition, and artilleries, bearing of armes, or mustering of men, and generally all other things done and executed during the said time, and that since the said time haue ensued by the occasion, and for the affecting of the troubles, without pursuite, inquirie, or search, directly, or indirectly, in any sort whatsoeuer, against our said subiects. All the which, we do once againe cease and delay, as things that neuer happened, without any exception: assoone as the edict was published, and the kings lightnesse therin once perceiued, those that looked into it, presently iudged, that such peace couered a dangerous war. The leaguers to the contrary, tooke that as a miraculous effect of their Barricadoes, yet they feared much the last act of the tragedie, and although the aduancement of their enterprise tra^sported their sences, yet the most couragious amo^g the^, tre^bled with feare, whe^ they reme^bred the viole^t breach of their fidelitie vnto the K.

The onely remembrance of the twelfth day of May, caused their fairest daies to become cloudie, they put in obliuion the forgetfulnesse of their duties, and esteemed not the Prince so insensible, but that in the end he would be reuenged.
Two things abashed them, the one the fatall desteny and ouerthrow of the great armie of Spaniards, consisting of one hundreth and fiftie ships, that were destroyed in a manner without fighting vppon the coast of Ireland, which should haue ledde all English slaues into the mountaines of Granado, and the mynes of Peru: the other the kings resolution not to returne to Parris,The ouerthrow of the Spaniards armie. although hee had been desired and importunately sought vnto for the same: excusing himselfe by the preparations of his armie for Poitou, and the assembling of the 3. estates. In the first, they saw that their great hopes on the West side, were well weakned: in the second, they knew that there rested some sparkes of chollor in the Kings heart touching the Barricadoes, but they armed themselues with courage and resolution against all things whatsoeuer: esteeming it not time as then, to keep the oath which they had take^,The king will not go to Parris. to leaue all forraine leagues and intelligences, and that they must not so soone pull downe the scaffold, but rather let it stay till the building were fully finished. And therevppon they held new councelles in Parris, from the which was drawne the resolutions which the author of the treatie made (touching the causes of taking armes by the league) rehearseth: which are, to preserue and hold their authoritie and credite, gotten by so many trauerses,The discourse of the troubles of France, to the yeare 1589. and to further the decreasing of the kings and of the auncient order of
France: to hold the king in such sort besieged, and to make his will so euen and vnited with theirs, that hee should not see any more but by the leaguers eyes, nor speake, nor stir, but by the tongue and sinewes of their intents.
To take order that those that should bee sent vnto the estates, should be some of the paste which they had moulded, and their instruments furnished with the instructions of their Agents, or rather extracted out of the fine flower of the Articles of Nancy and
Peronne, to moue things vnto the king, that neither time nor necessitie of affairs did once permit, as wars against the Huquenots, and the ease of their people, by vnburthening them of tallages, to the end they might make his Maiestie odious if he refused that first fruite promised to the creatures of their league, and hee could not consent to warres, and release the meanes to maintaine the same. To bee the stronger partie duting the assembly of the estates at Bloys, and to the same end, they should send into all places, for the Gentlemen of their faction, to meet them there in armes. Not to leaue their good intelligence with the duke of Parma, to confirme the treatie of
Ginuille, and to aduertise the king of Spaine, that the agreement made with the king, stretched onely to the meanes of the execution of secret purposes. To send to the Colonel Phiffer into
Suisse, and to Monsieur de Balagny in Cambray, to retaine them in the particular assemblies among them.
To hinder Monsieur de Neuers from going into
Picardie, to pacifie the mutinies of the League, not to seeke after more confident mindes then they haue. To cause the Cittizens of
Parris to become bounde, yearely to pay thirtie thousand Crownes to
Monsieur de Villars, Gouernour of Haure, thereby to hold him in confederacie with the League.
The king was well informed of those enterprises, and had made that last The King wept when he sealed the Edict in IulyEdict as much against his heart, as he did the first, for he was seene to weepe when he signed them, lamenting his misfortune, that to assure his owne person, it constrained him to hazard his estate, he knew that the Edict would not bee obserued but by himselfe, and yet his mildenesse so much impeached him, and the apprehension of a good war, so much retained him, that he would not take order therein, reiecting the aduise of those that counselled him to make peace with the Huguenots, and let them stir against the mutinie of the League. Hee said there was lesse danger to dwell with those that continue in the vnitie of his religion, then with them that had separated themselues, and become heads of new opinions, although he well knew the causes and pretences of the raising of the League.The Duke of Guise, made Lieftenant generall of the kings armies. After that, eyther in good faith, or purposely, he bestowed his liberalities and fauours vpon all the principal heads of the League. To Monsieur de Guise hee gaue the office of Lieftenant generall, ouer all the forces throughout the Realm of France: if not of the execution therof, yet he had the name and title of Constable: he gaue him a beam of his brightnesse, an arme of his power, and a liuely image of his Maiestie: his letters pattents being sealed at Chartres vpon the fourth of August:The Cardinall of Guise, Legate of Auignon. The Duke de Maine in Dauphine. The Duke de Nemours Gouernour of Lyons. he promised the Cardinall of Guise his brother, to procure the Pope to giue him the office of Legat of Auignon: he sent Monsieur de Maine with a faire and great armie into Dauphine, wherwith he passed at Lyons, and there his voyage ended: he gaue the Duke of
Nemours the gouernment of Lyons, which his father had inioyed: his letters pattents were read, published, and registred in the Court of Parliament, vpon Thursday the 22. of December, in the same yeare, vpon charge that hee should not meddle with any sort, which the execution of Iustice, ordinary, nor for matters proceeding in triall of lawe, but onely to ayde and assist it: he forgot not the Archbishoppe of Lyons, whom he desired to withdrawe from the League, and to keepe him for his Councell, for some speciall cause that mooued him to bee adicted vnto him: he was iealous that the League should haue a primate of France in it, of so good credit, reputation, and desert in the Church.I except Peter of Sauoy, which reuolted against Lewis Hutin. And surely his iealousie was not without reason, for neuer before that time, any Archbishop of Lyons, did euer conspire with those that in times past troubled the quiet estate of France: they continued constant to the Colonel of the royaltie, vnited themselues to the Scepter of France, to maintaine the franchises of the French Church: they haue been arbitrators of great controuersies, in: he affaires that maintaine the order of the Monachie, which is called the estate: they neuer leaned but on the kings side. It is true, that Paul Emille reporteth, that
Agabardus Archbishop of Lyons, was President in the Councell that was holden for the deposing of Lewis Debonnaire, and the raising of his children, and whether the discent is inserted in the person, or that there is some other heauie destinie insident to the seate, the Bishoppricke of Lyons hath at al times had Pretates, that were most worthie instruments both for estate and religion, most affected and faithfull seruants to the King, and chiefe Presidents of their Councell: Eucherius vnder Clodion le Cheuelu: Patient vnder
Clouis: Sacerdos vnder King Childebert, Nisier and
Priseus: Gontran vnder Etherius: and Anemond vnder Clotaire: Asterius vnder Lewis and Carloman. And in the 2. and 3. familie of our kings, there were Archbishops of
Lyons chosen out of the greatest houses and purest blood in
France: or of the neighbour Princes, as Philippe and
Pierce de Sauoye, Countes of Sauoy, and Innocent the fift. Iames Archbishop of Lyons.of Bourgongne, Reinold Earle of Forest. Peter of Tarentaise, that after was Pope of Rome: Henry and
Lewis, Eales of Villars and Montluel, Charles d'Alencon, Ame, Iohn and Hugh de Talaru: two Charles de Bourbon Cardinals: Andre Cardinal of Espinac: Francis de Rouen, sonne of a Marshall of France: Anthony of the auncient house of the Earles of Albon, that were Dauphins de Viennois, and Earles of Auuergne.
Peeces of money quoyned by the Archbishop of Lions, with this deuise on the one side, Prima sedes, And on the other, Galiarum.And in trueth it is the principall sea of France, the most famous and most auncient, and in times past, the Archbishop had a priuiledge to quoyne mony: there are yet certaine peeces of mony to bee seene with their stampe, and in the time that the kings of Bourgongne had that authoritie ouer the sea, which the kings of France now haue, the Archbishoppes were the first, and most worthie instruments of their kings Councell. Frideric Barbarousse in the time of Lewis le Ieune, amplified their priuiledges, by his letters writing to the Exarches or Lieftenants, or chiefe Councellours of his Pallace of Bourgongne, because that part of the Realm of Bourgongne, that lyeth on this side the Mont
Iura, was as then Emperour of Rome.
The king seeking to withdrawe the Archbishoppe of
Lyons out of the league, promised him the custodie of the seale of France, made him one of his priuie Councell, before beeing onely of the Councell of estate, recommended him vnto Pope Sixtus the fift, and made him beleeue that the Lord of Gondy was sent expresly to fetch him the Cardinals Hat.
The Kings fauours shewed to the chiefe of the League.Hee continued his fauours, hee renued and amplified them to all those that had any credit in the League, thinking that by the signes of his good fauour, those Salmonees that would counterfeit
Iupiters thunderboults, would acknowledge and withdrawe themselues out of the confusion of their pretences. Hee did nothing without them, hee disclosed his secrets vnto them, thrust his soule into the deepest part of their passions: yea, and seemed to bee as much mooued as they, to the aduancement of treaties, most liberally thrusting all his fauours and authorities vpon them and their participants, so that there was none of them, how farre soeuer in degree among them,The Cardinall of Bourbon declared to be chiefe Prince of the blood. See the treatise of Ianuary. 1589. but felt some part of his benignitie: He proclaimed the Cardinall of Bourbon to be the first Prince of the blood royall: that is, hee ratified the first Article of Ginuille, made in Anno. 1585. which was wholly to exclude the king of Nauarre from the Crowne: and auoyded that great disputation and argument of the Vncle and the Nephew, so much written and disputed of both with tooth and nayle, thereby to trouble the auncient order of the succession, and make the good Cardinal of Bourbon to serue the League on both sides. This poynt deserueth some small view of their processe. Those that sustaine the right and title of the Cardinall, alleadged all these reasons, first, that the lawe of the Realme, or the Salicque law, that referreth the succession to the heires Masles, referreth also the prerogatiue to raine and to enjoy the Crowne, to the next of the blood to the king, that dieth without children. Francis de Valois Duke of
Alencon, died with this prerogatiue of first Prince of the blood, and first of the succession, and at his decease, had no nearer kinsman the^ the Cardinal of Bourbon, that was in the tenth degree of consanguinitie from him, and by consequent, succeeded in the prerogatiue of the Duke of Aniou: and as one cannot be heire to a man, if he be not his heire by law, so hee ought to haue that quallitie at his death, at the which time, the hope of succession was ioyned therevnto. And as the succession and inheritance of the Realm, permitteth but one onely heire, so this prerogatiue permitteth but one lawfull heire.

Quoniam sororem, c. De iure de
lib.This right of prerogatiue neuer rested but in the person of one of the Princes of Valois, by the priuiledge of first begotten: and those of the house of Bourbon neuer had it, because they could not represent the chiefe branch of a house, from whence it did not issue, the colaterall ingendring, not the colaterall. In such manner, that Anthony de Bourbon, although he had all the right of the house of Bourbon, hauing not, nor by any means would haue the right of elder: the auncienter house beeing Valios yet liuing, could not obtaine the prerogatiue of the first Prince, or any hope to attaine vnto it, nor yet to transferre it to Henry his sonne.
To say it commeth to the house of Bourban, there beeing no other familie of the Masses but that house liuing, and by consequent, to him that hath all the preheminence of the right therein by vertue of succession, and so to Henry sonne of
Anthony, as beeing the head of that house, and representing his father, eldest and first Prince of all that familie: it is most certaine, that this prerogatiue did not fall from the person of Francis Duke of Aniou,Jus suitatis. Eghinar din
^ita caroli. to the familie of Bourbon, for if it were so, it would follow, that all the Princes of that house, should succeed in the same prerogatiue, and that he which dieth, should cease the whole reuenue of that familie, and not the nearest. So you cannot say, that Anthony king of
Nauarre, being descended of the eldest house, the right falleth to him, seeing it is a thing cleare and without difficultie, that the familie of the eldest is preferred before the familie of the youngest, for in colaterall successors, they consider the nearnesse of the Parents, to the last that died ceased, and the nearest in degree alwaies excludeth him that is further distant in Consanguinitie: so
Charlemaine comforming himselfe to the lawe of the Realme, after the death of Charles his eldest sonne, and Pepin the youngest, iudged the Crown to Lewis his middle sonne (that after was called le Debonnaire) as brother and next heire to
Charles his eldest sonne, and not to Bernard sonne to
Pepin the youngest sonne, that was but in the second degree vnto him, although in paternall inheritance, he represented the person of his father.
Like case, the prerogatiue that Francis Duke of
Aniou had, fell and proceeded to the Cardinall of Bourbon, not because hee is of the house of Bourbon, but next kin to the Duke of Aniou, because hee descendeth of the Capets, and of the blood royall of Hugh Capet. And as the house of
Bourbon at this day is reputed to haue this right, because the said Cardinall of Bourbon, that is issued from the same, obtained it, so if the said Cardinall were issued out of an other house, so it were royall, the familie of Bourbon should not be admitted to this prerogatiue, but that from whence the said Cardinall of
Bourbon were so issued, because of the nearnesse of his person.
The Genealogie of Heary of Bourbon, King of Nauarre. S. Lewis. Robert. Lewis. Iames. Iohn. Lewis. Iohn.The king of Nauarre alleadged for his reasons, the genealogie and discent of the house of Bourbon, saying: Saint
Lewis king of France had two sonnes, the eldest
Phillip the third, surnamed the Hardy, and Robert the youngest, Earle of Cleremont: of this Robert and of
Beatrix daughter of Archambaut of Bourbon, was borne
Lewis Earle of Clermont, and first Duke of
Bourbon, created by king Philip de Vallois, which
Lewis espoused Marie Countesse of Hainaut, and had two sonnes, Peter and Iames, the Masculin kinde of Peter, is wholly extinct, and there resteth none of his side but the houses of Lorraine and of Sauoy by the females. Of Iames de Bourbon younger sonne to Lewis, and of Iane de S. Paul his wife, issued Francis. Charles. Anthony. Henry. The Duchie of Bourbon.
1327.Iohn de Bourbon Earle of Marche: of
Iohn de Burbon and Catherine Count esse of
Vendosme, issued Lewis de Bourbon Earle of
Vendosme: of Lewis de Bourbon and Ieane de Laual his Wife, issued Iohn de Bourbon: of Iohn de Bourbon and
Isabeau his wife, issued Francis Earle of
Vendosme: of Francis Earle of Vendosme, and
Marie of Luxembourg Countesse of Saint Paul, issued Charles de Bourbon: of Charles de Bourbon and
Francis d'Alencon his wife, issued Anthony de Bourbon, king of Nauarre the eldest son, Francis Duke of
Anguien, Charles Cardinal of Bourbon, Iohn Durke of
Anguin: Margaret married to the Duke de Neuers, and Lewis de Bourbon Prince of Conde. Of Anthony de Bourbon the eldest, issued Henry de Bourbon now king of Nauarre, and Catherine Princesse of Nauarre his sister.
Wherefore it is euidently seene, that the king of
Nauarre is a degree behinde the Cardinall of Bourbon, for hee is in the tenth, and the king in the eleuenth degree, but it is seene that hee is sonne of the eldest house of Bourbon, and therefore by consequent, preferred to all the rights, of the house royall.
Paul Aemil. in pud Crasso. Anno.
11110. ^olidin. Hist. Angl. By a statute in the Court, in the yeare 1341. By a statute in the yeare 1517. Filius Fratris Fratri aequiparatur and ita succedit atque parter si viuerer.All the Doctors concluded in fauour of the Nephew against the Vncle, that saith hee is the eldest by the disease of his father, whether it bee in the direct or colaterall line, in successions vndeuided, as Realmes, Empires, Duches, and Earledomes, and that is obserued in France, England, Spaine, Portugal, Almaine, and Sicile. So Archambaut had the Duche of
Bourbon from his vncle Hannon: Artus Duchie of
Normandie, fro^ king Iohn his Vncle, third son to
Henry the second, king of England. Lewis Earle of
Neuers, the Earledome of Flaun^ers from his Vncle, the daughter of
Guy Vicount of Limoges, the Duchie of Brittaine, from Iohn Earle of Montfort his brother, Henry d'Albert sonne of Catherin: the Earledome of Foix, from Iohn Viscount of Narbonne and his heires:
Richard sonne of Edward Prince of VVales, was crowned without contradiction, and Yorke. Henry de Bourbon succeeded in the right that Anthony de Bourbon his father had in the house of Bourbon, by the succession of his auncestors, the title of eldest sonne not beeing lost nor extinct in the father, but continueth and is transported to the sonne.
The right of eldest, is perfectly ingrafted in the eldest, assoone as he entereth into the world, and is made a man, which right being in him, hath continued in his posterie by the custome and common obseruation of the Realme.
The reason that some alleadge, to prooue that this right was neuer gotten in the father, is not to bee respected: for although there were but onely (and sometimes) hope, his sonne is permitted to claime it, and to seeke the possession as it falleth out, and although the son of the eldest, is a degree further then the Vncle, neuerthelesse being entered into the place of his father, hee ought to bee preferred: further, the right of preferment is not gotten by our selues onely, but by the right and person of others, so that as long as there testeth any thing of this elder house, an other cannot take place in any sort whatsoeuer.
The king of Nauarre hath another reason, against the which, there can bee no argument that may preuaile: which is, that the Cardinall of Bourbon his Vncle, at the contract of marriage betweene the said king of Nauarre, and the Ladie Margaret of France, acquitted, remissed, yeelded and transported vnto
to the said king, all and euery right, name, voyce, and action, present or to come, that in any case might appertaine vnto him, as beeing issued out of the house of Bourbon, expresly acknowleging the king of Nauarre his Nephewe for the true son, heir, successor, and representation in all respects, of the eldest house. And so to thinke by denying his own deed, to attain to the vaine hope of the succession of the Realm, comprehended vnder the generall declaration of the elder house of the saide deceased king of
Nauarre, there is no likelyhood.
So the king not to displease the League, that occupied the principall places of his thoughts, declared the Cardinall of
Bourbon the first Prince of the blood, although hee knewe that by iustice, and the lawes, not onely of this Realme, but of all the best gouerned estates that euer was, the king of Nauarre was onely capable of that prerogatiue: and the good Prelate perceiued not, that vnder that quallitie of first Prince, and successiue heire to the crown, which the league procured vnto him, it pushed forward her tyrannie with al the force shee might, thereby to vsurpe the royaltie, giuing to a king of sixe and thirtie years of age, a succession that hath past the climaticall yeare of sixtie three. To be brief, it may be said of the League, as Cicero said of Caezar and Pompey, it presenteth vnto vs the picture of the Cardinall of Bourbon, but will erect the Image of a straunger.
The League tooke away the Kings Councell.The affaires of the League hauing had in her poope, the winde, the authoritie of the king, and fauour of all the people, floating most proudely in the maine seas, without feare of winds or waues: fearing that the kings great goodnesse would not long continue, and that the wise Councellors that were about the king, would giue him aduise, and withdrawe him from the shipwracke, wherein they would reduce his authoritie, ceased not to blow in his eares, that his Councell set a darke cloud before his eyes, thereby to impeach him from seeing what is the dutie of a good king, hyding the truth fro^ him, and staying at nothing, but that which might content either passion or auarice.
The king to please them, is constrained to pull his eyes out of his head, to depriue himselfe of the light that he receiued by the wisdome of his Councellours,M. de Chiuerny. M. de Beliure. M. de Villeroy. Ad consilium de rep. dandume capite est nosse rem public. in that cloudenesse of his affaires, and whereof hee had most need. In the middle of those treasons of the league, hee dismissed those that neuer gaue peace to any passio^ against ye course of publike vtillitie: that had nothing in their minds which age had not made rich, graue, constant, and quiet, that could yeeld firme and infallible resolutions, that knew the present estate, that foresawe what would happen, that followed not opinions, but reason, and that haue stayed long in the sterne of the French ship, had fought against the waues, windes, and first troubles of the torment of the League. Then the seales were left in the hands of Monsieur de Monthelon, Aduocate of the Court of Parliament, an honest man, and one that had no other passion, that draue him forward, but onely religion.
The Duke d'Espernon although hee stayed so long from the Court, that it could not be said,The Duke d'Espernon, Gouernour of Aniou and Poitou. that he rule the voluptuous minde of the king his Maister, could not so much absent himself, but that the co^spiracies of the league made him apprehend the greater mischiefes they would breed in a contented estate, and hauing receiued the power from his Maiestie, to command in the Prouinces of
Aniou, Thouraine, Poitou, Angoumois, and Xaintonge, road from
Loches to Angoulesme, vppon aduise giuen him, that the League had conferated with certain of the Inhabitants thereof, to deliuer the towne vnto them: there hee was receiued with all the honor that the people might giue to the Lieftenant of a King, and with as much ioy, as if the King himselfe had been there: but those faire daies continued not long without cloudes, this goodnesse was soone followed with a terrible torment, and this publike reioycing, with a straunge trouble: for although hee shewed sufficiently both in words and effects, that he had nothing so deare, as the conseruation of Catholicque religion, and the excution of the Edict of vnion, which hee had caused to be published, the people neuerthelesse were perswaded by the impostures of certain leaguers, that his intent was, to cause certaine troupes of Huguenots to enter into the Castle, and to surprise the Towne.
A tumult in the presence Chamber of the Duke d'Espernon.The Maior of the Towne beeing altogether a Leaguer, conspired vpon Saint Lawrence day, to take the Duke of
Espernon and to kill him, and for that purpose, vpon the same day they entered into the Castle, vnder pretence to present certaine Posts vnto him that came from the Court, and therewith entered into the high chamber, where discharging two Pistolles, they cried, kill, kill: but the Gentlemen of his traine put themselues in defence, and presently draue the traitors backe: their leader beeing hurt with a Pistolle, that gaue him but seuen houres respite to take order for his affaires: with that an alarme was giuen in the Towne, and presently the people made Barricadoes, rose in a mutinie, raged and stormed, but they were like prisoners kept in a strong Tower, for the Duke d'Espernon held the Castle, and had the Citadell at his commaundement, whereby both through the one and the other, hee could let as many forces enter to relieue him as hee should need.
A vainte mutenie made by the people. Captaines for the league, summons the Duke d'Espernon.The people perceiuing that he held the Castle, and that the Lord of Tagens came in all haste to help him, that the Lord of Bordes their prisoner, Captain of the Citadell, would not redeeme his libertie at the price of his place, that the Sieurs de Mere, dela Messeliere, de Marquerolle, Desbouchaux, sommoning them, had found them resolute rather to diethen yeeld, they determined to fall to an agreement.
Which Nonsieur de Tagens, Cousin to the duke
d'Espernon agreed vpon, which appeased their strife, and therewith they layde down their armes: the dead bodies were honourably buried, and the prisoners on both parts released.
The Duches of Espernon, who before the commotion was gone out of the Castleto heare Masse in the Iacobins Church, had beene stayed in the Fryers Couent, and threatned to serue for a Gabion, if shee caused not her husband to yeeld vppe the Castle: was by the Lieftenant generall of the Towne,Tumults appeased. ledde to the said Castle, and because the gate was as yet rampierd with stones, shee was constrained to go vppe by a lather, and to creepe in at the window.
The second day after this reuolt, beeing the twelsth of August, one thousande fiue hundreth eightie and eight, they proceeded
to the election of a new Maior, who with the Sheriffes presented himselfe vnto the Duke d'Espernon, to excuse the folly of the people, and hee as if hee had not been offended thereat, receiued them with the best countenance he could, and sent them away well pleased, onely that hee would not suffer the body of the Maior (principall of the rebellion) to be buried with the state that belonged to his office.
The Historie of Gauerston printed at Parris, in the yeare 1588.About the time that the Maior made the first tumult in his vtter chamber, he was in his own chamber, staying the time to go to Masse, and shewing the Abbot of Elbene, and
Monsieur de Marimon, a most infamous libell printed, not so much against him, as against the honor of the Ma. of the king. Which was the Historie of Pierce Gauerston, whose life and fortune was therein, compared to the life of the Duke of Espernon: and the conclusion thereof was, that as the Gascon Pierce Gauerston, loued and onely fauoured by Edward the second, king of England, preferred to all offices in the Court, inriched with the treasures both of the king, and of his subiects, at the peoples request was bannished and exiled out of England, and after that beheaded: so the Duke of Espernon would play the like tragedie in France, vnder Henry the third, king of France. This libel was answered by a discourse imprinted at Parris, which the Lord of Mandelot would not suffer to bee solde in Lyons, because it did liuely describe the tragicall actions of estates, and made a most odious comparison of a good and religious Prince, with a bloody hypocrite, and tyrannicall Prince, saying: that Edward and Henry were all one. Hee said, that Edward, a man of no gouernment,Hist. Angl. subiect to his pleasures, of a vilde mind, litle caring for the affaires of his Realm, spent and prophaned the treasures of his country, appoynted for the preseruation of religion, and gaue them to
Gauerstone his Mignion: oppressed his subiects with great and excessiue exactions: solde and ingaged part of his lands and demaines: vsed his Nobles vnwoorthily, not caring for men of good reputation, beeing a great hypocrite, thinking to couer a great number of inormities, by building and erecting a Couent of Iacobius: his Barrons constrained him diuers times to hold a Parliament to reforme the abuses of his Court, which hee caused to bee assembled, making shewe to redresse the maladie of his Realme, but it was to intrap his Princes and Lords, and put them to death, which he did, apprehending the number of two and twentie, whose heads hee caused to bee striken off. Hee was degraded and deposed of his royall dignitie, and the Lords of his Realm caused him to die, by thrusting a redde hotte spit into his fondament.
The Duke d'Espernon complained of the wretchednesse of that time, and of the infamous libertie of Erenchmen, in dishonouring their Prince, and abhorred that manner of writing, wishing a seuere punishment might bee executed both vpon the composers and readers thereof, for example to others.
The League hauing dispatched the kings Councellours from his presence, and established their tyranny in his affections, desired nothing more but the ouerthrow of the Huguenots, for that thorne sticking still in their foote, they could not march with good assurance, so that they ceased not, till they sawe them assayled in two places,The Duke de Neuers Generall of the armie at Poiton. that is, Poitou and Dauphine. His Maiestie gaue the conduction of the armie into
Poitou to the D. de Neuers, a Prince full of zeale in religion, and fidelitie to the king, and valerous in armes, who
The Duke de Neuers Generall of the armie at Poiton.perceiuing that the warre stayed but onely for want of money, lent the king fortie thousand Crowns, proceeding fro^ his part of the partage of the goods of his fathers house.
The Duke of Guise knowing that the armie would not bee so soone prepared, and that while it was prouiding, the king of
Nauarre might take the field, and get the aduantage, sent the Regiment of Saint Paul, to Monsieur de Mercurie, and desired him to begin to prepare the way for the armie of Monsieur de Neuers, which marched forward, and to giue the enemie as much as hee could, thereby not to giue him libertie to march vppon them.
The comming of the Duke de Mercury in Poitou.The Duke de Mercury with his troupes, marched along by the riuer of Loire, to enter into base Poitou, and because the towne of Montagu, (although not long before spoyled and vnwalled) had been repaired and fortified, by Monsieur de Colombiers, that held it for the king of Nauarre) and that the Garrison thereof, continually molested and hindered those of
Nantes, hee determined to besiege it, and so take that retrait from the Huguenots, and to the same end, caused three cannons to bee layde at Pontrousseau to batter it, but beeing aduertised that the king of Nauarre had issued out of Rochell vppon the ninth of August, minding to ayde Montagu, he left it and retired to
Nantes, leauing the Regiment of Gersey, to make his retrait, which was surprised and ouerthrowne within two myles of
Pillemil, beeing the subburbes of Nantes. This Prince of so generous nature, that he gloried not in vanquishing those he had ouercome, perceiuing that Regiment to yeelde vnto his mercie,Victorie without bloodshed. contented himselfe with eight Ensignes, and foure hundreth and fiftie prisoners, and giuing thankes to God in open field, dined vnder a tree: and there forgetting the great way hee had marched the night before, not to leese occasion of intrapping that Regiment, the same day hee hunted the Partrige, and in the euening entered into Montagu, to take order for the fortification and Garrison thereof.
It is said that Caezars tongue did him great seruice in many enterprises, his eloquence did in such sort stirre vppe the courages of his souldiers, that bending their heads forward, they passed on whether fortune and his commandement would push them. Promptnesse and celeritie crowned all the enterprises of the king of
Nauarre with laurell and triumphs, esteeming that long discourses are to no effect, where it is more necessarie to doo then to speake. The action which is not done with speed, can neuer take any notable effect. Pompey was blasoned, and Hanniball likewise, as being too slacke in taking occasions offered. And most part of our armies are broken and ouerthrown, more by delaies, then speedinesse, wee must haue so long preparation for our men before they bee readie, while they are preparing, the aduantage is lost:An army from Spaine. while the king prepared and appoynted the two armies for
Poitou and Dauphine, that the king of Nauarre returned victorious vnto Rochel, and that the Duke
d'Espernon tolde how he had escaped the furie of the people of
Augoulesme,The estate of the army. and remained eight and twentie houres besieged without meate or drinke: newes was spred in all places of France,Their Commaunders and Captaines. of the approaching of the great and horrible Spanish armie, that had cast anker before Calais, on Dunkerke side, staying the ayde of the Prince of Parma, that was to ioyn with the Fleet, with great forces and numbers of horses, to make their discent in England more easie to bee performed.

The armie was called inuincible, and of a most admirable preparation* which might bee seene by the description thereof, printed at Lisbon, and after that, translated into French, Dutch, and Italian.
It contained one hundreth and thirtie shippes, one hundreth nine and twentie men of quallitie, that went voluntary at their owne charges, and with them foure hundreth fiftie and sixe seruants to attend on them,The number of the Regiments. two hundreth sixe and twentie Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines, Ensign-bearers, Lieftenants, and other principall officers of companies, with one hundreth sixtie and three seruants: one hundreth and thirtie regiments, hauing one hundreth seuentie two Ensignes, and twentie thousand fighting men: among the which many were appoynted to be horsemen, according to the preparations made in the Prince of Parmaes ships, that prepared diuers furnitures for horses, which they expected to be readie for them in England.
Euery Vessel and Regiment had his visitor, farrier, treasurer, Commissarie for prouissions,Their Officers and Commissaries. and his Surgeon.
The Officers of Iustice were an Auditor generall, his Lieftenant an Alquazil for the king, and his Lieftenant, foure other Alquazils, foure Secretaries, sixe Vshers, and one Geolier.
The Marshall of the field. The great Maister of the ArtillerieThe Maister of the field, Alphonse de Cepede, assisted with twentie Gentlemen, to prouide both by land and sea, for all difficulties that might happen, with two Ingenieurs.
The chiefe Maister of the ordinances and artillery, had his Lieftenants, beeing fiftie nine Maister Gunners, with a Generall of the carriages and cartes prepared for the land: and a Generall for al the instruments of Iron, that were to bee vsed about them: and for the entertaining and conduction thereof, a Commissarie of the Mulets, and twentie two Groomes to lead them.
In the Hospitall of the sicke, there was a General ouerseer and his Lieftenant, fiue Phisitians,The Hospitall. fiue Surgeons, fiue Assistants to them: foure binders vp of wounds, one Ouerseer of them: a Great-maister or Steward of the Hospitall, and sixtie two seruants.
There were religious persons proportionall to that great number, first, eight Obseruants of Castille: 20. Obseruants of
Portugall: nine and twentie Friers of Castille:Their Cleargie men. ten Friers of Portugal: 9. Augustins of Castille: 14. Augustins of Portugall: sixe Friers of Portugall of the Order called del Pagna: twelue Carmes of Castille: nine Carmes of Portugall: eight Fryers of the third order of S. Francis in Portugall: two and twentie Iacobins: fifteene Iesuites of Castille: and eight Iesuites of Portugall: so that besides the number of fighting men, there was almost tenne thousand that had nothing to do with armes.
An armie, how great soeuer it bee, and well conducted, if it hath not prouisions and amunitions accordingly, it receiueth but blasone, shame, and dishonor: but the king of Spaine tooke not that great enterprise in hand, without prouiding as great furniture as should bee requisite, whereby the Generall had no cause to feare any want, to put the armie out of courage.
Munitions and prouisions.For they had eleuen thousand Quintals of Biscat: foureteen thousand one hundreth and seuentie Pipes of Wine: sixe thousand fiue hundreth Quintals of Bacon: three thousand foure hundreth thirtie three Quintalles of cheese: eight thousand Quintals of dried fishes of all sorts: Rice to furnish euery vessell with three Quintals for sixe moneths: six thousand three hundreth and twentie vesselles of beanes and pease, eleuen thousand three hundreth ninetie eight roues or measures of oyle, twentie three thousand, eight hundreth and seuentie roues of vinegre, and eleuen thousand eight hundreth and fiftie Pipes of fresh water: besides the victuals and the necessaries of houshold, that were in great number, and of all sorts: as platters, goblets, pots, funnels, and vessels of wood, candlestickes, lanterns, lampes, falots, candles of waxe and tallowe, plates of lead and Oxe hides, to stoppe holes made with great shotte, bags of leather, canuaffe, and buckeram, hoopes for pipes and barrels, eight thousand sadles of leather, fiue thousand paire of common shooes, eleuen thousand paire of shooes with strings, cords, nayles, horses, waggons, wheeles, milles, apple trees, and all whatsoeuer belongeth eyther by water or by land, twelue great peeces for batterie, and twelue field peeces, with bagges of calues skins for powder and bullets.
The armes reserued for store, were seuen thousand caliuers, and their furnitures, one thousand muskets, tenne thousand launces, one thousand partisans and halbardes, sixe thousand pikes, more pickaxes, payles,Their armes and other instruments, then would serue for seuen hundreth pioners. With this number, and in this manner being prepared, the armie departed out of
Lisbon, vnder the conduct of the Duke de Medina Sidonia, assisted with two and twentie Lords of Estate, Councell, and experience: eightie pages, and tenne young Gentlemen or knights, and seruants in great number. But it had scarse entered into the sea, sayling towards the
Grongnes in Gallicia, but there rose a storme with so great force, that it was constrained to put to land, and there staye, till winde and weather serued: hauing lost in that storme, three Gallies of
Portugals, and many of them so scattered and brused, that they were not seruiceable for that voyage.
The storme beeing ceased, and the winde bettering, about the two and twentieth day of the moneth of Iuly, the Generall caused them to set sayle, so fortunately, that in lesse then fiue daies after, they discouered the point or end of Cornwall, and at the same time, they were seene from Plimmouth, by the Admiral of England, and Sir
Francis Drake Viceadmiral, that made them turne their faces, and gaue them such a skirmish, and that so neare, that the shippes were in disorder, and a great gallion lost, wherein was found a part of the treasures that the armie brought with it, and all the instructions that the Duke of Medina had what hee should do, hauing conquered England.
At the last, it got as farre as Calais, where it should haue ioyned with the Duke of Parma, but the armie of England, that sought to impeach it, followed it, and that so neare, that it was forced to leaue her anker-hold and confusedly to flie away.
Their principal Galleasse among other vesselles, was by the streame cast vpon the sands hard by the Hauen of Calais, and there with her ordinances was left for the Gouernours of Calais, the rest of the shippes were strongly beaten with cannon shot, and by the English shippes scattered abroad, in such sort, that in those skirmishes, the armie was lessened of twelue shippes, and aboue fiue thousand men.
Which done, it made towards the North seas, passing betweene Norway The scattering of the Spanish armie.and Scotland, and so towards Ireland, where those Northen seas (being as the risen, according to the time of the year, were very tempestious) vsed the rest of the army very hardly, for it drowned and sunke seuenteene great vesselles vpon the coast of Ireland, and spoyled, brake, and ouerthrew diuers others, in such manner, that of one hundreth and thirtie shippes, there were scarce thirtie that returned into Spaine.
The coppie of a Letter sent to Deepe, touching the encoumer of the English and Spanish armie, and howe the Spaniards had wonne the victorie.The report of the successe of this Fleet, was giuen out cleane contrary to that which happened vnto it, or then was trueth, and the innocency of diuers men was so great, that they assured and affirmed for certaine, that the Spaniards had the victorie, for the which, they made fiers of ioy, and printed whole discourses, thereby to couer the shamefull flight of the Duke de Medina, that could make no other excuse vnto the king his Maister, of that ouerthrow, but the infidelitie and ignorance of the Sailors, and the little experience they had of those Northen Seas: the want of ayde from the Prince of Parma: and the great stormes and tempests vpon the seas.
This great ouerthrow abashed not the league, that more vnpatiently then euer it did, pursued the execution of the Edict of vnion, it sawe that the king by words and oaths, not common but solemne, had sworne in the Cathedrall Church of Roane, in presence of the Cleargie, Princes, and Lords of the Court, that hee had sent vnto the Bishoppes touching those affaires: that their Priestes in euery Diocesse should cause their parisioners to make profession of their faith, that the Huguenots should abiure their errors in open Courts of Parliaments, Courts royall, and publike places, to make them obserue it, but not contenting themselues therewith, they would haue the Edict christened with the speciall name of a fondamentall lawe: and because it could not bee done but by the third estates of France, they besought the king to hold Parliament, as by the said articles of peace hee had promised.
De Commines lib. 5. cap.
4.The authoritie which the Senate had among the Romanes, the same authoritie hath the Parliament deuised by the first familie of the kings of France, which is of the third estates of the land, which represent the whole Realme. Although since that time, the name of Parliament is applyed to the companies of Soueraigne Courts, that haue the ordering of causes both criminall and ciuill.
That first age of our Monarchie, although rude and simple, that held our kings like puples vnder the Maiors of the Pallace, assembled the Parliament as often as the publike affaires of the Realme required:The kings of France were not seene but once a yeare. Aymon lib. 4. cap. 30. and the kings that as then retained the grosse vapors of the Da^ubian ayre, and of the Orientall France, were neuer seene but once euery yeare, vppon the first day of May in their Parliaments: that is, in the assembly of the third orders or estates of their Realme, in a place called the field of Mars, where the king was borne in a Chariot of flowers, Aymon li. 4. cap 30.drawne by foure oxen after the rusticall manner, and there placed in a royall throne, assisted with his Nobilitie: hee heard the complaints of his subiects: gaue order for all things that were to bee done that yeare, and dispatched the Ambassadors of forrain Princes. Vnder the second lyne of the kings of
France,The estate of France in the second line of the kings of France. the Empire inlarging it by force, and the kings leauing that seuere greatnesse, to haue conuersation with their subiects, the estates assembled more commonly, not at a certaine and fixed day, but according to the opportunitie and necessitie of their affaires: and therefore Pepin that had caused Childeric to bee shorne and put into a Cloyster, desiring to establish his vsurpation by the vniuersall consent of the people, caused the States to bee assembled at Soissons, that confirmed it, and another time at Compiegne: since that time, the diuisions and iealousies of the Princes, made those assembles to bee more difficult: the kings contented themselues with the Parliament, as an abridgement of the three estates, wherein there was Prelates, Noblemen, and Deputies, of all townes, with the Councell of Parris, to determine all things that belonged to iustice: the Bailiffes and Stewards, euery man in his iurisdiction, administring the causes of the Common-wealth, but when ignorance, auarice, and cupiditie, entered into that first order, that an euerlasting and continuall obscuritie, had infolded the beautie of lawes, men waxing more malicious, and thereby fell into diuers deceits and frauds, brablings and quarrellings tooke place, Bailiffes and Stewards not administring iustice with such integretie and seueritie, as was conuenient, and our kings hauing not meanes in their Parliaments, that alwaies held about them, to bee still imployed in hearing particular mens suites, and the affaires of estate that daily increased, as the Monarchie augmented, King Philiple Bel caused the Pallace to bee made, where soueraigne iudgements should bee giuen. Since that, Philip surnamed the Long, ordained that it should bee composed of a certaine number of persons,Controuersies vnder the raign of Philip le Bel. Vpon this President, he tooke the order of knighthood. one or two Presidents, the first President beeing the Counte of Bourgongne, a Prince of the blood, eight Clarkes, and twelue Lay-men, foure Maisters of Request, and two chambers of Requests, wherin were eight Lay-men, eight Clarkes as Iudges, and foure and twentie Atturneyes: he called Clarkes men with long gownes, married and vnmarried, and the rest Laye-men, Noblemen, or Gentleme^. The Parliament that serued only for iustice, hindered not the assembly of the estates, for the benefit of the Common-wealth, not at a certaine or ordinary time, as in England, euery three yeares,This is a false surmise of the Author. Reasons and necessittes, vrging the assembly of the Estates. but as often as it pleased the king, and no other to summon them, for one of these three occasions. The first, when the succession or right of the Crowne, was doubtfull and in controuersie, or that it was necessarie to prouide for the ruling and gouerning of the Realme, during the captiuitie or minoritie of the kings, or when they were troubled and wanted the right vse of their memories and sences. The second, when it was necessarie to reforme the Realm, to correct the abuse of Officers and Magistrates, by troubles and seditions, and to reduce things to their first order and integretie. The third, for the necessities of the kings and their Realmes, in those assemblies of the Deputies of all the parts of the Realme, they shewed the people in what estate the kings affaires were, and they were courteously mooued, intreated, and exhorted, to graunt subsidies, aydes, and assistances vnto their kings, which otherwise would haue contented themselues with their rents and reuenues, to maintaine the glorie of royall dignitie, they neuer vsed to impose any subsidies or tallages without the consent thereof: and said not as Lewis the eleuenth said, that Frunce was a medowe that vsed to bee mowed thrise a yeare: so for one of these three causes, the estates haue been seene to assemble in diuers places and times.
The yeare 1327.1380. Frosard. li. 2. chap. 58.60. In the yeare 1484. In the yeare
1356. In the yeare 1412. Philip Earle of Vertus.They assembled in Parris to chuse a Regent during the minoritie of S.
Lewis, an other time in the same place, to prouide for the gouernment of king Charles the sixt in his minoritie, and at
Tours for Charles the eight, that Lewis the eleuenth had left in infancie.
They assembled in Parris for the libertie of king Iohn prisoner in England, and for the phrensie of
Charles the sixt, whose gouernment was referred to his two Vncles, the Dukes of Berry and Bourgongne.
They assembled at Auxerre, to sweare a peace betweene the children of the houses of Orleans, and
Bourgongne, and by their aduice, the marriage of the Counte of
Vertus, brother to the Duke of Orleans, with the daughter of the Duke of Bourgongne, was made among the ioyes of this peace: the Dukes of Orleans and Bourgongne, were seene booth vppon a horse, sporting themselues with the other Princes, to witnesse their amitie and reconciliation: yet it was but a fained peace.
Monstrelet, lib. 1. chap.
59.They were againe assembled in the raigne of
Charles the sixt at Parris, vnder Francis the second at Orleans, and vnder Henry the third at
Bloys, to appease the difference of the new religion, abuses, desolations, and excesse, to take order for the administring of iustice, to rate the monies, and to institute the offices for the gouernment of the treasures: in the two last, the Deputies required two things, one the extirpation of heresies, but without wars, by a free and legitimate Councell: the second, the easing of the poore people, by taking accounts of such as abusing the fauour and libertie of the king, had inriched themselues by the oppression of his subiects, to the end, that the blood being drawne into an other part, might be brought into the emptie vaines, to quicken the head, and animate the most noble partes of the bodie.
In the first, the wicked Councellours and administrators of the publike treasures, were examined and openly named, with a most shamefull defamation.
King Henry the third, perceiuing this remedie to bee necessary, that ouer much practising and deuises, was seene to bee in all estates of the Realm, and that hee could not defer the purgation thereof, he consented to the convocation of all the estates of the Realme, and declareth what had alwaies bin his fatherly care towards his subiects, how he had respected their good, rest, and tranquillitie, with all affection that might be found in a Prince, that hath nothing dearer nor in more speciall recommendation: that hee knew well, to to his great griefe, that the effects had not been correspondent to his desire, by the renuing of troubles happened in the middle of a peace well established, vnder the which, he had begunne to prouide for reformation and re-establishment of many things, which the miseries of warres had brought out of order.
This, if for the small time that the peace did indure, the people had alreadie begunne to taste some acceptable fruite, it was easie to iudge, that i^ would haue been much more felt, without so suddaine an alteration.

That wee must must impute it to the iust punishment of God, that ceased not to laye his scourges vppon this Realme, that it might bee knowne to bee vnwoorthie of the benefit of a peace, wherewith hee vseth to indue and blesse those to whom hee will shewe any speciall fauour.
That the more men proceed forward, the more they perceiue all things to fall into such disorder and confusion, that in short time if order be not taken therein, there will not be any more steppes of the auncient force and greatnesse of this Realme, seene or perceiued, which in times past were so admired by forraine nations.
That for the same cause, his Maiestie thought it conuenient, for the loue and fatherly affection that hee beareth to his subiects, to thinke vppon the meanes that might bee deuised, to finde a remedie for the same.
That after hee had ripely considered therevpon, hee esteemed no better meanes could bee vsed, then the same that had beene practised by his predecessors, who among the great disorders happened during their raignes, they were not comparable to those of his time, because they surpasse them. They had recourse to an assembly of the estates general of the Realm, which at this day would bee more necessary and requisite then euer it was. For that cause therefore hee commaunded, that the principall personages of euery Prouince, Baliage, and Stewardship, should by the fifteenth day of September, assemble the Towne of Bloys, there in open assembly to make their petitions, and to shewe their griefes: to speake freely, without medling with any practises, thereby to fauour the particular passions of any man whatsoeuer, which will bee most fit and conuenient meanes, to quench and abolish such diuisions as are among his subiects, specially among the Catholicques, and to attaine to a good and an assured quietnesse, whereby Catholicque religion shall bee so well established, and all heresies purged and extirped out of his Realme: that his subiects should haue no more cause to feare a change, neyther while hee liued, nor afer his disease.
The kings commissions beeing sent and published in euery Prouince, the third orders, that is the cleargie, the Nobilitie, and the deputies of the people, assembled in the principall Towne of euery Prouince and Corporation, to conferre of their declarations, complaints, greefes, and of the meanes they should vse to propound them in the assembly, and to chuse their Deputies that might speake for all the Prouince. When the king sent his commissions, the league likewise, and it may bee by the same meanes, caused their memorials and articles to bee giuen to euery Baliage and Stewardship, most affected to their factions, that they might set them down with the rest of their requests. Wherevpon the author of the treatie made, touching the causes and reasons of bearing armes, by the league made in Ianuary 1589. saith, that those memorials were sent to the most passionate leaguers.
The names of the Deputies is to be seene in a discourse imprinted vpon this matter following, by Iamet Mettayer.That they might procure to be appoynted Deputies by the Bailiffes, so that in a manner, all the Deputies of the third orders, were altogither participants with the league, and their remembrances formed to require that which they had beene certified of before, and that the credite of the league was such, that the Marshals and Harbengers for the king, durst not refuse lodging to such as were marked with their Pater nosters. I would set downe the names of the Deputies, to giue the Reader free choise and destinction, of such as were found to be sent by special procurement, and others that had no other intent but onely the zeale of the augmentation of the Catholicque and Romane religion,
the honour and seruice of the king: the reformation of disorder: and the comfort of the poore people: but that is to bee seene in a particular discourse printed to the same end: wherevnto I referre the Reader. Meane time, wee will go before to marke out the lodgings for this assembly, for all the Deputies are on horsebacke to meete at
Lewis, where the king would bee.

Heere endeth the third Booke.



THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTOrie of the last troubles of France, from the assembly of the estates, and the peace of
Chartres, till the breaking vp thereof, beeing the sixteenth of Ianuary, 1589. And the troubles that beganne in the same moneth at Parris and in other Townes.
WHen folly rauisheth and vsurpeth the ordering and co^duction of a great and serious matter, it is a hazard if euer it fall out to the contentment of him that taketh it in hand. It is a poynt of folly in the Duke of Guise, to seeke the kings good will, seeing that of a proude minde hee had separated himselfe from it by an vnreconcileable offence: Folly to suppose that the peace of Chartres had healed the continuall bleeding woundes of the Barricadoes: folly likewise to come to
Blois, seeing the king would not go to Parris: therfore it was the assembly at Bloys that must make the bridge betweene the extremities of their desires.
There they played subtiltie one with the other, he that should be deceiued, thought vpon nothing else, but to deceiue the partie that deceiued him. The Duke of Guise was glad of the meeting of the estates, because he was assured, that among so many Deputies, hee should finde a sufficient number to authorise his cause, and giue a hard plunge, or rather ouerthrowe to the Kings power. And the king thoght that with his royall authoritie, he should haue credite sufficient with the three Estates of his Realme, and courage ynough in his heart, there to punish the Duke of Guise for all his vaine and glorious enterprises: each of them trauelled for the aduancement of their desires: the Duke of Guise for his part, wrought the hearts and mindes of his Adherents by faire promises, and most artificiall subtilties, to procure the more strength on his side, and to cause all the Deputies to haue no other desire and memoriall in their remembrances, then the aduancement and triumph of the league. The king that would not returne to
Parris, excusing himselfe by the preparation for the estates, went first to Bloys, to take order for their place of assembly, partition of chambers, and lodgings for the Deputies. He gaue the charge of the preparation to the Lord of Marle, one of the ordinary controwlers of his house, in the absence of the Lord of Roddez, Great-Maister of the ceremonies of France, to take order for the commodious placings of so great a company, and co^manded him to bring the deputies one after the other as they arriued into his chamber, that he might see, heare, and know them. And because the number of those that made most haste, were not sufficient in the the kings minde, to debate such waightie affaires, hee prolonged their meeting till the last day of the same moneth, and in the meanetime, all the Deputies arriued out of euery place. So that in lesse then tenne daies, Bloys was as it were the receptacle of all the Realme of France.
This most religious Prince desiring to begin this assembly, with a publike inuocation vppon the name of God, commaunded a solemne procession from the Church of Saint Saueor, in the great Court of the Castle at Blois, vnto the Church of our Ladie des Aydes, in the subburbes of Vienne. It was a generall shewe of the French pompe and magnificence, and specially of the beautie of the Court of so great a king. Their order was in this manner, first there went the communalties of the Churches: after them, the Deputies of the people foure in a ranke: then followed the Nobilitie, seconded by Ecclesiasticall persons: after them came Albon Bishops, Archbishops, and Cardinals: foure knights of the Order of the holy Ghost carried the Canape. the Archbishop of Aix bearing the holy Sacrament. Then followed his Maieftic on foote with the Queenes, Princes, and Princesses.
Monsieur de Saintes Bishop of Eureux made the Sermon, and the Archbishop of Bourges saide the Masse in our Lady Church, all hanged with the kings richest hangings: his Maiestie sat in the Quier vpon a seat couered with veluet. This procession was made vpon Sunday the second of October, and the next day they were to buy their meeting, but as then all the Deputies were not come, therefore that day there was nothing done, but appoynting of places and chambers for conference. The spiritualtie met in the Iacobins, the Nobilitie in the Pallace, the Deputies for the people in the Towne-house, the Presidents and officers of euery Order were chosen the Cardinals of Bourbon and Guise for the clargie, and in their absence the Archbishop of Bourges: for the Nobilitie, the Earles of Brissac, and the Lord of
Marrignac. For the third estate or people, Michael Marteau Prouost of Merchants of the towne of Parris: the Secretaries of the Cleargie, were Master Iues le Tartier, Dean of S. Stenens church in Troy, and Iohn Martin Cannon of
Perigueux, Deputies for the Cleargie of the same places: For the Nobilitie, Florimond de Dorne, Lord of that place, and Bailiffe of S. Prerrele Monstier, Claude de Moniournal, Sieur de Sindre, Deputies de Bourbonnois, and Francis d'Alonuille, Sieur d'Oisonuille, Deputie of the Baliage and Duchy of Estampes. The Secretary of the chamber of the third estate, was Iohn Courtin, Sieur de Nanteuil, Deputie for the 3. estate of the Baliage of Boys. The first sitting was put off till the 17. day of the same month, for two causes: the first, because they stayed the comming of the Princes of the blood, that as then were not arriued in the Towne, and the rest of the Deputies.

The other, to haue time to auoyde the differences and iealousies that happened, because of the preuentations and delaies made, touching the elections and procurations of Deputies.
The king at that same time caused a fast to bee published, and an abstinence from flesh for the space of three whole daies, that men might prepare themselues to the holy communion, which was receiued by the king in the Church of Saint Saueor, within the Castle, the Princes and Lords of the Court in diuers Churches, all the other Deputies of the third Estate, in the Couent of Iacobins, where the Cardinall of Bourbon celebrated the Masse, and communicated vnto them.
The sixteenth of October, the Hall where the States should sit, was opened, which was in this maner: It is in length fiue and twentie paces, and nine in bredth, with sixe great stone Pillers in the middle, hanged with rich cloth of Arras, wrought with golde, the Pillers couered with hangings of purple veluet, imbrodered with flower deluces of gold: the toppe of the Hall, couered with Tapistrie: betweene the third and fourth piller, was placed a great seate in manner of a scaffold, rising with three steppes, about eleuen or twelue inches high: fiue paces long, and foure broad: in the middle whereof, stood a great footstoole about foure or fiue inches high, foure foot long, and eight foote broad: and vppon that, an other litle footestoole of sixe foote square, whereon stood the kings chaire: on the right side vppon the great footestoole, was the Queene-mothers chaire: on the other side, the Queen the kings wife: behinde their chaires, stood the Captaines of the guard: and all along the scaffold, the two hundreth Gentlemen with their hatchets or poleaxes: on the right hand of the king vppon the great scaffold, there were two bankes togither, couered with purple veluet, imbrodred with flower deluces of gold: vpon one of the^rnearest and towads the king, sat the princes of the blood, the Cardinal of Vendosme, the Earle of Soissons, and the D.
de Monpeslier: on the other banke somewhat further, sat the Dukes of Nemours, de Neuers, and de Retz: right against those bankes on the left hand, the Cardinalles de Guise, de Lenoncourt, and de Gondy: and behinde them, two Priors of the Church, the Archbishoppe of Langres, and the Bishoppe of
Chaalons.
Before the footeftoole vppon the scaffold, there stood a chaire without abacke, right before the king, couered with purple veluet, and imbrodered with flower deluces of gold, for the Duke of Guise as great Maister of France, his backe towards the king, and his face to the people: on the left hand, and vppon the same scaffold, stood a chaire for Monsieur de Monthelon, keeper of the great seales of
France, his face towards the Princes of the blood, and his backe to the Cardinalles of Guise and Lenoncourt: the place at the kings foote, that belonged to the Duke de Maine as Chamberlaine of
France, and that of the Marshall of France, that should bee vppon the last steppe of the scaffold were emptie: at the foote of the scaffold right before the kings chaire, stood atable for the kings Secretaries, beeing Monsieur Ruze, Lord of Beaulieu, and
Monsieur de Reuol, their backs towards the king, and their faces to the people: and before them, the Heralts on their knees and bare-headed: on each side of this table, stood the seates of the kings auditors of all affaires: on the left hand Monsieur de Bellegarde, chiese Gentleman of the kings chamber, the Archbishoppe of Lyons, Monsieur Miron the kings chiefe Phisitian: on the left hand,
vpon an other banke, Monsieur de Longenac, an other of the Gentlemen of the kings chamber, Monsieur des Escars, Monsieur de Souuray, Monsieur d'O, three Commanders of the Order of the holy Ghost: at the end of the bankes aforesaid, there stood two banks, one at the end of the other, along on both sides, that made an Allie, about two or three foote broad: vppon those of the right hand, sat
Messieurs of the Councel of estate of the long gowne,
Monsieur d'Espesse the kings Aduocate, in the Parliament at
Parris, Monsieur de Chastelliers, Monsieur Falcon, Sieur de Riz, Monsieur Marcel, Receiuer of the Treasurie, Monsieur de la Guesle, Atturney generall for the king: Monsieur Campigny, Monsieur de Pont-carre, Monsieur de Ville-roy, Monsieur de Viart, President of Metz: Monsieur Petremol: Sieur de Rosiers, Receiuer of the finances: Monsieur de Thou, Sieur de Emery.
And vpon the other two bankes on the left hand, sat the Councell of Estate of the short gowne, Monsieur de Schomberg, Earle of Nantueil, Monsieur de Cleremont d'Antragues, Monsieur de la Chastegneraye, Monsieur de Rochefort, Monsieur de Pongny, Monsieur de Richelieu, Monsieur de Liancourt, Monsieur de Menneuille. And vpon the other banke, Monsieur de Chastre, Monsieur de Grillon, Monsieur de Birague, Monsieur de Chemerault, Monsieur de Manou, all Commaunders of the Order of the holy Ghost, except the Sieurs de Schomberg and de Menneuille. And these Lords were they that had the handling of co^mon causes for the ordinary of the Realme, or other particular Gouernments of Townes, Prouinces, and affaires, wherein the king onely might take order.
Behinde the bankes of the Councell of estate of the long gowne, on the right hand of the king, there stood eight great bankes before the scaffold, for the Deputies of the Clargie: on the other side vpon the left hand, behind the Councellours of estate of the short gowne, there stood nine great bankes for Deputies of the Nobilitie: crosse hard by on the sides of those bankes, was that of the Maisters of Requests: and after them, the Clarkes of the house and Crowne of France.
All these were inuironed and closed with great and strong railes of three foore high, hauing but one entery that was right before the kings face. Betweene the aforesaid third and fourth Pillers, whereat the Deputies entered, and within the inclosure of those Barricadoes, round about were the bankes for them to sit vppon. The space about the Railes without, was in bredth betweene sixe or seuen foote, for the better accesse and ease of the people, to leane vppon them.
The Legate, the Ambassadours, the Lords, and the Ladies of the Court, were in the Galleries closed with latises, vnder the which, were erected diuiers scaffoldes, eight or nine steppes higher one then the other, thereon to place great numbers of people.
The Deputies according to the order were called a Hussier, standing in a windowe that looked into the Castle-yeard, such as hee called were receiued by the Heraults, (named Normandy, d'Alencon, and
Valois, apparrelled in their Coate-armours of purple veluet) into the railes, that stood at the foot of the steppes, which they still shutte as the Deputies entered, and from thence ledde them to the enterie of the railes of the Hall, where the Herault, Brittaine and
Dauphine receiued them, and brought them to the Lords of
Roddez and Marle, Maisters of the ceremonies, telling them of what Prouince, they were Deputies, and setting them in their places, they beeing in that order ledde forward, the Herault at the windowe called others, which were receiued, led and placed as the rest: the order vsed in calling them was thus.
First the Towne-Prouost and Vicounte of Parris, the Duchie of Bourgongne, and Baliage of Dyon, the Duchie of
Normandie, and by order the Baliages of Roane, Caen, Caux, Constantin, Eureux, Gisors, Alencon, and Mortaing.
The Duchie of Guyenne, and by order the Stewardship of Bourdeaux, Bazas, Perigort, Rouergue, Xaintongue, Agenois: the Countrie and Countie of Comminges: the Stewardship of Launes, S. Seuer, Condounas. High Limosin and the Towne of
Limoges: Lowe Limosin, the Stewardship of
Quercy.
The Duchie of Brittaine, and her dependances: the Earledome of Champagne and Baliages of Troye, Chaumont in
Bassigny, Vitry, Meaux, Prouince, Sesanne, Sens, and the Castle of Tyerrie.
The Earledome of Thoulouse, and gouernment of
Languedoc: the Stewardship of Thoulouse, Puy: the Baliages of Velay: Mompelier, the Stewardship of
Carcassonne, Narbonne, Beziers: the Stewardship of
Lauragais, Vermandois, Poictou, Chastelleraut, Fantenay: and
Niort: the Stewardship of Aniou and of Maine: the Baliages of Thouraine and Amboise: the Stewardship of
Loudunois: the Baliages of Berry and S. Pierre le Monstier: the Stewardship of Bourbonnois: the Baliages of
Forest and Beauioulois: the Stewardship and lowe countrie of Auuergne: the Baliages of the Mountaines of
Auuergne: the Stewardship of Lyon: the Baliages of
Chartres, Orleans, Montargis, Blois, Dreux, Mantes, and
Meulan: the Baliages of Gien, Percht, Chasteauneuf, and
Amiens: the Stewardship of Ponthieu Boulonnois, Peronne, Montdidier, and Roye: the Baliages of Senlis, Vallois, Clermont and Beauuoisis, Melun, Nemours, Nyuernois and
Douziais. The countrie of Dauphine, and that which dependeth thereon: the towne and gouernment of Rochel: the Stewardship of
Angoulmois: the Baliages of Montfort, Houdan, Estampes, Dourdan: the Counte of Prouence, Grasse, Draguignan and
Marseille: the Counte de la Marche, both low and high: the Marquisat of Saluce, and the Baliage of
Beauuois in Beaunoisis. So that to conclude, the Clargie had 134. Deputies, among the which were 4. Archbishops, 21. Bishops, and two principals of orders: the Nobilitie 180. Gentlemen: and the third estate,
191. Deputies,The number of the Deputies. all Ministers of iustice, or of the short gowne. The Deputies being entered, and the Gate shut, Monsieur de Guise sitting in his chaire, apparelled in a roabe of white Satin, the cape hanging backward about his shoulders, (with his eyes pearcing through all the assembly, therein to know and distinguish his seruitors, and with one onely glance of his eye, to strengthen them in the hope and assurance of his pretences, greatnesse, and fortunes, and thereby without word, to tell them that he saw them) rose vp, and hauing made a great reuerence to all the companie, beeing followed by the 200. Gentlemen, and the Captains of the guard, he went to fetch the king, that entered in great Maiestie with his principall order hanging about his necke. When the company perceiued him to come downe the staires, that went straight to the great scaffold, euery man rose vp and stood bare-headed: which done, the king tooke his place, the Princes standing still, vntill hee commaunded them and his Councell to sit downe.

There was neuer any assembly made, wherin was found more excellent French wittes, concerning the resolutions of great affaires, the propounding of excellent and rare conceipts, and for the reformation of the estate. Nor yet for the pronunciation of Orations, with more grace and eloquence, then in this God that is the iust distributer of his fauours to whom it pleaseth him, hath ordained, that nature should helpe and adorne certaine nations, more then others with eloquence of speech, but it is a speciall fauour of God, to speake well and to the purpose, before great assemblies, not of a Commonwealth of Venise, nor a Councel of three hundreth in the cantons of Swisses, but before the estates of a great king: yea of the greatest Realme in all Christendome, and in the presence of the geatest king of all Europe.
This eloquence is a gift of God, such and so great, that
Moyses found no other excuse, to refuse that notable Ambassage, but the rudenesse of his speech, as if the first peece of the furniture of him that vndertaketh such things, were the grace of speaking well.
There hath beene diuers great personages, that haue buryed and obscured the best and brauest quallities in them, for the onely want thereof, and some haue beene seene in a publike place, at a barre, and in a Councell, that comming in presence of a Prince, and of a great assembly, became ridiculous to the company, with blushing and shamefastnesse, and in the assembly, some were ashamed to see their bashfulnesse. Heraclites the great Sophister was abashed before Seuerus, Talthybius and Eurybate, before
Agamemnon, Theophrastes in the Araopage: Herod the
Athenian, before Marcus Anthonius. Some stumbled in the beginning of their discourse, others omitting the principall matter, in the middle of their orations, and many making a woorse end, then a beginning. And whatsoeuer is the cause, those that are in such extacies, haue no man to supply their places, and perceiuing themselues brought into that poynt, either shamefully to stand still and say nothing, or take a new matter in hand besides the text, and so rather doo wrong to their reason and arguments,Great personages faile in deliuering their orations. then to their speech, as Bartholomew Soncin, before Pope Alexander the sixt: and Francis Barbare Venetian, before the Duke of Milan.
I commend such as take time to prepare themselues, and wonder at those, who without preparation, can so readily acquit their charge. Our countrie of France hath seene and heard, both of the one and other. It heard in this solemne assembly, of all the estates of the Monarchie, that the Romane eloquence is retired, and had withdrawn it selfe into the head of her great king: and that France likewise as wel as
Rome, hath Seuerus Cassiens, that speake both well and wisely, without premeditation, and that cannot indure a troublesome studie: that it hath Demosthenes and Pericles, that neuer speake without good aduise: that it hath a rare and almost vnknowne thing vnto all Monarches: which is,The signe of the weakening of an estate. This is vnderstood of the eloquence of Sophisters. that her kings speake without Interpreters: but in this poynt I must let you knowe, that it is a most assured signe of the weakning of the forces of our estate, when euery man taketh more delight in eloquent words, then in great effects, and is better pleased in saying then dooing well. For that eloquence is like a medicine, which is onely prepared for sicke persons, and eloquence is imployed but in such estates, that are like to fall and decay, and to mooue and perswade a people that are stayed.

The multitude of Phisitians in a Towne, maketh mee iudge the intemperance of the Inhabitants: the great troupes of Councellors and Atturnies that are in all places, do sufficiently shew, that the corruption of our manners entertaineth quarrelles, and there was neuer seene so many Orators in Athens, Rhodes, and Rome, but when they were troubled with ciuill dissentions.
The League brought with her, diuers eloquent fellowes, by their babling and deuises to make the people beleeue, that white is blacke, and trueth falsehood, and to constraine them vnder the sweetnesse of their arguments, to swallow downe rebellion, faithlessenesse and disobedience.
And who knoweth not, that the same day of her birth, had been the obsequie of her funeral, if in the places where truth ought to triumph, vntruth had not beene introduced, their sences filled with smokes, and sed the ignorant people with deuises and laughters?
Plutarch.Such as sought to winne the people, proceeded not all in one kinde of manner: in Athens there were some that would drawe them by the eies, presenting them with false and deuised things: others, by the belly, in seasts and banquettings: diuers by the purse, and shining beautie of that mettal,The people are taken by the eares. which bendeth the most stiffest: but the best aduised haue begunne with the eares, the beastlinesse and easie introducing of the people, not beeing handled but by them, all other holdes are vnassured, other rules and obseruations can neuer make them tame.
By it, Pompey, Caezar, Crassus, Lucullus, Lentulus, and Metollus, began their tyrannies, and ayded themselues better with their tongues, then by their lances: the French tongue was neuer more adorned, inriched, nor fairer, then at this time, and I would to God it serued onely to confound rebellions, detest Leagues, conuince schismes, eleuate the authoritie of the lawe, establish and strengthen iustice, euaporate the cloudes of errors, that trouble our vnderstandings, and that the fire of those hotte and liuely speeches, that make vs to attempt so high actions, and mortifieth colde and moyst humours, that make our affections glance against our soueraigne good, and that it would in flame the courage of good men, against the iniustice of the wicked.
Corruption of eloquence in holy matters.But to the contrary, it is imployed to the great disliking of straungers, to the infamie of Frenchmen, and against a king of
France, to rent and disseuer his authoritie, blame his holy intents, to accuse his Councell, and to pierce the eares of his subiects, therein infusing the dangerous poyson of despising his Maiestie.
They vse a phrase, adorned with rich and magnificall words, (without choise or consideration) to condemne the law, to degrade the Magistrate: and to praise those that neuer did good, but when they minded to doo euill: they haue borrowed great words of Architecture, Pilastres, Corniches, Architraues, Amphiteatres, and Theatres, and all for the description of that mischieuous hole or caue of the League, and of that miserable populer state, built vppon foure gibbets or stakes.
Against a sort of writers during these troublesBut the holy and true eloquence, is that which alwaies continued with the iustice of the kings cause, all that is induced therein, is firmer and more solide, the reasons liuelyer and stronger, the words more christian and Frenchlike, and the formes more ingenious and sweete: not pompious with arrogancie, nor furred with artificialnesse: not boulstered with blasphemies, not fantasticated with nouelties: nor false nor ridiculous as those of the eloquent Orators of the league: and if you take away but two or three bookes, issuing out of the shops of these Apothicaries, wherein neuerthelesse, there is nothing to bee redde but olde fables, well composed vnder a goodly and a faire couerture, you shall finde, that as they desire not to doo well, so they connot speake well: and all the harmony of their writings, is but a rude discord of the strings of some olde viole, and a building of diuers peeces weake and very feeble.
The Orations pronounced in this assembly, are not in such manner, and although there are some that sauour of the kennell from whence they issue, yet I esteeme this Historie would thereby be much bewtified, but we will reserue them for a larger volume, for that the breuitie wee haue promised in the beginning, permitteth mee not at large to induce them heerein.
That onely of the king, full of liuely affection, of true magnanimitie, of reasons, pertinent and very likely, is like liuely portratures of the beauties of France, and the euill fauourednesse which the League hath borrowed vppon her face, ought to be placed herein, in her proper and originall splendure: as not being a long preambulation or discourse, such as Theopompus, Ephorus, and Anaximenes, vsed to the Captains, when they receiued their charge, and that it is time rather to doo, then say: but a discourse woorthie the Maiestie of a King of France, and of Henry the third, that had that great aduantage aboue all the Princes of his time, to aunswere promptly, wisely, and aptly, to all important occasions that were presented, that like an ignorant Pilot, committed not the guiding of his shippe to his mates, and neuer spake by an other mans mouth, had within himselfe the knowledge of mannaging the rurther, and the wordes that gaue the vnderstanding of his will.
The places then beeing appoynted and filled, according to the greatnesse, order and degrees of euery man, all the Deputies standing vppe, bareheaded, the King beganne in this manner to make his Oration, by a graue choise of goodly wordes, and with a tongue truely ledde by his passions, and that yeelded no other sound, then the naturall harmonie.





The kings Oration to the estates.MY Lords and friends, I will beginne with an humble supplication vnto God, from whom proceedeth all good gifts and holy operations, that it will please him to ayde me with his holy Spirit, conducting me as it were by the hand in this serious action, therein to acquit that which I take in hand, as woorthily, as the worke is holy, desired, attended, and necessary for the vniuersall good of my subiects, which is the restoring of my estate, by the generall reformation of all the parts of the same, which I haue sought as much or rather more, then the preseruation of my own proper life.
Ioyne with mee therefore I pray you, in this most instant request, which I now make vnto him, beseeching him that he wil more and more strenthen that constant desire, by him alreadie for that cause rooted within my heart: and that likewise hee will take from you, all particular passions, if there bee any, that reiecting all other parts, but that of your king, you haue no regard, but imbrace the honour of God, the dignitie and authoritie of soueraigne Prince, and to restore the countrie in such manner, that there may ensue so laudable and fruitfull a resolution, accompanied with so good effects, that my estate may receiue his ancient splendure. And this will be a worke woorthy of the place wherevnto I am called, and witnesse both your capacities and loyalties.
He whom I haue now inuoked, to ayde both me and my estate, that is the searcher of all our hearts, if it pleaseth can bee a witnesse, that assoone as hee appoynted me to be commaunder ouer you, an incredible greefe entered into me, touching your publike and particular miseries, together with a care, that euer since hath much increased in mee, to procure some wholesome remedies, with as happy an end, as therein it is much more then necessary.
What greefe thinke you, hath penitrated in my entrals, within these fewe yeares, since age and experience haue made more capable to apprehend the desolation, oppression, and ouerthrow of my poore people, withall seeming vnto me, that my raigne should bee reserued for a light of the iust wrath of God, which I acknowledge iustly to hang ouer our heades, both for mine, and the sinnes of my subiects in generall.
For this cause, I stroue as much as I could, to fluffe vp the corruptions and disorders that had made so violent an habitation there, and to resist the euilles, which had not all been done by mee, and which by my onely means, if remedie might be had, I will appease. For I would say (without boasting of my selfe) that there hath been no meanes to reforme the depriuation of my estate, but that I haue called it to minde, thereby to establish the same, if I had been as well assisted, as I was by you good Madame, and as necessitie and my good will deserued: but I cannot sufficiently shewe how much I haue been ayded by my good mother the Queene, which cannot in any sort bee declared: and I must say, that among so many assistances and strickt obligations, whereby shee holdeth all my subiects tyed vnto her, that therein they haue aspeciall, and my selfe a particular cause, that with you in this notable assembly, you should yeeld her most humble and hartie thankes.
Which is, that shee is not onely the cause, that by the grace of God I am now in this world to bee your king, but by her continuall and holy instigations, laudable actions, and vertuous examples, shee hath in such sort ingraued in my soule, a right and true intent to the aduancement of the honour of GOD, the preferment of his holy, Catholicque, and Romish Church, and the reformation of my estate, that the intentions which I haue heeretofore declared, wholly tending vnto all good things, (wherevnto more then euer I was, I am resolued) proceedeth onely from her, not once complaining of the labours, indispositions, or discommodities of her age, in any thing wherein she hath perceiued or found the meanes to aduance this estate, hauing so oftentimes preserued the same, that shee not onely deserueth the name of the Mother of your King, but also of your estate and kingdome.




Now my principall care and pleasure beeing wholly set to restore this goodly Monarchie, and iudging particular remedies not to bee conuenient for the time, I determined to assemble my generall estates, wherein as in all other things, for the good of this Realme, it pleased her much to incourage mee, knowing, that by assembling them, I should not leese one houres time, what generall oppositions soeuer entered into my my minde, and with the which, many men peraduenture thought I should bee so crossed, that either I would bee constrained to deferre or wholly to remit it.
You see neuerthelesse, whether I haue had that constant resolution, which belongeth to a good king, for the generall good of all his subiects, which is so surely ankered in my heart, that I desire nothing more, then the conseruation of the honour of God and you.
This assembly of the estates is a remedie (with the good counsell of the subiects, and the holy resolution of the Prince) to heale those diseases, which tract of time, and the negligent obseruation of the lawes and statutes of this Realme, haue suffered to enter, and to assure the lawfull authoritie of the soueraigntie, rather then to shake or diminish it, as some euill aduised men and full of enuie, disguising truth, haue made the world beleeue.
For that good lawes well established and obserued, wholly fortifie and vphold the Scepter of a king, assuring his Crowne vpon his head, against all such practises whatsoeuer.
You may then well perceiue, by this my resolution (that hath resisted and withstood an infinite of impeachments, which certain men would haue opposed against it) the sinceritie of my intent, specially for that this assembly of the estates, is that which as much breaketh the euill pretences and purposes of Princes, that haue their hearts trauersed with deuises, and desirous of no good, as mine is and alwaies shall bee most readie, prompt, and altogither disposed not to desire or seeke for any other thinges, then your good: which if I doo, I beseech God confound mee eternally.
Seeing then that you see mee so fully bent to procure this peace and common tranquilitie of my estate, and that you cannot alleadge any thing to the contrary, ingraue it likewise in your mindes, and iudge well of mee, in regard of those that would haue proceeded in other sort,
Withall noting, that whatsoeuer lintend, cannot in any sort bee esteemed or attributed, as any wales pretending, to authorise my selfe either against lawe or reason: for I am your king ordained by God, and bee onely that may truly and lawfully challenge that right. And therfore I desire not to be accounted other in this Monarchie then as I am, not beeing able to wish or desire more honour or authoritie, then that I haue alreadie obtained. Fauour then I pray you (my good subiects) this true intent, which tendeth onely to the furtherance and aduancement of the honour of God, and our wholly Catholicque, Apostolike, and Romish religion, to extirpe heresies in all the Prouinces of this Realm, and therin to reestablish all good order and gouernment: to comfort my poore people so much oppressed, and to erect my authoritie vniustly imbased: which I desire not so much for mine owne proper interest, as for the good that thereby may redound vnto you all. Among all kindes of gouernments and commaundements ouer men, the Monarchie excelleth all the rest: and the profit which you and yours haue reaped, vnder the lawfull gouernments of my predecessors, forceth you continually to render thankes to God, that it hath pleased him to giue you life in such a time, and vnder such a Prince, who beeing of the same race, hath not onely enioyed their royall seate, but the same and greater zeale, (if possible it may be) to the augmentation of the glorie of our God, and the conseruation of you all, as I haue alwaies promised, that mine actions should wholly tend therevnto. That mischiefe which malice and tract of time hath induced into my Prouinces, ought not so much to bee atributed vnto mee, (not that I seeke wholly to excuse my selfe) as to the negligence, and peraduenture some other faults of those that heeretofore haue been assistant vnto mee, wherein I haue already begunne to take order, as you may well perceiue, but I assure you, that from hencefoorth, I will bee so circumspect, in making choise of those that serue me, that my conscience shall bee discharged, mine honour inceased, and my estate reestablished, to the contentment of all good people, and thereby constraine those (who against all reason haue placed their affections on others, and not on mee) to acknowledge their errors.
The testimonies are yet sufficient and manifest, and namely by the witnesse of many of you, (as reaping honour by assisting mee therein) both before and since I haue beene your king, to shew with what zeale and forwardnesse I haue alwaies proceeded for the extirpation of hereticques and heresies, wherein I will more then euer, expose my bodie, yea euen to a certaine death, if neede requireth, for the defence and protection of our Catholicque, Apostolike, and Romane faith: the ouerthrow of heresies beeing the most sumptuous tombe wherein my body may be laid, not the battels only which I haue wonne, but that great ouerthrow and abating of the pride of the armie of Rutters: wherevnto Cod, for the honour of his holy name and of his Church, had chosen mee for an instrument, are sufficient proofes, the triumphs and spoyles whereof are yet extant to be seene.
Is there any one then so vncapable of the trueth, that will suppose more zeale and ardent desire to bee in man, for the totall extirpation of such heresies, when more certaine signes then mine of such intents cannot bee found?
And if it should be, that the honor of God (which to me is dearer the^ my life) not so much esteemed of by me, whose patrimony do the hereticques occupy and disseuer, whose reuenues doo they take vp and receiue, from whom do they alienate the subiects, whose obedience do they despise, whose respect, authoritie, and dignitie, doo they violate? And should not I then as much or more then any man, seeke their destruction: open your eyes, and iudge particularly, what apparance may bee therein.
The revnion of all my Catholicque subiects, by the holy Edict, not long since made, hath sufficiently testified, that nothing hath had more force within me, then to see God onely honoured, reuerenced, and serued, within my Realm, which I had more proceeded in, (as god willing I purpose to do, euen with the hazard of my life) if I had not beene hindered by this diuision moued by the Catholicques, (to the great aduantage of hereticques) staying my voyage into Poitou, where I am of opinion, that good fortune would no more haue abandoned mine actions, then it had done in other places, whereby (God bee thanked) mine estate hath reaped both the necessarie and desired benefit.
And although I am perswaded, you will not omit any one poynt, tending to the restoring and reformation of this Realme, yet will I make known vnto you, by some speciall things, how much I am most earnestly bent (not onely by this which I will now vtter, but by the effects that shall ensue) to imbrace all good meanes, as I am bound, esteeming them most requisite, for the necessitie and vrgent vses thereof, both for our soules, our honours, and our estate.
The extream offence which daily is committed against God, by swearing and blaspheming, to him so much iniurious, and wholly against my desire, causeth mee to put you all in minde, not to forget the iust punishments that such blasphemies deserueth: which my desire is, should bee reformed without fauour or exception either of person or quallitie. The inquirie and punishment of simony, shall not (as it becommeth all good Christians) bee forgotten, neither yet the order which is requisite, touching the sale and multiplicitie of iudicial offices, as being pernicious and insupportable to my poore subiects, wherein had it not been for the troubles begunne in Anno. 1585, I had of my selfe taken some order: but now I expect from you the holy and good meanes therein to bee vsed: as in the distribution and prouision of benefices, iudiciall and other officices, of honour, charge, estate, and dignitie: in this Realme, there consisteth that (which is dearer vnto me then life it selfe) mine honour, the preseruation and splendure of this estate, and the good will of all my subiects towards me: to the end, that such things may be done with more deliberation, I meane from hence forward, to appoynt some certaine times, which shall bee made knowne vnto you, and therein so to distribute them with iust consideration of each mans desert, as in dutie I am bound, as reason requireth, my reputation restraineth mee, and as the good I wish to this estate, forceth me vnto: minding that from this time forward, euery man shall hold that good and honour hee hath, only from me: and for their better meanes to obtaine them at my hands, I will take order for their more easie accesse vnto my person, according to the times and houres I will imploy to that end.
I likewise will all my subiects, to determine and resolue with themselues, to liue as vprightly, affectionately, and faithfully, in such offices as shall bee committed to their charges, as shall be requisite for the discharge of my conscience, and their owne: wherein from hencefoorth I am not determined to indure any defects, restraining my selfe by oath, neuer to graunt reseruation of any thing whatsoeuer, reuoking such as heeretofore haue been graunted, and from this time foorth, declaring them of no force, intending not to obserue them, as things that may bee preiudiciall, and meanes to mooue men eyther to desire or purchase the deaths of other men, and vngodly both in my selfe, and in such as seeke to obtaine them.
I will likewise giue no more suruiuings, determining, that concerning those alreadie graunted, I am minded to referre my selfe therein to your opinions. It is most necessary to restraine euocations, graunts, remissions, and abolitions, that iustice should bee more prompt, and lesse chargeable to the people, and that crimes may bee exactly punished. You must not likewise forget the inriching of Arts and Sciences: the beautifying and repairing of the Townes within my Realme: the gouernments and ordering of trade and trafficque of Merchandises, as well by land as by sea, and the restraining of vsurie, with superfluities and excesse of things that are risen to most high prises. The restoring and renuing of ancient ordinances touching the authoritie and dignitie of the soueraigne Prince, with the reuerence due vnto him and his Magistrates, which you shall determine as reason requireth. The iust feare that you might haue after my death, to fall into the gouernment of an hereticque king, if it chance that God should not grant me any heires males, is not more considered of by you, then by me.
And I protest before God, that I haue not more care of mine owne saluaion, then desire to bereaue you of that feare, which is one of the principall causes that mooued mee to make my holy Edict of vnion, and to abolish that damnable heresie, which although I haue most holily and solemnely sworne, before him that giueth man constancie, inuiolable to holde and obserue all good and holy oathes. I am determined the more to establish it, that it should bee made one of the fondamentall lawes of our Realme, and that vppon the next Tuesday, in this place, and before the notable assembly of all my estates, I will that euery man shall sweare vnto it, to the end that none may heereafter pretend any cause of ignorance.
And our holy desires may not vainly be frustrate for want of meanes: I determine to take such order therein, by the counsell which you shall giue mee, that as the desert shall not consist in mee, it may not likewise proceede from the small assistance by you giuen therevnto, whereby the effects of our desires may bee in force.
By my holy Edict of vnion, all leagues, but such as are made by authoritie from mee, ought not to bee suffered, and although it did not sufficiently forbidde the same, yet neither Cod nor dutie doth permit it, as beeing wholly against it, for that all leagues, associations, practises, deuises, intelligences, leuyings of men and mony, and receits of the same, as well within as without this Realme, are actions of a king, and in all well gouerned Monarches, esteemed high treason if they bee done without the Princes authoritie. And although by word of mouth (thereby witnessing my accustomed clemencie in that respect) to omit all forepassed faultes, yet as dutie bindeth mee and you all, (to conserue the royall estate) hauing taken order for the establishing of certaine lawes, to bee made by my estates, I will by these presents declare, and from hencefoorth pronounce as guiltie of high treason, all such my subiects as desist not from them, or that in any sort dealeth therein, without my authoritie and consent, graunted vnder the great Seale of France. Wherein I am assured that you will not faile, to shewe your faiths and fidelities, counselling and requiring at my handes, to renue and fortifie this faire and auncient law, ingrafted within the hearts of all true French men that defend the same: which I will shall bee set downe in expresse words: I am bound thereby both vnto my selfe, and to my Realme: and you to mee: and to the state of the land, which you now represent: wherevnto in presence of the Almightie God, I summon you all.
In times past, the goodly order and exact pollicie obserued among our souldiers, bredde and procured an admiration and terror of my nation, togither with a particular and honourable glory to all our French Nobilitie.
Now therefore weed esire, that the same honour wherewith wee haue beene admired aboue all nations, may still bee maintained: wherein I will spare no paines whatsoeuer: and the like I craue of you, whereby the wrath of God beeing appeased, and that our forces may bee vsed to the preseruation, and not to the destruction of our estate, thereby procuring so much contentment and comfort to my subiects, as that hereafter they may as willingly desire our souldiers both horse and footemen for their gifts, as they now feare and abhorre them, and that with great reason.
Lastly, I am much greeued that I cannot maintaine my estate and royall dignitie, with the necessary charges of this Realme without mony: for mine owne particular, it is the thing that least greeueth mee, but it is a necessary euill: warres likewise cannot bee well followed without mony, and seeing at this present wee are in a good course, to extirpe accursed heresies, it is necessary we should prouide great summes of mony to furnish our expenses: for want whereof (to say the trueth) our leuyings of men will bee more to our hinderances then our profits, and yet there can be no exployt done without them.
For my part therefore I promise, not to spare any meanes whatsoeuer: wherein likewise I craue that zeale of you, which you haue alwaies assured mee to beare vnto the seruice of God, and the commoditie of this Common-wealth.
And therefore you must (shewing you the full reuenues of my whole estate) haue that consideration, that the Senate of Rome had of an Emperour, who desiring (as I doo) to suppresse all subsidies, shewed him, that such leuyings of treasure, were the sinues and vaines of the body of the Commonwealth, which beeing taken away, it would presently desolue and be vnlosed.
And yet I say, that I would to God, that the necessitie of my estate constrained mee not to vse them: and that at one instant, I might gratifie my people with so goodly a present, as also that my daies might be abridged, not desiring to liue any longer, then that my life might be profitable and aduantage to the seruice of God, and all your preseruations.
Touching the order required for the disposing of my treasures, so much for the comfort and ease of my people, whether it bee concerning the ouer great numbers of officers, or other particularities, I am perswaded you will take as good order by your wisedomes, as shall bee requisite, as beeing one of the principall pillers, whereby wee and all our estate in generall, for the most part are supported.
It is likewise a matter of conscience (that toucheth our soules healths) to take order for our debts, which I haue not altogither made, but beeing debts of our Realme, you ought to haue a care thereof, wherevnto both publicque faith and wisedome, bindeth you all, and you shall bee certified what they are.
The King beeing the patron, whereby all his subiects learne to frame their actions, it is therefore, that of my naturall inclination, I will so gouerne mine owne person and my house, that from hencefoorth they shall serue for a rule and example to all the rest of my Realme and Kingdome.
And to the end I may witnesse by effect, that which you desire of mee, and which is most deepely ingraued within my heart, touching this great assembly (hauing fully determined vpon your memorialles and billes) which I desire you, may bee done with all the speede you can, and with your good counselles and aduise (as I will shew vnto you,) the next day after in open audience in the Church, that it may bee knowne to all my subiects, and so holde it for an inuiolable and firme lawe, whereby no man may withstand it but with shame and infamie, and vppon paine to bee accessary of high treason, as an enemie to this countrie, I meane by oath vppon the Euangelistes, to binde all the Princes, Lordes, and Gentlemen, that are assistant at this Parliament, togither with you the Deputies of my estates, and therevppon you shall receiue the Sacrament, to obserue all the thinges that therein are contained, as sacred lawes, not reseruing vnto my selfe the libertie of exemption from the same, for any cause, pretence, or occasion whatsoeuer may heereafter happen.
Which done, I will presently cause it to bee sent into all the Courts of Parliament throughout my Realme, to sweare all Ecclesiasticall, Noble, and common persons therevnto, with this clause, that whosoeuer opposeth himselfe against it, shall alwaies bee holden as a notorious traitor.
And if heerein I seeme to submit my selfe more then becommeth mee, vnto the lawes whereof I am the Authour, and which of themselues dispence with mee therein, and that by this meanes, I reduce my rovall estate to more certaine termes and poynts, then that of my predecessors: It is the principall cause that maketh the generous minde of the Prince best knowne and discerned, to addresse and frame his thoughts and actions vnto his good lawes, and wholly to oppose himselfe against the corruptions thereof: and it will suffice mee to make answere therevnto, as that King did (to whom it was tolde, that hee sought to leaue his royaltie in woorse estate to his successors, then hee enioyed it from his predecessors) that he would make it much more durable and assured then euer it was.

But to end my long discourse, hauing vsed authoritie and commaundement, I will now proceede to exhortations and prayers: and first I charge you all, by the dutie you owe to God, by whom I am appoynted and substituted ouer you, to represent his person, by the name of true Frenchmen, (that is of passionate louers of their naturall and lawefull Prince,) by the ashes of the memories of so many Kings my Predecessours, that haue so louingly and happily ruled and gouerned ouer you: by the charitie that you beare vnto your Countrie, by the boundes and hostages it hath of your fidelities, your wiues, your children, and your domesticall fortunes, that with all your hearts you imbrace this occasion: that you bee wholly and altogither carefull for the Common-wealth: that you vnite and ioyne your selues with mee, to striue against the disorders and corruptions of this estate, by your sufficiencie, by your integritie, and by your greate care and diligence, abandoning and forsaking all contrary thoughts, (and following onely my example,) not hauing any other desire, then the onely good of the Common-wealth, and as my selfe beeing estraunged from all other ambition, then that onely which concerneth and toucheth a subiect, as I my selfe beare no other minde, then that which belongeth vnto a good, faithfull, and Christian King.
If you doo otherwise, you shall bee filled with all accursednesse, you will imprint a perpetuall spot of infamie in your posteritie and names, and also bereaue your posteritie of that successiue name and title of sidelitie towardes your King, which by your auncestors hath been so carefully left vnto you.
And for mine owne parte, I will take heauen and earth to witnesse, and I will bee iudged both by God and man, that it is not my fault, nor any want of diligence in mee, that the disorders of this Realme, haue not beene long since reformed, but that you are the onely cause, by forsaking your lawefull Prince, in so woorthie, so holy, and so commendable an action.
Lastly, I summon you all to appeare at the latterday, before the Iudge of all Iudges, where all mens thoughts and secret meanings shall bee opened, where the maskes and visards of craftes and dissimulations shall bee pulled off, there to receiue reward, by you desired, for your disobedience towards your King, togither with your great negligence and small loyaltie in regard of this estate.
But God forbidde, that I should euer thinke it, but rather conceiue that you will rule your selues therein, (as I perswade my selfe) with wisedome, affection, loue, and fidelitie, wherein you shall do good seruice vnto God, and also to your King, you shall bee bleffed in this world, and thereby obtaine the name of couseruators of your lande and countries.
The Chancellours Oration.This oration finished, with an extraordinary applauding of all the assemblie, the Chauncellour named Monsieur de Montelon, hauing made two greatreuerences, beganne to speake, and confirming the Kings speeches,
hee commended the zeale and integritie of his minde, declared the honour and Maiestie of Kings, with the inuiolable bond of obedience due vnto them: assuring them, that vnder his happie and prosperous conduction, they should by that assembly of all the estates of France, reape the same effects, which in times past had beene found and experiented vnder the raignes of Philippe le Bell, Iohn the first, and Charles the eight: charging them all, euery one in his estate and degree, to ioyne and vnite their wise and learned aduises vnto the kings good pleasure, therewith to ayde and assist him.
And directing the thunders of his eloquence, against the disorders of the estate, hee exhorted the Cleargie to reerect the beautie and dignitie of the Church, vsing therein the meanes and originall disciplines of auncient and holy Councels, as when riuers or kennelles are stopped, men seeke to finde out their Springs, and so to cleare them: shewing, that if the doctrine and preaching of the word, had been carefully administred vnto the people, so many heresies and notorious vices, hadde neuer sprung vppe nor taken roote in this Realme, nor yet so much breach of lawes, and disobedience towards the Kings, Nobles, Iudges, and Magistrates, had euer beene practised and performed.
Obedience preached by Ministers.That obedience then is most commonly knowne and obserued, when by the preachings, instructions, and examples, of Ministers and Pastors, it is ingraued into the hearts of the common people, alleadging this place of the Scripture: The word of God is liuely and effectuall, and sharper then any two edged sword.
Against admission into benefices.That the King had oftentimes by Edicts and Ordinances, incited and mooued them vnto their duties, but neuer could reape the fruite which hee desired: and therewith complained of their weake prouisions, their incapable admissions, into Ecclesiasticall functions: of their ambition and auarice: of their multiplicitie of benefices, against the cannons and decrees of their non residences: to the despising of holy lawe: of the corruption and deprauations of Monasteries, and of their rules and disciplines, almost left off, and in such sort weakened, that hee said there was but very fewe orders, wherein great numbers of Monkes and Fryers, had not wholly forgotten their promises and vowes.
The integritie of religious persons.Excepting some, that might iustly be termed like holy men, the pearles of religion, who by the perfection of their liues, good workes, prayers, and Orations, had surmounted the obscurities and mystes of this world, pearced the cloudes, and attained so neare to heauen, that they are (as Saint Barnard saith:) In susurio cum Deo, and with their extacies and rauishings of Spirits, they did diuert and turne the wrath of God from vs.
The praise of the French Nobilitie.From them, hee turned his speech vnto the Nobilitie, whose vertues are set downe in all our auncient Histories, recommending vnto them, pietie, bountie, and iustice, wherein they ought to bee examples to their subiects.
Obedience to the king, and to the principal supporters of equitie and iustice: The auncient oath of Gentlemen.and hauing long dilated vppon that poynt, by many examples taken both out of Pagans and French Histories, hee set before them the vices that at this day raigneth among them, specially swearing and blaspheming of the name of God: where in times past, the ancient oath of the Nobilitie, was vsually to say: Foy de Gentil-homme: that is, by the faith of a Gentleman, which they did with reuerence and requisite circumstances, as time and place required.
Shewing them likewise, what mischiefes proceeded of priuate quarrels, the onely name whereof is horrible in the eares of all christians, and haue alwaies been seuerely punished and forbidden by auncient and holy lawes,The mischiefe of priuate quarrels that in their daily praters they promised to forgiue such as offended them, and that they were bound vnto it: which if they did, they should not onely preserue their owne persons, but their friends and kinsmen, and withall, participating with that great glory which they should onely desire: which is, to knowe how to rule their passions and themselues in their behalfes. And that reuenge would bee so well wrought by the king and his iustice, with so great opportunitie, that thereby they should not onely preserue themselues, but bee fully satisfied to their contentments.
Benefices held comme^dably.To the said vices hee added their holding of Benefices, Hospitalles, and Spittle-houses, founded by their predecessors: shewing them, that it was not onely an abuse, but impietie committed towards God and his holy Church.
Lastly, hee recommended vnto them the bearing and vsing of armes, according to the examples of their auncestors. To the third estate he shewed, that their chiefe support and maintenance, is iustice and ciuill pollicie: that the iudges in that poynt held the first place, iustice beeing the foundation and establishment of all Monarchies, soueraignties and powers whatsoeuer: alleadging the saying of
Traian, who beeing required by the king of Partheans, that the riuer of Euphrates might serue as a border betweene their Empires,Iustice limiteth the borders of the Empire. aunswered, that not the riuer but iustice should limit the borders of the Romane Empire, and that kingdomes without iustice, are but dennes of theeues.
Dealing much vppon the ouerthrowing of particular iustices, the great abuses therein committed, with the prolongations, subtilties, and deuises (to hide the trueth) therein vsed, comparing it vnto a shippe, tossed and tormented in the waues of the sea, seeking for a safe port, and cannot finde it, beeing hindered by the crosse-waues and rockes that meete therewith: shewing, that such at this day is the miserie of those that seeke to end their suites in lawes,Prolonging and deceit in suites. by the subtiltie of men, and negligences of the Iudges, by so many delaies, incidences, and prolongations, wherein iustice is not to bee vsed, but to the contrary, it is rather vexed, troubled, and oftentimes wholly ouerthrowne.
That the particular faults of some men, were the principall causes thereof, who by that meanes thinking to aduance themselues and their posterities, would in the end, hauing attained to the full ripenesse of their wickednesse, felt the mischiefe thereof.
An intollerable number of Officers.That among those abuses, was to bee numbred the multiplicitie of offices that oppressed the Realme. The euill gouernments, the ignorances of diuers officers which the king had left vnto his Iudges to reforme, but that his commaundement had beene as good vndone, as done, altogither proouing wholly vnfruitfull, ioyning therevnto all sorts of pollicie, in Citties and Townes, in which cases they are vnited, by well gouerned lawes and ordinances, euery one according to his charge and necessary function, but that the mischiefe was, that in these daies, lawes are nothing else but written papers: hee set downe the vnexcusable faults committed in obseruation of lawes, pollices and ordinances, made for the punishment of swearers, blasphemers, players, idle persons, vsurers, vnlawfull exacters, cousoners, wicked liuers, men vsing prohibited and vnlawfull places, with all such kinde of vices: Idle Schollers, the libertie of liuing idlely and desolutely, without pollicie or gouernment, but only by bad and disordered meanes (causes and originalles of troubles and seditions) which ouerthrow and subuert all kingdomes and good Common-wealths, adding therevnto, a most earnest exhortation: to seeke remedies to all those michiefes.
The kings debts.Lastly, hee shewed the great debts the king hadde fallen into, his great diligences and hazards, by making warres against the hereticques, his pietie, religion, and deuotion to the Romish Church: with the rare behauiour, actions, and counsell of the Queene his mother.
Ending his Oration with the vnitie and concord that ought to bee (as a most necessary thing) in that assembly, thereby to holde the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romane Church, with general and particular estate of all that are comprehended therin, in true obedience to the king, in all vnion and concord: which doing, this Monarchie would bee found to be inuironed with all happinesse, vnder the authoritie of the most christian king: and to the contrary, dooing otherwise, they should feele a continuall greefe and remorse of conscience within their mindes, for disobeying God, their King, and countrie.
The Archbishop of Bourges Oration.The Archbishop of Bourges, Patriarch, and
Primate of Aquitaine, thanked the king, in that it pleased him to shewe his great good will towards his subiects, saying: that thereby the poore and miserable countrie of France, which for the space of eight and twentie yeares, hadde beene so much tormented, beganne to receiue some strength, and to take courage, hearing the sweete and pleasing voyce of her king, witnessing his more then fatherly affection towards his subiects, which would cause him to bee honoured and belooued within his Realme, as much as in auncient time, the world worshipped
Herculus, Theseus, and other valiant men, that eased and relieued them from the burthen of oppressions and violences vsed in those daies by Tyrants and monstrous Gyants.
Saying, that as God when his people were afflicted, raised
Moyses, Iosue, Dauid, Manasses, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and other good kings, so by his prouidence, hee hadde sent into this desolate kingdome, a King who from his young yeares hadde beene guided by the Spirite of the Kings beloued of God.wisedome of God to gouerne his people, and as the young Eagle (a celestiall bird) comming out of her nest, his Maiestie pricked and prouoked by the vengeance and generositie of his Predecessors, hath throwne the thunder of the eternall GOD, vppon the faces and heades of the enemies of his diuine Maiestie, not once sparing his owne life for the honour of God, and tranquillitie of his Realme, who in his voyage to
Polonia,His voyage to Polonia. passing and repassing through so many and diuers Nations, hath hadde and gotten so much experience in all actions, that by the onely wisedome and eye of his vertues, hee hath dispearsed a great and puissant armie of straungers, Rutters, and Switzers.
A happie houre of his raigne.Concluding therewith by so certaine a hope, that vnder so good and so mightie a king, they should see heresie suppressed and repulsed, peace assured, the seruice of God established, all the Churches restored and reedified, Townes franchised and freed from caliuers and drummes: the Temple of warres closed and shutte vppe, and that of peace opened vnto all men: iustice and peace imbrasing each other: lawes flourishing, charitie abounding among men, and by one consent and vnion of religion, vnder the obedience of God and the King, who representing the person of GOD, beareth the sword of Gods iustice heere on earth, the kingdome of Christ would thereby beginne to flourish, as an example of all goodnesse in the world to come, wherevnto wee all aspire.
Great ioy made by the estates.And therewith in the name of them all, adding this exclamation: Viue Rex in sempiternum: Liue King, liue, and liue eternally: and for the gracious vertues and notable inspirations, wherewith God hath touched your Princely heart, all your Realme of France singeth Benedictus Deus qui misit talem voluntatem in cor regis: Blessed and praised bee God, that hath inspired so good and notable a desire into the heart of our King, which wee beseech his diuine Maiestie to assist, fortifie and conduct, to a most happie and prosperous end, for his honour and glorie.
The Earle of Brssac, his Oratio^ made in ^ame of the whole Nobilitie.After the Archbishop of Bourges sat downe, the Earle of Brissac stood vppe, and for a congratulation of those of his order, hee shewed the King, that the Nobilitie in generall, hadde giuen him in charge to thanke his Grace, for the good and honour they receiued, beeing by his commaundements called and conuoked togither by an assembly of the generall estates, and in his royall presence, there to heare and vnderstand his holy and good resolutions, assuring themselues, that the effects would bee as prompt and certaine, as it was a naturall and iust thing in him to be a true king: acknowledging, that by that meanes onely, it would make them such as they ought to be,The affectio^ of the French Nobilitie in the seruice of the king and state. touching the reestablishing of the honour of God, the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romane religion, and of other things profitable to his estate, and necessarie for his poore people. Promising for their partes, to vse the fidelitie, zeale, affection, and generositie, that hath allwaies beene naturall in the Gentlemen of France, towardes their Kings and soueraigne Princes. Offering vnto his Maiestie, the most humble seruice of their armes, persons, and liues, to cause him to bee obeyed, honoured, feared, respected, and acknowledged of all men, as both diuine and humane lawes haue constituted and appoynted. And withall, to restore his Realme purged of heresies (the spring and cause of all diuisions) to her first and ancient dignitie, wherevnto they would expose themselues freely, generously, and liberally vnder his authoritie, euen to the last drop of their blood.
The Crati. of the third estate.The Prouost of Merchants within Parris, President for the thirde estate, fell on his knees, and for those of his degree, spake and sayde: That seeing it had pleased his Maiestie so to open his minde, and to declare his holy intents vnto his people, thereby assuring them of his great charitie (truely named most fatherly) in their behalfes, his most humble, most obedient, and most faithfull subiects of the third estate, first praised God, that it had pleased him to cast the eyes of his mercie vppon them in the extremitie of their afflictions, and then yeelded most hartie thankes vnto his Maiestie, who shewing his power, ordained from aboue, to rule and gouerne this Christian Monarchie, with all courtesie and princely inclination, hath not refused to bend his royall eares to their most humble petitions, to heare their greefes and complaints, and withall, to shewe a most singular and speciall desire, to restore his people to their auncient force, to whom as then there rested but the onely libertie of speech, and that very weake and feeble, to reestablish holy religion in her pristinate estate, by the extirpation of all errors and heresies, to rule and remit all auncient orders (altered by the iniurie and alteration of times) vnto their first forme and manner of beeing, and to comfort his poore people, protesting that therein their most humble and most faithfull seruices, should neuer bee wanting euen to the last gaspe: which Oration beeing ended, the assemblie with a maruellous contentment ended the first day of their meeting.
The second day of meeting vpon Tuesday the 18. of Octob. 1588.The second day of their meeting beganne vppon the Tuesday after, in the same manner as it did vppon the first day, and because the King had been mooued by the Archbishop of
Ambrun, the Counte de Brissac, and the Aduocate
Bernard, Deputies for the three estates, to renue his oathes of vnion, and perceiuing their pursuite to proceede from the distrust they had in him, seeing that hee hauing once sworne it within the Cittie of
Roane, it was as then needelesse to renue his oath againe, hee went neuerthelesse to satisfie the importunitie of the League, and so beganne that seconde meeting with the same action.
The Kings proposition made to the Senate at their meetings.Silence beeing commaunded by a Herault, his Maiestie saide, that at their first meeting, hee hadde shewed what great desire and care hee hadde, that in his raigne hee might see and beholde, his subiects revnited in the true Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romane religion, vnder the obedience which it hadde pleased GOD for their partes to giue vnto him, and for that cause, hauing made his Edict in the moneth of Iuly last, ordaining it to bee confirmed and holden for a
The Edict of vnion, made a lawefondamentall law of his Realm, therby to binde both himself and them, with all their posterities, his meaning was as then to haue it redde openly before them all: which done, euery man should sweare to obserue it accordingly. And with that, hee commaunded Monsieur de Beaulieu his principal Secretarie to read it, togither with the declaration made vpon the same, so to giue it the force and authoritie of a law of his Realme, and yet without derogating the liberties and priuiledges of his Nobilite.
The reading thereof, with the declaration beeing ended, the king desiring that the woorthinesse of the cause should bee preferred, with as much Maiestie as it deserued, thereby to mooue the whole assembly better to consider the importance of the contract, which as then they were to make with God, crauing his horrible and most fearefull vengeance, might fall vppon all those that disloyally should falsifie their faiths therevnto giuen, as assurances of the obseruation of his said Edict of vnion, he commanded the Archbishop of Bourges, to make an Oration vnto the states concerning the same.
The oration of the Archbishop of Bourges, touching the Edict of the vnion.This learned Prelate saide, that seeing it pleased his Maiestie, that the instruction of so solemne an oath, should bee giuen vnto the people by the mouth of the Prelates, hee exhorted all the assembly (appoynted for that great and solemne actions) to humble themselues vnder the mightie hand of God, and to acknowledge his Maiestie, togither with the effect and quallitie of the oath, which they were as then to receiue, considering that God is trueth it selfe, and all oathes whatsoeuer, which are not grounded vppon that trueth, are false and vniust.
That the cause of the oath as then presented, was for the Church, the onely spouse of God,The Church is visible. Vniuersall. Catholicque. visible heere on earth, because it comprehendeth all the faithfull that are the christian communaltie. Inuisible in heauen, where it is said triumphant, vniuersall, for that it maketh no distinction of persons, nations, quallities, conditions, or sects.
One, without diuision or schisme.One, for that of Alexandria, Ephese, Ierusalem, Affrica, and Aegipt, are but one Church, and her doctrine is one Romane doctrine, not in regard of the walles of the Cittie of Rome, but by reason of a speciall nomination and demonstration that is saide of it, that therein Saint Peter, and after him Saint Clement, and others their successors, haue preached and announced the word of God, witnessing the true christian doctrine, and many other Martyrs with the price of their blood, which they haue freely shed for the name and honour of God.
The vnion of the Church.That the vnion of this Church is so strong, that it cannot bee broken nor separated in it selfe, beeing placed vppon the firme rocke which is Iesus Christ, so that the gates of hell cannot preuaile against it: it is called the Lords vinyard, and the Gods sheepfolde, vnder one head, and shepheard of our soules.
That to preserue the vnitie of his Church, it is conuenenient, that all the children thereof, should be vnited vnder Christ their Sauiour, and vnder the king, whose faith hath continued from posteritie to posteritie, euen vnto his person, and neuer separated it selfe from the vnitie of this holy and christian religion.
Let vs vnite our selues then (said this Prelate), let vs vnite our selues togither as true faithfull Catholicques, let vs renue this great and solemne oath due vnto God: let vs ioyne our vowes and hearts togither, and so yeeld them and confirme them vnto God.
Obedience due to the king.Let vs sweare vnto our Prince, the obedience and submission due vnto him by all lawes diuine and humane: let vs imbrace christian charitie: let vs abandon hatreds and rancors, both open and secret, with all suspitions and distrusts which hitherto haue troubled and diuided vs, and which haue hindered, yea and broken so good intents, and had it not beene for them,
France had long since enioyed a happie peace.
Let vs lift vp our hands to heauen, to yeelde vnto that great God the oath wee owe vnto him, that it may bee a memorie for euer vnto the world, that our posterities may beholde our faiths and constancie in our oathes, and not our periurie, by the good and holy effects that shall insue.
And seeing it hath pleased your Maiestie (most noble Prince) to bee the first that heere in presence of vs all, shall performe this oath, for an example to all your subiects, all wee with one accord will lift vp our hands to heauen, and sweare by the liuing God, to serue and honour him for euer, to maintaine his Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romane Church, to defend your Maiestie and your estate against all men, to obserue and inuiolably to holde that which is contained in your Edict of vnion, at this present redde and published to the glory of God, exaltation of his holy name, and to the conseruation of his Church, and this Realme of
France.
The kings oath for the obseruation of his edict.This Oration made, the king spake and said: My Lords, you heard the tenor of mine Edict, and vnderstood the quallitie thereof, togither with the greatnesse and woorthinesse of the oath, which at this present you are generally to make.
The oath of the Spiritualtie, Ex consilio Triburienfi.And for that I perceiue all your iust desires conformeable vnto mine, I wil sweare before God, with a good and safe conscience, the obseruation of this my edict, as long as God shall lend me life in earth: and I will and command, that it shall bee obserued in this my Realme, for a sure and stedfast lawe, and in perpetuall memorie and witnesse of the vniuersall correspondence and consent of all the estates of my Realme, you shall presently sweare the obseruation of this my Edict of vnion, all with one voyce, each Ecclesiasticall person laying his hand vpon his breast, and the rest lifting their hands vp to heauen.
An act of the protestation of the oath.And to the end that a memorie of so solemne an oath may bee more pithily set downe to all posterities, hee commaunded Monsieur de Beaulieu to make an act thereof: which done, the ioy was so great, that nothing could bee heard among them, but crying: Viue le Roy, all the assemby followed his Maiestie into the Church of Saint
Saueor, wherein thanksgiuing they sung, Te Deum Laudamus.
The kings clemencie in taking away the Barricadoes at Parris. Mortales recidinae.There the Prouost of Merchants in Parris, vnderstood from the King, that the Parrissians offence had beene very great, but that hee hadde forgotten it: that hee made his Edict for the common good of all French Catholicques, and also the comfort of his poore people: the miseries whereof, caused him to remit the memorie thereof, withall, willing him to bee assured thereof, as beeing spoken from the mouth of his king, with commaundement to bee very carefull, least the Cittie of Parris should fall into the like fault, which vnto them would prooue both mortall and vnreparable.
A report running in the Parliament house.And because the Deputies that came last thither, brought newes that all the Countrie of France were of opinion, that vnder pretence of that assembly, there would be some publike and notorious vengeance wrought against the principall estates, and that this report ranne from chamber to chamber, it was determined among them, to enquire thereof, and to knowe the kings intent, the Archbishop of Ambrun spake vnto him, and gaue to vnderstand the great feare that diuers of the estates were in, by reason of the report that ranne among them, touching a tragedie (as they thought) to bee prepared, confirmed by the aduise of strangers, specially such as litle cared for the peace and tranquilitie of this estate.
Salus populi suprema lex est.The king made answere, that the safetie of his subiects, would be his owne defence: that hee cherished them as a father doth his children: that he knew the suretie and libertie of the estates, that they ought to bee assured of his word, that the occasion of troubling them, should neuer proceed from him: that it was an open offence, once to enter into distrust of their king: and that reports were deuised by those that could not loue their King, but onely seeke the meanes to cause him to bee hated of his people.
The Archbishop of Lyons of the counsell from the peace of Chartres.Likewise the familiarities, entertainments, and shewes of amitie and good will, by the King continued to the Duke of Guise and the Cardinall his brother, and for the loue of them both to the Archbishop of Lyons, that had beene of the Councell from the time of the peace concluded at Chartres, caused those reports to cease, and made the prognostications (in that behalfe sent from all places) wholly fabulous: which were, that the issue of the Parliament holden in Bloys, would bee horrible and bloody. And I beleeue, if that the league for her part, had vsed no means to kindle the ashes that as yet laye hotte within the furnace, that the fire of the kings chollor had neuer been kindled.
The intent of the league.The League therefore assured on that side, set those on worke that were of her sect, in that so solemne assembly, to effect their secret pretences, which was so to incroch vppon the king, that they would leaue him but onely a vaine shadowe of royall authoritie, vnder the conduction and direction of her tyrannie, and withall, to exclude the king of Nauarre from his royall succession.
The league declareth and blameth the kings actions.The bridge to passe vnto the first poynt, was to make his actions odious and intollerable, to reproach him for his liberallitie, his mignions, his edicts, his dissimulations, and the long oppressions and troubles of the people, to the end, that consenting to the suppression of estates and offices, hee might thereby procure the hatred of all such as had any interest therein, that is the most apparant families of the third estate, and not seeking to redresse it, hee should bee dedeclared not a father, but an enemie to his people: not a King, but a Tyrant in his Realme: and that the people would presently confine him in a Cloyster.
The King was continually solicited with many petitions, thereby not so much to make him see the euill, but rather to threaten him, that he shuld yet find it much greater, if speedie order were not take^. They set before his eies the extreame coldnesse of the greatest part of all the Catholicques, in loue Petitions made to the king at the beginning of his raigne. The king ought to reuenge the dishonours done against God.and obedience towards him, by reason they were most straughely oppressed with excessiue impositions and subsidies, constrained to liue in company with such as had burned Churches, prophaned the Altars, massacred the Priests, and robbed and taken away their goods.
They brought him to defend the Church, not to esteeme so much of the wrongs committed against the state, as of the iniuries done vnto religion: not to suffer any feare to enter into his minde, concerning the enemies of GOD, which more and more increased, by a certaine kinde of distrust, which constrained him to shewe contumelious passions, not breeding peace, but rather seruitude, and so to dissemble the iniuries committed against God: which to preuent, hee should reuenge himselfe like a King, bannish those that counselled him onely for the aduantage of heresies, and imbrace such as had strayed out of the right way, and desired to enter into it againe, to vse his sword of authoritie against the obstinate, and to remember this most true and certaine maxime, that were the fault of treason against the diuinitie of God, left vnpunished, there the fault of treason against man, will proceed so farre, that in the end it will bee esteemed no offence.
Straungers authors of new impositions to oppresse the people.They assured him, that the greatest scourge of this Realme, is the straunger, from whose extreame auarice proceedeth all the inuentions of new imposts, which most cruelly impouerish all the Realme of France, that laugh at her ruine, and make them of great authoritie, who alreadie haue made a great part of his people to become male contents, and in the end will cause the rest to reuolt, if they bee not speedily dispatched out of the Realme, like the diuell, that causeth perpetuall diuision, still hindering the rest and quietnesse of the common people.
Disorders in pollicie.Among diuers disorders crept into the common pollicie of the Realme, they mooued him of two most great abuses, which by continuance produced all the rest. The first, touching the giuing of benefices vnto all persons, without choise or exception either of men or souldiers: that all the Bishoppes of those daies, some fewe onely excepted, that as yet haue some remembrance of their estates, and some sparke of the feare of God imprinted in their minds,The pride and couetonsnesse of Prelates. are daily seene, not to shed teares before the Lord of heauen, and by praiers to mittigate his wrath and furie bent against vs, but proudly to walke within the Court, and in all places, with great troupes of men, the most desperate and vaine persons that are within this Realme.
Their houses are not filled with the noyse of Himnes and Psalmes, sung to the honour of God, but with barking of dogges, breeding of hawkes, and all kindes of vaine and dissembling speeches. And to bee short, there is nothing seene but ignorance, slaunders, adulteries, and shame among them, the onely beholding of their countenances, mooueth men more to go out of the Church, then all the Ministers and Preachers of heresie are able to inforce them.
The second is the sale of offices and places of iustice, which causeth the most wicked to bee most esteemed, that the strongest without reproach oppressethe weak, that without scruple of conscience they sell iustice by retaile, which they themselues haue bought by grosse: that Townes and Prouinces abound in murthers, and diuers vnpunished crimes: that there is no more order in pollicic, nor faith in bargening: no respect to the lawe, nor loue to vertue, The pollicie of the estate of the churchand that a most vnbrideled libertie to all euill, runneth throughout the whole Realme. Which two abuses to extirpe, they said vnto him: Your Maiestie is not to deale in any sort with the spiritualtie, but if you will vndertake so great a charge, when you haue first taken order for your cruill pollicie, you must imploy your time therein with all holinesse, such as belongeth to the handling of diuine causes: you are carefull to seeke and finde out men that are excellent and of good conscience to serue about your person: but what excuse will you alleadge, in beeing lesse carefull to prouide sufficient men for the seruice of God? your Grace conceiueth not the importance of this fault, you are the cause that a million of soules are lost, and it is a most great fault in those that should aduertise your Maiestie thereof, if they do it not: If you repent not great and forepassed abuses, and heereafter suffer it not to proceed any further, it is most certaine, you can neuer auoyde eternall damnation.
Ministers disturbers of the church, of iustice and pollicie.And let your Maiestie bee assured, that if you diuert not these ruines, that are likely to fall vpon vs, if presently you do degrade a great number as well of Ecclesiasticall Prelates, as ciuill Magistrates, who at this day are officers in al your soueraigne Courts and iurisdictions, you cannot preserue your estate: you must degrade and punish with death a great number of the most manifest offenders therein: for that hath already been done within your Realme, and bred a great contentment.
Then you must inquire and search out for men of good and honest behauiour, wherewith you must replenish your Councell, and then God will bee assistant vnto them (for Gods spirit is alwaies with the iust man) and thereby your enterprises will surely take effect, sooner by the hands of those whom he doth blesse, then by such as are prophane persons, whose works are accursed. It is very true, that we finde not so great numbers of honest men walking abroad,Rari quippe boni. yet how corrupt soeuer the world may be, it was neuer known or found to be voyde of some most excellent and vertuous men: what numbers of excellent wits and zealous persons, are yet at this day in al the Prouinces of this Realme? how many hereticall courages, replenished with holy magnanimitie and incredible boldnesse, as among the Nobilitie of this land (not blasphemous Gentlemen, but such as loue and feare God) that neuer were in your Court, but rather dwell and remaine in their owne houses without any imployment? How many great, rich, and commendable wittes, are distributed and lye hidde within the heads and mindes of men of all sorts, and yet wholly despised of diuers persons? who if they were imployed in diuers charges, would within short time, wholly redresse all the disorders and ruines of our estate: but such men are onely knowne of GOD, and of some honest men: if in your Maiesties Court, there were a zeale and a desire of saluation and amendment, their places and habitations would be continually sought and found out,Reformatiof the excesse and disorders in the court. and men vppon their knees would intreate them, desiring them to helpe to redresse this fauage and barbarous time wherein wee liue: and that in steade of ciuill warres of pouertie, of miserable seruitude, and infinite other mischiefes, they would bring vs a holy peace, togither with the aboundance of all good things.

But the blinde prouidence of your Court, is onely to finde out new meanes of recouering mony: it onely regardeth that, as an Angel of desence: it placeth all her confidence in gold and siluer, wherein are seen nothing but Italian banquers, and inuentions of new imposts: it is much deceiued, it is not the great and massy Scepter of golde (as an auncient wise man saith) that is, not the great treasures that maketh Princes to flourish, but rather the dutifull amitie of their subiects, which proceedeth only from the good order of iustice, and the election of capable persons, fit for the gouernment of all estates.
Touching the proposition made to the king, to cut off the superfluous number of officers, and to abolish the corruption of the sale of offices, from whence hee receiueth not one penny profit, which is not tempered in the blood of the common people: such as found themselues interested thereby, (fearing to loose the profit and commoditie of their places, and those specially that concerned the receit of treasures) made a great and goodly declaration to the king, to mooue him to the contrary, and to hold the^ in their places which they possessed vnder the title of officers for his Maiestie: shewing him, that the good and comfort of the people (which was thought would bee procured by the suppression of their offices) is the greatnesse, glorie, and riches of his Crowne, and of his people, which is alwaies oppressed and troden vnder foote by such as are mightie, if there bee not some that like a barre interpose themselues betweene the power of the one, and the weaknesse of the other, which is specially done by the offices, as well of iustice, as of his Maiesties treasures: that the erection of offices, rather wanteth ayde and profit, then oppression and wrong vnto the people, for that without them, the people must of force haue beene constrained to helpe the King in his warres with their owne goods.
The decree of Charles the fift, dated the
28. of May. 1359.That it is a vaine thing, to seeke to make those offices that ought to bee perpetuall, to become annuall, and so to be exercised by Commissaries, for that is not to bee indured in any estate or Monarchie: and Charles the fist seeking to erect that order, during the prisonment of king Iohn, perceiued so many discommodities, discontentments, and seditions therein, that hee reuoked the suspencing and depriuation of such offices, and himselfe in person pronounced the decree thereof in open Parliament.
That it is easie to iudge by the passions and instant pursuites, of the greatest of those that demaund commissions, that they haue a most extreame enuie, to confound the order and principal supports of the royal estate, so to transferre it to the occupation and mannaging of a small company of men, or else to put the rurther of this Monarchicall shippe into the hands of the common people, and such as haue least skill and knowledge to rule it, and by that means to bring the head vnder the foot: that diuers of those earnest petitioners, had not solde their offices (which they had likewise obtained by the same means) for the most aduantage, they would thinke themselues most happy at this day to ioyne with 80. or a 100. thousand officers, whereof that body is composed which at this present, imploreth iustice due and woorthie the desert of their cause.
That the suppression of so many estates and offices (which at this day are the chiefe and most orient brightnesse of the honourablest families among his subiects) would vnfainedly drawe on the desolation, decay, and totall ruine of the best Townes in all this Realme: wherein the youth for want of good exercise, should easily throw themselues headlong into vanities and follies, whereof idlenesse onely is the cause, and therefore they most humbly besought his Maiestie, to maintaine them in his seruice, suffering them to continue therein, and to enioy their offices as they had vsually done.
The billes of the three estates.Which allegation beeing ended, the complaints and petitions of the three estates, were read in such large and ample discourses, that the least towne in France, had matter sufficient to make a long and tedious declaration. All of them in generall complaining, (besides the excesse of tallages,) of other subsidies, impositions, customes, furnishings of fiftie thousand souldiers, tallies, augmentations, and increasings of new forces, impostes vpon wines, lendings of mony, both generall and particular, subsidies of one hundreth soules for euery processe, redeeming of their commons, new inuentions touching the pauing of walled Towns, the raising and calling downe of monies, the surcharge of two, three, and foure soules vpon euery franke, the vniuersall number of tallages,The common peoples complaints. the fourth and eight part of wines that are solde by retaile, with other superfluous impositions: and to conclude, the people complained of the publicque calamities and oppressions, which made them as bare and naked of ease and fatnesse, as the body of a man that is appoynted for an anatomie.
The Nobilitie complained of their seruices done without recompence, and of the indiscrcet distribution of the kings liberallities and rewards. The Cleargie made a greater noyse, and found themselues greeued, that neither the summes of mony, nor yet the great charges leuyed vpon them, had not in any thing aduanced the seruice of religion.
Wherevppon the King supposing to sustaine the golden world, and thereby to restore and procure great rest and quietnesse to his people, almost spoyled and vtterly ouerthrowne, hee commaunded the Deputies to inuent all the meanes they could for their comfort. And from thence sprang the Edict of the suppression of offices newly erected, and the ouerture of the discharges of talliages, but with a most industrious stratageme of the League.
They mooued the king to reduce the talliages of the yeare
1576. which they did to this end, that if the king agreed therevnto, hee should perceiue himselfe bereaued of the meanes to pay his souldiers, to content his seruants, and to maintaine the greatnesse of his royall estate: and if hee refused it, it would bee an euident occasion to make the estates fall in a mutenie, and so to effect their secret determination, which was to appoynt a Protector ouer the King, and to driue his faithfull subiects from him.
Read the kings declation vpon this poynt.The Duke of Guise perswaded the King not to graunt it, to the ende, that thereby hee should not imbase his authoritie at the states pleasures: on the other side, hee prouoked and incited the Deputies (which daily repaired to his lodging, there to conclude their propositions and aunsweres) to continue their pursuite. But the king to shunne their fury, consented to the reduction of tallages, hoping neuerthelesse by that meanes continuing the Parliament, he would shewe them, that with so small summes of mony, hee could not maintaine his royall estate, nor yet proceed in warres against the Huguenots, which all of them had so solemnely and faithfully sworne vnto.
Meane time, they beganne to enter into the depth of their pretences, A proposition made before at Mallet and Bobier.and sought to haue pursuits made against such as had beene appoynted the kings receiuers, and thereby abused his liberallitie, that they should be constrained to yeelde account, they shewed the king what losse hee had sustained, by his carelesse contract made touching the farming of salt, for the term of sixe yeares, then ended in the month of September, 1588. to the great deminution of his treasure, and oppression of his subiects, for that the losse thereby sustained, did yearely amount vnto the summe of a hundreth thirtie sixe thousand Crownes, and for the other sixe yeares, foure millions and eight thousand crownes, by not rating the farme of the imposts of salt at as high a price as they should bee.
This aduise beeing great and very important, for the increasing of the Kings treasures, was giuen by the Presidents
Mallet and Bobier, (that had laboured for the space of sixe yeares to discouer the same) couered and disguised with the Sophisteries and subtilties of their participants.
Meane time, that the estates were busied in the Parliament, let vs see what the kings forces did against the enemie. The Duke de Neuers led one armie into Poitou, and the Duke de Maine conducted the other into Dauphine.
The armie of the Duke of Neuers in Poictou.The Duke de Neuers with a great and strong armie passed into Poitou, promising not onely to reduce the whole Prouince vnder the kings obedience, but to restore the losse hee had sustained by the battell of Coutrus, by some profitable and woorthie exployt: hee beeing assisted by Monsieur de la Chastigneraye, Maister of the Campe, of a Regiment of footemen,
Monsieur de Sagone, Marshall of the light-horse, Monsieur de Lauerdin, and Monsieur de la Chastre, Great-maister of the field: the armie being composed of Frenchmen, Switzers, Italians, and diuers voluntary Gentlemen.
The siege of Manleon.The Towne of
Manleon was the first place which they pretended to besiege: and to the same end, it was presently inuironed with great numbers of horse and footemen: It is the lawe of armes to punish such as seeking to striue against the streame, some to oppose themselues by rash and vaine resolution, to hold a fort, which of it selfe is wholly weak and vndefensable. And for that kinde of foolish hardinesse, Anne de Monmorancy Constable of France, hanged such as hee found in the Castle of Villane, and all those that were in a Tower, standing in the subburbes of Saint Anthony of Pauie. Yet the Garrison of Manleon, although they well perceiued both want of amunitions and weaknesse of their walles, would neyther parley, nor yet yeeld, vntill they sawe the last extremitie, but when they sought by articles to compound the assaylants, vsing all inhumanitie against them, beeing disarmed, bathed their victorie in the blood of naturall Frenchmen.
Montague taken.From thence they marched towards Montagu, where Monsieur de Colombiere Gouernour of the Towne, issued and skirmished with the Duke de Neuers forces, with equall losse on both sides: which done, after some resistance made, and certaine Cannons shotte against the Towne, the souldier fearing the euent of cruel assault, not long after, drew to an honourable composition, and so yeelded the Towne.
When Montagu had yeelded, the armie went to batter
la Ganache, a Towne with a Castle, lying betweene Poitou and Brittaine, as I will shewe you heereafter.



The Duke de Maine at Lyons.The Duke
de Maine beeing at Lyons, and from thence, minding to passe into Dauphine, found his affection as much cooled, as at the first it had beene greatly inflamed, and knowing such pretences to bee daungerous, and ouer lightly grounded vppon the mutenie of the people, hee stayed his proceedings, expecting the issue of the Parliament: and while hee continued at Lyons, Monsieur de Mandelot died, beeing in great feare to bee displaced from his gouernment, by the Duke de Nemours, that had the graunt thereof, and for the same cause, hee doubted the comming of the Duke de Maine, to bee to that end.
Hee fell sicke about the end of the moneth of October, troubled with a windie colicque,The sicknesse and death of the Lord de Mandelot. and certaine fittes of an ague, the goute likewise ceasing vppon him, and all at once: Yet hee seemed not to bee in any great daunger, till Sunday the thirteenth of Nouember, when hee changed in such sort, that on wednesday after, in the morning, feeling his forces to decay, hee began to thinke vppon his end, and comforting his Ladie, hee besought father Edmond Auger, to shewe the king that hee died poore and indebted, by reason of his Maiesties seruices. Hee recommended his wife and children to the Sheriffes and Magistrates of
Lyons, desiring them not to shewe themselues friends to mutable fortune, that they would not suffer him to die like a
^ancrout, and that his goods and mooueables might be openly solde: he made the like declaration to the Straungers in the Towne. And vppon Saturday at night hee receiued the extreame vnction: which done, hee besought God, that it would please him yet to giue him life for the space of two yeares longer, if hee thought it good for the profit of the Church, the seruice of the king, and the commoditie of the Cittie of Lyons.
Presages of the leaguers affaires.The next day the Duke de Maine went to visit him, where for a certain time hee had some conference with him. And this Gentleman, that had alwaies had a great insight into the affaires of the League, by a spirit although not propheticall, yet prognosticating said vnto him, that the end of the Parliament at Blois, would not bee so agreeable as the beginning, that the wound of the Barricadoes of
Parris, was yet bleeding, and that the taking of the Marquisat of
Saluces, had much increased it, that the Duke of Guise should neuer finde the meanes to pacifie the sea, by him so much troubled and tormented, and that the supposed ayde of straungers, which hee expected would fayle him, hee died the foure and twentieth of Nouember, and was buryed vpon Saint Andrewes day, at whose funerall the Ladie his wife shewed, both by her apparrell, honour, and order, that amitie continueth as well after as before mans death: Father Edmond Auger made the funerall Sermon in presence of the Duke de Maine, and among other things, commending his person, saide: that hee had neuer subscribed to the League, and that hee died constant in religion, and the seruice of the King.
But now let vs returne againe vnto the Parliament, where the king laboured with great paine, to procure the remedies which hee expected from the wholesome counsell that should bee giuen vnto him, and like a wise Pilot, that scoureth and maketh clean the plankes of his shippe, thereby to clense it of all filth that might hang vppon it, and so to hinder the like fish from catching holde thereon, which in the middle of the streame vseth to staye the course of the greatest shippe: that is, hee sought to cutte off all the difficulties that hindered his Realm from passing out of the troublesome waues of long and continuall warres,Remore, a fish, stayeth a shippe. and thereby could not arriue at the hauen of happie peace: but as hee continued in his great labour and holy desire, that goodly harmony of the assembly of the estates, beganne to iarre vppon the newes of the taking of the Marquisat of Saluce,Newes of the taking of Carmagnoles by the Duke of Sauoye, and of
Carmagnoles, the Frontier-Towne of France and
Italie.
The estate of the Duke of Sauoye.I must heerevnto adde this discourse, which of force I must declare at large, the better to make it knowne, first shewing the estate of the Duke of Sauoy: then, what were the principall causes of this enterprise, the right and reasons, wherewith hee defended himselfe, and the meanes hee vsed to attaine vnto the same: I will put this proposition, that this Prince is bound and a neighbour vnto France, and in that case, neither ought nor may bee an enemie vnto it. Hee is the sonne of that great and polliticque Prince Charles Philebert duke of
Sauoy, who so wisely found the means to recouer that which his father had lost.
The praise of Charles Philebert Duke of Sauoy.The principall glory, and truely as I thinke, the most necessary for a Prince of his quallitie, was, that among so many troubles, and betweene two great Monarchies striuing togither, hee could behaue himselfe so well, that neither the one nor the other once touched him, maintaining his countrie in peace, affectioned to the seruice of our kings, as hee that had receiued that honor, to marrie the sister of king
Henry the second, a friend to the King of Spaine, in whose Court hee had passed ouer the most part of his greefes for his forepassed losses, a good neighbour to the Switzers, and other Princes of Italie: to liue in peace, hee permitted the free accesse of Huguenots into his Townes of Thurin, and assured them a retrait into the vallies of Angrongne, Lucerne, Saint Martin, Pragela, and la Perouze, without constraining them (as hee might well haue done) to vse the Catholicque religion, and looking into the depth of diuers things, hee made meanes vnto the king of Nauarre, for a match to bee made betweene the Lady Margaret the Kings sister, and his sonne: and what hee practised for his owne benefite, the same he counselled vnto others: for when hee perceiued that Henry king of
Polonia threatned to renue the warres, assoone as hee should set foote within his realme, hee disswaded him from that resolution, setting before him, the incertitude of warres, which most commonly are sweete in the beginning, but difficult to bee pursued, and most bitter and hurtfull in the ende:See the order of Montagu Hee desired rather to leaue some parte of his Landes vnto the Switzers, then to seeke to winne them by armes.
Hee behaued himselfe so well in his counselles, (which our kings reiected) and imprinted such an opinion of his wisedome, greatnesse, and felicitie, within his subiects mindes, that the
Sauoyen not knowing, nor beeing able to imagine any greatnesse more eleuated or happyer, then that of their Duke, that they said, that if the king of France could haue guided his affaires in as good sorte, hee hadde beene man sufficient, and fitte to haue beene Great-Maister of the Duke of Sauoyes house.

Charles Emanuel Duke of Sanoy.Charles Emanuel his sonne, perceiuing that the wisedome and pollicie of his father, had left his estate in good securitie with a reasonable great quantitie of treasures, and yet not so much as would suffice to make any forraine warres, determined to imploy that generositie, naturally ingraffed in him, in some goodly enterprise: hee threatned Ceneua, and made shewe of doing some great exployt against it, but acknowledging the insufficiencie of his forces for his so high an enterprise, they determined vppon a marriage, and married the King of Spaines youngest daughter, and with her, the passions of his father in lawe.
The Duke of Sauoy cannot liue in peace if the king of Fra^ce be his enemie.At the beginning it was thought hee would haue contented himselfe to haue beene friend with France, allyed vnto Spaine, that vppon the apprehension of the fall of our estate, he would neuer pretend any thing against vs, that hee would staye himselfe more vppon thinges certaine, then vppon vncertaine and variable: that knowing, that vppon the one side hee hadde the Almaines: on the other, the Switzers: on the third, the Venecians: and on the fourth, the Princes of Italie: hee would become friend to the Frenchmen their friends: It was thought, that if hee had ambition in his minde, it would vanish vnder a more iust title, that feeling himselfe weake, hee would enterprise any thing against a mightie King, nor would not breake the bond of amitie, for his part due vnto him: holding his estates from this Crowne, which of late of meere courtesie hadde restored Sauignan and
Pigneroles, vnto him, yet without apparant necessitie, and without any reason whatsoeuer, hee vndertooke the vsurpation of the territories of France, bordering vppon Piedemont.
And yet it was not done without pretence, declaration, and excuse, for first hee wrote vnto the Pope, that the feare hee had least
Monsieur de Desdiguieres, should cease vppon certaine of his Townes, and so in the middle of his countrie make a retraict and refuge for the Huguenots, had constrained him to diuert that mischiefe generally from the Church, and particularly from his owne estate, which hee desired to continue in the puritie of the auncient religion: vnder the obedience of the holy sea of Rome.
The duke of Sauoyes pretence why he inuaded the Marquisat of Saluce.Hee excused himselfe vnto the King, touching this breach of peace, saying: that the onely zeale of religion, togither with the feare of the contagious neighbourhood of hereticques, had constrained him ther vnto, sending an Ambassador to giue him notice thereof, and so to disguise that iniurie with the fairest and most counterfeit hee could deuise.
At the first, he made shewe as if he would not hold those places but vnder the kings authoritie, and by little and little, he vsurped all soueragne power, degrading the kings officers, erected the
Sauoyan crosse, and threwe downe the flower deluces of
France.
Ann. 1481.His officers couered this vsurpation with an other title, and maintained that the Marquisat of Saluces is holden infest of the Duchie of
Sauoy, and that one of the Marquises thereof, beeing a braue and valiant Gentleman, disdaining in person to doo homage to Charles the sixt, Duke of Sauoy, being very young, was for his misprision declared a traitor, driuen out of his Countries, and his Marquisat confiscated.

The Marquesse of Saluce infested into the countrie of Dauphine.But the truth is, that this countrie hath alwaies been infest to the principalitie of Dauphine, contained in the gift that Prince Humbert made vnto the Crown of France, and namely, that the Marquesse of Saluce had recourse vnto the king of France, who receiued homage and fidelitie of him, and euer since, his successours did continue the dutie of vassalles vnto the Kings, Charles the eight, Lewis the twelfth, and
Francis the first.
From thence it proceedeth, that hee which enquired and gathered into a great volume, the causes and reasons of the raising of armes in the moneth of Ianuary, reporteth this surprising of the Marquisate of Saluces, to bee deriued from principalles of the League, that dismembreth thier Crowne and Common-wealth, perceiuing that neither of them could preserue it whole and intire, and these are his words.
ABout that time, the Duke of Sauoy supposing the king by reason of his departure from Parris, to bee wholly ouerthrowne, sent to speake with Monsieur de Guise, minding to enter into League with him, vppon condition, that for his part, hee might haue the Marquisat of Saluce, Prouence, and Dauphine, which the Duke of Guise would by no means consent vnto, desiring rather to keepe the kingdome wholly for himselfe, which was the cause that the Duke of Sauoy mooued at his aunswere, sent Monsieur to the King at Chartres, in the moneth of August, to offer him all loue and friendshippe: whereat the Duke of Guise beeing offended, practised the saide intelligence and league, graunted the Duke of
Sauoyes request, and the saide Duke of Sauoy was aduertised of of the resolution taken against the king in the Parliament at Blois: to the end, that for his part, he might finde the meanes to dispatch his businesse at the same time: wherein hee slept not, forgetting neuerthelesse the promise made vnto his Maiestie, and that of his owne free will, for hee preuented the time of the execution thereof, by the surprising of the Marquisate of Saluces, which serued as a preparation to the conspiracie made against the person of the King, as euery man iudged, as beeing most easie to bee perceiued, that the Duke of
Sauoye, who in regard of the puissance of this great Realme, is but a meane Prince, and hath la Bresse, Sauoye, and
Piedemont, so neare vnto the limittes of France, that it laye in the kings power to bereaue him of the greatest parte thereof: and that in very short time, if hee were not ayded, or that his Maiestie hadde not hinderances otherwise, which made it apparant vnto all the worlde, that hee enterprised not the taking of Carmagnolle, Rauel, and
Saluce, without assistance: and that on the other side, the king should bee retained and hindered from making warre against him, although that after such hinderance, hee might bee well assured, that the Parliament beeing ended, his Maiestie would recouer both his saide Marquisate of Saluce, and wholly ouerrunne him, if hee left not off in time.
For my part, I haue heard it reported, that this young Prince foreseeing Cadenti arbori, securim in iecit. A politicque maxime of Spaine. Multa fieri prohibentur, quae tamen facta tenent.seeing the dissipation of our estate, assured himselfe that it would bee best for him to bee the first at the dinision, as sonne and husbande of two daughters, issued from the blood royall of France, and so goodly a peece of land, lying in the middle of his countrie, would bee sufficient cause to awake a man that were most sound a sleepe, to mooue and heate the most colde and greatest Pollititian, and that although there appeared iniustice in the action, yet there would bee reason found to the possession thereof. Concluding his determination by this maxime holden in Councell of Spaine: That diuers thinges are forbidden, which are good and hold steadfast, beeing once done.
And to execute his pretence, for the space of a whole yeare hee had solicited the Gouernour of the Citadell of Carmagnole, who playing on both side, on the one side tooke money of the Duke: and on the other side, hee aduertised the King thereof, and wrought so well by that meanes, that hauing gotten aboue fiue and twentie thousand Crownes, hee withdrewe himselfe vnto the Court, without deliuering the place which the Duke of Sauoye hadde bargained for, who perceiuing himselfe deceiued, and that the Barricadoes at Parris gaue the King worke in hand, and more then hee could doo, hee determined to surprise the Citadell of Carmagnole, by the meanes of a Corporall called la Chambre, whose treason beeing discouered, and his fact once knowne, hee was hanged by the feete in the Market-place of Carmagnole, and then with all his confederates put to death as hee deserued: but that notwithstanding, the duke perceiuing the kings minde to bee otherwise occupied, then to thinke vppon the Marquisat, of Saluces, hee leuyed great numbers of men,Marquesse of S. Sorbin. causing the Marquesse of Saint Sorlin to mount on horsebacke, and vnder the pretence of a false report giuen out touching the besieging of Montferrat, hee approached in so good time, that vppon Al-saints day at night, hee surprised the Towne of
Carmagnole, that for the most part was kept by souldiers of
Piedemont.
And the Castle that hadde alwaies beene victualled for aboue the space of two yeares, at that time was found wholly vnprouided, because that Montseur de Saint Siluie, that hadde succeeded in the place of la Coste, hadde caused the victualles to bee carried foorth, to haue some fresh in their place, in such sort that the Captains fearing to indure great miserie and famine, with small honour yeelded vppe that impregnable Fort, wherein there was found aboue foure hundreth cannons,Ordinance founde at Carmagnole. great and little, with great quantitie of powder and shotte, and by that means the double Pistollets that flew about on all sides, bare away the double cannons of this Frontier-Towne of France, so that in lesse then threce weekes, the Duke wanne all the Marquisats of
Saluce, and also the Captaines and Frenchmen souldiers retiring, with liues and goodes saued, drummes sounding and playing, Ensignes displayed, weapons in their handes, but no matches lighted, and without their paye of three moneths, which the Duke had promised them by his agreement.

This victorie and conquest made the Duke holde vp his head, and his seruants made him beleeue, that although hee were forced to yeelde it vp again, in the mean time he should enioy it, and that it is good to bring things to passe when time and opportunitie serueth. And for the same cause, he made certaine peeces of mony of the value of a Duket to be minted, stamped with the picture of a Centaure, treading a Crowne of golde vnder his feete, with this deuise, Opportune.
The taking of the Marquesse of Saluce, troubles the state.Not long after, the king receiued the newes thereof, and considering the troubles, distrusts, and commotions, practised by the League, he imputed this surprising to a brauado, togither with an euill will against the good and quietnesse of his estate: and knew full well, that the Duke of Sanoy, beleeuing that the deuision of France would impart a peece thereof to euery man, he went to take his part, and that rather for the scituation, then any other right or title hee had vnto the Marquisate of Saluces, thereby to ioyne it vnto Piedemont, and that he had forseene, that his Maiestie beeing hindered by quenching the fire that flamed within the heart of his Realme, hee would not haue the meanes to ayde himselfe in his extreamities.
The full relution of the French Nobalitie, to make warre in Sauoy.Such as at all times had the flower deluce, and the respect of the glory of France liuely imprinted in their hearts, not beeing able to support the iniurie wrought (in the presence of all the estates of France, as then assembled in
Blois) touching the taking of a place, which was the onely treasurie of the spoyles of such conquests as the Kings of France brought out of the countrie of Italie, shewed the King, that it would bee necessary for him, to make peace within his Realme, and to reuenge that iniurie, to driue away the Goate that eateth the colewoorths, while the Good-man is fighting with his wife: to chase the wolfe, that assayleth the sheepfolde, while the Sheepheards are quarrelling togither: For so the Romanes agreed togither, when they perceiued the enemie before their Capitoll: so the Spaniards left of their mutenie, when they beheld the white crosse before Fontarabie: so the Frenchmen appeased their debates, to ioyne togither for the driuing of the Englishmen out of
Normandie.
They tolde the King, it would bee accounted a poynt of great cowardise in them, if they should seeme to bee offended thereat: if they should indure the pride and ambition of their so weake an enemie: if they should suffer the Crowne of France to bee dismembred, specially the places which are particularly allotted vnto the eldest sonne of the King.
The king is resolued to folow strange wars and to pacifie ciuil broyles.To suffer that a meane Prince should in a brauado take away from a King of France, that little plot that rested vnto him of the territories of Italie, togither with foure hundreth peeces of Cannon-shotte, the Frontiertowne of
France lying beyond the Mountaines, that place that was able to withstand the most proude forces of the Spaniards: which onely rested vnto vs as an assured pawne, therewith in short space to recouer againe the countries of Naples and Milan.
The King beeing in flamed with iust greefe, was fully mooued at this tyranny, and iudged this branch of mischiefe to spring out from the bodie of the coniurations of the League, for the which cause he said
hee would make peace with the Huguenot, to serue himselfe by their means, against such as sought to pull off his cloathes, before he ment to go to bedde, minding to quit himselfe from the rule of such as like maiors of the Pallace, sougt nothing but his subiection vnto their passions.
The Duke of Guise excuseth himselfe.The Duke of Guise perceiuing that all the assembly, the whole Parliament, and all the kings seruants, iudged this inuation to be done by his means, and to bee the onely effect of the League, and that it bred hatred and repentance in the hearts of those that esteemed his proceedings to bee most iust, he besought the king not to bee mooued thereat, assuring him, that assoone as his Maiestie should haue quenched the fire which the Huguenots had begun to kindle within his realm, he would be one of the first that should passe the Mountaines, to make his forraine enemies yeeld their praye, desiring his Maiestie to giue him that commission, but first he said, hee ought to assure his people of that hee had promised them by oath touching the holy vnion, and the good resolution of the Parliament.
The king that could not well disiest this aduise, receiuing it as from the heart of him that had giuen the spirit and motion to the mischiefe, by his continuall practises with straungers, perceiuing that neither his Edict of vnion, nor yet the obligation of the oath which he had taken (concerning religion) of all the Princes of the League, to make them depart and leaue their secret associations, as well within as without the Realme, had not wrought that effect which hee expected, hee determined from that time forward, to bee reuenged of all forepassed offences, perswading himselfe not to bee bound to obserue the Edict of vnion, seeing the League had first begunne to breake it, consenting to the pernicious intents of strangers,Reade the wars of Geneua in the booke following. and not withdrawing themselues from the mutuall intelligences it had with him: but in the meane time, while hee dissembled his displeasure against the Duke of Cuise, hee vsed another meanes against the Duke of Sauoy, which I will shewe heereafter.
That the king of Nauarre was not much greeued at the iniurie which a meane Duke had done vnto a mightie king, it is not to bee doubted: yet he reioyced thereat, being in hope of some good fortune that might thereby ensue, and that it would be occasions to end the diuisions and partiallities within the Realme of France. At such time as this new trouble sprang vp among the assembly at Blois, hee was in Rochel, where hee called an other assembly of the Churches of his religion, seeing the artificiall deuises of the League, had shut the gate against him, where hee ought to holde the principall place, as the first Prince and chiefe Magistrate of France.
An assembly at Rochel.This assembly began the fourteenth day of Nouember, in the Townhouse of
Rochel, the King of Nauarre beeing present, assisted by
Moniseur de Turenne, Monsieur de Trimouille, and other Gentlemen of his house and Councell, as in a manner there is not any Prouince in
France, wherein this religion hath not purchased some acres of land, and by that meanes there were Deputies from all places.
By whose aduise and resolution, sprang the request presented vnto the States at Blois,The Protestants demaundeth a Councell. vnder the name and title of the Frenchmen exiled for the religion, beseeching the king to restore them vnto the libertie of the first Edict, which from the name of the moneth wherein it was published, was called the edict of Ianuary, to ordaine that a national Councell might be assembled, where the Doctors on both parts with good securitie, in presence of his Maiestie and all the assembly, might peaceably debatetheir differences and holily decide and resolue vpon the same, to graunt them the free libertie of possessing their goods, for supplying their necessities, and to permit the registring of their supplication, together with the consenting therevnto, by his Maiesties pleasure, to the end that nothing might bee done in that assembly to preiudice them.
This petition was badly framed at that time, as beeing wholly contrary to the principall intent of that assembly, which beeing for the most part composed of men, chosen and purposely taken out from among the most passionate aduancers of the League, desire rather to destroy then instruct, such as had strayed aside, and sooner to drowne, then to wash the infected. And therefore not beeing satisfied with the Edict of vnion (the right destruction of the Protestants) they ceased not, vntill both from the king himselfe, and all the assembly, they had procured a declaratio^ of the perpetual disabilitie of the king of
Nauarre, to the succession of the Crowne. Yet their artificiall poysons do not so fully infect all the body of that assembly, and their mindes were not in such manner tyed vnto the opinions of the League, but that there were some persons, both of dignitie and reputation, that would not permit that the means should bee taken from the king, to revnite his subiects in one religion, seeing that the intent of the Parliament ought onely to tend vnto a publike peace, and therefore they counselled him to procure a lawfull Councell against this schisme of conscience, which should be eyther vniuersall, or nationall, a most soueraigne and assured remedie, prooued heretofore against more pernicious herefies, then these of our time, whereby the bodies of Common-wealths haue bin purged of their infected blood, and filled againe with good and viguerous humours.
Chiections against the instruction asked by the king of Nauarre.Others, that commaunded both the minde of the king and all the estates, said: that trueth once debated and determined, ought not to bee brought in question againe: that it was no reason, that the apperite of some newters, that had withdrawn themselues from the common societie of the Church, to play their parts alone, and to induce the madnesse of their euill timbered braines, should seeke to trouble all Christendome by assembling of a Councell: the resolutions whereof, can bee no other then those at other times assembled, trueth hauing but one face. And therefore counselled his Maiestie to prouide that his successour might bee of no other religion then his owne, and to assure all his Catholicques therein, that feared nothing so much, as the establishing of the King of Nauarre, in the succession of the Crowne of France.
The king had promised by his Estict, to take an order touching his successor, but at that age wherein hee liued, and in the young and lustie yeares of the Queen his wife, he hoped that God would blesse him with some masculine line, that might auoyde the difference of those ambitious persons. And therefore hee tooke no pleasure to heare any speech of that which in his minde seduced to imbase his authoritie, and to make his graue before he was dead. For that assoone as a Prince hath declared who shall bee his successor, his testament is made, and then in his Realme, he is accounted but as the sun that goeth downe, euery man casting his eyes vpon him that shall succeede. It was a capitall offence in Rome, to seeke to knowe what should bee done after the death of the Emperour: and the Emperours of Turkie cannot indure the sight of the children their successors, but send them farre from the Court, and neuer see them but when they are first borne, or else when they are circumcised. There are diuers well gouerned and peaceable Monarches, wherein such are punished as are ouer serious to inquire what may happen after their Kings death.
The Parliament holden in England,
156^.The Parliament of England, that solicited the Queene to nominate her successor, among those houses that aspired therevnto, receiued no other aunswere from her, but onely that shee was of opinion, that they sought to make her graue before shee was dead. And to cut off such seditious curiosities, she caused an Act to bee made, that no man should presume to speake or dispute of the succession of her kingdome.Ne quis assirmet vel existimet vel coniectet cui nam regnandi ius debeatur.
The death of king Francis the first.
1547.The iealousie of him that is to succeed is incredible, and so much distrustfull, that the father cannot indure the hope of his sonne: the gold of this Historie is too weake, therein to place the Orientall pearles, which I finde in so many notable discourses, that are made concerning this last motion, hee that wrote the free and excellent discourse (so called) rehearseth this domesticall example of our kings, that the great king Francis beeing weake and sicke, in his Castle of Fontainbleau, about the begining of the moneth of May, in the same yeare that hee died, his disease increased so much, that they esteemed him eyther dead, or that hee would not long continue aliue. Wherevppon all the Court in great haste ranne to seeke the
Dauphine, prince Henry, who for the same iealousie of succession, durst not come in his fathers presence for the space of sixe or seuen yeares before, in such manner, that most of all the chiefe Courtiers had left the king, euery man going to worship that new son. Meane time, the king recouered his health, and his disease beeing somewhat cured, there was a Procession to bee made, which is yearely obserued with great solemnitie through out the Realme of France, against which time, the olde King rose vp, and came out of his chamber, his face and haires dressed and combed, not as if hee had neither beene sicke nor aged, withall, putting on certaine youthfull garments, and in that sort was present at the processions: and beeing returned, he vsed this speech: I will once againe put them in feare before I die. And it was true, for suddainly the chance turned, for that assoone as the news was spred abroad, that the king had recouered his health, all the Courtiers by degrees repaired vnto him, much abashed and in great feare: and then the
Dauphine for his part was left as naked without company, as his father had beene before. There the king shewed himselfe like a king, and so hee ought to behaue himselfe like a king.
Non legiones, non classes perinde sunt firma imperii munimina vt numerus liberorum. Tacit.But to the contrary, the king not onely permitted a conference touching the succession, but suffered his subiects to rise vp in armes for the triall thereof, and that before all the assembly, there should bee a proposition put forth, touching the excluding of the lawful successor. Is not this as much as if they should compel him to make his testament, and to striue as though hee were at the poynt of death?
Wherein you may beholde the extremities of the League, that seeking to ouerthrow the estate, would beate down the supporters, with al the Princes of the blood, who being aliue, it is vaine for them to seem to lay hold on the tree, or once to digge the myne of their pretences, for neither armes nor fortresses do so well defend and maintaine an estate, as the number of children of the Princes familie, which is the meanes to breake a perpetuall order of succession, as long as they liue, choaking the ambitious hopes of such as would ouer throw and subuert it. Then the League can neuer attaine vnto the end of their course, nor their forces remooue the Crowne of the branches of Valois and
Bourbon, to the house of Vaudemont, if first they procure not the degrading of all Saint Lewis race.
Propositions made the fourth of Nouember. 1588.The king to please the inraging appetites and desires of the League, consented they shuld determine of that which the greatest part of the league had alrea die resolued: which was the condemnation of the king of Nauarre: it was first debated among the Cleargie, where by them, without great resistance, it was determined, that this Prince should be holde for an hereticque, and their leader a Relaps, excommunicated, depriued of the gouernment of Guyenne, and of all his honors, vnwoorthie of all successions of Crownes and royalties: which they appoynted to be signified to the rest of the estates: the Archbishop of
Ambrun, the Bishop of Bazas, the Abbot of Citeaux, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, opened their intent vnto the Nobilitie, and the rest of the estates: who altogither entered into conference, touching the waightinesse of that action: and conforming themselues vnto the first aduise of the Cleargie, they appoynted twelue of each degree, to giue the King intelligence of their determination, and the Archbishoppe of Ambrun in the name of all the estates, opened it to the King. But his M. reme^bring that the king of N. had often shew'd him, that he had bin born and bred vp in that form of religion, that in conscience he could not leaue it without instruction: that if he did it in hope or dispaire of enioying a kingdome, hee should thereby reape the blasone of inconstancie, infidelitie, and hypocrisie, thereby not to make himselfe capable to be a king, but rather vnworthie for the place: that hee was readie, and alwaies will be, to bee instructed by a free and lawfull Councell, and to leaue his error, truth being made known vnto him, found this proposition very strange and passionate, wherwith he rested wholly vnresolued. Such as preferre the hopes and right of succession in this Prince, shewed him, that the submission he had made,The king of Nauarre, in hope of a Crowne wilt not be instructed. A discourse taken out of an answere made by the king of Nauarre. The Edict of the libertie of conscience, in an. 15^1. and which he still continued to make during these troubles, are full of iustice and all good consideration, because he doth not willingly defend any thing, but that only which honor and zeale of conscience forceth him vnto: that the law of this Realm depriueth not a child of a direct or collaterall succession, because of religion: why then should it depriue a Prince? The law admitteth all persons indifferently into any office, and why shuld it not do ye like in an estate? The law permitteth euery man the exercise of his religion, and excludeth no man, why then shuld the Prince be debarred from this priuiledge? and the Prince that maketh it, why shuld he be burt hened in his conscience, in the thing specially that toucheth him most neare? it being he that giueth libertie vnto others: I say the law of this estate, for it is the law whereby we liue in peace: that is, to restore this estate vnto her first being, and thereby to withdraw it from continuall miserie. A law made and determined at the Parliament holden in Orleans, not a forced Parliament, not suspicious, not leagued by the deuises and subtill practises of such as at this day trouble the Realme of France: and which is more, a Parliament summoned by themselues, in the time of their greatest credite, and namely at their instance, which from that time hitherto, wee neuer desired to infringe, vntill we were constrained to enter into ciuill warres, and when I speake of ciuill warres, vnder that word I thinke may well comprehend all sorts of calamities and confusions: a lawe that is very iust, as beeing most necessary: a lawe, which at this Parliament is not allowed, for that the reuocation thereof, is our destruction: a law iudged: a lawe sworne vnto by all the Princes, Gouernours, Lieftenants, Councellours, Courts of Parliament, Presidents, Townes, and communalties of this Realme, and by those namely, who at this day would protest against it. And yet hee remitteth mitteth the deciding of the cause of religion to a free Councell, and til then, no man in this estate can bee esteemed or holden an hereticque, and whosoeuer submitteth himselfe vnto it, by all right cannot bee said or reputed for an obstinate or schismatic que person.
The king wold they should summon the King of Nauarre.The King prouoked by these reasons, thought it vnreasonable to condemne the king of Nauarre, before hee aunswered for himselfe, and therefore made aunswere vnto the Lords and other Deputies, that it should by to see if that were good and expedient, to summon him once againe to sweare vnto the Edict of vnion, and so to declare himselfe a Catholicque.
The League would not heare of that aduise.This aunswere made by the King, was shewed vnto the estates, and by them a collection was made, of all the means that had the king of Nauarre vnto the Church, the absolution which the Cardinall of Bourbon his vncle had obtained for him, his Relaps into his errors: that he had abiured the voyages made by the Queene-mother, to seeke to win him: the Doctors whom the king himselfe (desirous of his conuersion and his good) had sent vnto him, and the excommunication pronounced against him in the Consistorie of Rome.
They set downe the paines due vnto hereticques, as also to such as are relapsed: they accused this Prince to bee both the one and the other, nourished and brought vp from his infancie in that new and erronious opinion, and that beeing such a person, hee was not woorthie eytherof respect or obedience, no not of so much honour, as once to bee saluted: that they might not communicate with him by any meanes: that there is an eminent daunger of the losse of religion, and that it would bee put in great hazard, if once they should acknowledge him for their king, who both by his power and example, might easily compel his subiects to yeelde to his religion, finding nothing more assured nor certaine, in all auncient Histories, then the decay and ruine of religion, when the chiefe Magistrate sought not to preserue it in all puritie.
Hereticum ho minem deuita. Nee aue dixeritis illi. 1. Tim. 3. Iohn 2.They said the King of Nauarre held the same opinon, that had alreadie beene condemned in the Councell of Trent, and by other Councelles, that hee perseuered therein, and that hauing oncereiected it, hee receiued it againe, and thereby constrained the holy Sea of of Rome to declare him a Relaps, excommunicated, and vncapable of the succession of this Realme: concluding thereby, that hee ought by that assembly to bee declared such a person, and to leaue this lawe for a perpetuall memorie vnto the Realme of
France: that an hereticque may not enioy the Crowne of
France, and that it is a thing wholly against his sacrying, and the oath which at his coronation hee should make, but much more preiudiciall vnto the honour of God, and the good and quietnesse of this estate.
The lawe to heare such as are accursed, is not ciuill and particular, nor obserued in one or two Common-wealths, it is a lawe drawne from nature it selfe, and the common consent of all nations, practised by those who for their guide haue had a true and perpetuall reason in all their actions, and it seemeth that God himselfe, to whom all the secrets of mens consciences are open, that knoweth all things, that hath no need of humane witnesses, nor yet to follow the order or manner of a Parliament, would not pronounce his definitiue sentence against the ingratitude, felony, disloyaltie, pride, and presumption, of the first man
Adam, before hee had called him to iudgement, examined, confirmed, and vnderstood his reasons,The law to heare the accused. leauing this infallible doctrine vnto vs, that wee must not condemne any man, how greeuous an offender soeuer hee bee, before wee haue heard him, and well examined his cause: it was the naturall equitie of this lawe, that caused Sicynius to oppose himselfe against the decree of the Tribunes, pronounced vppon Cariolanus, condemned without beeing heard: this reason mooued the Ambassadours of
Etrurie, to perswade themselues that the Romanes would graunt them the repeating of Tarquinius Superbus, because hee hadde beene banished, and neuer heard speake in his owne defence, and that great author of Romane eloquence, complaineth that hee had beene banished, without offence, without accuser, without witnesse, and without permitting him that libertie, which is neuer refused to enemie nor slaue. And hee it was that cried out against Verres, saying:Crimen sine accusatore sententia siue consiliio damnatio siue defensione. that in condemning his hoste Sthemius Termitanus without hearing him, hee had forced and violated nature. And this misgouernment of condemning men beeing absent, was neuer induced but by the outragious enuie of Tyrants, against the common tranquilitie of their countries, it was neuer practised but by those furious
Donatists, that deposed Cicilia from his Bishoppricke of Carthage, hee beeing absent: and the holy fathers of
Rome haue alwaies detested this practise. Liberius saith plainely and boldly vnto Constant, that he would neuer signe to the bannishment of Athanasius, as being extreame iniustice to condemne a man, that hath neither been summoned, nor once heard to speake for himselfe. Innocent the first, excommunicated Arcadius and Eudoxia his wife, because that without inquiring of the matter hee had condemned Chrysostome. Pope Clement blasoned and reprooued the Emperour Henry, because hee had bereaued Robert of his Kingdome of Sicile, and proclaimed him traitor, without hearing his excuse.
The King of Nauarres answer.It may bee, that if the King of Nauarre might haue beene heard to speake, hee would haue giuen them to vnderstand, that the Pope had beene deceiued, or seemed in declaring him to bee an hereticque, obstinate, and relapsed into heresie, hee would haue said, that hee neuer knew nor vnderstood, that there should bee any other trueth, then that wherein the Queene his mother had brought him vp: it is true, that after the massacre committed vppon Saint Bartholomews day, he was constrained to vse time as occasion then fell out, and to submit himselfe vnto their tyrannies:
The king of Nauarres minde was not free in Anno. 1572.but so much against his minde, that assoone as without daunger hee might once make it knowne that his conscience was at libertie, he shewed thedesire hee had to bee instructed, and to submit himselfe to the free and lawfull iudgement of a nationall Councell within the Realme of France, hee wrote to all the degrees of France, both Cleargie, Nobilitie, Parliaments, and common people, that hee had nothing more liuely imprinted within his mind, then a desire to see the revnion and reduction of the seruice of God vnder one kinde of religion: and therefore that hee could not bee called a Relaps, for that to bee such a person, hee must first haue beene condemned and iudged as an hereticque: that hee had publicquely abiured his error, and then receiued into the Church, and that hee had returned againe vnto his first heresie. But now hee is the man that neuer had beene accused of heresie, nor neuer abiured the opinion which at this day hee holdeth, for that assoone as he found conuenient means to depart out of the Court, wherein he had bin stayed by the accusations that his enemies made against him, vnto king Charles the ninth, he retired into his countrie of Bearne, where he made it known, that hee had no other beliefe, then that which hee had alwaies holden: neuerthelesse, as often as the king desired to haue him vnited to the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romane Church, he alwaies desired to be instructed, and to the same end, that it would please his Maiestie, to bee a means to assemble a free and lawfull Councell of the vniuersall Church, or else to call a nationall Councell of the Church of France: submitting himselfe to all discipline, and to the free and lawfull iudgement of that holy assembly: which his Maiestie acknowledging to be most requisite,The king of Nauarre, first king of all Europe, next to the king of France. granted both to him and his partakers by the Edict of pacification, made in Anno. 1577. These reasons being neither presented, nor co^sidered of by thec largie, the most affected to the aduanceme^t of ye league, executed their pleasures vpo^ one of ye greatest Princes in Christendome vpo^ the first prince of ye blood: yea, and the first child of ye most and ancient famous familie, bearing Crown within this world, which ye heaue^s borne and brought foorth capable to command ouer
France, when God shall see his time, and to depriue him of the right, that nature had affoorded him, without summoning or once hearing what hee could alleage vnto the contrary: So that in the end, the kings aduise to cause him to bee summoned to sweare vnto the Edict of vnion, was found to bee without reason, and the Cleargie resolued that hee neyther can nor ought any more to resist. This conclusion was borne vnto the Nobilitie by the Bishops of Chaalons and Champaigne: and to the third Estates by the Bishop of Comminges: the Archbishop of
Ambrun, companion of the 12. of each order that were appoynted therevnto, declared the States mindes vnto the king, which was not to vse other means to summon the king of Nauarre, and that his heresie and incapacitie to the Crowne were sufficiently knowne.
But if the king knoweth not three things, hee knoweth nothing: hee raigneth without raigning: hee cannot defend himselfe, his familie, nor the peace. Hee suffereth himselfe to be bereaued of the vnseparable quallities belonging vnto his person: that is, power and authoritie: hee suffereth them to declare those of his familie to bee vnwoorthie of succession: hee permitteth them to take away the peace and tranquillitie of his Realme, to giue it vnto his enemies: so that to this proposition of the League, hee answereth, that he would satisfie the Deputies reasons, and resolue vpon them.
But while they were busied to band themselues against a Prince capable of the Crowne of France, and issued from the royall branch of Bourbon, vpon the which familie, God hath bestowed more particular blessings, then vpon all others of the same tree and linage: as Aniou, Alencon, Eureux, Berry, Bourgongne, Angoulesme, Orleans, and Valois, that are all gone and extinct. God suddainly entered vpon the Theater, and shewed that his iudgements are wholly contrary vnto the iudgements of men, and that his spirit mouing eternally, worketh continually to his glory, and that hee can change the mindes of men, (when they thinke least therof) cleane contrary to their desires.
For the king was aduertised by all his seruants, and such as made no account of him, the Duke of Espernon by letters assured him, that a great conspiracie was intented against his person. The Duke de Maine commaunded a Gentleman to shewe the king, that the Duke of Guise sought most ambitiously to climbe aboue the degree of a subiect, that hee practised some secret matter contrary to his Maiesties seruice,Al this agreeth with the Kings authoritie. and that the execution thereof, would shortly bee performed. The Duke of Aumale sent Madame
d'Aumale his wife, to shew the king of a secret Councell holden vnder a prodigious attempt against his person
The King determined to put the Duke of Guise to death.The kings heart by these aduises beeing stirred vp with a newe force and liuelier courage, and minding to preuent the Duke of
Guise, discouered his intent to foure of his friends, whom hee knewe to bee as much affected to the suretie and welfare of his Maiestie, as wholly estranged from the pernicious Councell of the League, and shewed them, that he was fully resolued to quit himselfe of the Duke of
Guise, who as a new world, was alreadie worshipped of all the people.
Introductio^^ against the duke of GuiseThey set before his eyes the register of this Princes actions, those specially that offended the king and his estate, namely the edict of vnion, wherwith hee armed himselfe as with a target made of Diamonds.
 That the Duke of Guise holding no other quallitie in France, then onely of a meere subiect, had erected a League, raised men of war, practised with straungers, without authoritie, aduise, or permission from the king, enterprised vpon townes, and troubled and broken publike peace.
 That by the Edict of vnion, hauing sworne to leaue all leagues and associations, as well within as without the Realm, he ceased not to continue his practises and deuises with the Cardinall Morosin, and the Ambassadour of Spaine, assuring them, that hee ment not to leaue off the good intelligence hee had with their Maisters.
 That hee had not broken, but rather confirmed and continued the particular confederacies, sworne with the Gouernours of the townes of France and others, therby still to maintaine the souldiers on his side, against the seruice of the king.
 That by his billes hee had declared, that he had not taken armes but for the seruice of God, and of the King, and yet by the surprising of townes in Picardie, hee had impeached the aduancement of the armie that should haue passed into
Guyenne against the Huguenots, and in all places exclaimed against the Kings actions, esteeming him fitter to were a sacke, then a Scepter.
 That hee had declared, that hee bare no armes but for the assurance of the Catholicques in France, and of their religion, and to impeach the succeson of the king of Nauarre to the Crowne: and yet the King had beene aduertised by the saide King of
Nauarre, that the Duke of Guise had sought his fauour so farre, as that hee offered him his sonne in hostage, and that he, with seuenteen Princes of his house, would come to visit him as farre as the riuer of Loire, to doo him seruice, and to make him the greatest and peaceablest king of France that euer was: the Bailiffe of the Mountaines of Dauphine, and Monsieur de Bethune, beeing imployed in those affaires: and a great person of estate, that neuer could indure such Petti-Maisters, after the king of Nauarre hauing discouered that this practise could not bee for the good and quietnesse of this Realme, aduertised the Queen-mother.
 That after the pardon of his treasons (for associating and practising with the enemies of this Realme) graunted vnto him by his Maiestie, many letters had beene intercepted tending to great purposes, to trouble both the King and his estate.
 That the taking of the Marquisat of
Saluces was done by his aduise, and that then when his Maiestie complained of that iniurie, and that it was requisite to continue peace in
France, and to make warre against straungers, who in a brauado sought to dismember the estate, hee stood against it, and saide they ought rather first to heale the interior vlcer, then to enter into warres that any waye touched the superficiall euill.
 That his participants publishing his praises, aboue those of the King, caused it to bee sung about the streetes, and in the Townes that helde with the League: that the Duke of
Guise had constrained the King against his will, to make waarre against the Huguenots, and that hee had solde the Marquisat of
Saluces, to the Duke of Sauoy, to the end, that vnder pretence of recouering it againe, hee might diuert the warres from
Guyenne.
 That in stead of ayding his Maiestie, and to imploy their liues and meanes, in reducing the Townes holden by the Huguenots, his Captaines and men of warre stayed at Blois, vppon assurance giuen them of a commodious change.
 That hee had caused bookes to bee imprinted, thereby to breake the lawfull succession of the Crowne, in fauour of the house of Lorraine.
 That his seruaunts vppon the day of the Barricadoes in Parris, perswading themselues, that as then hee hadde mounted to the highest degree of his greatnesse, saide openly throughout his lodging, that it was no time to make any more delaies, (for such were their proper termes) and that there rested nothing to doo, but to conduct their Maister to Reims.

 That hee caused triumph to bee made in
Parris, as if it had beene in a Towne new conquered: that his Lacqueys had more credit with the people, then his Maiesties principall seruants: that hee boasted both by word of mouth and writing, that it was in his power to hold the king, that is, to stay him prisoner, or else to vse him woorse.
 That he boasted to haue stayed the sacking of Parris: and that he could arest the king, beeing in the middle of fiue or sixe thousand men, and all of them the kings friends, and yet hee entered into Parris but with eight horse: hee was so well assured of the good wils and mindes of the Inhabitants, that receiued him with the cries and open reioycings, which onely belong vnto a soueraigne Prince.
 That the king had no meanes to appoynt a Knight of the watch within Parris, nor to dispose of the
Bastille at his pleasure.
 That hee had so intised the states to fauour his ambition, that the Deputies spake nothing but what pleased him, and had no other billes nor petitions to present, but such as had been first examined and perused by his Councell: and that it seemed that this assembly at Blois, was wholly made to seale a contract of some new royaltie: and that alreadie diuers said, that he made too long delay to execute his intent.
 That hee spake not but with authoritie like a king, vsing words full of brauadoes, disdaine, and threatnings, against his Maiesties subiects.
 That hee spake in all affaires, as if hee were chiefe soueraigne: that hee had constrained the king to prouide a succescor, as if hee lay at the poynt of death.
 That hee had sent his letters pattents (sealed with the great seale) vnto the Inhabitants of Romorantin, forbidding them not to administer victualles nor amunition, to the company of
Monsieur de Souuray, and they had expresse commaundement to send vnto him.
 That in presence of the Queene-mother, hee had refused his Maiestie to subscribe to the ordinance which hee ment to publish, concerning certaine treasons as then practised and pretended.
 That his only intent was, in his person (as a supposed branch of the house of Charlemaine) to reestablish the greatnesse and vsurped authoritie of the ancient Maiors of the Pallace, to the ende, the king should onely beare the name, and that hee might deale with him, as Charles Martel did with
Chilperic.
Some that were present at this Councel, the more to stirre vp the kings minde, by the auncient perill of an vnrecouerable fall from his authoritie, to shewe him, that his Maiestie was to remember the dreame he had before the League beganne: which was, that the Lyons and wilde beasts, by him nourished in his Castle of the Louure, deuoured him,The kings dreame or vision, and that beeing mooued with this vision, hee had caused them to bee killed: and among the rest, one Lyon being the most furious beast of them all.
Lastly, they put the King in minde of Salcedoes processe, which had discouered all the pretence of the Councell holden at
Nancy, the first article whereof, was, to cease vpon the Kings person, of the Councell of fiue persons, holden at Parris in the time of Lent, in An. one thousand fiue hundreth eightie seue^, wherin the Duke de Maine couertly inuayed against his Maiestie:
Of the memorials taken about the Aduocate Dauid, of the letters sent by the Queene of Denmarke, to her sonne the Duke of Lorraine, which were found about the Abbot of Billy comming from Rome, and withall, the attempt of the Barricadoes was not forgotten, therewith to end their Councell.
Considerations that stayed the kings minde.But three things caused the kings minde to wauer, and to staye long before hee resolued vpon it: one, the respect of the Pope: the second, his oath made touching the protection of the states: and the third, the troubles that this execution would breed, by their meanes that fauoureth the Duke of Guise.
Touching the first, it was shewed him, that his holinesse beeing aduertised of the Duke of Guise, at the erecting of the Barricadoes had ceased vpon the Bastille, and
Bois de Vincennes, hee said vnto the Bishop of Parris, that the enterprise was ouer bolde, that it touched the estate, and that the offence would prooue vnrecouerable. That his holinesse had often written vnto his Maiestie, that hee should assure himselfe of the estates, what meanes soeuer hee made, and that in these so apparant daungers, there is no remedie whatsoeuer, but it may bee vsed: that hee needed not to inquire if it were lawfull to be done, and that it was for the same cause, that his Maiestie had obtained a Confessor, by him to bee resolued of all things touching or concerning the holy Sea of
Rome.
That the heads and authors of factions, are so odious vnto Princes, (iealous of the quietnesse of the estate) that therein they pardon not their owne blood: as king Philip, that pardoned not
Charles his owne sonne, that sought to surprise the low Countries. And the Duke of Guise, when speeches were vsed touching the disobediences of the Duke of Aniou deceased, had alwaies this example (of extreame iustice) readie to produce: It is knowne why the Cardinall of Caraffe was strangeled. Pope Sixtus at this day liuing in the first yeare of his pontificates, put to death the Counte de Pepoly, one of the most famous families in all
Italie, because hee kept certaine banished persons his kinsmen, secretly in his house. In this Realme of France, Iohn Earle of Harcourt, of the blood royal of Scotland, Lewis de Luxembourg, Constable of France, Iaques Counte de la Marche, issued from the house of Castille, and diuers others of as great quallitie and estate, as the Duke of Guise, haue indured shamefull ends, because they practised and made secret leagues with forraine Princes and kings.
 The Pope thoght that the Duke of
Guise had borne armes for the religio^, but after the Barricadoes once erected, hee beleeued it not, and although religion were the cause of the warres, yet should it not bee lawfull without the kings authoritie. The example is both good and memorable in the Historie of the king of
Spaine, called Leoncilde, both an hereticque, and an
Arrian. This Barbarian pursued the Christians, and pardoned not his owneson, that had bin instructed and conuerted vnto Christian religion, by Leander Bishop of Tolede, hee banished him out of kingdome. This young Prince being mooued at the miseries and persecutions of the Christians in his countrie,Qui contra genitorem quamuis hereticum talia cogitarer. didtwise raise armes against his father: at the first he was ouerthrowne and sent into exile: at the second time, he was put to death, and slaine vpon Easterday. S. Gregory Archbishop of
Tours, in this example noteth the effects of the iudgements of God, and condemneth the boldnesse of this Prince, that The king is not bound by oath nor obligation vnto his subiects.rebelled against his father, and his king, although both an hereticque and an Arrian. Touching the oath which is the second consideration that stayed his Maiestie, and which is neuer broken nor neglected, but repentance followeth, it was tolde the King, that euen as betweene the bond-man and the Lord, there is no obligation to bee made, that there can bee no strickt promise betweene the subiect and the Prince: that the promises made, are not to bee obserued: that if faith bee not to bee holden with him, that cannot iustly bee called an enemie, and that hath no authoritie to make warres, (who by the lawe is termed a theefe or a rouer:) the Prince is not bound to keepe his promise with a meane subiect, who by his rebellion hath first violated his owne faith vnto his Prince. Necessitie hath no lawe, wee must vse time as occasion serueth: that is, when necessitie compelleth, and when men break their faith and promise. In great assemblies, great examples of punishing rebelles are done and executed: as at the marriage of the Emperour
Zeno, with the daughter of Ardaburis, where the Bridegome was slaine, Balisene and the Emperours father in lawe, committed prisoners. The kings of England and Polonia, haue often summoned Parliaments, therein to take and surprise the Lords that had rebelled against them. Our kings haue arested them beeing at their bankets. These great motions haue alwaies some extraordiry event, but necessitie and publike vtilitie doth authorise them.
A league grounded vpon the good will of the people.The third obiectio^ of this vnresolued resolutio^, was the great credit which the Duke of Guise had gotten among the people: wherevpon it was shewed the king, that as the said Princes part, had no other credit but among the multitude of the co^mon people, so there is no foundation more ruinous and vnstable. That the principall families in Townes, his Maiesties officers, the gouernours and men of commandement will not stirre, but onely to cause the people to arise, which will be altogither abashed, seeing him thrown down, that was the principall of their rebellion, that the Courts of Parliaments in Parris and
Roane, the Towne of Orleans beeing the Citadell of
France, and Lyons the Bulwarke of his Realme, would neuer change partie, nor yet estraunge themselues from the fidelitie of good and true subiects. That the Duke of Guise is like a great tree, that standing vpright, and hauing a large roote, causeth the branches to spring out, and the leaues to flourish,A comparison made vpon the death of the Duke of Guise. but when it is lopped downe to the bare bodie, as long as any sappe is within it, it will bring foorth some small twigges, and a fewe pasle leaues, but if the heate of the sunne doth once pearce it, that litle sap that resteth, consumeth, the tree dieth, her leaues hang readie to fall off, because the ridicall humour is wanting, and such as hidde themselues vnder the shadowe of her branches are all discouerd. And because they perceiued the K. ballancing his resolutio^, towards ye rigor of his vengea^ce, such as feared least he shuld alter his mind, that the opinion they had holde^ in this Councel would be discouered, assured him that the D. of Guise wold first begin to vnwind his M. spindle: that he wold surprise him: that it was alreadie published within Parris, that this year 1588. is the climaticall and last yeare of his raigne: that alreadie it was determined how long he shuld be holde^ in a Cloister:The pollitike and unlitary discourse of Monsieur de la Noue. that the cizors had bin shewed wherwith he shuld be shaue^ and put into a Monastarie, like Childeric: that is was said, that a raisor should make the last crowne of the three, which the king expected. The king beleeued that the life of the Duke of Guise would be his death, and therfore he was fully resolued to rid him of his life.

Aduise giue^ the king to keepe the D. of Guise in prison.A Knight of both orders, thought it more expedient to keepe him in prison, to the end, that hee might bee iudged and condemned like a traitor, but the rest of the Councell saide: who will accuse, who will labour against him, who will execute the iudgement, among so many participants and friends, that will mooue both heauen and earth to saue his life? In matters of treason the punishment must first proceed before iudgement, as lightning co^meth before thunder: and as this crime is altogither extraordinary in the head, the like is the forme of the punishment. Wee must leaue the formes and manners of iustice,Andronadorus and Themistius slaine. to preuent and punish the culpable, and then at leisure to frame their processe.
The Senate of Siracuse, caused
Andronadorus and Themistius, that sought to renue the tyrannie of Nero, to bee presently slaine by the hands of the Magistrate himselfe. The Romanes, beeing a Common-wealth so humane, so polliticque, and so great an enemie to contrary actions, held it for a maxime, that where the estate is in daunger, men may beginne to remedie by execution. And therefore Cato in his Oration against
Catilina, saith: that we must rather quit our countrie of a traitor, then consult what death hee shall die, hauing taken him. To put the Duke of Guise in prison, would bee as much, as if wee should take a Bore in a net, that beeing ouer strong, would breake the cordes, and which is to bee feared, would spoyle both the hunter and his hounds, all at one time. When the serpent is slaine, the poyson hath no more force.Incide semel quicquid iucidendum est. Lips. A dead man maketh no more warre, it is dangerous both to delay and to disclose this counsell, and therefore punishment is more necessarie, then the force of iustice.
The Duke of Guise was aduertised from all places, that it would be dangerous for him, to stay longer at the Parliament, but the more hee entered into distrust, the more the fauours and vnaccustomed kindnesse on the kings behalfe vsed towards him, stayed his intent: one of his principall Councellours tolde him, that withdrawing himselfe from the Parliament, he should beare the blasone to haue abandoned the countrie of
France in so important an occasion, that hee would easily loose his countrie, seeing hee forsooke it: that his enemies would make their profit of his withdrawing from thence, and that they would ouerthrow al that which with so much paine and pursuite had been procured for the assurance of religion.
Want of prouidence in men.It is straunge, that men beeing at the poynt of their misfortunes, do oftentimes loose al prouidence, wisedome, and iudgement, to auoyde the mischiefe that is readie to fall vppon them. There are certaine birds which foresee tempests, and knowe on what side the winde and stormes will happen. Rats forsake a house, that for want of reparation is readie to fall: but men not only close their eyes against the mischiefe, but run headlong into the middle thereof. The Duke of Guise was aduertised from all parts both within and without the Realme, that the Parliament would ende with a bloodie tragedie.
The day before his death, as hee sat downe at the table to dinner, hee found a litle scroule of paper vnder his napkin, wherein was written, that he should looke vnto himself, and that there would be some mischief wrought against him, and in the same paper with his own hand hee wrote two words, saying: (they dare not) and so threw it vnder the table.

There was no other speech among the states, but that the execution should bee done vppon Saint Thomas day, the aduises came both from Rome and Spaine, the Astrologians filled their Almanakes with threatnings: and the euening before his mischiefe, the Duke of
Guise was assured by the Duke d'Elboeof, that the next day hee should bee slaine.
But all this notwithstanding, he was so carelesse of his safetie, that in a manner hee was wholly blinded, and forgot himselfe. Hee kept the keyes of the Castle, as beeing Great-maister, but the euening before his death, they fell into his enemies hands, who thereby had the meanes to bring in those that ought both to aduance and execute the kings pleasure vppon him.
The king in the meane time, that feared to bee preuented, not minding any longer to delay his purpose, thought to execute it at a supper, which the Archbishop of Lyons should make both him and the Cardinall his brother vppon the Sunday before Saint Thomas day, but hee referred the execution vntill the Tuesday following, the Duke of
Guise hauing but small company with him in his chamber, yet hee let that day passe, and went to walke in his Garden, followed by the Duke of Guise, who approaching his death, had certaine speeches with the king that much offended him, whereby hee changed his collor into furie. And after many words, both ouer hardy and bold, wherein hee had been instructed and counselled by Cardinall Morosin, hee perceiued, that all things proceeded from euill to woorse, and that the things which seemed curable, were become incurable.
The king suspected the Duke of Guise, to vse these speeches either to induce him to bereaue himself of his authoritie, and to giue him all soueraigne power, or else to find some means of discontentment, that thereby he might breake vp the Parliament, and so make his Maiestie odious to his subiects: wherewith hee could not so much dissemble his displeasure, but that such as were present, perceiued well, that it would bee the meanes to open the woundes that were thought to bee healed, he determined to stop the hopes and enterprises of this Duke, with the price of his life, and no more to indure so many insolencies and braueries of the league, that esteemed it a title of honour to beare the name of Guisart, and of infamie and dishonor to haue the name of a seruant to the king.
The death of the Duke of Guise vpon the
23. of December. 1588.Vppon Fryday the three and twentieth of December, hee sent for his Councell, and willed them to assemble somewhat sooner then ordinarily they vsed to do, because hee determined after dinner to go to Nostredame de Clery, which is betweene Blois and Orleans, there to keepe his Christmas. The euening before, hee had sent into diuers places, to assure such townes as hee iudged to bee most wauering, and prouided for all things necessary, beeing in the middle of so many seruitors of the League: and sent for certaine of the fiue and fortie, to the number of seuen, shewing them, that hee had indured too much at the hands of the principall Ruler of the League, that hee would no longer haue a Maister, and that hee had determined to put the Duke of Guise to death. The order of the execution beeing deuised, the Cardinalles de Vandosme, de Guise, and de Gondy, the Archbishop of Lyons, the Duke of
Guise, the Marshalles of d'Aumont and de Rets, Monsieur d'O, Monsieur de Rambouillet,Princes, Prelates, and Lords of the Councell.
Monsieu de Maintenon, Monsieur Marcel, and Monsieur de Petremolle, came to sit in Councell: and the king had giuen order to shut the Castle Gates, assoone as they were entered.
There is nothing that so much iniureth the trueth of a Historie, as passion, which maketh mans iudgement to yeelde which way it will, and causeth him to erre, and to seeke to disguise the trueth.
Diuersitie and contrarietie in Historians.There is a maruellous vncertaintie in the circumstances of this Historie, wherevnto euery man giueth what shewe and colour it pleaseth him, and turneth the fairest side vnto his passion, so that among so many varieties of iudgement, a man can hardly finde a certaine trueth.
Some write, that as the Duke of Guises eye on that side his face where he had the scarre, began to water, not finding a hand-cherchef in his pocket, hee desired Monsieur Otoman Treasurer of the house, that stood by him, to take the paines to go to the chamber-doore, to see if hee could finde any of his Pages or Lacqueys, and to commaund them to fetch him one, and that Monsieur de l'Archan Captaine of the guard, caused one to bee fetched by Saint Prix, chiefe Groome of the kings chamber.
Others say, that as the Duke of Guise stayed till all the Councell were come,The Duke of Guise was in a new sute of russ^^. hee talked with the Archbishop of Lyons, who perceiuing him to be in a new suite, and that somewhat thinne, sayd vnto him, that the indisposition of the time being colde and moyst, required a warmer kinde of garment, and that vppon those speeches his nose bled, he was a colde, hee commaunded one of the officers of the Councel-chamber to make a fire, and one called Fontaine to fetch him a hand-cherchef.
He that wrote the recuell of the third volume concerning the league, saith: that the Duke of Guise before hee went out of the Councel-chamber, sent a Page into his owne chamber, to fetch him a cleane hand cherchef, and that his Secretary in one the corners thereof, tyed a small note in writing, for an aduertisement vnto the Duke his Maister, withall speede to leaue the Councell, otherwise it would cost him his life. And that the handcherchef was brought, but not deliuered, beeing taken from the Page, togither with the note, as he went vp the staires.
The Councell beeing set, about eight of the clocke in the morning, and reasoning of that which Monsieur Petremolle had proposed:The Lord of Pretremolle vnderstandeth their agreements. the Duke of Guise felt certaine straunge motions at his heart, with diuers extraordinary passions, his spirit beeing the Prophet of his euill fortune that ensued, and in that distrust hee felt a weaknesse at his heart, wherewith hee willed the Vsher of the Councel-chamber, to go to Saint Prix to fetch him some preserued Lemons, and hee sent him some prunes of Brignoles, and reisons of the sunne, whereof hee eate, and put the rest into a cup, wherein they were brought. With that, the King sent for him by Monsieur de Reuol, one of his Secretaries, and as hee went out of the Councel-chamber, to enter into the kings lodging, and that hee lifted vppe the Tapistrie to go in, hee perceiued himselfe to bee charged both with Rapiers and Poinyards, by fiue or sixe of the fiue and fortie, but they could not enter so faste vpon him, but that he defended himselfe till he made them driue him once about the chamber, minding not to leaue his life like a coward, thereby to shew the last signe of his inuincible courage, that made him so much esteemed and as yet giueth an honourable memorie of him, to all those that commend the valour of a valiant courage. The same Collector of the proceedings of the league, turneth the bias an other way, with an ouer thorny and sharpe iudgement, and a ballance too much vnequall, setting down this action contrary to the trueth: for hee reporteth it in these words, saying: The Duke of Guise thinking to go into the kings chamber, and issuing out of the Councel chamber, into the entrie that leadeth to the kings lodging, redoubled his distrusts, and would haue returned backe againe, which neuerthelesse he did not.
And it had oftentimes beene tolde him, that Monsieur de Longnac had enterprised to kill him, in such maner, that he hated him, and had him in great suspition, and as hee went towards the kings chamber, hee perceiued Monsieur de Longnac sit vppon a trunke, with his legges crossed, thinking verely hee had beene there of purpose to assayle him, (as shewing to bee mooued with most violent distrust and deepe suspition) and although the said Monsieur de Longnac mooued not, the Duke of Guise notwithstanding thought to runne at him, and layde hand on his rapier, being halfe drawne, as then hauing his cloake cast about him like a scarfe, which hee vsed ordinarily to do, and his rapier vnder his cloake, which by that meanes hee could not so hastily pull out, but that som of those that were in presence (perceiuing him to bee so bold at the kings chamber dore) preuented him. This is the aduise of the Collector, the noyse and bustling among them was presently heard within the Councell-chamber, which made the Archbishoppe of Lyons to come foorth, and went to knock at the chamber doore, where as then they had newly slaine the Duke of
Guise, and yet hee came time ynough thither, to heare his last words.
The astonishment of the Cardinall of Guise.The Cardinall of Guise was in a maruellous maze, his sences troubled, and his courage abated, and as hee sought the doore to go out, he with the Archbishop of Lyons was arested by Monsieur de Larchan and his guard, that made conscience to lay hands vppon them, because of their order. They desired Monsieur de Larchan to bring them into some chamber, that they might not be a wonder to such as passed by: wherewith they were Iedde into a litle chamber ouer the kings lodging, made not long before, therein to lodge the Feuillans and Capucins, where for a time they remained without either seate or fire.
The Cardinall of Guise could not cease by his words, to poure out the heate of his passions and his greefes, and in that chollor spake certain words, which in a quiet and more sencible minde hee would not haue vttered, so that hee renued the Kings furie, who therewith commaunded la Bastier and Monsieur de Valence, two of the fiue and fortie, to kill him. The one refused the commission, saying: that his hands should neuer bee defiled with the blood of a man of the Church. The other determined to execute the Kings pleasure, and beeing accompanied with fixe of his companions, hee mounted vp the staires close to the chamber doore, where hee was, there they stood disputing which of them should beginne, and as hee thought to enter, hee felt a certaine motion that stopped the heate of his furie,The imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon. and made him to godowne: presently after, the Duke of Guise was slaine, the king appoynted a guard to attend vppon the Cardinall of Bourbon, who as yet was in his
bed, and to stay Madame de Nemours, the Duke
de Nemours, and the Duke d'Al-boeuf.
The Prince of Iuinuille.The memories of the League write, that the great Prior rose vp, and went very early to call the Prince de Iuinuille, to play a set at tennis, whereon they had agreed the night before, and finding him in his bed, desired him to rise, who being soone vp, and speedily made readie, whether it were because the great Prior was presently followed by certaine of the guard, or otherwise, it is not certainely knowne: he entered in distrust, and presently after, would haue forced a doore that issued out of his chamber, and so haue saued himselfe, wherewith the guard tooke him.
And the great Prior perceiuing by that meanes, that their set would not go forward, hee tooke his leaue and departed: but the trueth is, that when the Duke of Guise was slaine, the Prince
Iuinuille his sonne was hearing Masse in the Chappell of the Castle, and comming out from thence, as he thought to go vp the staires to find the great Prior, with whom he had made a match to play at tennis, hee was stayed by the Archers, and seeking to defend himselfe, they held him, and led him into the chamber of the great Prior. Meane time, the Switzers were set to keepe the Duke of Guises lodging, that no man might come foorth. Monsieur de Hautefort, Monsieur de Pericard chiefe Secretary, and Monsieur de Barnardin, chiefe Gentleman of the chamber to the Duke of Guise, were taken.
It is said that Pericard beeing brought to this extremitie, either to speake for life, or else confesse for death, disclosed all the secrets of the League, and wholly instructed the king of his Maisters intent. Monsieur de Richelieu, Marshall of the house, accompanied with his Archers, and certaine souldiers of the companie of Mo^sieur de Gast, went into the Town-house, where the third estate were assembled, and there laide hands vpon the President de Neuilly, the Prouost of Merchants in Parris, Compan and
Corteblance, Sheriffes of the said Towne: Monsieur le Roy, Gouernour of the Towne of Amiens: the Counte de Brissac, Monsieur de Bois Dauphine, and other Gentlemen affectioned to the Duke of Guise, that were all arested, the rest stayed neither for bootes nor spurres, to get them thence, this accident being so fearefull vnto them.
Monsieur de la Chastre iustifieth himselfe.The Duke of Guise had two principall seruants, that were as disposers of all his secret intents: the one, the Archbishop of Lyons: the other, Monsieur de la Chastre. The first was safe ynough from any more troubling the king, but touching the second, hee had him in great distrust, by reason of the perfect amitie that hee bare vnto the Duke of Guise: but assoone as he had receiued the newes, hee went presently to the Duke de Neuers in the armie, vnder whom hee was Marshall, and saide vnto him: that although he had alwaies beene a seruant to the Duke of Guise, yet hee still held and continued his faith constant vnto the King, and because the great amitie hee bare vnto the Duke of Guise, might cause him to be suspected by the King, hee willingly yeelded himselfe into the Duke
de Nemours hands, to iustifie his actions, and not long after, he went in person to present himselfe vnto the king, assuring him, that from that time forward, to become his faithfull seruant.
Monsieur d'Antragues in all haste mounted on horsebacke, to assure the King of the Towne of Orleans: but there he found Monsieur de Roissieu, who Orleans holden for the League.the same morning had been the with D. of Guise, and perceiuing the Guard to bee stricktlier disposed, then ordinarily they were, and knowing the kings commaundement, to shut the gates while the Councell sat, hee entered into a maruellous apprehension of the cause, and presently departed out of Blois, to take order for the Town of Orleans, sending expresse messengers in all hast to aduertise the Duke
de Maine his Maister beeing at Lyons.
The Queen-mother aduertised of the Duke of Guises death.The first thing that the king did, after hee came out of his chamber, was to beare the newes vnto the Queene his mother, to whom hee said, that as then he was absolute king, and that he had no more companions. She at the first was strangely abashed, and said vnto the king, that it would haue fallen out hardly for him, if he had not taken order for the assurance of the towns, where the name and memorie of the duke of
Guise had credit and authoritie. Councelling him by the Cardinall
de Gondy, to aduertise the Popes Legate: which done, shee went to visit the Cardinall of Bourbon that lay sicke, and was kept prisoner. And assoon as he espied her, with tears in his eies he spake vnto her and said: Ah Madame, you haue brought vs hither vnto the slaughter. She that seemed to be much abashed at so violent and vnexpected change that then had happened, assured him, that shee neither had giuen consent nor aduise to any such thing, and that it was a most incredible greefe vnto her soule.
The death of the Queene-mother, vpon the fift of Ianuary, 1589.But the Cardinal redoubling his complaints, shee left him striken at the heart with so great greefe, that presently shee went to bed, and died therevppon, the fift of Ianuary after, much lamented by the king her sonne, who as yet had need of her counsell. The king going out of his mothers chamber, went to heare masse, where at large hee informed the Legate of the causes that had constrained him to put the Duke of Guise to death, as hauing attempted against his person.
About euening, the Cardinall and the Archbishop of
Lyons, were taken out of the chamber, wherein they had been shut, to leade them into an other, stronger and darker then the first, in the highest part of the Castle. But sorrow and greefe had so much seized vppon the Cardinall, that what apprehension of death so euer he must haue, he could not chuse but sleepe, assoone as hee was layde vppon the mattresse prepared for him. After his first sleepe his spirits reuiued, and considering the extream imbasing of his greatnesse, and the fall of his house, he complained to himselfe of his misfortunes. The Archbishop of Lyons vsed al the meanes he could, to disswade him from the thinking of any other thing, then onely of death, which he suspected to bee the ende of both their persons. They imployed all their Philosophie to make it seeme easie and lesse fearefull, thereby to dispoyle it of the horrible and straunge shape wherewith it is figured vnto vs. They confessed themselues each to other, reconciling themselues to God, committing their causes vnto him, and in that conceit of death, they only attended the commandement when and where they should receiue.
With that, the Cardinall had desire to sleepe, vntill morning, that the Archbishop of Lyons rose vp and left him sleeping, and not long after, he waked him to rise to Martins. The king in the mean time was counselled, yea and solicited by most violent reasons, to put ye Cardinal to death: which counsel at the first Iustice regardeth not the qualities of men.seemed perilous vnto him, considering the quallitie of that Prelate beeing a Peer of France, Archbishop of
Reims, Cardinall of Rome, and President of his Order in the Parliament: but after he had been shewed, that iustice hath her eyes closed, not to behold the quallities of men, and that the greater authoritie a man is in, the greater is his fault: that treason is more apparant, and a worse example in a Cardinall, then in a simple Priest. That the Cardinall of Guise would succeed in the credit of his brother, and that hee had alreadie vsed threatning speeches, hee determined to make him follow after his brother the Duke of Guise, and therevppon commaunded
Monsieur de Gast, to kill him, who excused himself of that commission, saying it was not a thing conuenient for a Gentleman of his calling. But in fine, for foure hundreth Crownes, they found foure instruments to execute that commission. One of them went into the chamber where the Cardinal sat, and making low reuerence, told him the king sent for him.
The Cardinall before hee went, asked if hee sent not likewise for the Archbishop of Lyons, but aunswere was made, that he onely must come vnto him, wherevpon with an assured countenance, that not seeming to thinke vpon the mischiefe that attended on him: about three steps within the dore, hee bad the Archbishop of Lyons farewell, who perceiuing the Cardinall to go without any apprehention of death, said vnto him: Monsieur, I pray you thinke vppon God: at the which word, the Cardinall ceised with feare, was abashed, and turned his head towards the Archbishop, who at that instant fell downe vppon his knees before the Crucifix, recommending his soule vnto God, beleeuing stedfastly that they would do the like to him that he supposed they ment to execute vpon the Cardinall, who beeing about three or foure pases without the chamber, was inclosed by foure men, that with blowes of rapiers, poinyards, and partisans, dispatched him of his life, and beeing slaine, they stripped him.
The King going to Masse, accompanied by the Cardinall of
Vandosme and others, met the Barron de Lux, who falling downe on his feete, offered his head to saue the Archbishop of
Lyons his vncle. The king that loued the Gentleman, and that desired not to loose such a Prelate, thinking by his meanes to attaine vnto the
Quintessence of the Leaguers deuises, assured him of his life, but not of his libertie.
Not long after, the king sent Monsieur Guiotard and Monsieur Languetot, two of his priuie Councell, with a Clarke, to examine the Archbishop touching the causes and accusations layde against the Duke of Guise. He said vnto them, that they being Lay-men, had not any iurisdiction ouer an Archbishop, and that hee beeing such, might not aunswere vnto them, desiring them not to trouble him any more therein.
The answer of the Archbishop of Lyons vpon the Duke of Guises accusatio^.They returned this answere vnto the King, who presently sent the Cardinall de Gondy, to perswade him to satisfie his commaundement, and to aunswere to the propositions that should bee made vnto him: the Archbishop aunswered him and saide: that hee could say nothing against the Cardinall, nor the Duke of Guise his brother, with whom hee had imbarked himselfe: that for his owne person, hee neither could nor ought to aunswere before any man but the Pope, or to those whom it should please him to appoynt: and that as Primate of France, he had no other Iudge. And that that the Cardinall de Gondy himselfe beeing Bishop of Parris, was vnder his primatie: that if the Cadinall
Morosin, Legate for his holinesse (by the aduise of other Prelates assembled in the parliament) thought it conuenient for him to answere, he wold follow their resolutio^: and that so doing, it shuld be they and not the Arch. of Lyons, that shuld break the Priuileges and immunities of the church.
The king to the contrary esteemed, that considering the quallitie and importance of the cause, he was not bound to haue recourse vnto the Pope, to examine the trueth of the Duke of Guises actions. It was shewed him,The king hath power ouer Bishops. that the priuiledge which the Archbishop demaunded, much derogated the soueraigntie and power of his Maiestie, who at all times had iurisdiction ouer the Bishops of his Realme, specially in things touching the Crowne: and when processe was to be made against Giles Bishop of Reims, and Didier Archbishop of
Vienne, the king vsed the helpe of the Bishops of France, and had no recourse vnto the Pope: Chilperic sent
Pretextatus Archbishop of Roane, to the Councell holden in
Parris, to bee iudged by them, but with this clause: (Although that of our owne authoritie wee could deale therein, it beeing treason for the which he is accused, neuerthelesse,Gregorie de Tours, Atmon Ado, Vincent. because it concerneth our own person, to the end it shall not bee thought, that wee will do otherwise, then by iustice and reason, wee giue you leaue to deale therein. The Emperours themselues, neuer remitted the examinatio^ of causes that touched the estate of their Empire, vnto the long and solemne daies of the Popes Councel. The Emperour
Zenon condemned and bannished two Bishops, the one of
Alexandria, named Iohn, the other of Antioche, named
Calendion:Euagriu^s lib. 4. whereat Pope
Simplicius was offended, and for the same cause wrote vnto the Emperour, who made him answere, that the execution was not done for any Ecclesiasticall crime, neyther yet touching religion, but that one of them had lyed in his owne presence: and the other fauored Basiliscus his enemie. And good Popes neuer sought into that iurisdiction, whereby to peruert the order of polliticque lawes. Saint Gregory admonished
Victor and Iohn,C. experientiae ca. sequ. 11. q. 1. Bishop of Taurese, (which as the^ was the Metropolitane Church of Dalmatia, founded by
Iustinian, in the Towne by him called Iustinian, after his own name) to cause two Bishops that had troubled the state of
Aquilee and Millan, with a good guard and all speede to bee ledde vnto the Emperour: and such was the institution of the fathers, assembled in the first general Councels of Constantinople vnder Theodose, and in that of Carthage, to remit Ecclesiasticall causes to the iudgement of the Cleargie,Pauliuus Bishop of Aquilee. but the persons to the temporall Magistrate, when it is a crime, the punishment whereof, dependeth not vpon the authoritie of the Ecclesiasticall Iudge, and is to be otherwise ordered, then by Ecclesiastical and Canonical censures: It is true, that the ordinances of France, ful of respect and reuerence towards the church, haue induced ye Concorda^ce of the spirituall and the te^poral Iudge, when the cause dependeth vpon priuiledge, and ordaine that the processe should be ioyntly made, to the end,Co^currance of the spirituall and temporal Iurisdiction. that if the offender be found guiltie, he should be degraded, according to the prescript order and ordinance of the cannons, and then sent to the secular power to be co^de^ned to death, or other punishme^t according to his offence, but wher it co^cerneth the Co^mon-wealth, suretie and preseruation of an estate, it is not the maner to follow the ordinarie course, therby to auoyde a great disorder, and the extreame necessitie to prouide things present, ought not to bee restrained vnto the long detractions of the Romish Courts.
The king prouoked by these reasons, after he had let the Archbishop rest in prison for the space of fifteene daies, with resolution to refuse all the Iudges that should bee sent vnto him, but such as were appoynted him from Rome, sent the Bishop of Beauuais, and Mousieur Ruze his Secretarie, to certifie his pleasure vnto him: which was, that hee should aunswere to the Articles by them to bee propounded vnto him, wherein they perswaded him, not to deny the King, that had not refused to graunt him pardon of his life.
The Archbishop of Beauuais.The Archbishop asked the Bishop of Beauuais, in what quallitie he had taken that charge vpon him, framing an argument consisting in two points. Asking him if he came thither as a Bishop, or as a Peere of France: It as Bishop, he saide hee could not examine him, hee in that poynt beeing his superiour: If as a Peere of France, it was a temporall office, and therefore hee could not aunswere, nor the Bishop examine, saying: You haue beene in the Courts of Parliament, where you neuer sawe processe framed against a simple Priest, without the consent of his superior: I thanke God, I haue red what authoritie and priuiledge belongeth vnto the Church, and cannot beleeue, that the King in any wise is minded to infringe it, nor yet to beginne with mee, and seeing hee hath graunted me my life, hee meaneth likewise, that my conscience should bee at libertie, the honour and respect whereof, is dearer vnto mee then a thousand liues. The Bishop of Beauuais perceiuing that hee could not effect his charge, withdrew himselfe: the Archbishop desiring him to acquaint the king with his reasons, and to beseech his Maiestie, that hee might bee comforted by some religious persons, and to haue Masse within his chamber. Which the Bishop of Beauuais certified vnto the King, who made aunswere, that hee would put the Archbishop in such a place, where hee should haue both religious persons, and Masses as many as hee would desire. In the meane time, vpon aduise giuen vnto him, that the great blow which hee had giuen the league, had not in such manner astonished it,The rising of Parris. but that alreadie diuers of them began to rise and to leuie armes, he had recourse vnto his first remedies, and to that dangerous maxime, by him vsually obserued, as neuer doing any thing but by halues. And while he sent tongues, and not armes, therwith to retaine the people so well prepared vnto sedition, hee found the towne of Orleans to reuolt, both against him, and Monsieur d'Antragues,Orleans is declared against the Citadel and the Gouernour. Gouernour of the Citadell, that the Towne of
Parris had alreadie shewed the beginning of their mutenie against his Castle of Louure, his armes, and his seruants. But the contentment hee had receiued, to see his enemie dead, made him so carelesse, touching the rest of his affairs, that in stead of mounting on horsebacke, to shewe himselfe to those of Parris and
Orleans, and to send for the armie in Poitou, therwith to stoppe the passages and forces of the Duke de Maine, hee contented himselfe to publish a forgetting and remitting of things past, and renued the Edict of vnion, thinking that the Catholicques of the League,The Kings declaration touching the things past, vpon the 23. and 24. of December. would lay downe their armes raised against their king, to imploy the same against the King of Nauarre.
In his declaration hee saith, that at all times (and especially since his Edict made in the month of Iuly last) he had assayed by all means possible, to vnite all his good Catholicque subiects, in peace and concord vnder his authoritie, by the same vnion and the effects thereof, to reape the fruite by him alwaies
expected, and sought to purge his Realme of heresies, therein wholly to establish the faith and Catholicque religion, foreseeing that by the diuisio^ of his said subiects, there could rise nothing but a total desolatio^ of religion and ruine of his estate: that althogh for ye space of certain time, ther had bin some about him that most manifestly practised in his presence, and elsewher by their adherents, to renue and raise deuision, to cause his actions to be disliked, and wholly to suppresse his authoritie, neuerthelesse, with great patience and calamitie, hee had tollerated the effects of the euill will in those respects appeared to bee in them, assaying by all the fauours and courtesies hee could deuise, to mollifie their hearts, and to drawe them vnto those things that concerned reason, with the good and profit of his estate, and the conseruation of religion.
That this notwithstanding, they not beeing disswaded from their pernicious deuises, by the aforesaide effects of his good and holy intents, neither yet by any other considerations, his Maiestie had discouered that they had proceeded so farre, as by new inuentions to enterprise against both him and his estate.
That to withstand the same, to his great greefe hee had bin constrained to preuent their sinister dealings: but that for the singular loue and good wil naturall in him, and which hee hath alwaies continued, and will continue vnto his said Catholicque subiects, with like care of the quietnesse, safetie, and conseruation of their liues, as much as any father towards his children. Hee had therein vsed so much clemencie and moderation, that hee had restrained and layde the paine and punishment onely vppon the heads and authors of the euill, sparing their adherents and seruants, and fauourably receiued and admitted them among the rest of his good subiects, vpon promise by them made, from thenceforth to become his true and faithfull subiects.
That although, not only by his actions past, as by this last proceeding, hee hath giuen and declared by euident testimonies, of his holy intent and clemencie, that no man ought to doubt: neuerthelesse to make it more manifest to all his subiects, his Maiestie declareth and protesteth, that this which hath happened, hath beene effected by reason of the preuentions vsed against his Edict of Iuly, and since that time.
And in the execution of that which is contained therein, his will and meaning is, to keep and cause it to bee kept, and to obserue and maintaine it from poynt to poynt for a lawe, as it hath been established and sworne in the Parliament, according to the forme and tenor thereof.
Forgetting and wholly remitting, all whatsoeuer is or hath bin done against dutie and fidelitie, by those that haue participated in the said practises, vppon condition, that heereafter they shall depart and wholly forsake all leagues, associations, practises, deuises, and intelligences, with all persons whatsoeuer, both without and within the Realme.
The practises against the Edict of vnion, wherevnto the King referreth the cause and motion of the death of the Cardinall and the Duke of Guise, are specified in the treatie written, concerning the troubles that ensued this execution.
Causes of putting the D. of Guise to death.The first, that assoone as the edict of vnion agreed vpon within the Cittie of Roane, was published in the Parliament-house, the principall heades of the League, in stead of causing their partakers to leaue their armes, had entertained them with further hopes and meanes, contrary to the Edict sworne, summoning them to bee in a readinesse to effect a great exployt. The second, that they had determined to seize vpon the Kings person, and to co^strain him to dismisse his Councel, whom they thought to be most faithfull vnto him, and least affected to the aduancement of their intents, and to bereaue him of his authoritie, yea and of the name of a king.
The third, their practises, leagues, and deuises, to breake the libertie of the Parliament, and to hinder them from consulting with the king, touching the good of his estate, and the quietnesse of his people, hauing a great number of the Deputies so much affected to their pretences, that they neuer assembled, before they had first consulted with the Councell of the Duke of Guise, touching their aunsweres, propositions, and resolutions.
The fourth, the fained perswasions deuised against the good intents of the king, to disswade him from the easing of the long oppressio^s of his people: the Duke of Guise on the one side, counselling him not to imbase his authoritie so much, as to depriue himselfe of the meanes to maintaine the glory of his Maiestie royall, by reducing the tallages to a lower rate then was conuenient: and on the other side, hee perswaded and pricked forward his participants to craue it, by that meanes to make his Maiestie odious among them, by refusing the easing of his peoples oppressions, or else to force him therevnto.
The sift, the confirmation of the treaties and confederacies made with forraine Princes, as the king of Spaine, the Duke of
Sauoy and Lorraine, and the fiue small Cantons, the leagues and intelligences with diuers Lords and Gouernours of Townes and Prouinces within the Realme, all contrary to the Edict of vnion, which they had sworne and promised so religiously to obserue. A great person in our time, in the second part of the Historie of the League,Vulgus audacia turbidum nisi vim metuat. The second discourse of the state of France. noteth the vnrecouerable fault of the king after that action, that busied himselfe to iustifie his pretence, and to flatter the people, who by lenitie become obstinate, and by seueritie are constrained. This great tree ouerthrown (saith he) such as shadowed themselues thereby, were for a time discouered: and without doubt the Duke of Guise himselfe was all the League, hee onely had more parts and valour, then all his participants togither. And if the king had beene resolute to go forward with his actions, and not to doo them by halues, as his maner was, and if within two houres after the act performed, hee had mounted on horsebacke, and so had added his presence and his forces vnto the feares of the townes that helde with the League, abashed at that great accident, it is very likely hee had auoyded the mischiefe which after fell vpon him. But God that derided the vaine enterprises of the one, mocked the remedies by the other prouided. This Prince, who neuerthelesse wanted neither iudgement nor courage, had no sooner perceiued his enemie dead, put presently perswaded himselfe to haue no more in all the world, and certainly being among his familiars, he vsed this speech, saying: This day I am king, and yet to the contrary, from that day forward his royall estate begane to decline.Incauta semper nim^^ presumptio and sui negligents. Egesippus. This presumptio^ caused him to be so carelesse in his affaires, that he lost Orleans, which he might haue saued by shewing himselfe vnto it: and that he suffred the D. de Maine to come and fortifie himself with men and munitio^: he laughed at those ye moued him with al dilige^ce to send for his armie that laye in Poitou: hee was offended against such as counselled him at the same time to vse the ayde of the king that now is, and of the Huguenots: and to conclude, so much despised all things, (which neuerthelesse within one moneth after, hee was constrained to do) that within sixe weekes, hee perceiued himselfe to bee reduced, onely to the Realme of Tours, Blois, and
Baugency.
The fourth of January,
1589.And so after the death of those two Princes of
Lorraine, and the imprisonment of the rest that were most suspected, despising all the aduise giuen him to enter first into the field, and that doing so, hee should haue a great aduantage vppon his enemies, hee commaunded the estates to proceede with the Parliament. They presented him the billes of the three estates, and againe the third time, the Edict of vnion was published by Monsieur Ruze, and sworne by his Maiestie, with most solemne protestation to obserue and cause it to bee holden for a lawe of the Realme.
The king of Nauar vnderstandeth of the death of the Duke of Guise, the 26. of December. Lachrymas non sponte cadentes effudit genitusque expressit pectore lato.His Councell besought him to reiourne the Parliament vntill an other time, but hee was so much affected to heare and determine vpon their billes, that hee forgot both the care of his person and estate, and would not leaue off the assembly, vntill hee heard that the Duke de Maine was alreadie before the subburbes of Parris, and that hee went to ayde Orleans, with all those with whom hee had practised to reuenge the deathes of his two bretheren. The king of Nauarre receiued the newes of this execution, beeing at Saint Iohn d'Angely, by two Postes expresly sent from Blois on horsebacke, to certifie him thereof.
And he that was neuer found to be voyde of great modestie, in his most haughtie enterprises, nor yet without constancie in all the greatest crosses which both time and men had wrought against him, bewailed not so much the death, as the euill fortune of the house of
Guise, it is the nature of those that are most couerteous, not to behold the head of their enemie, but with a sad and sorrowfull eye.
Antigonus bewailed Pyrrus: Caezar Pompey: Rene duke of
Lorraine: Charles Duke of Brurgongne: and the Earle of
Montfort, Charles Earle of Blois. It is true, that hee knewe this accident would bee a great helpe touching his iustification, that thereby hee was discharged from beeing cause of the mischiefe of ciuill warres, and that the king hauing iudged and found the Duke of Guise to bee most culpable touching the troubles of the estate, had punished him according to his desert. He said that al the world (he onely excepted) imagined mischief of the house of Lorraine, and would bee glad to see the indignation, declarations, and forces of the king his Lord, bent against them. But for his part, hee could not doo it, neither yet doth it, but only that of two euils, he is constrained to chuse the least. Yet did he not refraine to pursue his enterprise against the Towne of
Niort, which was in this maner: The troupes that were to execute the same, vnder the conduct of Mousieur de S. Gelais, giuing foorth that they went for Congnac, by night marched within halfe a myle of the towne, the lathers and other warrelike amunitions, passing about a bowe-shot from the walles: and because the moone shined very bright, they were forced to stay till it was downe, least the assaylants should be discouered, who in the meane time slept vppon the Ice, wearied with long trauell and troublesome way.The taking of Niort. The execution being followed in conuenient time, Messieurs de Ranques, Valiers, and Gentil, hauing founded the ditches, caused their lathers to be broght, and other instruments, Wherein valour consisteth.neare vnto the gate which they ment to assayle, I would desire such as shall read this poynt, to consider and note, that notable enterprises are not executed without good order and discretion, and that the honour of armes consisteth not in strength, wherein many beasts haue great aduantage ouer vs, nor in that kinde of furious assault, which is more naturall to beastes then men: neither yet in the hearts of the Actors, which go where blinde conductions leadeth them, but in the good order and pollicie established by the Leaders. The approaching of those that bare the lathers, was not so secretly done, but that the Sentinel heard some noyse, and presently cried: Quivala. Whereat if the assaylant had either beene fearefull or troubled, the enterprise had bin discouered, and so haue lost their labours. But they stayed, and stood so quietly, that the Sentinell himselfe answered to the Corporall and saide: I heard a noyse, but I perceiue it is nothing, and vppon that, the lathers beeing artificially made to ioyne togither, were raised against the walles, about sixe and thirtie or fortie foote high.Scaling Lathers set vp. Galeati lepores. Liuius 28. By this escalado the Sentinell was surprised and throwne ouer the wall, and then the Court of guard, wherein they found but seuen or eight poore artificers (for that commonly within Townes, the rich do watch by the eyes of the poore) that saued themselues because they should make no noyse.
And although it had been determined to let as many of their men mount vp by lathers, as possibly they might, it chanced neuerthelesse, that one of the small number that had entered, perceiuing himselfe in some perill, cried vnto the engenier, and thought to spoyle all their enterprise: for that crie made an alarme among all the Inhabitants, and serued to the engeniers for a watch-word, to play with their Ensignes: being before the Rauelin, which made an ouerture of the gate, and at that instant, the Engin wrought against the bridge of the Towne, which brake but two plankes of the bridge, and so the gate opened in two parts, the entrie of the bridge was very straight, where one man alone could hardly get in, and yet hee must descend by one of the lathers into the ditch, and then with the same lather go vp to the entrie of the bridge, two men well armed had beene sufficient to haue kept it against them all.
In the end, by meanes of that entrie, and by their escalado, the first that entered were Messieures de S. Gelais, de Rambures, and de Parabieries, who with their companies, met hard by the Towne-house, where they beganne to crie, Viue Nauarre: and there among the people, being in feare, surprised, and abashed, they found so small resistance, that in lesse then three or foure houres the assaylants entered, vanquished, and became Maisters of the towne, being put to the spoyle, and yet without murther, violence, or iniurie done vnto the Cleargie, that were not once touched: the king of Mauarres intent beeing not to constraine them in their religion. Hee receiued the newes of this surprise at S. Iohn d'Angely, whereas then he remained: the gouernment whereof, he committed vnto Monsieur de S. Gelais. Monsieur de Parabieres, commaunded in the Castle, wherein hee found fiue peeces for batterie, and two long coluerins, which hee that was Captaine thereof, had caused to bee made, therewith (as hee said) to salute the king of Nauarre, when hee should approach the walles of
Niort.
The siege of Ganache.In the meane time, Monsieur de Neuers besieged la Ganache, a very strong Towne, lying in the marches of Poitou and Brittaine, with sixe battering peeces, foure double, and two demy coluerins: after hee had summoned Monsieur du Plessis by a Herault, to yeelde the Towne vnto him. The batterie beganne vppon New-yeares day, and within foure dayes after, the breach was reasonable great to giue the assault, which was done with great fury, and aunswered with the like courage, whereby the assaylants left at the least fiftie of their me^ dead within the ditches, the assieged loosing at the same time two good Captaines, and certaine souldiers.
The next day Monsieur de Paluau sent a drumme to
Monsieur de Plessis, to aduise him to growe to some good composition, saying that hee had obtained sufficient honour, by defending so weake a place, that his wilfulnesse hindered the king of
Nauarres affaires, and that the Duke de Neuers had fully resolued not to leaue the siege, before hee brought the Towne vnder subiection, wherevpon hee ingaged his honour.
Monsieur de Plessis resolued vppon a conference, hoping by that means to certifie the king of Nauarre of his affaires, the effect of the co^ference, was to yeelde the Towne, and to issue armed, their goods saued.
Meane time, the king of Nauarre issued out of
Niort, minding to relieue the Towne, but a sicknesse (proceeding from a great chaffing of his body, which hee did, lighting of his horse to heate himselfe beeing extreame colde) seized vppon him: which stayed him in a little village called Saint Pere, where he was troubled with so fearce and cruell fittes of a feuer, that hauing been let blood, and all remedies vsed that possible might bee found, it was thought hee would haue died, and the report of his death was brought vnto the Court.
But God who in so troublesome and confused a time, ment to vse the seruice of so great a Prince, whom hee had saued from so many perilles, to make him the woonder vnto kings, and the king of woonders,The king fell sicke the 9. of Ianuary. stayed the arest of death, which the Phisitions had pronounced against him, restoring him vnto a liuely and good health, and of a beholder, made him enter vpon the Theator, not as one that vpon a suddaine, by accident, feare, foresights, nor hopes, should represent a king in a commodie, but to fulfill the true and lawfull office of a king.
After hee was recouered, perceiuing that Messieurs de Chastillon, de la Roche Foucaut, de la Trimouille, and
Plassac, could do nothing touching the relieuing of
Ganache, and that the Duke de Neuers with his armie, made towards Blois, hee tooke the places bordering vpon Niort.
The iudgement of the Huguenot* touching the death of the Duke of Guise.The Huguenots in their writings published at that time, acknowledged not that action of the 13. of December, as a clap of thunder that maketh more noyse then it doth hurt, nor as a disgrace of fortune, wherevnto the greatest personages are most subiect: but as a worke of God, and as one of the most notable workes that he had wrought for them, thereby beginning to worke their reuenge, for the massacre of Saint Bartholomewes day, and to relieue them out of the miserable estate wherein they liued.
The Catholicques that neuer separated themselues from the auncient fidelitie of France, nor from the seruice of the king, co^sidered not so much vppon that which had passed at Blois, as vppon the cause thereof, they admired the kings long patience, that rather suffered those Princes to doo what pleased  
them for the space of certaine yeares, then once to punish them for a first, second, and third fault, and that in the end, this long patience changed into a iust furie.
These Princes made leagues both within and without the Realme: without his Maiesties consent or knowledge, they seized vpon townes and strong places in the land, euery man forsooke the king to follow them, they would haue the king to yeeld them account of all that hee had spent and done since his aduancement to the Crowne, they had dispearsed iniurious and slaunderous bookes throughout the Realme, and by them, made the name of the king to become odious: besides the disputation by them made touching the right and title vnto the king of France: as if the king and all his Predecessors had enioyned and holden the kingdome wrongfully from the house of Lorraine, at this day liuing. And to conclude, they were at the poynt to kill the King, if they had not been preuented.
As then one reioyced at the death of the Duke of
Guise, esteeming it for a worke of God, all the League to the contrary, made great sorrow.
Two daies after the execution, the sixteenth displayed their olde colours, and cried out: murther, fire, and vengeance: they presently made a collection of monies to maintaine warres, the poorest artificer among them, was content to impart at least sixe Crownes, and some hauing no mony, (that they might not bee found without affection to that commotion) solde and pawnde their goods, to bee contributaries vnto it: golde ranne like a riuer along the streetes: they found hidden treasures, and it seemed that France had nourished theeues, to make an almasse of treasures, for those inraged people. Parris became the infamous Theater of rebellion, wherein the sixteenth like furies issuing out of hell, shewed the fier and flame wherewith they inclosed and murthered the poore countrie of France. Vnder those mad dogges, and stinking impostumes of the Co^mon-wealth, was practised the most filthie and straungest rising that euer troubled the estate of any Towne. To please the sixteenth, they must displease God, their king, and their own co^science. He was but hardly thought on, that had not halfe a dozen of great outrages, wherewith to detest that execution, and an elegie for the memorie of the Duke of Guise, and all with the most sad and sorrowfull countenance that might be deuised: withall, powring out some notorious and blasphemous oathes, the better to counterfet a disliking. Hee that could not recite the memorable actions of the Duke of
Guise, eleuate him to heauen, with open mouth speake euill of the King, detest his actions, abhorre his life, and account the execution done at Blois, as most cruell, barbarous, and in humane, was neither accounted an honest man, good Catholicque, well affected, nor yet zealous.
There was no foolish Poet nor Ballet-singer within
Parris, that deuised not one couple of songs touching this action, nor any Preacher, that found not one place in his sermon, wherein to vtter a multitude of iniuries against the king. There was no Printer, that set not his Presse on work with discourses made touching his death: but aboue all, there was great disorder and libertie permitted in Preachers, that who not onely cast foorth a million of iniuries and vilanies against the king, but in stead of preaching the Gospell, they kindled a reuolt and sedition within the hearts of the people, that neuer came
from hearing them, but their heades were set on fire, and their handes prepared to seize vppon those poore Pollititians that were set before their eyes.
All this is drawne out of the discourses that were published at that time in Parris, or from the report made of such sermons.One reproached the forgetting of the seruices done by Claude Duke of Guise, vnto King
Francis, that was found almost slaine among the dead at the battell of Marignan, against the Switzers: of Francis de Lorraine to the Kings, Henry and Francis the second: who after so many notable exployts was slaine, during the siege of
Orleans: of Henry de Lorraine, to Charles the ninth: and Henry the third at Iarnac, Sens, Poitiers, Moncontour, Auneau, and Vimory, and slaine at Blois.
An other made his Auditorie weepe, by shewing the manner of this execution.
The third blasphemed against heauen, speaking against the prouidence of God, and the maner he vsed in his iudgements, touching the death of those two Princes.
The fourth said, that the Duke of Guise for a terrestriall and mortall, had obtained a celestiall and perpetuall Crowne in heauen: and by his death had opened the passage vnto his successors, by that meanes to possesse the thing which hee with so great reason and iustice had pursued.
The fift, taking the simple people to witnesse for the remembrance of things past, cried out in open Pulpit: Who knoweth not, and that most euidently, as it were at his fingers endes, that the Prince of
France, and the brauest knight that euer set foote in stirrope, lyeth now vpon the ground? Was it not hee that by his onely presence defended
Parris, the most puissant Cittie in the world, from an vniuersall spoyle and destrustion? Was it not this Prince, that tooke the naked sworde out of the souldiers hands, that helde it readie at the breasts of the poore Cittizens of this towne? Was it not that valiant Leader and Generall of armies, who so many times and so happily beate downe and cut in peeces the enemies of our God, who for reward and recompence of all his good and valiant seruices, is now stabbed to death.
They added, that France was sicke, and that it could not be healed of her sicknesse, if it had not a drinke of French blood administred vnto it.The sixt, the better to kindle and increase the fires of commotions, openly cried out: to armes: and made the word of God a trumpet of sedition, saying: Bee of good courage my maisters, you must slumber no more, the God of battels is on your side, hee stretceth forth his armes vnto you, you know not your owne forces:
Parris knoweth not what it is woorth, it hath sufficient treasure to warre against foure Kings. Take courage, turne backe the weapon that is readie to strike you: a good warre will procure a peace: without this warre, peace will be your ouerthrow and destruction. For what hath Christ to do with Belial? this warre will bee your libertie and freedome, which if you neglect, God that reuengeth the iniurie done vnto his seruaunts, will make you pay the interests of your so cowardly slacknesse.
So that sufficient perswasions were vsed, to stirre vppe and mooue the most colde and fearefull minde, and to cause the veriest coward to arme himselfe.
Such was the end of the Duke of Guise, a Prince (without all doubt) of valour and courage, the League called him her
Caezar, and made goodly comparisons betweene them. For my part, take away the name of Christian, and I cannot finde so good a comparison betweene Camille and The mistocles:Read a booke imprinted at Zurich, vnder this title. Carolus Magnus rediuinus. Numa and
Licurgus: Scipio and Epaminondas: Marcellus and
Pelopidas: Pompey and Agesilaus: Silla and Lysander: Charles the great, Henry the fourth at this present raigning, (the wonder of kings, and the king of woonders) as there is betweene the liues of Iulius Caezar, and Henry de Lorraine, the one being cause of the ouerthrow and ruine of his Common-wealth: the other, of all the miseries in France.A compariso^ between Casar and the duke of Guise Abanco Martio sunt Martii reges quo nomine fuit mater a Venere Iulis cuius gentis familia est nostrae. Caezar alleadged himselfe to be issued on his mother side, from the Kings of Alba, and that his father had his originall from the Gods, the race of Iules beeing descended from
Venus, and therefore hee caused a Temple to bee erected, Veneri, Genetrici.
The Duke of Guise (and all his familie) affirmed themselues to bee issued from the king of Ierusalem: and the Dukes of Lorraine, by their father, and from the king of
France, by Anne d'Est, daughter to Renee of
France, daughter vnto King Lewis the twelfth.
Caezar was of a goodly and tall stature, well limbed, full faced, and quicke attractiue eyes.
The Duke of Guise was one of the fairest Princes of the Court, big and high of proportion, an amiable face, so quicke of eye, that therby he pearced into all places,Plut, in the notable saying of auncient Kings, Princes and Captains. to know and chuse out his seruants farthest distant from him, and in the greatest prease. Caezar increased in ambition, as wel as in yeares, in greatnesse of courage, as well as in bodie. And as willingly a generous nature, in good time discouereth it selfe, beeing but young fell into the hands of Pyrates, that asked him 20. tallents for his ransome: but hee smiled at them, because they knew not how much their prize was woorth, and gaue them fiftie, and beeing kept and watched carefully by them, he sent commandement vnto them to be quiet, and not to make any noyse, that he might take his rest.
The Duke of Guise, as young and Eagle as hee was, assayed by all means to take his flight, farther then any of his time, very haughtie, dissembling and aduised, hee could not submitte himselfe to those from whom hee ought to haue expected his adua^cement, he differed in nothing from a kings childe of France, with whom he had bin nourished and brought vp, shewing most euidently, that his nature was to command, and not to obey: to go before, and not to follow after: in his first action hee so much disposed the thoughts of the Frenchmen, that they beleeued such parts to bee in him, as were most fit and proper to cause a great change and alteraion in the Realme where hee should liue.
His first exployts in Nauarre.Caezar began very young to beare armes, and yet not so soone as Alexander, and reading his actions, beganne to weep, when he perceiued that at his age, Alexander had alreadie conquered
Darius, and that as then he had done nothing. The Duke of
Guise, in the spring time of his yeares, was in the wars of
Hungary against the Turke, defended Sens and
Poctiers, fought valiantly at Moncontour, and brought honourable markes of his courage from the battel fought against the Rutters.
Caezar vsed so great diligence in trauelling, that hee departed from Rome,Hic dilige^ce. and within three daies after, he arriued at Rhosne. The Duke of Guise made such speedie iourneyes, that when some thought him to be fiftie leagues off, hee was found to bee in a manner at their heeles.
The promptnesse of his exploits.Caezar had no sooner begun an enterprise, but he finished it with speede. The duke of Guise was so vehement and hastie to execute his enterprises, that many esteemed his celeritie to bee a kinde of rashnesse.

Veni, vidi, vici. His dissimulation.Caezar vsed dissimulation, wisely and happily to serue him for aduantage.
The Duke of Guise was so expert therein, that hee dealt in his exteriour affaires as hee thought good, to hide the secrets of his heart, and although hee desired nothing so much as the raising of armes by the league, yet hee made his bretheren beleeue, (when they prouoked him to take occasions offered) that it was not his desire, wisely dissembling it, to the end, that if the effect had not fallen out as they desired, hee might impute the fault vnto their Councelles, or at the least, obiect against their pursuites, or else he did it to the end hee might holde them stricktly bound and ingaged vnto the enterprises, which of themselues they counselled him to take in hand.
His foresight. His cunning and slights, Com. de Caezar, Lib. 1. of ciuill wars.Caezar was maruellous expert in the science of taking occasions when time serued, and to vse them to his aduantage, whatsoeuer it cost him, oftentimes hee made shewe to agree to that, which he sought to impeach, as the meanes which the Switzers desired of him to passe through France, wherein hee made a good shew and countenance vnto their Ambassadors that made suite vnto him for the same, vntill hee had meanes and force to withstand them.
The Duke of Guise was an excellent cunning Prince, to vse both time and occasion, and his subtilties were notable stratagems, against the most violent effects of his enemies. The Reisters bare with them into Saxen and Pomerland, the effects of his so subtil practises by their incounters at Auueau and Vimory.
Caezar with a small force, and wholly contrary to militarie reason, enterprised all things, and durst set vppon the forces of Scipio and Iuba, beeing ten times greater then his owne.
His armie were of more courage then number.The Duke of Guise saide with Caezar, that high enterprises ought speedily to bee done, and not long consulted vppon: and with a small handfull of men, determined to oppose himself against the furious armie of the Almains, he discommended and disliked the monstrous multitudes full of disorders and confusions, that forme and frame a most daungerous confidence, in the hearts of the greatest cowards, that trusting to their great numbers, despised the power of their enemie, he had a small number of souldiers ruled and gouerned within certaine limittes, that need no great quantitie of ammunitions, nor retrait.
His courtesie towards his souldiers. Dux plerumque in opere, in agmine, gregatio militi mixtus, in corrupto ducis honore. Tacitus. His credit with his souldiers.Caezar flattered and fauoured his souldiers, terming them companions, and calling them by his owne name. The Duke of Guise knowing the humour of his souldiers, and that there is nothing which so much inflameth the heart of the souldier, to a desire of honour and glory, then when he is noted and marked by his Generall, hee fauoured his souldiers, and honoured his Captaines, promising them more then hee could do, and neuer denied them any thing that lay in his power.
Caezar had such credite among his souldiers, that they offered him in the beginning of the ciuill warres, to follow him at their owne expences, and many of his souldiers that were taken prisoners, offered rather to die, the^ to bee constrained to change parties, and sooner to indure most extream famine, then to yeeld vppe the Townes they held for him: witnesse the honorable siege of Salone, wherein beeing vexed with famine, and constrained to cut off the haires of their wiues heades, thereof to make stringes for their bowes, hauing placed their women and childre^ vpo^ the wals to make shew, they made so furious an issue, that therewith they put their enemies to flight. The Duke of
Guise ordinarily termed the father of men of war, so much respected and beloued of his souldiers, that neither for want of pay, nor discommodities, there was euer any mutinie seene among his troupes, and fewe or none were euer found, that during his life forsooke him, to serue vnder any other Generall. And yet the Captaines that were brought vp vnder him, are still imployed.
The execution of his commaunds. Facta non dicta mea, vos milities sequi volo^nee disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam a me petere. Liuius. His strange ambition.Caezar neuer sent to any place where hee might go himselfe, nor commaunded that to bee done by other, which by himselfe might bee effected. The Duke of Guise alwaies beeing first at any exployt, neuer trusting to any thing, but his owne watchfulnesse and diligence: the enemie found him alwaies before them, with a magnanimitie and resolution, rather to die, then to bee vanquished.
Caezar suffered himselfe to bee wholly led by the furious passion of ambition, to make himselfe great by the ruine of the Common-wealth of Rome. The same vice was the cause that the Duke of Guise lost the greatest part of his praise.
Caezar enterprised to ouerthrow the lawes and orders of the Commonwealth, passed the Rubicon, entered
Italie with armes, tooke the treasures of the Common-wealth, vsurped the office of perpetuall Dictator, wan towns by force. The Duke of
Guise enterprised to trouble the order of succession, caused the drumbe to strike vp in the midle of peace, tooke the kings towns, placed Garrison therein, and fortified himselfe.
He could not indure acompanion.Caezar could not indure a companion in his gouernment. The Duke of Guise for the same cause, mooued the great trouble of Barricadoes, and constrained the king to quit him the place.
His debts.Caezar when hee passed Rubicon, hazarded either to winne or loose all. The Duke of Guise by a popular fury, hazarded both his life, his honour, and his place. Caezar was indebted a million of gold more the^ he was worth. The Duke of Guise to accomplish his enterprises, died poore, and almost as much indebted.
Caezar vsed the fauour of the people and the tribunes, for the whing of his ambition.
His purposes grounded vpon the common people. His popularitie.The Duke of Guise found the principall support of the League, to consist in the good wil of the people, and in the multitude, being desirous of nouelties.
Caezar marched alwaies bare-headed to make himselfe more common, gentle, and amiable. The Duke of Guise to commaund great men, humbled himselfe vnto the meaner sort, as hee passed through the streetes, with his hat in hand, saluting euery man, eyther with head, hand, or speech.
The greatnesse of his thoughts.Caezar durst conceiue in his minde, and then execute his thought, to make himselfe perpetuall Dictator, and to vsurpe the soueraigntie of the Common-wealth. The Duke of Guise with as much courage, lesse reason, and more danger then Caezar, enterprised to be king, or wholly to be ouerthrowne.
His boasts.Caezar vaunted to haue made Rome the Queene of the world, a name without forme or bodie. The Duke of Guise by the league, taking away both
order and royaltie, beeing the forme of this Realme, and that which made it flourish, might well say, that hee had made
France without life.
His exerciseCaezar loued Astrologie: the Duke of Guise beleeued the Astrologians that assured him of his greatnesse, of the kings death, of the death of the house of Bourbon, promising him that the Crowne should change families, and from the Capets, should fall into the house of
Austria.
His minde could not indure much apprchension.Caezar could not indure the apprehension of conspiracies deuised against him, and said: that hee had rather die, then to liue long in distrust, esteeming that death which is least doubted, to bee best: the Duke of Guise desired rather a fall, that might be the end of his miseries, then a continuall daunger.
He despised the aduise of death.Caezar despised the aduise giuen him, touching the conspiracie of Brutus: the Duke of Guise esteemed it fables, that was told him touching the mischiefe that fell vppon him, and could not bee perswaded, that hee should so soone end his triumphs.
Haruspices praemonuerant vt d^^gentissime Iduum Martiarum caucret di^m.
Velleius Pater. L^belli coniuratione nunciantes
^^ats, abconeque protinus lectierant. Velleius Pater. His death. His Sepulchre. Guisius and Cezar, medio perite sedio perite senatu. The years of his death. Sydus Iul. Hob. Sar. lib. 8. Ennead. 6.Caezar would not read his friends letters, that aduertised him of the enterprise practised against his person. The Duke of Cuise iested at the letters written vnto him from all parts, and saide that it was done at the leaft thirtie times euery day.
Caezar was slaine with blowes of rapiers: the Duke of Guise with poinyards. Caezar fell dead at the feete of the Image of Pompey, whom hee had so cruelly pursued. The Duke of
Guise died at the kings chamber doore, where hee had made so many brauadoes, and so much despising of the kings authoritie.
Caezar had the fire for his sepulchre: the bodie of the Duke of Guise was burnt.
Caezar was slaine in the Senat: the Duke of Guise at the Parliament, when hee came out of the Councell chamber.
Caezar died in the 56. yeare of his age, in his climaticke yeare, and vpon his birth day. The Duke of Guise, in the
42. yeare, which was likewise his climaticall yeare.
Caezar was accounted among the Gods, and so esteemed of by the common people: the league cannonized and honoured the Duke of Guise with the name of Marter, and were long time in doubt, if praying for him, they should do wrong to the holinesse of his condition, beeing freed from the paines in the other world.
Caezar debaucha Cleopatra.Heere I will end the comparison of the hearts and humors of those two Princes, and touching nothing of the sobrietie, courtesie, affabilitie, and familiaritie, that was equally both in the one and the other, nor yet of that amorous complection that so much resembled Caezar, and auanced the mischiefe and troubles of France. And touching the end of the Duke of Guise, I say, that as themnrther of the Dictator
Caezar, serued for a protext vnto Anthony and
Augustines, to ouerthrow the Commonwealth of Rome: so this death of the Duke of Guise, put weapon into the hands of the Duke de Maine, like Anthony, to destroy both himselfe and his countrie.
Beeing at Lyons, hee receiued the newes of the death of the Duke of Guise, and the imprisonment of the Cardinall his bretheren, vpon Christmas day at night, and said nothing vntil the next day in the morning, that he went fro^ the Archbishops Pallace, (where he was lodged) to Saint Nisier, and there finding the Officiall of the Archbishop pricke of Lyons, tolde him hee was desirous to walke a turne or two along the painted Gallerie. Thither he sent for Monsieur Bothcon, the Marquesse of Vrfe, and certaine of the principall officers of the Towne, shewing them what had been done in Blois, against the persons of his bretheren, and of the imprisonment of the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Archbishop of
Lyons, and others.
This accident made the assistants so much abashed, that they all stood in a maze, some of them thinking more vppon the manner, then the matter, and more vppon the authoritie of the estates, then vppon the kings collor.
Others, what assurance soeuer they had of ayde to bee readie to be imployed at all assayes, yet were they constrained to shrinke in the shouldier. They iudged the wound to bee great, and that it would bee hard vppon the suddain to finde a fit playster: such as without inspiration had foreshewed, that the king would bee reuenged of the Duke of
Guise, for his ouer great boldnesse, and the day of the Barricadoes, had alreadie disisted the astonishment of that blowe.
The Duke de Maine thinking vpon the death of his brother, forgot not his own safetie, asking them, if that staying in the towne of Lyons, he might beassured of his life: they besought him to moue his seruants, in that which should bee against the kings will and pleasure, to whom they were bound, and priuately to all others, and could acknowledge no other soueraigne then hee. The Officiall of
Lyons, that had knowne his nature to bee more stayed, and lesse ambitious, desired him not to arme himselfe against his king, who without all doubt would receiue him into fauour,The Duke de Maine counselled not to arme himselfe. when hee should once perceiue him to referre the desire of his reuenge, to reason and good discretion, and not preferre the interest of his house, before the benefit of the whole Realme of France, which trembled at the apprehension of the calamities that this warre will draw on.
That he should aduise himselfe, before he passed the
Rubicon, into what daunger hee would fall, the good and quiet estate that hee should leaue behinde him: that to set the people at libertie, hee would abandon it to the spoyle: that to defend the Monarchie against the king, hee should make him the head of a confused and monstrous Monarchie, against the lawes of the Realme: that God will neuer abandon the protections of Kings, how vnagreeable so euer they be vnto him, against the rebellion of the people: for kings are the image of God, the children of heauen, Gods among men, and whosoeuer armeth himselfe against them, striueth against God. Then hee foreshewed him, that if in that imbarking, he thought not vppon the stormes and tempests, how hee might shunne them, hee would thinke vppon them but too late, when they might not bee auoyded, when all the owers would bee broken, and the waues strike against his vessell: when danger shuld vanquish his art, and necessity force his wisdome: that of the wind of the peoples fauour, which of long time hath bin disposed vnto rebellion and troubles, maketh his sayles blow full: and that furiously he would thrust his pretences into the maine sea: that neuerthelesse he oght to consider the vnco^stancie and lightnesse of the people, who hauing shake^ off the yoak of the Vulgus infidum bonis.
Horat.Vnum imperij corpus, vnius animo regendum videtur.Tacitus.kings obedience, would do as much vnto a Prince, to whom it shall not be bound, but as to Proctor of their mutenie. That there is nothing more vnconstant, nor more disloyall, then the common people, traiterous to the good, and dutifull to the wicked, and that rewardeth those that do it good, with ropes, exiles, and publike execration: that in the ende, after many attempts and prooues, of all sorts of principallities, it wil alwaies return againe vnto the royaltie,
France not beeing able to indure the gouernment of two kings, no more then the body two heads, nor a ship two Pilots: that France no more then the whole world, without a generall consuming, cannot indure two sunnes: that the people continueth not long in their furie, it loseth breath in the first setting forward,Si duo soles, velis esse pericu^um
^e in cendio omnia perdantur. Serenus. like a reed that beginneth with a long and straight pipe, and suddainly it windeth and is crooked, loosing the vigor that it shewed in the first part thereof.
The Duke de Maine, beeing as then Maister either of his good fortune, or ouerthrow, held the conduction of the Leaguers affaires at his disposition, and by a good resolution, could revnite the Catholicques by his brother led astray: but his passion leading him at her pleasure, and that it represented vnto him the aduantage hee had to succeed in the fauours, credite, and authoritie of his brother, and by consequent vnto his hopes, hee reiected the aduise of good counsell, and thinking that they sought his life, determined the same day in all haste to depart from
Lyons, and went to Mascon, and from thence to
Chalons, where hee assured himselfe of the citadell: from thence he got to Dyon, where he receiued letters from the king, by the which, the king assured him, that hee desired to continue him in his fauour, staying the punishment of things past vppon the death of his bretheren, whom hee had put to death, to saue his life, whereof hee had aduertised him.
The Duke de Maine attributing the clemencie and fauour of the king, to an affection, languishing, feeble, and faint, and to a feare he had to haue him for enemie, or to loose his friendship, not beeing able to moderate his chollor, nor to incline himselfe vnto a generall and good ende, hardened himselfe in his resolution, receiued the pestilent breath of those mindes that bad framed themselues to tyrannie, feared not the king, and made lesse account of him, then of the chaine of
Tartaria.
While hee continued at Dyon, he gaue out commissions to assure himselfe, and to seize vpon diuers places, and among the rest, one of the Messieur de Rosne and de Saint Paul, to commaund in Champaigne and Brye. He had no great trouble to constraine them of Dyon to reuolt against the king, bridling them by the Castle: there was none but the Court of Parliament (who perceiuing that they could not shine without the light of the authoritie royal) that would not consent to that rebellion, and therfore the principal officers were driuen from thence, the rest imprisoned, some poore people fearefull for the discommodities they might reape, remained in miserable slauerie, vnder the confused and disordered democratie.
The kings Letters to the Duke de Maine.From thence the Duke de Maine went to Troye, a Towne long time before spoyled and corrupted by the participants of the Duke of Guise, where hee was receiued with honours due vnto a king.
The king perceiuing that the league caused al the townes beyond the riuer of Loire, Chalon, sur Saone, Dyon, Troye, Parris, and Orleans, to rise against him, and that if hee sat with armes crossed, it would not ease him, was constrained to leaue the affaires of the Parliament vnperfect, to prouide for the safetie of his person: and to remedie the violent intents of his enemies, and before the Parliament brake vp, vppon the fifteenth and sixteenth daies of Ianuarie, he heard the declarations of the Deputies of the third estates, wherein may bee found the examples of the disorders, which at this time trouble the Realme of France.
The Oration of the Archbishop of Bourges.The Archbishop of Bourges, President for the spiritualtie in the Parliament, after the death of the Cardinall of
Guise, made a long discourse of the miseries and calamities, that had continued for the space of eight and twentie yeares within the Realm of France, touching the causes thereof, assuring them, that the despising of the name of God, is the cause of our euil, hauing broken the band that tyeth and vniteth vs vnto God, that is, religion, which is the signer, the band, and foundation of all Monarches and Common-wealths.
Difference in religion.That the diuision happened in the vnitie of this religion, separating the hearts and minds of families, and then of communalties, hath produced this disorder, that thereby they should haue seen nothing but fire and weapons throughout
France, nourisheth this long ciuill warre, which to entertaine, hath beene the meanes to seeke out so many prodigious inuentions, to ouerthrow and spoyle the people, by so many subsidies, sale of offices belonging to iustice, and treasures, with the alienation of the sacred patrimonie of the Church.
The kings zeale to his religion.That the king in his youth being adorned with so many victories, obtained against schisme and heresie, had giuen to vnderstand, that the honour and glory of God and his religion, was dearer vnto him then his own life, ought not to permit, that heresie should oppose it selfe against the true religion of him and his forefathers, a new, against the true alter, and a king against his authoritie royall. That hauing reestablished the assurance of the franchises of religion, he ought with a care woorthieof a royall name, to purge the disorders and the abuses which the corruption of this world hath induced into all estates,Abuse in the Church. in the house of God: in the church, in the Nobilitie, in armes, in Magistrates, in iustice, and in the people: and on the one side, shewing the disorders: on the other, hee applyeth the remedies: and because the libertie of these last troubles hath increased them, wee will present them like euill vlcers, which spoyle this polliticque bodie, and that will become incurable, if the remedies that follow bee not applyed.
The vnworthie promotion of Prelats.1. Disorder. In the Church, simonie, ignorance, corruption: into the Lords sheepfold, are entered false Pastors, not by the dore, but ouer the wals like theeues, by vnfit promotions, by mony, by treasure, by fauour, and not by learning or good example: so that among the learned, they introduce ignorant men: in stead of fathers and tutors of the Church, destroyers: in steed of Pastors, rauening wolues. An abuse which hath drawne with it, a chaine and band of all sorts of euilles, for the aduancement of ignorant and slaunderous persons, vnto Ecclesiasticall dignities, hath brought foorth heresie, heresie diuision, and diuision, ruine and destruction.
Remedie. To restore the ancient forme of the Church, the election of God, wise and learned Prelates, that loue God and his Church, and faithfull Ministers of Gods word.

The nomination.2.
Disorder. The introducing of nominations of Abbeys, as also vppon the chiefe Prelates of the same, the Monasteries which in times past, were the Congregations and colledges of al doctrine and pietie, renowmed among the Christians, as among the auncients, the Schooles of Nazariens, Leuites, Egyptians, Medes, Persians, and Athenians, that had nourished and brought vp holy Saints, Basiles, Chrysostomes, Saint Benets and Augustines, haue now in them all sorts of people indifferently, not only Lawyers, but Cittizens, souldiers, men without learning and crudition, and without either name or marke of spiritualtie, with women and children: from whence proceedeth the foule disorder of the Monasticall life:Monasteries of the holy fathers. the ruine of the houses and goods of the Church: the sacred Temple without prayers, prophaned, and occupied for ye most part by me^ of war, who in stead of sustaining and nourishing religious me^, do therin feed their horses, dogs, and hauks, frustrating the seruice of God, appropriating the inheritance of the Church vnto themselues, giuing for dowries to marriages, and diuided the Vinyard of the Lord.
Remedie. To chuse and nominate good and holy personages, that shall bee of requisite estate and quallitie, to serue God in those places, that shall commit good Priors to giue good example, and helpe to reforme, therevnto imploying the ayde of the arme, and force of iustice, that from this time forward, all Harpies and wilde Boores, which spoyle Dauids Vinyard, auoyde and depart from all such holy, consecrated, and appoynted places. And to this ende, let informations and decrees bee made against them: those that detaine Abbeyes, and are not of that quallitie, and those that vsurpe and detaine the goods, tithes, and other reuenues, and according to the informations, let proces bee made, as against sacriledges and rauishers of the riches that belong vnto God and to the poore.
The Commanders.3.
Disorder. Those that were called by our Sauiour vnto the Ministrie, for the ease of the Apostles, which are Priests and Vicars, whose seruice is so necessary in the Church of God, is at this day the most miserable, and most afflicted order. They are driuen and cast out of their houses by the Catholicques, and where they are suffered to continue, their goods are robbed and taken away, they are spoyled and sacked, or else constrained to giue part to him that is strongest: the souldiers consume them, the Lords of the places apropriate their tithes, and the people will not pay the duties belonging vnto them, both by humane and diuine lawes. Remedie.
Faults of the Cleargie.That it will please the king, adding vnto the ordinances, concerning this poynt made in the last Parliament, that it may againe bee inioyned vnto all Gouernours of places, and Atturneyes for his Maiestie, euery man in his iurisdiction, yearly to send processe verball vnto the Parliament, containing the names of the Vicars, with a testation from euery of them, touching the possession and inioying of their goods, and what is kept or withholden from them. And because diuers poore Vicars dare not openly complaine, let it be inioyned vnto the Gouernors and Atturneyes for the king secretly to inquire and informe of the vsurpation that is made vpon the said Ecclesiasticall persons.
The alienatio^ of Church-liuings.4. Dis. The riches consecrated to God, and giuen to him, his Alters and his Priestes, the goods that belongeth not to those that fell it, is sold, withdrawn, and alienated, thereby to consume and bring to nought the Ecclesiasticallestate: the goods of the Church is not to bee alienated, for any cause or occasion whatsoeuer, or with what authoritie so euer it is done, it belongeth vnto God, it is sacriledge to lay hands vpon it, if it belong to the spiritualtie, whether it be in propertie or vse, it is no point of iustice to incroch vpon it, specially without their consent, but it belongeth to them both.
Saint Augustin and diuers other good fathers, permitted the selling and alienating of the goods of the Church, for the redeeming of Captaines, and to releeue the poore, but that was the holy vessels, mooueables, and the mony of the treasurie: but touching the immooueables, that was neuer known, one onely Charles Martell, spotted and defaced his memorie by a horrible serpent found within his tombe, because he attempted to sell the goods and immunities of the Church. So great warres against the Albigeois, so great necessities and warres against the Englishmen, could neuer breake open this
Paladion, which the suggestion of secret and couert Huguenots hath inuented.
Remedie. That it would please the king, to graunt vnto the Cleargie, the perpetuall restoring of the goods of the Church that are solde, repaying the iust value, with all costs and charges, and that such as heereafter shall venture to sell or buy the goods of God and the Church, shall now and at altimes bee declared and accounted, both vniust sellers, buyers, detainers, and occupiers, with this clause, to bee bound to the restitution both of the principall and the profits.
The great number of Benefices. The vsurping of Hospitall rene^^es.5. Disorder. The pluralitie of Benefices, for that as no man can sit vppon two seates, so all Ecclesiasticall persons, well and truely to discharge his dutie, cannot holde two benefices, which require two Ministers, hee cannot pronounce the word of God in two places at one time, which is principally vnderstood by two Bishoppricks, or two Curates, that haue charge of mens soules, and consequently require a continuall residence.
Remedie. To cause the Councell of Trent to bee obserued, which hath so amply prouided for reformation of the Ecclesiasticall estate, togither with the maintenance of faith and Catholicque religion.
6. Disorder. The manifest sacriledge of such as detaine and vsurpe the reuenues of Hospitalles, Spittle-houses, and others goods destinated and appoynted for the vse of the poore, founded for the ease of Townes, Villages, and Burrows, and of all the people. The goods of the poore in diuers places, are applyed to the vse of Lay-men, to the communalties of Townes, to the common charges thereof: to voyages, and processes: yea apropriated to the priuate vse of diuers men, a great hinderance to the poore, and vnwoorthy the name of Christians in this Realme. Hospitalles haue beene made and erected vnder Cathedrall Churches and Bishoppricks, to the end that Prelates and Pastors should haue the care thereof: but since charitie is conuerted into auarice, the charge and administration hath beene transformed to the Layetie.
Remedie, if it please the Layetie to continue this charge, and that the later ordinances seeme fitter then the ancient constitutions, at the least, let the spiritualtie bee present at the distribution and yeelding of account, to see and vnderstand the fidelitie and dutie that shall bee vsed towards the poore, and to reforme the abuses, sacriledges, and vsurpations, that therein are vsed.
7. Disorder. In times past, no man might bee admitted to the place of commander Knights of the order of Ierusalem.ouer the order of the knights of S. Iohns in Ierusalem, not being noble borne, and that in the third degree, and by order of antiquitie, now that goodly order of degrees of antiquitie, which procured a hope vnto young men, (as new fruite vnto the spring) to attaine vnto that honor in their Automie, hath been broken by the entrie made by certaine Princes, by fauour and greatnesse of their house. If this disorder had onely rested, it had been a thing somewhat tollerable, and that might haue couered it selfe by greatnesse and authoritie. But now, that by this consequent, this disorder is induced (like the linkes of a chaine following one the other) to all persons indifferently without consideration of antiquitie, nor any other respect but of fauour, or rather (as I may say) of importunitie, the suddaine ouerthrow of this goodly order is like to ensue.
Knights of S. Iohns of Ierusalem.Remedie. The king knowing the honour of this order, that hath cost so many mens liues, to defend the name of Iesus Christ against the Turkes, Moores, and Barbarians, that hath aduanced the crosse, throughout all the Mediteranean seas, euen into
Affrica, ought to suffer or permit that it should bee lessened or imbased by these disorders, but rather preserued to the glory of God, and the honour of this Realme.
Deceiuing of the Vniuersities.8. Disorder. The Schooles and Vniuersities, depending vppon the care and administration of the Church, which yeelde the Ministers of doctrine and word of God, now are full of disorders and licentious persons, by the meanes and mischiefes of warres and rebellions.
Of iustice and faithfulnesse.Remedie. His Maiestie, according to the wisedome and loue that is ingrafted in his minde towards learning and vertue, ought to chuse and name capable persons for this reformation, long time desired, so many times promised, and still vnperformed.
Disorders i^^ the estate among the Nobilitie.1. From thence hee turned to the capitulation of the disorders knowne to bee in the Nobilitie, the valiant and generous French Nobilitie (saith hee) hath continually beene the terror of all nations, and the nations adioyning, that haue addicted themselues to the profession and exercise of knightly prowesse, confesse and acknowledge to haue learned it of the Frenchmen: these valiant French knights haue preserued the honour and vertue of France, as long as it was respected and had in honor, but since, that in stead of Nobles, there hath beene new introductions taken out of the Common people, and that they haue been raised to the honour due vnto the Nobilitie, and of such men which commaund ouer companies of men at armes, it hath wholly altered and changed the glory of this French Chiualrie, and many haue degenerated from the vertue of the auncestors, and obscured their renowne, some vsing trades and trafficques of Marchandises, keeping in their houses, and not going into the field, other giuing themselues to spoyling of the poore, to almasse corne, to take and apropriate benefices, and other goods belonging to the simple people, and to destroy their neighbours and tenants, in such sort,Aduertisement to the Nobilitis. that diuers others, more valerous and vertuous, beholding the manner and behauiour of many of these Gentlemen, beeing greeued to haunt the company of such men, had rather imploy their times in the warres, with the king and his Lieftenants, vertuously to oppose themselues, and shew the effects of their valor, then to be in the company of those in whom there remaineth but onely the name and shadow of Nobilitie.

Remedie. The King, which is the head and father of Nobilitie, ought to reerect that goodly order of knighthood, ordained by his predecessors, to restore decayed trees, and to refresh and renue it, pruning the vnprofitable branches, and so to reduce into such order and forme, and with such Discipline, that the people may not bee oppressed, and to that end, cause certaine stipendes to bee yearely payde for the maintenance thereof.
Excesse in wen of warre2.
Disorder. The crueltie, violence, and rapin of souldiers is so great, that there is no difference in them from the fury of Barbarians, beeing Conquerers of their enemies, there is nothing else but fire and blood, that haue entered into diuers places of this Realme, but to beate, binde, ransome, imprison, sacke, violated women and maides, to pull yong children from their mothers breasts, spoyle, breake, rent, and throw the goods of poore people vnder the horse feete, and to beare away the rest, to leaue the wife and children in great misery without bread,Nonfacile in officio potest miles co^tineri abco qui necessaria no^ sub ministra.
Xenophon. following after their husbands and fathers: and horses led away by them, is an ordinary thing among souldiers: these euills happen partly for want of pollicie and commandement, and partly for want of paye and good order, and distribution of the treasures of this land. To leade souldiers into the warres without mony, is properly to make them become theeues, and whosoeuer beareth armes, and hath no maintenance, hee must needes haue some by what meanes soeuer it bee.
Euill gouerning of treasures.3. Disorder. Treasures euill gouerned, are like water powred into a siue or basket, which presently runneth out, and neuer is filled: as to the contrary, the better and more certaine reuenue consisteth in landes. The immoderate leuyings of monies, which are drawne from the people, are compared to the Milt with in a mans bodie, which the more it filleth and swelleth, the more it destroyeth and drieth the rest of the bodie, and in the end killeth it.
Remedie. The cause or pretence of such leuyings of mony, hath beene the warres ingendred by heresie and diuision: and seeing that warre is the cause of the ouerthrow of the people, it must be brought vnto an end, and by the ayde and helpe of all this Realme, seeke a finall remedie to this miserable diuision, without deferring it so long to the vtter vndooing of the people.
Corruption in gouernme^t4.
Disorder. Among other mischiefes, which war indureth, it hath corrupted both lawes, manners, and pollicie, it hath bred a maruellous disorder in iustice: Iudges are bound to giue iudgement according vnto the lawes, as they haue sworne and promised at their admitting.
Neuerthelesse, part of the Iudges at this day, haue so great a pride in themselues, that they affirme themselues not to bee bound to iudge according to the laws written by the Iurisconsules, that they are not bound to the imperiall lawes, but onely in those poynts which they find not decided by the ordinances royall (which haue handled but fewe causes touching lawe: but onely containe certaine generall constitutions) they will iudge according to their owne equities, and therein, as euery mans wit and sence serueth him, so many heades, so many opinions, so many soueraigne Courts, so many sentences and iudgements.
Fro^ the^ce proceedeth the co^trarietie of sente^ces, and diuersitie of iudgeme^ts, in one cause, and in one matter, whereby the poore suters fall into an infinit of charges, and continuall sutes.
This mischiefe happeneth many times by the ignorance of youth, which runne to ruine by presumption and philautie: for that such as are learned in the lawes, and that haue a good conscience, take paines to satisfie their offices, and to limit their zeale of iustice according to conscience, and the doctrine they haue attained vnto. Otherwise there should bee no difference betweene the Iudge and the Artificer, but onely in the gowne and the cappe, togither with their pattents receiued from the king.
Remedie. This sore cannot bee healed, but by good and faithfull examiners in soueraigne Courts, for they do lightly prooue and sound the depth of the learning of such as present themselues to bee admitted, they throwe iustice and the subiects of this Realme, into the waters and puddles of errors and ignorances, from whence they cannot get out. But if it were permitted vnto young men (by their Parents) to studie the time in that case appoynted, without taking them from the Vniuersities, as fruite from a tree before it is ripe, to place them in the seate of Iustice, this would bee a great meanes to make them capable, but the ambition of fathers at this day is so great, and they are in such feare to leaue their children without offices, that they had rather therein, see them vnwoorthie and deridid, then wise and honoured: which partly to remedie, all reuersions must bee cut off, and no more graunted.
The sale of Offices.5.
Disorder. The corruption that is vsed in iustice, by the sale and infamous building of offices belonging to the same, a great shame to this estate, and in our time time, wherein this Realme onely among all Monarchies and Potentates, yea the most barbarous, iustice and the Iustices office is solde by publike authoritie, and giuen to him that offereth most, although he be the most vnwoorthie. The excuse is made vppon the publike necessitie of this Realme, as if the sale of offices, the mony whereof, for the most part, is disposed and goeth to the receiuers, that inrich them, that smal summe which is clearely left, can be so great maintenance to the Realme from this first sale of offices, which is done by publike authoritie, ensueth a consequence which seemeth to bee naturall, yet very euill, that whosoeuer hath bought an office by great, may sell iustice by retale, to make vp his mony. From thence proceedeth the corruption of Iudges, that euen as at the entery into their offices they are forsworne, affirming that they neither gaue nor payde any mony to attaine the same, they become much more periured in their consciences, betraying and selling iustice, drawing vppon them the curse of Iudas, the perpetuall trembling of Cain, and the Leprosie of Ciesi, with other such like executions and maledictions. It is the corruption and damnation of the wicked Iudges, which maketh honest men abstaine from the places, and yet some of them how honest soeuer they shewe, they haue some sparke of couetous desire, to handle spices and sweete sugar, yet much more bitter then the hony of Sarde. And as this sale of offices, hath increased a great number of Iudges, Councellors, Atturneyes, Clarkes, and Soliciters, whereof there are so many, that make their aduantage by sucking the treasure and blood of the people, that it is well knowne, that lawe costeth the people of this Realme, twise as much more as all the tallages: and not onely the common people, but also the Nobilitie and great personages, whereby many good houses are ouerthrowne.
Remedie. Is the reducing and surprising of this great number of Iudges, to the ancient, iust, and first number, and the interdiction of the sale of offices, by publike and perpetuall lawe.
The Archbishop of Bourges hauing set downe the other disorders that spring, and haue their issues out of the first, he besought the king to take order therein, by a good and perfect reformation, which shall cause the people to increase, iustice to flourish, and assure the tranquilitie of this Realme, to make it continue as long as the moone continueth in the Elements: and so hee ended his Oration.
The Oration for the Nobilitie.The same day Charles de Cosse, Counte de Brissac, Lord of Estland, Great-Panetier and Falconer of France, who after the death of the Duke of Guise, had reobtained the kings fauour, and continued in the honour which before hee had to bee President of the Nobilitie of France, beganne his Oration, and hauing excused his insufficiencie, he assured himselfe, that the king considering, that the profession of a Gentleman consisteth more in deede, then in word, hee would with his Graces fauour, couer the imperfection of his discourse, and that as in the disputation betweene two Musitions,
Piton and Cephiseus, Pirrus gaue iudgement, that
Pelibercon was the better Captaine: so his Maiestie hearing the thundering eloquence of Monsieur de Bourges, and Monsieur Bernard, would iudge him but to be a souldier: which done, hee saide: That the long raigne of the king, had sufficiently shewen, that it is not the hand of fortune, that haue inuironed the forehead of his Maiestie with a double Diademe, but God, that hath established him for our King, and that before, chose him for Monarch of a people further distant, not for the greatnesse of his royall linage, nor for the vniuersall signes and tokens of the valour of Frenchmen, but for the pietie, faith, clemencie, and magnanimitie, wherewith it hath pleased his gracious goodnesse, to haue adorned his Maiestie in his most tender yeares.
That it is sufficiently knowne, that in his raigne onely, the heauens haue not permitted the birth of so many mischiefes, but that during the times of great kings his predecessors, heresie, schisme, disorder, and diuision, hath entered into the peoples hearts: and that we must beleeue, that God hath caused him to bee borne in the middle of the troubles of France, reseruing vnto him that hath supported the paines and trauels, the honor and glory vnto so iust a labour: to the end, that by the hands of so famous a Prince, France hauing prostrated it selfe vnto the furies of hereticques, may not onely be succoured, but reuenged: not saued, but increased: not flourishing, but eleuated aboue all nations: and that from this triumph so much desired, his Maiestie shall reape the honour: his estate the principall good, and all the people of Europe bee participants to this happie chance, it beeing an assurance vnto his Crowne, the most assured stay of all Christendome.
The memorable victory of the
^ing against the Rutters.That the victories which France desireth to see his Maiestie obtaine, shal be but a continuation of the ouerthrow by him giuen to that great and searefull armie of Rutters, Switzers, Lansquenets, and French Huguenots, which by the good conduction and vigilacie of his Maiestie, receiued more shame and losse, then it hoped to reape in riches and honour: and the Switzers found more fauour and mercie, then before they had shewed boldnesse and desire to doo him iniurie: those that were saued, returning like trumpets of his renowne, publishing the honours, praises, and victories of his Maiestie.
That now the prayers, teares, and trauels of auncient Frenchmen, seemed to aske vengeance against those, that after so many religious times, haue violated the Sepulchers of their fathers and ours, who by fire, furie, and rage, would pull from among vs, this onely religion which those holy fathers had planted throughout the world.
That of all reprobates, there can bee no sect found, that is so dangerous nor abhominable, as that of the Hugunots, and as their impietie is extreame, so ought their punishment to bee the like.
That it is knowne, whether the furie of the enemie be greater, then the disorders are deplorable, which are found to bee in the Church, by negligence, ignorance, confidence, and abuse.
And proceeding to shewe the affection and zeale which the Nobilitie continueth in the assistance of the King, to remit religion and the state in their first splendure, and with the price of their liues, following the example of their elders, and the hereditary generositie of such as haue driuen out and vanquished the Gothes, Vandales, Arrians, Albigeois, Lombardes, Sarazins, and Pagans, that haue pursued the defence of the faith, and victories of the kings of France, from the furthest parts of the Ocean Seas, farre beyond the Westerne, and that haue not left any place for the reputation of their honours, within the compasse of the circle of the sunne: hee besought his Maiestie, to fauour the antiquitie of the priuiledge and right belonging to the Nobilitie, in them to acknowledge the seruices done vnto his predecessors:The prowesse of auncient Frenchmen, to reforme the rules and militarie ordinances of the Kings his auncestors: not to permit, that any by mony or fauour, may attribute vnto himselfe the name of a Gentleman, to maintaine the priuiledges of the order of the knights of Saint Iohns of Ierusalem, to cut off the superfluities: in iustice to moderate his subsidies: order his treasures: reestablish the Magistrate: ordaine an order and pollicie among souldiers: cause the Church to bee reformed: and to punish the enemies of our holy religion. And so wishing a thousand prosperities to the king, and peace vnto his subiects, hee ended his Oration.
The compl^^^ts of the third estate. The agreement of subiects to the kings obedience. Heresie and schisme.Monsieur Bernard Councellour of the Parliament in
Dyon, presented the complaints of the third estate, beginning his Oration with a solemn thanksgiuing, for the promise made by his Maiestie, fully to execute the holy Edict of vnion, written, marked, and pointed vnto by the finger of god, by the which heresies shall bee driuen away, as cloudes that are dispearsed by the sunne: exhorting all the townes and subiects of this Realme, besides this vnion in one onely religion, to enter into an other vnion and good intelligence for the seruice of the King, continuance of his dignitie, and in defence of the good of the estate: euery man remembring, that the Prince is giuen of God to commaund, and the subiects to obey. Hee discouereth all the infirmities of this polliticque bodie, which beside the vlcer of heresie and partiallities, haue most straungely corrupted this Realme.
Blasphemies are naturall and ordinarie speeches among diuers Frenchmen: adulterie is a sport: coniuration is a subtiltie of spirit: curiositie, honestie, and simonie, a common trade of marchandise.
Simony.Simony is not onely a spirituall Leprosie of the Church, but a poyson which innisibly is tasted by the Nobilitie, and a contagion which intecteth the third estate. The Gouernments of townes, places and Castles, are committed to meane Gentlemen: the suretie of the Inhabitants of a place of importance, is exposed to the hazard of the meanes and riches of a Captaine euill affected. The most ignorant beeing rich, obtained the chiefest places within this Realm, me^ are rather known by the goldennesse of their estates, then by their vertues, knowledge, and wisedome, and haue nothing but an officers gowne to hide and couer their ignorance. So the beautie of Iustice is darkened, the elections of benefices and offices violated, good customes peruerted, vertue banished and exiled, vice in authoritie, and rapin marcheth throughout the Realme with Ensignes displayed.
The disorder in warres.The insolencie of horsemen, the violence of souldiers, who like mad men and patrticides, haue pilled, torne, murthered, violated, and sacked this countrie of France: our Common-wealth haue spoyled the villages with so barbarous hostilitie, that most part of the lands are vntilled, firtile places become desarts, houses voyde, and the flat countrie vnpeopled, and all things reduced into a most fearefull disorder.
The Partisans.Warre is not onely made among the people, by souldiers inrolled and prest by the kings co^missio^, but also by another sort of enemies, that haue no lesse troubled his subiects, then an armie of Rutters, which are the partakers, such as by importunitie, gifts, and inuentions of new tallages, haue drawne the treasures of this Realme into their coffers, and made the people readie to begge, those are the deuisers of sibsidies and new Edicts, the executors of extraordinary commissions, buyers and fellers of offices, vermine of men, hatched by harpies, bred vp in one night, who by their deuises haue fretted this Realme, euen to the very ashes of houses.
They march proudly incredite, with the Seargent at their heeles, at their word to execute the kings subiects, with summons in their hands, to constraine the consciences of the good, and to violate the authoritie and religion of soueraigne Courts, by crosssing of payes, and interdictions of entries. Many Edicts haue been verified, and registred with these words, by commaundements diuers times reiterated in good and iust Edicts, the commandements of the soueraigne Prince is not necessarie.
Treasures euil imployed.That if such and so great nouelties and oppressions, neuer seen nor heard of in
France, had been deuised for the profit and commoditie of his Maiestie, the complaints against them were neither iust nor reasonable, but the souldiers haue bene without maisters, and not payd: the wages of officers lessened, and the treasures spent and consumed. And yet they go about to deuise new subsidies and receipts of mony, but vpon whom? vpon a poore countrieman, robbed, and naked, and turned into his shirt, for so wee may terme the people of France.
And after this Orator had shewed, that there rested no surer nor better remedie against those disorders, then to require an account of those who by the oppression and impouerishing of the subiectse haue heaped vp so much riches, then to free himselfe from the practises and false perswations of certaine euill Councellours, religiously to execute, and violably to obserue his ordinances, and not to content himselfe only to see them published and imprinted, without causing them to bee practised, by a prompt and continuall exercise, hee concludeth his learned and long Oration, by demaunding the conclusion of the estates, saying.
Sorrow for the death of the Queene mother.ANd therefore most noble Prince, we humbly beseech you, that the eie of your prudencie may alwaies be open, for the defence of your poore people, and the vnburthening and comfort thereof, and that your good resolutions, may in no sort be altered nor changed. Wee hoped that by a long life, the Queene your most wise and most honourable Ladie and mother, should therein haue been a great furtherance vnto vs, by the proofe and experience that France hath had of her so good and profitable Councels, but seeing her daies are finished, and that her dignitie of a Queene and Princesse, graunted her not the priuiledge to prolong her yeares, neither yet to promise her further respite, the will and pleasure of God, with the necessitie of a tombe must serue you for a consolation and patience, and hope that her happie soule will make prayers in heauen, that shall be more certaine and profitable vnto your Maiestie and the estate, then all the counsels in the world.
In the meane time, we will haue our recourse vnto the fauour and good will of the Queen your most deare spouse, in whom your subiects haue beholden so much shining light of deuotion, pietie, and christian vertues, that they expect by her meanes, the comfort by them hoped for, with a confirmation of your good and iust intents, ayded and assisted by those of the Catholicque Princes of your blood.
The rest dependeth partly vppon your chiefe Iustice, and the Keeper of your Seales, who beeing chosen for his deserts, and by the certaine report of his integritie, wee hope will not permit that such ordinances which are made within his time, should bee violated and broken, as it were at the same instant.
Which dooing, wee will no more lament the holy raignes of auncient kings, wee shall not neede to speake of the iustice of
Charles the great, Saint Lewis, nor Philip Augustus, much lesse will wee make account of the fatherly affection of king Lewis the twelfth.
Our bookes shall onely bee filled with your wisedome, iustice, clemencie, and loue: the heauens shall open, to place vppon your heade a Crowne of great prosperite: God will giue you the grace to see your posteritie, which in valour shall cause the name of Valois to increase a name, the onely continuation whereof, will procure the welfare and honour of France.
Further, the sweetenesse of so happie a season, and the enioying of the fruits by vs hoped for and expected to proceed from the conclusion of this Parliament, will confirme vs in the seruice that wee owe vnto your Maiestie, the which by vs is newly assured, by a solemne oath made in open assembly of all the estates, and registred for a perpetuall lawe, in all fidelitie, to loue, honour, and obey your Maiestie.
And because that time representeth it selfe, wherein wee may make proofe of the effects of our good wils, and that otherwise the want of means, commandeth diuers of vs with speede to depart from hence. I am expresly charged to beseech your Maiestie to graunt vs leaue, to the ende, that beeing in our Prouinces, some of vs will bee messengers of your most holy and laudable inspirations: others by the authoritie of Magistracie which they beare, may there cause you to bee obeyed: and that all of vs togither with mutuall minds and certain concord, may withdraw ourselues out of a common perill, and yeeld you certaine testimonie that we are and will continue, most faithfull, most humble, and most obedient subiects, vntill the last gaspe of our liues.
The king, who for the space of fifteene daies, had been solitarie, without resoluing vpon the billes by the three estates presented vnto him, perceiuing that the estates could not attend nor stay the full conclusion thereof, without great disco^moditie touching their own affairs, and that they besoght him to haue licence to depart, hee vsed certaine perswasions rather then commaundements, to stay them for a time, vntill their billes should be fully aunswered, or at the least, a certaine number of each Order to bee there, at the publication of his aunsweres and ordinances.
All the Deputies that were aduertised of the risings that beganne to bee made within their Prouinces, and that vpon a suddaine all the Townes disposed themselues to dance after Paris, besought him to depart. The king not desiring to hold the^ against their wils, caused a publication to be made of certaine articles touching some of the principall poynts of the billes put vp in partliament, which were the rebating of the fourth part of the balages, foreseeing very well, that in so great a raising of armes, his poore people would bee so extreamely oppressed, that they could not paye all.
A dissolution of the estates the
16. of Ianuary, 1589. Attempts of the League against the king.And thus the estates being dissolued, a declaration was sent vnto all the Prouinces, to assure them of his Maiesties good intention. The nineteenth of Ianuarie, there was published at Paris and in other places, a declaration from the Princes Catholicque Townes and Communalties, vnited togither with the three estates of the Realme, for preseruation of religion and the peoples libertie, to whom they promised a discharge from a fourth part of the taxes, and of their fruites and increase: although hee one night well ynough said, that the people of
France had suffered greater extortion vnder the league in three yeares, then before they had done during the space of three ciuill warres, and vnder the raigne of the three last Kings.
Further, the thirtieth of the same moneth, the Presidents, Princes, Peeres of France, Prelates, Maisters of requests, Councellours, Aduocates, and Procurors generall, Registers, Porters, Notaries, Solicitors, and Procurours of the Court of Parliament, to the number of three hundreth and sixe and twentie, made a newe oath of vnion, signed by each of them in particular, some of them hauing thereto set their blood instead of Inke, the purpose and end whereof was, to persecute the king by all meanes possible (without respect had to his dignitie, or any other consideration) for the execution of Blois. The decree of
Sorbonne before made, was also published, importing, that the people of France were freed and absolued, from the oath of fidelitie and obedience made to Henry the third.

That the same people might lawfully and with good conscience, arme and vnite themselues, raise money, and make contributions, for preseruation and defence of the Romain Church, against councels replenished with all flagition, and the force of the king or his adherents, whatsoeuer. In that (affirmed they) hee had violated publike faith, to the preiudice of Catholicque religion, the Edict of sacred vnion, and the naturall and proper libertie of the three estates of the Realme.The king first imployeth his pen before he draweth his sword. The king perceiuing that the greater mildenesse he vsed in reducing these errants into the right way, the more they took bridle in mouth, to run whither soeuer their violent passions would transport them, scoffing at him, and attributing that affection which he bore to revnite them to himself, rather to a feare he had, of either retaining them as his enemies, or loosing them as subiects, vsed his authoritie, publishing throghout all the Prouinces, diuers declarations of his intention, as well against the Duke de Maine, the Duke, and
Cheualier d'Aumale, heads of the rebellion, as likewise against the townes of Parris, Amiens, Orleans, Abeuille, and other their adherents. He therefore accused them of attempt against his person, of fellonie and rebellion: hee denounced those heads and members all disloyall, rebellious, attainted and conuicted of the crimes of fellonie, rebellion, and high treason, to their chiefest head: and disgraded them, togither with their posteritie, of all honours, if within the space of one month they rendred not the^selues vnder his obedience. The terme set downe, was the beginning of March: but seeing that instead of repenting themselues, they committed so many the more outrages, taking vp armes on all sides, and that they practised out of the land, seized on his treasure, vnder colour of Lieftenants general of the estate, co^firmed pattents and commissions vnder a new seale, oppressed by incredible violatio^s, diuers prouinces stript into their shirts, many of his most faithfull subiects which would not adheare vnto them, without intreating much more graciously others, who had so greatly desired and laboured the league. In briefe, that they had vsurped all poynts and prerogatiues of his royall Maiestie, except the name and title of king, which they reserued to an other opportunitie. He then resolued also for his part, to put in readinesse an armie to suppresse these insupportable attempters. And for performance of this, he dispatched letters pattents for conuocation and assembly of his Nobilitie and martiall power. Not long after, ensued an other Edict of the kings, by which he translated to the towne of
Tours, such exercise of iustice as was wont to be performed in his Court of Parliament of Parris, inioyning them of that Court, to repaire incontinently to Tours, there to execute their offices. He made the like transportatio^ of his chamber of accounts to the same place, and depriued Parris, with the other townes, of all offices, charges, dignities, and priuiledges, whom he would willingly haue made afeard, and won vnto himselfe, before comming to armes. But all this was but a casting of oyle into the fire.
Exployts of the king of Nauar, who came afterwards to be king.The king of N. recouered of a daungerous disease hee had, a little after the death of the Queen-mother, determined for testimonie of his fidelitie towards the king, to crosse (as far as in him lay) the diseignments of the leaguers, hindring them from defacing any thing in those places, which hee had meanes to assure, as well for seruice of the king, as for the reliefe of those of the religion. Thus therfore he receiued into his protection, those of S. Maixent and
Millezay, he safegarded against ye league, Chastelleraut, Loudu^, Ile Mirebeau, Viuonne, and other places adioyning. Afterwards he set forward euen into Berry, and tooke ouer the leaguers head the Towne and Castle of Argenton. And beeing returned to Chastelleraut, hee writ in the beginning of March, ample letters to the three estates of France, full of serious admonitions, that they should giue ouer the League, and aduertising them, that if they proceeded in their euill counsels and determinations, he was minded, if the king so commaunded him, to take the field, with his friendes and followers, hoping that God would giue him the grace to breake many of their deseignments, and to cut them off from their affaires and inuentions. He took into his protection and safegard, all such towns and personages as would ioyne with him against the league, promising that in the townes he would suffer nothing to be innouated, neither in pollicie or church-affairs, except on such considerations as shuld touch the libertie of euery one: hauing learned (said he) for conclusion, that the true and onely meane of revniting people to the seruice of God, and establishing pietie in an estate, is mildnesse, peace, good example, not warre, nor disorders, through which wickednesse and vices spring vp in the world. At the same time, the Towne and Castle of Angiers were assured to the king: but the Duke de Mercoeur brought almost all Brittaine in subiection to the partie of the league, with which Roane, Thoulouse, and Lyons, were now ioyned, and Bourdeaux wanted not much of doing the like: but Marshal de Matignon was faithful to the king, so that the leaguers and Iesuites, were constrained to remooue from thence. During these commotions, debatement was made of a truce between the king and Nauar, to the ende they might more commodiously make head against the league,Debatement of truce betweene the two kings. which augmented euery weeke more and more. The K. minding to vse Na. forces, without which hee could not doo much of himselfe, offered and yeelded into his hand, Saumur for securitie of his passage ouer
Loire: by means whereof, in attending ratification of the truces, the king of N. caused all his troupes to passe ouer on this side of Loire, to ioine with the forces of Normandie, Maine, and other places which attended him, with intention to approach the Leaguers, and thus to ease them of the labour of comming any more to find him out in
Gascon and Xaintongne, as before they had don. Afterwards the 18. of April, he proclamed wars against them, if they deferred any longer to lay aside armes. But they shewed themselues as little moued with this, as before by the kings letters patternts, by which he translated the iustice and iurisdictio^ of the Great-maisters, Inquisitors, and Reformers generall, which was wont to be held in the Pallas at Parris, at the bench of the table of marble, to his Court of Parliament not long since established at Tours.
An enterprise on the kings person by the league, frustrated by the king of Nauars presence.About the end of the same month, he published an Edict, declaring that al the mooueable and immoouerable goods of the Duke de Maine, of the Duke and
Cheualier d'Aumale, and of those which voluntarily dwelt and remained in the Townes of Parris, Thoulouse, Orleans, Chartres,
Amiens, Abeuille, Lyons, Mans, and of all other maintaining their partie, forfaited and co^fiscated, minding that the mony rising of the sale therof, should bee imployed in the charges of the war. Notwithstanding all this aboue declared, the D. de Maine and his confederates, hauing their armie in readinesse, made a selection of their resolutest men, and marched into Vendosmois, with an intentio^ to surprise the K. in Tours, were he was weakly ynough garded: and besides this, they had secret intellige^ce both in the court and town.
The king of Nauarre beeing aduertised that this armie was in Vendosme, and in the confines thereabout, determined to go to see them: and for this purpose, departed the eight and twentieth day of Aprill, with 400. Maistres, and a thousand Harguebuziers on horsebacke, going ten long myles at one march. But beeing in the way to haue gone further forward, hee receiued newes that the king called him backe to his owne succour, wherefore with all speed hee turned head, and came to lodge at Maille vpon Loire, two miles from
Tours, after hee had remained by the space of 24. houres on horseback.A peculiar order of Cauallere. The king presently hearing of this arriual, was much eased at heart: for it was mightily seared, least the Duke de Maine hauing taken S.
Ouyn near Amboise, which he battered with two coluerins, wold haue come to ledge in the subburbs of Tours: the which so falling out, the K. had bin in euident danger of his person. On Sunday, being the last day of the month, the two kings viewed each other, in the passage from Plessy Parke to Tours, with mutuall demonstration of all contentment.
Free resolution of the K. of Nauarre.The K. of Nauarre this day shewed a free and absolute resolution, which was wont with him to bee ordinarie. For Marshall Hautmont being come to finde him out, and exhort him in the behalfe of the king, that he would come to him, incontinently he determined to go, laying aside all suspition, and reiecting diuers adnertisements which had been giuen him, for slacking of this enterview thrise pleasing to the people, and profitable to the king.
Truce between the two Xings.After that the two kings had for the space of some daies co^municated togither,
Vauar returned ouer to Loire, and lodged himself in ye subburbs of Saint Saphorin, afterwards the truce accorded betwixt them, was published throughout the town of Tours, after it had bin promulgated in the Court of Parliament, as was also the second Edict or proclamation of war against the heads of the league and their adherents: who in the beginning retired themselues towards Vendosme: afterwards iudging ye the K. of N. was far off, about the 8. of May they set euen vpon the subburbs of Tours, drawne therevnto by their intelligence and fastned skirmish: their suddain arriuall made an alarme in ye twon, wherin there was great trouble at the first, and with all speed they sent toward; the king of Nauarre, who was somewhat remote, willing him to make haste. Cheualier, d'Aumale, arriuing there after the skirmish, lodged himselfe neare the Prouost, hard by S.
Simphorian, where in searching throgh the house, three or foure houres after, they found certaine souldiers which they broght vnto him, al whom before his own eyes he caused to be stabbed.Acts and Catholicke carriage of the leaguers. At the same instant wer
40. or 50. wome^ and maids fou^d hidde^ in a caue, who were all forced: as like wise they were in the rest of the subburbs, yea, and euen within the Church of S. Simphorian, som wome^ and yong maids fled thither, as to a place of securitie, were violated in the presence of their husba^ds, fathers, and mothers, who^ these Catholicke leaguers caused to be assista^t to so horrible spectacles, the more to outrage and oppresse them. The day following, vpon the pauement of the Church were seen the beds, wheron the Vicar protested to haue seen the^ hale wome^ and virgins. They broke ope^ the chests and defaced the windows of the temple, and stole away whatsoeuer there was, and after they had beaten flatling with their swords, the Vicar and chaplain whom they kept bound all night, they cut the cord that sustained the pixe, to see whither it were siluer and gilt or no, but finding that it was but brasse, they threw it in despite against the ground. In pilling and stealing they light vpo^ two chalices, whereof ye one was of siluer, the other of copper: ye of copper they left, saying in mockerie, that it belonged to the league or vnion, and made a conscience so much as to touch it, but that of siluer, was denounced royall, or appertaining to the king: hereticall, and therefore consequently of good price. The Church-boxe, wherein there was some siluer, the Copes and or naments of the Altar, with the Vicars robes and vestments, were also found hereticall, and in this nature were carried away.
This Knight tooke for his spoyle, a verie young virgine of an honest s^^^lie, which was scarcely eleuen yeares old, being found within a barne, whom hee forced, holding continually his poniard at her throat, by reason of her resistance, sending her afterwards to his officers, to bee abused in the like manner. The day following in the morning, these leaders perceiuing that some bodie would quickly come to vnnestle them, and that the kings succors approached, made themselues readie to dislodge, and euery man to pay his Hoste, set fire on his lodging, so that all the whole subburbe had been brought to dust and ashes, without the present succour that thereto was giuen.
Other stimulations of the leagues exploits, against Romain Catholicke religion, where of they termed themselues to be protectors.Now seeing I am entered into this discourse, I will yet make a step or two out of the way, and returne afterwards to the prosecusion of this my collection. It is therefore to bee obserued, that after the taking vp of armes, the league shewed no violence, but against the townes and boroughs of their owne partie, wherein persons Ecclesiasticall, noble, and vpright men suspected to fauour the king neuer so little, were in all sorts offered violence: that is to say, at Thoulouse they cruelly killed the President
Duranti, and Dafis the kings Aduocate, both of them well affected to the Romaine Church.
Those of the religion in Guyen and other places, had neuer more peace then during these outrages of the League. And it was then a common prouerbe: that the sheepe then fed most securely, when the wolues were at warres amongst themrelues. It is impossible to set downe the sacriledges, violations, blasphemies against God, mockerie of all religion, but namely of the Catholicque Romaine, perpetrated in the leaguer Townes and in the countrie, by their troupes: their souldiers, wherof a part were Priests and Monks, all the time of Lent, in contempt of the Popes ordinances, whom they call the holy father, eate flesh, yea euen in those places where they had aboundance of fish. Diuers of them constrained Curates and Vicars of Parishes, by putting a dagger to their throates, to baptize (pardon mee, if I vse this sacred word in an act so execrable) calues, sheepe, lambes, pigges, goates, chickens, and capons, and to giue them the names of pikes, carpes, barnobles, soles, turbots, and herrings. It was in diuers places and sundrie Innes, that thus much was performed, while
Sorbonne and the Preachers, thundred out against their souer^igne and lawful Prince, to rauish women and virgins within the Temples: to murther the poore prisoners hard at the Altar: to run away with the Challice, and to strip the Ecclesiasticall Officials, was the essentiall forme of a good and zealous Leaguer: if any alleadged that they were of the royall partie, among a number of examples, one shall suffise to discouer the Lyon (as wee vsually say) by his pawes. One of the most insolent of the league, named Commeronde, had vnder him a Regiment of seuen or eight hundreth men, and hauing ouerrun, pilled, and forraged the whole countries of
Aniou and Countie Laual, in the end of Aprill he lodged himselfe in the Borough of Arquenay, appertaining to the Lord of
Rambouillet, and distant three myles from
Laual. There was in the same place a Temple (which they call a Church) as well furnished and set foorth as any in all the countrie, hauing been of long time inriched and indowed with many donatories, by the Lords of that place. The Inhabitants had not laid apart nor shut vp any one thing of their or naments, seeing they could not bee perswaded, that vnder these goodly titles of zealous and vnited Catholickes, so many erronious offences might bee hatched: withall, diuers of the religion had passed by that way before, which did not so much as touch this Temple, nor athing that was therein.
But Commeronde, for his first warrelike exployt, burned the Gates of the Church: afterwards hee entered thereinto with his people, which wholly pilled and spoyled it, killed a poore man at the crucifix foot, because he complained, that in the self same place they had rauished his wife in his own presence: they eased their bellies within the holy water stocke, and in euery corner of the Church: and of robes, wherein were wrought certaine Aue Maries, they made garments for change, and setting foorth of their queanes. For the top and height of this exployt, they tooke the pixe of siluer, wherein there was foure and twentie hostes: one amongst the rest apparelled him-himselfe in Priestlike habite, caused eighteene or twentie souldiers to fall downe vppon their knees, and hauing his hands yet full of blood and sacriledge, distributed these hostes, throwing downe vppon the ground three or foure others that remained, which were troden vnder foote. At their departure they solde the Copes, banner, and relicques, to the Moonkes of Eurons: the Challices, lampes, boxes, and crosse of siluer, to them of
Vague: and not many daies after, they did as much at
Thorigni. But expecting a particular Historie of the league, wherein shall bee found renued, all kindes of cruell and infamous Tragedies, let vs returne to the armie of the league, and to the Parisians.
The revnion of the two Kings, made them see how it was time for the league to runne: for this cause the Councell generall of the vnion, addressed memorials, letters, and aduertisements, both within and without the realm, of whatsoeuer they thought expedient, to assure and protect this building of confusion. They sent men and large instructions vnto
Rome, to iustifie their actions, to demaund a legate from the Pope, to promise publication of the Councell of Trent, to obtaine and fauour on all sides, through the intercession of the Pope and his Cardinals.
One of their packets was surprised by the way, so that their mynes by this meanes were blowen vp: neuerthelesse their Deputies, who were the Commaunders of Diou, Councell our Coqueley, the Abbot of Orbais, and the Deane of Rheimes, went forward about the end of May. Other dispatches were sent to the leaguer Townes, for raising contribution: for whole Cartlodes of siluer was behoofull for the disbursments of such young kings, to fill the coffers of others most greedie, for payments of some mens debts, and for the purchase of other summes, lands, and Lordships.
Exployts by the king against the league.In the meane while, both within and round about the townes, were infinit pillages, incoursions, thefts, and depredations performed: diuers of the royall partie were murthered heere and there. In euerie place there was extreame libertie giuen, and the furie seemed desperate, that was vndertaken against the kings name. There was no longer any question of a commotion in some small circuite of a countrie, but a man might perceiue the fire of this reuolt, to haue taken hold in the foure corners, and even in the middest and heart of France: so furiously, as it is an horror to call it to mind. The king had from the beginning of Aprill, sent forces hither and thither, and some towns not farre from Parris, remained yet at his commandement. Genlis, which had done homage to the leagne, was happily reduced to his obedience by the solicitation of some noble Burgesses, and this (because it was but a little daies iourny fro^ Parris towards Picardie) was afterwards a thorn that mightily pricked the leaguers. Duke
Mo^tpensieur being in Norma^die with forces for the K. assisted by the Lords of Halot, Creuecoeur, Baqueuille and
Larchan, discomfited first the Garrison of Fallaize, tooke three Captaines, hewed in peeces the greater part of the men, and dispearsed the rest. There he besieged Falaize, and receiuing newes that Countie Brissac, accompanied with two or three hundreth Gentlemen leaguers, some Priests: and fiue or sixe thousand men were comming to succor, hee left the siege to go and meete them.
Counte Brissac disconfited in Normandie by the Duke Montpensier.They were lodged in three villages, two of which hee entered by force, killing all those that stood out valiantly: the others neuer made offer of combat afterward:
Brissac himselfe fled away with al the Caualleriers. The number of the leaguers then slaine, were 3000. and more: amongst whom were many Gentlemen: the Conquerours had about one thousand or 1200. prisoners, amongst whom there were some thirtie Gentlemen, and of the principallest. This was a bad presagement for the League.
In Beaussy by the Lord of Chastillon.A month after, or thereabouts, that is to say, the 18. of May, the Lord of Chastillon hauing passed Bagency with
200. horse, and as many harguebuziers, vnderstanding that some troupes of the Duke d'Aumale marched along to charge on the L. of
Lorges, who scoured the high-waies, made forward towardes
Bonneual with twentie Gentlemen, conducted by Fonquerolles, who encountred Arclenuille, commander within Chastres for the league. Hee would haue acknowledged them, but they charged him, and slew fiue of sixe of his men euen hard at his elbow: so that galloping he retired, and gaue the alarme to the troupes of Picardie, ledde by the Lords of Sauenze and Brosses, who had in their companie about 500. Gentlemen, beeing likewise followed by other Caualleries, to the number of 300. and a company of harguebuziers both on horsebacke and a foote,
Sauenze cast before his harguebuziers, placed his troupes of lanciers in wings, and without shrinking one whit came forward.
Chastillon hauing made a stand, placed his infanterie, and made two strengths of his horse, returning on his left hand,
Charbonniere and Haranbure, with their companies of light horse: afterwards hee receiued the charge, wherevnto Sauenze ran brauely with a gallop of 30. paces long: his harquebuziers on horsebacke, hauing giuen their volley neare ynough. Chastillions foote receiued them, and (after the first discharge of their shotte) coupled with the horse ye came to charge, killing diuers horses with wounds they made in their flancks with swords, without any losses on their own part, more then of three souldiers. Sauenze, who skirtwise was opposed against the light horse, made straight forward, charging
Chastillon with such furie, as his first ranckes were broken, he shocked and born down to the earth, with 8. or ten Gentlemen, where there were but two or 3. lightly hurt, and 20. or 25. of their horse slaine:
Chastillon and his men recouered the^selues, and fought couragiously on foote. Surce Harambure, and Fonquerolles, charged so fiercely Sauenze and his men, that they ouerthrew them, and broke their array in such a sort, as they were not able to revnite themselues togither again, but were put to plaine flight and pursued: more then 26. Gentlemen hauing beene borne downe dead to the earth in the field. In the pursuite there was more then 60. slain, al their harguebuziers yt were left behind ouerthrown, two Cornets won, and fortie Gentlemen taken, part of them beeing wounded, and amongst others,
Sauenze, who being conueyed to Baugency, when his friends and familiars seeing him in danger of death, admonished him to aske pardon at Gods hands, to confesse and communicate himselfe, as also to craue mercie of the king, he could neuer be brought the revnto, by any reason could be laid before him, but died as a desperate man. He bore in his Cornet the Crosse of Lorraine, with a Spanish deuise in letters of gold: Morir omas contento. Oh rather content to die. There was in this skirmish some 25. or 30. souldiers, which in the ende of the fight were fallen into Chastillions hands, who desired to saue them, and yet they chose rather to be dispatched in the field, then to sweare that they shuld neuer beare armes against the king: all whose enemies at that instant come foorth of Picardie, were then ouerthrown.
In the Ile of France by the Duke of Longueuille, at the siege of Sentys.At the same time, the town of
Senlis besieged by the Parisians armie, vnder the conduct of the D. d'Aumale, hauing been furiously battered, sustained and repelled a greeuous assault. And as the defendants were minded to capitulate, succour was brought vnto them by the Duke of
Longueuille, hee being followed by the L. of Boniuet, Humieres, la Noue, and others. Wherevppon battell ensued, in which the assaylants were defeated, about 1500. of them being slaine vppon the field in their flight and pursuite, as well by the Conquerors as by the Pesants. The league lost also therin, their artillerie and all the baggage of their armie. Afterwards the D. de Maine attempted to win this place by practise, because it so highly imported him, and by certaine treacherous Canno^s, Priests, and Monks within the towne, they entred in with 20. or thirtie Captaines, at an instant set downe, to cut off in the night a Corps de guard: and to further on their owne behalfe and escalado, his troupes approached verieneare, and some there were that came euen to the ditch, but the Corps de guard hauing then been lately relieued, and keeping good watch, they within durst not shew themselues, and one without aduenturing to approach, had his thigh broke^ with a musket shot: when the alarme being giuen, the assaylants retired. This wounded man beeing taken, discouered the whole practises. The entred Captaines with the traitors, passed through the hands of the executioner: and Senlis hath euer since perseuered in the obedience of the king.The king approacheth neare Paris with an armed power. The king incouraged by so many prosperous beginnings, determined to go forward: so that from the beginning of Iune, to the middest of Iuly, the war began to grow hot, and the principall intention of the king, was, to kill those of Parris, assuring himselfe, that after hee should once haue tamed the great head of the league, all the others would incontinently yeeld to the yoake, and that he should recouer again, which was maruellous straunge and difficult for him, to wit, the loue and obedience of his subiects: who on the other part, fearing him as much as they hated them, practised also on euery side to maintaine their league, and to remaine in their insurrections. This implacable war against him, was an occasion that in the chiefest towns, but especially in Parris, they spake not of this Prince, but as of the most execrable tyrant that had euer beene in the world. I and the Preachers solicited by certaine heades of the league, and for this effect, by them well payed with extraordinarie pensions, animated all in generall, and each one in particular, to run vpon him and kill him, in what maner soeuer it were: promising vnto the tirannicides, a place in Paradise aboue the Angels. Furthermore, they hotly and with diuers pollicies instigated a Moonke, of who^ wee will presently speake, to performe a noble seruice to the league. Thus therefore the King being approached Parris, he planted himselfe near Parris, wheras the Duke de Maine returned in hast from about Tours, to oppose himselfe to the Duke of
Longueuille, was mightily hindered, perceiuing himselfe to bee cut off in so many respects, and by enemies so puissant. His soldiers beganne to liue at pleasure within the towne, the which the Parisians felt impatiently ynough, but the meaner sort durst not complaine, and for the great ones, they put in practise the common prouerbe: vpon an euill game a good countenance must bee set. The king tooke incontinently
Estampes.
Exployts to the disaduantage of the League.In the meane while, the Duke of Longueuille ioyning togither the troupes of Champaigne, and gathering to head in the confines of Chastillon vpon Seine, the Switzers and Lansquenets which the Lord of Sancy conducted (who had raised war against the Duke of Sauoy, in the territories of Geneue, and hauing there stayed him) was marched into France. He made of all this power, a bodie of an armie of twentie thousand men, or thereabouts. Afterwardes hee went to passe the riuer of Seine at
Poissy, and shewed himselfe before the king, who laied batterie to Pontoise, wherevppon the defendants yeelded themselues the day following, being the 25. of Iuly, to a composition of 200000 Crownes, and a deliuerie of the most seditious, to the end they might receiue exemplare chastisement. The K. afterwards followed by Nauar, went to welcome the Switzers armie, ranged in battell, and would needs passe through all the squadrons, with so great demonstration of contentment, ioy, and entertainment to the heads, as that all of them likewise made manifest vnto him, the great affection they had to do him seruice. Hauing all his forces togither, which made a bodie of 45000. men, he marched presently towards Parris, and with shot of cannon made himselfe Maister of S. Clouis bridge.
Attempts by the heads of the League, against the kings life.The Duke de Maine and other heads of the league, with their most confident friends, to the number of 46. within
Parris beganne to renue their concels, and seeing the king so neare them, either to vrge them to battell, or else straightly to inclose them, and constrained the people to acknowledge him, iudged by that, in this progression of the kings affaires, their own went to ruine, and that there was no other means left to sta^d out, being proclaimed guiltie of high treason against their chiefest head, then by executing some notable villanie in procuring the death of the King, their Maister, Benefactor, their Prince and soueraigne Lord. Some certaine weekes before, a young
Iacobine Monke, called Fryer Iaques Clement, borne (as men report) in a village called Sorbonne neare Seins, a man drowned in all wickednesse, hauing passed through the handes of certaine confessors, and conferred with some Iesuites and others, was for a kind of dexteritie obserued in him, found meete to strike so great a stroke.
The murther entended of long time.He was vrged and put forward therein, and in the end the Duke de Mayene, the sister of Montpensieur and others, had conference with him in diuers places, they requested him to perseuer in this good determinatio^, which they knew to rise in him, by extraordinarie inspiratio^s, to performe so renowmed a feruice to the holy vnion, the Catholicque Church, and his countrie. They promised him Abbotships, Bishoppricks, and whatsoeuer he would desire. He remained for certain daies, one whiles with the Duches Montp. Who amo^gst the Parisia^s was termed the holy widow: other whiles with his Prior, and sometimes with the Iesuites. This Monke drunk in his own furie, and with so many alureme^ts, entertainme^ts, promises, and protestations, of felicitie te^poral and eternal, resolued with himselfe, and promised to kill the king. The people, who thought nothing, nor knew not of their cruel practises, talked of yeelding themselues, and had greatly rebated their spleene and collor. Surce, Duke de Maine, and those of this complot, caused the most zealous Sorbonnists and Iesuites to preach, that they should yet haue patience for seuen or eight daies, and they should perceiue some wonderfull matter come to passe, that should make well with the vnion. The Preachers of Roan, Orleans, and
Amiens, preached the like at the same time, and in semblable termes. The Moonke hauing taken order for his complot, departed from
Paris, and went towards S. Clou. So soone as hee was departed, the Duke de Maine caused more then two hundreth of the principallest Cittizens, and other rich men whom he knew to haue friends and credite with the kings partie, to be taken prisoners for a gage, to the end to saue his Moonke, if after hee had attempted or executed the fact, he were stayed or arrested. The Monke being presented to speak to the king, the first day of August, saying yt he had letters from ye President of
Harlay, and credence on his part: the king caused him to be called into his chamber, where there was no other but the L. of Bellegarde, chiefe Gentleman of the same, and the Procuror general, whom he procured to retire apart, more priuately to giue eare vnto him, which addressed himself as it seemed, with a countenance very simple and demure. It is affirmed, that in the selfe same chamber, the Councels of the massacres in the month of August, the year 1572. were surprised, wherin the king, that then was D. of Aniou, was one of the chiefest. The Moonk perceiuing himself alone, and opportunitie put into his ha^d, co^firming his countena^ce more and more, drew out of one of sleeues a paper which he presented to the K. and out of ye other a knife, with which viole^tly he sheathed a thrust within ye kings smal ribs, he being attentiue to read, and who perceiuing himself wou^ded, plucked ye knife out of the wound, wherwith he strooke ye Monke aboue the eie, and thervpo^ some Gentleme^ came ru^ning in, who moued with the indignitie of so execrable a fact, could not contain, but killed the murtherer with their swords, who went to the place appointed for him, and was cannonized and adored by the league: but on the contrarie, detested of those ye cleaued to the dignitie royal and partie of the religion. In the annagratisme of his name, Frier Iaques Cleme^t, were found these words in so many letters: C'est l'enfer qui m'acree, which importeth: It is hel ye created or brought me forth. For so it seemed, that after this fact the furies themselues were come out of hel, to ouerwhelme topsie turuie al
France. The King being caried to his bed* the Phisitians and Surgions applied vnto him his first dressing, and iudged that the wound was not mortal: by means wherof, the same day he procured writing and aduise to bee giuen of this attempt, as also of the hope of his healing and recouerie, as well to the Gouernours of Prouinces, as to Princes straungers, his friends, and allies. But the soueraigne King hauing otherwise disposed of the life of this Prince, took him out of the world about 3. of the clock in the morning the day following. A litle before his departure, hee spoke with a moderate and confirmed mind, named the King of Nauarre his good brother, lawful successor to the Crowne, exhorted his good subiects to obey him, to remaine vnited, and to referre the difference of religion, to the conuocation of the Estates Obseruations vpon the life of king Hienry the third.generall of the Realme, who would thinke vpon conuenient remedies for the same, to haue a care of religion and pietie, and to pray to God for him: vpon these words he gaue vp his ghost. Touching the insolencies of the league within Parris and elsewhere after the kings death, an other Historie shal declare the same: for our intention is not to proceed any further in these collections. In this Prince failed the Kings of the race of Valois, which had raigned in France from the yeare 1515. to the yeare 1589. vnder their dominions, almost all the wonders of former ages had been renued. This last king was little bewailed of his subiects, by reason of many faults he committed in his gouernment and administration. The occasion of them (without touching in any sort, either his conscience, or affaires of instice and pollicie) was, that in his polliticke gouernment hee could neuer well discerne, except too late, his friends from his enemies: and the desire he had to lead his life in pleasure, made him let slippe infinite exellent opportunities of prouiding for the good of France and other countries. His securitie imboldened his enemies, both neare and farre of, within and without the Realme, to innouate much, and in that he would not lay to his hand when he ought to haue done, he at last found the gate shut against him, perceiued himselfe driuen out of his own house, and those whom many waies he had too much supported, established in his place, who gaue him right downe blowes vpon his head, whereof he should haue bin warie in time. Men talke diuersly touching his departure, some iudging that he left the world too soone, in respect of France her good: others deeming the contrarie. Howsoeuer it was, his decease was to the whole Realme a beginning of particular calamities aboue all the rest, as the Historie of king
Henry the fourth, of the race of Bourbon, will giue testimonie.
Heere endeth the troubles that happened in the raigne of
Henry the third.


This is to giue the Reader to vnderstand, that there is certaine Titles gone Henry the fourth, that should haue bin
Henry the third.




A BRIEFE RECITALL OF THE MOST MEMORABLE THINGS which came to passe in Fraunce, vnder the Raigne of Henry the fourth, since his first comming to the Crowne, vntill the middle of the yeare,
1598.
The Frenchmens disposition after the death of Henry the 3.ALthough there were great sorrow, greefe, and lamentation made in the royall armie, for the death of king
Henry the third: as much signe of ioy and gladnesse was there seene on the other side, among the leaguers throughout al the Citie of
Paris for the same, in singing of songs, and making mocking times therevpon. The Duke de Maine with his Court, and many others, which since the execution of Blois, wore black scarfes in signe of sorrow, did heerevpon cast them aside, and wore in stead of them, scarfes of hopeful greene. Then was there great feasting, masking, and other sportfull games made among them, wherein and whereby, the murthered king was cursed and banned in most horrible sort.
At that time the image and portrature of the traiterous Moonke which kild the king, was by the commaundement of the chiefe of the league, artificially framed in Brasse, and other paintings, wherewith they garnished both their houses and Churches. Then was he cannonized, and among the supersticious prayed vnto, as a new made Martyr, whom they called by the name of Saint Iaques Clement. All such as were knowne to bee of any kin vnto him, were greatly inriched with almes gifts and publicke contributions.
Councels of the league.The Duke de Maine, which as yet durst not name himselfe king, caused that title by proclamation to bee giuen throughout all Paris, to the Cardinall of
Bourbon, beeing then prisoner, stamping mony and gold, as the coyne of king Charles the tenth. The Duke disguising his vsurpation by his new and rediculous title of Lieftenant generall to the Estate and Crowne of France, and perceiuing that the declarations made by the lawfull king, did shake in the beginning of his proceedings, a great part of the league, published and sent abroad an Edict dated the first day of August in his owne name, and the generall Councell of the holy vnion of Catholicques, established at Parris, who
stayed there for the assembling of the estates of the kingdome, to revnite (as he said) all Christian Frenchmen in the defence and conseruation of the Apostolicque, Romane, and Catholicque Church, for the holding vp of the royall estate, expecting the libertie and presence of king Charles the tenth.
Orders giuen to the king for the affairs of the armieKing Henry the fourth, which soone after the death of his predecessor, had signified to the Princes and Lords in the armie his full intent, vndersta^ding that many of the Nobles made diuers bad attempts, caused the principall of them to bee assembled, before whom hee called vnto mind, the recommendations of the oathes which the deceased king had caused him to make before them all, for the tranquillitie of the Realme after his hurt, perceiuing himselfe to drawe toward his end. The first and chiefest poynt whereof, was to maintaine the Frenchmen in the libertie and exercise of the two religions: that is to say, the Romaine and the reformed Churches: vntill such time as by a good and generall Councell it were otherwise determined. These promises by oath he renued vnto them againe, which appeased the controuersies. And because hee might not securely stay at Paris, by reason of this suddaine change, and the sicknesses which afflicted the royall armie, the king by aduise went into Normandie, as well to receiue the succours which came from England, as also for the fortifying of certaine places and passages which was fit for his purpose. The league remooued on the other side, and then the Earle of Randan, one of the chiefest of them, had surprised in Auuergne the Cittie d'Issoire, about the tenth of August. The Parliament of Bourdeaux published a decree the 19. of the same moneth, whereby all those of their side, were inioyned to keepe inuiolably the Edicts made by the holy vnion, concerning the Apostolicque, Catholicque, and Romaine Church, and all the declarations by them made. Three daies after that at Thoulouse, tearing the picture of the deceased K. bodie in peeces, they ordained by an act, made by the generall consent of the leaguers, that euery yeare vpon the first day of August, they should in making processions and publicke prayers, acknowledge vnto God the great benefits which as vppon that day they receiued by the fearefull death of Henry the third: whereby the happie deliuerance of Parris ensued, with many other distressed Cities in the Realme: forbidding al persons to acknowledge Henry of
Bourbon king of Nauarre to be king of France, whom that Court thoght a most vnfit man to succeed in the same kingdome, because (said the edict) of the notorious and manifest crimes expressed against him, in that bull of excommunication, which was giuen out by Pope Sixtus the fift.
His genealogie.The enuie of which partiall Parliament hath constrained mee once againe to set vnto your sight in briefe sort, the true genealogie of King Henry the fourth.
Lewis the ninth, surnamed the Saint, beeing the 44. king of France, came to the Crowne in the yeare 1227. and raigned till the yeare 1270. he had foure sonnes, two of the which, namely Peter and Robert, died without issue, and before their father. The other twaine that suruiued, was Philip, and Robert the second of that name. Philip surnamed the Hardie, and third of that name, successiuely left these following: from the father to the sonne: from brother to brother: and the nearest of blood, to the nearest of blood:
Philip the fourth, called the Faire.
Lewis the tenth, surnamed Hutin. Philip the fift, surnamed the Longe. Charles the fourth, termed the faire. Philip de Valois, Iohn, Charles the fift, surnamed the wise. Charles the sixth, called the welbeloued. Charles the seuenth:
Lewis the eleuenth: Charles the eight: all descending from Saint Lewis in the right line. Charles the fift, which makes the second branch from the end of the first line, had two sonnes:
Charles Duke of Orleans, and Iohn Earle of
Angoulesme. Charles the eight, dying then without children:
Charles Duke of Orleans, successiuely came into the right line, so that Lewis his sonne was found the first heir, who also raigned after Charles the eight, who was surnamed father of the people, Lewis their dying without issue male, the right of inheritance came into the branch of Iohn Earle of
Angoulesme, so that the lawe set the Crowne on the head of
Francis the first, the Earles onely sonne. And from
Francis, it came to his sonne Henry the second, from whom succeeded orderly, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third his childre^, one after the other, fro^ brother to brother. In this right line ended the last King of the race of
Valois, who died without children. The law then tooke hold on the second sonne of Saint Lewis, named Robert, who was Earle of Clermont, and married with Beatrix, daughter to
d'Archambaut of Bourbon: by her hee had one sonne named
Lewis, from whom the lands were made errigible, in Counte, the yeare one thousand three hundreth twentie seuen. After this Lewis, succeeded Peter and Iames his sonnes. Peter had one sonne named Charles, Duke of Bourbon, and Constable of France, who was slaine at the taking of Rome, in the yeare one thousand fiue hundreth twentie seuen. And in him, dying without issue male, ended the line masculine of this branch. Iames his vncle, the sonne of Lewis, had then a sonne named Iohn, who espoused Catherine Countesse of Vendosme of
Castres, and Ladie of Conde. This Iohn sonne of
Iames, had three sonnes: Iames, Lewis and Iohn. The first and last, to wit, Iames and Iohn, left no posteritie. Lewis sonne of Iohn had two sonnes,
Francis and Lewis, the younger hath issue, the Duke
de Montpensier, who liueth at this present. The Prince de la Rochesur-yon, the eldest of this branch died without children. The eldest named Francis the sonne of Lewis, which espoused Marie of Luxembourg, had three sonnes:
Charles, Francis, and Lewis. Charles the eldest, had by the Ladie Frances of Alencon fiue sonnes: Anthony, Francis, Charles, Lewis, and Iohn. Anthony of Bourbon eldest sonne of Charles, married Iane d'Albert Queene of
Nauarre, the yeare one thousand fiue hundreth fortie nine. The twelfth of December 1553. was borne of this marriage in the ninth degree of the heires male, after Saint Lewis, Henry of Bour^^n, the onely sonne of
Anthony.
Now by the decease of Henry the third, the last king of the race of Valois, descending by the masculine line, from
Philip the eldest son of king Lewis the Saint, the right of the Crowne came vnto Robert his youngest sonne, and from him, consequently to Henry of Bourbon, the fourth of that name, king of France and Nauarre, who at this day raigneth, and of whom we are specially to speake in this Breuiarie.
That which the king did in his beginning.This king hauing accompanied the corps of the deceased king to his tombe, and put it in safe keeping to the Maister of Meulan, Gisors, and Clermont, diuided his forces into three armies: the first for himselfe, with the which he marched vnto Touraine: the other twaine hee committed to the Duke de Longueuille,
and to the Marshall d'Aumont, for
Picardie and Champagne. Before hee had taken the way to
Touraine with his troupes, which were composed of twelue hundreth horse, three thousand footemen, and two Regiments of Switzers, hee purposed to take his iourney into Normandie, where the Pont de l'Arche was yeelded vnto him. Then he came to Deepe, won
Caen vnto his side, and constrained Neufchastel to bee rendered vnto his hands, hauing disappoynted by his Lieftenants, the succours which they had sent vnto them.
And hauing made a shew to besiege Roane, it caused the Duke de Maine beeing called to the succor by
Aumalle and Brissac, to set himselfe in the field, with more then three thousand horse, and fiue thousande footemen, who promised to the Parisians at that time, to make an ende of all warre: and to bring the king their enemie vnto them, bound both hand and foote.
The king vndersta^ding that this mightie armie of his enemies increased euery day more and more, by the assistance of the low countries, of Picardie and Lorruine, asked of the Duke
de Longueuille, and of the Marshall d'Aumont, if they should go and meete them.
A notable exployt at Arques against the League.And then marching toward his enemies, they incamped at a certaine Village called Arques, about two leagues from the Towne of
Deepe.
And within three daies, he made such entrenchments for his troups, that the bancke in the lowest place, was seuen or eight foote high on the one side, aboue the towne where the artillerie were placed, vnder the keeping of foure companies of Switzers.
The approach of the campe was espied by the Castle, wherevppon was placed certaine peeces, that shot off with great aduantage. Meane space, the Duke de Maine was greatly busied, to thinke how hee might take againe, the Townes of Gourney, Neufchastel, and
Euison, at what time both hee and his whole armie, was perswaded that they might take Arques at the first.
But the Duke found it at his comming farre more troublesome then he imagined, by reason of the newe Trenches which the king hadde made on euery side thereof, for his commoditie, by the which meanes hee might the better and the more easier ouer-runne his enemies at all times.
A sore skirmige.The two armies continued there, from the end of August, to the midst of September. And vpon the sixteenth of that moneth, two fierce and cruell skirmiges was made, in the which the Leaguers lost a great number of their approoued souldiers, and nine or tenne of their Captaines.
This did truely presage and shew vnto them, what successe they were like to haue in their attempts to come, whereof followed nothing else but shame and sorrow to the leaguers.
VVhose foolish hope was also made frustrate, which they hadde to chase the king himselfe into England, or to kill him with all his followers, or else to bring them in triumph prisoners to the Cittie of
Parris.

The furie of these skirmiges was at last conuerted to the playing of the cannons, both on the one side and the other, which indured three or foure dayes togither.
On the Thursday the three and twentieth of September, the Leaguers Armie, or a part thereof, containing a thousand horse, and about six, or eight thousand foote, came to a place named la Maladerie: which was strengthened with eight hundred smal shot, foure co^panies of Rutters and Lanceknights: sustained moreouer with three companies of light horsmen, three companies of great ordenance, and with the forces of the Princes of Conde and Counte. Furthermore at the top of the Trench, stood the companies belonging to the Lords of Chastillon, and Maligni: with a good number of the Nobilitie who were vnder the Marshall of Birons charge. The Leaguers beginning then a bloodie skirmage, it was most valiantly held out by the kings troupes, at what time in the first assault Monsieur Sagonne, a principall man of the Leaugue, was slaine, with diuers of his horsmen, the rest were put to flight. But they comming with a fresh supply, the kings wearied souldiers were forced to retire. There the Switzers who was of the Regiment of Monsieur de Soleurre, vnder the Collonell Galati, did stay and withstand the furie of the Leaguers, being ayded by certaine harguebuziers which were lodged in places of aduantage, and by the Cannon which played vpon the Leaguers. And while this second charge was preparing, the Leaguers Lance-knights drew near vnto the trenches, declaring that they would yeeld themselues to the king. And after some speech on both sides, though many French Gentlemen were of an other opinion, they were at last receiued. But while the kings Maiestie, with Monsieur de Biron, and their troupes of horsemen, fought here and there, these Lance-knights perceiuing clearely the great power of the Leaguers,The falshood of the Leaguers Lance-knights. togither with the Switzers, iudged in themselues that the king was alreadie halfe vanquished: and vpon this imagination, they began to turne their weapons against him. Then receiuing the words, they lighted vppon the Marshall de Birons troupe, and beating away the most part of the souldiers there, they tooke the Ensignes of the Switzers and Lance-knights belonging to the king: then deliuering this Trench to the Leaguers, it was suddainly repaired by them: but they held it not very long. For the Duke de Montpensier beeing come thither with his Cornet of Horse, and an other company of the vantgard of his men of warre: being also assisted by Monsieur de Chastillon, with a fresh supply of fiue hundreth harguebuziers.
The Leaguers were constrained to depart both from
Maladere and the Trench: where the king speedily brought two great peeces of Ordenance, which he caused to be shot off among the thickest of the Switzers his enemies: who with certaine of the horfmen made a retrait, in the which they were mightily damnified by the great shot: neuerthelesse they neuer turned their faces to looke backe, whereby they might see from whence their hurt came. This day the Leaguers lost a great number of souldiers and men of warre, among whom were diuers of their chiefe Gentlemen, and many were taken prisoners.
The King lost also sixe or seuen Gentlemen, with the Earle of Roussie, and a fewe footemen. There were many hurt by the traiterous practise of the Leaguers Lance-knights.

On Sunday the foure and twentieth, the Leaguers armie raised themselues about midnight: and vpon the Tuesday following, they came vpon the other side of the Towne of Arques, and set semselues right against the place from whence they were parted, assaying to batter it with cannon shot. But the king found the leaguers so much worke, by continuall skirmiges, and hampered them in such sort, that vppon the eleuenth day after their comming thither, they were faine shamefully to withdraw themselues from the Towne of Arques: vpo^ the news which they receiued, that the Earle de Soisson, the D. de Longueuille, and the Marshal d'Aumont, were comming within twentie leagues of Arques with their troupes, to strengthen the king in his forces. While these affairs were in hand, the leaguers to make the Parisians beleeue great things, and dreame of wonders, sent the Ensignes thither, which they had taken from the kings Switzers and Lance-knights, as a token of the good successe which they had against his Maiestie. Wherevppon there was a certaine pamphlet imprinted at Parris, wherein it was published, that betweene Arques and Deepe, where the king of Nauarre was besieged, the Duke de Maine had wonne from them, foureteene Ensignes of the footemen, and eight Cornets of their horsemen were by him slaine.
These grose fables were set out, to feed the people with vaine fancies, and to pinch the purses of those that were readie to beleeue it, and that bare a good desire to haue it so. The king thought at the first, that this retrait was but a pollicie wrought by the Duke de Maine, that bending himselfe to entercept his succours before they came vnto him, hee might the easier subuert them, and afterward returne with more strength and furie then before. For this cause the king resolued with himselfe to ioyne the Earle of Soisson and the others togither. After the which, leauing the Marshall of Biron at
Deepe, his Maiestie with foure hundreth horse met and ioyned with his succours, within fiue myles of the leaguers armie: who with them incontinent passed ouer the riuer of Somme.
The Duke de Maine was faine for his credits sake, to couer this his shamefull retrait with a quaint excuse. He therefore published abroad, that he was constrained speedily to go down into
Picardte to possesse himselfe of those Citties which hee was bound (by the agreement made at Arras) to deliuer to the Spaniards. Vpon this newes the king determined to stay the returne of the leaguers, beeing perswaded that the Cities of Picardie would not be drawne to consent in any wise to submit themselues vnder the Spanish troupes. Hauing then prouided for his affaires in Normandie, and gathered togither those succours which the Queen of England had sent vnto him: he departed out of those parts the one and twentieth of October, with full purpose to awaken the Leaguers in Picardie, and to constraine their chiefe commaunders to auoyde that countrie, where by treason they had taken the Towne of Fere, and after deliuered it to the Spaniards. This done, his Maiestie by casie iourneyes drew neare vnto
Parris, and incamped himselfe within a league thereof, vpon the last day of the same moneth.
The same day, hauing knowne what trenches the enemies had made round about the Subburbes, on that side where hee was, by the aduise of his warrelike Councell, they concluded to assayle them on the morrow by
breake of day by three seuerall companies, and in three sundrie places. The first companie consisted of foure thousand Englishmen, two French Regiments, and one regiment of Switzers: who were led by the Marshall de Biron, to assaile that side of the subburbes called Saint Victor and Marceau. The second companie hauing two Regiments of Switzers, foure of Frenchmen, and foure of strangers, were all vnder the conduct of the Marshall d'Aumont: for that part of the Subburbes called Saint Iaques and Saint
Michael. The third companie consisted of tenne Regiments of Frenchmen, one Regiment of Launce-knights, and one Regiment of Switzers, who were commanded by the two Lords, Chastillon and la Noue. Each one of these troupes were winged with a good number of hardie Gentlemen on foote, well armed and appoynted to assist the rest of the footemen, if any cause of resistance were: and these set vppon that part of the subburbes called Saint Germaine, Bussi, and
Nesle.
These had at their taile, two cannons and two coluerins: the king commaunded ouer one of the troupes, the Earle of Soisson, and the Duke de Longueuille ouer the other twaine. The first day of Nouember, all these subburbes were assaulted and taken in lesse then one houre, with the losse of seuen or eight hundreth men on the defendants side.
They lost beside foureteene of their Ensignes, and thirteene peeces of artillerie, small and great. The assaylants lost almost nothing at all, and if the ordenance hadde beene well mounted, the gates of Parris hadde beene battered downe, eare the Cittizens hadde knowne of any such exployt.
The king entered within the subburbes of Saint
Iaques, about 8. of the clocke in the morning: and beeing aduertised that the Duke de Maine was come foorth of Picardie, and with all his forces hadde entered into Parris, made a proofe to winne the other part of the subburbes, which hee onely did to drawe his foes to the fight. Hauing then stayed foure long houres in battell, and that none of the leaguers would issue foorth: hee contented himselfe that he had giuen knowledge to the Parisians, that at the least, meanes failed him not to chastise them, but his desire was, to winne them by gentlenesse to the acknowledgement of their faults.
Therefore without more adoo, the king departed thence, and lodged about sixe or seuen myles off, at a place called Linats, which is a Town aboue Montleheri, where his grace stayed one whole day, to see if his enemies had any desire to cometo fight. But in stead thereof, the leaguers did the woorst they could to the poore Parisians, robbing and murthering many Housholders, whom they accused to take part with the king, which they did without pittying either sexe or age.
They massacred and drowned at that time, a great number of men and women, whom (as I said) they accused to fauour the kings forces, hauing no colour at all of any such thing.
The king tooke within eight daies after, both the Cittie and Castle of Estampes, where hee receiued a supplication in writing from the Queene Dowager, wherin shee desired iustice for the cruell murther committed on the person of the deceased king.

The which petition his Maiestie sent to the Parliament at
Tours, enioyning them to cause processe to be drawne against the offenders, to the end, that in his owne presence, they might soone after receiue iudgement. Moreouer, the King added, that for his part, notwithstanding the iust sute prosecuted by the said Queene, he would not faile to do the best that lay in him: whereupon, he vowed again in the presence of all the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, which were about his royall person, to imploy his whole power and strength, vntill he had inflicted that iust vengeance which God had ordained him to take.
The Nobilitie also renewed their promise and protestations, neuer to leaue off armes, till they had reuenged the vilde death of the deceased King. After this, on the tenth of Nouember, the King tooke his way to Beausse: and on the morrow, hee came to
Ianuille: from thence arriuing at Chasteaudun, he caused
Vendosme to bee summoned, and to open the gates vnto him: which is a Citie of his owne patrimony. There was in that Towne one Benchard, which held it against the king, hauing therein the command of twelue hundred men, Citizens and strangers: and when they had chosen the fittest places for battery, in the morning by breake of day, the artillerie began to play vpon them. The impatient souldiers did no sooner spie a breache in the wall of foure foote wide, but presentlie they ran and entred it, so that in lesse then halfe an houre, they were maisters of the Castle (into the which they made their first entrie) and of the Cittie, which was greatlie spoyled. Then was Benchard and a seditious Fryer take and put to death, who had beene the cheefe of this rebellion.
Sedictous persons put to death.The morrow after the taking in of this Towne, the King caused all the souldiers and men of warre to be sent from thence, appointing that the inhabitaunts should there againe possesse theyr owne houses, without any further raunsome. Moreouer hee permitted that all their Cleargie men should bee placed in their former charges and benefices, wherein afterward they liued more peaceablie (without comparison) then they did before vnder the League.
This example of iustice and mercie, saued the liues of more then a thousand men: For the people of foure or fiue small Villages which stood there round about, who hadde protested to loose their liues in defence of the holy Vnion, hereuppon became more wise, and humblie submitted themselues (in lesse then foure or fiue dayes) to the Kings good and mercifull hands.
The Towne and Castle of Lauardin did first begin in those parts to shewe themselues obedient: whereupon it followed, that the Townes of Montoir, Montrichard, and the Castle of Loyer did the like: who willinglie opened their gates to the Marshall de Biron.
The Kings entrance into Tours.The King approached neare vnto Tours, entered it the 21. of the same moneth: and on the morrow, he was ioyfully receiued by the Citizens and the whole Court of Parliament, with all the honour and royaltie that could be imagined. The same day the Ambassador of Venice had Audience, who hauing presented his letters, he made in the name of the whole estate of
Venice, an Oration of ioy and gladnesse, for the happie comming of this King to the Crowne of France: with offer of their seruice and friendship to the King and Crowne of France.

The King departed from Tours the fiue and twentieth of the same moneth,The siege and yeelding vp of Mans and on the seuen and twentieth he came to a certain place neare to the towne of Mans, which was besieged and battered the second day of December.
The Earle of Brissac, which was come as farre as
Bernard, with two Regiments, for to succour the besieged Towne of
Mans, beeing astonished at the noyse of the great Ordenance which played vppon the Towne, retired with his troupes twelue myles backward. And hauing taken fortie horse, and certaine baggage belonging to the kings Kutters, whom they met vnawares, hee went to publish at Parris what a great victorie hee had obtained. Meane while, a great man of the league called Bois-daufin, who had in Mans vnder his commaund, an hundreth Gentlemen, and twentie Ensignes of footemen: requested parley, instead of battell, and so made himselfe readie to the assault: but in fewe houres hee yeelded the place. Albeit that within fewe daies before, both hee and his, made as though they would rather die in fight at once, then they would giue enterance to the king. This being done, it was a straunge thing to consider what expences they had put the poore people vnto, of whom they hadde receiued aboue fiftie thousand Crownes, for the fortifying of the Towne and Subburbes, in which Subburbes they had burned more houses, then came to an hundreth thousand thousand crownes, hauing also spoyled the countrie six times more: to reco^pence all which wrongs, they indured three vollies of cannon shot, and so yeelded the Towne.
The spoyle whereof was hoped for by the kings souldiers, which by the wisedome and prudence of his Maiestie was spared and pardoned to the Inhabitants. The rest of this moneth was spent in taking and compounding with many Citties, Townes, and Castles: namely, Sable, Laual, Chasteau-gontier, Beaumont, Toutesvoyes, and Alencon, chasing the leaguers out of the Prouinces of Vendosmots, Touraine, Aniou, and of Maine: where the Inhabitants perceiued (after they had submitted themselues to the king) namely those which had confederated with the leaguers, that those whome they had before esteemed their best friends, were indeed their woorst enemies. For after they had them once vnder their power, and if there were but speech of the comming of an armie, presently the best shift they could make for the poore people, was to cause their Townes, Villages, and possessions, to bee burned and spoyled, from that place round about: causing the Cittizens to worke and labour night and day, to make rampiers and intrenchments to defend them from their foes. Moreouer at the sight of the cannon, or the first shotte comming from it, they fell to agreement for themselues, that they might depart with their liues and goods, leauing no other markes of their protection, then the Towne halfe burnt to ashes, the most part of their wiues and daughters deflowred, and the neckes of the poore Inhabitants to the halter. The Duke de Maine toward the later end of the yeare, sound meanes to make himselfe Maister of Pontoise, onely through the friendship of many of the Inhabitants that held vpon it side. About which time the king met with the Earle of Brissac, beeing within the Cittie of Falaise, which be inforced to yeeld, where he tooke the Earle prisoner, at what time the leaguers being then neare ynough, would not once come to his succour.

A fewe weekes before the leaguers Parliament beeing begun at
Roane, they continued their enuie against the king their soueraigne Lord, beeing not ashamed to publish a most vile Edict, wherin they declared guiltie of treason, enemies to God, to the Estate and Crown of France, those that opposed the^selues against the league, surnamed the holy vnion: pronouncing them and their successors disgraded, of all priuiledges of Nobilitie: their estates voyde for euer, and vnwoorthie to possesse any office, benefit or dignitie, within the kingdome: confiscating also, all their lands and goods, notwithstanding this Edict did not any whit impaire the good affection of the kings seruants, not much aduanced the affaires of the league.
 The chiefe of the league beeing astonished in their hearts, to see the kings prosperitie, set neuerthelesse a very good face full of spite against him, trusting very much on their intelligences, both within and without the Realme.
Through euery Cittie which they held, they set seditious Preachers to seduce the people, during the whole feast of Christmasse, thereby to inflame their hearts against the king. On the other side, they caused an infinit number of libels to bee imprinted and throwne about, whereby they entertained those that had least iudgement, with a certaine hope that they might bee able long to vpholde themselues in this bottomlesse pitte of confusion.
The Leaguers deuices to maintaine themselues.The people of Parris, and of other Citties pertaining to the leaguers, were so bewitched with these deuices, that they thoght no maner of taxes or imposts too much, induring patiently the outrages of soldiers, and a thousand other calamities, to maintaine them in their vniust warres against their soueraigne: yet notwithstanding their powers waxed euery day more weaker then other, beeing nothing able to hinder the kings exployts. Therefore the Duke de Maine, verie earnestly solicited the King of Spaine to send some speedie succours, otherwise the league should bee constrained perforce to make composition with their enemies. In the meane space, the king chased the leaguers by sieges and assaults (in the month of Ianuary) quite out of base Normandie.
The parliament at Roane cried for warre, to whom the Duke de Maine soone after sent an answere, that hee would giue order for their affaires, vsing great threatnings against his soueraigne Lord and Maister. The king contrariwise hauing recouered the Cittie of
Honleur, which is a port of the sea, came to raise the Duker siege, which fifteen daies before, he held before the Cittie and sort of
Meulan, distant from the saide Towne of Honfleu more then thirtie myles.
The king presenting himselfe, offered occasion of sight, which the Duke seemed to accept, hauing at that time twise as many forces as the king. Notwithstanding, supposing hee had not aduantage ynough, he thought it best to take vp first the succour of fifteene hundreth lances, and about fiue hundreth hurguebuziers, which the Duke of Parma had sent vnto him.
Meane space, the king besieged Dreux, where hee was aduertised that the Duke had ioyned with the forces of the lowe Countries, conducted by the Earle d'Egmont, wherevpon hee offered battell. Those things were done in Ianuarie and Februarie.

Preparation to battell.In the beginning of March, the Duke with all his troupes came toward the riuer of
Seine, thereby to passe ouer the bridge of Mante, which is about eight or nine myles from Dreux. Whereof the king beeing aduertised, prouided for his affaires, and the twelfth of the same moneth, hee set himselfe in the way to go against his enemies.
And on the morrow hauing set his battell in order, he made in the presence of all his armie, a most earnest prayer vnto God, wher each one according to his conscience, framed his thoughts to the like purpose, according to the ceremonies both of the one and the other religion.The Kings Armie. On the thirteenth day, the king mustered all his troupes, vppon a very faire and large plaine neare vnto the Towne of Yury, where hee had about two thousand and fiue hundreth horse, among whom were two thousand Gentlemen brauely armed, and very wel appointed for the battel: he had there foure Regiments of French footemen, the regiments of the Gardes, of Brigneux, of Vignolles, and S. Iran: moreouer, foure or fiue regiments of Switzers, with certaine Ensignes of Grisons.
The Leaguers armie.The armie of the leaguers consisted of foure thousand horse, and twelue thousand footemen, Yury is a great village, hauing a bridge on the riuer of
Vrte, ouer the which the leaguers passed very speedily, supposing that the royall armie had beene farre from that place, but in short space the one lighted on the other, by which meanes there was that day certaine skirmiges, where the leaguers had euer the worst. Many of the leaguers were there taken prisoners, who confessed and gaue vs to vnderstand, that their comming was rather to follow on their way alreadie begunne, then to make triall of battell.
Now, for so much as the day was spent, both the armies repaired to their lodgings. By the breake of day following, which was the fourteenth of March, the king by aduise of his Councell, determined how to order his battell.
The battell of Yurie, and the kings notable exploicts.And after they had co^mended all their successe vnto God, he broke his fast: and so about nine of the clocke in the foorenoone, they were in the field readie to giue battell: and the king beeing at the head of his squadron, (of which the first ranckes were composed of Princes, Earles, Knights, and principall Gentlemen of the noblest families of
France) beganne to make his prayers vnto God, with an exhortation, that all the other squadrons should do the like.
Then passing along from the head of his armie, hee encouraged his people to the fight. And returning to his place, without further delay he caused the great artillerie to bee shot off, which gaue nine daungerous vollies, to the great hurt of the leaguers. Who after three or foure other vollies giuen on both sides, aduanced forward fiue or six hundreth light horsemen, to giue charge against the Marshal d'Aumont, but he without stay, ran vpon them, and pearced the^ in such sort, that he might soone see their heeles. In the mean space, while they were thus busie, the squadron of the Rutters which were on their right hand, in comming toward the artillerie, lighted vpon the Kings light horsmen, aduancing the^selues against the^ very manfully, and being as valiantly receiued, at last they were constrained to retire, without performing any thing woorthie of memorie. The whilest, another squadron of launciers of the low Countries, would haue giuen a fresh charge to these light horsemen.

But the Barron of Biron aduancing himselfe forward, hauing no meane to meete the Vantgard, set presently vpon the reareward: and in breaking their array, was hurt in two places. The Duke de Montpensier ranne before the rest, and gaue them a most braue charge, in the which, hee himselfe was once vnhorst, but beeing againe mounted, hee behaued himselfe in such valourous sort, that he became Maister of the place. The selfe-same the Duke de Maines great squadron consisting of eighteene hundreth horse, among whom were the Duke of Nemours, and the knight of Aumale, with others of the Captains of the league: aduanced themselues to the battel, causing foure hundreth Carbines to march vpon their left wing, who made a sallie of small shot, some fiue and twentie paces from the kings squadron. This sallie beeing ended, the great squadron of the leaguers, came on the forefront of the kings, where they sawe his Highnesse before his company, fiue long paces off, who furiously rushed among the leaguers, which could not by any meanes with all their huge forrest of launciers, keepe backe the kings squadron. But his Maiestie did in such warre like sorts assayle them, that this great squadron was at last scattered, hauing beene fighting among the thickest of them, a good quarter of an houre. In the end, this huge heape of enemies, who had thus the foundation of their strength abated, were at last brought to hand-strokes, who beginning to shrinke, in the turning of a hand men might see their backes, which before shewed such furious faces, who tooke their flight by straunge passges.
This ioyfull victorie was at first intermixt with much sorrow in the royall armie, when they saw not the king returne: but within a while after, they spied him comming, all stained with the blood of his enemies, not hauing shed one drop of his owne, whom they described onely by the great plume of white feathers which hee bore in his creast, and that which his Palfraye had on his head. There was not so much sorrow among the leaguers for their losse, but there was as much ioy recouered on the kings partie: hauing been so happily returned from such an intermixture of blood and death.
But as hee came from the chase of his enemies, with twelue or fifteen of his followers, hee chancst to meete betwixt two companies of the enemies Switzers, three cornets of Wallons, accompanied with other that had ioyned with them, whom his Maiestie charged with such high courager that hee wonne their colours, they which carried them lying dead in the place, with many other of their companions. The king then beeing arriued at the place from whence he parted, all the armie gaue humble thanks to the Lord for his safetie, crying with one voyce: God saue the king.
His Maiestie hauing set in order certaine of his troupes, and seeing his enemies flying before him, hee left the field surcharged with their dead: so that there remained none aliue, sauing the Switzers, who beeing forsaken by their horsemen, did notwithstanding stay without mouing: and althogh the king might well haue ouerrun them, yet hee receiued them to mercie: who hauing cast down their weapons, were discharged and sent into their own countries. The Frenchmen also which were mingled among them, had their liues saued.

This beeing done, the king accompanied with his horsemen and the troups of Picardie, followed the league, which tooke their flight two waies. In the one was the Duke of Nemours, Bassompierre, the Vicount of Tauannes, Rosne and others, which tooke their way to
Chartres. In the other, the Duke de Maine with his most trustiest Captaines drew toward Yury, to passe ouer the riuer. The Leaguers artillerie and all their baggage were left in the campe, and in the high-waies neare adioyning. The time which the king spent in receiuing and sending away of the Switzers, gaue leisure vnto them that fledde, to put themselues vnder couert: in such sort, that comming vnto
Yuri, they perceiued that the Duke de Maine was alreadie entered, who neuer thinking on any new charge, broke vp the bridge before his owne people were all come, which was the cause of the death of a great number of his armie, especially of the Rutters, of whom a great sort were drowned. The others, to hinder those that followed them, stopt vp the streetes of
Yuri with dead and wounded horses, which stood in stead of chaines or inclosers, whereof followed a new losse: for all those that sought to passe the deepe streame, perished for the most part. The king was counselled to passe the riuer at the sord of Anet, and although it were an houre and an halfe losse of his way, yet hee ouertooke a great number of those that fledde, which for their liues rested at his discretion Those that thought to escape, putting themselues into the woods, fell into the Pesants hands, which handled them in cruell sort. This pursuit continued euen to the Towne of Mant, where neither the Duke de Maine, nor any of his, turned once their face to see who pursued them. But if the Mantois had continued in their first opinion, to keepe the gates shut, all those that fled had beene vtterly ouerthrowne. But beeing in the end ouercome by the D. de Maines earnest intreaties, they gaue them leaue to enter the Towne, vpon condition that those of his side, should passe by tenne and tenne in the night beyond the bridge, which indeed wrought their safetie. The king seeing his enemies ouercome both with shame and losse, rested himself neare vnto Mant, the which soone after the Leaguers were departed thence, yeelded themselues to the king, as also the Towne of
Vernon and other Cittie. To bee brief, in this battel of
Yuri, al the footmen of the leaguers were ouerthrown.
Of the horsemen there were about fifteen hundreth slaine and drowned: and about foure hundreth taken prisoners. Among the dead there was knowne to be slaine, the Earle of Egmont, who was Colonell of the troupes sent by the Duke of Parma: one of the Dukes of
Brunswic, Chastegneray, beside those whose names could not bee found. VVee will make no mention heere of those prisoners which afterward abused the kings benignitie and gracious fauours, who might iustly haue put them all to death. Who after their releasment tooke part against him.
More then twentie Cornets of horsemen was at that time wonne by the King: among the which, was the white Cornet, the chiefe standard belonging to the Spanish Generall, and to the Flemmings, the Cornets of the Rutters, and more then threescore ensignes of footemen, beside the foure and twentie Ensignes of the Switzers, which were yeelded presently after the slaughter. The king lost the Lords of Clermont, d'Antragues, Captaine of his Guards, the Lord Schomberg, de Bongaulnay, de Crenay, Fesquieres, and 15. or 20. other Gentlemen, a fewe souldiers, and fewe hurt.

The Duke de Maine and other Captaines of the League, beeing frustrate of their hope, and seeing their armie thus spoyled, betooke themselues to their ordinarie shifts, which was, to feede the Parisians with lies and fables, publishing many bookes, wherein it was shewen, that at the first assault giuen at Dreux, the Inhabitants had slaine more then fiue hundreth men of the kings armie, and greeuously hurt a great number more, at what time also the Marshal of
Biron was slaine: and how in an other incounter near vnto
Poissy, the league had gotten a great victorie. In which battell they had a long fight, and almost equall losse. And that if the king were not alreadie dead, hee was very neare vnto it.
The people beeing not satified with such false quoyne, and hearing euery day more then other, contrarie reports, by certaine men that had escaped from the said bloodie fight on the leaguers side, murmured greatly thereat, as people that desired peace. The seditious preachers stopt the report of the Leaguers losse, by all the meanes they might. And whilest the Duke de Maine and others, (after certaine meetings at Saint Dennis, because that the pauement of Paris was too hot for them) tooke his way toward the Duke of Parma, to obtaine succour from him.
The Parliament of Roane, that according to their olde custome, did bend themselues against their king and gracious soueraigne, did execute and put to death the seuenth of Aprill, certaine prisoners which were seruants to the king. And three daies after, declared by an Edict, all those to bee traitors which were of the king of
Nauarres campe (as they called him) and that would not linke themselues to king Charles the tenth (vnderstanding by that name the Cardinall of Bourbon) to ioyne themselues to the league, and beare weapons in the Duke de Maines armie, vsing many threatnings in written papers, which they set vp at the corners of euerie lane, and afterward put them in print. And whilest the leaguers applyed these businesses, the king hoping by gentlenesse to win the Parisians to obedience, continued stil at Mant, without any further hot following his victorie. But the trumpets of sedition imputing this mildnesse to the kings want of courage, perswaded with ye people, that he whom they called their sworn and irreconcileably enemie, shuld be shortly brought to such a hard exegent, that he would bee glad either to graunt them their owne request, or else that they should see him vtterly ouerthrowne. Breefly, their great bragges and insolencies, constrained the King to draw toward Paris in this month of Aprill. In fewe daies after, Corbeil vpon Seine was yeelded vnto him, the towne of Lagni vpon Marne, and Melun. Then hee assailed Sens in Bourgongne, where hee did nothing, onely through their fault, of whom he thought to haue had better seruice. The Parisians had such confidence in the promises of the leaguers, that they assured themselves, the king was not able to hold out many weekes against their forces, insomuch that they respected not the strengthening of their Cittie, to repell the batterie of any foe, or the strength of any siege. In time of peace, that great and goodly Cittie was daily maintained and serued with fresh prouision, as well one weeke as an other, by the infinite commodities that was brought thervnto both far and neare, by the help of the riuers of Seine, Marne, and Oise. Diuers particular persons, wisely foreseeing a storme, made prouision before hand for their families.
But the number of the Inhabitants in that little world was so mightie great, that for one prudent housekeeper, there was found an hundreth that neuer thought to prouide against the time to come, or sought to shun a mischiefe before it fell vppon their pates: whereof followed the strange and wofull desolations, which I will briefly present heere vnto you.
The fiue and twentieth day of Aprill, the king returning toward
Paris, tooke and seized vpon the bridge Charenton, and diuers other places thereabout, for the commoditie of this armie, which consisted of twelue thousand foote, or thereabout, and three thousand horses. The Parisians were six times as many, in respect of the number of those that carried armes, who were vnder the commaund of the Duke of
Nemours, in the absence of the Lieftenant generall his brother, beeing assisted by the Cheualier d'Aumale, and certaine other Captaines of the league. In the beginning of this siege, the affaires were horribly tossed. They had in the Cittie certaine Preachers,The siege of Parris. and among many more, were these following: Boucher, Pilletier, Guincestre, Feuerdant, Guarin, Christin, little Fueillant, and others in diuers Churches, which mooued the people to indure all the miseries that might bee imagined, rather then to submit themselues to an hereticall Prince (as they called him.) These Preachers beeing poysoned with Spanish golde, and maintained by the chiefe Ladies of the league, did so inuenome the people with subtill perswasions against their lawfull king and soueraigne Lord, that they resolued to perish miserably in the siege: propounding on the other side, questions to the facultie of Sorbonne: that is to say, if it come so to passe, that the Cardinall of Bourbon should die being prisoner, whom they called king Charles the tenth: whether then they might receiue Henry of Bourbon for their king, or no: though hee would reconcile himselfe to the Pope.
Also whether they that should seeke to make peace with the said Henry, or that permitted the same, might not giue cause to bee held and suspected, or counted a fauourer of heresies, if it were according to the law of God, if they might faile therein, without mortall sinne and paine of damnation. Contrariwise, if it were a thing meritorious, to oppose themselues by all means against the said
Henry: and in case they should resist him vnto death, if it might be called martyrdome. The seuenth of May, in the third generall Congregation, made for the decission of these articles in the great hal of the Colledge of Sorbonne, all the Doctors of that facultie in generall, and each one in particular, which were by oath called to this Councell, concluded and resolued with one accord, vpon this that followeth.
It is by the right of Ecclesiasticall lawes, forbidden and prohibited, that Catholicques should receiue an hereticque for their king, or a fauourer of heresie, and a notorious enemie of the Church: and more straightly forbidden to receiue one that was fallen away, and excommunicated from the holy mother Church. That if it came to passe, that any one defamed with these faults, had obtained by exterior iudgement, absolution of these crimes, that hee rested notwithstanding, in an euident daunger of dissimulation and perfidiousnesse, and the vtter ruine and subuersion of the Catholicque religion: and the same partie ought neuerthelesse to be excluded and banished the realme, by right of the same law.
And whosoeuer should bring againe such a person into the realme, and either ayde or fauour, or otherwise permit that hee should come againe, If he might hinder it, and beeing bound to do it according to his charge, that person should doo open iniurie to the sacred cannon of the lawes, and therevpon hee might bee iustly suspected of heresie, and reputed a pernicious person both to the religion and Romaine Church: and for this cause they might and ought to proceed against him, without respect either of degree or preheminence. And for as much as Henry of Bourbon is an hereticque, and a fauorour of heresie, a notorious enemie to the Church, fallen away from the Romaine faith, namely exco^municate by our holy father, and that there would be euident danger of dessimulation and parfidiousnesse, and ruine of the Catholicque religion. If hee should obtaine outwardly his absolution, the Frenchmen are in conscience bound to hinder him to the vttermost of their power, from comming to the gouernment of that most christian Realm, and not to make any condition of peace with him, notwithstanding his foresaide absolution. Although euery other lawfull successour of the Crowne, should surrender vp his right, and all those that fauour him, doo offer iniurie to the holy cannons, are suspected of heresie, pernicious to the Church, and as such, ought to bee diligently reprehended and punished. And like as they which giue ayde, or shew fauour in any manner whatsoeuer to the said Henry, pretending title to the Realme, are disturbers of religion, and dwell continually in deadly sinne, so likewise those that with all their might doo oppose themselues against him, mooued therevnto by a religious zeale, doth vndoubtedly merite great praise both of God and men. And as wee may rightly iudge of those, which by their false opinions established the kingdome of Sathan, to haue eternall paine prepared for them in hell: so may it bee saide with reason, that those here mentioned, shall bee rewarded in heauen, with eternall glorie, that persist euen vnto death against him: and as defendors of the faith, shal they beare in their hands palmes of martyrdome.
The Sorbonists cast oyle into the fire of sedition, the chiefe of the leaguers being aiders thereunto.Now, although before this diuision, the Parisians were of full opinion to keepe the gates shut against the King, yet afterward they became far more obstinate: and at the beginning assayed by often issuing foorth, to indomage the kings troupes, who contented themselues, onely to repulse them, hoping that the extream want of victuals, which they perceiued to grow euery day greater then other, would at length constraine them to repent their follie.
But oner and aboue the deceits before mentioned, they were helde in hand with other subtilties, for the chiefe of the leaguers hauing purposely set spies in euerie place, to marke the countenance and speeches of such as they held in suspition: that is to say, such persons as longed after peace, shewing by their words that the flower deluce, and the true Princes of France, were not expelled out of their hearts.
So soone then as any one durst but speake of peace, accord, or communication of agreement, without forme or figure of law, they were presently killed in the place, or drawne foorth, and then throwne into the riuer: there were aboue twentie seuerall persons thus vsed, onely for saying, that it were good and necessarie to make peace with the enemie.
On the other side, the Duke de Maine, being in the Duke of Parmas Court, writ diuers letters to the borderers of
Picardie, that shortly they should see a puissant armie sent for the deliuerance of Paris. Afterward the Duke de Nemours beeing the Popes Legat, the Ambassadour of Spaine, the Bishoppe of Vaine remedies sought by the Popish C^^^rgie.Paris, the Archbishop of Lyons, the Bishop of Plaisance, those of Renes, Senlis, and others, Panigarole, the Bishop d'Aost, Bellermin, and
Tycens, lesuites, with many more of the Romaine Clargie, caused solemne processions to be made, double fastings, brotherhoods, visi^ations of Temples, vowes and supplications, and all to entertaine and hold the people in a vaine hope of deliuerance.
Likewise many Doctors, Priests, Curates, and Friers, girt weapons to their sides, and made shews abroad with many fond ceremonies, which caused the people both to laugh and weepe. They trauelled without ceasing, to the walles, trenches and rampiers of the Towne. The Iesuites and other Monkes, being well stored with munition of victuals in their Colledges and Couents, kept watch according to their turne. The Ladies of
Nemours, of Maine, of Guise, of
Montpensier, and others, solicited the people on their side, with strong perswasions, rather to perish by the famine, then to speake or seek for agreement with the king. But the famine grewe great: for the Leaguers Captains hauing imbarqued their people and passengers without bisket, they had no meanes for the space of three or foure months, but to stay for the Spanish succours, to bee assistant to the Parisians. All their prouision of wheat and other graine, which was broght in for publicke reliefe, was spent and consumed in the first three weekes of the siege.Famin made war against the Parisians. Those which had any reuertion left in their houses, did most closely lay it vp in secret places from being found.
The others, which put their confidence in the speeches of the chiefe Leaguers and seditious Preachers, soone perished, or indured infinite sorrowes.
The king kept them closed in on euery side, beeing Maister of Mant, Poissy, Corbeil, Melun, and Montereau, holding the riuer of Sein by that meanes shut vp both aboue and below.
Laigni and the fort of Gournay, kept also the riuer of
Marn stop from them. Cempiegne, Creil, Beaumont, and other of the kings holds, stopt the passage of ye riuer of
Oise. So that al prouision yt shuld come by water to ye Parisians, was hereby preuented: being also depriued of the plain of the Isle of France, by the taking in of S. Dennis. Now vpon intelligence giuen to the Duke de Maine, that the extreame want of victualles would constraine Parris verie shortly to yeelde vnto the king, answered, that the taking thereof should bee very preiudiciall vnto him, who would scatter his armie by that conquest, in such sort, that soone after, the league should make a good match thereof.
But the kings minde or intent was not to possesse
Parris in such sort as his enemies imagined. For although the same were in a manner vnpossible, by reason of the smal number of his people, yet would he not see and behold, much lesse procure the ruine of his chiefe and capitall Cittie: although that many therein, especially the chiefest, deserued for their offences most greeuous punishment. Hee tooke much pittie on the great number of people misled by euill counsell, and hoped that their afflictions would giue them warning, that if the Dukes of
Maine and of Parma comming to their succors, would hazard themselues to a battell, their discomfiture would constraine the besieged to acknowledge it.
But the miserie of the Parisians was so great, that some of them were inforest to yeelde, the other would rather indure an hundreth deathes by famine. So that within twelue or fifteene weekes, there was an extreame desolation among them. They eate vp both their mooueables and their mony. The souldiers had license to bee so bold, that they broke vp their walles, and defiled the chastitie of many families. The principal men of the League rose vp, and tooke to themselues the relicques of their Churches. The anucient Iuels and the Crownes of the kings of
France, were put in the font. Those householders which were rich, were subtilly spoyled, the subburbes ruined, the Cittie become full of sorrow and need: the rents of the chamber of the Cittie lay dead: the lands all about vntilled and desolate. An hundreth thousand persons died with hunger, with nakednesse, with pouertie, in the streetes, and in the Hospitals, without all mercie or reliefe, in the space of three moneths.
The Vniuersitie was conuerted to a desart place, wherevnto all the Pesants resorted for lodging, and the Cloisters of the Colledges were conuerted into stables for beasts. VVithin the great hall of the Pallace, there was none found but Leaguers and forgers of newes. In the streetes grasse did growe plenteously, and the shoppes for the most part were shut in continually. In stead of Chariots and Coches, appeared on the one side certaine troupes of men of warre, who were more imployed to fight with hunger, then with any other enemie: on the other side, an horrible desolation. The besieged could by no meanes come by victuall, but through the mercie of the Kings Garrisons, which hee had set within Saint
Dennis, in the Fort of Gourney, at Cheureuse, and at Corbel.
The most part of the furie of this famine, fell vpon the third estate: as for the Cleargie, who for the most part were well prouided, they preached nothing but patience. And the Prelates before mentioned, vttered still vilde things against the king and his followers, and in all their sermons assured the poore famished people, that the Spanish succours would come very speedily. On the one side, those whom they called the sixteene: on the other, the, fortie, with the factious sort that wore long gownes, wrought in the wheel.
The Parliament, which continued as it were slaues, both to the Spaniard and to the Guise, published an Edict the fifteenth day of Iune, wherin it was prohibited vnto all, of what estate, quallitie, dignitie, and condition so euer they were, not to speake of any composition with Henry of Bourbon, on paine of death, but thereby were inioyned to oppose themselues against him, by all the meanes they might, and not to spare any practise whatsoeuer: ye^; though it were to the very spilling of their heart bloods. Moreouer this court ordained, that all the Inhabitants of the Towne should bee obedient to the Duke of Nemours, Gouernour of the Ile of France, in all things which they should bee commaunded to do on his behalfe, and that this Edict should bee read and published throughout all the streets and lanes of Parris, to the end, that more should pretend cause of ignorance.
But the people, who could not liue by paper, nor the windie promises of the Duke de Maine and his Preachers, after they had eaten dogges and cats, horses, asses, mules, hearbes, rootes, and all that they could imagine to get in their necessitie, came in a shole to the Pallace, requiring peace of the councell there assembled, where they made among them a certaine tumult: but the Captaines who were before aduertised of their comming, at last appeased The Parifia^s desire peace and cannot obtaine it.them, the people beeing content, by the meanes of certaine small comforts, for the space of nine or tenne daies: but in the end there assembled to the same place, a greater troupe of people then before, euery one prouided with weapons, boldly demaunding that they might either haue peace or bread. Then a certaine Captaine of Parris named le Glois, ranne foorth vnto them, to send them away with faire words: but it is to bee remembred, that famished bellies haue no eares. VVherevpon they required him in the field with his own Oration, where hee was so beaten, that within a small time after, hee departed the world.
The Cheualier d'Aumalle beeing followed by his adherents, went among the multitude, causing all the gates of the Pallace to bee shut, and imprisoned a great number of them, of whome there were some afterward hanged. The chiefe of the leaguers perceiuing that in the end, the discontented multitude would worke their confusion, if in time they did not preuent them:The chiefe of the league seeketh to de ceiue both the king and the people. assembled themselues togither with the principall of their Towne, and after many writings, notwithstanding the diuision of the Sorbonnists, and the act made in the Leaguers Parliament, were resolued that the Bishoppe of Parris, and the Archbishop of Lyon, should go to seeke out the king, to conferre vpon means of pacification. This was done in the beginning of August: but before they departed, they would haue leaue of the Legate, to the end they might not be excommunicated by the Pope. Before they had obtained it, the Legat made a consultation with Panigarde, Bellermin, and Terius, Rector to the Iesuites, comprised in these articles: that is to say: If the Parisians did runne into excommunication, being constrained by famine to yeelde themselues to an hereticall Prince. If the Deputies going to such a Prince to seeke his conuersion, or to better the condition of the Catholicque Church, were comprised in the excommunication of the bull of Pope
Sixtus the fift. The Doctors answered to these articles, no.
Deputies of the leaguers sent to the King, and his aunswere.Then went the Deputies to seeke the king at Saint
Anthonies in the field, who hauing heard the Bishops Oration, tending to a generall peace, or perticular to Parris, if the Duke
de Maine would not seeke for a general, made this answere (after he had shewen how their Councel had infolded them in contraduction, asking peace for him which would not acknowledge him, saue onely for King of
Nauarre) that it was his will and desire, to haue peace, for the comfort of his people, but not according to that which the Deputies held for expedient: declaring that he loued the Cittie of Paris, as his eldest daughter: and that hee would doo more good for her, then shee required at his hands, prouided that she would seeke his fauor, and not the Duke de Maines, or the King of Spaines. That the Deputies proceeded very ill, and contrarie to the dutie of their Ecclesiasticall charges, in suffering the Parisians to die so miserably, while they sought vnto the Duke de Maine for a generall peace: sith vppon that voyage, though perhaps it would not bee long, it might the while cost the liues of twentie thousand persons, dying with meere hunger. Then did hee dechipher with a maruellous good grace, the ambitious practises of the king of Spaine and his people. The most wicked and horrible disloyaltie of the chiefe of the league, discouering the vanitities of their badde purpose: hee drew his discourse into diuers articles to the Bishoppe of Parris, the Archbishop of Lyons, who in their excuses, accused themselues more and more, before a most noble companie of Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of France, who were attending round about the King. Moreouer hee shewed that the report of the Spanish succoors for Parris, made him nothing dismaid: and caused them clearely to see wherevnto the Spanish forces tended: and that it was not for nothing that the Prince of Parma tooke his way into
France: staying but till hee might bring his purposes about,
Parris and the kingdome beeing morsels too big for king
Philips mouth, the which hee told vnto them in a short and pithie speech, discouering in diuers sorts, the blindnesse of the Spaniards in their attempt for France. He allowed them eight daies to thinke vppon the yeelding vp of Paris, and the articles of peace for the whole kingdome: adding, that his dutie constrained him in the end, to do iustice vppon those that were chiefe of the mutinies: exhorting the Deputies to make a faithfull report of that which hee had aunswered. The Bishop of Parris had before alleaged in his Oration, the constancie of the people of Sancerre, dispraising therein the victorie gotten by those of Gaunt, to extoll the Parisians. But the king auswered that such allegations were impertinent: for those of
Sancerre were resolued to indure the extremities of their siege, because their enemies would haue depriued them without mercie, both of their goods, liberties, religion, and their liues. But contrariwise (said hee) I will surrender to the Parisians, the life which Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador doth at this present take from them, by their sore famine. As for the religion, all these Princes and Catholicque Lords shall witnesse vnto you, how I vse it: nor wil I constraine them against their conscience, were it neuer so litle, either in the exercise of religion, or otherwise. Concerning goods and liberties, I giue them to my subiects. So that the comparison with those of Gaunt is not good. The Parisians haue well shewen what hearts they haue, hauing suffered me to possesse their subburbs. I haue fiue thousand Gentlemen, that neuer feared those of Gaunt,The duke de Maines wicked proceedings. beside, I haue God for mee, and the iustice of my cause.
After certaine other discourses, witnessing the kings good conscience, and the litle feare he had of the leaguers forces, the Deputies tooke their way toward the Duke de Maine, who sent them backe againe to his Maiestie, with declaration, that he desired nothing more then peace. At the same time hee sent letters to those of Parris, by one of his owne Secretaries, euen at the said Deputies heeles, aduertising his partakers, not to bee discouraged for all the answere which he sent to the king: and that hee would sooner die then make peace with him. These letters beeing intercepted, they were a great reproach to the Duke, by reason of his vnconstancie: but he made no other excuse, but onely that they were surprised.
As for the king, hee indured both before and after that which the Parisians vttered out of their rebellious mouthes, that they had brought victuals for the Duke of Nemours and others, which made them render him euill for good, nor made hee any strong warre against his chiefe Cittie, hauing an intent to preserue it if he could.
But hauing vnderstood that the Duke de Maine at his returne from Bruxelles, accompanied with Balagni and
Sainpol, drewe toward Parris with certaine troupes. The king departed from his armie with a small troupe of horsemen, without any carriages, seuenteene leagues outright, to incounter with his foes, and came but one houre too late to haue met with them: The king goeth to meete his enemies.who hearing of his comming, were speedily constrained to cast themselues into the towne of Laon. Then the D. with his troupes made such haste, that at last they came as farre as Meaux, where hee reported that hee would fight with the king: which occasioned him to repaire to his armie with a small troupe of horsemen onely, whom hee pursued as farre as Meaux. But hee found the Duke inclosed betwixt two riuers, where hee stayed for the Prince of Parma, at whose arriuall the battell was the second time published, aduancing themselues to the Towne of Claye, and the Castle of Fresnes, about sixe leagues from Parris, where they lodged about the ende of the moneth of August.
The king supposing hee should then haue battell with them, after hee had recommended himselfe vnto God, according to his custome in such affaires, departed from Parris on the VVednesday, the nine and twentieth of that moneth, assigning the Rende-vous to all his armie, for the next morrow in the plaine of Bondi, which is at the end of the forrest of Liu^i, the right way toward his enemies.
On the Friday following, hee chased their forriers from the Towne of Chelles, who beganne to marke out their lodgings, and gaue a charge to a certaine troupe of eight hundreth horsemen, whom he constrained to retire, euen till they came within their armie. On the morrowe beeing Saturday, by eleuen of the clocke, the first of September, the Kings armie were all in battell array. The Duke of Parma got vp vppon an hill to behold them, and after he had throughly noted them, hee said to the Duke
de Maine: that this was not the armie of tenne thousand, which he tolde him might bee ouerthrown so easilie: for hee sawe by estimation, more then fiue and twentie thousand, in the best manner prouided that euer hee beheld. And indeed they consisted of eighteene thousand men on foote, as well Frenchmen as straungers, and of fiue or six thousand horse, among the which, he had foure thousand Gentlemen of the chiefe houses in the Realme. Hee had also sixe Princes, two Marshals of France, and many gallant Captaines.The leaguers being not disposed to fight, intrench the^selues in a strong place. The Duke of Parma tooke then a resolution, the which saued himselfe and all his armie: which was, not to fight at al. And following this opinions, his people changed their swords and launces into pickaxes, doing no other thing all the euening long, and that Saturday night, but to intrench and fortifie themselues within a great Marsh, into the which they were all withdrawne. The daies following, they had diuers skirmiges made vppon them, but they kept still within their trenches.
And soone after, they besieged and battered with nine peeces, the Towne of Lagne vppon Marne, which was a little weake towne, and kept with two or three hundreth men, which for a space valiantly defended themselues, but in the end, they were ouerthrown by great multitude of the besiegers. This place was not passing halfe a little myle from the Marsh, and hard at the back of the Spanish armie, by meanes whereof, the chiefe of the leaguers caused a bridge of boats speedily to be made, wherewith they did as it were ioyne the place. And the eight of the same moneth by breake of day, the most of their footemen passed away by the same, causing nine peeces of Ordenance to bee shot off: the riuer beeing betweene them, the breach was made before the king could haue knowledge thereof, by reason that the winde was turned contrarie, and the blustering so great, that the sound of the cannons could not bee heard in the royall armie.
After the taking of this, the Dukes of Parma and of
Maine, seeing the weaknesse of the place, did dismantle it. And although the king to draw them vnto fight, fained as though hee would assaile Parris, and published a purpose to scale it, beeing departed from them in the euening the tenth of this moneth, with a good troupe: notwithstanding they would not stirre out of the Marsh. VVherfore the king by aduise of his Councell dismissed his armie, and fortified the Townes which hee held about Paris, chiefly those on the riuer of
Seine, sending a part of his troups into Touraine, Normandie, Champagne, and Bourgongne, and kept notwithstanding a sufficient armie to amaze his enemies.
Some haue boldly written, that the king was then very ill counselled, and in fauour of the Prince of Parma, who in fewe daies had beene inforest to fight, or to haue fled: that it was not possible for so great an armie as hee had, to continue long in a Marsh, where they should indure much harme. That Parris and the league were now in safetie. That the fault came through part of the Nobilitie, induced therevnto by certaine enemies to the religion and the kings prosperities, who was forsaken at his need. Other some also being accustomed to fish in troubled waters, would not it should bee yet cleared: and others pretended to serue the king as it seemed best vnto them, and alwaies to see one confusion rise of another.
The Duke of Parma commeth to Paris and taketh Corbeil.By meanes of which proceedings, the Dukes were incouraged to go out of the Marshes, to enter triumphantly into Paris, whereof the Duke of Parma named himselfe the deliuerer. And to make his valour appeare the greater, hee departed incontinent to besiege Corbeil, about halfe a daies iourney from thence, vpon the riuer of Seine. Captain Rigaud, commaunding ouer certaine companies of footemen, behaued himselfe so valiantly, that he slew a great number of the leaguers. As for the Duke of Parma, after the heating of his troupes, of whom many were slaine: he lost much of his reputation. For it was there wher his armie was so weakned, and during the time hee rested in that place, the king got togither his troupes, addressing them to new purposes, which brought the league into greater incumbrances then before.
The king of Spaines Agents thought to fill his good Cittie of Paris (so the Spaniard called it in his letters) with Spanish companies and VVallons. But on the one side, they had nothing to eate: and on the other, so soone as those of Guise and other Captaines of the league (moreouer the sixteen and the fortie of
Paris) sawe themselues somewhat at large, they began to giue the Duke of Parma thankes for his good will, and intreated him to go with his people to Bruxelles againe. This request or secret commaundement fell out verie well for the Duke: for on the one part, his armie in all mens sight was seene daily to waste, and himselfe did plainely behold, that hee stood in the midst of an vnconstant multitude, and that it was not good for him to put confidence in faithlesse peple. The leauing of his forces there, to glut Paris euen as Antwerp had bin, was to turne all vpside downe, and build a new and perilous matter for the Spaniards: that the king watcht to giue them a shameful ouerthrow, if they should separate themselues neuer so little.
Therefore hee determined to get him gone with all speed possible, hauing consumed a world of money, leauing the Leaguers Captaines more altered with the gold of Peru, then euer they were before.The Duke of Parma returned to Bruxels, hauing done nothing, but growne unto shame and euill report with the Leaguers. Of all his forces hee had great neede: for the king ceased not to runne vpon him, pursuing him to the verie frontiers of
Arroys, and diminishing his armie euery day more and more, to signifie vnto the Spaniards, that France could not bee ruinated or taken but through their owne follie.
Now, assoone as they were thus departed, Corbeil and other small townes which they had taken, were againe recouered by the kings troupes: the which brought the Parisians into new confusions. The D. of Parmas comming, serued to no other end but to fil their purses, and to intangle and bring all their affaires, to a remedilesse end.
In diuers parts of the kingdome, as in Brittaine, Prouence, and Languedoc, the League stirred and did many outragious and wicked acts, working desolation to the great preiudice of the kings subiects: but it little aduantaged the Leaguers, whose armies consisted of such people, that sought no other thing but disorders. Also they could neither grow nor continue, but by the confusion of others, which they raised by their forces and bad purposes, for whereas they fained that they wold haue the Spaniard to ioyne with them, it was for no other thing, but to draw into their hands his double Pistollets: in lieu whereof, they would present him a new nothing betwixt two dishes. And if hee shewed himselfe discontent, they would helpe to throwe him out of those places which hee had vsurped, as it came to passe soone after.
 In the beginning of this year, the king continued his inclosing of the Parisians, which were fallen into their wonted distresses as before. The Queen of England with certaine Lords and wealthie Merchants of her kingdome, lent the king mony for the comforting of his forces.
Dauphine gotten againe for the King.Francis de Bonne Lord of Diguireres, chased the leaguers out of the Countie of Dauphine, and became Maister of
Grenoble, which is the seate of the Parliament of the Prouince, constraining the Lord d'Arbigni, who commanded there, to depart, before the Duke of Sauoy or any other of the League could come time ynough to succour them.
In Normandie the Duke de Montpensier wonne
Honfleur, and inforced the Leaguers to forsake the field. The Vicounte of Turenne came into Almaine to leuie a band of Rutters, and hauing gathered an armie, Christian Prince of
Anhalt, was made chiefe commaunder thereof. On the other side, the new Pope beeing a partaker with Spaine,The Pope an ayder of the Leaguers. promised to the league eight thousand footemen, and fiue hundreth horse, vnder the conduct of his cousin
Francis Sfondrate, and during these enterprises, the
Cheualier d'Aumale set vpon the Towne of Saint Dennis neare
Paris, supposing hee should winne it. Hee was followed with many approoued warriours.
The Lord of Vic which commaunded in that place, shewed good proofe of his skill and courage: for although the knight and his followers were entered without losse, hee ranne vpon them, and charged them so roughly, that the knight and the most of his people lay dead vpon the ground.
The Cheualier d'Aumale slaine with all his companie.This knight was one of the principall Captaines of the league, but in his deedes so strange and desolute, that hee could no longer support himselfe: otherwise hee was very hardie and valiant.
This was cause of great greefe among the seditious, who had fewe men left, that had more mischiefe in their heads then hee. Many hath reported, that his bodie hauing beene wrapped in a searcloth, and laide in a Chappell within the great Church, rested their til they migh know what the kings pleasure was to bee done therewithall.
Rattes and Mice found about a dead man.On the morrow after, as they would haue drawne foorth the corps to imbalme it, the searecloth was found full of rattes and mice, in such number, that they had much ado to driue them away, till such time they were faine to lay vpon them with hand-strokes, and teare them out from the woundes.
The king that on his part would not bee ydle, addressed himselfe to certaine enterprises, to giue an alarme to the Parisians, that by this occasion bee might awake and cause them to remember themselues. They tooke such an alarme, that they came to the gate of S.
Honore, where they had knowledge giuen them, that the kings troupes would come and giue them battell the 20. of Ianuarie.
The Spaniards shifts to corrupt Paris.All this vanished away, without any incounter or losse of the one side or on the other. The Spanish Agents tooke this occasion to put the Parisians in feare, for the aduancement of their affaires: for they thrust certaine Regiments of Spaniards and Neopolitans into Parris and Meaux, staying till they might conuey thither, a farre greater number, which the Duke of Parma was gathering togither with great diligence, vnder pretence to come with them to the succour of
Parris.
The packets and letters of the succours comming from
Spaine and Italy, serued for a very good remedie to the leaguers, thereby to content the Parisians. And to comfort and incourage them the more, the new Pope assisted by many Cardinals, did againe excommunicate the king and his adherents. And sending a monitorie bill, put it in the handes of his Nuncio, called Marcellin Landriano, to bee carried to the Cardinall of Plaisance his Legat at
Parris. The succours by him promised beganne to assemble.The Popes forces against France. As for the king of
Spaine, following the particular intelligences which he had with the Duke of Mercoeur, his armie by sea came into the Castle of
Brittaine, and seized on the part of Blauet, greatly fortified since that time.
Monsieur de la Noue was sent to make heade against the Spaniards. And while they stayed for the succours of the lowe Countries, the Earle of Brissac made a voyage toward the Duke of
Parma, who brought mony from them to pay the Pentioners, thereby to entertaine them in hope of continuation.
The siege and yeelding vp of Chartres to the king.The King retired to Senlis, tooke his way to
Brie, and stayed about foure myles stom Prouence, accompanied with the Duke of Neuers, each one thinking that hee would haue besieged that Towne, which is not strongly situated, hee made such a shew, and in such sort, that the League sent thither speedily fiue or sixe hundreth foote, and two hundreth horse. But because hee came no nearer therevnto, they verily thought hee would haue set either vppon the Towne of Troys, or on Seni, staying onely for the Marshal of Birons comming, who had receiued at Deepe certaine barrels of powder and bullets which was sent from England.
They continued firme in this opinion, till such time the King marched towards Montereau. Heerevppon rose an other report, that the King went to Tours, for the redressing of certaine disorders: such as the leaguers blazed abroad, euen to the very slaundering of the Princes of the blood. But such thoughts did greatly hurt the league. For the King holding himselfe close, tenne or twelue daies with the Duke of Neuers, sent word to the Marshall de Biron (who was come toward Mant, in his returne from
Normandie, after he had taken Caudebec, Harfleur, Feschamp, and other Townes: in briefe, when hee brought all Prouence vnder the kings obeysance, Horsmas le Haure, Roane, Pontoise, and two or three other places) that hee should crosse to Beausse, as though hee ment to ioyne with him. But that on a suddaine hee should turne toward Chartres, to recouer it before any succour should enter into it, for as much as the town had no other garrison but the own Inhabitants, who were also diuided, many bearing good affection to the King, especially the Bishop: which thing the Marshall performed so suddainly, that Chartres was inuironed round about, and besieged the tenth of Februarie.
A Captaine of Orleans named la Croix, attempted to come to the succour of the Towne, with his Regiment of threescore Curates, and two hundreth harguebuziers. But hee was incontinent inclosed and ouerthrowne in such sort, that of all his followers there escaped but four, and himselfe which made the fift, who with the rest beeing very well mounted, had all their mindes bent vppon flight, while their fellowes throates were a cutting. The Lord de la Chastre, chiefe Captaine of the siege in Berry, was constrained the same time to raise his siege from before Aubigni, and soone after his troupes were ouerthrown by the Lord of Chastillon, who came to the king at the siege of Chartres, who by his valour and notable inuention of a bridge, to go right vpon the breach, was the principall cause vnder God, that the place was won for the King.
In Poictou, the Barron de la Rochepose, the Lords of Preaux, of Parabere and others, for the King fought oftentimes with the Leaguers. The Duke of
Nemours after certaine sallies in and about Langres, put himselfe within Lyons. As for those of Chartres, they defended themselues most couragiously, for the space of two moneths and a halfe, without beeing succoured by any: in the end whereof, perceiuing that the bridge which was made by the pollicie of the Lord de Chastillon, to come vnto blows with them, would be their ruine, they entered into conditions of accord, the Fryday before Easter, the which contained, that if within eighteene daies they were not assisted by the Duke de Maine (who was then at Soissons, three smal daies iourney from
Chrartres) they would yeelde themselues to the king.
Then they sent Deputies in post toward the Duke, who for prouision, dispatched a Maister of his housholde, and two Maisters of the campe, with tenne or twelue horse, to trie if they could enter into the Cittie, with charge to confime the Townesmen in their obstinacie. But all the succours being taken on Fryday the ninteenth of Aprill, about foure of the clocke in the after noone, the king with his armie entered into
Chartres, where hee stayed Saturday and Sunday following. The morrow after his enterance, the Leaguers of the Cittie, to the number of sixe or seuen hundreth, went foorth of the Towne with their armies: and suddainly the Marshall de Biron entered, being followed with 1200. harguebuziers, and about 300. horse, the garrison assigned to him, and the gouernment giuen againe to the Lord de Sourdis, who before commanded ouer them. They dislodged from thence, certain Ladies and Gentlewomen of the leaguers in Coches and Chariots, which they caused to be safely conducted to Orleans. The K. being Maister of so faire and strong a place, leuied certain monies of the Inhabitants, which had submitted themselues to his mercie.

Then hauing brought Aulneau and Dourdan to his obeysance, hee returned to Senlis.
Leaguers ouerthrowne at Esperron.At this time when Chartres was yeelded vp, the Leaguers armie in
Prouence, consisting of a thousand Chieftaines, and of sixteene or eighteen hundreth harguebuziers, as well Prouencieux, Spaniards, as Sauoyans, were othrowne at Esperrond de Pallieres, by the Lords
de la Valette and Diguieres, who did the king excellent seruice. For the league lost at that time near hand foure hundreth Chieftaines, and fifteene hundreth shot, leauing a great number of prisoners, fifteen tents, and an infinit companie of horses and baggage, which were equally diuided among the victors: they lost among the rest, young Buous, a braue and gallant Gentleman, twentie souldiers, and there were an hundreth hurt.
At Poictou. also.In Poictou certaine weekes after, the Vicount de la Guierche, commanding ouer certaine Regiments of footemen and horsemen, and where hee found neare a thousand natural borne Spaniards newly come from Brittaine, hauing an intent to do some great exployt, they were charged to so good a purpose, and with such high resolution, by the Barron de la Roche pose, and other of the kings chiefe seruitors, that after they had giuen them a certaine fight, la Guierche seeing on the cold earth more then three hundreth Gentlemen, and his most assured fauourites, tooke his flight toward the next riuer, where finding the ferrie, and thinking to go ouer easilie, the throng was so great, that the ferrie-boate and all the passengers suncke to the bottome. La Guierche was there drowned, with a great number of others. There perished in the water and in the fight, more then seuen hundreth Spaniards. Some supposed this losse of the Leaguers to bee little lesse then that of Coutras, by reason of the great number of the Nobilitie, which died therein. As for Guierche, hee was but little lamented, in respect of his vngodly life and disordered behauiour.
Chasteauthierri yeelded to the League.The Duke de Maine hauing thus lost Chartres, followed his intelligence vppon the Towne of Chasteauthierri, the which was yeelded vnto him with the Castle, by the Pinarts, the father and the sonne, who were commaunders of the same place. The Spaniards sackt both the Towne and Castle, spoyling in like sort diuers Gentlemens houses round about, neuer caring of whole part or religion they were of. After this exployt, those of Guise beeing at
Reims, made there a new Archbishop, dispatching Ianin, sometime President of Diion, to go into Spaine, to the intent hee might there looke vnto their affaires.
The kings Edict for upholding the two religions in his kingdome.On the other side, the Princes and Romaine Catholicque Lords, which were the kings partakers, perswaded with him to frame himselfe to the exteriour profession of their religion, and by the Duke of Luxenburg, who had before made a voyage vnto Rome in their name, they practised with the Pope to that end. On the contrarie side, the Protestant Lords beseeched the king to haue them in remembrance, who were so faithfully and constantly imployed for him. Other of his Councel pressed vpon him, to prouide for his peaceable subiects, as well of the one as the other religion. Also that hee would preuent the new attempts of the Pope and his adherents against
France. And these solicitations begat two Edicts, which were brought foorth at Ma^te in the beginning of Iulie.

The one established the decrees of pacification made by
Henry the third deceased, vpon the troubles of the Realme, repealing and abolishing that which had been made in Iuly 1585. and 1588. in fauour of the league. The other contained in forme of letters pattents, an ample declaration of the kings intent, to maintaine in France the Romaine Church and religion, which was surnamed, Catholicque, Apostolicque, togither with the rights and auncient liberties of the Gallican Church.
An act made by the high court of Parliament at Chaalons, and at Tours, against the Popes bulles, his Nuntio, and his legat in France.It hath beene said before, that the new Pope called Gregorie, had sent Marcellin Landriano his
Nuntio into France with monitarie bulles against the king. The Court of Parliament of Paris sitting then at Chaalons in Champaigne, hauing receiued and verified the two Edicts aboue mentioned, added at the last making mention of the conseruation of the liberties of the Gallican Church, that she admitted the Atturney generall to appeal touching the abuse of those bulles published by the Popes pretended Nuntio, the thundring and execution of the same, held him to bee wel relieued, giuing him audience for the first day that commission should bee deliuered vnto him, to informe against this pretended Nuntio and his adherents: which information beeing made and brought throughout the Court and viewed, then they wold decree that which should bee reason: moreouer, that the same Atturney should haue an act of protestation by him made, to prooue himself for the counsell to come. This Edict was giuen the first day of Iuly.
In the montth following, there was a second decree made, containing these words: The Court hath repealed, reuoked, and disanuled, and by these presents doth repeale, reuoke, and disanul, all those bulles of the legation of Cardinall Caietan, and those other buls brought from Rome the first of March, proceedings, publications, excommunications, and thundrings, made by Marcillius Landriano, the Popes aforesaid Nuutio, as false, scandalous, seditious, full of corruption, and madde against the holy decrees, cannonicall constitutions, approoued councels, and against all the rights and liberties of the Gallican Church. Haue ordained, and by these presents do ordaine, that if any haue been excommunicated by vertue of the aforesaid proceedings, they are absolued thereof: and that the said bulles, and all the proceedings made by vertue of them, shall bee burned in the Market-place of this Cittie, by the hands of the executioner.
Againe it is ordained, that the said Landriano the Popes pretended Nuntio, entering priuily into this Realme without the kings leaue or licence, shal bee personally taken and conueyed to the kings prison in this Cittie of Chaalons, there to aunswere to all such things as shall bee alleadged against him. And if his taking and apprehention cannot presently bee, there shall be three daies libertie giuen for the same, according to the accustomed manner. And to him that shall deliuer him vp to the lawe, shall bee giuen tenne thousand pound.
Straightly charging and forbidding all person and persons, of what estate, qualitie, or condition soeuer they bee, to keepe, receiue, succour, or harbour the saide pretended Nuntio on paine of death: And all Archbishoppes, Bishoppes, and all other Ecclesiasticall persons, to receiue, nor publish, nor suffer to be published, any sentences or proceedings, comming in the behalfe of the foresaid Nuntio, vppon paine to bee punished as in case of high treason.
Also it is declared, and we do declare, the Cardinals beeing at Rome, Archbishops, and all all other Ecclesiasticall persons, that haue counselled and signed the said bull and excommunication, and that haue allowed that most inhumane, most abhominable, and most detestable parriside, traiterously committed on the person of the foresaid deceased Lord Henry the third, the most Christian and the most Catholicque king of France, worthily cast off from the pocession of those benefices held by them within this Realme: Inioyning the Atturney generall to seize them into the kings hands, and there to establish good and sufficient Commissioners, forbidding all other his subiects to carrie or send gold or siluer to Rome, or to sue to the Pope for the obtaining of benifices, vntill it shall bee otherwise ordered by the king.
And the act of appeale shall be by the Atturney generall, deferred vntil the next Councell, lawfully assembled by Pope
Gregorie the fourteenth, etc. The Parliament at Tours proclaimed the same decree, adding moreouer in theirs, these words: VVee haue proclaimed and do proclaime, Pope Gregorrie the 14. of that name, an enemie to the common peace, to the vnion of the Romain Catholicke Church, to the King and to his royall estate, adherent to the conspiracie of Spaine, a fauourer of rebels, guiltie of the most cruell, most inhumane, and most detestable Parriside, traiterously committed on the person of Henry the third, of most famous, most Christian, and most Catholicque memorie.
Certaine months after, and about the end of the yeare the parliament of the League at Paris, condemned and caused all those decrees to be burned, which were giuen out against the Popes bulles, and the Ministers of that sea. As for Landriano and the Legat, they were kept close and secret. Finally after they had beene well feed, they got safely out of France, through the kings mercifull fauour, carrying away great booties, whereof they had small ioy, because that soone after their returne they died.
The most part of the prisoners of Blois, who then with the Duke and Cardinall of Guise, should haue beene done to death, escaped away, some after one sort and some after another. But one of their principalll men remained stil vnder sure gard in the Castle of Tours: that is to say, the Duke of Guise, whom the multitude of the Leaguers, and diuers Parisians did greatly desire, saying many times, that if after the death of his father, and before the comming of his vncle de Maine, hee had beene within Paris, that of a certaine they had carried him to Reimes, sacred and crowned king of France.
But his keepers held him sure ynough from them, for the kings Councellours would not, that the seditious should haue so fit a subiect to worke vppon, nor such store of wood and oyle to increase the flames of their sedition.
On the other side, the Duke de Maine hauing obtained his new title, to bee Lieftenant generall of the estate and Crown of
France, desired not that his Nephewe should bee at more libertie. Neither was the royall throne and seat bigge ynough for two to sit in, and hee which was alreadie setled, would not come downe, to suffer a younger then himselfe to ascend thereinto.
Diuers other of the principall men of the League, willing to counterchecke the Duke de Maine, did all that possibly they could, to preferre his young Nephew: but all in vaine. When the Kings Councell saw fit time to thwart the Dukes of Maine and Nemours, which by diuers slights did daily robbe the Crowne, as also diuers other straungers did, would notwithstanding set on them againe, and seeke to destroy the one by the other: they caused their affaiers to bee so disposed for the keeping of this person, that the Duke of
Guise, escaped the fifteenth day of August, by a cord which was giuen him,The Duke of Guise escapeth out of prison. wherewith sliding down out of one of the windowes, hee went quite away. There was but small running after him, who hauing found all things readie for his conueyance, tooke his way to the Lord de la Chastre, who kept him in a sure place.
Those which iudged not but superficially of these things, namely the Leaguers, made bonfires for ioye of this escape, supposing that this young Prince should be so well prouided for, that he should bee made king for the holy vnion. But the Lieftenant generall his vncle, and certaine others, pretending to beare away the best part in that peece, were of an other minde.
Noyon besieged and taken by the king.The King all this while slept not, hauing the selfe same moneth besieged Noyon, a towne in Picardie held by the league, and hauing ouerthrown by foure assaults, the succours which the League had sent them, slaine the most resolute men of war on their side, taken a great number of prisoners, put the rest to flight, and constrained the besieged to yeelde.
The Duke de Maine with the Lords of Belin, Vitri, d'Alincourt and others, had a great minde to set vppon Mante, thinking to withdraw the king, and afterward assayed to force the Switzers of Soleurre lodged at Houdan, but all in vaine, as also was their comming to Noyon. For the king beeing neuer mooued with their bragges, followed to the poynt of his purpose, euen to the verie noses of his enemies, who daring not to come vnder his hands, hee became Maister of the Towne. And hauing brought vppon the Leaguers and Spaniards great shame and dishonour, hee chased them euen vnto Han, prouoking and inforcing them to fight, but they could not heare on that side.
Noyon was yeelded and giuen vp to the King the seuenteenth of August. About a month after,The Duke of Sauois armie ouerthrowne at Pontcharra. the Lord of Diquieres was ouerthrowne in the plaine of Pontcharra, neare vnto the Castle of
Bayars, standing in the valleye of Graisiuodan, with the Duke of Sauois armie, commaunded by Amedio the Dukes bastard brother, accompanied with Dom Oleuares a Spanish Captaine, the Marques of Treuic, and others.
There were slaine vppon that plaine, more then two thousand and fiue hundreth of the Dukes armie, a great number were taken prisoners, beeing for the most part Gentlemen of commaund. They wonne also aboue three hundreth horse, eighteene colours bearing the redde crosse, a Cornet was there taken, and all their baggage left behinde.
The bootie which was gotten, amounted to the summe of two hundreth thousand Crownes, the most part thereof beeing in chaines, rings, siluer cuppes, and coyne both of golde and siluer, the rest in horses and armour.

The next day, two thousand Romaines and souldiers of
Milaine, who with their commander the Earle Galeotte of
Belioyeuse, were saued within the Castle d'Aualon, at length yeelded the^selues to the kings mercie. But the furie of the soldiers could not be quieted, til they had slain six or seue^ hundreth of them, the rest hauing white wands giuen in stead of Pasports, were sent into Italie, there to make report of their vnhappie fortune, hauing promised neuer to beare armes against France any more.
This victorie was the more excellent, for that on the kings side, after they had searched their companies, there was found but one horseman, and two footemen dead, and three or foure hurt. The rest of this yeare was spent by the Lord of Diguieres, in the fortifying of
Grenoble, and in the refreshing of his garrisons. After the taking of Noyon, the king caused a part of his troupes to go into
Normandie, as well to same those of Roane, who shewed themselues no lesse obstinate then the Parisians, as also to prouoke the Spaniards vnto battell, for he knew that incontinuent the leaguers would crie for ayde: and that if the Duke of Parma deferred their succour, that he should either soon ouerthrow them, or quickly bring them to some reason. On the contrarie, if the Duke should come there, it would be a meanes to dispatch their affaires, hoping that God would fauour his iust cause, against the vngodly and infamous rebellion of his enemies. In the meane space, hee gaue order that Paris should be inclosed on euery side, keeping still his garrisons in the fort of
Gournay vpon Marne, at Saint Dennis, Melun, Corbeil, and other places, as well by water as by land, the great tributes and taxes which was gathered for the bringing of victuall to the Parisians, and the maintenance of their troupes, did so glean their mony from them, peece by peece, that it brought the people to great pouertie.
The Leaguers then did that which was loooked for: for after the kingThe second and the last comming of the Duke of Parma into France. had set forward to Normandie, the king of
Spaine beeing solicited from diuers parts, and of his owne accord also, for the recouering of his money, sent the Duke of Parma, who was diligently prouiding for the affaires of the lowe countries, into
Normandie, to relieue those of Roane, and to helpe them, vpon such occasions as should bee presented. Those of
Guise and other commanders of the league, made continuall sute to the saide Duke to that effect. By this meanes toward the end of the yeare, the Duke of Parma hauing committed the gouernment of the low Countries to the Earle of Mansfield, departed from Bruxelles, and with foure thousand foote, and three thousand horse, set forward on his way, making small iournies, because hee thought it the most necessarie for him, and that vnder the appearance of armes, hee might attaine to an higher purpose: which was, to procure the states of the league to giue the Crowne of France to the king of Spaines daughter, whom they had promised to wife vnto one of the chief of that partie. The Dukes armie was strengthened by the Italian succours, conducted by Sfondrate Earle of Montemarcian, and three thousand Switzers.
While all this preparation was made, the sixteene of
Parris, the first authors of the league among the people, who could not indure to see the Duke de Maine despise them, and take state vpon him, as he had done within a fewe moneths, resolued to depriue him of his state, pretending to walke more watily in their affaires, according to the king of Spaines intent, to whom they had
Brisson the^ President, l'Archir and Tardif councellors, hanged.solde the Cittie, therby to cut off as it were with one blow, al the hope which the king had in their subiection. They discouered among other, that Brisson the President,
Tardif, and Larcher, Councellours, were sorrie that they had such great part in the furious actions of the league, thinking how they might finde remedie for the same: vppon this, supposing they had found that which they looked for, and after certaine counsell had on the matter, they went by their authoritie, and apprehended the President and both the Councellours, committing them to prison the fifteenth day of Nouember, and on the morrow they caused them to bee hanged in Greue streete. In this sort perished these learned men, especially Brisson, which plunged himselfe against his conscience, into this pit of execrable felonie, against his soueraigne Lord, and the lawes of the Realme. Thus hee receiued of those wicked men, which he had so vniustly and so long supported in their heinous crimes, a fit reward for his inexecrable faults.
Foure of the 16. hanged by the Duke of Parma.The Duke de Maine, which practised with the Duke of
Parma, beeing aduertised of this tumult, went to ioyne with his trustiest friends, made speed vnto Parris, and caused
Louchart, Anroux, Hameline, and Emonnot, foure of the sixteene to bee hanged, and caused the other twelue to bee thrust out of office, and made his Lieftenantship as sure as possibly hee could: and to appease the people, who were guiltie of this mutinie, proclaimed the tenth of December, an Edict of banishment vnto all those which had bene medlers in this new ryot.
Straunge felony committed by the Parliament, at Roane.As the Duke of Parma tooke easie iourneies into Normandie, the Parliament of
Roane published the seuenth of Ianuarie, a cruell decree against their soueraigne Lord the King, containing these words: The Court doth most expresly forbid all persons, of what estate, dignitie, or condition soeuer they bee, without all exceptions, to fauour in any sort whatsoeuer, Henry of Bourbon or any of his, but to withstand him incontinent, vppon paine to bee presently hanged vp. Also the same Court ordaineth, that absolution shall bee obtained for the said Atturney generall, Nemine dempto, to informe against all those that shall fauour the said Henry of Bourbon and his adherents. That the oath made by the holy Vnion the two and twentieth day of Ianuarie, 1589. shall bee renued from mouth to month, in the generall assembly, which for that purpose shall bee held in the Abbey of Saint
Ouen within the same Cittie. Further, it inioyneth all the Inhabitants to keepe, and inuiolably to obserue the said Edict, from poynt to poynt, according to the tenure and true meaning of the same, vpon paine of death, without any hope of grace or fauor to be had therein.
Villars a notable Leaguer.Moreuer, the same Court doth expresly inioyne, all the Inhabitants to bee obedient to the Lord of Villars, Lieftenant generall to our soueraigne Lord
Henry of Lorraine (eldest son to the Duke de Maine) in this gouernment, in all things which shall bee by him commanded, for the conseruation of this Cittie.
The Bishop d'Euereux, hanged.A little before the siege of Roane, the King hauing in the month of September, 1591. taken Louuiers, chastised certaine seditious persons, and sent the Bishoppe d'Euereux, surnamed the holy, prisoner vnto Tours (who was one of the Arches and Pillers of the league) to the end he should there haue the law, and after be hanged: the which was done without the Cardinal of Bourbons knowledge: least hee should repriue him from the Gallowes, hee prouided for all things necessarie to the siege, causing diuers engines to be made at Caen, at Pont de l'Arche, at
Ponteau de Mer, and in other places. The D. de Maines sonne hauing encouraged the Cittizens to perseuere in their actions, for their reliefe, Baquemare at that time their chiefe President, procured that all the Inhabitants should sweare before the Maior, named
Londe, that they should reueale all those, whom they knewe either in word or deede, to fauour the King of Nauarre, that they might bee punished for example to others.
Villars was there entered, to strengthen them with sixe hundreth horse, and twelue hundreth muskets, and gaue such order for his affaires, that they yeelded him soone after, the Roiteler of
Roane, without any respect to the Lieftenant generals sonne: in so much, that when they commaunded him any thing which hee thought not good to bee done, his aunswere to the Duke de Maine was, that being both of them companions and spoylers of the estate, hee would not obey him, whom hee knewe not for his Lord and Maister. And the better to apply himselfe, he caused all those to be chased out of Roane, that were by him suspected, writing letters full of outrage to the King, who summoned his subiects to an acknowledgement of their rebellion, placing artillerie, and vsing all acts of hostillitie against his soueraigne Lord and King. Moreouer he caused a new search for victuals, hee subborned Friers, Priests, and Preachers, to poyson the multitude by their seditious perswasions, broght his troupes into the fielde, indomaging the armie as much as possibly hee might, the which, beside ye obstinate dealings of the besieged, had a shrewd fight, with the extreame rigour of the sharpe winter, with sickenesse and the want of food. Notwithstanding all which, at the last the besieged were constrained to come to composition. But vnderstanding that the Dukes de Maine and of Parma were comming with succours, and were withall, become Maisters of Neufchastel, giuen ouer by the Kings garrison, they held it till the 20. of March, the which armie of the Dukes came to
Franqueuille, which is about halfe a daies iourney from
Roane.
The Leaguers armie.The Duke of
Guise, la Chastre, and Vitri, ledde the vantgard: the Dukes of Maine, of Parma, and Sfondrate, Nephew to Pope Gregorie the fourteenth deceased, co^ducted the maine battel: the rearward had for their leaders, the D, of Aumale, the Earle of
Chaligni, Boisdaufin, Balagni, and Sainpol. Bassompierre, and Monsieurle Motte, were Captains ouer the Switzers and the artillerie. The Kings troupes being ouer weake to match with this great armie of leaguers, left them to worke their woorst, seeking opportunitie to meete with them at aduantage, staying for the Kings comming, who with all speed iournied toward Deepe on necessarie causes, the which broke the great intended purposes of his enemies.
And the whilest the Marshall of Biron, caused seuen peeces of artillerie to be conueyed to Bans, which is a towne about one mile from Darnetal, where hee set himselfe in battell array, planting his cannons in their seuerall places, therewith to entertaine the Duke of Parma, who came to lie in the valley on the side thereof. The King stayed all that night within a Mill hard by Bans, who continued in fight well near thirtie houres, making continuall skirmiges vppon the forwardest of his enemies.
The Duke of Parma, which made as though he would giue battell, after some excuses and delaies drewe this armie on the side of Barnetal. But the more to drawe and intangle him, straight after his comming, the king hadde dismissed his Nobilitie, in such sort, that they were all neare ynough to bee heard, with intent to bring an euill bargaine both vpon the Spaniards and Italians. The rest of the moneth of March, and the most part of Aprill, was spent in continuing small skirmiges. In the end, on Tuesday the one and twentieth day of Aprill, about tenne of the clocke in the morning, the Dukes de Maine, of Guise, and of Parma, put themselues into
Roane, where they stayed but certaine houres. Villars would not haue any partners, much lesse such Maisters.
The Leaguers armie had vpon the same day of the Dukes enterance, taken Caudebec neare adioyning, from whence the garrison dislodged in the night following, and left the towne for the Duke of
Parma, which was yeelded vnto him: but he kept it not long.The king ouerrunneth his enemies and breakes their Campe, chasing the rest out of Normandis. For the king seeing his enemies had not victualled Roane, passed to Pont de l'Arche le Mercredi, on the Wednesday, and aduanced his armie toward Fontain le Bourg, and sent to all the neighbour owns, as Louiers, Mante, Mulean, Vernon, and otherswhere the Garrisons were, that they should march toward him: the which was speedily performed. Then grew his armie to more then three thousand horse of Frenchmen, and sixe thousand foote, in lesse then sixe daies.
Then turned he his forces toward the Towne d'Yuetot, where the Dukes of Maine and of Guise were then lodged, who had no leisure to go to dinner, hauing news brought that their vantgard was suddainly set vpon, and wholly ouerthrowne. This constrained them by flight to saue themselues two myles off, in the Duke of Parmas quarter, leauing behinde them all their baggage and siluer vessels, a good bootie for the Lord de la Guich.
The first of May they were raised to an other lodging, and aboue sixe hundreth of the leaguers slaine, without any losse, except fiue souldiers, and about eighteene or nineteene hurt. And hauing knowledge that the Leaguers intent was not to fight, but to retire, they followed the^ the more close, shutting vp all their passages, as well to preuent the bringing of victuals, as their escape: for which there was good reason. Vppon the riuer their ships and vesselles were beaten, part whereof was taken, and part suncke by the Holanders. By land they were inclosed, in their campe intrenched and fortified, yet would they not issue foorth, although the necessitie of victuals was extreame great among them, and that all warrelike order shewed their insufficiencie.
They were moreouer intrenched within a wood, where also two thousand Spaniards and VVallons were lodged, to intercept the kings passage, who neuerthelesse in the sight of their enemie, broke throgh their trenches, where all this great troupe was ouerthrowne, except some fewe which by their swiftnesse tooke the groues, beeing more amazed, then desirous to reuenge. The daies following they continued their chasing by skirmiges till the tenth of March, at what time the king, after hee knew where they pitcht their campe, chose out such forces as hee thought necessarie, and set vppon them by fiue of the clocke in the morning, within a quarter which the leaguers supposed most strongest.
There was ouerthrowne without any great resistance, twentie two Cornets of horsemen. It is thought that it was there where the Duke of
Parma had his arme hurt with a musket shot, other say it was done in the former charge.
Howsoeuer it were, the Leaguers lost at the same time two thousand horse, which by the victors were carried away with all their baggage: leauing slaine vpon that place, more then two thousand and fiue hundreth men, and many taken prisoners.
They retired towards Fescamp, where hauing within fewe dayes selt the force, both of hunger and thirst, at last they fledde shamefully toward Parris, and from thence to Brie, at last they came to Artoys, wherwithin few months the Duke of
Parma with his troupes melted like waxe in the sunne.
Sfondrate sawe his people also confounded, Roane beeing brought to great extremitie, bought of Villars his Rotelier, the corne hourded vp in his Garners, whereof hee made a maruellous masse of treasure, which hee imployed for a small space, till such time as hee was slaine by the Spaniardes neare vnto D^rlans. Thus was France the thirde time deliuered out of the handes of herenemies.
Those of the house of Guise, and other chiefe Captaines of the League, that sought new troubles, being nothing sorrie for the Duke of Parmas ill successe, set themselues with the Spanish Agents (to get into their handes newe bags of Spanish golde) in consultation touching the assembly of their estates, to the end to elect a King or a Queene: to wit, the king of Spaines daughter, who was to marrie with one of the principall Leaguers.
And although the Duke de Maine wrought with the others in the same wheele, yet had hee a contrarie intent. As for the most part of the Parliament of the leaguers of Parris, and the third estate, they all desired peace and some end of these troubles.
The Leaguers forces in diuers parts.In many other parts of the Realme, and namely in
Languedoc and Brittaine, the Dukes of Ioyeuse and
Mercoeur, two principall Leaguers, continued their warre, doing great domage to the Kings subiects. In Iuly the Duke de Maine tooke
Ponteau de Mer, while the king practised his enterance into
Paris, which as then found no good successe, beeing broken off by the Marshall de B^rons death, who was slaine by a cannon shotte at the siege of Espernon. On the other side, the Duke of
Nemours purposed the building of a little Monarchie at
Lyons, being possessed by intelligence of the Citie and Castle of Vieru^, which were solde vnto him.
Hee attempted to do much more, by helpe of the forces comming from Sauoy, but in vaine at that time. The King was very watchfull to preuent the enterance of forraine forces, giuing order within his Realme, for all his most vrgent affaires, distributing his troupes heere and there in places most conuenient.
And for as much as his Nobilitie had been greatly hazarded at the siege of Roane, and in the seruices following, hee dismissed a great many, and retained a certaine number of the most deliberez. Others, which went farre off, to assayle the League in diuers places, perished for the most part.
The Spaniards, which were very curious to recouer their great losses, with some memorable act, some certaine monthes after the
The spoyle of Bayonne attempted in vaine by the Spaniards.Duke of Parmas discomfiture, they attempted the taking of Bayonne, by the helpe of a puissant armie, which came vnto them as well by water as by land. Long time before this, the Gouernour of Fontaraby, had from his Maisters intelligence, that a Doctor of Phisicke called Blancpignon, had often receiued letters in couert termes, to further the Spaniards affaires, consisting in the surprising of the Cittie, and the expulsing of all the kings officers and seruants in the same.
This Doctor conferred with a Spaniard, which had long time dwelt in that Towne: and those two brought their treason to such a poynt, that a fleet of certaine ships, and an armie by land, were made readie for the executing of their purpose. But God would that the Lacquey which was sent to Fontaraby, with letters speaking of Phisicke and curing of the sicke, was taken by the Lord de la Hilliere, Gouernour of the towne, who hauing with all speede apprehended the Doctor and the Spaniard, in fewe houres preuented all their mischiefe.
But that which hee had deliberated heerevppon, which was to giue a strappado to the enterprisers, could not bee performed because of the obstinate resolution of the Spanish prisoner, who would not write such letters as was of him required, but rather chose to die, then to set pen to paper for the intrapping of his countri-men: and heerevpon with the Doctor hee was beheaded, whereof followed the discipation of the Spanish armie.
Amblize and the Leaguers of Lorraine, ouerthrowne by the Duke of Bouillon.In the month of October, the Duke of Bouillon Marshall of France, ouerthrew before
Beaumont, the Lord of d'Amblize high Marshall of
Lorraine, and the Dukes Lieftenant generall, accompanied with two thousand foote, and eight hundreth horse. Amblize was himselfe slaine in the field, with more then seuen hundreth others, his artillerie won, all his Cornets and Ensignes taken, and foure hundreth Launce-knights sent away vnarmed. The Duke of Bouillon did this valerous exployt, with foure hundreth horse, and two harquebuziers. But this was much to bee noted, hee lost not in all that fight any one man of account, and beeing himselfe something hurt, hee left the pursuite of his foes to his Lieftenants, who beeing ayded by a sallie of shot comming out of
Beaumont, they made a happie ende of their prosperous beginning.
That also which came to passe in this moneth at the siege of Villemur, doth woorthily deserue to bee written in this place, wherein I will onely follow the notes of Monsieur de la Grange, an excellent Historian, and most eloquent among the exquisite wittes of our time. The Duke of Ioyeuse (his brother which was slaine at Coutras) hauing about the ende of the moneth of lune, done many outragious acts about Montauban, became Maister of
Monbequin, M^^bartier, and Monbeton, from whence he assayled
Bart, which was yeelded vppon composition, after hee had lost foure score gallant souldiers. And against the faithfull promise which hee made, hee caused the most part of the poore yeelding people to bee slaine.
Then hee battered and assayled the Castle of
Mauzac, and hauing giuen them three hundreth cannon shot, it was yeelded vpon composition. Saint Maurice fort, beeing also yeelded vnto him, hee besieged Villemer, with the Lord of that place named
Remiers, commaunding ouer an hundreth and fiftie souldiers, as well Inhabitants as straungers, to whose ayde the Lord of Themines,
Seneshall of Querci, a wise and valiant Gentleman, speedily brought sixe and fortie men, as well Curats as Harguebuziers, vnder the conduct of the Lord de Pedone. The Duke
d'Espernon and Themenes constrained Ioycuse to raise his siege, and to forsake one of his great cannons.
Thomenes his forces recouered againe the Castle of Maurac and other small holds.
The nineteenth of luly, those troupes which Esper^^^ hadde left with
Themenes, were surprised in the night by Duke Ioyeuse, who slew foure hundreth of them, hurt a great number, and had it not beene for the great discretion of Themines, he had discomfited all the rest, and carriediwo of their coluerins to Montaubon. While the Duke d'Espernon tooke his iourney into Prenence, Ioyeuse came againe to the siege of Villemur the tenth of September.
Reniers committed the keeping of that place to the Barron of
Mauzac, to Cha^bert, and to Chaize, who were wise and warrelike Captaines, while he gathered new succours at Montauban, where at the same instant hee found Mo^^f^^r de Desme with certaine forces, who without more ado put himselfe with his troupes into Villemur.
Ioyeuse beeing counselled by two craftie Captaines: to witte, Onoux and Montherand, did batter them with eight cannons and two coluerins. The^^^nes accompanied with sixe score Gentlemen, and two hundreth harguebuziers, marched couragiously to their succour, but in the midway, hee caused his horsemen to alight, giuing order for the safe conueying of the horses into Montauban, and then speedily hee got within Villemur, vnespied of
Ioyeuse or any of his companie, who on the next day, beeing the 20. of September, gaue them a furious assault, the which was manfully withstood, to the losse of a great number of the assaylants. Then on a suddaine, Themenes commanded an alarme to be sounded, by foure trumpers which he had brough with him, and therewithall furiously assayled Ioyeuse, and ouerthrew a Regiment of his footemen, newly come thither, whom they of Thoulouse had sent with a supply of powder, bullets, pickaxes, and a great number of Iron forkes.
The quallitie of these footmen that would haue made so bloodie an attempt, did dispatch the execution, for these were all but boyes and rawe souldiers, as vnskilfull in warre, as they were accustomed to play the warriours in the streetes, and to kill all the world with table talke. In reuenge whereof, the leaguers garrison at S.
Leophaire, tooke a bootie of two hundreth and fortie oxen feeding in the fields.
Heerevpon the Marshall of Montmorencie Gouernor of
Languedoc, sent a good supply to the besieged, vnder the conduct of Lecques, and Chambaut. Hauing then chased all the robbers and spoylers from Saint Leophaire, which had beene there harbored, vppon the report which was made of the new forces that was come to Duke Ioyeuse, they kept aloofe for certaine daies, about what time
Missalac Gouernour of Auuergne, tooke his way toward them, which beeing by Ioyeuse vnderstood, hee supposed it better to bee packing, then to stay any longer. And comming to assaile the kings troupes at Bellegard, he had a pleasant beginning, but a heauie and sorrowfull end of his attempt. For flying the field, heere tired with great losse. Neuerthelesse, beeing minded by a tricke of auncient warre to astonish his enemies, he caused many great bo^fires to bee kindled in his Campe, as tokens of victorie and gladnesse: wher^^ Themines and his followers could not forbeare laughing: for whilest they were doing thereof,
Charnbant at one instant ouerthrew a company of lance-knights, of whom there was threescore slaine in the same place. Missac came to Montauban, followed with an hundreth Gentlemen, and a good number of harguebuziers, which by the Counsell of the Barron of
Mauzac and others, was fully resolued to giue Duke
Ioyeuse battel: who reposing too much confidence in his forces, and the ordinarie reports made vnto him by certaine faire Gentlewomen which were his fauourits, and near neighbours to those of Montaubon, lost both himselfe and his followers: for his forces were found scattered at his most neede. And the Ladies did too late aduertise him of Miss silacs departure, who led the vantguard, Chambant the maine battell, and Lecques the reareward. The nineteenth of October, these warriours beeing resolutely aduanced forward to the Towne of
Villemur, ioyned directly with the Regiments of Clouzel and
Montoison, the outermost of Duke Ioyeuse trenches, which was guarded with two hundreth soldiers, and presently succored with foure hundreth others: neuerthelesse, they were beaten and driuen to the next trench, and there were they fought withall a good halfe houre, being conducted by the Duke himselfe, who seeing the rest of the kings armie come before him, and Themines issuing out of the town at his backe, was constrained to flie the field, and to retire further off, to a place called Condommes, where his campe and artillerie lay: but this retrait fell out so ill for him, that his people seeing the^selues pursued by the victorious armie, fled in great disorder, and tumbled the^selues headlong into the riuer of Tar. I he bridge which
Ioyeuse had builded being cut vp, was almost ye cause of all their deaths, which forsooke the land to passe the water:
Ioyeuse being ouercome with dispaire in this distresse, was heard to vomit forth these words: Farewel my great canno^s. Ha. I renounce God. I run this day a high fortune. And therwithal desperately be plunged himselfe horse and all into the riuer Tar. There were two Gentlemen, the one called Courtete, the other Bidon, that sought by all means to saue him, but the riuer swallowed him, as it were betwixt their hands. And thus did God, who is the true executioner of diuine iustice, worke the ende of this cruell, proude, and blasphemous yong Duke, who was much lamented of the leaguers, for whom he had done many great exployts. The kings horsemen hauing passed the forde, charged those that were in the water: and pursuing the fugiriues, cut in peeces all those that withstood them. At that time, for the space of a good harguebuze shot in length, the heads of the fugitiues was seen floting vpon the riuer. This vanquished armie consisted of 600. horsemen, and 4000. foote, togither with 1400. lance-knights, which was a part of a greater number, that was raised in Almanie by the Emperors commandement, as it appeared by the original of the commissions, which were found after the discomfiture. By the confession of the vanquished, they lost at that time about 3000. men, three cannons, and two coluerins. They also had from them 22. Ensignes, and carried from thence 43. prisoners. They on the kings side, lost only ten men, foure of the which being not very well known, were for want of heed slain by their own fellows. The town of
Villemur hauing indured 2000. cannon shot, saw themselues finally deliuered, hauing in all lost but 17. common souldiers. The body of Duke Ioyeuse was the next day drawne out of the water, and carried into Villemur, there to bee interred.
The royall armie consisting of fiue hundreth horsemen, and two thousand fiue hundreth hargue buziers, beside those that were within the Towne of Villemur, withdrew themselues in good order into their Garrisons, after they had giuen thankes vnto God in all the Churches neare adioyning, for so miraculous and prosperous a victorie.
Now, although the leaguers affaires were in great disorder, yet did not their principall Captaines cease, to make many reports before the people, wherewith they besotted the most subtillest, assuring them, that shortly they would so prouide by the assembly of the estates at
Parris, that they would proceede for the election of a newe king: adding, that as for him (whom in disdain they called the Bearnois) that raigned partly by those named Catholicks, was not to bee receiued or suffered any longer, and to this effect was their counsell published, according to the affection of the new made Pope and the King of
Spaine.
The peoples complaint in open Parliament.And whilest the Spanish king made payment of their pentions by a day assigned, many of the Moonkes being of one opinion, left the Duke de Maines affaires, perceiuing that in the end, his pretended Lieftenantship would intangle and bring them from the greatest to the least, into a pitte of vtter subuertion and confusion, beganne to lift vp their heads, and to seeke after conditions of peace. At length in the open Parliament of the Leaguers at Parris, they cast in many billes of complaints: and the principall of the Cittie cried out in such sort, that an assembly of the Citizens was held in the beginning of Nouember, where they spake so openly for the ending of their troubles, that the Duke de Maine beganne to shake. But in the end, to strengthen his affaires, hee came into the lower house, desiring the assembly to commit the deciding of that poynt to the estates conuocated for that month? And hee added in the end of his Oration these words, staying for the Estates: I pray them that haue set things so forward, that they would send to the king of Nauarre, to intreate with him, that hee would depart vpon this proposition: if hee will not do it, I shall haue occasion to beleeue, that hee is euill affectioned to our side, and well pleased with those that are enemies to our religion.
Notwithstanding these threatnings, it was agreed vpon in the said assembly, that they should send toward the king, staying for the renuing of the Estates, to the ende agreement might be made, that traficque and marchandize might be free, as well for Parris, as other Cities of the kingdome. The Duke that could not resist their wils in this matter, fained to giue his consent therevnto. In middest of these matters, the Popes Legat strengthened by the principall leaguers, and according to his intelligences with the Spaniards, whose Pentioner hee was, continued the troubles of France by his bulles: so that it prouoked the Parliament of Paris sitting at Chaalons, to proclaime an edict the 18. day of Nouember, which was published euery where among them, the which for a remembrance to all posterities, I haue here in this place set down at large.An act of Parliament made at Cha alons against the Popes Bulls, and the assembly of the Leaguers Estates. Vppon this which the kings Atturney generall hath declared to the Court, that the rebellious and seditious, to execute their euill and wicked purposes, which they haue of a long time attempted, to depriue the lawfull successors of this kingdome from the Crowne, not beeing content to fill this Realme with murthers, massacres, robberies, and spoyles, but haue aboundantly brought in the most cruell and pernicious Spaniardes, enemies to this Realme, perceiuing the Inhabitants of the rebellious Townes to beginne, as from a long lethergie and trance, to come againe vnto
to themselues, and to enter againe into the way of obedience, wherein God and nature both binde them towards their lawfull King, thereby to kill and mortifie all poynts of loue and charitie that should bee working in them, and to bring this Realme into greater trouble and diuision then before, by proceeding to the election of a new king. And to giue some colour to the same, they haue published a certain writing in forme of a bull, giuing power and authoritie to the Cardinall of Plaisance, to assist and authorize the said pretended election, wherein the rebellious and seditious sort discouered openly, that which till then they had kept close. All which they did vnder pretence of religion, to couer their wicked and damnable enterprise. This is a thing that all good Catholicque Frenchmen ought to detest and abhorre, as a matter directly contrary to the word of God, holy decrees, Councels, and liberties of the Gallican or French Church: the which openeth a gappe to all ruine and subuersion of all humane societies and pollicies, instituted of God, namely in this renowmed and flourishing Monarchie, the ouerthrow of the ground of the law, wherein principally consisteth the true order of the lawfull succession of our kings. For the preseruation whereof, all good and true borne Frenchmen, ought to spende their liues, rather then to suffer the same to bee altered or violated, as the foundation on the which the certaintie and quiet of the estate is builded. The Court in allowing this request, made by the kings Atturney generall, hath and doth receiue him, complaining of the abuse committed in the obtaining of the said bull, the contents, publication, and execution thereof, and all the rest that should follow the same: and hath and doth holde him well relieued, and doth order, that Philip by the title of S. Onuphrius Cardinall of Plaisance, shall bee assigned in the same, to aunswere to the said appeale, and the decree made in the Cittie of Chaalons, by publicke proclamation shall haue as full strength and effect, as if it were done on his owne person, or in his owne house. And in the meane while, the said Court doth exhort all Prelates, Bishoppes, Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, and all the kings subjects, of what estate, condition, or quallitie soeuer they bee, not to hearken to the poysoning inchantments of such rebellious and seditious persons, but to continue the dutie of good and naturall Frenchmen, and alwaies keepe and hold the loue and affection due to their king and countrie: and not to holde with the deceits of such, which vnder pretence of religion, would spoyle the estate, and bring in barbarous Spaniards and other vsurpers. Giuing most straight charge and commaundemen, vnto all persons whatsoeuer, neither to receiue nor keep in their houses, or about them, the said bull, or to publish the same, neither to assist or fauour the saide rebelles, nor yet to assemble themselues to any Townes or places, which might be appoynted or chosen for the foresaid pretended election, vpon pain to the Nobilitie, to bee disgraded of their honours, and to bee proclaimed infamous, both they and their posteritie for euer. And to the Clargie, to bee depriued, thrust out of their possessions and benifices, and to be punished togither for this their offence, as traitors and disturbers of the publicke quiet and royall prerogatiue of their countrie, without all hope to obtaine in such a case, any fauour or pardon whatsoeuer. And the like paine we pronounce to all townes that shall receiue the said rebels and seditious persons, for the making of the said assembly, or that doth lodge, retaine, or succour them.

And the said Court doth further ordaine* that the place where the said deliberation shall bee kept, togither with the Towne where the said assembly shall bee made, shall bee raced and destroyed from the toppe to the bottome, without all hope to haue it reedified or builded any more, for a perpetuall remembrance to all posterities, of their treason, disloyaltie, and vnfaithfulnesse joyning all persons to assault all those which shall repaire to the saide Cittie, to bee present in that assembly. And there shall be commission deliuered to the said Atturney generall, to informe against all such as haue been the authors and procurers of such monopolies and conspiracies made against the estate, and that haue fauoured or assisted them. And this present Edict shall bee published by sound of trumpet, and publickly proclaimed in all places of this Towne, and sent to all places of this precinct, there to bee red, published and registred, by the diligence of the substitudes belonging to the Atturney generall, whereof they shall certifie the Court within one moneth, on paine to loose their Offices for the contrarie.
The leaguers despising the kings authoritie, flowted at the Edict of this Parliament: and called the Deputies from all parts of the Prouinces and confederate Townes, to bee present with the estates at
Paris. As for the chiefe and principall, each one had a seuerall purpose, beeing desirous to bee seated in their Soueraignes chaire, without hauing any minde to bee seruants or fellows in this Anarchie maintained by them, with the helpe of the double Pistolles of
Spaine. It came to passe in the moneth of Nouember, that the Lord of Vaugrenan commanding for the king within the Towne of S. Iohn Delaune, in Bourgondie, ouerthrew seuenteene companies of footemen hard by the Towne of Diion, wonne their colours, weapons, and other furniture. Amongst the packets and coffers of the Barron de Tenisse, who was a great leaguer and chiefe commaunder of these troupes, were found certaine instructions and commissions, which were sent from the Duke de Nemours to the said Barron, to conferre with the Duke de Maine, to this ende, that Nemours might bee elected king by the estates of Parris.
This young Prince aymed at no other thing but soueraigntie: and beeing misled by certaine euill Councellours which hee kept, planted at
Lyon and thereabout, the foundations of his loftie purposes, for the accomplishing whereof, an hundreth yeares would bee farre too little: but hauing builded vpon sand, in fewe moneths his edefices fell downe, wherewith he was confounded.
Now as the leaguers were promised great thinges by their estates of Parris, and the partakers of Spaine, held it for a most certaine troth, that the Duke of Parma would returne yet the third time, with puissant forces to doo some notable exployt, thereby to couer the shame of his two former voyages, and so to assure the Crowne of France to king Philip, or to the Princesse his daughter.
The death of the Duke of Parma.But death cut off the thrid of his life, togither with his enterprises, the second of December, 1592. Many men thought that this blowe would rent those patches wherewith the league was attired.
But the Duke de Maine beeing deliuered of him of whom hee stood in doubt, supposed that now the time presented it selfe, wherein hee might bring his long desired purpose to effect, heerevpon hee raised his Cornets of horse, and did more mischiefe to Paris then before.

A little before these newes came, hee gaue some eare to the conditions of peace, which had beene happie for him, if some euill counsell had not turned his mind from the same. But the decease of him by whom he was ouer awed, caused his humour to bee changed, imagining that hee should shortly haue the title, to bee Lieftenant generall to the King of
Spaine in the conquest of France. Therefore one of his attempts was to create the Lord de Rosne one of is chiefe familiars, Marshall of France, and Gouernor of the Isle of France, constraining the Presidents and Councellors inclosed in Paris, to receiue this Rosne into two offices, which appertained to a Lord of a higher blood and estate.
The Parisians, which before spake openly of peace and agreement, durst now speake no more thereof, except in secret. In the feast of Christmas, the Duke de Maine caused those decrees which were lately made at Chaalons against the bull of the Popes Legat, to bee openly burned vpon the steps of his Pallace, the Citie beeing all in armes. Also the Dukes of Guise, of Maine, of
Nemours, of Sauoye, the Marques of Pont, wrought diuers slights to bee aduanced in the election.
The King of Spaine by his Agents did as much on the other side, asuring himselfe, that as hee had made many of the Leaguers his Pentioners, so also knewe hee well, that in time hee should finde opportunitie to ouerthrow and bring them all to destruction, one after another, and to make himselfe the absolute and supreme Lord. During these practises, the king was fully resolued to assemble the principall Peeres of his Realme at Chartres, to prouide and thinke vpon remedies against those euils, which now beganne to present it selfe. The warres continued in diuers Prouinces but slowly, except in
Lorraine, where the Marshal de Bouillon tooke by plaine force, and by a maruellous incounter, the strong Towne of Dun vppon
Meuse, a little aboue Stenay, and droue thence those of
Lorraine.
The Duke de Maine publisheth a proclamation against the king.Now for the closing vp of this yeare, in the same moneth of December, the Duke de Maine published a great writing, intituled: A declaration for the vniting againe of all the Catholicques of the Realme. This was an invectiue against the King, couered vnder colour of religion, and a summoning of all those which profest the Romaine religion, to withdraw themselues from the obedience of their lawfull and soueraigne Prince, and a conuocating of his partakers into the Cittie of
Paris, on the seuenteenth day of Ianuarie next insuing, that they might determine togither without passion (saide hee) and without respect of any mans interest, such remedie as they should in their consciences thinke requisite, for the preseruation of the religion and the royall estate.
But while the Cardinall of Bourbon, (named by the League Charles the tenth) was prisoner, they vsed other speeches: but after his death, they not daring to deny, but that the Crown appertained to king Henry the fourth, vsed the colour of religion to blinde the simple. And soone after by this meanes there arose other changes, notwithstanding the king of Spaine gaue not ouer the prosecuting of his enterprises in France. As for the warre of
Sauoy and Piedemont, wee will speake briefly about the ende of the yeare following.

Against this declaration made by the Duke de Maine,  The kings answere to the Duke de Maines declaration.the king published an other, wherein he discouered the deceits of his rebellious subiects, namely of the chiefest sort, also the f^lonie committed by the Duke de Maine, in assembling the estates of his kingdome, wherin he manifestly vsurped his royal authoritie, confuting his excuses and vaine coulour to the same: maintaining his right in claiming the Crowne. And for the state of religion, hee declared that if without the conuocating of a Councell, there might bee found far better and easier meanes to come vnto that instruction or admonition which they pretended to giue him, to withdraw him from the exercise of his religion, to that of the Romaines: hee was so farre from reiecting such a meanes, that to the contrarie, hee did desire and imbrace it with all his heart. As wee suppose (said hee) that wee haue sufficiently witnessed by the permission which wee haue graunted to the Princes Officers of the Crowne, and other Catholicque Lords which do follow vs, to send their Deputies to the Pope, for the more easie and speedie performance of the said instruction or admonition. Beside, the K. doth accuse the leaguers that they had hindered the said instruction or admonition; Hee doth largely discourse of the dutie of true Frenchmen, promiseth to receiue the said instruction: and for answere to the chiefe poynt of his aduersaries declaration, he doth on the other side declare, that this pretended assemblie of Parris, is enterprised against the lawes, the good and publicke quiet of the Realme: and that all which shall bee therein concluded, is meere abuse and of no effect or force. Hee likewise pronounceth the Duke de Maine, and all that should therein assist him, guiltie of treason in the highest degree. Hee doth furthermore offer pardon to the Citties, Communalties, and persons, which haue beene seduced by the Captaines of the League. And hee doth exhort them to acknowledge their dutie.
A declaratimade by the kings Councel to the estates of the League.The Princes and Catholicque Lords who were of the Kings Councell, published the same time a declaration, and sent it about the end of Ianuarie to the estates of the League. By the same they required that Deputies might be assigned on both sides, to determine togither of the most readiest means for the asswaging of the troubles, and the preseruation of the Romaine Catholicque religion and the state. The Duke de Maine and his adherents answered, that they were readie to send their Deputies, so that they on the Kings side would with a good conscience ioyne themselues to the Catholicke Romaine Church, vnder which cloke of reconciliation, they did carefully hide their furious actions and former rebellion. The Popes Legat made on his part an exhortation to the Catholiques, fraught with reproach against the King, who was on euery side defamed and euill spoken off by his enemies.
All his discourse beeing imprinted, tended all to this poynt, to perswade all Frenchmen, that the king beeing of long time cut off from the bodie of the Church, had bin most iustly pronounced vncapable of the Crown. Soone after, they did disanull those acts of Parliament that were made at Tours and at Chaalons, against the monitaries of Landriano, and the assembly at Chartres, which they called a conuenticle, they sung their Maisters praises, damned the Parliament of Chaalons which had condemned their bulles, magnified the estates of the League, which wholy reiected so obstinate an hereticque, with full purpose neuer to bee subiect vnto him, declaring that in deed the Pope had so commaunded it to be.
In this assembly of Parris, appeared the Duke of
Feria for the King of Spaine, who also made an Oration exhortarie to elect a new King: then presented he his Maisters letters tending to the same effect, with promise to aide and succour the Leaguers by all meanes possible. For this had hee great thankes giuen him in the name of all the rest, by Cardinall Pelue Archbishop of
Reimes, who was a slaue to the house of Guise. While the Spaniards and their Pentioners, indeuoured with all their power to continue
France in her miseries, hoping by meanes of these estates of the League, more and more to intangle the affaires of the Realme: yea, to throwe them headlong into such confusion, that in the mean space they might haue leisure to set forward their purposes against the Lowe Countries, England, and France it selfe, the king was solicited from diuers places, by Councellors both neare about him, and farre off, openly to forsake the profession of the reformed religion, and to imbrace from that time forward, the Romaine ceremonies. The summe of their solicitations was, that to expulse the Spaniards, to recouer Parris and the other of the leaguers townes, he must be inforcst to take away from the chiefe of that side, the onely colour of Papisme, by meanes whereof, they would continue their rebellions.
And while the king openly imbraced his accustomed religion, those of the contrarie side (an hundreth times in greater number) might follow the house of Guise, and other chiefe Leaguers, who by meanes of the Spaniardes and the Pope, might well finde means to maintaine and augment the discentions, through all the corners and in the middest of his kingdome, the which was well woorth a Masse: and that it were not good to let it bee lost for a few ceremonies, nor to bee subiect to so many censures, and to bee couerted by euery bace person that would controll the kings pleasures, and hinder his recreations after so many troubles.
And for as much that such a voyce was spredde abroad, by the notable aduertisements of other Councellours, Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall, it seemed to them, that the king would incline therevnto, and the Deputies of the Princes and Lords of his Councell, communicating with those of the League, to preuent the election of a new king, gaue some hope thereof. On this report the Frenchmen in diuers sorts suspended their iudgements, according to their seuerall affections.
Those that desired to see a change, which came soone after, did carefully keepe the Protestants from comming neare the king, to shewe him by word of mouth or writing, reasons of diuinitie and pollicie, for which it was not lawfull or conuenient to change his religion: on the other side, they did daily driue this counsell into his eares, that hee must needes espouse the Crowne of France to the Masse, and not otherwise.
These men followed this matter so much, that at last they procured diuers learned Prelates to bee assembled, which were the Popes subiects, in whose presence the state of the reformed religion should bee ouerthrowne: heerevpon diuers Archbishoppes, Bishoppes, and Doctors of
Sorbonne, were appoynted to meete at Mant the fifteenth of Iuly, without any mention made of the protestant Ministers which were before clapt vp.

The Leaguers deuices against these solicitations.The Deputies of the leaguers fearing this blowe, deuised a new shift to thwart the kings affaires, and to set forward the Spaniards, they first complained of these suddaine changes, declaring that they could not put any trust therein: also that it appertained to the Popes holinesse, both first and last to haue his hand therein. That the king ought to shew all submission to the sea of Rome, and to attend for a declaration from thence, if he would be found meete to gouerne the Realme of France. That vnderstanding the Popes pleasure, they would determine on all things that were reason. Moreouer, they condemned the voyage made by the Marques of Pisani, whom the kings Catholicque Councell had sent toward the Pope, thinking it very ill that the king should giue vnto him any charge at all, who would beleeue (these were their words) that they would proceed in an other sort afterward, and with more respect to the Popes dignitie, and their dutie toward his sea. They added moreouer, that it was impossible to determine any further with the kings Deputies, before that the change of religion which the king was to make, was receiued and approoued by the Pope: of which matter they pretended to take further counsell as it was requisite, for the onely conseruation of the Romaine religion in France. They left also in suspence, the surcease of armes, because of their other troubles.
Now while the Romaine Cleargie which were appoynted to dispute of their religion in the Kings presence, assembled togither, and that the states of Parris followed to conferre of their affaires, where the principall leaguers, especially the Duke de Maine, the Popes Legate, the Duke of Feria, a Spaniard and others, still practised for the bringing in of a new king, continually standing vpon this poynt, to maintaine the warres in France vpon expence of the Indian golde: the Parliament of Paris assayed to hinder part of these practises, and to driue the Spaniardes home againe.
Means made by the Parlament of Paris against the League and the Spanyard.By an act made the twentieth eight of Iune, they ordained that declarations should bee made the same day after dinner, by the President, the Maister, assisted with diuers Councellours, to the Duke of Maine in presence of other Lords, to this effect: that no act might bee made to set the Crowne on the heads of any forraine Prince or Princesse: ordaining moreouer, that the auncient lawes of the Realme, should be still kept inuiolate. That the decrees giuen by the Court, for the declaration of a Cathoclique King, a Frenchman borne, should bee executed. That the Duke de Maine should bee exhorted to imploy his authoritie of Lieftenanshippe, to prouide that vnder colour of religion, the Crowne should not fall into the handes of straungers, contrarie to the lawes and statutes of the Realme. And to prouide speedily for the peoples quiet: declaring ouer and aboue, all manner of acts made or pretended to bee made, for the establishing of a forraine Prince or Princesse, to bee of no strength, force, or effect, but to bee as deeds preiudiciall to the Salicque lawes, and other ancient lawes and prerogatiues of the Realme of France.
The Duke de Maine beeing extreame wrath at this Edict, grew to very hard words with the President, who confuted all these houe speeches vsed by him, and certaine other of the leaguers which held with him.
At last, after much conference, commings, and goings, letters, and answeres, The K. changeth his religion.from the Deputie on each side, the supplications of those which desired that the king would make profession of the Romaine religion preuailed, in such sort, that the king who since he withdrew himselfe from the Court of France, for fifteene yeares before, had made open profession of the reformed religion, contrarie to the aduice of his Ministers, went to see and heare Masse sung in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Dennis, the fiue and twentieth Sunday of Iuly, where hee was receiued by the Archbishop of Bourges, and other Prelates, lates, with certaine peculiar ceremonies, peculier to this receiuing, which was incontinent published throughout the Realme, with diuers censures as well of the Catholicque Nobilitie, as also of those of the religion, whereof not one followed this example.
As for Courtiers, there were a very small number, or other particulars in seuerall parts of the Realme, which shooke at this change, but men made not thereof any account, for they were all speedily suspected. And as for such as went about to gratulate the kings conuersion (as they called it) their recompence was only to bee mockt, and soone after, the most part of them perished in miserable sort.
A generall truce practised.The Duke
de Maine and his greatest fauourites, seeing their intended enterprises preuented, by that which was now come to passe: and on the other side, that the practises of the Spaniardes was still to maintaine the fire of discention, by meanes of the election of a newe King, which should bee married to the Spanish kings daughter: to the ende they might giue some hope to haue at length a day for their turne, and to frustrate the Spaniards practises, began in Iuly to treat a general truce, and after much adoo made therein, the articles were agreed vpon the last of
Iuly. Notwithstanding this truce, the chiefe of the league with their estates of Parris, gaue not ouer the following of their purposes.
New deuices made by the Leaguers to hinder the king.And as they had before opposed themselues at Rome by the meanes of the Spanish Ambassadour, against the suite of the Marques of Pisani, and the Cardinall of Gondy, Deputies to the Kings Cathonique Councell toward the Pope, before the foresaid ceremonie the fiue and twentieth of Iuly: also they resolued to hinder the king, of whom they spake most odiously, from being receiued, and to withstand him as much or more then before, by the Sermons of seditious Preachers, by declarations to the contentment of their adherents, by secret indeuours, and by practises at Rome, to ouerthrow, indomage, and make the D. of
Neuers voyage for the king vnprofitable, whom hee had sent to acknowledge his dutie to the Pope.
As for the Preachers belonging to the League, publicke and priuately, before and after the truce, their discourses at Paris and other places were, that the Masse which they sung before the king, was but a deceit: that it was impossible the King should bee conuerted; that the Pope could not recatholize him: that it was lawfull for the people to rise against him and his officers: that it appertained to the Sorbonnists, to iudge whether the Pope oght to receiue him as king. And if peraduenture hee should do it, neuerthelesse hee might bee held for an hereticque, and one excommunicate: that it was lawfull for any particular man to kill him that should say, hee was revnited to the Catholicque Romaine Church. These and such other propositions, were made and spredde both within Paris and other places.
In regard of the declarations made by these estates of the League, to keepe the fauour of their partakers, to giue a secret touch to the kings Councellors, as if they were not right Catholickes, and to bring the Realme into far greater trouble then before, they in their assembly the eighteenth day of August, made a declaration containing these words, among many others: With one consent and aduise wee haue decreed, established, and or dained, and by this present doo decree, establish, and ordaine, that the holy and sacred generall Councell of
Trent, shall bee receiued, published, and obserued, purely and simply in all places and iurisdictions of this Realme: as at this present in the generall bodie of the estates, wee do receiue and publish it.
Their oath.Moreouer, the same estates deuised the forme of an oath in these termes: Wee promise and sweare, to continue vnited togither for the defence and preseruation of the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romaine religion, and to bring (if it be possible) this kingdome so long time afflicted, to his auncient dignitie and renowme: and neuer to consent, for any perill or cause whatsoeuer shall come, that any thing shall bee done for the aduancement of heresie, or to the preiudice of our religion: for defence whereof, wee promise to hee obedient to the sacred decrees and ordinances of our holy father and the sacred sea of Rome, without euer falling away from the same.
Their diuision vpon the principall point.But they were not vnited togither in respect of the principall poynt, which was, to acknowledge one king. The Parisians, and other townes that held for the League, desired that the king of Spaines daughter might bee married to the Duke of Guise, and so beeing ioyned by matrimonie, they might be crowned King and Queene of France. The Duke
de Maine, who was solicited to aduance the house of the Popes Legate, made shewe to agree to so great an honour done to his Nephew, but hauing accorded vpon the generall, for his particular profit, hee demaunded things impossible, or at least so difficult, that it might bee well perceiued, that not esteeming the Popes or King Philips will, nor the consent of the estates and chiefe of the League, hee said as the Cardinall did in the Conclaue: I chose myselfe. Impossible it was, that euer hee should come to aduance his Nephewe to the Crowne.
Peter Barriere atte^pted to kill the king, and is executed for the same.These contentions produced the truce aboue mentioned, which the Duke of Maine and his Councellours forged, to breake a blowe with the partakers of Spaine, and to draw new treasures into their purses. This wrought the confusion of
France on the one side: on the other, the Prelates and Sorbonnists, which with the watch-word receiued from Rome, had drawn the king to the Masse, imagined in this sort, to fish for a golden world. But the leaguers thought to bring in new troubles and pernicious practises: for in middest of these businesses, the sixe and twentieth day of August, Peter Barriere, Alias Bar, borne at
Orleans, was committed prisoner at Meleun, where hee finally confessed, that hee was seduced by a Capucin Fryer at
Lyons, by the Curat and Vicar of a certaine Parish in
Paris, and also by a Iesuite, closely to follow the king, and to murther him with a two edged knife, the which was found about him. He had beene intised to this parriside, and was resolued to doo it, chiefly about two months before: and further, confessed that two Priests by him nominated, were also come from Lyons for the verie same intent: and that he set himselfe the forwardest for the execution thereof, to the ende hee might get the greatest honour thereby. Hee was drawne through the streetes of Meleun, where then the king was, they cut off his right hand, holding the murthering knife therein, and after burned the same. After this was done, they broke his armes, legges, and thigh bones, and in that sort laide him vppon a wheele, where hee languished certaine houres till hee died, then was his bodie consumed to ashes and throwne into the riuer, his compleces or confederates so disguised themselues, that they could not bee found or taken.
The Duke of Nemours Tragedie.At this time was the Duke of Nemours within Lyon, from whence hee would not stirre, to go to the estates of the league, although the Pope had giuen him commaundement: the other chiefe Captaines thought it meete, and his friend and seruants desired him to go, hee vouchsafed not so much as to send vnto them, knowing that the leaguers cast their eies altogither vpo^ the Duke of Guise, and that the Duke de Maine his brother by the mothers side, crost all his purposes, and would worke all meanes for his death. A certaine bolde Eryer of Lyon, perceiuing well that this yong Prince pretented to bring some new matter to passe within the league, whereby at least hee might haue some great hand in the gouernment, by the aduice of two or three Councellours who were of his complecies, hee compassed Lyon with many fortresses which held on his side at Toissai, Vienne, Montbrison, Chastillon, de Dombes, Belleuille, Tisi, Charlieu, and other places. Quirieu forsaking him, hee bought it with a great sum of mony, at the hands of the Lord of Saint
Iulian, which was Gouernour thereof. This done, Lyon was inclosed as well by water as by land.
The Lyonnois did not withstand neither his prodigallities nor his Councellours, nor his men of warre, which forraged the plaine countrie, receiuing the guerdon of their reuolt from the kings obedience. In the end, acknowledging themselues, they rose vp against the Duke of
Nemours, assisted by the counsell and presence of their Archbishop, sent by the Duke de Maine, and the eighteenth of September they tooke holde of Nemours, who was seene three times at deaths doore, committing him to close prison, where hee continued certaine moneths, and at last escaping by cunning meanes, spoyled of his succours, chased from his Fortresses, hee went and died farre from
France, in a litle Towne of his owne name Aneci, scituat in
Sauoy, in the Countie of Geneuois.
During this generall truce, many matters were intended for the establishment of the affaires of the kingdome. The king, which desired the agreement of his subiects, and the abolishment of the pernicious league, assayed by faire meanes to winne the Duke de Maine, in making him offer of charge, and honourable assurances of preferment. The Duke, which seemed yet to haue two strings to his bowe, bargained, promised, refused, aduanced, gathered, and stretched these matters to the length: procuring vnder hand, that the decision of the Sorbonnists in the yeare 1590. might take place: that is to say, that Henry of
Bourbon was declared vnworthie of all right or pretence to the Crowne, although hee made profession of the Romaine religion. The Spanish Agents in France set this matter forward, working with all their power, for the preferment of the Duke of Neuers. On the other side, they induced both great and small to continue their accustomed request, for the abolishing of one of the religions in France: many other were of this opinion, that the king could not be receiued, except hee first promised expresly to driue away all those of the reformed religion, or at least to abolish and put downe their publicque exercises. This counsell did hatch or breed infinit vniust matters in the rest of the yeare, through diuers parts of France, where they of the religion could obtaine no true rest, but in promise and papers, being molested in effect with all reproaches that might bee imagined: wherevnto they opposed themselues in nothing but in peaceable complaints, and humble supplications. Notwithstanding they obtained nothing, the deuices of their enemies beeing such, that all their forepassed and faithfull seruices were disdained, and contrariwise, the most part of the chiefe Captaines and leaguers Townes receiued into fauour, cherished, and raised vnto honour. Briefly, all the kings good and faithfull seruants were cast into the lake of forgetfulnesse, and the enemies and conspirators of the estates set as it were in a chaire of triumph, before whom iustice was so shamefully abused, that the wronged cried vengeance from heauen, to fall vppon their detestable dealings.
There were also at this time other deuices against the king.There was also at this time, an other sort of Courtiers that greatly fauored the League, and yet notwithstanding fained to bee fauourers of the Commonweale and quiet of the Realme: who daily spredde rude reports of the kings insufficiencie, saying that all meanes failed him, to make him be obeyed, that his enemies were of two great a number, and too mightie for him, yea inuincible: that they would ouerthrow him in short time. That France vnder his raigne beeing scourged with so many warres, then falling into a new sicknesse of desolations and shamefull deceits, it could not but languish, and that it would come to passe, after once it hung the wing, that she should remaine a pray for a greater Maister. This was (by their account) the king of Spaine, of whom they made great bragges of his honour, reputation, and greatnesse. His double Pistolles had so bewitched their thoughts, that they also supposed to make the Frenchmen afraid with the very name of this Prince: remembring not at all, that an hundreth yeares before, Philip Artch-Duke of Austrige, great Grandfather to the king of
Spaine, made homage within the towne of Arras, to king
Lewis the twelfth, in the person of his Chancellor, the Earles of
Flanders, Artois, and Charrolois, where on his bended knees, hee called him his soueraigne Lord, swearing to become true seruant vnto the said king Lewis, promising to bee faithfull all daies of his life, and in his behalfe to stand against al other, to procure his welfare, to preuent his harmes, and in all things to behaue himself toward him, as to his soueraigne Lord and Maister, of which the Histories of these times do make true mention.
While yet this truce indured, the king deliberated to assemble at Mante, certaine of the chiefe Nobles of the Realme, to take counsell on diuers matters at that time needfull. The Deputies of the reformed Churches were there present about the end of Nouember, whom the king caused to be called togither, the twelfth day of the moneth following, and hauing giuen them audience, and heard the great sorrow which they made vpon the infinit contradictions of his decrees, and their complaints of the greeuous wrongs done vnto them through all his Prouinces: hee aunswered, that the change of religion, had not any whit changed his affection from the^, that hee would redresse their greefes, and make peace and concord among his subiects. He receiued their billes of complaints to haue them perused. But these affaires were drawn to such length, that the distance of many yeares hath buried all. And the Captaines of the league hauing plunged the Realme into new miseries, those of the religion almost in all parts of the kingdom, continued as greeuous vnder the crosse as before.
The war of Piedmont.As for the warres on the other side of the mountaines, their affaires fell out in this sort: About the ende of the yeare one thousand fiue hundreth nintietwo, the Lord of Diguieres, beeing entered into Piedmont, had taken there for the king, Briqueras, Cauours, and three or foure other little townes, hauing ouerthrowne the Duke of Sauoy in diuers incounters, as hee did also in Prouence, and on the frontiers of
Dauphine: hee chased them out of all these Prouinces, and droue him to his owne house, in such sort, that if hee had beene strengthened in the yeare following, with men, money, and munition, hee had inforced the Duke to giue ouer all that which hee vsurped from the Crowne of
France.
But the Duke, who was not ignorant of the estate and affaires of France, assayed to couer and hide the shame he had gotten in so many iournies, as in the plaine of Pontcharra, at Espernon de Pallieres, and otherwise in so many incounters in
Piedmont, where hee had lost in two yeares, as also about
Geneue, many of his best approoued good souldiers, and a great number of Captaines, hauing also consumed a maruellous heape of treasure and munition in these continuall warres. Hee did then through his father in lawes fauor, who furnished him with a new masse of money, besiege, batter, assault, and take by composition, the Townes of
Briqueras and Cauours, beeing content to keepe them to himselfe, without seeking any further in Prouence, where his Garrisons could not long remaine without chase of the enemie, the Towne of
Berry onely accepted.
Thus did the Frenchmen loose in small time, that which they had gotten in Piedmont: whereof men do write in diuers sorts. In these sieges, the assayled did their duties maruellous well, but being ouerwatcht by the multitude of the assailants, and depriued of the principall commodities to withstand a siege, destitute of succour, and the passages stopt, they were of necessitie constrained to yeeld: while the said L. of Diguieres was as it were bound hand and foote in the countrie of Dauphine: and that many which should not haue forgotten his braue exployts, but stretch out their hands for the relieuing of that distressed countrie, and to make head against the Spaniardes, euen at their very gates, forsooke him in his neede, thinking by their enuious deuises, to eclips the glorie of this great Captain and commander, crossing all his purposes, that he could not recouer himself long time after, hauing been depriued of all necessarie means to begin in which he did acco^plish about four yeares after, with no lesse courage and magnanimitie then before. Thus haue wee briefly runne ouer that, which the whole Historie doth more at large mention, our intent beeing onely in this breuiarie, to touch and passe ouer things as it were in a word.
 The king considering that his enemies, which required a prolonging of this truce, sought no other thing, then meanes to continue the Realme in miserie, resolued no longer to beare the same, wherefore hee caused in the beginning of this yeare, a declaration to be published and imprinted, containing an Oration of the mischiefes and vnfaithfull practises of the Leaguers, which vnder a continuing of truce, soght to establish their tyrannie. He prescribed a moneths libertie, as wel to the chiefe of the leaguers, as to the Clargie, cities, towns, and Communalties, yea to al men generally within ye same, to acknowledge him their king, and submit the^selues to his gouernme^t, as it was requisite, and in so doing, he would place them again each one in his charge, benefices, lands, and priuiledges. The time once past, he would reuoke his grace and fauour, accounting them to be rebelles and guiltie of high treason for contempt of this kingly offer.
The report of this declaration, and the preparations which the king made to chastise their stubborn opinions, amazed the very principall of the league, and the most part of the rebellious townes and commons. The Duke de Maine, did now beat his braines to auoyde this danger, but hauing no forces, neither of his owne, nor from others, sufficient to remedie the same, these matters fell out otherwise then he thought. The Lord of Villeroy sent his opinion plainely to the Duke, in letters which were intercepted, and since that, imprinted, describing in most fit termes, his owne insufficiencie and miserie. Certaine Townes partaking with the Duke, sent to the king, crauing truce for two moneths more, but he refused to graunt it.
The Leaguers townes forsake their rebellion.This vnion then intangled by so many oathes, deceits, conspiracies, and fellonies, were seene to faile and part asunder the most obstinate, beginning now to conceiue and foresee their finall ruine, if they perseuered in their former rebellion. The preuentials taking example by the rigorous gouernment of the Duke d'Espernon, against whom they had obstinately resisted, beganne to abace their Pecockes plumes. Those of Meaux in Brie, a small iourney from
Parris, yeelded themselues to the king the eleuenth day of Ianuarie, by the meanes of the Lord of Vitri their Gouernour, who hauing drawne great summes of mony out of the treasures of Spaine, wherewith hee builded a gorgious house, forsooke the league, and deliuered the Towne to the king, with al the artillerie which the Duke of Parma brought thither from the low Countries.
Moreouer, the Inhabitants of Meaux, exhorted the Parisians by a pithie letter to follow their example. They obtained of the king (as also Vitri did) euen whatsoeuer they would request. The Parisians beganne to looke one vppon another, and the kings Atturney generall in the Parliament, made a long Oration in the open audience, whereof the whole sum was, that they should no longer stay from acknowledging their king, except they would prepare themselues to indure greater miseries then before, which wold produce a generall subuertion. The Lord of
Bellin, Gouernour of the Cittie for the leaguers, was of the same minde. To preuent this eminent destruction of the league, the Duke de Maine through enuie wrought such meanes, that Bellin was put out of office, and driuen out of Paris, what time himselfe drew into the Cittie an armie of Spaniardes, Italians and Wallons, vnder the commaund of the Duke of Feria, thinking to keep for the king of Spaine his good Cittie of Paris. But the parliament more carefull for that which was to come, ordained that the Duke de Maine should be required by one of the Presidents, and sixe Councellours, to prouide for the quiet of the Cittie within a month, in such sort, that a happie peace might make an end of all these disorders, and that the king might bee by them acknowledged.

An act made by the Parliament of Paris against the Spanyards.And during the time that they sought vaine excuses, and strengthened the garrisons, the Parliament made an act, the fourteenth day of this month, containing these words. The Court with ful consent hath vowed and protested, to oppose themselues against the euill and wicked purposes of the Spaniards, and against such as would seeke to bring ayde, or protect them within the Realme of France: ordaining that all garrisons straungers shall depart the Cittie of
Parsis, and declaring their intent to hinder with all their might, that the Lord of Billin should abandon or forsake the said cittie, nor any Bourgeous of the same, but either hee to stay with them, or hee and they to depart altogither. And wee inioyne the prouost of the Merchants, to warne all the Citize^s togither, to take counsel on things necessarie, and to ioyne with the same court, for the better executio^ of the said act. And that the said Court shall forbear all other matters, till such time as the said act is put in execution and receiued. Those of that bodie which had been before the greatest sustainers of the league, were now the first that humbled themselues herevnto. The Ambassadour of the Spanish part, wrought at Rome an other occasion to hinder the accord twixt the Pope and the king of
France, who alleadged that the Kings penitence at S. Dennis, was not sufficient to obtain absolution of the papall seat, sent the Duke of Neuers with great presents to bee giuen to him and his son. He parted from Rome the 15. of Ianuarie, who met vpon the way, the Cardinall of Ioyeuse, and the Barron of Senescay, who were speedily trauelling toward the Pope in the Duke de Maines name.The shifts of the leaguers of Rome. Their courtlike salutations was then forgotten, both on the one side and other. The Cardinall had audience the 24. of this month, who demaunded succors for the league, and 200000. Crownes, otherwise all would bee vtterly lost. But the Pope answered, that vntill then, the K. of Spaine had furnished the league both with men, mony, and promised so to continue. As for the mony which they demanded, he excused himselfe by means of warres with the Turkes. Six daies after, the Cardinal hauing by an other Oration shewen the meanes how to sustaine the league, the Pope made answere, he could resolue on nothing, till first he had taken aduice with the king of
Spaine, for the most expedient meanes to maintaine the Catholicque religion in France.
Leaguers receiued into grace thorow the mercie of their gracious soueraigne.The Duke of Neuers was most royally receiued at Florence, at Venice, and at
Mantoue, from whence hee came into France. Many memorable things came to passe in the month of Februarie. On the one side, the King co^strained those of Milon and the Castle of Thierri, to acknowledge him for their soueraigne Lord: on the other, he receiued into fauour the Cittie of Orleans, Lyon, Roane, Poictiers, Bourges, Haure de Grace, Ponteau de Mer, Vernueil at Perche, Pontoise, Riom in
Auuergne, Peronne, and Mondidier in Picardie, agreed that they of Amiens and Abbeuille, should remaine newters, (which shortly after acknowledged him) because they would not open their gates to the Duke of Aumale, one of the Captaines of the league, nor to his troupes.
The Bishop of Orleans for his better obtaining of the kings pardon for al the Cittie, procured that certaine mutinous persons of the league should bee whipt, and the rest banished. As for the Duke
de Maine, they tooke a packet of his letters, that was sent to the king of Spaine, containing a complaint of his miseries.

Hee sent Zamet his Agent to the king, to vndertake his affaires: but the kings aunswere was, that hee would not deale with the Duke of Maine, as with the chiefe of a faction. That if he wold craue pardon of his soueraigne Lord, he wold receiue him as his kinsman and allie. The leaguers townes made their seueral intreats, and each one vpon their declaration, obtained of the K. much more fauour then they looked for: as much may be said of all the rest in particular, which in great numbers submitted themselues to the king, whom he receiued in gracious sort, giuing them for the most part, authoritie and charge, and was himselfe most liberall vnto many: while his faithfull subiects and seruants of the religion, were most hardly vsed and spightfully intreated, in diuers Prouinces of the Realme.
Now resteth the Principall Cittie to bee spoken of, that is, the faire Cittie of Parris, which was brought to the kings obeysance by meanes of the intelligences which they had within, with the Lord of Billin their Gouernour, the Earle of Brissac and others, the two and twentieth of March: The Duke de Maine had trust vp his baggage certaine daies before, to be packing to Soissons. There was once resistance made at the New gate, by certaine Lance-knights, who were torne in peeces: and a Court of guard of the Leaguers toward the Pallace, whom the Cittizens soone put to flight. The Neapolitans made shewe as if they would proffer fight, refusing to agree, except it were by the consent of the Duke of Feria, and Don Diego d'Euera their Generall.
They accepted soone after without resistance, whatsoeuer it pleased the king to offer them, as vnto their Captaines: to witte, that all of them should enioy their armes, and so depart with bagge and baggage out of the Cittie, from thence to haue safe conduct out of the Realme, toward the borders of Picardie, after they had promised the king neuer to beare armes in France against his seruice.
Heere was a thing woorthie to bee noted, that foure thousand men on horse and foote, entering armed into this little world of
Parris, should put the league to silence, keepe so well the order prescribed vnto them, and be so obedient, that no souldier left his rancke, to commit any outrage or violence.
That no Burgeous or Inhabitant was indomaged, nor so much as wronged in his reputation, person, or goods: that all the people mingled themselues presently with the men of war, and other that entered with the king, in such familiaritie, as if they had alwaies dwelt togither, filling the streetes with ioyful applaudes and maruellous reioycings, euen as if they had escaped the hands of the hangman, to beholde the face of their deare father, or best beloued friend.
The Kings troupes entered the Cittie, about foure of the clocke in the morning, and within two houres the shoppes were all set open, the Citie appearing so peaceable, as if there had neuer been any change. The most paine which the kings seruants had, was to keepe the people with faire intreaties, who required no other thing, then to bee medling against the Spaniardes, Neapolitans, and VVallons, who were in number nine hundreth men, or thereabout, to bee reuenged on them, calling to minde the great iniuries which they had receiued by their meanes in times past.

All their Churches and Temples were filled soone after, with praiers and songs of thansgiuing to God, according to the order and custome of the same Cittie, which was newes most pleasing and agreeable to the Inhabitants. As much was done in all other places of the kings obeysance, and namely in diuers parts out of France. In short time after, Bastille was yeelded, and hee which commanded there for the league, sent away with his souldiers. The Cardinal of
Plaisance the Popes Legat being sick at Paris, had his safe conduct to bee gone, who died soone after, and so likewise did the Cardinall of Pelue. This was the cause that other dispearsed Leaguers and seditious Preachers fled away, some heere, some there, vnder the wings of the king of Spaine, or toward the Duke de Maine, who was gone to Soissons. The most part were confounded with despight and sorrow. The other do as yet bite on the bridle in
Spaine and the lowe Countries, and from one moneth to another followe their companies. There were some found that hazarded themselues to enter into Parris, but it was to be drawne to the gallowes, where they receiued the guerdon due to their villainie.
The Parliament of Paris beeing established soone after this yeelding published a decree the thirtieth of March in these termes: The Court hauing the twelfth day of Ianuarie last, required the Duke
de Maine to acknowledge the king, whom God and the lawes hath giuen to this Realme, for the establishing of peace and vnitie, whereto hee would giue no eare, through the deuises of the Spaniards and their adherents: and God hauing since of his infinit goodnesse, deliuered this Cittie of
Parris from the hands of straungers, and brought the same to obedience of her true, naturall, and lawfull king: after solemne thansgiuing to God for this blessed successe, would imploy the soueraigne authoritie and iustice of this Realme, for the preseruation of the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Romaine religion, to see that vnder the false colour and pretext of the same, straungers do not possesse the estate: Calling all Princes, Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen, and other subiects, to the grace, fauour, and clemencie of the king, and to a generall reconciliation, and to repaire that which the libertie of the warres hath altered or taken from the authoritie of the lawes foundation, of the royall estate, rights and honours of the Crowne.
These things hauing beene in deliberation, all the chambers assembled hath declared, and doth declare, all acts, decrees, ordinances, and oathes, giuen, made, or readie to bee made, since the 29. of December,
1588. to the preiudice of the authoritie giuen to our kings and lawes of the Realme, to be set and extorted by force and violence: and as such, we reuoke, repeale, and disanull them: ordaining, that they shall remaine abolished and of no force: and especially that, which hath beene made against the honour of the deceased king, Henry the third: as well those in his life time, as since his death, to be nothing: forbidding al persons to speake of his memorie, otherwise then wel or honourably. And further, wee ordaine* that the detestable murther committed vpon his royall person, shall bee informed and proceeded against extraordinarily, against all such as shall be found guiltie therein. And the saide Court hath reuoked, and doth reuoke, the power heretofore graunted to the Duke de Maine, vnder the title of the Lieftenant generall of the estate and Crowne of France.

Forbidding al persons of what estate or condition soeuer they be, to acknowledge him by that title, or to shewe him any obeysance, fauour, comfort, or ayde, on paine to bee punished as guiltie of treason in the highest degree. And on the same paine, inioyneth the said Duke de Maine, and other Princes of the house of Lorraine, to acknowledge king Henry the fourth of that name, King of
France and Nauarre, for their king and soueraigne Lorde, and to giue vnto him such seruice and obedience, as to him is due. And that all other Princes, Lords, Townes, Communalties, and particularities, shall giue ouer the pretended part of the League, whereof the Duke de Maine was made chiefe: and to render vnto the King all obedience and fidelitie, on paine to haue the said Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, to bee disgraded of their Nobilitie, and to bee declared outlawes, both them and their posteritie, with the confiscation of bodie and goodes, racing and destroying of their Townes, castles, and manners, which shall bee disobedient to the commandement and pleasure of the king.
And this Court hath broken and repealed, and by this present do breake and repeale, all that which hath beene done, inacted, and ordained, by the pretended Deputies of the assembly held in this Citie of
Paris, vnder the name of the generall estates of this kingdome, as of no effect or force, beeing made by priuate persons, who were for the most part, practisers with the factious sort of the Realm, and partakers with the Spaniards, hauing no lawful power or authoritie. Forbidding also the said pretended Deputies, from henceforth neuer to take the like vpon them againe, and no more to make assemblies, either in this Citie or any other, on paine to bee punished as disturbers of the publicke peace, and guiltie of treason toward his Maiestie. And wee enioyne all these pretended Deputies, which are at this present within the Citie of Paris, to depart each one to his owne house, there to liue as subiects vnder the kings lawes, and to bee sworne to their fidelitie, before the iudges and Magistrates of those parts. It is also ordained, and by these presents were doo ordaine, that all processions and solemnities tollerared during these troubles, all occasions of them shall cease, and in steade of them, the two and twentieth day of March shall bee for euer solemnized, on the which day, generall processions shall bee made after the accustomed manner, assisted by the said Court of Parliament in their scarlet robes, in remembrance of the most happy deliuerance of this Cittie on that day, from all her miseries, and the bringing thereof vnder the kings obedience, with thanksgiuing vnto God for the same.
At the same time the king published a declaration, wherein all the shifts and deceits of the Captaines of the league were discouered, and his loue and great good will toward the Parisians, to whom hee forgaue all matters past, restored all their customes and priuiledges, obtained new fauors, and shewed a most fatherly affection towarde them, which was most pleasing to the people, which drew many other townes from the league, to humble themselues to his highnesse.
Three weekes after, the Rector of the Vniuersitie, the Deane, and the Doctors of Sorbonne, the Deanes and Doctors of other faculties, in briefe, all the members, officers, and substitudes of the Vniuersities, of their owne minde assembled, went all to humble themselues to the king, which was then in the Chappell of Bourbon, where they all fell prostrate on the ground before him, acknowledging him their onely true and naturall Prince, shewing with a most heartie affection, well witnessing their loue, that they were readie to take what oath it pleased him, to confirme them to his subiection: hee receiued them, and with great benignitie sent them away. The moneths of April and May, were spent in receiuing and answering supplications, from the Townes and Commons in diuers Prouinces, and in drawing Lordes, Gentlemen, Captains, and other principall members of the league vnder the kings subiection, who pardoned all, in such sort, that the League resembled
Isopes Choffe.
Warre in Picardy against the league.There remained some Townes in Picardie, which were solde through the meanes of the most factious of that part. The king besieged Laon and certaine other Townes, which the Spaniards assayed to warrant and keepe. But their succours hauing been ouerthrowne in diuers incounters, where they lost more then fiue hundreth men, at last
Laon yeelded to the king, and so likewise the others,
Soissons and Fere excepted, which were possest by the Duke of Maine and the Spaniardes, who also at the same time became Maisters of Chapelle, a little Towne in the Duchie of
Thierasche. The Duke of Maine ranne to Bruxelles for fresh supplies. He receiued a good summe of mony, but not sufficient to withstand the kings prosperous proceeding, who then receiued into grace and fauour, the Duke of Guise and his brother, giuing since to the said Duke the gouernment of Prouence. The Duke
de Maine, who could do nothing in Picardie, hauing left good garrisons within Soissons, hee closely trauelled into the Duchie of Bourgondy, that hee might assure those places to himselfe, which hee knew yet to hold for the league. Now let vs turne againe to Paris, where they beganne a new warre. The Iesuites hauing in former times stood against sundrie purposes of the Vniuersitie (whom they had set out in their colours, shewing that this sect is the most execreable of al others) by the helpe of such which had to do with those people, for the executing of their great and most vnfortunate enterprises. And in the end, since the day of the Barricadoes had imperiously commaunded within Parris, vsed infinit practises to aduance the Spaniards in
France, kindled the fire of sedition in all the principall towns in the kingdome, defaming in their sermons and confessions, the memorie of the deceased king, and the Maiestie of him now raigning, whose fame was by them spotted in the vildest manner they could deuise: and finally had indeuoured to kill the king by the meanes of Barriere, who was executed at Meleun, as hee deposed a little before his death.
These considerations were cause that the first resolution taken by the Vniuersitie of Paris, since the Citties reduction, was to require the banishing of the Iesuites. To this effect a supplication was presented to the Court of Parliament, who hauing a certaine time despised the authoritie thereof, in the end constrained by an act made the seuenth of Iuly, containing that the indightment which was to be giuen against them, should be heard the Monday following, in a publicque audience to be iudged in open field, they did that day entertaine their Aduocates and men of law in the great chamber before the audience were readie, who did declare, that to defend the cause on their behalfe, he was constrained to say many hard things against diuers that
were knowne to bee the kings true seruaunts, and for this occasion, they requested that the cause might bee pleaded within doores.
This deuice was made, to hinder the people from the cleare knowledge of the corrupt and pernicious purposes of the Iesuites, pretending to make all Europe subiect to the Spaniards: but for as much as they had obtained their request, this inuention had no such successe as they looked for. For all their pleadings which were done close within doores, was afterward openly published in print, where the Aduocates of the vniuersitie, men learned and deepely affectioned to the Romaine Church, did particularly represent and discouer to the full, the horrible, wicked, and insupportable malice of that sect. But the deciding of the matter was suspended: Gods prouidence reseruing the same to an othertime, which came sooner then many looked for.
The Spaniards being desirous to continue the fire of discention in France, instantly solicited the Duke de Mercoeur,Warres in Britaine. one of the chiefe of the league, and an vsurper of a part of the Duchie of Brittaine, alwaies to continue warre. His sister Loyse of
Vaudemont, king Henry the thirds widdow, did all shee might to make his peace. Certaine troubles hapning in the meane time, broke all that was done. The Spaniards, which were Maisters of Blauet, a Fortresse almost inuincible, had builded during the Sommer of the yeare
1594. a strong Fort neare vnto Croysil, to stoppe^ he enterance to the port of
Brest: which would haue beene better for them, if they had made another right against it, and on the other side of the hauen.
Sir Iohn Norris. Captaine Forbisher.To hinder them, came the Marshall d'Aumont, and
S. Iohn Norris, Generall of the Englishmen, to whom was sent a supply by sea, vnder the conduct of Captaine Forbisher, they soone became Maisters of Quimpercorencin, and of the Towne and Castle of Morlay. Soone after, they assailed the Spaniards new fort, and slew foure hundreth souldiers that kept it, not without losse of their own men, among other the said Forbisher. The king on the other side, deliberating to make war out of his own realm against the Spaniards, agreed with the States of Holland and their confederates, to beginne in the Duchie of Luxembourg, where the Marshall of
Bouillon, who married one of the daughters of the deceased Prince of Orange, and Earle Philip of Nassau, assayed to enter in the moneth of October, where they found all the passages shut vp, and Earle Charles of Mansfield making head against them, especially on the troupes of Holland. The king on the other side, sought to ouerrunne the frontiers of Picardie, and gaue the estates of Artois and Hainaut to vnderstand, that if they fauoured him so little, to suffer the Spanish forces to molest Cambray and the countries adioyning, that hee would then make warre vppon them incontinent.
This message beeing sent in writing from Amiens, by a Trumpetter, about the midst of December, the estates knew not what to say vnto it, and before they would make answere, they opened the matter vnto the Arch-duke Ernest, the king of Spaines Lieftenant in the lowe Countries, whom they intreated that the warre might not continue, perceiuing the desolations that were like to follow therevppon, and that which had alreadie afflicted them: but this Prince, who deceased shortly after, could neither doo any thing for himselfe, nor in their behalfe.

The seuen and twentieth of December, as the king was returning from Picardie to Parris, readie booted and spurd within a chamber at Louure, hauing about him his cousins, the Prince of
Countie, the Earle of Soissons, the Earle of Saint
Paul, and thirtie or fortie other Lords and Gentlemen of his Court: there came also in, the Lords of Ragne and Montigni, who had not as yet taken their leaue of his Maiestie. And euen as hee was receiuing them,
Iohn Chastill attempteth to kil the king, hurts him in the mouth, and is for the same put to death. and in Princely manner kissing them for his farewell, a young stripling named
Iohn Chastill, of a small stature, and about eighteene or nineteene yeares of age, a Drapers sonne of Parris, who was slid into the chamber among the preace, drew neare vnto the king, before hee was almost perceiued of any bodie, and suddainly would haue smote him in the bodie with a knife which hee had in his hand, but by reason that his Ma. was verie readie to take vp the Lords which were on their knees before him, in his stooping hee strooke him in the face, on the vpper iaw on the right side, therewithall cutting out one of his teeth. Presently this miserable catiue was taken, and after hee would haue excused the deed, incontinent vppon examination, hee confessed the whole trueth voluntarily and without compulcion. The king commaunded the Captaine of his guard, that had taken him, after that hee had throwne his knife to the ground, to let him go: saying that hee freely forgaue him. But afterward vnderstanding that he was a scholler to the Iesuites, he said: And must it needs be, that the Iesuites should bee confounded by my mouth?
This Parriside beeing brought vnto the Bishops prison, freely declared the circumstance of his euill intent, discouering many of the Iesuites secret practises. Among many other things, hee remembred that he heard the fathers of that holy societie say, that it was lawfull to kill the king, that hee was excommunicate out of the Church, that hee was not to bee obeyed, nor to be taken for their king, vntill such time as he was allowed by the Pope. The Court of Parliament co^demning this Chastil of treason in the highest degree, caused him honourably to be brought naked in his shirt, before the principal gate of the Cathedrall Church in
Parris, holding in his hand a taper of waxe lighted, of two pound waight, and there on his knees to confesse and declare, that most wickedly and traiterously hee had attempted this most inhumane, and most traiterous parriside, hauing hurt the king with a knife in the face. That by false and damnable instructions, hee had maintained by argument, that it was lawfull to kill these kings, and that king Henry the fourth at that present raigning, was not of the Church, till such time he was allowed by the Pope, of all which hee repented himselfe, asking forgiuenesse of God, of the King, and of the lawes: which done, hee was conueyed vnto the place of execution, carrying in his hand the murthering knife, wherewith hee intended to murther the king, the which was there first cut off, his flesh puld off with hotte burning pincers, hoth from his armes and thighes: after that, his bodie was drawne and halde in peeces with foure horses, and his quarters cast into the fire, and consumed to ashes, and the ashes scattered in the winde. Moreouer, by the same act of Parliament, it was forbidden to all persons, of what estate, condition, or quallitie soeuer they were, on paine to be punished as traitors, to say or publish in any place whatsoeuer, the aforesaid slaunder, to witte, that the king was not of the Church, till hee had the Popes allowance or approbation, or that it was lawfull to kill the kings. By which they Henry 3. Henry 4.vnderstood, kings that were not authorised by the Pope.
In what reputatio^ were the Iesuites before the first Parliame^t in Fra^ce.The Court hauing declared the said reports to be scandelous, seditious, contrarie to the word of God, and condemned as false and hereticall, by all holy decrees. Ordaining also, that all the Priests and Schollers of Clermont Colledge, and all other of the same societie of Iesus, to bee held and reputed as corrupters of youth, disturbers of the publicke peace, enemies to the king and the estate, to auoyde within three daies after the proclamation of the said Edict, out of Parris, and all other places and Townes where their Colledges are, and within fifteene daies after, out of the kingdome, on paine that being found or taken after the said time prefixed, to be punished as guiltie of the said crime of treason. That their goodes, mooueable and immooueable, shall be forfeited and imployed as the said Court shall giue order. Forbidding moreouer, from thencefoorth, all the kings subiects to send their children to any Colledges of that societie, out of the kingdome to bee their instructed or trained vppe, on the same paine to bee punished as guiltie of high treason. This Edict was pronounced to Iohn Chastel, executed on thursday the 29. of December.
 During the imprisonment of
Chastel, some of the Deputies of the Court which were sent to search the Iesuites Colledges, hauing seized vppon many papers, found among them certaine written bookes, made by a Iesuite Priest, named
Iohn Guignard, since the generall pardon giuen by the King to the people of Parris: there was written in these bookes, many vilde matters, both against Henry the third deceased, as against
Henry the fourth now liuing, containing nothing but traiterous practises: among the rest these words were found.The king was born at Bern for which cause they cal him Bernois. That the
Bernois being now conuerted to the Catholicke faith, was more gently vsed then he deserued, that if they would inuest him with the royall Crown, they shuld do it in some wel reformed couent, wher hee might doo penance for all the euils which hee hath done in France: that thankes might be also giuen to God, for that hee had giuen him grace to acknowledge his wickednesse before his death. That if he might not be deposed without war, they ought to war against him, and to kill him, if he did not otherwise. That the Crowne of France ought to be transferred to an other familie then that of Bourbon. That Iames Clement did an heroicall act, in murthering Henry the third. The Court hauing seene such writings, sent for Guignard before them, who auouched all he had written, by meanes whereof he was found guiltie, and condemned to be hanged to death, which thing was executed the seuenth of Ianuarie. Peter Chastel father to Iohn, and Iohn Gueret, Schoolemaister or Tutor to the young traitor, were the same time banished: the father for a certaine time out of Parris, the tutor for euer out of the realm: and not to returne on paine of death. Moreouer, the father was condemned to pay for a fine 2000. Crowns, and commadement giuen, that his house shuld he puld downe to the ground, and a stone piller set in the place where it did stand, with an inscription of the cause wherfore it was thus raced. The court at that time did again looke ouer
Peter Barrieres iudgements, wherin the wicked counsel of
Varade, a notable Iesuite, was more throughly marked, who had principally and more then any other, induced Barriere to kil the K. whom he called tyrant. It was also testified, that two Switzers passing by Besancon, a fewe daies before Chastelles deede was attempted, did meet two men attired like Iesuites, who said one to the other, for shortly the king of Nauarre shall bee either slaine or hurt: which deede they esteemed most meritorious in the kingdome of heauen.

It was also noted, that a Iubelie had bin published at
Rome, which the kings enemies called a peece of ordenance to confound the Bernois, as if it had been a good worke: the same was also vnderstood by the Spaniards, lately arriued in Brittain to succor the rebels. This was also hoped for by the Iesuits, namely by those that were at Paris, some of whom, as their Colledges were inuironed about with watchmen, incontinent after the king was hurt, cried at their gates to their companions in these words: Surge, frater: agitur de religione. There were also found among these Iesuites, many Anagrames against the king, and certain rimes made in their Chases: wherof the argument was, to suffer death constantly, and to assaile the tyrants. Againe, there was it found, that the Maisters of the Colledges of
Clermont, depriued and forbad the Schollers, at any time to pray for the king, since the yeelding of Parris to his Maiestie: saying, that all such as went to heare his Masse, were excommunicate. Moreouer, it was prooued and iustified against an other Iesuite, a Scotchman, named
Alexander Haius, that hee taught the people publickly, that they might dissemble and obey the King for a time, and oftentimes faintly speaking these words: Iesuita est omnis homo. This Iesuite was also charged that he had oftentimes vsed these speeches, that if the king did at any time passe before their Colledge, that hee would fall out of the window vpon him, to the end he might breake his necke. On these accusations his inditements being drawne, and that his words were found to bee spoken before the yeelding of Parris, the Court did onely banish him out of the Realme of France for euer. It appeared also by other informations sent from Bourges, made the seuenth of Ianuarie, that one named Francis Iacobe, a Scholler of the Iesuites at Bourges, vanted that he wold kill the King, but that he thought he was dead alreadie, thinking that an other had done the deed. In consideration of these matters aforesaid, and other prooues testified by the Historie of these times, the Iesuites were banished out of Paris and other townes of the Realme, but not out of all. They sought to excuse themselues by diuers writings, wherein they accused themselues in greater measure, well expressing the enuie and poysoned minds which they carried to the realme of France, which shall bee well preserued from all their attempts, if any iustice do raigne there.
Open warre proclaimed against the King of Spaine.The seuenteenth of Ianuary, the King published his declaratio^ of the making of open wars against the Spaniards, by reason of his attempts made against his countrie of France, the Cambernisces, and against his royall person. Two months after, the King of Spaine answered the king of France, whom in his letlers he called the Prince of Bearn, against whom also he demanded open war. A little before, the Arch-duke of Ernest wrote to the Estates of Artois and of Hainaut, to incourage them to armes: the like he did to the Co^mons, that they might wrathfully bend their force against the Frenchmen. The D. of Lorraine hauing taken truce with the K. permitted his troupes to do him seruice, vnder the conduct of the Barron of Ausonuill, the L. of Tremblecourt, and of S.
George, who had leuied about 8000. foot, and 1200. horse.The leaguers of Soissons ouerthrown. Mean space, the garrison of
Soissons, conducted by the Barron of Conan, Lieftenant of
Ponsenac, Gouernor of the Cittie, and by Belfont chiefe and principal Captain to the D. de Maine, being aduanced as far as
Crispe in Valoyes, they were repulsed, pursued, charged, and ouerthrown in the plaine of Villiers Cote-rets, by the Lords of Cadancourt, Beine, Moussie, and Edonuiel, who slew in the field 50. of the principall of the leaguers troupes, the most valiantest that were in France.

And hurt threescore so greeuously, that in short time after, the most of them died, they tooke away aboue fourescore good horses, much of their munition and other booties, with a great number of prisoners. Among those that were slaine, were found two principall Captaines, their Ancient, and the Marshall of the field: there were taken the Cornet of Belfont, and thirteene Captaines, so that there escaped but twentie persons of all the troup that went into the Towne of
Soissons: this was a new blood shed among the leaguers.
At the same time, the Marshall of Bouillon tooke near vnto Vuirtun, in the Duchie of Luxembourg,The Spanish armie ouerthrowne by the Marshall of Bouillon, in the Duchy of Luxembourg. eleuen Cornets of horsemen of the Earle of
Mansfields armie, whom he charged vpon their dislodgement with such resolution, that they were all ouercome in little space: two hundreth and fiftie were there slaine, the rest forsaking their armour, horses, and other furniture, saued themselues within a forrest neare vnto Vuirton.
Warres in Franche-Countie.On the other side, Tremblecourt and Saint George, inuaded
Franch-Countie, in Bourgongne, tooke Vezou, Ionuille and other places, spoyled diuers parts: and in these beginnings of troubles the countrie was greatly spoyled, and many Bourgongnians slaine. The Constable of Chastille Gouernor of Mylan, ranne ouer them with diuers Spanish companies, and Neapolitans, recouered againe the places lost, constraining the Lorraines to scatter themselues: in requitall whereof, the Inhabitants of Beaune hauing about the beginning of February, valerously sacked the leaguers garrisons, which had made themselues readie to cut al their throats, opened their gates to the Marshall of Biron, which being done, hee laid siege before the Castle, which in six weekes indured three thousand cannon shot, and finally it was yeelded by composition. The taking of Beaune dismayed the Duke of Maine, who euer since, did nothing (as it were) but fight with one hand, sawe himselfe at the end of his last hopes, dismayed of the one, and detested by the other. Autun, Nuis, and lastly Dyon, followed the example of Beaune, and yeelded themselues to the king: which comming to passe in
Bourgongne at the beginning of Iune, they charged neare S.
Sein, certaine troupes of horsemen belonging to the Constable of
Chastille, whom he inforest to flie.
Diuers memorable exployts, done here and thereA litle before this, Vienne in Dauphine, sold to the Duke of Nemours by Maugrion, shooke of the yoke of this great leaguer, and was brought vnder the kings authoritie, who whilest he stayed for the leuying of mony from diuers places of
Franch-Countie, and iourneyes of small importance, he lost in
Picardie, Chastelet, Dourlans, and Cambray, Townes of great strength, which were taken in the monethes of Iune, Iuly, and August, to the great griefe of these good Lords, and by the fault of some that might haue remedied it, if they had wold: but they were not willing to see their countrey in peace. The losse of men and munition was great in these ouerthrowes. The Spanish souldiers bore away great booties. The Earle of
Fuentes and his Captaines, won as great honour, as Balagne and others did dishonour. The Marshall of Bouillon, the Marshall of Villars, sought to succour Dourlans, but beeing charged with a farre greater number of enemies, Villars was slaine with certaine of his Captaines, and many of his souldiers, diuers carried prisoners into Arras, from whence they were ransomed. Beside these losses, a little before, the Lord of Humieres of
Picardie, and a faithfull seruaunt to the king, was slaine in recouering the Towne of Han, with twentie Gentlemen, and an hundreth souldiers. In reuenge whereof, the Spanish garrison which was within the Towne, to the number of seuen or eight hundreth men, were cruelly slaine each mothers son. The Marshall of Bouillon behaued himselfe most valiantly in this exployt. A fewe weeks before, to wit, about the end of May, this said Lord parted from Stenai, to succour those of Ferte vpon Cher, in the Duchie of
Luxembourg, which was besieged by Verdugo and
Burlot, Captains to the King of Spaine, of whom hee slew fiue hundreth of the very best of their troupes, constraining them to raise their siege, and to retire to Vuirton. Such were the chances of warre during this season in Picardie, in the Duchie and Countie of Bourgondy, and the countrie of Luxembourg, all which were greeuoussy afflicted in diuers sorts. Brittain was also vpon the point to become wholy for the Spaniard. But ambition striuing with couetousnesse in Duke Mercoeur, the affaires there, went alwaies doubtfully. In the end, the king of Spaine was made frustrate of all his hopes in those parts.
The Duke of Maine obtaines pardon of the king.The Duke of Maine seeing the Spaniards take other course then was accustomed, his forces slaine, his credit crackt, and his destruction at the doore, though late, at last he sought by Mediators the kings fauor, which he obtained in the month of October. But he could not so easily haue it, till he had renounced the vaine title of Lieftenant generall of the estate and Crowne of France, and except such liberallities as it pleased his Maiestie to bestowe vppon him. Each one said, that hee hauing committed so many hainous acts against the Crowne and his soueraigne Lord, that hee was vnwoorthie too bee esteemed the kings subiect, but to receiue punishment according to his deserts, blaming the kings too much gentlenesse therein: to whom might bee applyed, that which was of olde time spoken of by Charillans, who being greatly praised for his courtesie equally shewed to all, was thus answered by
Archidamidas the Spartane, that such a Prince deserued small praise, that shewed himselfe fauourable to wicked persons. But such matters pertaines to other discourses, and not to bee intreated of, in so briefe a collection as this is. Vpon this receiued grace, the Duke de Maine wrought the yeelding vp of Soisson, Pierfont, and other places to the King. Now among all the chiefe leaguers, there onely remained the Duke of Aumale, who had not time ynough to make his peace with the King.The Duke of Aumale executed in his picture. Things fell out so contrarie on his side, that lawe was prosecuted against him in the Parliament of Parris, which found him guiltie of treason in the highest degree, so that his image or likenesse being made, it was drawne in peeces with foure horses, and his goods and lands confiscate to the King. It hath been said that his faire house at
Annet, was iudged to be raced to the ground, and the woods all about the same cut downe, in detestation of the said Dukes treasons. But this article was not executed. This Duke of Aumale went since that, toward Albert. Cardinall of Austridge, came into the low Countries to succeed in his brothers charge, who was Arch-duke of
Ernest, of who^ he was honourably receiued, and royall entertained, so that he might say with the renowmed Greeke: I was lost, if I had not been lost: and since, he hath made sore warres against the Frenchmen. Certaine members of the league, as some of the sixteene of
Parris, diuers principall Councellours and Agents of that side, togither with some Preachers and seditious writers, durst not shewe themselues, knowing lawe to bee proceeded against them.
Th. Towne of Fere besieged.While the Cardinal of Austrige made his voyage from Spaine into
Italie, to become Gouernour to the low Countries, taking with him
Philip of Nassau, Prince of Orange, who had a long time beene kept prisoner among the Spaniards, the King besieged
Fere, the onely place possessed by his enemies in
Picardie, before the taking of Capelle, Chastelot, Cambray, and Dourlans: hee set there all the succours that could enter in, where a great number of Spaniardes were slaine: then gaue he leaue to the most part of his horsemen to refresh themselues, because the Earle of Fuentes, hauing set garrisons in the Towns for a new conquest, was retired into Hainaut.
The king being willing more and more to plant quietnesse in his realme, made an edict the same time, whereby all persons that were fled, might returne againe to their lands and houses, where their passed faults should neuer bee sought after, but wholly forgiuen, those onely excepted, that were confederates in the murther of the deceased king. In middest of these matters, Ossat and Perron the Kings Agents towards the Pope, demanded and obtained a bull of absolution, hauing aforehand made all the submissions, obeysances, and accustomed reuerences, promising that the King had performed the penance, and accomplished the conditions to him prescribed. This bull was committed to
Alexander d'Elbene, to bee carried into France, to bring thereby in the kings behalfe, confirmation and approbation of all that which had been done by his Agents: one of the which, namely Ossat, for recompence of his seruices, wonne a Cardinals Hat: Perron (being but a Ministers sonne, in the Lord of Bearns land, became by his worthy seruices Bishoppe of Eureux, a Courtly Poet, and a new Diuine) was sent with good hope, to see that hee should continue as hee had begunne: that is to say, to oppose himselfe against those of the religion, and to drawe by his example, all other that hee might, by their praaching and writing, to maintaine the vocation and doctrine of their Ministers, and the publicke articles of the inreprehencible perfection of the Romaine Church. Hee was carefull to keepe promise, vnderstanding that the Pope had an eye ouer him.
The estates of Picardie.In the moneth of Nouember, the King assembled within Amiens, all the estates of Picardie, of Boulongne, Vermandois, and
Thierafche, to take counsell for the affaires of Prouence. Certaine Captaines were there beheaded, hauing been by their couetousnesse, cause of all the losses afore mentioned. The siege of Fere continued, those within it being more restrained, yet neuerthelesse resolued to hold the same, to the vttermost poynts of extremitie.
 The garrisons of Peronne, Amiens, and other places that held for the King, beganne againe in Ianuarie their former courses against the enemies countrie, still killing and sleying certaine Spaniards and Wallons. The king was at this time in great care, touching the countrie of Prouence: by reason that a man of great authoritie, named Casaux, commanded within
Marseille, who made means to the Spanish king, that this goodly Towne might bee solde vnto him. Charles Dore of Geneua, was now approaching with certaine gallies for the Spaniardes. The Duke of
Guise drew also neare with certaine troupes, but knowing well
Casaux euill will toward him, retired to the port of
Thoulon, where a farre off he thought on such affaires, whereof proceeded the death of the said Casaux, who was suddainly stabbed as he was going forth of his owne lodging, to runne toward one of the gates, which they were readie to open to the Frenchmen, the sixteenth of Februarie. The Duke of Guise his troupes beeing mingled among the rest in the Cittie, was cause that all the Spaniardes with their adherents ranne their waies.
Marseille brought to the kings subiection.Thus was Marseille deliuered out of their hands, and brought to the kings subiection, togither with all other villages thereabout, that might any way annoy them.
The arriuall of the Cardinal of Austriche in
Flanders, caused the King to summon the Nobilitie of
Picardie and Normandie, to be present in the Towne of
Guise, there to be readie according as need required. There he forbad by an expresse proclamation, the transporting of gold or siluer, coyned or otherwise, out of his realme. In the beginning of March, the Cardinall gaue such order, that the besieged within the Towne of
Fere, were succored with some munition. And for his first exployt against The Cardinall of Austriche releeueth Fere, winneth Carl^ and Ardres, with maine force.France in the beginning of Aprill, did so dispose of his armie, (at that time most mightie) so dexteriously and secretly, that in few daies he besieged, assailed, and with plain force won the town and Castle of Calais: in spight of al the kings forces, and the resistance of the besieged, there died in the taking thereof, a great number of the Nobilitie of France, especially in the Castle, whereinto they had sent a good supply.
Fere yeelded to the king by composition.The Cardinall following this new won victorie, besieged the strong Towne of Ardres in the beginning of May: who for all that euer they could doo within the Towne, hee became Maister thereof, the 23. of the same moneth: seuen daies before, Fere wes yeelded to the K. vpo^ composition. The Sene shal of Montenemart leaguer, and
Aluaris Osoro a Spaniard, indured with their souldiers, all the extremitie that could be thought or imagined, euen till they saw the water two or three foote high within the Towne, before they would yeeld or giue ouer, after they had sustained a thousand greefes, the space of fiue months. The composition was honorable, and for the profit of the besieged, who went foorth with their colours spredde, their drummes sounding, their weapons and baggage: drawing forth with them a double cannon, markt with the armes of
France. They went forth the 22. of this month, and retired to
Cambrises. The rest of this Summer was spent in small exployts in the countrie. About the end of the month of August, the Marshall of
Biron, followed with certaine troupes on foote and on horsebacke, passed the riuer of Sone, and the first day of September hee entered within Artois, repaired the Castle of Ambercourt, constrained diuers villages to redeeme themselues with a great summe of money. And beeing accompanied with fiue Cornets, charged the Marquesse of
Vuarambon Gouernour of Artois (who by reason of his forces: to wit, fiue to sixe hundreth horse in battell, thought to haue got the glorie) slew those which durst stay, put the rest to flight, tooke the Marquesse prisoner, of whom he had fortie thousand Crownes for his ransome, gaue a great alarme to all the countrie, after ward chased the Earle of S. Paul, seized and spoyled the Towne, and diuers other places. The Pesants which would haue spoyled the Towers and Steeples of the Churches, were rudely handled, in respect of those that stayed in their houses, who felt onely the smart of this tempesteous warre, by contributions for the prouision of victuals. All this was done in eight daies. The Cardinal intending to take the Marquesse, sent the D. of
Arschot in his place, who while he entered into Arras, had the Frenchmen on the other side, who by a harguebuze shot from the Town, set fire on a litle village. And for that it was full of good booties, the Marshall would not they should loose their praie, and therefore conducted them to the frontiers of Picardie. Thus beeing discharged the 21. of the same moneth, they entered the borders of Banpaulme, spoyling
Hebutere, Benuiller, Courcelles, and other places, robbing the Pesants of their goods, that durst not striue against them. The Duke of
Arschot incampped neare to Arras, within a cannon shot, and beeing carefully intrenched, hee deliberated to hazard nothing, knowing that he was to deale with a hardy Knight, and one of the most resolute warriors in Europe. The Frenchmen set fire on all places round about, and getting more booties then before, returned with easie iourneyes toward Bethune and Theroenne, from whence they brought many prisoners and cattell, then they retired and camped in the plaine of
Azincourt, without any resistance at all, in this second voyage, which continued ten daies. The Duke of Arschot supplied with eight hundreth footemen, ioyning with the Colonell of Burlots Regiment, departed from Arras the fift day of October, and incamped at S. Paul, where the Marshall of Biron leauing them, entered seuen daies after with his horsemen into Artois: who with his footemen stayed at Moucy S. Esoy. The thirteenth day he remooued to Co^firmation of aliance betweene the King, the Queene of England, and the lowe countries.Donay, then hauing spoyled the countrey, hee retired into Picardie, within foure or fiue dayes after. The Duke of Arschot, hauing taken againe the Castle of Ambercourt, discharged his Army, setting his companies into Garrisons. Certaine weekes before, the Marshall of
Bouillon, had bene sent for into Holland, to confirme (as he did at Haye) the aliance sworne betweene the King, the Queene of
England, and the vnited Prouinces. The like was done in
England, about the end of September. The Spaniards in
Brittaine, defied Duke Mercoeur, seeing him to continue truce with the Prouences of Poictou, Aniou, and Maine, began to fortifie themselues at Blauit, more then before, and in other smal Townes which they helde. Whilest the Kings Troupes were in
Picardie, he made his entry into Roane, the 20. day of October, where he was receiued with such pompe, that the expence thereof, was esteemed to amount aboue the value of foure hundred thousand Crownes, at the Townsmens charges. Throughout all France, nothing was spoken of so much, as how meanes might bee found to defend themselues against the Spaniards, and to be reuenged of the manifold iniuries, which the Realme had indured vnder the League. But the Duke of Austrich, on his side, was not al this while idle, but suffering the rigor of winter to passe (which was wonderfull wette, hauing had many great floods of waters, wherof followed much hurt, especially at the bridge at
Paris, which one night fell downe, at the latter ende of the yeare: at which time it was the death of three huundred persons, drowned in the water, and by the fall of the buildings) made himselfe ready for the spring. The King being stil desirous of the peace of his Kingdome, about the end of Su^me^, gaue order to haue all the Nobilitie of the Realme, assembled togither in a generall Councell, which he determined to hold at Roane, at the beginning of Nouember, at that time there to be present, to prouide for the publike benefite of the countrey of France. In opening this matter, he first made them an Oration, the which, to cut off briefly, we will incert within this Page following. If I would (said he) claime the tytle of an Orater, I should haue learned some eloquent and long Oration, and haue studied how to pronounce it, with all pleasing grauitie. But my Lords, my desire aymeth at two more glorious titles, which is, that I might bee called the Restorer, and Deliuerer of this decayed estate: for which cause, I haue assembled all you this day. You know what belongs to your owne care, so do I of mine: for since it pleased God to call me to the Crowne, I found France, not onely neare hand ruined, but almost vtterly lost from the Frenchmen: I vowe, by Gods grace, by the prayers, by the good counsaile of my faithfull Subiects, that make profession of Armes, by the sword of my true Nobilitie (from which I do not distinguish my Princes) because the faith of a Gentleman, is our fayrest tytles: by my paines and labour I haue kept it from losse. Let vs saue our selues therefore from ruine. Participate my deare subiects with me in this second glory, as you haue done in the first. I haue not called you, as my predecessors were wont to do, to confirme my owne will. I haue caused you to be assembled, to receiue your counsailes, to beleeue them, to follow them: briefely, to put my self wholely into your hands. Enuy can win litle from kings, from gray beardes, from conquerors. But the loue and good will which I beare to my subiects, and the extream desire that I haue to obtaine these two goodly titles, makes all things seeme to me easie and honourable. My Lord Chancellor shall make hereafter, my minde further knowne. I cannot close vp this collection, with a more worthy speeche then this: my intent being thereto ioyned, hauing come to the ende of this yeare, 1596. which was the marke I onely shot at. That which hath come to passe since that time, in the yeares following, shalbe shewed in other bookes, if God permit.
FINIS.



A TRVE DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE deliuerie of
Brittaine, in the yeare 1598.
VVHat? Shall this Duke of Mercoeur for euer retaine the mouth of the Riuer of Loire, with one part of Britain against a king of France, a victorious king, acknowledged to be the greatest Captaine in the world? Shall wee continually beholde this chanel, this sincke, this puddle and heape of all the theeues and murtherers, firmly vnited with this insolent, cruel, and infected nation of
Chastille, occupie one of the Prouinces of the estate, one of the flowers of this mightie and proude Crowne, and make their neighbours, togither with all the highest part of this long riuer that diuideth the
Gaules, tributaries? All the rest of France hath been almost these two yeares quiet, vnited and conioyned for her owne preseruation, against al forraine vsurpation: yea, it is longer since our holy father powred foorth his blessings vpon this most Christian kingdome. This Summer hath God sent vs the most notable victorie and gallant triumph that hath beene seene this fiue hundreth yeares, where the King forced one of the strongest peeces in the world, in the full view of the Spanish armie. All Christendome is brought in admiration with such a conquest, and the glorie of the French armies is now more glorious then euer it was: which notwithstanding this Spartacus, relying vppon the imaginarie succours of Spaine, dare tarie vs. Let vs therefore with all speede make head against him: let vs abate this presumption, this rashnesse, this insolencie. Let vs go and set at libertie the poore Inhabitants of Nantes, who stretch foorth their hands to their king, and long onely for his comming: from whom this Viceroy of Brittaine shall hardly defend himselfe within, whilest we do couragiously assault him without. Let vs giue him to vnderstand, that nothing is able to withstand the thunder of the French Arsenall, and that the brauest Rauelines do stoupe to our cannons. Let vs roote out the Spaniard out of
Brittaine, which our ancesters neuer vnited to the Crowne, for vs to dismember it againe.
Let vs consider, that in all Martiall discourses,
Amiens was not to bee wonne: yet the incomparable vertue of our king: his great courage, and the incredible trauels of the French, haue forced nature: exceeded all hope: and surmounted all possibilitie: and contrariwise, that in all millitarie reason, Nantes might be beaten flat in six weekes. The countrie forces, the strength of the neighbour Prouinces, togither with all Guyenne, which beginne alreadie too march: the army royall that is on the way: the cannons and munition that commeth euery way: the benefit of the sea and riuers able to furnish all necessaries: the Nauall armies which replenishing all Loire, shall cut off all hope of succour: the valour of our souldiers: the experience of our Captaines: and the aduantage of our last years happy conquest, may put vs in full assurance, that this Cateline, shall bee made an example of his Maiesties: who hath hitherto shewed such testimonie of his clemencie. And in deede, in this man we may beholde such straunge ingratitude, that God cannot suffer it to passe vnpunished.
For the late king (whom God pardon) hauing so highly honoured his familie, as thereat to choose his wife, and heaped vp goods, honours, great titles, and extreame expenses vpon his bretheren in lawe, and sisters in lawe: especially vpon this modell of ingratitude, to whom hee procured one of the richest marriages in the Realme: for whose sake hee wrested the gouernment of Brittaine from a Prince of the blood, to giue him: yet hath hee become such a notable traitor to his Benefactor, that in lieu of spending his life at his feete, he hath procured a mightie and most important Prouince to reuolt from him: and stopped vp the mouth of the riuer of Loire, wherevppon the late king was forced to transport the seate of his enemies.

Hee was the author of the rebellion of Poictiers, and immediately hath called the Castillians to share in his conquests, whom hee hath setled in Blauet as a Spanish Colonie, to hold vs in continuall checke, vntill we may haue rooted them out, togither with all those that brought them in and cherished them, and haue put themselues in our protection and safegard, which notwithstanding they shall finde to be but weake against the strength of France, euen of the warlike
France, which now we will make more terrible then euer it was.
Our owne emulation to do wel, who in sixtie three, in so fewe daies recouered New-hauen, shal no doubt very shortly driue the^ out of Nantes and Blauet. Euery man wil be willing to declare his zeale to his countrie: his valour in the presence of his Prince, and his indignation against the traitors of France: who destitute of all pretence, excommunicate by the Pope, by the Archbishop of
Tours, and the facultie of Sorbonne, as rebels to their king, condemned by God and man, are yet so shamelesse, as to denounce vs heretickes for driuing the redde scarfes out of Brittaine. Alas poore wretches, your pollicies are too wel knowne: which whilest they were yet in force, could not hinder vs, but that we made the Flower de Luce in euery place victorious: and now that these sleights are growen into contempt euen with litle children, can you repose any hope in them against vs, who both by Gods word and the exhortation of our holy father, are commanded to obey our soueraigne, to serue our countrie, and to roote out all strangers, as also your selues, ye wretches, who haue called them in, and do perswade your selues to be able to maintaine them, vnder a vaine hope, that if his Maiestie goeth into Brittaine, the Spaniards shall in the meane time swallow vp all our frontiers of Picardie, and so force vs to retire? But so farre as I can perceiue, you haue but small knowledge of the miserable estate, whereinto your Protectors affaires in the lowe Countries are brought. This Summer hee hath lost 8. good peeces: an vndoubted argument of his weaknesse. Artois is in a wonderfull amaze at this great exployt at Amiens. His garrisons are in such necessitie, that either they must vtterly ransome his subiects, or liue vpon rootes. The Cardinall hath not to defray the expences of his owne house. King
Philips banckroutship hath made him loose his settings ouer from
Genes to Antwerp, who was seeing his countries that cost him so deare, lost without remission, offereth them as a dowry with his daughter, that so in all Histories the losse of them may bee recorded in the name of an other then himselfe.
VVell, this Summer we will make a iourney to visit them: In the meane time, leauing our frontiers, able not onely to defend, but also to offend, let vs go straight into Brittaine to punish the rebellion, ingratitude, and malice of him, who seeing Amiens surprised by the Spaniards, and all France in alarme, in lieu of concluding the truce which before hee demaunded, tooke the field, in purpose to detaine in the Prouinces a great number of souldiers, who before were taking horse to come to his Maiestie.
O Spanish soule! couldest thou more euidently declare, thy treason and disloyaltie against the countrie that hath warmed thee, inriched, and increased thee in honour and dignitie: but by seeking all meanes to diuert and impeach this great and so necessarie a conquest? Haddest thou had any remainder of good will toward France, thou wouldest as then haue made demonstration therof: neither diddest thou want most gallant examples.
Now would euery man haue imbraced thee, and vnto thee attributed a share in the glorie of this triumph: but in liew thereof, thou haste laboured to keepe downe such as sought to shunne this shipwracke: thou diddest insult vpon the afflictions of France: and yet, blind as thou art, after this great prosperitie which thou couldest not hinder: thou darest obstinately stand in thy vsurpation, expecting some cursed aduenture, to publish thy inuestiture of Brittaine. For, what else couldest thou hope for any time these two yeares? VVhat? canst thou thinke, that so great a Prince finishing the course of his yeares, and shunning the Iesuites knife, would still leaue Nantes and part of Brittaine in the hands of such a man as thou art? Thou art not so deuoyde of sence: and therfore of necessite thou must yet hope vpon one Barriere, or one Chastel. No other reason hath vpholden thy obstinacie these two yeares, but the winning of time.

But in these imaginations thou shalt find thy ouerthrow, doubt it not: for God who hath vsed this son of S. Lewis to reestablish the scattered estate, will in his power preserue him, and daily increasing his victory, both speedily and seuerely chastice thy pernitious effects and cursed hope. Thy K. Philip plunged in the pleasures of his Escurial, shal not defend thee fro^ the furious batteries, which within this mo^th his Ma. wil lay to thee on euery side. Beleeue me, thou wilt curse this great monarcke of Chastille, of whom thou doost yet make such account, and vpon whom thou buildest the felicitie of thy whole life: being so doultish, as to thinke that he that was not able to keep his conquest of Amiens (a towne in a maner inespugnable) can hinder the taking of Nantes. Thou doost not consider, th^^ thy treasures will serue our souldiers for lathers, or rather wings to scale the wals of that faire town, wherin we shal find the keyes of all the rest, which wil follow their capitall, who without whose wealth, togither with the great imposts there leuyed, would neuerthelesse fall without any assault. In taking of Nantes, we do vndoubtedly take all the rest of Brittaine, and withall, cure our Gangreua, which neglected, might in time subuert the whole realm. To what purpose should we quench the most part of the fire that burneth the house, if wee still leaue ynough to kindle and take hold of the rest. By little and litle, tyrants are established by killing or murthering the most couragious, and setting foot vpo^ the throat of the rest. Nine years ago, did
Nantes reiect the flower de luce. Now let vs accord prescription, and quite clense this so great and important a Prouence, which king
Charles the 8. preferred before al the low countries and the Countie of Bourgondy: to the end the Ocean might bound our Empire, and the heauens our valor. I do therfore abiure you, ye braue Frenchmen, euen by the glorie of your ancestors, who haue crossed the seas and pierced the mountains, to seek after wars in the middest of
Asia and Affrica. I abiure you by your own vertue, by your honorable wou^ds, and by your garla^ds of baies yet greene, with the co^quest of Amiens, Yea, I abiure you by the incomparable valor of your Prince, who hath ouercome al that resolued to atte^d him, to com to this last enterprise, which shal finish our intestine wars, with such feruent zeal, passio^ and courage, that we may exalt the name of
France, aboue all that is most haughtie, or of greatest eminencie in this world. Hitherto our slacknesse hath had som reasons: euery yeare hath had her necessarie imployments: but this yeare, a fatall yeare to Brittaine: hauing alreadie set hand to the enterprise, what a shame wil it be, not to finish it, or to suffer our selues to be ouercome with the only apprehension of the labor? VVhat glory and credit shal we so purchase to this Viceroy of Brittain? and what Spanish Rodomontades wil he make therof? Into what dispaire shal we bring this Prouince, and all her borderers, who for these two years, seeing others in peace, haue tasted the discommodities of wars? VVhat will our confederates say? VVhat may Italie and Germanie think, whe^ they see the palme trees of our victories wither so soone? VVhat a dangerous example shall we set to those that seeke to trouble the realme: if he that was neuer acounted a soldier: a man nursed vp in the shadow and in all riot: a man neuer assaulted by any Monarke: that neuer stood out a siege: and that lost Rhenes within
8. daies after he had taken it: stop, I wot not by what mishap, the course and enterprise of so great a king, togither with the resolution of all France. Sir, you haue ouer long borne with the insolencie, rashnesse, and outrages of this presumptious
Salmonee, who within your realme playeth the soueraigne, holding a Parliament and the estates, and threatneth you with the Castillian armies: as if you had not at all times chased them before you, causing them, for the shunning of the fight, to crosse the deepe riuers, and taking
Amiens euen before their faces. Now Sir, ye want but this one trauell, for the perfecting of your conquest, of the whole inheritance of S.
Lewis. All other enterprises you shall find a thousand times more easie, when you haue the strength of al these great Prouinces peaceable at your backe. And co^trariwise, so long Sir, as any one place in
France may claime it selfe your enemie, and foster rebellion, your estate cannot be assured. VVhom by disobeying you, men shall bee driuen to depart the realme, and to begge some miserable pention among the treasurers of Castille, fewe will delight in such extreame resolutions: but if they haue a shelter at hand, euen in the bowels of
France, where siluer and all other commodities do abound, it wil yeeld great incourageme^t to such as beleeue, that in case their enterprise shuld faile, yet they should escape by getting into Brittaine, and at the last, be comprised in an edict. Sir, you are entered the ninth yeare of your raigne: the whole course of your life, haue beene no other but triumphs, garlands, and trophees, brought fro^ your enemies. It is now time for you to finish your great worke, about the reestablishment of the soueraigne power, and the restoration of the French Monarchie. Time requireth that we should now beholde your iustice flourishing throughout the realme, and the greatest fortresses open their gates to the smallest of your commaundements. This done Sir, all things shall bee possible for you. Cast your eye on euery side: consider the Chastillons Prouinces: euery thing is readie for your conquest: they do groue vnder the intollerable burthen of his tyrannie, which worketh them into all maner of desperatio^^ but your onely name with their assurance, that one day by the felicitie of your victorious sword, you shal deliuer them, incourageth them to liue. Yet knowing Sir, that the good of your subiects must be preferred before theirs: their eye is still vpon
Brittaine, as hoping that that businesse once finished, your Maiestie shall fauourably looke vpon them: also that after those great heroes of antiquitie, you will deliuer the afflicted from the yoke of this cruell Philip, the common enemie of all Christ endo^^^: vnto whom your valiant mind (if euer there were any) contrarie to the opinion of many, wisheth a long life of eightie yeares: to the end, that contrarie to his conceipts, he may see you Sir, after the pacifying of your owne kingdome, and the conquest of
Artois and Flanders, the domaines of your Crowne, bring the firebrands of warre into the middest of Spaine: and with the profit of three great battels, deliuer Portugall, Aragon, and your
Nauarre, from the insolencie and barbarous cruelty of this Castillian nation, from whom al wise men may well perceiue that you haue wrested the Monarchie of Europe, which the conquest of
France, that you onely haue hindered, did vndoubtedly yeeld them.
FINIS.



