


OF THE WORthines
and excellencie of
the Lawe.

The first Chapter.
AS nothing more
encourageth the soldior
to fight, and to
giue forth apparan^
signes of valor, then
the glorie and renowne
which is gained by
exploits of warre: so
nothing is a greater spurre to the student of
any Arte or Science, then the iust reward of
fame and commendation, which belongeth to
those, who by labor attaine to perfection in any
praiseworthie science. For as nature rewardeth
the Bee with hony, so Art recompenseth
the painfull student with riches, praise or
honor. And howbeit some men make small acco^pt
of praise or good report, as being in their
owne conceit but an emptie sound, yet wise
men haue thought and written, that a good name
is better then Gold,Prouerb. 2^ Aym. cons. 145 viso proces^^ in fi. and that a mans credit
is the fairest flower of his garden. Now if
praise be due to Arts and sciences, as being the

best treasure and endowment of the mind, religion
only excepted, then surely the knowledge of
the law may in the first place challenge prerogatiue
of dignity, by whose righteous doome and
decree it is prouided, ruled, and ordered, that al other
sciences should haue their maintenance and
support, in such plentiful and condigne maner, as
by merite or equity doth to them of right aptaine.
But euery art receiueth his commendation
by the end and scope which it proposeth to it
selfe. And the chiefe end or last marke of ye law
aswel as other sciences is God his glory. But
ye next and immediate end, which is allotted to it,
is to administer Iustice to al, and in that sence it
may be called the rule of Iustice: For religion,
Iustice, and law do stand together, and are together
trodde vnder foote by such as neither care
for God, nor goodnes: such as are rehearsed by
one of notable iudgment.Cyprian de 12. abusio. A wise man without
workes, an old man without deuotion, a
yong man without obedie^ce, a rich man without
almes; a woman without chastity, a gentleman
without vertue, a contentious christia^,
a proud begger, an vniust king, a neglige^t Bishop,
a co^gregation without discipline, a natio^
without law. But Iustice is then rightly administred,
when it is not sold,Can. venden. q. 3. Canon pauper 11. q. 3. When there is
no respect of persons.Deuteron. 1 Whe^ hatred is away and
conscience is present.Can. sex. 23. q. 3. When rigor is te^pered
with mercy.Can. omnis and sequ. can. discipli. 45. dist. And Iustice must be regarded of

the law as the load-star is minded of the Seaman,
for without it can be no gouernment. An
other end of ye law is the good estate of the people.
For it is an Aphorisme amongst the lawes
of the 12. tables: Salus populi suprema lex esto:
Let the safety of the people be acco^pted the
chiefe law.l. 12. tabula^. c. 6. And ye deserueth not the name of
a law which hath no relation to publik profit.
Cicer. 2. de legi. For Hermogenes said wel yt euery law was
made for the good and profit of men.lib. 2. de sta^ homiu^. And Plato
saith, that a Law-maker ought to haue regard
of 3. things especially: namely, that the co^uenient
liberty of the comon weale may not be impeached
by the laws, that they may preserue amity
amongst the people, and that they may furnish
the^ with wisdome.lib. 2. de legi. Wherefore they that
dispise laws, haue no care of comon profit,Cicae. pro Caecin. because
they were made for comon vse,lib. 2. de legi. and without
law, which I interpret to be an order established
by authority, neither house, nor city, nor
natio^, nor mankind, nor nature, nor world can
be.Cicer. lib. 3. de legi. And therfore Cicero saith, yt our ancestors
were of such vertue and wisdome, that in making
of their laws they had no regard, but of publike
good:Cicer. lib. (...) de inuent. For they would not write any thing
to hurt, and if they had written any such
things, it would haue bin reiected as soone as
it had bin vnderstood. It is manifest therefore
that the end at which the Law doth ayme
is the generall aduantage of common societie

in a iust maner distributed and dealt to euerie
one. For, non sufficit bonum fieri nisi bene fiat, It
is not sufficient to doe that which is good vnlesse
it be done in good sort, and therefore let
not any man, which vndertaketh this profession
lay conscience aside: for though the charge
and calling be seculer, yet it must be religiously
handled. For God is the author of the Law,
and the reuenger of the abuse thereof, The
weight and measure,Pro. 16. saith Solomon, are God
his iudgments, and therfore if any man maintaine
any wrong by colour or pretence of Law
let him know, that though man be hurt, yet
God is offended, ye do not execute the iudgement
of Man,Chroni. 2. c. 19 but of God, saith Iosaphat. God
is the beholder and vmpier of Counsailes and
Iudgements, and surely if a man do well discharge
this weightie and excellent function,
there is no man of any religious habit or vocation
in higher place or greater reckoning
with God. So much the more are they to bee
reprooued, who exercise sychophancie, fraud and
caueling in the handling of causes, being wresters
of Lawes, and wringers of money, whose
conquest in bad causes maketh them triumphe
as much as Romulus did when he had killed
his brother: nay as Atreus did when he had co^past
the death of his brother Thyestes, boasting
and glorying.Senec in Thy. nunc parta vera est palma, nunc
meas laudo manus, Now haue I gotten an honorable

victorie, nowe I praise my handie
worke, but they in whom conscience beareth
stroke are farre otherwise addicted, and shalbe
hereafter otherwise rewarded. Nay euen in
their life time do they possesse ye ensigns of authoritie
and dignitie, and by good right may they
challenge many special fauors, immunities and
indulgences. Constantine the Emperor gaue
to the professors of the imperial Lawes, full and
perfect freedome from all collaterall charges,
taxes, and other burdens of the co^mon weale,
L. medic. 1. 6 de profes. and medi. and he decreed also that certain yerely pensions
should be paid vnto them out of the Treasury,
D. L. medicos. and the Emperor Valent. would haue the^
which by the space of xx. yeres were professors
of the law, to be illustrated by the name of Comites,
a name of excellent dignity.l. vnica and rubri. de profes. qui in vrbe Constantinopol. docent ex lege merueru^t. Comit. li. 12. c. tit. 15. Many other
priuiledges and benefits are mentioned in
the Ciuil law, which belong as well to Studients
as to professors, and hereupon had that
saying his originall.

Dat Galenus opes, dat sanctio Iustiniana:
Ex alijs paleas, ex istis collige grana.Angel. Aretin in @. proaem. institut.

Neither hath England bin vnkind or strait
handed to men of that coat and calling: for in
old time as I find in M. Plowden, who was
credibly infourmed thereof, there were fower
Reporters of the cases of Law, which were
chosen men, and had a yerely stipend for their

paines and trauaile therein, paied by the king,
Plowd. in Epi. a les estudents de le co^mon ley. But some will say that God forbiddeth vs
to contend. Who denieth that? but he doth not
forbid to Iudge and determine controuersies: and
there is great difference between iudging and
contending: for though God do forbid thee to
beate a poore traueling man: yet he doth not
forbid thee to bind vp his wound, when he is
hurt and maymed of others. So though he do
greatly abhorre the hatred, rancor, malice, and
disagreement of men, yet he is wel pleased and
contented yt such pernicious and contagious diseases
should be cured. Let him that conde^neth
the fault, approue the remedy. One ma^ rageth
with a burning desire of reuenge: an other co^ueieth
to himselfe an others mans goods by
craft, whom when charity and duty cannot bring
into the right way, his disloial dealing must be
repressed by the seuerity of Iudges. Moses,
Dauid Solomon, committed no sin, when they
caused wicked men to be rigorously punished:
and though Christ do condemne a quarrelous and
reuengeful person, yet he leaueth to the Iudges
their authority, whether they rule and order
causes by the Lawes and customes of nations, or
by the law of Moses. Ioseph, Daniel, Naaman,
the Centurion, did gouerne co^mon weales by
the lawes of the heathen. Surely the politicke
lawes of Kings and Magistrates are greatly to
be heeded and regarded, which Christ himself allowed,

when he paid tribute to Caesar. And the
profession and practise of the knowledge of lawe
is warra^ted by the example of great men, who
would not haue borne the names of professors,
if the science had not contained in it singuler
wit, excellent wisdome, and profitable directions
for the whole course of mans life. It is well
knowen that the Camilli, the Curij, the Fabritij,
the Fabij, the Claudij, the Scipioes, the Crassi,
the Iulij the Ciceroes, and the Scaeuolaes were singuler
men and singulerly skilled in law. And
to giue the^ their proper appellation were lawyers.
These men gouerned their co^mon weals
not in the shadow, in darknes or corners, as the
Grecians did, but in the cleare light of the
Sun, and in the face of the world, vsing experience
as a Pilot against the boysterous and turbulent
affections of the people. And therefore
Virgil when he distributethVir. Aeneid. 6. seueral sciences
to seueral Countries, appropriateth the science
of gouerning co^mon weales to the Romaines.

Tu regere imperiopopulos Romane memento,
Parcere subiect is and debellare superbos.


Mind thou O Romaine men by law to guide,
To spare the meeke, and ouer-master pride.

But some accompt it a matter of too great curiosity,
yt the laws which should be plain and manifest
to al should be reduced to an art obscured
with difficult cases, shadowed with conceited

termes, and as it were, couered with cloudes,
and wrapped in darknes: to whom I answere
that it is very expedient, that there should be a
certaine art and science of the Law, generall
rules and preceptes, and conuenient discourses.
For the particuler things which do fall vnder
the obseruation of law ar infinite, and the weaknes
of mans memorie ca^not tollerate the multitude
of particular lawes: and therefore it is
conuenient that that which we call aequum bonum,
which in plaine termes is nothing else
but perfect reason, should be comprehe^ded and
deliuered in certaine generall preceptes, and
Plato alleageth this for a reasonPlat. in polit. because it is
necessarie, that there should be Regia disciplina
a princely science, for he suteth it with that
name, which may by a generall censure, order
and dispose of all things without regard of euery
particular circumstance. For the certaine
knowledge of matters, it is good that the law
should be bounded by certaine rules and limits:
For a ma^ could not certainly know what were
his owne, and what an other mans, vnles the
Law should as it were by finger point, and shew
vnto him, what, when, and howe it were his,
and therefore true is that saying of Cicero,
Cicer. lib. 9. Epist. famil. Omnia incerta sunt cum a iure discessum est. If
you depart from Law there is no certain state
of any thing. And his opinion is in an other
place,Cicer. in ora. pro Caecin. that our inheritance rather co^meth to

vs by the law, then by our auncestors: for
though they doe giue is, or leaue it vnto vs, yet
it is the law which doth settle it in vs, and
doth preserue the possession thereof free and
inviolate vnto vs. Wherefore it is to good
purpose, that the Law should be definite in it
selfe, and should consist of certaine conclusions
which should be as the listes and periodes of
the science, by the contemplation of which, a
man may be instructed and sufficiently furnished
for particuler causes and euents: For the
particuler case lyeth as it were embowelled,
and is implicatiuely contayned in the generall
learning, and there is nothing in the Law
which may not be reduced vnto some vniuersall
theoreme, which may easily be conceyued
and remembred, because it is generall.Marcell. 2. ff. de iur. et fact. ignor. And
though the professors of the Law doe make-particuler
arguments of speciall causes, and
do admire examples or cases to the illustrating
of that which they do principally handle, yet
the Law it selfe is comprised within certaine
rules. Neyther ought it to trouble vs, that
the Law bookes are so huge, and large, and that
there is such an ocean of reportes, and such a
perplexed confusion of opinions, because the
science it selfe is short and easie to one that is
diligent, according to that saying: Industriae
omnia serua fiunt, All thinges are seruants to
diligence, or come at her commaund, and artes

ar not to be estemed by the greatnes or smalnes
of the books, but by the goodnes of their rules.
And though ye lawes which do vind mens liues
and maners ought to be vnderstood of all, that
their prescript being knowen, men may decline
fro^ that which is for bidde^, and follow that which
is commaunded: yet that may be done either
by their own means, or by ye meanes of others:
and if a mans braine be no fit mould for the Law,
let an other mans mouth be his teacher. Hence
commeth the name of Counsailor, because in
doubtful causes he may resolue and giue counsel:
Whereby appeareth aswell the necessity, as
the excellent vse of the calling: for what can be
more conuenient or of better oportunitie, then
that a man of experience should shew the way
to one that is ignorant. It is therfore expedie^t
that there should be lawes written, and that such
lawes should not be altered without vrgent occasion:
for it is a fonde part to striue against the
course and stream of lawes, and customes receiued.
A great question it hath bin heretofore, whether
common weales were better gouerned by
written Lawes, or by the present and voluntary
conceit of ye Magistrate: This matter, because
religion it selfe hath committed ciuil duties to
the wisdome and ordering of man, ought to be
measured by the examples of wise gouernors and
by popular sense. What good co^mon weal hath
there euer bin without written Lawes, which
haue bin vsed by the Egyptians, Cretensians, Athenians,

Romanes, and Iewes. The writing or the
engrauing of lawes in Tables is a principall
cause of ye certainty of the same, and without certainty,
it should be of smal credit: for what authority
or force should it haue, if it did alwaies
change like the Moone, or like Vertumnus: but
when causes ar decided by the opinion and wil of
the Magistrate, the power of gouerme^t may be
in the hands of such as be vnskilful, or wicked, and
so either for want of skil, or conscience, Iustice
may faile of her course. How often might the
prete^ce and shew of iustice beguile vs? how often
might iustice be peruerted by fauor or malice?
But if Lawes were not generall, and should not
sometimes restrain Magistrates and gouernors,
great inconuenie^ce would ensue: euen as great
as happened in Athens by the violent domination
of the 30. tirants, who when they had cancelled
and disadnulled the Lawes, did exercise a
common butchery and slaughter of good men:
Wherfore, as in dangerous tempestes the ship
is not rashly co^mitted to the winds: but there
is neede of a skilful Pylot by cunning and carefulnes
to gouern: so the wauering and passionate
mind of the Magistrate, must be ballassed and
weighed downe by Law, least his own priuate
affections do driue him from doing Iustice as
from the hauen. Aristotle affirmeth, that God
ruleth that common weale which is gouerned
by a written Law, because the Lawes are the

champions and defenders of conuenient libertie,
then which there is nothing more pleasant
in this life: for what thing can be more happy,
then to be free from the feare of iniury, and safely
to inioy the societie of men, and therefore he
would not haue the gouerment of the common
weale to be committed to any one man,
though very vertuous, without the regiment
and direction of Lawes. Neither let any man
say, that I do sinisterly iudge of the natures and
dispositions of men, in that I accompt no man
of so approued and speciall vertue, and fidelity,
that the mannaging of common affaires may
be offered vnto him to order them at his will
and pleasure without the appointment and warrant
of lawes: surely I could wish that euery
gouernor were a Numa: But yet I would
haue the law to be ioyned with the Magistrate
in the act of gouerment. Neither do I fancy
or figure in my minde any happier common
weale, then such as may accord with the tenor
and progresse of humaine affaires. If a man
should imagine that the aucthoritie of gouerment
were in the handes of the Stoikes, such
as would neither be moued by hatre, nor fauour,
though they in other respects were very
vnfit to gouerne, how shall their humors be satisfied,
who had rather be gouerned by written
lawes, then by vpright Magistrates? for such
is the madnes and frowardnes of some, that

they wil not be contented with the equitie and
faithfull dealing of the Iudges, but will still
contend by the rigor, and dint of law, and will
trie all extremitie, being often times more at
iarres and at oddes with the Iudges, then with
the aduerse partie: here the aucthority of Iudges
will be weak, vnlesse the lawes publikely
receyued do strengthen it: so that in the written
lawes there is not onely a safegard for innocency
against iniury, but also for the Magistrate
against the importunitie of the people:
But as wayfaring men whilest they trauaile
are not afraide of going a stray, when Mercuries
image doth point out vnto them the way
that they are to goe: so good men when a certaine
law is proposed vnto them, when by it
they know what euery man ought to perform,
what to auoyde, they are secured and do wholy
repose them selues in the protection of lawes.
To the intent that the Hebrewes might well
agree, and haue good order amongest them selues,
God did enact and establish certain lawes,
that they might iudge by prescript, and rule,
least the law being ambiguous might procure
dissentions. And other people and nations haue
either by the tyrannons domination of Magistrates,
or the outragious discord of the people
bin enforced to receiue Lawes as the square
and measure of their actions. In the Citie
of Athens when there was continuall debate

about the difficult points of ye law the^ in force,
there arose three factions of men, not of the
worst sort, but yet not well agreeing in matters
of state: the Citie by this meane being
greatly molested, and the hartes of men being
edged and exasperated by the festered sore and
cankerworme of contention, the gouernment
was committed to Solon: he surueying by depth
of iudgement the weake, and impuissant estate
of the Citie, made Lawes, whereby peace and
contentment were restored: And when he saw,
that these Lawes were the sinewes of the good
estate of the citie, he determined that whosoeuer
should hold any iudiciall place, should in
precise tearmes take oath that he would iudge
according to the Lawes. This was also the
cause why the Romanes dyd flie to a written
law: the Magistrates dyd arrogate and assume
too much to them selues, the people did exceedingly
grudge and murmure that their honest
libertie was impeached by the maner of their
ruling, and the best men were at variance in
matters of Law: so that it was thought meete
that some equall Lawes should be in force,
whereby the rashnesse of the people, and the violence
of the Magistrates might be moderated:
For this cause the Lawes called the Twelue
tables were prescribed to the City, which yoak
was willingly receiued, because without laws
they knew their common weal could not prosper,

nor continue. And as there ought to be a
certain forme of Lawes, so these lawes ought
not to be altered or abrogated wythout great
occasion, and the euident aduantage of the co^mon
weale. There was a Law amongest them of
Locros, that whosoeuer would make a motion
or inuectiue against any receiued law, should
therof deliuer his mind, hauing an halter about
his neck, and if it were agreed by the assembly,
that the thing which he indeuored to perswade
were for the good of the common weale, the
man was safe, and receiued co^mendation: but if
it were disallowed, and reiected as an vnprofitable
admonition, he was streight way hanged
and receiued death as the guerdon of his
innouation. And in Athens there were a kind
of men called (...), who in all publike meetings
did sit amongest the chiefe Magistrates,
and did put them in mind not to decree any thing
against the Lawes in force. Thus it is euident
that both the making and maintayning of lawes
is necessarie. And it is rightly said of Cicero,
that the Law is as necessary for the gouerme^t
of a state, as the soule and mind is for the preseruation
of the bodie,in orat. pro Cluentio. this (saith he) is the bond
of all dignities, and degrees, which are in the
common weale, this is the foundation of libertie,
the fountaine of equitie. The will, counsel,
and decree of the Citie is contained in the lawes,
as the bodie can doe nothing without the soule:

so a citie without Law cannot vse her actions,
power, or aucthoritie. The Magistrates are
the ministers of Lawes, the Iudges are interpreters,
the people are the Seruants, that they
may haue true libertie. The Law is thus defined
by Cicero,3. lib. 1. de legi. Summa ratio insita a natura,
quae iubeat ea quae facienda sunt, prohibeatque contraria,
A principall reason ingrafted in vs by
nature, which commaundeth the things that
are to be done, and forbiddeth the contrarie,
and all the particuler and seuerall lawes of diuers
nations, are but the branches of this law:
for the lawes be certain and cleere intelligences,
and rules, whereby the mind is addressed
to pursue that which is good, and to eschew the
co^trarie: and they offer to the mind the formes
and Ideaes of vertue and dishonestie. So that
in the sacred precepts of law, as in a christall
glasse, a man may perceiue what he may doe
with praise, what he cannot doe without infamie:
for the common places, which be handled
by diuers, of common duties, of that which is
truly good, of that which is perfect happines,
of the best estate of a common weale, do not so
sufficiently qualifie and instruct the vnderstanding,
as the law it selfe. But here I shalbe
crossed by an other obiection, that great and tedious
are the labors which are to be sustained in
the study of the law. Surely there is nothing
of weight or woorth, which may be compassed

without paine and trauaile, and yet if the paine
be compared and ballanced with the profite,
it is but as a few drops of haile to a whole
shower of Manna. What would not a towardly
man do? what would he not vndertake by
his wisedome and warines, to keep all danger
from the bodies, heads, and lifes of the innocent:
to preserue his memorie from obliuion,
and silence: to be of great accompt amongst
the greatest: to attaine to that knowledge,
which is the highest of all humane artes and
sciences? and though it were as hard a matter
for a young gentleman to gaine the knowledge
of the lawe, as it was for Phaeton to
ascend vnto the Chariot of the Sunne, who
ere he could accomplish that, was to passe
through vncouth wayes, and by the ghastly
formes of deformed creatures, by the terrible
Signes of the Bull, the Lion, and the Scorpion
Quid. Metamorph., though (I say) a Studient ought to
haue all the lawe perfect, and to passe through
a multitude of cases, iudgements, Statutes,
arguments, treatises, comments, questions,
diuersities, expositions, customes of courtes,
pleadings, mootes, readings, and such like:
yet sith there is no arte nor science, by which
the common weale receiueth so great benefit:
sith there is no course of life, no time of age,
no estate of men, which can either florish or be
without the safeguard of lawes, and sith the

difficultie of the science is rewarded by the
dignitie, credit, and ample fortune which belongeth
vnto it: the hope of them which employ
themselues in this studie ought not to
waxe faint, nor their mindes to be daunted
with the labour and paine, which all artes
require: but they ought to be incited and
allured to proceede in their studies by the
excellent and honorable rewardes of the
same.


Of the good qualities
wherewith the Student
of the lawe ought to
be furnished.
The second Chapter.
BEcause many applie themselues
to the studie of the lawe, without
deliberate consideration of their
qualities and sufficiencie, so that
many times they finde not that contentment,
which otherwise they might enioy. It is very
conuenient that they should know what qualities
are requisite in him, who is to employ

his time in the studye of the lawe: for
as Aristotle sayeth,Aristot. lib. 10. Ethico^, ad Nicomach. Rules and precepts
haue not force in all, but the minde is to
be decked with good gifts, that it may take
ioy in things that be truly good, and abhorre
the contrarye. The first and chiefe thing
that I doe require in him, is, to haue the
true knowledge, and feare of God, without
which his other knowledge is but as a
sword in the hand of a frantike person: and
where the light of truth is not, there is a
darke and tenne-folde mayste about the minde.
But where God is not, there is no truth,
there is no light, there is no lawe. The
soule and sences, are but the instruments
of his will, which hee bindeth and looseth
at his pleasure. And if they turne from beholding
him to the contemplation of any
arte and science whatsoeuer, surely they
effect nothing but their owne destruction.
I knowe this is no pleasant sound to some
daintie eares, who cannot tollerate any naming
or mentioning of religion, which the
Paganes, whome they make as presidents
of their prophane manners did not onely
regard, but in the very front and beginning
of theyr lawes (such was their reuerence)
they prefixed a precept and caueat
for the obseruation and keeping of holy rites
in a regardfull manner: Ad diuos adeunto

caste, pietatem adhibento: qui secus faxit, deus
ipse vindex erit: Let them go to the worship
of God with a chaste minde: let them vse reuerence:
God will be the reuenger of him
that doth otherwise.Leg. 12. tabular. c. 1.. Some perhaps had
rather heare a curious discourse handled by
some Astrologer, whereby they might haue
certaine notice and vnderstanding what complexion
and constellation is most fit to enter
into the studie of the lawe: with such dregs
they would haue their minde satisfied. They
perhaps, will beleeue (for what is more credulous
then fansie) that they which are borne
vnder Iupiter, are not fit for the study of the
lawe, as Cocles teacheth them,Cocles in Physiognom. that they
which are borne vnder Mercury, are of
quick conceit, but quickly vnconceited, soone
ripe and soone rotten, especially if Mars be
ioyned with Mercury in the constellation, as
it hapned according to the suggestion of some
in Hermogenes the Sophist, who writ of
Sophistry in his youth like a graue old man,
and was in his old age as a trifling boy. But
they which are borne vnder Saturne, are sayd
to be more dull in the beginning, but in processe
of time of more sound and deepe knowledge
then others: surely I am not of opinion,
that the soule and the powers thereof are
subiect to the sway and motion of the planets.
If I should thinke, that it were a substance

flowing from the bodie, or so mingled
with it, that it might be accompted a kind of
bloud, as some Philosophers grossely conceiued,
this might seeme vnto me probable.Cicer. in Tusc. quest..
But I am fully and immoueably perswaded,
that the soule commeth from aboue into this
strange matter, whereof the bodie is compacted,
and is of an incorporeall nature, which
is not subiect to the impression of the senses.
For when sicknes affecteth the bodie, the soule
is sound: and when the bodie is racked, the
minde is free. Neither is it to be maruailed
at, that it conformeth not it selfe to the
change of the bodie, because some materiall
parts of the bodie are not alway partakers of
the change. Let a man go abroade in the most
cold and freezing weather, yet his eyes will
neuer be frozen, let him stand by a most scorching
fire, yet they will neuer feele heate.
The strange and different substance of them
from the other parts of the bodie, I take to be
the cause. Now the Planets do worke only
vpon corporall things, for their influence is
of the same sort as the attractiue force of the
Adamant, or the Geate, which cannot worke
but vpon materiall things: and therefore I
may well conclude, that the Starres do not
qualifie the minde, but the bodie only, which
being a cotage of clay, must needs beare the
wind and weather, the alteration and impression

of the Planets. Wherfore let not any ma^
who aymeth at the knowledge of the lawe
as the marke of his desire, make any estimatio^
of these Physognomicall fictions: let him not
goe to the house of Mars nor to the spheare of
Mercury for knowledge. Si quis indiget sapientia,
postulet a domino: If any lack wisdome,
let him request it at the hands of GodIacob. c. 1.
He must likewise obserue, that the way to
the hight of knowledge is by humilities gate.
Let not the increase of his skil make his mind
to increase, and swell, after the maner of loftie
spirited men, who when they know nothing,
yet would seeme not to be ignorant of any
thing. Euery auditor must be willing to heare
Oportet discentem credere, sayth Aristotle,In Analytic. posterior.,
who though he were a man of singuler knowledge,
yet gaue example of great modestie, by
this censure, Maxima pars eorum quae scimus
est minima eorum quae ignoramus, The greatest
part of the things which wee knowe, will
counteruaile but the least part of the things
which wee knowe not: as if a man should
compare one hundred to one. But none doe
more boast of knowledge, then the ignorant,
as nothing soundeth more then emptie
vessels: and they nourishing in theyr
mindes a haughtie and ample opinion of
theyr supposed abilitie, are so bewitched
with selfe-loue, that they thinke they sucked

eloquence with their nurses milke, that the
bees which are feined to sit vpon Platoes lips,
did flye to their lips whilest that they were
dreaming in the cradle: that they were able to
teach old men before they had teeth: and triumphing
in this conceit, they admire themselues,
and disdaine others, aduancing their own
doings, and discommending the fruitful labours
of other men, like apes, louing their deformed
children, and like phantastick Pygmaleons
wo^ing their owne deuises. If any thing be
spoken of the^ sometimes clarkly, and acutely
as they thinke, they make an inward applause
vnto the^selues, and cherish their harts with this
acclamation, facete! lante! lepide! nihil supra!
but if any thing be spoken of others aptly and
sensibly, they straightway inferre, Quanto tu
melius hoc inuenisses Thraso! But a discreete
and aduised man, wil iudge none to be so meane,
but that he may learne something of him: for
though he know more then others, yet hee
must thinke, that others knowe somewhat
which he knoweth not. The best and the most
graue man saith Cicero, will confesse, that he
is ignorant of many things.Cicer. Tuscula. 3.. And Solon was
not ashamed to say, that in his old age he was
a learner.Cicer. in Catone maior. And Iulianus the Lawyer sayd,
that though he had one foote in the graue, yet
he would haue an other in the schoole.Lapud Iulianum de fide commissis liberal. in p.. The
next thing I require in a Student is temperance,

which I do not take so strictly as Aristotle
doth, who defineth it to be a restreint
from corporall pleasures, which are obiected
to the sense of feelingAristoteles lib. Nicoma chior. 2. and 3. and in lib. magnor. morali., but would haue it so
largely vnderstood as PlatoPlat. in Conuiui., CiceroCicer. lib. 1. officior., and
now of late timeScalig. lib. 3. poetic. Alberic. Gentil. lib. de leg. 3. c. 13. Scaliger, and D. Gentilis
haue taken it to be, a restreint of the minde
from all voluptuousnes and lust, as namely
from couetuosnes, excesse of diet, wantonnes,
and all other vnlawfull delights. A Student
must in his diet be temperat, and abstinent,
for as Musonius sayth, Continency in dyet is
the step to wisedome.Stobaeus de temperantia. A fat and full belly
yeeldeth nothing to a man but grosse spirits,
by which the sharp edge of the minde is dulled
and refracted, and too much meate cast into
the stomack doth ingender nothing but cruditie
and diseases. This measure must be vsed
in our diet, that no more be taken then will
suffice. Seneca prescribeth a good rule,Senec. epistol. 111. Famem
fames finiat, Let hunger end hunger,
which is nothing els in plaine termes, but
that a man should rise with an appetite, being
rather satisfied then filled. Yet he that feedeth
more plenteously, is not to be reprooued, if his
bodie do stand in neede of more copious nourishment,
and a man must not so abstaine, that
the functions and duties of the minde and bodie
be hindered. Good and moderate nourishment
doth quicken the spirits, and they do

giue strength to the braine, but that which is
vnwholesome and immoderate doth stop,
thicken, confound, and destroy them. As in
diet, so in other things, it is good for a Student
to haue the rule and mastery of his mind
and appetite, neither so to let slip the reignes
to his desire, that he will for any commodious
respect, bring himselfe to shame and obloquie,
and for a present aduantage, incurre a perpetuall
discredit. Plato hath a sentence worthie
of obseruationPlato in Timae., Et dicere and facere ea quae decent
ad sobrium and prudentem hominem tantum
pertinet, To say and to do the things that are
comely, belongeth only to a sober and wise
man. That example of rudenes vsed by certaine
Florentine Embassadors, is to be auoided.
Iouius reporteth itIoui. lib. 28. They were sent as
Embassadors to Charles the fift, and Pope
Clement the seauenth staying at Bonomia, and
being Macthants, caried with them (such
was their extreame couetousnes) certaine
wares to make gaine of, thinking they should
be free from custome, as going vnder the
name of Embassadors necessaries. But this
being perceiued to the two great Estates, moued
the Emperour to laughter, and the Pope
to anger, who was a citizen of Florence. The
Legates departed with infamy, which they
well deserued for abusing so honorable a calling
by such base indignitie, which may be a

warning to all to preferre their credit before
their greedie desires.
Dilligence in the pursuing of any studie
is of great weight and moment, and in
the studye of the Lawe it hath principall
force and effect, for the cases are many in
number, which must be read, remembred,
and applyed, which cannot bee compassed
but by extreame diligence. And whereas
some pretending a lumpish idlenes, would
haue the Lawe measured with narrowe limits,
and woulde haue the multitude of volumes,
cases, rules, and diuersities abridged
and made lesse, surely they giue large testimonie
of their great desire of ease. But
ease is a very badde medicine for difficultie,
and their pretense is wholy repugnant
to reason, yea to possibilitie. They that
would haue fewe lawes, must procure that
there be fewe causes, and little busines,
which it is not possible for any to bring to
passe. If it were possible for these faint
students to take away the infinite and the
innumerable affayres and actions of men,
then that which they require might sort
to good effect. But that lyeth not in their
power, and therefore they should surceasse
theyr sluggish surmise. For this cause Ludouicus
Viues is iustly reprehended of Albericus
Gentilis, in that he held, that all things

might be finished by fewe lawes, whome
GentilisAlbericus Gentilis dialogo primo de iuris interpretibus. affirmeth, to fight against common
experience. For if many contentions
or controuersies should happen, which none
can bridle or preuent, if the lawe shoulde
not handle, discusse, and determine them
all, the lawe shoulde doe iniurie, and it
should not be the handmayd of Iustice, it
should not Suum cuique tribuere. So that
in the Students minde this resolution must
bee fixed, not to sinke vnder the burden,
but with all conuenient industrie to followe
hys Studye, neuer to be wearie of
paynes, nor to slacken his endeuour, sith
nothing of price and accompt is purchased
without great labour, by which hee
may attayne to the knowledge of many
excellent thinges more worthie of admiration,
then prayse. Neither is it seemely
to pretende weakenesse of bodye, and tendernesse
of complexion, when health and
strength doe well serue, and may well be
imployed in Studye. Ciceroes bodye was
neyther of yron, nor of oake, yet hee was
not broken, nor in manner altered by continuall
night-watchings, noone-sittings,
and morning-risings, by many laboures,
contemplations, and studyes, by the great
charge of hys houshoulde, by the weightie
care of the common-weale, by writing

manie bookes, and epistles without number,
as Cardanus well obserueth.Lib. 4. de sanitate tuend. c. 16.. and why
should any man despaire to doe that which
another hath done, especially hauing the like
disposition of minde, the like faculties and
meanes to attaine to knowledge, and the like
desire. This diligence doth chiefely shew it
selfe in reading and hearing. It is not fit
for him that heareth or readeth, to haue a mind
wauering from the purpose, and as it were
going on pilgrimage. A man is then said to
floate in fancie, and to wander in thought,
when hee doth not bend his minde to that
which is handled, and when he is amongst his
bookes in bodie, but not in minde, or when he
is present at some reading, and doth not shew
himselfe attentiue, but doth number the tiles
of the house, or buildeth in the aire, or doth
nothing lesse then that which he should do:
but the force of the mind must bend it selfe to
that thing only which is to be conceiued. For
the power of our mind and vnderstanding is
more strong when it is vnited, then when it is
dispersed, and distracted into many parts.
Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula
sensus.
But as these things forenamed are of great
consequence and value to the Student, so
wisedome that rare and excellent vertue of

the mind is of great importance, which I do
rather exact, then require in a Student, for
without it nothing can be done decently or
perfectly: and surely to a Student of the law
it doth specially appertaine, for it doth consist
in the cunning discerning of the truth of
euery thing.Cicer. Offic. lib. 1. And a Student ought not only
well to deliuer things conceiued, but well to
iudge of them, and in this part standeth the
best part of a Lawyer. It is the propertie of
a wise man most sharply to perceiue what is
true, what is false in euery cause and controuersie,
not to be deceiued nor inueigled, not to
be vnconstant in opinion, nor ignorant in the
circumstances of things. The ordinarie
meane to attaine to wisedome, is to vse time
and diligence sufficient for the consideration
of things, to heare reasons on both sides contending
in his mind as it were armed and professed
enemies, not to iudge of any thing rashly
or hastily, nor to giue a sleight censure of
weightie matters. For as Fabius sayth in
LyuyeLiuius lib. 22. Omnia non properanti clara certaque
fiunt, festinatio improuida ac caeca est, All things
are plaine and certaine to him that is not rash
nor headie. Haste is improuident, and blinde,
which is therefore rightly termed of Plato
Nouerca Scientiae, The stepdame of knowledge.
Plato in politic.. And the Aetolian Magistrate sayd
well,Liuius lib. 31. That there is nothing so great an enemie

to good aduise, as haste, which bringeth
pennance swiiftly, but warning too
late, and without profit, because counsaile
hastilie giuen cannot be reuoked, neither can
the thing which is disordered by badde aduise,
be entirely restored or brought into order
againe. But where a man taketh time
sufficient, hee cannot be sayde to doe any
thing rashlie. Wherefore not vnfitlie hath
it beene defined by some to be the knowledge
of the oportunitte of doing things aright,
and the cause that all things be well
done,Diogen. Laer. in vit. Platonis. Cicer. lib. 1. officior., and it hath not onely a stroake in
worldly affayres, but euen in matters of religion:
for by it a man may be so directed,
that hee may neither decline to superstition,
nor to that which is contrary vnto it, namely,
impietie or atheisme. And it is the leauill
or compasse of all other vertues in the accidents
and affaiers of this life. It will shewe
the times and measure of boldnes and audacitie,
least it turne to rashnes and impudencie.
It will so order Temperance the mother
of order, that it may not be accompted
rudenesse or inciuilitie. It will guide
Iustice which gouerneth all things, least it
turne to crueltie: nay it wil moderate it selfe,
least it be termed craft or deceipt. By these
effects the Student may easily perceiue, how
necessary it will be vnto him.

The qualities aboue mentioned, do so directly
respect a Student, that they may be
numbred in the ranke either of adiuments,
or ornaments. One thing yet remayneth,
which is, to be placed and raunged amongst
the ornaments only, being a meere ornament,
yet it doth as much adorne, as the other doe
helpe: and that is curtesie or mildnes, which
doth as much decke and illustrate any gentleman,
as the dyamond doth the gold to which
it is fastned, or as the chaine of the necke
doth giue a luster to the brauerie of the other
partes, it setteth in order, garnisheth
and graceth the other giftes of the minde,
without which they shoulde be vnsauorie,
and want applause. I distinguish it from
Ciuilitye called Vrbanitas, and (...), for
that is onely to be seene in publique meetings
and assemblyes, but this may shewe
it selfe within a mans priuate walles, or
chamber, and may be vsed betwixt man and
man. Most loathsome and deformed are the
manners of the Stoikes, who whilest in
sowernes of minde they seeke to ouercome
mans nature, do exceede it, and of men they
become beasts. And such manners haue disgraced
men of excellent abilitie. Coriolanus
was by nature a Stoike, and his roughnes of
maners is iustly and worthilie reproued of Dionys.
HalicarnastausDionys. Halicarnast. lib. 8. Cato was both by nature

and profession, whom for his bitter austeritie
Erasmus condemnethErasmus in Encom. mo^ae.. And surely I thinke
that such rugged behauiour doth relish harshly,
and is sometimes vnpleasant to them who
by naturall inclination do fauour it. Heare
therefore a Stoike dispraysing a Stoike.
Cu. Piso (sayth Seneca) fuit a multis vitijs integer,
sed prauus, and cui placebat pro constantia
rigorSenec. lib. 1. de ira. Cu. Piso was free from many faultes,
but yet a froward man, and was delighted
with stifnes of minde in stead of constancie.
Florus hath noted the currishnes of Romulus
with a perpetuall blot of infamie, Romulus ob
asperitatem morum a Senatu discerptus estFlor. lib. 1. histor..
Romulus for the roughnesse of his manners
was torne in peeces of the Senate. But mildnesse
is of that sweete and delectable nature,
that it pearceth the stonie harts of barbarous
people, it affecteth their eyes and eares, it
bendeth the most stubborne and insolent spirits,
it findeth an easie way amongst swords,
it ouercommeth wrath, and alayeth hatred.Valeri. Maxi. lib. 5. c. 1..
This I commend to the student as a principall
meane to gaine fauour, loue, and good
entreatie.



Of the choise which a student
of the Law ought to make
in his studie.
The third Chapter.
NOwe that we haue shewed what
qualities are conuenient for him,
who purposeth to gaine knowledge
and credite by the studie of
the Law, it remaineth to giue him some taste
of that course which in pursuing his studie
hee may not vnprofitably obserue. For though
the way were plaine, yet to them that know
it not, it is harde and difficulte. And as the
first yoake is to the young Steere heauie, not
because hee is not able to beare it, but because
he is vnacquainted with the carying of
it, so yong Students though they be in age
and capacitie mature and perfit, yet because
they aduenture vpon a new enterprise whereof
they neuer had triall, they are somewhat
troubled at the first: yet in continuance of
time, by labour and some direction of Veteranes
in the Art, they pearce through the thornie
fence or barre of these great difficulties:
but heere let the Student take courage vnto
him, and when the doore is opened, let him

not doubt to enter. As hee must not neglect
time, which is a consuming treasure, so hee
must make distinct choice of it, least omitting
better opportunities, he doe cast him selfe into
the straites of time and necessities, whereby
he shall finde much incombrance, and his
proceedinges shall be crossed by many interruptions.
And surely as in all matters of moment,
the place where a thing ought to be done
is greatly to be regarded: so likewise the time
wherein it is to be done. For the turning of all
temporall affaires doth depende vpon these
two hynges, and these circumstances doe either
make or marre the substance of our actions.
It hath bin questioned of diuerse whether
the morning or the night be more conuenient
time for the studie of the Lawe, which
because it is no moderne doubt, but either part
hath had fauorers and patrons in all ages, and
to the end that by some clerenes of reason the
truth of this matter may appeare, I will bestowe
some paines in the opening of this
point.
Marsilius Ficinus a man of excellent learning
and iudgment doth by fiue reasons proue
that a man should rather rise in the morning
to studie, then watch in the night.Marsilius Ficinus lib. de vita sana. c. 7. His first
reason is borrowed of the Astrologers, which
he doth not greatly vrge, because he had smal
regarde of their vaine speculations: but admitting

that they say to be true, he thus reasoneth:
there be three planets which be verie
fauorable to Students in the course of their
studies. Sol, Venus, and Mercury, all which in
the night are most remote from our Hemispheere,
and goe into the twelfth house of the
heauens, which is called the prison, towarde
the West. His second reason is this. The
spirits of our bodies doe followe the state and
disposition of the aire. Now in the morning,
when the Sunne riseth, the aire is subtilized
and made rhinne, pure, and free from al grosse
vapours. But in the night time it is thickned,
and corrupted with contagious exhalations,
which possessing the sences, doe pierce into
the braine. Thirdly, the day was made at
the first, for labour, and the night for rest,
(and therefore it is said in the 104. Psalme.
Thou makest darkenes and it is night, wherein
all the beastes of the Forest creepe forth,
when the Sun ryseth, they retire and couch
in their dennes. Then goeth man foorth to
his labour, vntill the euening.) And whilest
the Sunne holdeth and conteineth his race in
our Hemispheere, with his beames he doth open
the poares and passages of our bodies,
and from the center, to the circumference of
the same, he doth enlarge the humors and the
Spirites which maketh vs more apt to labour
and studie: but when hee departeth

from vs then all these thinges are bound and
straitned, and then we are driuen and prouoked
to sleepe. Fourthly, it is verie healthfull
vnto vs to vse labour or studie in the morning,
which if it should be in the night the spirits
being greatly wasted and consumed by
the motion in the day-time, the bodie becommeth
weake, and so is vtterly vnfit for any
kinde of labour. And he that giueth himselfe
at that time to studie, causeth the Spirits to
flie vp into the head, and they being so distracted,
cannot yeelde sufficient seruice eyther
to the head or to the Stomache. Fiftely
if a man studie soone after supper, the nourishment
is resolued into grosse vapors which
doe fill the bodie and are verie noisome obstupatiues
to the senses. For the meate being
destitute of heate and spirit, doth waxe rawe
and doth putrifie in the stomacke. So that
the braine is offended and our studie greatlie
hindred and impeached. It may be added for
a sixt reason, if any thing may be added to Ficinus.
The spirits wherein all our agillitie and
dexteritie doth consiste, by which the braine
doth worke, are together with the other parts
of the bodie refreshed and strengthened. So
that in the morning they must needes be more
seruiceable then at night. Seuently, the phantasie
or imaginatiue part of the Soule which
helpeth greatly in studie, and principally in

the studie of the Law, is in the night time
confounded and obscured. Lastly the bodie in
the night time waxeth more dulle, so that the
minde cannot vse it as a conuenient instrument.
For when the stomacke is full and stuffed
with meate, the thicke aire being round about
vs, stopping the poores, the great store
and abundance of humors is caried, as Aristotle
saithLib. de somno and vigil. c. 3. to the head, where it sticketh for a
time, and layeth as it were a lumpe of leade
vpon the braine, which maketh vs drowsie
and proane to sleepe: then it discendeth by
steppes or degrees, and comming into the other
parts doth ingender sleepe. And it is the
opinion of a learned Phisition,Lemnius lib. 1. de complexion. c. 9 that the
nightlie studie is vnseasonable, and that it wearieth
and weakneth Students, making them
leane and exhausting their bodies. For by late
watchinges their vitall spirits through too
much intension are weakened, and their natiue
humiditie dried vp. Demosthenes did studie
much by candle light, and therfore his orations
were said to smell of the Lampe: but he
did not begin to studie till the first entrance of
the morning, and herein he did endeuor to excel
euerie man. But whosoeuer will followe
Demosthenes in this, had need to be well aduised
of the strength and constitution of his body
and to examin,
Quid valea^t humeri ferre, et quid ferre recusent.

For nature must not be oppressed, but measure
and meane must bee vsed, least the stomacke
being made by too much fatigation
vnable to digest the meate receiued, the poares
of the bodie bee cleane worne out and extinguished.
The whole Senate of Phisitions
doe call the morning howers, the golden howers,
in regarde that the bodie is then in best
temper. This may suffice to perswade, that
the morning is more fit for all kinde of studie
in generall, and by consequent for the
studie of the Lawe. I hath bin prooued by
probable reasons, and by aucthoritie of wise
men. If this will not serue, heare the voice
of wisedome her selfe. I loue them that
loue mee, and they that seeke mee earely
shall finde mee.Prouer. c. 8. ver. 17. I haue dwelt the longer
in this question, because it is very expedient
for a Student, to know the best time
of his studie, which if it bee vsed in season,
may prosper, and take good effect: otherwise
his labour may bee vnprofitable God (saith)
Solomon hath made all things good in their
time.Ecclesi. c. 3. And Ecclesiasticus woulde haue euerie
man to obserue time.Ecclesi. c. 4. This therefore
I will noe longer handle, being a matter
plaine, but will satisfie the Student in
other difficulties, which are more frequent and
doubtfull, and are occasions, that many which
doe enter into this studie doe breake off their

course, and bid the Law farewell. The bookes
of Law, say they, are not pleasant to reade, the
wordes or termes are harshe and obscure, the
stile no whit delightfull, the methode none at
all. It is a science void of all proper definitions,
artificial diuisions, and formall reasons.
To aunswere this cauil, (for I cannot blainch
it whiter.) I will vse a two-folde manner
of confirmation, and will shew that either the
Lawe hath those thinges which they denie
vnto it, or if it doe want them, it needeth
them not. The writings of wise and graue
common weale men learned in the Lawe are
not to be censured by Grammarians, and Rhetoricians,
who make a gallant glosse of Clytemnestraes
mules, Alexanders horse, and such
friuilous vanities. For their studie was farre
different being for the generall good and commodious
gouernement of the common weale.
And if any man reprooue them for want of
sharpenes of inuention, and finenes of witt,
let him be well aduised, and consider the substance
of their workes, and he shall find, that
they caried Mercurie in their braine, and not
on their tongue, and that they wanttd not
wisdome, though they were defectiue in Rhetoricke,
which not to haue ioined with wisedome,
is so far from fault, that if they had conioined
it they had co^mitted a fault, for who wil
not dispraise and detest curled haire, and paynting

of the face in an aged Matron. And in their
writinges wherein their chiefe purpose and
addresse was, to search out the truth of doubtfull
matters and to deliuer it to posteritie,
there could be nothing worse, then a curious
kind of stile, which is vsed commonly of them,
that seeke to flatter and to dissemble, and to bewitch
with a familiar kind of perswasion the
common people, with whom such flowers are
of more accompt, then substanciall fruit. All
kinde of things is not conuenient for all sorts
of men. Rethoricke I graunt is a pleasant
thing, and full of delite. But in professors
of grauitie, neither comely nor commendable.
Who would not allowe a tripping gate,
nimble handes, glauncing eyes in a Stageplaier
or dauncer. But in an auncient Citizen,
or graue Philosopher, who would not
dislike them, blame them, abhorre them. If
we see a young Damesell pleasant and talkatiue,
we doe not reproue it in her, but if we
finde that in a Matron, wee loath and condemne
it. And truely from the purpose and
practise of graue men, there shoulde bee nothing
more different, then that which sauoreth
of too much daintinesse or curiosity. Alcibiades
his shooe is not fit for Socrates his
foote, and it is not conuenient for graue men
to celebrate the feast of Bacchus in the Temple
of Vesta: there is great distance betwixt

the style of the Courtier, and the professor of the
Law: For if the Courtier should neglect delicate
speech, he should be no good Courtier: so
if the professor of the Law should affect it, he
should not speake like a Lawier. If Pythagoras
could haue lyued without meate, he would
not haue eaten so much as herbes, and if he
could haue expressed his meaning by signes or
gesture, or by any other meane then speech, he
would neuer haue spoken, so loath was he to
offend in superfluitie: Therefore the writers
of the Law are not to be reprooued for doing
that, which if they had done they might iusty
haue bin reprooued. Cicero when he treateth
of matters of Law, speaketh like a Lawyer,
and a Lawyer must speake as the Law doth
speake: Therefore Baroin Epist. ad Com. Iust. saith well, the writers
of the Law would not haue left to posteritie,
so many Law-bookes, if they had affected
a choice phrase of speach. And surely if when
the Latine tongue did most florish, the Caesars
and Cicero him selfe, did not vse any gorgeous
and fyled kind of speech in matters of Law,
shall we desire it of Bartolus, Bracton, Britton,
and Glanuill, when eloquence was in the Ecclipse
or wayne, and exceedingly decayed. Varro
saith, that by the diuerse mixtures of people and
nations, olde wordes grow out of vse, and are
changed, and new do take place:Varro lib. 4. de lingua latin. How can it
then be, but that the Common Law should

haue harsh, obscure, difficult, and strange tearmes
by the commixtion of the seueral languages of
the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, the authors
of the same. Polybius reporteth, that there was
such alteration of the Romane language soone
after the expulsion of their king, vntil his time,
that they which were most skilfull of antiquitie
could hardly vnderstand a great part of the
wordsPolybius lib. 3. hystor. which doubtles was a great impeachment
to learning and knowledge. If the receiued
wordes of the Law should be altered,
it may well be presumed that many auncient
bookes of the Ciuill law, and the old yeare bookes
would in short time, be hardly vnderstood: And
I am fully perswaded, that if the auncient
Tearmes of the Law should be changed for
more polite and familiar nouelties, the new
tearmes would be nothing so emphaticall and
significant as the olde. The wordes of the law
may be compared to certaine Images called
Sileni Alcibiadis, whose outward feature was
deformed and ouglie, but within they were full
of iewels and precious stones: so the wordes of
the Law, though they be rude in sound, yet are
they preignant in sense. But some perhaps
will say mine eares cannot tollerate such an
vnpleasant sound and so confused a style, O
delicate fellow, when you go to the Theater or
dauncing Schoole repose your selfe wholy in
your eares, but when you come to heare matters

of weight handled and discussed, rest not vpon
your senses, but vpon your mind and vnderstanding.
Alcibiades was more moued by the
naked speech of Socrates, then by the laboured
eloquence of Pericles: But this Rhetoritian wil
replie: I confesse the Law to be of it selfe a reuerend
and excellent thing: but it would be no
whit worse, if it were more finely and politely
deliuered. Who wil deny that which is comely
of it selfe, to be made more comely, if other
thinges be added to adorne it? To aunswere
this briefly and plainly, many things there be
to which if you should adde any other thing,
you should take away their grace and beawtie.
They be of their owne nature in so good estate,
that you can not change them, but you must
needs make them worse: A Tombe or pillar of
marble, if it should be painted with any colour,
should lose the former grace, and be a great deale
worse: and a beawtifull face is often disgraced,
by a needles ointment, and so it is of other things
which of them selues are fayre and comely: the
thing which is added hydeth that which it findeth,
and sheweth that which it bringeth: and these
thinges which ar handled in the law are not adorned
by the varnishing of art, but are obscured
by it. And it is not conuenie^t in such a serious
matter to dally with tropes and figures, nor
to riot with superabunda^ce of words, nor to florish
wt eloque^ce and diaperd phrases: But yet he

will further obiect, Though it do not belong
to the professors of the Law to speake and
write figuratiuely; yet surely it behoueth
them to speake and write in good congruitie,
which notwithstanding they do not. I would
gladly know what congruitie it is which Curiositie
doth require: The fine Rhetorician wil
say, absurda consuetudo disrumpenda est: The
Lawyer, he will say, vsus contra rationem annullandus
est, he will say that this is not Romaine
latine, it is most true: therefore (will
he conclude) it is not well spoken, nor congrue,
the argument halteth. The Moscouite will
speak of a thing after one sort: the Fleming after
an other sort will vtter the same thing:
neither of them speake in Latine, but in their
owne language: do they not therefore speake
right? yes, they speake right and congrue in
their owne language, and so do the Lawyers
in their owne dialect and language proper to
their Art. Doth any man thinke that these
wordes, Bellum, Exul, Sylua, Proscriptio, manus
iniectio, were vnknowen to the auncient
writers of the Law? Yet sometime they doe
not vse these, but in stead of them they say,
Guerra, Bannitus, Boscus, Attinctura, Arrestu^.
But it is conuenie^t that they should vse these
latter wordes, being proper to their Art or science.
Neither is it meete that they should
change them for the wordes of a strange language.

Wherefore Scaliger doth vpon good
cause dispraise the Graetians, because they doe
expresse things merely forraigne and external
by wordes of their owne Idiome: and commendeth
the Romanes, because they did apply
forraigne wordes to forraigne matters.Iuli. Scaliger in exercitation. And
the common law being deriued from the Normans,
and other nations, doth conueniently
retaine the words of the first Inuentors. And
because amongest Lawyers Latine wordes be
vsed many times in an other sence then they
are vulgarly and commonly taken, it is not
good to haue the interpretation of such words
from any other then the Lawyers themselues.
And though the Grammarians and Antiquaries
do in the Etymologicall interpretation of
wordes excell: yet the writers of the Law in
the Analogical interpretation of such Latine
wordes as do belong to their art do farr surpasse
them. I do not think any exquisite skill
of the Latine tongue to be necessarie in (...)
Lawyer: but hold it sufficient if he know so
much thereof, and in such maner, as the common
sort of men, which are conuersant in the
reading of Latine bookes. And Plato hath a
good saying to this purpose, that these things
ought of necessitie to be knowen, whereof if a
man should be ignorant, he should be said to be
shallowPlato lib. 7. de Legi. and superficiall. So much therefore
of the Latine tongue ought to be knowne, as

will keepe a man free from such reprochfull
tearmes. The auncient Reporters and handlers
of the Law whilest they writ of Fines,
Vouchers, Remitters, Restitution, Releases,
and such intricate matters, had no leasure
to note the properties and rules of the Latine
tongue in Cicero, Plinie, Plautus, and
Varro: they inquired not which was good Latine,
but what was good Law: But they
were wise in their Iudgements, circumspect
in their aduise, sharpe witted in their arguments,
graue in their speech, subtill in their
questions, cunning in their resolutions: they
were excellently instructed to distinguish of
ambiguous thinges by most wittie diuersities,
to open and to argue harde and enigmaticall
cases by sound and inuincible reasons,
to confute that which was false, and
confirme that which was true. And whereas
they are impeached for the want of good and
proper definitions, let me aske of these strict
Logicians, what a definition is? I thinke
they will say that it is a briefe and plaine
declaration of the substance of a thing: and
be there none such in the Law? surely many:
but they will haue ti to consist of the proper
genus and the proper difference, as they
tearme it, wythout adding any thing els:
But it is sufficient if it expresse the nature

of the thing, whereunto it is applied. May
May not these be admitted for good definitions,
A Fayre is a great Market: a Market is a
little Faire: a village is a multitude of houses:
a Countie is a multitude of villages, Do not
these sufficie^tly expresse the nature of a Faire,
Market, Village, and Countie: yet if they
should be tried by the touchstone of the Logicians,
they wruld be vtterly reiected as not currant.
Some do spend a whole decade of howers
in doing nothing els, then seeking out the proper
genus and difference of one onely thing,
and when they haue done, they are scarsely so
wise as they were before, they may say of
them selues as Gentilis speaketh of them verie
fitly: Confidentia astra petimus, ruimus in
praecipitia.Abberie. Gentilis li. 4. de Iur. inter^p. Their diuisions like wise are reprooued,
because they doe not flow from the
essence of the thing diuided: Yet it is sufficient
if they doe briefely diuide a thing into his
particulers. Who can disallow of this diuision
vsed in the Law, whereby all causes are said
to be eyther criminall, or pecuniarie: none
but such as will finde a knot in a bulrushe.
Againe, they say their reasons are not artificially
concluded: Surely, it is not for any
man, vnlesse he bee in the Schooles to tye
himselfe to a precise kinde of syllogysmall
logike: But if it go to the end of the controuersie,
it is sufficient, and that is the opinion

of Alciat.Alciat. lib. vlt. parerg. c. vltim. Their Methode is amongest other
thinges reproued, or rather their want of Methode,
which exception wanteth trueth. All
bookes written of the Law may be reduced to
these fower heades: either they are Historical,
as the yeare Bookes of the Common Law:
and Zasius his counsailes in the Ciuill law, in
which no Methode is requisite, but it is sufficient
to report the thinges done, and how they
were done: or explanatory, as Mast. Stamford
his Treatise of the Prerogatiue, and the
discourses of diuers Glossographers, and Commentors
in the Ciuil Law, wherein no strict
Methode can be obserued: For the Commentor
must needes follow his authour euery way
that he goeth: And if there be no Methode in
the one, there can not iustly be any demaunde
of the other. For he that vndertaketh to comment,
or to confute, must applie himselfe wholy
to the course of his authour, or the aduerse
partie: And therefore Scaliger said very aptly
to ^ardanus, Sequor te non quo ducis, sed quo
trahis:Iul. Scalig. in exercitati. Or els they be Miscellaneall, and in
such there needeth no Methode, because things
of diuerse sort, and not depending the one
vpon the other are laide together: And such
are the Abridgements of the Common Law,
and the Pandectes of the Ciuill Law: Or els
they be Monological, being of one certain subiect,
as M. Stamford his booke intituled the

Pleas of the Crowne, Ma. Lambards Iustice
of peace, whom if any reproue for lacke of methode,
surely his iudgment is out of order, and
that excellent Booke of Albericus Gentilis, a
Ciuilian De legationibus, then which I haue
not seene any thing done with more plausible,
artificiall, and exact methode which as it is
verie hard for any to imitate, so it were to be
wished, that he would in some other like treatife
equall himselfe.
But yet an other obiection hauing more fauorers
then the former must bee auuswered,
which is that the Law is vncertaine, and that
Lawyers in their opinions and arguments do
greatly differ, and dissent. But here the matter
is greatly mistaken. For the Law it selfe,
which doth consist of agreable co^clusions, and
of the iudgements, awardes and opinions, to
which reason and truth haue subscribed, is not
vncertaine, how-be-it they which doe argue
of new questions, and causes neuer heard off
before, or such as for their great difficultye
haue not yet bin decided, doe in argument contend
amongst themselues: but that which moueth
disputation is not the obscuritie or doubtfull
vnderstanding of the Law, but the qualities
and circumstances of the persons, of the
actions, and accidents, of the time, the place,
the antecedents, and consequents. And though
reason be opposed to reason, and circumstance

to circumstance, yet the Law is neuer opposed
to it selfe. And if a man will condemne an art,
because the professors and practisers are diuers
in opinion, surely there is no art, nor science,
which wil be free from condempnation.
Goe to the Historiographers, who should report
the truth of euerie thing, you shall finde
them at great oddes: Lyuie against Polybius,
Plutarche against Liuie, Sigonius against Plutarche,
and Xiphilinus the interpreter and abridger
of Dio against his authour. Dio reporteth
a prodigious miracle, which Xiphilinus
altereth, setting a new face vpon it, and
discrediting his authour.Xiphili. in vita M. Anto. Philoso. Goe to the Grammarians,
you shall find seuen great Masters at
variance about this one word Anticomarita.
Eras. li. Colloquior. in Synod. Gramma. Goe to the Philosophers, there is great dissention
and a diametrical repugnance of opinions
amongest them: there you shall see the
Parepatetikes against the Academikes, the
Epicures against the Stoikes, the Cyrenaikes
against the Cynikes, the Nominalles against
the Reals, the Carpentarians against the Ramistes.
Goe to the Schoole of the Phisitions:
you shall haue the like disagreement:
Galen against Hipocrates, Auenroes against
Galen, Auicenna against Auenroes, Paracelsus
against them all, and Erastus against
him. Will any man nowe condemne Historie,
Grammer, Philosophie, and Phisicke?

If not, then it is euident, that an Art or Science
is not to bee reprooued, because the
writers thereof doe in opinion or argument
disagree. No more is the Law to be dispraised,
but rather to be liked for the varietie of
opinions in it. For as by the collision or beating
together of Flint and Iron fire doth appeare,
So the truth is disclosed and made
manifest by the conflict of reasons. A man
shall more easilie and discreetely iudge of
thinges (saith Aristotle.) If he haue hearde
the reasons on both sides contending like
aduersaries.Aristot. metaphy Sicor. 2. c. 1. But if some men be more contentious
in points of Law, then others, that
is the fault of the men, but not of the art. The
knowledge of the Law (saith Cicero) is not
Litigious, but the ignorance thereof.Cicer. lib. ^. de Fi^. And
if a man should deferre his studie of any art,
or science, vntill the writers thereof did fully,
and vnitedly consent, It woulde bee as
vaine a thing, as if a man shoulde purpose
his iourney from London to Yorke, but
shoulde make a vowe not to begin his iourney,
vntill all the clockes in London shoulde
strike together.
Now that I haue remoued out of the way
all such obiections, as might be occasion of impediment,
and interruption to the student, I
thinke it not beside the purpose, to prescribe
and commend vnto him some speciall writers

of the Law, in the reading of which, he may
with aduantage and ouerplus bestowe his
paines.
He that frameth himselfe to the studie of
the Ciuil law, may very profitably imploy his
paines in reading of the Code, Nouellaes, and
Pandectes, which are necessarie for the profession.
Of the auncient writers I thinke these
are most conuenient to be read, Bartolus, Baldus,
Paulus de castro, Philippus Decius, Alciatus,
Zasius. Of the latter writers, Budaeus, Duarenus,
Cuiacius, Hotomannus, Donellus, and amonge
these, yea aboue these, him whom I
lately named Albericus Gentilis, who by his
great industrie hath quickned the dead bodie
the Ciuil Law written by the auncient Ciuilians,
and hath in his learned labours expressed
the iudgement of a great state-man: the
soundnes of a deepe Philosopher, and the skill
of a cunning Ciuilian: Learning in him hath
shewed all her force, and he is therefore admirable,
because he is absolute.
The common Lawe is for the most part
contained in the bookes called the Annals of
the Law, or yere Bookes, all which are to be
read, if the student will attaine to any depthe
in the Law. In them he shall see notable arguments
well worthy of paines and consideration.
The two late reporters are Ma. Plowden,
and Sir Iames Dyer, who by a seuerall and

distinct kind of discourse, haue both laboured
to profit posteritie. Some humors doe more
fancie Plowden for his fulnes of argument,
and plaine kinde of proofe: others doe more
like Dyer, for his strictnes and breuity. Plowden
may be compared to Demosthenes, and Dyer
to Phocion, both excellent men, of whome
Plutarche reporteth, that such things as were
learnedly, wittily, copiouslie, and with admiration
dilated, and deliuered at large by Demosthenes,
were shutte vp in fewe wordes,
compendiouslie recited, and with admiration
handled of Phocion.
There be certaine auncient writers of the
Law, namely Bracton, Britton, and Glanuille,
whom as it is not vnprofitable to reade, so to
relye vpon them is dangerous: for most of that
which they doe giue foorth for Law, is nowe
antiquated, and abolished: their bookes are
monumenta adorandae rubiginis, which bee of
more reuerence then aucthoritie.
Ma. Fortescue in his writing sheweth a
sharpe iudgement, and in this is exquisite, and
artificiall, that where hee endeuoreth to bee
plaine, he spareth not to be profound. For he
writ to a King, who desired to haue intricate
things plainly opened.
Ma. Littleton layde a sure foundation of
the Law, and by his owne booke hath deserued
more praise, the^ many writers of note and

name by their ample volumes: out of the
great bookes of the Lawe hee gathered the
most speciall cases, which were either generally
agreed vpon, or by the Court awarded
to be Law, or else in all ages receiued for positiue
rules. For very few there be throughout
his whole treatise, which may not be signed
with one of these three markes: his booke
doubtlesse is of such singularity, that Littleton
is not now the name of a Lawyer, but of the
Law it selfe.
M. Fitzherbert must needes be commended
for great paines, and for well contriuing that
which was confusedly mingled together in
many yeere Bookes: but he was more beholden
to nature, then to art, and whilest he lab^red
to be iudiciall, he had no precise care of methodicall
pointes: but as hee was in conceit
slowe, so hee was in conclusion sure: and in
the treatises which bee of his owne penning,
hee sheweth great iudgement, sound reason,
much reading, perfect experience, and in
the whole conueyance of his discourses giueth
sufficient proofe, that hee sought rather
to decide then to deuise doubtful questions.
Mast. Brooke is more polite, and by popular
and familiar reasons hath gained singuler
credite, and in the facilitie and compendious
forme of abridginge Cases hee carieth

away the garland. But where Ma. Fitzherbert
is better vnderstood, he profiteth more, and
his Abridgement hath more sinewes, though
the other hath more vaines, but I am ^oath to
make them countermates, and therefore leaue
the iudgement thereof to others.
In Ma, Parkins his booke be many commendable
thinges, deliuered by a readie conceit,
and pleasant methode: many excellent cases
which sauour of great reading, and good
experience, his Treatise is to young Students,
acceptable and preciouse, to wh^m
his verie faultes and errours be delightfull,
but it might bee wished, that hee had written
with lesse sharpenesse of witte, so hee
had discoursed with more depth of Iudgement.
For hee breaketh the force of weightie
pointes with the shiuers of nice diuersities,
yet many thinges are to be allowed (...)
him, many to be praised, so that the reade^
be carefull in his choice, wherein he was too
carelesse.
In Mast. Stamforde there is force and
weight, and no common kinde of stile: in
matter none hath gone beyonde him, in
methode, none hath ouertaken him: in the
order of his writing hee is smoothe, but
yet sharpe, pleasant, but yet graue: famous
both for Iudgement in matters of his profession,
and for his great skill in forraigne

learning. And surely his methode may bee a
Law to the writers of the Law which shall
succeede him.
Ma. Rastall for his long and laborious trauaile
in collecting matters of weight, and moment,
which lay dispersed, and reducing them
to a conuenient forme hath deserued neuer to
be forgotten. And I know not whether I may
more iustly commende him for his greatnesse
of knowledge, or for the largenes of his books
and labours, or for his speciall care of doing
things exactly.
In Ma, Theloall his Digest of writs, diligence
and desire to profit is eminent. He endeuored
to be like M. Stamford: but he is so farre
distant from the delightfull progresse of his
stile, and methode, that he may seeme to haue
liued in some other age a long time before
Ma. Stamford. But as his strength was lesse,
so his labour was equal. For in handling one
title of the Law, he hath dealt so painefully,
that no point can be named concerning that
Title, which he hath not discussed, nay to giue
him right, hath not fully discussed.
Ma. Lambards paines, learning, and Law,
appeare by his bookes, which are conducted
by so curious methode, and beawtified by such
flowers of learning, that he may wel be forted
amo^gst them to whom the Law is most beholden.
His stile runneth like a te^perate streame,

his excellent knowledge and vse of antiquities
argueth no small reading, and a singuler
conceit: He hath bin so vniuersally beneficiall
to the whole Realme, that whosoeuer despiseth
his workes, bewraieth himselfe.
M. Crompton hath taken great paines in
this studie, and his bookes are in euery mans
handes, which prooueth their generall allowance,
his cases are verie profitable, and apt
for the title to which they are applyed, and
so compendiously collected, that a man may by
them in few houres gaine great knowledge.


Certaine Rules to be obserued
of the Student in the
reading of his bookes.
The fourth Chapter.
NO actions haue good successe,
which be rashly and ex abrupto
vndertaken wythout direction:
for where aduise faileth, there
fortune is blind, and not in other cases, and it
is farre greater trauaile to atchiue any matter
of difficultie by selfe labour, then by the prescription
and instruction of others: Wherefore
it shall not be inconuenient to propose

certaine rules, by which the Student may hold
an euen course in the study of the Law.
In the vnderstanding of the Law the Student
must not vary or depart from the proper
sense and signification of the words, vnles therby
some absurditie, inconuenie^ce, or vniustice may
appeare: for otherwise the propertie of wordes
is strictly to be maintained, and reteyned. Therfore
let him be diligent to search out the proper
sense of wordes: for as Celsus saith, Scire leges
non est verba earum tenere, sed vim et proprietatem,
Celsus li. 9. digestor. Plowd. Comment. 82. per Saunders. To know the Law is not to know the
wordes of the law, but the force and property
of the wordes: for wordes are as it were seruants
to things, because they were first inuented
for the plain and perfect discription of things:
for though nature do make soundes, yet industrie
doth coyne words, without which our vnderstanding
might be contemplatiue, but not
practicall: for without them the vnderstanding
is in maner bound, or maimed, because without
freenes of speech, and plentie of wordes it can
not display it selfe, nor extend his force to the
opening and discouerie of any mean matter. And
as art maketh the mind to speak, so the mind or
vnderstanding maketh art to write. Certaine
it is, that without words a mans meaning may
not be certainly knowen: Of wordes some be
artificiall, and some inartificiall: Inartificiall are
those which the common or vulgar sort of men

do vse for the deliuerie and declaration of theyr
intentions and meanings, seruing not for the
illustrating of artes and sciences, but only for
mutual conference betwixt man and man: Artificiall,
are these which the inuentors of artes
haue deuised for acquainting the mind with the
rules and mysteries of their arts, because words
fitly and accomodatly vsed are the verie images
and representations of thinges, which do lead
the vnderstanding as it were by the hand, to
the apprehension and perfect knowledge of the
thinges them selues: wherefore in this respect
diligence must be vsed of the Student.
2 Where the Law is obscure, that sence
must be taken which is least* preiudiciall: for
euery perfect speech of man consisteth of two
thinges, of wordes, and of meaning, and when
both the wordes and meaning are plaine and manifest,
he that doubteth of any thing is rather
foolish, then curious: But when the wordes
be directly repugnant to the meaning, the
whole proposition or assertion is meerely
voide. Obscuritie in writing or speaking,
is when the sense can not be gathered, 1. by
that which of the most part of men is vsually
done, 2. nor by that which was vsually
done by him that vttered the wordes, 3. nor
by the custome of the countrie, 4. nor by the
common vse of speech, 5. nor by the pr^misses
nor by the ^^quel: And therefore if a man

will hyre workmen, and will couenant wyth
them that he will giue them as much as other
men of the same village or parish, if some giue
by day iii. pence, some vi. pence, some ii. pence,
the couenantor in this case shall giue but ii.
pence:Guido question. 252. because in obscuris quod minimum est
sequimur: Otherwise it had bin if it had bin
plainly and expressely said (as much as any other
man of the said village or parish.) So if a man
promise vpon good consideration to giue to
euery of the Canons of a Cathedrall church a
quarter of Wheat euery yere, and the number
of the Canons be augmented: yet the graunt
is restrained to that number, which was at the
time of the grant.Imo c. literas de resscript. 38. H. 6. 10. 39. H. 6. 6. Temp. E. 1. Common 28. and 21. E. 3. 2. per Wilby. Yet the Law doth sometime
construe deuises by mediocritie:Philip. Dec. Comment. ad regul. iur. As if
a man deuise to one two cuppes for his table,
without expressing the mettall whereof they
shall be made, they shall neither be of gold as
the best mettall, nor pewter as the baser mettall,
but of Siluer as a mettall betwixt both:
But that is, because euery deuise ought to be
interpreted for the benefit of the deuisee, and yet
as neere the meaning, and as farre from the preiudice
of the deuisor as may be: Therefore in
deuises not words but meaning is followed, and
a transposing of the wordes may be vsed if the
meaning require: confused thinges must be
distinguished, generalitie restrained, seuered
things must be conioyned, implied things must

be explicated. But in bargaines and contractes
we must not respect so much that which was
meant, as that which is spoken, because bargaines
do properly consist in facto, and therefore
in matters of contract a mans will is rather
gathered by his wordes, then by his meaning:
for, propositum in mente retentum nihil operatur,
and as the wordes do sound, so his will is to be
construed: and the wordes of the contract be
the substance of the contract.
3 When the opinions of the learned in the
Law are repugnant the one to the other, it is
the safest and best way to follow that opinion
which is most agreeable to reason: for if contrarie
reasons be probable, the better of them
is to be chosen, and that which is more consonant
to Equitie: and where the reason of the
Law doth faile, there the disposall of the law
doth faile:li. adiger. @ quamuis. de iur. patron. li. 7. P. tit. 14. c. cum cessante de appell. As of the contrary part where,
the reason of the law taketh place, her the law
taketh effect.l. non possunt et li. nam et ait Pedius de ll. in p. But if contrarie reasons doe
seeme to be of great force, wherof the one tendeth
to a publique good, the other aymeth at a
priuate aduantage, that which is for the common
good is more to be imbraced, fauored, and
followed: for that which is good to many must
needes be good to euery particuler person: and
these things which are generally expedient, ar
with good reason preferred before such things
as do peculiarly profit.Iulian in l. ita vulnerat. @ quod si quis absurde ad leg. Aquilei. But that reaso^ which

is for the profit of a priuat man, and doth not
preiudice co^mon right, may well be admitted.
Publike profit may be considered after fower
maners, 1. When profit doth accrue both generally
and particularly, as by the gouernment of
Magistrates,l. i @. huius. ff. de insti. et iur. 2, when the profit is general,
but not particuler: as locupletatio aerarij, the enriching
of the Treasury in Cities and Townes
corporate,l. pen. c. de princip. li. 12. 3. when the profit is priuate, but
yet a publike good commeth of it: as the dowry
of women, and the infranchising of Citizens,
4. when it doth so profit particulerly, as that
it doth not disprofit generally: g. as when we
say that it is not expedient, that men should
mispend their goodes, or throw them into the
Sea: That reason therfore is of more force in
law, which is more generally commodious.
Atque ipsa vtilitas iusti prope
mater et aequi.Horati.
It is good therefore for the Student to fift
out the reason of the Law, and that by very diligent
and earnest search: for the reason of the law
is the life and soule of the Law: Wherfore not
without good cause is Bartolus reproued of the
Ciuilians,Alciat. li. 1. de verb. sign. for that he denied reason to be of
the essence of the Law: And surely I thinke
there is no Law wholy without reason, I
mean which was not grounded vpon reason at
the fift making of it. Yet I will confesse that
the reason of many Lawes is so obscure, and

vncertain, that it can hardly be found out, conceyued,
or deliuered. The Law is the inuention
of wise men, who would not make any
thing publique without reason, though the reason
of the Law may be hid from him, from me,
and from a number of men: Neither are we to
think that any Law is therefore without reason,
because a reason therof can not be rendred:
for as Cicero said well, Iniquum est quod accidit
non agnoscere, si, cur id accidat, reperire nequeamus,
Cicer. in ora. ad Brut. It is an vniust thing not to acknowledg
the thing which hath happened, because we
cannot find out the reason, wherfore it happened.
It is not good to affirme that the Lawes
made by wise men do want reason, because we
can not discouer ye reason. But as I do not like
Plato his conceit, whe^ he forbiddeth yong men
not to inquire of the reason of the lawes:Plat. lib. 1. de leg. So
to be too curious in the inquisition of it, wil be
rather matter of trouble then of praise to the
Students: Therfore it is a point of humility and
modestie to think those things, which by graue
and sage men haue bin established for law, not to
be without reason, though ye reason therof can
not be discerned. And that which Gentilis wittily
speaketh of the Ciuil law, may be affirmed
of the co^mon law of this realm, Rationem vbique
habet, sed non vbique conspicuam.Alber. Gentilis lib. 2. Epistol. c. 2. Castrensis is so
peremptory for ye reason of the law yt he boldly
auoucheth, yt he neuer saw any law, wherof he
did not see the reason.Castr. in eo @ item si reip. Theodosius did ascribe

such aucthoritie to the deceassed professors of
the law, that he would haue their answeres in
doubtful matters to haue the force and strength
of a Law. And the same thing was done by
Augustus, as Pomponius reporteth.li. 2. de orig. iur. But yet I
could wish, as GentilisAbberic. Gentil. lib. 3. Epistol. c. 17. and AlcitatAlciat. lib. 4. perarerg. c. 17. do require,
that the aucthorities and cases of the learned
writers of the Law should rather be weighed,
then numbred: that is, should rather be examined
how they accord with reason, then how
many they be in number: but if it so fall out,
that two men of great iudgeme^t do dissent, his
argument is to be held for Law, which reason
doth informe and enforce to be agreeable to the
truth: For no man will intend the meaning of
the Law to be, that the opinion of any man,
though singuler in knowledge, should be preferred
before the truth: For both the Lawyer
and Iudge are the ministers and dispensers of Iustice,
and of the giftes of God, and are seruants to
God him selfe: but the seruant must not do that
which the Master will not permit: but neither
Iustice nor God will do any thing against
the truth: Therfore, neither the Lawyer nor
Iudge ought to do any thing against ye truth.
If Iustice should iudge according to opinion, and
not according to verity, it should the^ do iniury,
which thing is against her nature. And though
many arguments be made for the preseruing
and maintayning of the rigor of Law, yet none

of them ought so to be admitted against iustice
and truth, as that occasion of iniurie may
seeme thence to arise, whence right and equitie
should proceede:l. meminerint. c. vn. vi. li^. 42. coll. 9. because no reason of the
lawe, no course of equitie will tollerate, that
those things which haue bene conueniently
introduced for the profit of men, should be against
their profit with a more hard and rigorous
interpretation restreined. For these
things which be established for a certaine end,
ought not to worke the contrarie.l. quod fauor* c. de legi* But some
perhaps will obiect, that a Iudge ought to determin
and a Lawyer ought to argue, according
to the knowledge which he hath by the
written lawe, and that is the reason and conscience
of a Lawyer, as he is a Lawyer. But
surely such arguments are not proofes, and
such iudgements if they be not according to
the truth of the thing it selfe, in reason are
not sound nor maintenable. For euery proofe
should be a true assertion, and euery iudgement
the rule of truth. And how can that
seeme iust according to the lawe, which appeareth
to a mans conscience to be vniust.
Surely the light of the truth in an honest
mind dimmeth and obscureth all cauils and
quillets: And it is a friuolous dreame to
thinke, that a Lawyer hath one conscience as
a Lawyer, and an other conscience as a Christian.
For he hath but one soule, and knowledge

of the truth, and therefore but one
conscience: for conscientia is cordis scientia,
and no reason will require that a lye, by any
distinction shoulde bee preferred before the
truth. The principall meane to enquire after
the truth of euery thing, is to examin of
two or more contrarie reasons whether is
more probable. That which is plausible to
common vnderstanding is tearmed probable,
and whe^ the words of a couenant or deuise be
cleare and manifest, we follow the literall sense
of the^ without farther inuestigation, because
in things that be certaine, and apparant, there
is no place for coniecture: but whe^ the words
be obscure, or whe^ some thing is omitted, least
the graunt, couenaunt, or deuise do faile, we
haue alwaies recourse to that which is more
probable, and wee imagine that more was
spoken then written, and more intended,
then vttered. And it is not conuenient, that
in the affaires of men, the interpretation
which dependeth vpon probable coniecture
should be excluded.l. non aliter. ff. de legat. 3. A thing may be probable
many wayes, first,decis. Neapol. 44. Numb. 26. by the common vse of
speech,Marius Salmonius ad. l. omnes populi ff. de iustitia and iure. secondly, by comparing the consequent
with the antecedent, thirdly, by the circumstances
of a mans actions, fourthly, by the
concordance or agreement with the lawe, because
euery one is intended to co^forme his wil
according to lawe, vnlesse the contrary be proued:

quaero. @. inter locatorem. ff. locat. but it may be sayde, that where the
words of the law do faile, the law it selfe doth
faile.L. 4. @. totie^ ff. de damn. infer. And words were inuented, that they
might shew the meaning of the parties, therefore
we must not regard that which is probable,
but that which the words do sound.l. si repetendi c. de condi^. ob causam.
To this I answere, that there ought to be
no departing from the words, and from the
true propertie, vnlesse there bee apparant
proofe of an other meaning:l. non alit^^ ff. de leg. 3. but where
an other meaning doth appeare, there the
toung yeeldeth to the heart, and the words
do giue place to the meaning.Bal. in c. mandat. de rescript. The words
onely in such case are not to be regarded,
but wee must consider what was meant by
the person, quantitie, qualitie, place, time,
precedents, consequents, and other circumstances.
l. penult. ff. ad exhib. Alciat. in l. 1. ff. de verb. sign. And where it is sayd that if the
words faile the lawe doth faile, it is true,
vnlesse there bee some secret intent of the
lawe to the contrarye,Tiraquell. in l. si vnquam ad verb. lib. Num. 35. C. de reuoc. donat. the ground whereof
is probabilitie. And though a mans sense
and meaning be declared by his words,Quintilian. lib. 7. c. 7. yet
because there bee more thinges which wee
thinke, then which wee speake or write, the
speech of a man is not alwayes the touchstone
of the minde, but the concurrence of circumstances:
and though a mans words ought
to be taken most strongly against him,ad. d. l. si inguam in princi. num. 54. yet
they are wel to be sifted and examinedl. semper in stipulationibu^ ff. eod. least the

interpretation bee too burdenous in some
case,Loriotus de reg. axiom. 105. and so vniust against the partie. A
mans speech doth consist of words and meaning,
euen as a man himselfe doth cons^st of
bodie and soule, or to make the matter more
plai^e, the words are but the superficies, and
the intent or meaning is the substance.l. tutor petitus @. 1. ff. de excus. tut. And
the lawe traceth the meaning of a man by the
circumstances, euen as the hunter traceth the
hare by the print of his foote.Bartol. in l. si quis serio coll. vltim c. de fur* and Cons. 275. lib 2. num. 2. Yet I would
not that a mans deede or act in the countrie
should be made frustrate by some Iewish or
misticall interpretation: but such an intendment
must be taken, as the words being compare^
with circumstances will yeeld. For
words are not by violence to be racked, but by
circumstance to be ruled. And wee must alwayes
so interpret, that a mans right may be
vpholden. But it may be further obiected,
that in graunts and contracts, and in other
priuate affaires Casus omissus habetur pro omisso
l. si commodissim. ff. de liber. and posthu. l. post dotem. ff. solut. mat^im. and the inte^^ion or meaning of a man,
which is not apparant and manifest, is as a
child vnborne, which is of no account till he
be brought to light.l. Vlt. c. de posth. haered. instit. Bald. ad l. 1. C. qui admit. ad bonor. post. and col. 9. For a mans speech is
an externall act, which is ordained for the
declaration of his inwarde meaning,l. Labeo ff. de supell. legat. and
therefore words are sayd to be the limits of
our meaning.Socyn consi. 4. lib. 41. Iason. Cons. 140. lib. 2. To answere directly, these
words (Casus omissus etc.) are to be vnderstood

onely in such cases where a thing is omitted,
both in respect of the not expressing of it, and
in respect of the not implying it. But where
the lawe will vphold the meaning of the partie,
there is no neede of words: and though
words were inuented, that they might expresse
our thoughts, yet by them onely our
meaning is not signified. But there be other
signesl. 3. ff. de testi. l. de minore. ff. de quaest. namely, the circumstances before the
acte, in the acte, and after the acte. Thus it is
euident, that the best and most probable reason
in the conflict of opposite arguments, is to be
sought for by the Student, and how it may
be found.
4 The best interpreter of the law is common
reason and intendement.l. si de interpret. ff. de ll. Wherefore if
any one mans opinion do differ from common
reason, let the Student auoide it. Neither are
such things without cause to be altered, which
haue alwayes heretofore receiued a certaine
interpretation.l. minime ff. de legi. Neither is the common
lawe any other thing, then a determinate order
established and ratified by common consent.
Wherefore Bodinus saith not well, who
putteth this difference betwixt a lawe and a
custome, in that a custome is accepted by the
plausible agreement of the multitude, but a
lawe springeth vp in a moment,Bodin. lib. 1. de repub. c. 10. and is commaunded
by the authoritie of the Rular, many
times against the liking of them that are

bound by it. For common lawe is that which
is made and approued by common allowance,
and therefore it is lawe, because it is
commonly vsed for lawe. Wherefore Athenaeus
Athenaeus lib. 12. c. 22. andPolibyus histor. lib. 6. Polibius do vpon good ground and
reason reproue the lawes of Plato, because no
nation of Greece could be perswaded to vse
them: but as Plato faigned lawes, so he might
likewise faigne men to vse them: therefore
Horace sayd rightly, Quid leges sine moribus
vanae proficiunt? Lawes without vse are vaine
and profit not.Horat. lib. 4. ^arm* ode. 24. But here it is good for the
Student to be assured of what nature and qualitie
the thing is which I call common reason
or intendement, for that may seeme to offer
doubt, whether we ought to ascribe common
reason and opinion to the number of authors,
or to the worthines of them, or to the perswasion
of reason which doth concludenter demonstrare
to the sense and vndersta^ding of ye most part
of men of indifferent capacitie. I would haue
co^mon opinio^ take^ according to this last bra^ch.
5 The things which be odious in lawe must
be restrained, and the things which be fauorable
must be enlarged. Priuat customes are odious
in the eie of lawe, and whatsoeuer swarueth fro^
common right:c. cum delect. de consuetud. l. cum quidam. ff. de lib. and posth. for the co^mon law was framed
in fauour of publike tranquilitie, and therefore
the departure fro^ it must needs be accounted
odious.Aymo consil. 170. nu. 3. Baldus in l. non possunt ff. de legib. The lawe is more proane to acquite,

then to condemne:l. Arrianus. ff. de oblig. and act. and because it is
better with the restraint of an odious constitution,
to absolue one that is giltie, then with the
enlarging and amplifying of it to condemne one
that is innocent,l. absentem. ff. de paenis. therefore there is nothing
that requireth more diligence and consideration,
then to deale warily where there is great danger
to any partie, that a man may not rashly
determin of a mans credit, bloud, or life: sith
these things be of that qualitie, that being
once lost, they ca^ neuer be repaired.cap. vbi maius sup. de elect. lib. 6. But to
know whether things be fauorable or odious,
the things are not to be co^sidered in the^selues,
but theffects which proceed of the^Alciat. ad l. 2. in num. 44. de verb. oblig. as dower
is fauored in respect of the widowhood, and desolatenes
of the woman whose husband is deceassed.L. 1. ff. solut. matrim.
6 It must likewise be obserued, that when
a thing is forbidden, all things that follow
therof are likewise forbidden: as on the contrary
part when a thing is granted, all things
are implicatiuely graunted with it, whereby
we may attaine to the thing graunted:l. ad rem mobil. ff. de procur. l. 2. ff. de iurisd. om. iud. Temps E. 1. Grauntes. 41. and
if the beginning of things be forbidden, the
end also is forbidden according to the rule,
Qui meditatur principiu^ meditatur etia^ finem,bald. ad L. quamuis. c. de fide comm.
and things are principally forbidden for the
end to which they are directed. But here a distinction
is to be vsed, for where the conseque^t
is of it self auaileable, and doth not necessarily

depend vpon the power and vertue of the antecedent,
it may be of force, though the antecedent
be forbidden,Baldus ad d. l. non dubi. in 13. oppositione for then it is without
the cause of the prohibition: but if it depend
essentially vpon the antecedent, it is otherwise.
For the better vnderstanding of this
rule, it is good to be seene what may properly
be sayd a principall thing, and what an accessorie.
That is principall which is of greatest
moment: an accessorie thing is that, which
by consequence goeth with the principall.
If the Queene graunt vnto one Cognitionem
causae, her highnes graunteth vnto him the
hearing of the parties, and the examination
of witnesses. So the margarites or pretious
stones that be in gold or siluer, do yeeld vnto
it, and do passe with it, because they are but
the ornaments thereof, and were applied to
the decking and beawtifying of it. An accessorie
briefely may be taken to be that, which
is adioyned to a thing, and is lesse then the
thing to which it is annexed, either in substance
or in valew, or in respect both of substance
and valew.
7 The validitie of an act must be especially
fauored, vnlesse there be a manifest nullitie
in the proceeding.l. quoties ff. de verb. oblig. Therefore whensoeuer
the nullitie of an act shall appeare by the
proceeding of the parties, which is sayd to
be euident, and notorious and excluding all

cauill,Bart. in l. 3. parag. condemnat. ff. de re iud. it is to be held as voyd, but if the nullitie
proposed do not so appeare, but requireth
a deeper search, because many times error is
obiected that the Sute may be protracted,
there consideration must bee vsed. But in
doubtfull causes interpretation must bee so
made, that the acte may rather stand then fall.
But the obiection of error is alway to be fauored,
when the error assigned doth concerne
the figure and solemnitie of iudgement.9. E. 4. 3. gloss. in verb. defensiones in de saepe de verb. figu. And
therefore he that will dispute of the validitie
of an award or iudgement, ought to be warie
and carefull, that he put the axe to the roote,
and that he first examin the iurisdiction and
power of the Iudge, because that being the
basis and foundation of the iudgement, if that
fall, the rest cannot stand. It is therefore to be
co^sidered whether he were a compete^t Iudge
by reason of the cause, of the parties, of the
time, and the place. For by reason of the sute
or cause, a Iudge may be incompetent, as if
the cause belong to a meere iurisdiction, and
the Iudge be only a Magistrate in a certaine
corporation: or if the cause be ciuill, and the
Iudge who taketh connusans of it be Iudge
of Gaole deliuerie, or if the Iudge be secular,
and the cause Ecclesiasticall, or if the Iudge
haue some other limited iurisdiction, and he
taketh connusans of a cause not co^prehended
within the lists and bounds of his commission,

he may be incompetent also by reason of the
place, as if he iudge of causes without his territorie,
or circuite, or els within his territorie,
but yet in a place exempted, he may be incompetent
by reason of the time, as if he did iudge
before he had his commission, or after his commission
expired, or if his iurisdiction were suspended,
as at festiuall times, which wee call
dies non iuridicos, or at such a time, when a
greater Iudge was present: or if the Iudge
were called to a higher place, or if he were forbidden
to exercise his power. And also the person
and qualitie of the partie is to be considered,
because some by reason of a legall impedime^t
are vncapeable of the aduantidge of lawe, as
these that are outlawed, excommunicate, and
out of the Queenes protection. And there can
be no fast roote or sure ground of their proceedings,
for such are to be denied audience, because
their offence and default ought not to find
patronage. Likewise there may be a default
in ye party making an Attorney, as if he could
not make an Attorney in that cause, or else by
reason of the Attorney himselfe, as if he be vncapeable
of such an office as being not lawfulby
aucthorised. But if a iurisdiction be giuen
and graunted to one, it is to be intended to be
giuen him accumulatiue, and non priuatiue, rather
to enlarge, then to diminish his power.
And though a Iudge of the Gaole deliuery

being appointed and ordained by commission
to the hearing of causes criminall, may not
principally inquire of causes ciuill and pecuniarie,
because it is a Iurisdiction limitted,
yet incidently and as it were by the way, for
the better examining of capitall crimes, hee
may take notice of such things. But if the
processe and iudgement bee framed against
one, who is not onely not subiect to his iurisdiction,
but is also free from the iurisdiction
of euery man liuing, as if the partie be dead,
concerning whome, no acte can be conceiued
or vpheld, the Iudgement is voide.
Thus haue I shewed to the Student in
so generall manner as the order of this treatise
doth require, and likewise so particularly,
as to his vnderstanding may be playne and
manifest, what course hee ought to take in
examining the cases, reasons, opinions, arguments,
proceedings, and iudgements, whereof
he shall finde great store and aboundance
in his bookes. Now I will by fauour discend
to describe and delineate vnto him briefely
(for it is a matter which may be handled
plainely and in fewe wordes) what course
hee ought to obserue in the exercise of his
studie.



Of the exercise and conference
which the Student
of the lawe ought to
vse.
The fifth Chapter.
EVery art and knowledge produceth
effects, and like a good weapon
is vnsheathed and vsed in time
conuenient, otherwise it would be
quickly ouercast and eaten with rust. But
there is nothing that with so much brightnes
and glory illustrateth our knowledge, as the
orderly and iudiciall applying and accommodating
of that which we haue read. For as
a man knoweth by his bookes, so he is known
by his practise, and by that which he is able to
performe in the faculty which he professeth,
and hee which knoweth to himselfe is not
knowne of other men. Wherefore I suppose
it a thing of exceeding moment for the Student,
to demeane himselfe well in his conference
and exercise, least the multitude of
howers which he hath spent, do slip from him

without vse, as the sand falleth out of the
howre-glasse, when no man seeth or mindeth
it.
1 The student of the lawe ought to haue
great regard of his speech, and that he deliuer
his opinion or argument in conuenient and
orderly sort, not after a rude confused and
impolite manner, and hee who is not onely
wise but eloquent, is without comparison
the best in all professions which consist in
practise and in the forme of speech. Therefore
parents and tutors in the Uniuersity
should haue principall regard, that he who
is to addresse himselfe to the study of the
lawe, may be fitt with a plausible grace to
discourse and dispute, and euen in the prime
of our yeares this care must be had. For
by nature we hold that fast which in our tender
yeares we conceiue, and the worse sort
of things do stedfastly abide in vs, the better
is soone turned to worse, but in this matter
it is good to follow the precepts of such
as be neyther too curious nor too ignorant:
for there is nothing more like a may-game
then these vaineglorious persons, who haue
decked themselues with a false perswasion
of knowledge. To the Student of the lawe
I doe therefore thinke this course necessary,
because he must liue in great celebritie in

the assembly of the people, and in the middest
of the common weale. Let him therefore
enure himselfe from his youth, to frequent
assemblyes: let him not be afrayde
of men, nor appalled or tymerous through
a shadowed kinde of life, least when hee
shoulde make vse of hys studye, hys eyes
das^e at mid-day, and all thinges bee newe
vnto hym, who seeketh that in hymselfe,
which is to bee done and performed in a
multitude: Yet I woulde not haue hym
too curious and deynty in hys speeche, for
wee must vse wordes as wee vse coyne, those
which be common and currant. And it is
a great errour for a man to estrange himselfe
from the common vse of speach, and
to exceeding precisenesse in wordes, and
stile, doth quench the heate of our inuention,
and brideleth the course of our wittes.
Yet it is commendable to haue in our discourses
both good wordes, and good matter.
For Cicero dyd not fight with armour
of proofe onely, but wyth bright-shining
harnesse, when hee did not onely gayne the
admiration of the Romanes, but theyr acclamation
also and applause. But let good
wordes conteyne in them good matter, that
the Argument or discourse may not shyne
as it were by oyle and oyntment but by

bloud and complexion. It is a feauer-like
payne to endure a mans speech, loadned
with superfluous wordes. In all thynges
decorum must be obserued, least that which
wee saye, doe turne to laughter, or loathing,
and purchase the name of folly, a
meane must bee kept, least our speach bee
drye and faynt, or else too copious, and full
of circumstaunces: yet it is better for the
inuention to bee abundaunt and copious,
then to bee leane and poore. Wordes if
they bee not vested with the substaunce of
thynges, are of no force: Rhetoricke which
is the Artificer of perswasion, if it bee seuered
from circumstaunces, and raunge
without learning by a facile kinde of sway.
It is called Atechina. If it bee applyed to
the destruction of good men, it is tearmed
Cacotechina, but if it bee bestowed in vayne
and superfluous matters, it may bee tearmed
Mataeotechina, a friuolous labour, and
a tryflyng arte. There is nothing whiche
more beawtifieth a mans speeche, then an
apte diuision or partition of the thynges
which bee handled, whiche doth ease the
mynde of the hearer, prepareth the mynde
of the vnderstander, and refresheth the
memorye, and (as Iustinian sayeth) the

obscurytie which doth ryse of a confused
text, is by separation and diuision dispersed
and remoued.Iustin. in @. alio. insti. quib. modis tes. infirm. and in @. sed ne in primis de leg. And as the diuision of fields
doth make the tillage more plentifull and
sightly, so doth partition in the handling of
causes, adorne and garnish them. These
things may be aptly deuided which haue
a seperate reason, and are sorted to diuers
endes.
2 Students shall not do amisse, if at
certaine times they meete amongst themselues,
and do propose such things as they
haue read or ^eard by that meane to be assured
of the opinion of others in such matters.
By this course it may be brought to
passe, that euery one may both better vnderstand,
and more firmely reteine in memory
the thinges which hee hath read or
heard, and these things which be to good
purpose vttered of others, hee may enioy
as his owne. For priuate conference there
is no time amisse; Adrianus the Emperour
(as Dio reporteth) did handle and discusse
pointes of lawe at dynner tyme. M. Cat^
euen in the Court whiles the Senate was
assembling, did busie himselfe in reading:
and surely, he that hath a minde to learne,
may learne at euery place, and at euery
tyme.

3 Gentlemen students of the Law ought
by domestical Moots to exercise and conforme
themselues to greater and waightier attempts,
for it is a point of warlike policy, as appeareth
by Vegetius to traine young Souldiours by
sleight and smal skirmishes for more valerous
and haughtie proceedinges,Veget. lib. 1. de re militari. for such a shadowed
kind of contention doth open the way,
and giue courage vnto them to argue matters
in publique place and Courts of Recorde, and
it will not be amisse, sometimes to reason together,
before men of more reading and greater
iudgement which may friendly admonish
them, and if they erre reduce them into the
right way, It is good to bring such matters
into question as be disputable, and may deserue
argument, for it were a vaine thing to make a
doubt of that which is plaine and manifest, as
whether a rent or annui^ie ought to be paid to
a dead man, or whether a man may commit an
offence against the Law without punishment
and such like, wherein if a man should a^ke any
mans opinion, hee might perhaps receiue
such aunswere as Labio did of Iubentius Celsus:
Aut non intellig^ quid sit de quo me consulis,
aut valde stulta est consultatio tua.l. Domitins Labio de testa^. It is
euident that one Law may with good probability
heare seuerall interpretations, but that
sence is most to be imbraced which doth take
away the occasion of doubting, the way to remoue

doubt, is to examine well the reasons
of the contrary part, wherefore Baldus saith
well.
Ferro aperire viam qui per contraria transit.In l. precib. c. de impub.
And to loose doubts is to find out the truth as
Aristotle saith,Arist. Metaphys. 3. but often conference and priuate
debating of points of Law, is the fountaine
and originall of exceeding profit, for by
it the wit, the memory and the tongue, are
greatly furthered and holpen, and a man is
made more ready and bold for publike matters,
and the truth which is the marke of our study,
doth more easily appeare. Wherefore it is not
vnfitly said of Marcellus the lawier, that euery
art by continual exercise doth receiue increase.
In l. legatis @. ornatri. de leg. 3. The wit if it be somewhat dull is by conference
more sharpened, if it be ripe and ready
it is a great deale more furthered, and to the
memory nothing can be more profitable, which
of it selfe is so brittle and tender, that vnlesse
it be renewed with continual exercise, it will
easily perish. And in vaine shall a man passe away
the night without s^epe, or the day without
recreation, in vaine shall he run ouer the
volumes of the Law, in vaine shall hee inquire
after the opinions of the learned, vnles his memory
do represent and readily offer vnto him
these things being with great labor followed
and atchiued when time and occasion shall require,
I neede not shew how much it doth benefit

and polish the tongue: for conference is the
proper exercise of the tongue. I said that boldnes
is procured by the frequent meeting and
communication of students, and I wil auow that
which I haue auerred, for as by degrees a man
doth conuerse and talke with his companions
and such as be better then himselfe, so by degrees
he groweth bolder, which may bee gathered
by that Fable of Esope: The Fox did by
chance mete the Lyon whom he neuer saw before,
and was so affrighted that his senses were
almost lost, when he saw him the second time,
he feared likewise, but nothing so much as before,
but when he saw him the third time, hee
was so little afraid, that he went vnto him and
talked with him. I said further that it was the
high way to discerne the truth of euery thing,
and therefore Archadius saieth of Herennius
Modestinus that by much disputation he atteined
to excellent iudgement,In. l. mune^. @. mista. de muneri. and honori. wherfore let
the student often resort vnto his fellow students,
and amongst them let him be well aduised
of his choise.
4 After priuate and home exercise, publike
exercise must ensue, which must not be rashly
done, but there must be both maturitie of yeres
and aduise, least the vnripe braine doe make
the forehead to blush, and in stead of praise we
reape contempt. Surely it is the beginning
and foundation of impudency, for a man to

because the opening of the dore, and the holding
of the Candle was not parcel of the consu^mation
of the act, and so was the Law taken
3. of Queene Elizabeth.3. Eliz. 186. Dyer. An adulterer did
counsell the woman to murder the child when
it should bee borne, the child was borne and
murdered by the Midwife in presence of the
Mother, and by her commandment, The Mother
and the Midwife be principal, and the Adulterer
but accessary, because his counsel was
before the birth, and he was not cooperant in
the act, but because the force of his perswasion
and counsell did continue vntill the murder
it being not countermanded by him, therefore
he was held and adiudged an accessarie, but
whether in the same case if the woman be admitted
to be accessary, whether she should bee
a traitresse or no, because the principall is no
traytour, is a question which may well beare
argument on the one side vpon the letter of
the Law, and on the other side vpon the meaning
of the Law, but of this matter I haue
giuen the Student a sufficient taste, and my
meaning was in this treatise rather to drawe
the lineaments of things, then to discusse them
to the full. These may serue to prepare the
minde of the Student to handle such things
as may seeme to be contradictory in the body
of the Law.
6 That the Student may with more ease

compas and accomplish the things precedent,
it is good for him to haue great care of preseruing
and continuing his memory, and therfore
it is a profitable course vnder titles to digest
the cases of the Lawe, into which they
may transfer such things as they haue either
heard or read, neither is it safe to trust to other
mens Abridgements which are little auaileable
to such as haue read little, but that which
we by our owne sweat and labor do gaine, we
do firmely retaine, and in it we do principally
delight, and I am perswaded there hath neuer
bin any learned in the Law, and iudicial, who
hath not made a collection of his owne, though
he hath not neglected the Abridgements of others,
The memory is specially to be helped
and increased of the Student, for though it be
the gift of nature, yet by industry it becommeth
more excellent. For the integrity of
the memory it is good to haue sound health and
conuenient digestion of the meate, and a mind
free from all other thoughtes, It helpeth it
much to make good diuisions, for he that deuideth
things aright, can neuer erre in the order
of things. There is nothing surely which doth
either more growe by diligence or by negligence
more decay then memory, It is not
good trusting to a suddeine memorie, but a
nights rest will adde great strength vnto it.

Of what force memory is by nature and labor
Themistocles may witnes, who in one yeares
space did speake the Persian language verie
perfectly and Mithridates who did well vnderstande
the two and twentie languages of
the nations whom he did gouerne. M. Crassus
whiles he was President of Asia attained
to the fiue differences of the Greeke tongue.
Cyrus did remember the names of all his Soldiors
who were in his Campe. And if memory
be necessarie for any science, surely to the profession
of the Law, it is of weightie importance,
which because it doth pursue accidentia,
and infinita requireth no helpe of nature so
much as memorie, for the vnderstanding conueyeth
the cases to that treasury; out of which
it draweth them as often as vse and oportunitie
doth demande. But if the vnderstanding be
good, and the memorie nought, a man shall be
a Lawyer to day and none to morow. Wherefore
in this part the Student must excell, and
that he may excell, he must labor, and that hee
may labor, he must haue health, which I wish
vnto him.



That the vnderstanding
of the Student ought to be
proportionable to the intendement
of the Law.
The sixth Chapter.
THe Law considereth thinges according
to publique respect, that
is, as much as concerneth the
common weale, not according to
their contingencie in facto, which is euery
mans obiect, and familiar to common sense,
and therefore needeth not any artificall handling:
And the Students vnderstanding must
be so sequestred and re^^ued from vulgar opinion:
being the mother of error, and measuring
thinges onely by the skinne, and colour, that
he must comprehend and conclude many things,
which are verie remote from the reach of the
the senses, and from ordinarie apprehension:
in which contemplation the common Law of
this Realme of England aboue all other doth
shew wonderfull sharpnes, and a most exquisite
conceit, subtilizing thinges whereof common
sense hath but a confuse knowledge, being
guyded by the principall reason and inseperable

truth of euery thing, which the vnderstanding
straineth out of the secret and hidden causes
of thinges: for as in hearbes, if we touch them
outwardly, we do not finde nor feele any moisture
in them, but rather take them to be vrie,
vntill by pressing or distilling of them, we
wring out a iuyce proper to their nature: So
the Law doth conceiue and conclude many
things of ordinarie contingents, which common
sense can not perceiue, but rather imagineth
them to be clean contrary to the truth,
whereas they may to a good vndersta^ding easily
appeare to be true by the certaintie and necessary
coordination of their causes and reasons.
That this may be made euident I mean to annexe
some particulars for the explaning therof.
1 It is cleere by Law, that a terme and a
freehold of the selfe same thing may be both in
one man at one time, yet if this be deliuered to
a superficiall vnderstanding, it will seeme a paradoxe.
Tenant for terme of yeres maketh his
executors and dyeth, the executors purchaseth
the reuersion, in this case both the terme and fee-simple
are in the executor to seueral purposes:
for the terme shal be assets to the vse of the testator,
and the fee simple free inheritance for the
vse of the executor and his heires,43. E. 3. 27. et. Br. cases. And if a man
be seised of land of an estate for life, the remainder
to his executors for yeres, he may deuise
this term or assigne it.16. E. 2. per Herle, Couenants 25. And if lessee for yeres

grant his terme to the wife of him in ye reuersion,
and to a stranger, the inheritance of the husband
can not extinguish the moitie of ye terme:
because he hath the inheritance in his owne
right, and the terme in right of his wife.14. Eliz. 416. Com. Bracebridges case. A man
seised of land in right of his wife is attainted
of felony, and the king seiseth the land pro vita
viri, the king hath but a chattel and the wife the
freehold: for if a stranger enter, and the husband
dye, the wife shall haue an Assise.4. E. 3. 47.
2 Likewise it will seeme strange, though in
Law and reason it be true, that a man should be
remitted to his land to some intent, and yet not to
an other: As if a recouerie be had vpon a false
title against tenant in taile, the tenant in taile
dyeth, the issue entreth, he is in of his first right
against all but onely the recoueror.12. E. 4. 21. per Choke. So if tenant
in taile discontinue, and his sonne and heir apparant
disseiseth the discontinuee to the vse of
the father, the tena^t in taile dieth, the sonne by
M. Chookes opinion is in his remitter against
all, but onely the discontinuee.12. E. 4. 21. per Choke. et vide 7. R. 2. tit Entre en le Per, en le collect. de Bellew. the issue in
taile which hath good cause of a Formedon in
the discender, is of couin that A. should disseise
the discontinuee against whom he recouereth:
he shall not be remitted in respect of him, but
shal be accompted a disseisor:18. H. 8. 5. 15. E. 4. 4. but against all
others it seemeth that he is remitted. Tenant
in taile maketh a feoffement to the vse of
his wife and his sonne being heire apparant

to the intaile and dyeth, the issue is remitted
against all persons but onely the woman.4. E. 6. 68. Dyer.
A title may be executed to some intent, and
yet not executed to an other: And therefore
if there be tenant for terme of life, the remainder
in fee to a stranger, against whom a recouerie
is had pro loco and tempore in a Warrantia
chartae, brought by a stranger of other land,
he in the remainder dyeth, the recouerer is impleaded
and voucheth the heire of him in the
remainder, and recouereth, tenant for life dyeth,
execution shall be ^ued against the heire of
the land whereof his auncestor had a remainder,
because there was a remainder executed
in the father to this intent at the time of the
Warrantia chartae brought:15. E. 4. 13. per Littleton. but to all other
intents it was executory, for it was not executed
that the wife might be endowed, nor for
him in the remainder to bring a writ of right,
40. E. 3. 43. But the remainder in such cases is to some
intents executed: for if he in the remainder had
aliened his remainder in Mortmaine, the lord
might haue entred,15. E. 4. 13. and vpon such a remainder
the lord may haue a Cessauit,27. E. 3. 87. but the
heire shall not haue an Assise of Mortdauncester.
39. E. 3. 3. Mortdauncester 50. Fitzh. Na. bre. 196. k.
4 A thing may be extinct or in suspence in
one respect, and in Esse in an other respect: the
father being tenant in taile alieneth the land
with warrantie, and hath a rent charge in fee

issuing out of the land of his sonne and heire
apparant, which rent discendeth to the sonne,
this rent is a good assets for the value in respect
of the discontinuee: and yet it is extinct
in respect of the issue.31. E. 3. Garrantie 39. A man seised of a rent
seruice is bound in statute staple, and after
purchaseth the land, out of which the rent is
issuing after execution, the rent is extinct, as
to the conusor, but in Esse as to the conusee.4. Eliz. 205. Dyer.
A corrodie is graunted to I. S. for life, who
graunteth it backe to the grauntor for terme
of yeares rendring rent, the corrodie is in Esse
as to the payment of the rent, but in suspence
as to the taking of the corrodie.20. E. 4. 12. 22. E. 4. 17. 18. And it was
lately ruled in one Caires case in the Court of
wardes, that if a man held land of the Queene
by a certaine rent, and the Queene graunteth
the rent to a stranger, who graunteth it to the
tenant, the rent is extinct as to the payment,
but in Esse as to the tenure. The King seised
of a forrest graunted the office of the forrester
to one rendring rent, and he graunteth
the forrest to an other, the forrester forfayteth
his office, yet the grauntor shall haue the
rent:26. Ass. p. 60. So that it must needes be that the office
to the intendment of law is to that intent
in Esse. And if a man graunt to an other a rent
out of his land in fee vpon condition, that if
the grauntee or any of his heires dye, their
heire being wythin age, the rent shall cease

during the minoritie, if the grauntee dye
hys heire wythin age, his wyfe shall haue
dower, but cessabit executio during the nonage:
10. H. 7. 13. per Keble. But in this case it seemeth that if
the heyre dye during his nonage, the wyfe
of the heire shall not haue dower of the rent:
because it was neuer leuiable by the sonne,
as it was by the father. A man seysed of
two acres of lande hath issue two daughters
and dyeth, now the rent is in suspence, as to
one moitie, and in Esse as to an other moitie.9. E. 3. Charge 4. 9. Ass. p. 22.
5 The intendement of the Law is as
stronge in a matter of law, as the trueth it
selfe in a matter in facto: And therfore if A.
be disseised, and hys brother maketh a release
with warrantie to the disseisee, and afterward
entreth into religion, this warrantie
shall be a barre to A. although that hee
be lyuing:34. E. 3. Garrantie 72. for A. may haue his land by discent,
and therefore it seemeth to be reason,
that the warrantie should discende vpon him
as his heyre. Note here of what validitie
the intendement of Law is touching a ciuill
death. The Wardein of the Fleete who hath
the office in fee dyeth seised, and the office
discendeth to his sonne and heire, being then
in prison, the Law doth presently discharge
him of imprisonment, because he is to be at

large the better to looke to others, that be in
pryson.Plow. Com^ Plats c. 37. A man maketh a lease to one for
terme of life, rendring the first seauen yeares
a rose, and if he will hold the land any longer
then seauen yeares, that then he shall pay foure
Markes yerely: liuerie is made, the lessee surrendreth
at the ende of the first seauen yeares,
his estate was adiudged to be but a terme ab
initio, and no freehold, and the writ of couenant
brought against him for not repayring
was qui tenuit ad terminum annorum.50. E. 3. 27. If a
man make a lease of land excepting the trees
which grow vpon the land, the trees are seuered
in law: for he hath no reuersion of them,
and if he sell them, and after the sale make
a feoffement, the feoffee shall not haue
them, because they were seuered by the vendition
or sale of them,20. H. ^. 22. for by the exception
they were seuered from the terme, but not
from the inheritance, but by the vendition
they were seuered from the inheritance. If
the Baylife of the land doe demaunde a rent
seruice, and the tenant denyeth it, and the
Baylife sayth that hee will distraine for it*
and the tenant sayth that hee shall not distrayne,
wherefore the Baylife dare not proceede
further to take a distresse, for doubt of
death, thys is a disseystn of the rent in the
eye of the Lawe.49. E. 3. 14. Assise 66. And if a rent seruice be
warranted to one, and the land doth escheat,

the Law as M. Finchden thinketh transferreth
the warrantie to the land.45. E. 3. Voucher 72. per Finchden.
6. One thing in the vnderstanding of Law
may be of seuerall natures in seueral respects,
and so one writ may be two seuerall writs to
two seuerall intents: In an action of debt the
declaration was of x. li. vpon a sale, and v. li.
which he had deliuered to the defendaut to redeliuer,
and it was held good, because the action
was in the debet and detinet, and the warrantie
of atturney and the essoine in this case
shall be in placito debiti.32. E. 3. Brief 288. Quaere, If a man
lease land to one for terme of yeares rendring
rent, and the lessor graunteth his rent to a
stranger, and the lessee surrendreth; this doth
not extinguish the rent, for now it is a rent
seck which doth not depend vpon the reuersion,
^0. E. 4. 12. And so one man to the vnderstanding of
Law may haue seuerall capacities or respects:
For if a man disseise a feme sole, being an inheritrix
of certaine land, and after he taketh her
to wife, and they haue issue, and the husband is
disseised, and the disseisor leuieth a fine wyth
proclamations, the husband dyeth fower yeres
after the proclamations, and before the fifth
yere be passed, the issue being of full age, and
after the wife dyeth, and the fifth yere passeth,
now the issue is bound as heire to his father,
yet he may haue other fiue yeres, as heire to
his mother, to be accompted from the death of

his Father.Plow. Com. Stowels c. 367 So if I. S. be tenant of land,
for terme of an other mans life, the remainder
to an other for life, the remainder to the said
I. S. for terme of his life, or in fee: and he is
disseised, and the disseisor leuieth a fine with
Proclamations, and the fiue yeares incurre,
now is I. S. bound for the present estate, but
if he in the mesne remainder for life die, hee
shall haue other fiue yeres for the other estate.
Ibid. So if a man haue an estate in land for the
life of A. the reuersion to himselfe for the life
of B. the remainder to himselfe for the life
of C. and is disseised, and the disseisour leuieth
a fine with Proclamations, he shal haue
fiue yeares seuerally after euerie seuerall estate
determined.Plow. Com. 368. Stow. cas. I. S. giueth land to A.
his daughter in taile, and hath issue B. another
daughter, and dieth, A. dieth hauing issue
C. a Precipe is brought against C. who
voucheth to warrantie her selfe and B. as
heires to the donour of the reuersion to haue
the warrantie paramount, in this case is C.
both the vouchor and the vouchee.2. H. 6. 16. A terme
is deuised to one who is made executor, he entreth,
this is an administration and an execution
of the terme vnto him, and he is both deuisee
and executor.20. Eli. Com^ Weldens cas A. couenanteth by Indenture
with B. that the sonne of A. shal marrie
the daughter of B. and that therefore B.
shall giue vnto A. an 100. li. and if the marriage

did not take effect before such a day that then
A. and his heires should stand seised to the vse
of B. and his heires vntill the hundred pound
be payed by A. his heires or executours B. dyeth,
and after the marriage taketh not effect,
the vse and possession of the land vesteth in the
heire of B. but Quaere saith Brooke whether
he shall be in ward or no, for he is an heire and
yet he is a purchasor.3. Mar. Br. Feff. al vses 59. and vide 3. Mar. 128. Dy. Wilf. cas and 13. E. 3. Br^ Exting. 45. If I. S. be Deane of
P. I may giue him land to him and his successours,
and to him and to his heires, there hee
taketh both as Deane and as a priuate man,
and is tenant in common with him selfe: so if
a rent charge be graunted in such manner, he
shal ioine with himselfe in an Auowry.24. H. 8. 30. per Pollard Likewise
the Lawe may deny one a benefite as he
is I. S. and yet allow it vnto him as he is executor
to I. N. and therefore if an executour
be Outlawed, or Excommunicated, which be
disabilities in Law: yet as an executour hee
may maintaine an action, because he sueth and
is to recouer to the vse of an other person.14. H. 6. 14. 21. H. 6. 3
and so an executour may haue an action of
trespasse in his owne name, without nameing
his companion in the executorshippe, if
goods be taken out of his possession.42. E. 3. Execut^s 67. For he
is possessed of them as a priuate man, but he
is possessed of them to the vse of an other as
executour.11. H. 6. 35 And he need not in the case aforesaid
name, himselfe executour.12. R. 2. Executors 75. For if he do,

it may tend to the abatement of the writ according
to M. Kebles opinio^.16. H. 7. 4. per Keble 19. H. 6. 65. per New^. who saith that the
possession of one of the executors (his meaning
is as he is executor) is the possession of both,
and herewith agreeth the opinion of Newton,
but by their fauors though the propertie of the
executors in the goods of the testator be one
and the same, yet the possession may be seueral,
for he that hath the custody of goods may only
be said to be in real and actual possession of the
same, which kinde of possession is onely heare
meant, for which cause a writ of Detinue that
concerneth the possession of goods, shall bee
brought only against that executor who is possest
of the goods.
721. H. 6. 1. 39 E. 3. 59. H. 5. 14 11. H. 4. 46 The Law may worke seueral thinges
in one instant as if a disseisor make a lease for
yeres, and after he and the disseisee release, by
one deed to the tenant for yeres, the Law adiudgeth
the release of the disseisor first to take
effect, and after the release of the disseisee, for
there is no priuity nor estate in the lessee, vpon
which the release of the disseisee may inure, if
the Law doe not make such construction.21. Eli. Com^ 539. Para. cas.
If the tenant for thirtie yeres make a lease
for tenne yeares, and they both surrender to
him in the reuersion, the surrender is good
for both estates, and yet the lessee for tenne
yeares, coulde not surrender by himselfe
for defaulte of priuitie, but when the other

ioineth with him, his surrender shall hee taken
to goe before and the other to followe
it.14. H. 7. 1. and 4. Likewise if the tenaunt for terme of
life surrender to the grauntee of the reuersion,
this is both an Attournement and also
a Surrender.19. Eliz. 258. Dyer. So if a man haue land by
discent by the Mother side, and leaseth it for
yeares, the lessee couenanteth and graunteth
to pay yerely to the lessour and his heires
xx. s. the lessor dyeth, the Law in a moment
will conuey the reuersion, to the heire of the
part of the Mother, and the twenty shillings
to the heire of the Fathers side, because it is a
su^me in grosse.Plow. Com^ 132. Brow. cas
8 By intendement and admittance of
Law a thing suspended may bee reuiued, for
if the donour disseise the donee in taile, and after
maketh a feoffement, and the tenant in
taile reentreth, nowe the feoffee shall haue the
reuersion.9. H. 7. 25. per Fineux So if the heire in taile entreth
vpon the discontinuee, and maketh a feoffement
vpon condition, and for the condition
broken reentreth, and after a recouerie is
had by the discontinuee, the issue in taile is
now restored to his first action, and the entaile
is reuiued, for by the breach of the condition
the feoffement is disanulled.23. H. 8 Br. Restore al primer acc' 5. Tenant
for life, the remainder in taile, the remainder
in fee to the heires of the tenant for terme of
life, graunteth a rent charge in fee, this shall

charge the land during his life, but it shall be
suspended during the entaile, and after the entaile
determined it shall be reuiued, and shall
charge the heire of the tenant for life.5. E. 4. 2.
9 The Law altereth the nature or substance
of a thing by matter, ex post facto, A
man seised of lande in right of his wife, entreth
into religion, the wife alieneth, the husbande
is deraigned, the husband may reenter
into the land.33. E. 3. Ent^ congeable 52. So if a man bee indebted to
a villaine, who recouereth in an action of
debt, and after the debtour purchaseth the
mannor to which the villain is regardant, and
after alieneth it, the villaine may nowe haue
execution.12. H. 4. Execuc' 28. If a man make a lease for terme
of an other mans life rendring rent, and the arrerages
incurre, the lessor shall not haue an action
of debt, because he hath a franktenement
in the rent, but if Cesty que vie die, now is the
freehold as to the rent conuerted into a chattell,
and nowe he shall haue an action of debt.
39. H. 6. 26. per Paston Likewise a deuorce altereth the estate of
frankemariage into a bare freehoold.7. H. 4. 16. If a
man adde a condition to a single Obligation
after the deliuery, this maketh the Obligation
void, for now it is not his deed, and
the same Law is of the rasing or enterlining
of a condition after the deliuery of the Obligation.
36. H. 6. 5 per Ash. Iust. If land bee giuen to one in taile,
and the donee giueth the land to the donour,

and to a straunger for terme of their liues,
this is a discontinuance conditionall, namely
if the straunger suruiue.28. H. 8. 7 Dy. per Fitzh. If the Sheriffe
attache one by force of a Capias that is iustistable,
but if hee returne a Non est inuentus
vpon the writ, he is a trespassour ab initio.3. H. 7. 11
If I. disseise I. S. and leuie a fine to I. N.
and after I. S. entreth vpon I. N. and enfeoffeth
me, and I. N. entreth vpon me, and
I bring my Assise, and I. N. pleadeth the
fine in barre, I may auoide the fine by shewing
the matter aforesaid.15. E. 4. 5 per Litt^. If a fine be leuyed
of land in auncient demesne, and the Lord
disanulleth the fine leuied at the Common
Lawe, he hath restored the right to him that
leuied the fine.16. E. 2. cont^ claime 10 If hee which abateth after
the death of the tenant in fee simple make a
Feoffement vpon condition to be perfourmed
within nine yeres ensuing, and after the feoffee
leuieth a fine with Proclamations, and
the fiue yeares incurre the condition is broken,
and the abator reentreth, now the heire
of him that dyed seysed may haue an Assise of
Mordauncestor against the abator, whereas
before hee was bounde by the fine.Plow. Com^ 358. b Sto. cas. Tenant
in tayle maketh a Feoffement and taketh
backe an estate in fee, and bindeth him
selfe in statute Marchant, and then maketh a
Feoffement vpon condition, and after the recognisance
is put in execution, and the tenant

in taile dyeth, and the heire in taile being within
age entreth for the condition broken, he is
remitted, and the recognisans auoided, but otherwise
it had bin if he had bin of full age:
for then he comming in vnder the Estoppell
should not haue auoided the Estoppel, nor by
consequence the recognisans.8. H. 7. 7. If my very
tenant be seised of a Manor held of the King
in Capite, and of an other Manor held of me
by knightes seruice, and he is disseised of the
Mannor helde of the King, and afterward
dyeth seised of the Manor held of mee, wherevpon
I seise the body of the heire, and after
the heire within age recouereth the Mannor
held of the King, nowe the King may haue
my lande also in Warde, because the heire
shall nowe be adiudged to bee in by discent,
and the King shall haue the Wardeshippe of
the body.15. E. 4. 14 per Littleton Skreenes cas If my Horse strike one, and after
I sell the Horse, and afterwarde the
partye that was stroken, dyeth of the stroke,
nowe shall the Horse be forfayted as a Deodand.
Com^ 290. per Car. dame Hales. cas If a villaine inflicte vpon himselfe
a mortall wounde, and the Lorde seyseth
his goods, and then the Villaine dyeth,
nowe shall the Queene haue his goods because
hee is Felo de se.Ibid. A man administreth
of his owne wrong, and after taketh
letters of Administration of the Ordinarie,
this shall relate to the death of the intestate.

9. E. 4. 33. the heire chargeth land which is after recouered
in a writ of Dower, the woman shal
holde it discharged.10. H. 7. Charge 3. Thus it is euident
that the vnderstanding of the Lawe worketh
especially vpon relations on the first causes
of thinges reducing through many straites
of colourable pretenses and obiections the
right of a thing to him to whom it appertaineth,
according to the qualitie and exigence
of the said right and title, so that the vnderstanding
of the Student when it entreth into
the suruey of these intricate and hidden
pointes, must bee of this abilitie to compound
thinges, and to resolue them by imagination,
to builde and destroy, and to turne sayle by
circumstances and occurrences: for there is
no case which accidents may not alter, but
that one thing may counteruaile an other, or
that a defect may be supplied by enforcement
of reason, or that a wrong may bee purged
and transfourmed into right, and blacke as
it were changed into white, contrary to nature
is the worke of intelligence reflecting
vpon it selfe, some perhaps carry such spiced
and scrupulus consciences, that they cannot
abide any fiction or representation of a thing
that is not in facto, but surely the supposall
admittance and intendement of the Law is
necessarie, without which neither the science
of the Law, nor any other which consist in

contemplation and abstraction of the essences
of thinges from the confusion and mixture of
circumstances can be of any woorth or force.
And though I must confesse that euery thing,
which is imagined to be done, and is not actually
done is a phantasie, or an vntruth, yet this
must be graunted, that, that which is not really
done, and yet for auoyding inconuenience must
be supposed to be done in facto is not a fault,
though it be false. Many things of thys kind
and qualitie haue I before immediatly proposed
which will be voide of all effect, if you take
imagination from the Law: Let it therefore
be considered what this imagination is whereof
we speak, that by the description thereof it
may be better knowen. It may thus appeare
vnto vs, Fictio a supposall or admittance of a
thing to be is, legis aduersus veritatem in re
possibili ex iusta causa dispositio, the disposing of
the Law against a matter of truth in a thing
that is possible, grounded vpon iust cause: and
there is great difference betwixt imagination
and presumption, because fictio iuris the imagination
of law tantum operatur quantum veritas
ipsa, in the conclusions and decisions of
law, and the Law maketh sometime ens ex
non ente in intelligence, though not in existence:
but praesumptio stat in dubio it is doubted
of, and yet it is accompted veritatis comes,

the companion of trueth, qu^tenus in contrarium
nulla est probatio: And the vse of supposall
or fiction in the Law is onely to supplie
that quod desideratur in facto, which is wanting
in fact, vt ex ipsa produc^ntur veri i^ris
effectus, that true effectes and conclusions of
law may proceede from it. The Logicians say
that the vniuersals are not in rerum natura,
for if they were they should be monstra: for an
vniuersal man, or an vniuersall tree comprehending
in it all trees, is r^^her by vnderstanding
to be comprehended then by sense to be
compassed, yet I would not haue any imagination
to be vsed: but where Equitie
and the orderly coherence of thinges doth require
it.



That the Student ought
well to conceiue the reason and
Iustice of the Law in distinguishing
and establishing the propertie and
communitie of thinges.
The seauenth Chapter.
THe ende and effect of the Law is
to settle the propertie and right
of thinges in them to whom they
belong: And to iudge those things
common which continuance of time and the
entercourse of parties hath distributed and warranted
to many, for if all thinges should be
common, there should be nothing in order, and
if nothing should be common, men would
hardly be kept in duitie, for then should friendship,
societie, and conuersation, the comforts of
mankind faile, which would turne the whole
common weale into a wildernes: therfore the
most prudent and politike Law-makers haue
thought it most conuenient, that betwixt
these two extremities a middle and euen course
should be taken, whereby propertie myght
be reteigned, and yet communitie preserued.

Plato, because once he was of opinion that all
thinges ought to be common, hath therefore
many blowes of his scholler Aristotle writing
against him in hys Politikes, in which
booke he hath a learned difference, that all
that be common (...) in vse but not (...) in
possession and title, which notwithstanding
is not generally and indefinitely to be admitted,
because then it tendeth to the ouerthrow
and vtter subuersion of all common weales:
But Plato being after better aduised did retractate
his former opinion, and laboureth to
confute it: for in his book of Lawes he writeth
in one place, Let euery man haue the free
vse and possession of his goodes by law, whether
he be citizen or stranger,Plat. lib. 8. de legib. and in an
other place: The distinction of demeanes,
inheritances, and titles, is the foundation of
all priuate contractes, which must be seuerely
established by Law: therefore meum and
tuum ought to be in euery common weale.Plat. lib. 11. de legib.
And againe, Let the inheritances and properties
of thinges be definite and certaine in
euery common weale, and let a certaine
manner of purchasing them be prescribed
by Law.Plat. lib. 12. de ligib. Thus it is euident that a distinct
propertie of thinges is commodious and conuenient
for the good administration of a common
weale: It is of two sortes, eyther an
absolute and indefeasible propertie, or els a

qualified propertie and sub modo. An absolute
propertie is such which is not in any
sort subiect to the claime of any other: but a
qualified propertie is that, which one man
may claime after one sort, and wyth a certaine
limitation, and an other may claime after
an other maner, and wythout limitation:
As if a man doe hyre beastes of an other to
manure his land for a certaine tearme, hee
that hyreth them hath a propertie in the beasts
pro tempore, and therefore if the beastes during
the tearme be taken away, he may haue
a generall Repleuine:42. E. 3. 18. 11. H. 4. 17. 17. E. 4. 2. So he may haue of
beastes which bee in his custodie and were
committed to his keeping:47. E. 3. 12. And so he may
haue a generall writ of Trespasse for the taking
or dryueing away of beastes in his custodie,
though the absolute propertie bee in
an other man: But if hee whych hath the
verie propertie doth take them, an action of
the case will onely lye48. E. 3. 20. 11. H. 4. 23. And the Bailie of
corne or money, being out of sacke or bagge,
hath so farre foorth a propertie in the thinge
deliuered, that if the Bailie be afterward attainted
of felonie, he shall forfait the corne
and the money: for it cannot be knowen whether
they be mine or no.3. E. 3. Corone 317. 323. 334. And the Lord may
haue a Repleuine of the beastes of hys villaine,
or bondman, if hee haue bin seised of

his villaine.42. E. 3. 18. Na. br. Fitz. 69. 9. H. 6. 25. per Bab. 19. E. 3. Repleuin 32. 33. E. 3. Rep. 43 And it appeareth by diuerse
bookes, that in an action of trespas, it is no
plea to say that the propertie, that is the verie
propertie, is in an other.12. H. 6. 19. 27. H. 8. 21. And it is sayd
lykewise, that hee out of whose possession
goodes are stolne, may haue an Appeal: and
he lykewise may haue an Appeal who is the
verie proprietarie.19. E. 3. Repleuin 32. And therefore it is a
firme conclusion in law, that if sheepe be deliuered,
or leased to one for a certaine time to
marle his ground, the deliuerie or demise is
a good plea in barre of an action of Trespasse,
or Repleuine, because hee hath a propertie
modo et forma against the baylor himselfe,
or lessour, and may haue an action against
him for taking them away wythin the
time.21. H. 7. 14.
2 And as the propertie of thinges may be
particuler or generall, so likewise it may be
ioint or seuerall: A ioint propertie is where
two or more are ioyntly interessed in a thing:
A seuerall propertie when they haue seuerall
interestes in seuerall thinges: and therefore
where the propertie or right in goodes
and chattels is ioint, there the action which
is brought to trie the propertie must not
bee seuerall: And therefore in a writte of
Rauishment of a warde the defendant sayd
that the plaintife had nothing in the seygniorie

but onely in common wyth such a one,
and this was helde a good plea, wythout
saying that hee had nothing in the warde
in seueraltie, or wythout shewing how hee
helde in common in parcenarie, or by iointenauncie.
6. H. 4. 6. 12. H. 6. 4. 22. H. 6. 14. and 1. E. 4. 7. And so if the propertie bee seuerall,
the action must not be ioint but seuerall:
And therefore if in a writte of Repleuine
brought by two for certaine beastes,
if the propertie of some of the beastes belong
to one of them onely, and the propertie
of some of the beastes to the other, the
writte shall abate.28. E. 3. 92. 3. H. 4. 12. 34. H. 6. 37. 2. E. 4. 23. 10. E. 4. 2. 8. E. 3. 15. Thus it is euident that
the Lawe doth maintayne and vpholde the
ioynt and seuerall propertie of thinges, without
which the common weale could not consist.
Now let vs consider how the communitie
of thinges is lykewise respected by
Law.
3 A man may obserue and deduce hys
accompt from former times, that it hath bin
thought very necessarie and conuenient that
mutuall commerce and trafique betwixt Nation
and Nation should be entertayned and continued:
Plat. lib. 12. de legib. And therefore Plato wisely admonisheth,
peregrinorum commercia respub. ne auersetur:
And Amasis the Egyptian king was so

glad of the commerce and resort of strangers,
that he graunted to the Grecian merchants
beeing meere aliens, the vse and exercise of
their rites and religion in their owne language:
And to the ende that strangers might
more commodiously practise their negociation
in that Realme, there was a certaine
place appointed in that kingdome, namely
Naucrate for the receit of forraine wares,Herodot. lib. 2.
which course is greatly approoued by Aristotle,
whose opinion is, that a principall Citie
must be erected in some conuenient place
whereto thinges which be necessarie to thys
lyfe may bee abundantly conueyed, and to
which there may bee easie passing for them
that be in league w^th vs, and hard for others:
Arist. 5. polit. cap. 7. 6. polit. ca. 7. et lib. 7. ca. 4. et 5. and therefore sayth he it ought to be scituate
neere to the sea.7. polit. cap. 5. And doubtles iust was
the quarrell and complaint of the people of
Megara against the Athenians, who had vtterly
barred and secluded them from theyr
hauens, and from all marting wyth them:
Plutarch. in Peric. for he whych breaketh and dissolueth the
reciprocall entercourse of nations, is an enimie
to the societie of mankind. And Strabo
in hys last booke noteth it as the propertie
of the Barbarians, to repulse and keepe out
of theyr territories all straungers, which
custome is agaynst the Lawe of Nations,

what a great point of inhumanitie is it to
deny them the sea which by nature is open to
all:Vlpian. lib. 8. Digestor. tit. 4. c. 14. yea, it ought to be as common as the
vse of the aire:Celsus li. 43. Digestor. tit. 8. c. 3. and all creatures may claime
the free vse of that, as may appeare by that
^aying of Daedalus:

Omnia possideat, non possidet aera Minos.Ouid. in Metamorph.


Though Minos all things do possesse,
the aire is not his owne.

And the shore of the sea is by nature common
to all, as Neralius sayth,c. 14. tit. Digestor. de acquirend. rerum domini. and though Empires
and kingdomes be deuided, yet the vse of
such things remaineth still in common, and
therefore the saying of Maro in the person of
one of his traueilers was vttered with good
reason:
Quod genus hoc hominu^, quaeue hunc tam barbara more^
permittit patria? hospitio prohibemur arenae.
but yet to enimies, because in them the league
of friendship doth faile, the right of fellowship
should not be graunted. For grossely are they
deceiued, who would without restraint haue
all things common, of which error the Anabaptists
are patrons, and do endeuour to
ground their error vpon scripture, but falsely,
for Abraham and the Patriarches were men
of great riches: Iosua did publikely and priuately
distribnte his goodes to the people of

Israell. There be in Solomon precepts of the
proprietie of things. And God woulde not
haue sayd, Thou shalt not steale, if he would
haue had all things common: for to steale, is
to take away goods wherein others haue a
propertie, and therefore theft is sayd to bee
contrectatio rei alienae animo furandi, inuito illo
cuius illa res est.Stamford. fol. 24.
3 But yet the rule of charitie and societie
requireth that some things should bee
in regarde of vse and benefit common to other,
and therefore by customes of Countryes,
and by lawe, the offspring of these
customes, the earth is in parte appropriated
vnto some, and in parte participated
and made common to others. Therefore
the Common lawe doth well allowe and
mainteine the common vse of certaine things,
as namely, the vse of Fishing in another
mans Pond,18. H. 6. 29. and 92. 17. E. 4. 7. 7. H. 7. 13. 18. E. 4. 4. of pasture for hys beasts in
an other mans soyle,9. H. 6. 36. 27. H. 6. 10. 15. E. 3. Common. 12. 22. Assis. pl. 36. 36. Assis. pl. 3. 4. H. 6. 13. 37. H. 6. 34. 4. E. 4. 29. 10. E. 3. 15. 10. E. 3. 56. 4. E. 3. 4. 15. Assis. pl. 5. 14. E. 3. Barre. 277. 17. E. 2. Commo^. 23. 22. H. 6. 51. of taking of an estouer
or maintenance of wood in another mans
groue,N. B. Quod permit. 11. Elizab. 281. Dy. of hauing a franchise and libertie in
an other mans Mannor or Seignorie,13. E. 45. 10. H. 7. 13. 7. E. 4. 10. 48. E. 3. 17. 30. E. 3. 20. 3. H. 6. 12. 34. H. 6. 43. and
lastly, of hauing a way through an other mans
ground.33. H. 6. 26. 8. E. 4. 9. 6. E. 3. 23. 2. E. 4. 9. 20. E. 3. Admeas. 8. 21. E. 3. 2. 11. H. 4. 82. 2. H. 4. 11.
4 Some thinges there are, the propertie
whereof the lawe can not vest in any, and
therefore it leaueth them to the occupant,
that is in playne tearmes to hym that can

seise them, as things which are by nature
ferae naturae, as beasts, birds, or fishes, being
in theyr owne libertie. And as to the propertie
it is not materiall whether they bee
taken in a mans owne ground, or in an other
mans, and such things be his no longer then
they bee in hys possession or custodye: for
when they haue escaped and recouered their
naturall and pristinate libertye, then they
cease to be his, but then the lawe vnderstandeth
such things to haue recouered their naturall
libertie, when they are eyther past the
view, or els being in view they be hard to
be followed, and recouered. The nature of
Bees is wilde, and therefore when a swarme
of them lighteth vpo^ thy tree, they are no more
thine before they be couered with thy hiue,Iustinia. lib. Institut. 2.
then hawkes, which haue made their neasts in
some of thy trees, or doues in thy doue-house
for though the yong birds be thine, whereof
thou mayest bring an action of trespasse, quare
vi and armis pullos esperueriorum suorum in bosco
indificantium, or columbas columbaris sui caepit,
which writ is not only maintenable, whe^ the
doue-house is broken or the dore open, and the
young doues be taken out of their neastes, but
an action of trespas wil also lye for ye troubling
or hurting of the old doues within the doue-house,
though they be ferae naturae, as wel as for
chasing and killing conies in a mans warren,16. E. 4. 7. 22. H. 6. 6. 67. 18. E. 4. 8.

yet he shall not vse this word suos,43. E. 3. 24. 12. H. 8. per Newdig. 14. Eliz. 307. Dy. in his
writ, yet because he hath them by reason of
his Warren or Doue-house wherein he hath
a propertie, he shall haue an action for the
chasing or the taking of them.8. E. 4. 5. 22. H. 6. 55. N. B. Fitzh. en le briefe de trespasse. The nature
of Cranes and Doues is wilde: neyther is it
materiall that by custome they are wont anolare
and reuolare, to flye from home, and returne
home. And in such things which are
came, and by custome are wont to depart and
yet to returne, this rule is allowed, that so
long they may be sayd to be thine, as they
haue animum reuertendi. And felonie cannot
be committed in the taking of beasts that be
sauage, if they be sauage and vntamed at the
time of the taking, nor for taking of Doues
being out of a Douecoate, nor for taking of
Fishes being at large in the riuer, for such
taking is not contrectatio rei alienae sed quae est
nullius in bonis.18. H. 8. 2. 22. Assis. pl. 95. And the stealing of a Doe
which is tame and domesticall is fellonie, but
then saith M. Stamford, it seemeth that hee
that stealeth it should haue certaine knowledge
that it is tameStamf. lib. 1. c. 16. but if the Doe be killed
and then stolne, this is felonie.10. E. 4. 15. And
though a man may haue for the taking of his
Ferret an action of trespasse, because hee is
profitable to take Connies for the vse of his
maister. Yet because a Ferret is ferae naturae,
a man cannot haue an appeale of fellonie for

him, no more then he may haue for the stealing
of his Hauke and Popiniay, or such like,
for such things are ferae naturae, and a man can
haue no propertie in them, neither can he say
in his writ feras suas, for that implyeth a
contradiction, and because they are sauage,
therefore they are not tithable. But when
such things are made came by my labour and
cost, the propertie of them is changed, and the
nature altered, and then if a man take them
out of my possession, I may haue an action.
For a man may haue an action quare molossum
suum cepit, because he is necessarie for the keeping
of his house, or the keeping of his folde
or a fish pond.12. H. 8. 3. Fillowes C. per Brooke. Pollarde. Brudnell. Newport and Newdigate. But the nature of hennes and
geese is not sauage, and therefore if they shall
flye away, though they be past thine eye-sight,
notwithstanding in what place so euer they
be, they cease not to be thine: and who so euer
deteyneth them, is punishable by way of
action.Iustini. lib. Institution. 2.
4 In the Ciuill lawe there is this case,
certaine Sheepe were caried away from the
Shepherd of A. by Wolfes, an husbandman
of the next village hauing pursued them with
great and strong dogs which he kept for the
safetie of his beasts, recouered them from the
Wolfes, for the dogs did enforce the Wolfes
to leaue them, and when A. did demaund the
Sheepe, the question was whether the sheepe

became his that did so recouer them, or remained
still the sheepe of A, for the dogs did get
them by a kinde of hunting: yet Pomponius
thought in this case, that as those things
which are taken either on sea, or on land, do
cease to be theirs that tooke them, when they
are come to their naturall libertie, so by the
same reason our goods take^ away with beasts
liuing either in the sea, or on the land, do cease
to be ours whe^ the beasts that tooke them haue
escaped our pursuit. And who wil affirme that
that continueth to be ours which a bird flying
hither and thether, carieth out of our barne,
or out of our field, or by any meanes carieth it
away from vs, if therefore it cease to be ours
when it commeth to the mouthes of beasts,
in common apperance, irrecuperably, it must
needs become his who first recouereth it, and
so be made proper to the occupant, euen as a
fish, or bird, which hath escaped our power,
if it be taken of an other, is streightway his,
but he thinketh it more reasonable that it
should continue ours, so long as it may be recouered.
Vlpianus lib. 19. ad edictum.
5 Likewise a thing pro derelicto habita,
waiued and forsaken, is nullius in bonis, as when
a man for feare of a tempest casteth his things
into the sea, or some danger being imminent,
leaueth them vpon the land, or els of his owne
free will leaueth that which is his owne sine

spe rehabendi.29. E. 3. 29. 12. E. 4. 5. If a thing be fallen out of a
chariot or wagon, it may be sayd to be lost or
waiued.Vlpia. lib. 56. ad edictum. And if a man haue a libertie to take
wayfes and strayes in his mannor by prescription,
and certaine beasts be wayued or do stray
within the precincts of his mannor, and a
stranger taketh them, he that hath the mannor
shall not haue an action of trespasse generall
for the taking of them before he hath seised
them,16. Elizab. 138. Dy. though the lawe be taken to be otherwise
by some.ibid. and Fitzh. N. B. 19. But 13. E. 3. a writ was
mainteined by an Abbot by reason of his franchise
in the like case, but that was an action
vpon the case, which prooueth that the propertie
was not in him before seisure.13. E. 3. Briefe 678. But
it hath been held for cleare lawe, that felonie
is not committed in the taking of treasurie
found, wreck of the sea, wayfe and stray, and
such like, vnlesse they haue been before seised,
and the reason is, quia dominus rerum non
apparet, ideo cuius sunt incertum est, and therefore
the punishment in such cases is by fine,
and not by the taking away of life and member.
22. Assis. pl. 99. Such landes, the propertie whereof
hath been executed by possession, cannot be
wayued but by matter of record.7. E. 4. 7. and 20. And it is
a certaine rule and sound reason, that such
things as cannot passe but by matter of record,
cannot be wayued or relinquished, but
by matter of record.8. H. 4. 13.

6 Such things are said to be nullius in bonis,
which haue not from time out of minde
bin knowne to belong to any man, as treasures
hid in the earth, as when any money,
gold, siluer, plate bullion is founde in any
place, and no man knoweth in whome the
propertie is. The lawe bestoweth it vpon the
King, and it becommeth res fiscalis, parcell of
the treasurie royall, and therefore it is called
in the common lawe treasure troue, that is to
say, treasure found, whereby it appeareth,
that the King is not proprietarie of it, till it
be founde, but it is before nullius in bonis.
But if any mine of mettall be found in any
ground, that alway pertaineth to the Lord of
the soyle, except it be a mine of gold or siluer,
or a mine which hath vaines of gold and siluer,
which shall alway be the Kings in whose
ground soeuer they be found:Exposit. des tearmes de ley, Plowd. in le case de informat. pur mines. and in auncient
time, as M. Bracton sayth, it belonged
by the lawe of nature to him that found it:
but now by the lawe of nations it is res fisci,
and belongeth to the King: but heretofore it
hath bene ruled quod thesaurus non competit
regi, nisi quando nemo scit quis abscondit th^saurum:
Fitzh. corone 446. for then (as M. Stamford collecteth)
it shall belong to him in whom the propertie
was before, and if he dye before such
finding, his executors shall haue it.Stamf. lib. 1. cap. 42. And because
there might befall some square or variance

betwixt the Lord of the soyle, and the
King about the propertie of such treasure,
it is therefore decided quod thesaurus competit
domino regi and non domino libertatis si non
sit per verba specialia aut per praescriptionem.Fitzh. corone. 281. 436.
7 And things are sayde to bee nullius in
bonis by common consent, as things consecrate
and religious: for though the goods
belonging to a Church, as belles, seruicebookes,
surplices, chalices, and other things,
must be supposed in a writ of trespasse brought
by the Churchwardens to be bona parochianorum
in custodia nostra existentium.8. E. 4. 6. 37. H. 6. 30. 12. H. 7. 27. 8. H. 5. 4. 11. H. 4. 12. 19. H. 6. 66. Yet in
that the lawe giueth the action to the Churchwardens,
and to their successors, for the recouerie
of such goods vniustly taken, and doth
giue the propertie to the parishioners, this
properlie must be intended to be to the vse of
the church, that is, to the vse of the parochians,
as they are the Church: for though it be
true that Rolfe sayth, 8. H. 5. that a church parochiall
can not otherwise be intended, but
a house made of stones, and walles, and roofe,
and such materiall things which can not take
by gift or feofment no more then a church
conuentuall which lacketh a soueraigne:8. H. 5. 4.
yet it cannot bee denyed that the parishioners
are incorporate for the purchasing of
personall thinges, and that in regarde of

such capacitie, they may be sayde to be the
Church it selfe, as well as the Parson and
his successors in auncient time were sayd to
be the Church in the purchase of land and
realties, which may appeare by this case:
Land was deuised to one for life, the remainder
to an other for tearme of life, the remainder
to the Church of S. Andrew in
Holburne, this is adiudged to be a good deuise,
21. R. 2. Deuis. 27. and this must needes goe to the Parson
and hys successors, because the Churchwardens
and parishioners were neuer admitted
by lawe to purchase land to the vse of
the Church. And Belknappe sayde, that the
cloathes of a dead man being found dead in
the field, did belong to hys executors if hee
had made a will, otherwise that they should
be deliuered to the Church for celebration of
diuine seruice for the soule of the dead: for
his meaning is (as I take it) that the Ordinarie
should intermeddle with them for the
disposing of them.48. E. 3. Enditement. 27. And if a man take a
coate-armor which hangeth ouer a dead mans
tombe in a Church, the enditement must be
bona executorum, of the dead man: but if a
graue-stone be taken away, the enditement
must be bona ecclesiae.Lambard Eirenarc. 494. 495.



That the words or termes
vsed in bookes of lawe ought
to be vnderstoode and applied
as the lawe doth expound
and conceiue them.
The eight Chapter.
IT is not possible for a man to be
skilfull in any Science, vnlesse he
do perfitly know the words which
do occurre and are often vsed in
that Science. I doe not meane wordes of
Arte onely, which by Lexicons and explanatorie
bookes may easily be conceiued, but such
as do import and concerne the obiects of the
science, about which it is principally conuersant.
To pursue therefore briefely an interpretation
of such words as in the lawe are materiall,
I take it not to be dissonant from order
to begin with the diuersitie of lawes, and
to shew how these words, the lawe of Nature,
the lawe of Nations, the lawe Ciuil, the common
lawe, the statute law, the customarie law
ius merum, and aequum et bonum, are vsed in the
lawe bookes, and are to be vnderstood, that so
it may be knowne how and in what sort one
lawe differeth from an other, and of what

qualitie and condition that lawe is to which
the Student is addicted, or vpon which hee
doth grounde his reason. The lawe of Nature
therefore is that, which the Nature of
Natures, or the God of Natures of the Philosophers
called Natura Naturaus, hath
caught all creatures that haue sense by the
mediation of nature created of which they
consist: for this lawe is grounded in the
roote and inwarde partes of Nature, and
therefore one sayeth well, Habemus non
scriptam sed natam legem, quam non didicimus
sed hausimus: This is according to
Iustinian his definition, in hys Institutes,
to whom D. Hotoman may seeme at the first
to doe iniurie by obiecting that by this definition,
to eate, to sleepe, to mooue, and to
rest, are parcell of the lawe of nature: and
though this be aunswered by some,Gou. lib. 1. lect. ^ur. c. 19. that
these thinges are excluded from the definition,
by this word ius, yet what absurditie
woulde followe if such thinges shoulde
bee graunted to bee parcell of the lawe of
Nature, why not as well as the repulsing
of force, which apparantly proceedeth from
the lawe of Nature. For in truth there is
no difference in the effect betwixt externall
force, and the force whiche a liuing
creature hauing sense should doe to it selfe,

if it shoulde not performe these aforesayde
actions of Nature, as to eate, to sleepe, to
mooue, and to rest, whereby Nature is preserued
and kept in time. This is playne
in men, who by the Ciuill lawe are sayde
to kill, in denying nourishment to themselues,
or others, whereby life and nature
may be mayntayned. And Iosephus writeth
well, that it is against the nature of liuing
creatures for any of them to kill it selfe.Ioseph. de bel. Iud. lib. 3.
But D. Hotom. doth further cauill, following
hys forefather Valla, that lawe cannot
bee applyed to beastes, no more then iniurie
may be done vnto them. To this may
be replyed, that iniurie in some sense may
be done vnto them, if iniurie be taken for
that quod inre non fit, which is not done according
to that lawe, that is prescribed vnto
them by nature. But if it bee done according
to the rule of nature, though it differ
from the nature of all other things, yet
it is not iniurious or vnnaturall, for example.
All birds except the Cuckoe, doe foster
and bring vp theyr young, these doe it
by the lawe of Nature, this doth it not by
the lawe of Nature, and yet doth no iniurie
to her young, because shee doth it by
the instinct and priuiledge of Nature. This
lawe is of all most auncient, beeing connaturall

vnto vs, and following immediatly
and indissolubly, the very principles of Nature
created, being an euen leuill, and most
iust lawe in it selfe, though wrested and corrupted
by the corruption of things: but in
what kinde so euer it is vniformely executed,
it is without all blemish of vniustice, as
in mankinde it is vniformely apparant, that
euery man is inclined by nature to prouide
for posteritie. But when some prouide too
much, some too little, some with pinching
from themselues, some in seeking to make
their children farre greater then themselues,
this is not vniforme, this therefore is vniust:
neyther doe I dissent from the opinion of
them that thinke the lawes of Moses doe
imitate and resemble the simplicitie, integritie,
and vniformitie of the lawe of Nature.
The lawe of Nations is that which naturall
reason hath propounded and appointed
in common to all men: I doe not saye
that nature hath appoynted, but nature with
reason, or naturall reason. And it is also seuered
from the lawe of nature, because it
is appropriated onely to men, yet communicated
to all nations, for there is no nation
which vseth it not. The distinguishing
of Demesues, the diuersitie of Realmes and

Kingdomes is parcell of the lawe of Nations.
Likewise warres, contracts, and such
like, are braunches of that lawe, the definition
of it may be shortly this, a lawe in
which all Nations doe consent. But this
pleaseth not Bodinus, for saith he, all nations
haue consented to Idolatry, yet who will accompt
that a lawe?Bodin. lib. de Repub. But this definition is
meant of humaine things, not of diuine, for
who will so vnderstand it? For all the Nations
of the world may not prescribe a lawe
to God, nor capitulate any thing touching
these thinges that concerne him, hee is a
law-maker for hymselfe, and therefore hath
sayde Quod praecipio tibi hoc tantum facito, non
addas, nec minuas.Deuter. 12. v. 32 But in humane things
that whiche all Nations doe allowe for a
lawe that is for gouernment and publique
respect (for which intent the worde lawe
is vsed in the definition) that is to be receyued
and acknowledged for the lawe of
Nations.
The lawe Ciuill I doe not take so largely
as some doe interpret it, to bee a lawe
which euery citie or people hath appropriated
to it selfe: for though the originall denomination
of it came from this word Citie,
yet by that was meant onely one Citie
where that lawe was practised and obserued,

and that was the auncient citie of Rome, for
which cause the Ciuil law is at this day called
by some ius Romanum.Alber. Gentil. lib. lecti. and epistolar. 2. c. 14. And though many
Cities and Commonweales be now gouerned
by that lawe, yet therefore it can not be
sayde to be ius Ciuile, sith it had the name
before.
The Common lawe is that which by
common vse or common reason is made, not
by common assemblie, as Statutes or Actes
of Parliament are established: And it differeth
likewise from statute lawes in this, that
in such lawes there are many times prouisoes
and exceptions of certaine persons. But the
Common lawe bindeth all alike, and is not
applyed and vsed as a plaister to one part,
but as a strong purgation to all the partes
of the bodie politique, and it may challenge
a thirde difference, for that the Common
lawe ariseth from the people and multitude,
but the Statute originally from the
King, because before euery Parliament, writs
of summons issue from the King for preparation
to that solemne meeting of the States.
Againe, the King may dispense with penall
Statutes,34. H. 8. 52. Dy. by clause of non obstante, but hee
may not alter the course of the Common
lawe,11. H. 4. 73. though the worde of Common lawe
extende by the generallitie of it, to any

lawe that is commonly vsed in any place,
yet vse hath restreigned it to the Law of this
realme of England, to the dominions of which
it is confined, and beyond this neast streatcheth
not her feathers.
The customary Law is nothing els but a
custome long time continued, which may bee
thus more fully defined, Custome is a law not
written, by the manners and vsage of a certain
people or the greater part of them vpon good
reason and iudgement, begun, and continued,
and hauing the force of a Law. I said (a Law
not written) because the bare memory of man
is the register of customes. I said by the manners
and vsage etc.) because no custome doth
grow without the consent of certains people
or the maior part of them* I said (begunne vpon
good reason and iudgement) because such
things as are introduced by error, are not to
be obserued. I said (continued) because without
diuturnitie of time, custome can haue no
force or strength. I said (hauing the force of
Law) because it must bee of equall power in
the place where it is vsed with the Law. Acustome
against the Law of nature is of no force,
because naturalia sunt immutabilia; A custome
against the Law of nations is of no validitie,
because that is grounded vpon the Law of
nature. A custome against the Law positiue
is either against publi^^ v^ilitie or priuate

profit, if it be derogatorie to publike vtilitie,
it is void: if it be onely against priuate profit
it is good and effectual, and a custome once disallowed
and defeated by Law, cannot be recontinued
or reuiued by any meanes. It hath
bin questioned how many Actes or deedes of
men be required to bring in a custome, and the
opinion of the most learned hath bin, that so
many actes and so notorious, that the thing
which is done may be intimated into the notice
of the people, so that it may seeme to be allowed
by the secrete consent or likeing of the people.
But one notorious act cannot induce a custome,
for that is against the name of a custo^e:
for consuetudo is nothing els but communis assuetudo.
It hath bin also doubted whether an
act contrarie to a custome do interrupt the custome,
to which it may be thus answered, either
the custome was not yet perfitte, and
then it doth interrupt the custome, for the
consent of the people did not yet euidently appeare,
or els it was complete and perfit, and
then it cannot be defeated by one act, but by
so much time and in such maner as it was
induced.
Ius merum is that Law which hath no mixture
nor regarde of circumstances, but groundeth
a rigorous conclusion vpon thinges done
without further examination how or why they
were done, as if a man sell a lease of lande

for yeres, and certaine cloth for tenne pound,
the contract is entier, and if the title of the
vendor be not good as to the lease, yet he shall
haue the entire summe though the vendee be
dispossessed of the lease at the time of the action
brought for the money,24. H. 8. Br. Contract 35. 7. H. 7. 4 because in strict
reason the contract was entire, so if a man
sel his owne horse, and the horse of I. S. to
A. for tenne pound, and I. S. taketh away
his horse, yet an action of debt will lye for
the whole summe, because the contract was
in it selfe entire.30. H. 8. Br. Apportion 7 But if a man reteigne
one in seruice for a yeare, for tenne pounde
to bee payed at two feastes of the yeare, and
the Master dyeth after the first feast, and
before the latter, the Seruaunt shall haue
his wages but for the first Feaste, because
the contracte was at the first time apportioned.27. E. 3. Br. Apportion 6.
The Law which is termed aequum and bonum,
is that which doth mildely interprete, amend,
and mollifie the hard and rigorus speaches,
and censures of the other Lawes: and is
sometime sharpe and seuere, where the other
Lawes are remisse and conniuent: as may appeare
by that saying of Salust, sentencing the
proceeding of the Romaines in a matter of
estate fit reus magis aequo bonoque quam iure gentium
Bomilcar comes eius qui Romam ^ide publica
venerat, and this is not so much comprehended

in writing, as in the true vnderstanding of
that which is written. It is necessary by the
iudgement of an other Law, which saith Etsi
nihil facile mutandum est ex solennibus, tamen
vbi aequitas euidens poscit subueniendum est.l. 183. de Reg. iur.
and againe iustus iudex aequitatem solutius sequitur.
l. 14. de reg. iur. @ de relig. This though it haue place somtimes
in the precepts, rules, and cases, of the ciuil and
common Laws: yet it hath more affinity with
the Law of nature, and the Law of nations,
which are ignorant of the knots, and intricate
points of these aforesaid Lawes.
Now that we haue discoursed of these seueral
Lawes, it remaineth that we should shew
what things are the principall obiects of the
Law, which may be reduced to two heads, for
either they are real or personall. That which
is reall, is either land, or that which issueth
out of land: land is either firme and fixed
earth, or that which is immediatly and coherently
annexed to the earth, as houses. By the
differences of this diuision a pischarie or fishing
is excluded, whether it be libera piscaria,
that is a libertie of fishing in an other mans
pondes, or waters, which he hath in common
with others. For xx. persons may haue a fishing
after that sort in one riuer, and it is therefore
called libera because none may disturbe
them to whom the fishing belongeth:17. E. 4. 7. Or
seperalis piscaria, which in our bookes hath seuerall

significations, for either it may signifie
a seuerall fishing, which one man alone hath in
an other mans soile.18. H. 6. 29. Or els where a man
hath a seuerall fishing to himselfe in his owne
ground, and so it is a thing compounded of
water and of earth, and therefore it is said,
that where a graunt is made of a stagne or piscarie,
the land passeth.4. E. 3. 3. Feoffem^r 79 And in a Formedon
brought of a gorse, which in Latin is called
gurges, a gulfe or d^epe* Yarmouth, wherein
fishes are commonly taken, the demaundant
shall recouer the land and soile it selfe.14. E. 3. Formedon 34. And
it hath bin adiudged that a fishing so taken
lyeth in Tenure.40. E. 3. 44 And a writ of Aiell was
brought of a fishing as a thing lying in demes^e.
20. E. 3. Bre 685 And also of a stagne or poole:Temps E. 1. Briefe 861 But
it cannot be termed land, because the water
is not coherently fired to the soile, but otherwise
it is of an acre of lande which is couered
with water: for though that be ouerflowed
with water, yet it is not naturally ouerflowed,
as a ponde or fishe-poole is.18. E. 4. 4 And
therefore it is said 12. H. 7. that a man may
haue a Praecipe de vna acra terrae cum aqua cooperta,
or de vna acraterrae generally at his election.
12. H. 7. 4 But a tenement cannot be said to bee
freehold, except it touche the earth, and therefore
a chamber built vpon a hallor parlor, cannot
be said to bee freehold, because it cannot
be perpetuall, for the foundation may perishe,

and for that cause it cannot be demaunded by
plaint or Writ.3. H. 6. 1. Plaint 1^. Yet 9. E. 4. an exchaunge
was made of lande for a chamber,9. E. 4. 40. but that
prooueth it not to be freehold, for an exchange
may be of things of diuers natures, as of land
for rent.3. E. 4. 10. And so of a rent for a common.9. E. 4. 21.
A Castell whether it bee a thing either of it
selfe, or parcell of a seigniory or Mannor may
well be called land or freehold.7. H. 6. 36. For though
land may not be parcell of land no more then
one Leete or Hundred may bee parcell of an
other.3. Mar. 1. Com^ 168. Hilles cas. 7. E. 6 Com^ 80. Pa^^idg. cas. 23. H. 8. Br. (...). 53. Yet land may be parcell of a Manor.
4. E. 4. 16. 42. E. 3. 22. 44 E. 3. 40. Feoff. 53. lib. ^unda^. leg. fo. 70. And a parke may be parcell of a Mannor.3. E. 3. Br. Iurisd. 39.
And land may be parcel of an Honor.26. Ass. pl. 60. And of
a Castle.4. E. 4. 17.
It is nowe shewed what may properly be
called Land, and it is not impertment to declare
how many sortes of land, which we haue
before called firme ground, may be demaunded
by Law, of which the Law hath a seueral
contemplation. Land therefore as it is subiect
to the consideration of Law is sixefold, Arua,
Florida, consita, compascua mineralis, in frugifera.
Arua is the arable ground which is tilled
with the Plough. Florida, the garden ground,
which procreateth flowers, Herbes, and all such
thinges as the Bee doth feede vpon. Consita,
is the wooddie ground which is throughly replenished,
with trees, plants, shrubbes, and
such like. Compascua is that which bringeth

forth grasse and fodder. Mineralis is that,
wherein mines are conteigned whether they
be regall mines, as mines of Gold or Siluer,
or baser mines, as brasse, leade, copper, tinne,
coales, or the like. Infrugifera is that which is
barren, and cannot be helped by manurance as
the soile where rushes, weedes, ferne, and such
things doe grow, and it is good to know the
diuersitie of these seuerall sortes of grounde,
that when such thinges are to be demaunded
by writ, they may be demaunded by their proper
names and kinds, and therefore if a feoffement
be made of two roodes of land, and after
a house is built there vpon, and part of it is become
medowe, parcel pasture ground, and parcell
wood, the demaund must be by the name
of a house, medowe, pasture, and wood,3. H. 6. 8. and
there is a writ in the Register, de minera plumbi
and cuiuscunque generis metalli cum pertinentijs.
Regist. 165 and ruscaria the soile where rushes do grow
must be demanded by number of acres.16. Ass. pl. 9. And
where a stagne hath bin, or land couered with
water, if the water be turned out of the course
or dried, the land may be demaunded by the
name of medow.33. E. 3. Entre 80.
That which issueth out of land, or the profits
of land are of three sortes, Naturall, Industriall,
and Artificial. The Naturall profits
of land are such as doe rise by the force and
benefit of Nature principally, and not by

the diligence and labour of man, as apples,
hearbes, trees, and such like. Industriall profits
are such as doe principally require the diligence
and culture of man, which vnlesse it
be continually applyed, natura nihil operatur,
as corne, hoppes, woad, saffron, and such like.
Artificiall profits are these, which are reserued,
graunted or issuing out of land by the
Acte of man, and the approbation of Law, as
a common of pasture, a warren, a rent, and
thinges of like sort. Common of pasture is
of fower sortes appendant which is belonging
onely to arable grounde, or to land that
consisteth as well of arable ground, as of other
thinges, as a Mannor or measuage, but
the appendancy doth principally grow by reason
of the arable, and therefore it belongeth to
such beastes onely as doe manure or marle the
grounde, as horses, oxen, kine, and sheepe.37. H. 6. 34
And if a man haue common to certaine arable
landes in one Village, hee cannot vse
the Common with beastes that manure his
arrable in an other Village.10. E. 3. 56 And this
ought to bee intended of auncyent arrable
ground, not of land newely improued.10. E. 2. Co^mon 22. 5. Ass. pl' 2. For
continuance of time immemoriall maketh the
appendancy, wherefore if the arrable land to
which common is appendant, do by purchase
come into the possession of the owner of the
soile, in which the common is to be taken, the

common is extinguished in his person: But
if after the tenements be seuered by alienation
as they were before, the common is reuiued
by some aucthoritie,4. E. 3. 45. 17. E. 2. Common 23. because the same auncient
arable land to which before it belonged
still continueth: But by some it is otherwise,
because being once extinguished it cannot be
de nouo and in an instant made appendant.14. H. 4. 2.
Common appurtenant is where a man
prescribeth to haue common of pasture belonging
to his land with all maner of beastes,
it differeth from a common appendant in this,
that a common appendant is onely to be taken
by such beasts as manure or marle the ground,
and by such number of beastes as will serue to
manure or marle the ground, to which the
common may be claimed, and belongeth onely
to them as long as they are demurrant vppon
the land: But a common appurtenant may
be taken by all maner of beastes.37. H. 6. 34. 9. E. 4. 3. Likewise
a common appendant must be onely claimed
by reason of land which may be marled or manured:
but a common appurtenant may bee
claimed by reason of a mesuage or house.22. H. 6. 43. 4. E. 4. 29.
Furthermore a common appendant groweth
onely by continuance of tune, and the essence
of it is prescription ioyned wyth appendancie,
26. H. 8. 4. 5. H. 7. 7. 4. H. 6. 13. But a common appurtenant may bee
graunted at this day, and springeth vp in an
instant.26. H. 8. 4. 15. Assis. pl. 5. Common 13. And a common appendant can not

be seuered from the land to which it belongeth:
5. H. 7. 7. But a common appurtenant may be
seuered:26. H. 8. 4. And they differ in this, that a common
appendant must be vsed and taken, according
to the rate and quantitie of ground, in regarde
of which it is granted or claimed.15. Assis. pl. 5.
But a common appurtenant may be claimed
for beastes sans number: for by the opinion of
Monbray none shall haue a writ of Admeasureme^t
of pasture, but he that hath a common
appendant:18. E. 3. 30. So that it may be probably collected,
that a common appurtenant because it
cannot be admeasured, may be wel enough sans
number: And it may be likewise to a certaine
number of beastes, for if a man at this day will
grant one a mesuage with a common appurtenant
for tenne beasts, I doubt not, but this is a
good common appurtenant to the mesuage.
Common by vicinage is where two townships
or moe do entercommon, and haue entercommoned
from time out of mind, which is
not to be vsed, by putting the beastes of the
inhabitants of one towne, into the landes of
the inhabitants of an other towne, for so they
may be distrayned damage feasant: But they
must put them in their owne fieldes, and if they
stray into the fieldes of the other village, they
must suffer them to be there, and they must
put in their beastes, hauing regarde to the
freehold of the inhabitants of that village

where the common is to be vsed.13. H. 7. 13. 15. Elizab. 316. Dyer. 16. E. 3. Common 9. 22. H 6. 51. 6. E. 6. 70. Dier. This kind
of common Mast. Littleton maketh appendant,
7. E. 4. 26. but by other aucthoritie it is a feueral
and distince kind of common.
Common in grosse is where a man claymeth
to haue common for all maner of beastes,
whether the number be certaine or vncertaine
by speciall graunt in writing, or by prescription
in him that claymeth or his auncestors, or
they whose estate he hath not by reason of any
particuler land: and this common may be vsed by
the beasts of a stranger, which the proprietarie
of the common may giest, as we tearme it.11. H. 6. per Babing. Mart. and Paston. 45. E. 3. 25. Assise 61. 36. Ass. pl. 3. 15. Ass. pl. 5. Perkins tit. Graunts.
A Warren is a profite likewise which may
be taken out of other mens ground by prescription,
30. H. 6. 28. Dyer. and if the owner of the soile (...) any
one by his commaundement; or as his seruant
doe come vpon the soyle, and do ^hase the Conies,
he cannot iustifie the chasing,34. H. 6. 43. though he
may iustifie his entrie into the ground.3. H. 6. 12. And
a rent is also a profit issuing out of the soyle of
a stranger, and sauoureth of the nature of the
land; out of which it issueth and therfore if rent
issue out of land in auncient demesne, it is auncient
demeshe, and so it is of rent granted out of
land in Gauelkind, it shalbe deuided as the la^d
it selfe:4. E. 3. 53. 14. H. 8. 5. And so it is of rent graunted out of
land deuisable by custome, though the rent
bee graunted but of late time.22. Ass. pl. 78. And so if
rent be receiueable out of customarie land,

as borough English, or where dower is to be
had of the halfe part, and such like, the rent
shall be of the custome and nature of the land,
and therfore in the demaunde of such rent by
Praecipe, or in a Repl^^in, the tenure by auncient
demesne of the land is a good plea.14. H. 8. 5.
And so if land in taile be deuided amongest
parceners, the (...) reserued to one of the (...)
parceners shall be in (...), and of the same
condition as the land was.2. H. 7. 5. 15. H. 7. 14.
Parsonall thinges (...) thinges either in possession,
or in action: Thinges in possession are
either goodes or chattels: the name of goodes
is naturall and ciuill, by the naturall signification
all such thinges are comprehended vnder
the name of goodes, which may profite.1. 49. de verb. signific.
But as the name of goodes is taken ciuilly,
it stretcheth to the whole he ape and bodie of a
mans wealth, together with the charge and
deductions: the reason of this differenceis because
nature conside^^^ thinges as (...) they are:
but a common weale or citie after such sort as
is most expedientAlber. Gentil. lib. 4. Epist. c. 7. And though the charge
which followeth goodes do de^race somewhat
from the value and estimation of the same, yet
because it is to be discharged and satisfied out
of the goodes, it is therefore ioyntly reckoned
and considered with the goodes themselues.
Chattels which in the common Law are
tearmed Catalla, are diuersly taken, for the

profits of land if they be gyuen generally vnto
the King by acte of law, they may be called
Chattels, and therefore the profits and issues
of the landes and (...) of them which
flie for felony are forfaited vnto the King, vntill
such time as they be acquited, and that by
the Statute of Praetog. cap. 10. which sayth
that the King shall haue omnia Catalla talium
fugitiuorum, and vnder the word Catalla is
comprehended the corne which was growing
vpon the land, at the time when the forfeyture
of the goodes did begin to take place,3. E. 3. Corone 3. 4.
And if a man be outlawed in an action of debt,
and the outlawrie be retourned, so that the
writte issueth to the Escheator to seise the
goodes, chattels, and land of the partie outlawed,
the issues of the land shall be taken to
the kinges vse vntill he haue sued his Charter
of pardon:8. R. 2. Supersedeas 19. for an outlawed person shal not
forfait any land, but the profites onely, as
rent and corne, if he be outlawed in a personall
action: Otherwise it is if he be outlawed
of felonie, for then the King shall haue the escheat
of the land, or the Annum, diem, and vastum.
9. H. 6. 20. But if the profites of land be generally
graunted by the act of the partie, then
they are the substance of the land and doe not
passe without liuerie: And if a man graunt the
profites of land, the land it selfe passeth.14. H. 8. 5. 45. E. 3. 90. 4. Elizab. 210. Dyer.
And therefore it hath bin held by Fortescue

and Danby Iustices, that tenant in fee simple
may graunt vesturam terrae, and the grauntee
shall haue it after his death: But the tenant
in taile, for life, tenant in dower, and
tenant by the curtesie cannot make any such
graunt, but if they dye the graunt is determined.
37. H. 6. 30. And if a feoffement be made of land
vpon condition that neither the feoffee nor his
heires shall take the profites, the condition is
voide, and the feoffement simple and absolute,
21. H. 7. 24. and in such cases the profites of land
may not be tearmed Catalla, no more then the
landes themselues: But vnder the word Chattels,
a lease for terme of yeares is comprised.39. H. 6. 35.
And likewise a right of action for goodes: as
if goods be taken wrongfully from a felon:6. H. 7. 9.
Or when one is indebted to a felon by bond:19. H. 6. 47.
Or when he is accomptable to a felon by reason
of any receipt, or otherwise.28. E. 3. 92. et 50.
Thinges in action are such in which a man
hath neither propertie nor possession: as if a
man doe owe to an other xx. pound vpon a writing
obligatorie, though he haue a propertie
and possession in the1. H. 7. 15. writing or charter, yet
the summe contained is a thing in action, in
which he hath neither propertie nor possession:
and so it is of an Aduowson when the church
is voide of an incumbent: for the patron can
not graunt it to any other, because then he
should graunt but fructum aduocationis, which

is a thing rather imagined by law, then subsistent
by nature: and therfore the patron can
not truely be said to haue propertie or possession
in it. But though such thinges be to some
intent merely in action, yet in some cases they
are taken as thinges vested: and therefore if a
man be seised of an Aduowson, and the church
become void and he dieth, his executors shall
present, and not the heire,Fitz. Na. br. 34. for the aduowson
in regard of the executors was a chattel vested
in the testator. The King may graunt things
in action,2. H. 7. 8. and so may a common person in
some cases: As if a man bring an action of
debt against I. N. and the plaintife is indebted
to me, and promiseth me that if I will
ayde him against I. N. that I shall be paied
out of the summe in demaunde: there it is lawfull
for me to ayde and maintaine the plaintifie
against I. N, because by the promise I haue
interest in the summe demaunded.15. H. 7. 2. And
where a man is indebted to me in xx. pound,
and an other oweth him xx. pound by obligation,
he may assigne this obligation and debt
to me in satisfaction: And I may maintaine
suit for it in the name of the other.


A Table of certain words
in the Interpretation whereof
the Common Law of this Realme
and the Ciuill Law doe seeme
to agree.

A.
ACcusatio A bill of presentment,
is a regular fourme of complaint,
whereby offences, are opened and
punished.
Acquisitum purchased, that is said to be
whereof the propertie is translated from one
to an other.
Affines are the kinsmen of the husband and
the wife by mariage, so called, because two
Kindreds which are diuerse one from the other,
are coupled by marryage, and one of them
commeth to the borders or marches of the
other kindred.
Ad nos pertinere is said that which doth
belong vnto vs, eyther by way of propertie, or
by way of possession, or by charge, or by administration.
Aedes, plural: a house consisting of diuerse
rowmes, (for domus may consist onely of foundation,
wall, couer) as the integrall partes, or
as some briefly say, which consisteth of soyle
and superficies,
Aestas sommer, a part of the yeare, which beginneth
at the equinoctial of the spring, and
endeth at the equinoctiall of Autum, and so
sommer and winter are deuided by vi. moneths.
Annona vittaile, is not referred onely to
corne, but to the meate of the shambles, as well
to fish as flesh.
Aperta vis, open force, which is manifest and
euident, and doth not receiue any excuse of
simplicitie.
Arborvento deiecta, hath not now the name
of a tree, but the name of wood. Arbor dum
crescit, lignum cum crescere nescit.
Area, a floare is a vacant place, therefore called
Area quasi exaruerit, and were not able to
bring forth any thing, it hath bin taken to be
such an emptie place as doth lye discouered,
locus ab aedificio purus, and hath no superficies:
it is called a plot of grou^d, court or yard.
Argen^um siluer, it is of three sorts, infectu^,
factum, signatum. Infectum is that which is
vnpollished and not adorned with any particular
forme being in the ore, or bullion, newly
seuered and singled from the ore. Factum, is
that which is beutified with some particuler
forme, of which kind is a siluer cuppe, a siluer
goblet, a siluer bowle, or a siluer mazard. Signatum
is that which beareth some speciall Image
or impression, and such is the siluer that is
coined and accompted currant, Argentum factu^

must be described by the kinde or shape, Infectum
by the weight, Signatu^ by ye number.
Arrestare, is by the authoritie or warrant
of the lawe, to hinder that either a man or his
goodes bee at his owne libertie, vntill the
lawe be satisfied.
Artifices, artificers, are they which sell
things laboured by them, and by their labour
reduced into a particular forme, as Shomakers,
Smithes, Glouers, Taylors and Weauers,
but artificium if it be largely taken, extendeth
to ye knowledge of euery arte: artifex
and opifex differ, for in the one there is labour
and iudgement, in the other labour only.
Assultus, an assault is a violence done to a
mans person, by the person of an other man.


B.
Bona fides a sincere conscience, excusing one
of ill meaning.


C.
Carcer is taken two wayes, for it is eyther
locus custodiae, or locus paenae.
Cauillatio when a man turneth his speach
ab euidenter veris, ad euidenter falsa.
Cella because there we do celare, we do hide
that which we would keepe secret or close.
Ciuitas, a citie: it is taken materially, and
formally: being vnderstoode materially, it
doth signifie a multitude of houses made of
stone and timber, being formally taken it is
ciuilis societas quasi societas simul viuens, and

not viuens simplie, but viuens bene, for as
Cicero saith, ciuitas sine legibus is corpus sine
anima, and therefore Aristotle sayth, non concedimus
vt homo imperet sed ratio.
Cliens, is he that is in suite, so called quasi
colens, and hee who dealeth for him in the
cause is called patronus, quasi pater.
Codicillus, the declaratio^ of a ma^s last wil,
which without the iust solemnitie of a testament
a man ob impedimenti necessitatem is
inforced to write, but now the vse of codicills
or testaments are without any necessitie confounded,
which is contrary to lawe, for a ^odicill
ought to serue necessitie, and not a rash onset.
Cognatio kindred, it is deuided into three
parts; 1. into parents, 2. into childre^, 3. into
cosins. Parents are they of whom we are begotten,
as father, mother, grandfather, grandmother,
and these which are in degree aboue
them. Children are they which are begotten
of our bodies, as sonne, daughter, grandchild,
and such as he vnderneath them, Et nati natorum
et qui nascentur ab illis. Cosins are they
which haue neither begotten vs, nor bin begotten
of vs, but haue a common roote and originall
with vs, as brother, sister, vncle, aunt, and
such as do discend from them.
Colludere, is in fraudem tertij conuenire.
Commenda, the custodie of a Church committed
and commended to some.
Commodare is to graunt the vse of some
thing for a certain time, there is difference betwixt
commodare and mutuo dare, because co^modare
is to lend, to haue the same againe, as
bookes, apparel, and such like, but mutuo dare
is to trust, hoping to haue the like againe, as
money, corne, salt, spices, and such like.
Compromissum, is the power that is giuen
to the arbitrator, so called because both the
parties doe promise to obey the opinion of the
Iudge, and therfore he is called compromissarius
index to whom the matter is referred.
Communitas, a comminalty, is societas hominum
communi lege viuentium.
Conditio, when a thing dependeth super casum
incertum which may tende eyther ad esse
or ad non esse.
Confessio, is double: either iudicial, or extraiudicial,
iudiciall is that which is done before
the Iudge, extraiudicial which is done in presence
of good and honest men.
Consentire, is to meete in one opinion.
Constitutiones, Iudgements, rules and awardes
concerning seueral matters whereupon
this verse hath bin made.

Quatuor ex verbis virtutem collige legis,
Permittit, punit, imperat, atque vetat.

Controuersum ius, is that which is on both
sides doubtful: certum ius is that which is certainly
determined and is called positiue Law.
Copulatiua the coniunction copulatiue is
taken after two sorts, either in a deuided sense,
or in a compounded sense, in a deuided sense as
when I say, Sir Robert Booke, and Sir Iames
Dyer were Lord chiefe, Iustices of the Co^mon
pleas, for they were not chiefe Iustices together,
but at diuerse times: in a compounded
sense, as when I say two and three do make fiue.


D.
Debito is he of whom we may against his wil
exact money.
Decimae are of three sorts praediales, personales,
and mixt praediales are they which arise
of farmes or lands, as corne, hay, and the fruits
of trees: personal which are due by personall
labor, as by some trade, trafick, or mistery, mixt
of which it may be doubted whether they be
predial or personal as wool, lambe, milke etc.
Defensio, is the auoiding of a surmised and pretended
offence.
Delegatus a delegate, to whom a cause is co^mitted
to be determined and ordered.
De plano, vel sine figura iudicij, vel summarie.
Deprehendere, is to take a man in ipso
facto, so that he can neuer flye, nor denye the
facte.
Discendere to discende or to spring of ones
body, hereupon they which are borne of vs are

called by the name of discendents, which with
them that ascend make the right line, and the
ascendents and discendents cannot marry together,
wherefore if Adam were now liuing
he could not marrie a wife.
Dicecesis, the gouernment of a certaine
prouince by the Bishop, for as a territorie is
so called, quatenus iudex ius terrendi habet,
so a diocese as farre as a Bishop hath ius administrandi
sacra.
Dispensatio, a release of common right, either
ex causa vtilitatis, necessitatis, or ingentis
praerogatiuae meritorum.
Diuersa, such things whose subiect is not
alike, or whose definition is not alike.
Dominium is a right to dispose perfitly de
re corporali.
Domus instructa, a house furnished, if a
man deuise such a house the household stuffe
passeth, but not the wine that is within the
house, because by common intendement a
house is not furnished by wine.
Dubia causa, is that which is but semiplene
probata.


E.
Error, an opinion, whereby that is approoued
and allowed to be true which is false, and
that to be false which is true, and error may be
two wayes, eyther in iure constituto, or els

in iure quod quis in suo habet negotio, the
one is an error in lawe, the other in facto.
Euanescit actio, the action doth faile, or
abate, euanescit actio, by the power of the
lawe, or of the Iudges, remittitur actio, by the
will of the plaintife.
Executor, an executor, which is after three
sorts, executor testamentarius, executor legalis,
that is to say the ordinarie, executor datiuus,
the administrator.
Election, is the certainetie of our will, it
may be of persons, or of thinges, places, or
times: Of things, as if a man should pay a
summe of money, or els a horse or a hawke:
Or of persons, as if he should pay it to I. S.
or to I. N. Or of places, as if he should pay it
at London, or at Lincolne. Or of the time, as
the first day of April, or the second day of May.


F.
Falsitas, falshood is immutatio veritatis cum
doto and damno alterius, the chaunge of truth
with falsehoode to the deceiuing and endamaging
of an other man.
Fama, is a common report proceeding from
suspition, and published by the voices of men,
and it differeth from rumor, because that is a
diuerse whispering of men, which is not so
effectuall as Fame. Fama constans is that
which is dispersed abroade neither by men

vnknowen, nor of light credit, nec ignotis nec
improbis.
Fide^^^^^ is he which bindeth himselfe for
another, quasi inssu alterius ponens fidem
suam.
Fortuitus casus, a meare chaunce which by
mans counsaile, care, and diligence can neyther
praeuideri or praecaueri, be fore-seene or
foreclosed.


G.
Generalis lex, a general law which comprehendeth
all cases, except such as be vnlawfull,
and vniust. For there is nothing more absurde
then to draw a iust Lawe to an vniust interpretation.
Germani fratres are they which are of the
same Father and Mother, Consanguinei which
haue the same Father, but not the same Mother,
Vterini which haue the same Mother, but
not the same Father.
Gestores negotionu^, factors or procurators
be of three sorts, voluntarij which gratis and
of their owne accord do regard the busines of
their friend: Necessarij which by obligation
of their office doe follow matters: Quasi necessarij,
which haue some colour to deale in
matters.
Graeca mercari fide. i. pecunia numerata
with money paied in hand.



I.
Illegitimi bastardes, whereof there be three
sortes, Incestuosi which be begotten of kinsmen
and kinswomen within the degrees prohibited:
Nefarij, which are begotten of descendents,
the chyldren of the same parent:
Spurij, or Adulterini, which are borne in adulterie.
Iniuria whatsoeuer is done against law and
right, whether by wordes, as by slander: or by
deede, as by violence of hand.
Inops sine ope without helpe, which hath
no wealth nor maintenance, whereby he may
helpe himselfe.
Instaurare, is to bring a thing into his fourmer
estate.
Insula, a plot of ground compassed on all
sides with the sea, quasi in fato posita, it is of
two sortes: Perpetua, and Natiua. Perpetua,
which hath bin from time out of minde part of
a Prouince: Natiua, which hath bin lately discouered
by the ebbe and drought of waters.
Interlocutoria sententia, which doth not define
or determine the controuersie, for that is
called sententia definitiua: an Awarde.
Iudex limitaneus, which hath a limitted inrisdiction,
as the Lord in Court Baron who
onely holdeth plea of a summe vnder xl. shillinges,
and within the precinct of his Mannour.
Iuramentum an oath, it is the affirming or
denying of a thing with religious assertion, or
attestation, and it is double: Extraiudicial or
Iudicial. Extraiudicial, as Iuramentum conuentionale,
when vppon a bargaine one doth
sweare to an other. Iudicial is of two sorts,
Necessarium, and Suppletiu^m: Necessarium,
which is ad litem aestimandam, when witnesses
are produced by the parties. Suppletiuum,
when the Iudge doth enforce the partie himselfe
to sweare for want of other proofes.
Inseperabile, that is said to be which is so
inherent in the subiect, that it cannot be remoued,
but they do either stand together or fall
together. A thing may be said to be indiuidual
or inseperable in many respects, 1. according
to the fourme required in the act: And therefore
if three be bound iointly, they must be sued
iointly, 2. by reason of necessarie depending,
and therefore the principal being defeated, the
accessorie is also destroyed, because it cleaueth
inseperably vnto the principal: and therfore if
the marriage be not lawfull, the endowment
cannot be lawfull, 3. by the meaning of the
parties: as when a submission is made to two
arbitrators, it is not to be imagined that the
parties had an intent of seuerance, 4. by the
nature of the thing: as when a thing will not
suffer a particion: as a seignorie in grosse, a
common, a condition, and so a iurisdiction is an

entier thing: and therfore if a man will bring
an action in a base Court of a debt of 4. li. it
is not good for thirtie shillinges, or a lesse
summe: for a Iudge or officer hath a precise
power of the Law, and if he passe his iurisdiction,
his sentence or act is voide.
Integrum is that which is compounded of
diuerse partes, for partes compacted and ioyned
together doe make the whole, but an entier
thing may be diuersly: for it may be eyther
totum numerale consisting of many numbers
lincked together, 2. totum vniuersale, as the
general nature wherof the particulers ar comprehended:
as homo of animal, auis of brutum,
3. totum integrale which is made whole
and entier by many partes, and it is of two
sorts, Heterogeneu^, and Homogeneum: Heterogeneum
the partes whereof are not of the
nature of the whole thing, as a house which
doth consist of soyle, stone, woode, morter, and couer.
Homogeneum which is of the same nature
with ye whole, as water, fier, earth, wherof
euery part hath the name of the whole.


L.
Lacus is that which hath perpetua^ aquam.
Stagnum that which hath water at sometime,
and is sometime drie. Fossa a receptacle for
water made by mans hand.
Lana, wolle, which may be cloath, but
yet is not wrought in cloath. And if a man

by his will do deuise his wolle to any, be it
wrought or not wrought, dyed or not dyed* or
be it spunne, it is comprised vnder the name of
wolle, and it is called by the name of Volle
vntill it be made cloth.
Littus, that place to which the greatest
floude of the sea do^h come.


M.
Maiestas, a soueraigne honour: Maiestie is
said to be the daughter of honor and reuerence.
Marinum et Maritinum do thus differ, Marinum
is that quod Mare incolit, which lyueth
in the Sea, or which is bredde in the sea, Maritinum
quod Mare accolit, which is adioyning,
or adiacent vnto the sea.
Mercator, a Merchant, is not as some think
tearmed a Merce, but of the word Mercor,
which signifieth to buy, and they are properly
tearmed Mercatores, qui res emunt quas in
eadem specie carius vendant.
Moneta, a monendo, Money, so tearmed,
because by the impression of the stampe it doth
giue vs notice, either of the prince whose it is,
or the price which it beareth: It taketh Legem
valoris, the rule of the value of the superiour,
and therefore it cannot be abased or refused,
but by the commaundement of the superiour.
Mortua res, that is said to be by which a
man is not richer.
Motu proprio, ex certa^scientia, de plenitudine
potestatis, are praegnantes clausulae,
clauses of importance, against which none
may be heard.
Mutuum, quasi ex meo ^^uum.


N.
Narratio, a declaration of a matter eyther
ore tenus* or in forme of law: If it be ore tenus,
it is called a motion, and thereof it is said,
qui bene narrat, bene impetrat: If it be in
forme of law, it is a declaration grounded vpon
a writ, contayning the whole state of the
matter, as the plaintife supposeth it.
Naturaliter possidere he is said, which possesseth
a thing corporally, and taketh the profits
of the thing possessed, and this of the common
Lawyers is called possessio in facto: But if a
mans father die seised, and the sonne doth not enter,
nor actually take the profites, neither doth
any other disturbe him to take possession, this
is called a possession in law, or eiuilis possessio.
Negotium meum, that is said to be, cuius
^^erum and damnum ad me pertinet.


O.
Obuentio is a kind of re^enew: it differeth
from Reditus, being strictly taken, in this, that
obue^tiones are conting entiu^* reditus certoru^.
Oculis res subijci dicitur when it is plaine and
manifest, it is well said of Erasmus, ad cognitionem
magis faciuntaures, ad fidem faciendam

certiores sunt oculi.
Officialis, an Officiall, who in a certaine
part of the diocesse is the Bishops deputie.
Opera labour, it is double, Officialis, and
Artificialis: Officialis, is that which is spent and
bestowed vpon the diligent attendance done
by the seruant to the Master. Artificialis, is the
labour of the trade, as Printing, paueing,
feeling, graueing, embrodering, and such like.


P.
Pactum is the consent of two or more in a
matter which pleaseth both parties, Pollicitatio
is when there is not the consent of two,
but onely one agreeth. Pactio nuptialis is a
Matrimonial contract. Pactum retrouende^di
is when the vendee couenanteth, that if the
vendor or his heires or executors will within a
certain time pay so much money, as the vendee
doth pay, that then he shall haue the land again,
and be in his former estate.
Palam fa^tu^ is that which is done ope^ly. Publice
factu^ is that which is done cora^ populo.
Paries, a wall* thereof there be diuerse
kindes: Lateritius which is made of clay, Testaceus
which is made of bricke, Coementar^us
which is made of lime, stone, and water mingled
together, Cratitius which is made of wood,
boardes, or boughes, platted together.
Paraecos, a parishioner, an inhabitant in a
certaine place, who hath brought his houshold

to a certaine place, to reside there.
Praetor maior, he Maior of a city, as Rhodiginus
saith: for others ar called Praetores minores.
Priuilegium is ins ^singulare, whereby a
priuate man, or a particuler Corporation is
exempted from the rigor of common Law, for
that which is now called proprium, hath bin
called of olde writers priuum.
Proprium that which doth so belong to one
that it is not co^mon to an other, and though that
wherein we haue a ioint propertie with others
may be called nostrum: yet it cannot be called
propriu^, for propriu^ doth not admit any communion,
but proprium and suum be equipollent,
and of the same sense.
Puer hath three significations, either it signifieth
the estate of a man: as when we call seruants
pueros: Secondly the sexe, as when we
call a male child puerum: Or els the age, as
when we call one that is yong puerum.
Pars is that wherby the whole is supported,
it is either pars diuisa, or pars indiuisa, this diuision
wil hold both in nature and Law: In nature
that id a diuided part, which consisteth of
diuerse parcels: as the wing of a bird, or the
clouen hoofe of a beast, or the finne of a fish are
said to be parts diuided: In law there is also a
diuided part, as the third part wherof a woman
is indowed after the death of her husba^d, and after
the assignment made, and the third part of the

land of the tenant in Capite, which the king
hath after his death: Likewise the partes of a
manor diuided by parceners: A part vndiuided
is manifest to the vnderstanding and to the eye:
to the vnderstanding, as the moitie or third
part of iointenants, parceners, tena^ts in common,
before particion: to the eye, as the vnclouen
hoofe of a beast, or the partes of the
earth cleauing contumately together.


R.
Ripa, a banke, it is proper to a floude, as the
shoare is to the sea. Ripa is that which doth
flumen continere, stay the natural force of his
course, and that is said to be a banke, quae plenissimum
flumen continet, which stayeth the
water, when it is at the highest.


S.
Sequestratio is either a seperation, by way
of compounding, or by interdiction of possession:
It is voluntaria, or necessaria, Voluntaria,
when it is done by the consent of the parties,
Necessaria, whe^ it is done by one that hath a
competent aucthoritie to sequester.
Sylua caedua, which being cut may grow
againe.


T.
Tugurium, quasi ^egurium, it is taken of
some for euery countrie house, but not rightly,

for the house which doth consist of walles and
tiles or bricke is no cotage, but a cotage is
that which doth principally consist of reedes
or thatch or soddes, earth and twigs layed together,
and compacted by clay or slime, or
which hath in it a very small deale of timber.
Tumultus is taken for euery perilous commotion,
if it be publiquely and hastely done.
Turba, a multitude, consisting at the least
of the number of tenne.


V.
Vacillaus testis, which doth giue an inconstant
and diuerse testimonie.
Vagabundus, which hath neither certaine
house, nor stedfast habitation, a man, as one
tearmeth him, sine re, sine spe, sine fide, sine
sede.
Vel, a particle, it doth not alwayes disioyne,
but sometimes explane.
Vis force or violence: it is of diuers sorts,
vis detractiua, when a man taketh a thing
from one against his will: vis compulsiua,
when I compell a man to assent to a certaine
acte, vis diuina, commonly called vis maior,
whereof there is no resistance: vis expulsiua,
which is done with weapon, and it is called
of some vis armata, vis inquietatiua, when I

am disseised by force, vis imminens the striking
or assault of a man. Vis is not verbis, but facto,
for he is not said vim pati, which is onely touched
by wordes.
Vniuersale quod ad vniuersos pertinet.




What methode is to be
vsed in handling and disposing
matters of Law.
The ninth Chapter.
OF methode it were better to write
nothing then little, for so many
diuerse methodes are proposed by
many diuers authors, that plentie
breedeth scarsity, and a man can hardelye
tell which to choose. Curiositie as in all
other thinges it is vaine, so in methode it is
necessarie. For to proceede without equalitie
of tenor is negligence, and to obserue methode
vnartificially is ignorance. They that giue a
reason of the beginning, continuance, and ending
of their tractats and discourses, are without
doubte the most iudiciall and most plausible
methodistes: or they which so temper and
moderate the course of matters, that though

they render not a precise reason of their doeings:
yet it is apparant to the reason and vnderstanding
of others. A twofolde methode
is verie much talked of, and that is by proceeding
either a singularibus ad vniuersalia or ab
vniuersalibus ad singularia, the one of these I
accompt no methode at all, howsoeuer it hath
vsurped the name, being but a natural discerning
of thinges done in facto by the ordinary
direction of the senses, and making thereof
a generall conclusion, which is easie and familiar
to euery mans capacitie, so that the
praise of that action is diligence and not art,
for is it any difficult thing to reason and conclude,
wood is heauie, stone is heauie, iron
is heauie, and sic in caeteris: therefore all thinges
made of earth are heauie? how pro^e and readie
is the perceauing of these particulars to
euerie mans sense? and how easilie may the
conclusion be framed by his vnderstanding?
but in deede the discoursing from vniuersalles
to particulars is more hard, more artificiall,
more compendious, for it is done in lesse compasse
and fewer wordes, which is a great
argument of a good methode, and therefore
I doe not agree to Aristotle that Athenian
Doctor, when hee saieth, Ars tum existit,
cum ex multis experientiae notionibus vna^
quae ad vniuersum genus accommodetur nascitur
praeceptio.Me^aphys. 1* c. 1. Vnlesse hee meane it of

vulgar and mechanicall trades and occupations,
whereof onely I admit it to be true,
but I rather approoue that which he saith,
and doth likewise: progrediendum est ab vniuersalibus
ad singularia.Physicor. 1. c. 1. But there be some
which will not allow any discourse but that
which is furnished with mathematicall and
demonstratiue reasons. Some would haue
euery thing handled by examples, as Ramus,
a man happier in writing, then in reproouing
one that writ better then hee: who
in handling Logicall places, doth illustrate
them with many examples, but with neuer
a rule. What manner of teaching is this, to
shewe vnto thee that others did thus: but not
to shewe why they did so: which default is
for want of rules, in which the reason and
knowledge of doing thinges aright is conteyned.
A man cannot make a shooe by a
number of lastes, but hee must haue instruction
of one that is skilfull in the trade. Some
againe will haue euery thing confirmed by
the authorities and testimonies of them that
be learned, thinking that onely to be the fit
way of teaching. But the certaine and necessarie
reasons of the Mathematikes, are not
in all artes to be required.Arist. Metaphys. 1. part. poster. c. 3. Neyther is there
an (...) or accurate kinde of handling things
in all sciences alike to be vsed and obserued:
but in euery science things are so to be ordred

and digested, as the subiect or matter doth
require where about it is employed, and so
farre forth as may be agreeable to the profession
of the science. For a Geometrician and
a Carpenter doe diuersly handle and vse a
right line, the one, as it may be profitable to
his worke which he carueth, the other searcheth
what kinde of thing it is, and of what
nature and so other sciences must be ruled by
the subiect which they contemplate, least
there be more (...) then (...) in them: neyther
is a cause or reason to be exacted in all
things, for of many it is sufficient to haue this
knowledge quod ita sunt, though we cannot
know propter quod ita sunt, as of principles
which are the first and highest rules in artes
and sciences, and therefore no reason can be
yeelded, because they are prima, the very first
in the discourse of reason, and therefore (...)
for the^selues to be beleeued* Surely Methode
is so conuenient a thing in the studie of the
lawe, that without it neither can the vnderstanding
be well taught, nor the memorie
well directed. It is not enough to haue a
great heape of things that are to be read, vnlesse
the vse or order and manner of reading
them ^e well vnderstoode: and as in things
that ^e fit for banquets, tho^gh there be great
varietie of sweete meates, yet there is nothing
more vnpleasant or vnholsome if they

be mingled together, so the Student must
haue a care least the order of his reading be
confounded, least the last things be handled
in the first place, and these thinges which
should be in the middest be put in the last
place, whiche whosoeuer doe, they cannot
onely not comprehende the thinges which
they studie, but vtterly debilitate and weaken
the strength of the memorie: therefore
it is good for Students to vse an artificiall
Analysis, or resolution of things, into their
principles, which may teach to deuide the
whole into his partes, and to subdeuide partes
into parcells, and in the end to make a consent
and coherence of the entire thing and
his partes: for though the skilfull partition
of things be profitable and pleasant for the
memorie, yet the Synthesis, that is the apt
composition, coordination, and mutuall dependance
of them doth more satisfie the vnderstanding.
Polyb. lib. 1. histor. Therefore Polybius a iudicious
aucthor saith well, that they which thinke by
the knowledge of particulars dispersed to attaine
to the full and perfit knowledge of the
entire thing, doe no lesse erre, then hee who
viewing the partes of a handsome and comely
body seuerally and apart, doth therefore imagin
that hee knoweth the whole feature and
portraicture of the same man, who if hee had
beheld these parts ioyned together, and compacted,

and moued by the spirit of life, would
haue iudged farre otherwise. For though a
man may haue a confused notion, or conceite
of the whole, by viewing the seperate and disioyned
partes, yet it is not possible that hee
should haue certaine knowledge of the same,
no more then a man by seeing perticular
Mappes of Cities, may certainely perceiue
the figure, situation, and order of the whole
world. But he that can easily resolue things,
may easily compound: for when he knoweth
the particular sense and vse of the thinges
resolued, hee may easily gather a generall
knowledge of the whole thing, that is, a
generall knowledge of manye particulars,
whiche make one entire thing. The forme
of this Analysis following, whiche is of
Maister Littleton his two Chapiters of fee
simple, and fee taile, I doe offer to the
Student, as a thing to be considered of, because
it is incident to this purpose, which
though it gaine not his good liking, yet if it
minister but occasion vnto him to aduenture
vpon the conueyance of some other Analysis,
that may receiue the generall approbation,
and iust applause of the learned, I shall thinke
my labour herein well bestowed, and woulde
gladlye reape profit by other mens presidents.



The Analysis of Littletons Chapiter of Fee simple.
Tenure in
fee simple
may bee
considered
By the definition
Inuented.
Fee simple is as much to say, as a lawfull and pure inheritance.Expounded.
He that will purchase lands in fee simple must haue these wordes in his purchase, (To
haue and to hold to him and to his heires, for these words his heires make the estate of
inheritance, and he that lacketh this word (heires) and hath to haue and to hold to him
and to his assignes for euer, hath estate but for terme of life.By the tenant
in fee simple
who is after
two sorts to be
considered.
Generally.
Tenant in fee simple, is he which hath landes or teneme^^s to hold to him and to his
heires for euer.Particularly.
By purchase as when a man both lands and t^^ements by his deede, or by his agreement,
to the possession of which he commeth not, by title of discent from none of his
auncestors, or his ^osins, but by his owne act.By discent
who may
be thus
described.
He that is
tenant in
fee simple
must be of
the whole
bloud w^^
may bee
proued by
two examples.
1 If a man haue issue two Sonnes by two venters, and the
elder purchaseth lands in fee simple, and dieth without issue,
the yonger brother shall not haue the land, but the vncle of
the elder brother, or some other his ^ye cosins shall haue it,
for yt the yonger is but of the halfe bloud to the elder brother.2. If a man haue a Sonne and daughter by one venter, and a
Sonne by an other venter, and the sonne by the first venter*
purchaseth lands in fee simple, and dieth without issue, the sister
shall haue the land by discent as heire vnto her brother,
for that the sister is of the whole bloud to the elder brother.By the
properties
of fee simple.
1
Inheritance in fee
simple may lineallie
discend but not
lineally ascende
which may be
illustrated by sixe
prerogatiues.
1
By the vncles
prerogatiue
If the fathers sonne purchase land in fee simple, the vncle shal haue the
land as heire vnto the sonne, and not the father, because it cannot lineally
ascende.2
By the fathers
prerogatiue
which
is threefold.
1 If the foresaid vncle dye without issue, the Father liuing, the Father
shall haue the land as heire vnto the vncle, and not vnto the sonne, for that
he commeth to the land by collaterall discent, and not by lineal ascention.2 If landes discend by the Fathers side, the Fathers side shall inherite,
and none of the Mothers side.3 If the sonne die without issue, and haue purchased lands in fee simple
they of the bloud of the fathers side shall be heire vnto him before any of
the mothers side.3.
By the mothers
prerogatiue
which
is twofold.
1 If the sonne hauing purchased lands in fee simple haue no heires on
the fathers side, then shall the land discend vnto the heire on the mothers
side.2 If a man take a wife inheritrix in fee simple, which hath issue a sonne
and then dieth, and the sonne entreth into the tenements as sonne and heire
to his mother, and after dieth without issue, the heires of the mothers
side ought to inherite the tenementes, and not the heires of the fathers
side.4
By the brothers
prerogatiue
which
is after two
sorts.
1 If there be three brethren, and the middle or yonger brother purchase
land and dye without issue, the elder brother shall haue the land by discent,
for that he is more worthie of bloud.2 If there be two brethren by diuers venters, and the elder is seised in
fee simple and dyeth without issue and his vncle entreth as heire vnto him
which also dyeth without issue the yonger sonne shall inherite the tenementes
as heire to the vncle, because hee is of the whole bloud to his
vncle.5
By the Sisters
prerogatiue.
If a man be seised of land in fee simple, which hath issue a sonne and a
daughter by one venter, and a sonne by an other venter, and dieth: and the
elder sonne entreth, and dyeth without issue, the daughter shall haue the
land, and not the yonger sonne, but if the elder brother die before entrye
be made, then the yonger brother shall haue the land. Qui a possessio fratris
defe^do simplici facit sororem esse heredem.6
By the prerogatiue
of
the whole
kindred.
If a man purchase land in fee simple and dye without issue, euery one
that is his next cousin collateral for default of issue may inherite.2 Of such thinges
whereof a man
may haue a manuall
occupation, possession
or receite
as of lands, teneme^ts,
rents, or such
other, a man shall
say in his pleading
and in way of barre,
that one such was
seised in his demesne
as of fee, but
of such things that
lye not in manual
occupation, as of
an aduowson of a
church, or such maner
of things, there
he shal say, that he
was seised as of fee
and not in his demesne
as of fee.3 Fee simple is the
largest and greatest
inheritance that a
man can haue.4 For default of
lawful heires the
lord shal haue the
land held in fee
simple by eschete.




Obseruations vpon the
Analysis.
A.THis definition, which Maister
Littleton vseth, soundeth like a
good Logicall definition, as consisting
of the true genus, and the
proper difference: for this word (inheritance)
is the genus, which extendeth as well to fee
simple, as to fee taile, and this word (pure) is
a difference, whereby it is distinguished from
fee taile: for fee simple is a pure inheritance,
that is without limitation or restreint, but
fee taile is a limitted or a restreigned inheritance.
This word (lawfull) in the definition
is not idle: but the meaning of it is, that it is
an inheritance according to the meaning of
common lawe, for if by (lawfull) should be
meant rightfull, then a fee simple by diseisin
should be excluded, which I thinke was not
Maister Littletons intent. And againe, if this
worde (lawfull) shoulde extend to all lawes,
inheritance should be heere taken according
to the interpretation of other lawes also,

which cannot be. Maister Littleton well beginneth
with the definition, for there are but
foure things to be doubted of, first, whether
a thing be in rerum natura, secondly, what it
is, and of what nature, thirdly, whether it be
such and so qualified or no, fourthly, why it is
such, and so qualified: and he that wel openeth
these foure points* shall in all learned discourses
shewe hymselfe excellent and absolute.
B.The nature of fee simple may bee somewhat
vnderstoode by applying it to the subiect
to which it apperteineth, for tenant in
fee simple, and tenure in fee simple, beeing
coniugata, hee that well knoweth the one,
must of necessitie well vnderstand the other.
C.Maister Littleton lastly describeth estate in
fee simple by certaine adiuncts or properties
which do greatly serue to illustrate, and explaine
the things whereof wee intreate: they
are of two sortes, externall and internall.
Internall are they whiche flowe from the
nature of the thing it selfe: of such sorte are
the first and third properties mentioned in
the Analysis, for in that fee simple may lineally
discende, and not lineally ascende,
the nature of the tenure is the onely cause,
for it beeyng to a man and so hys heyres,

the more worthie heire is he that is of the
bodie, the lesse worthie he that is of the bloud
and not of the bodie, but the father in regard
of the sonne can be neither of these but in regard
and by mediation of the vncle he may
be heire to the sonne, because he is of the
vncles bloud, so that in the direct line it is
euident, that the fee simple cannot ascend:
and it is a very essential propertie to fee simple
to be the largest and greatest inheritance, because
it is to a man and his heires without limitation.
Externall properties are these;
which do so go before a thing, or so follow it;
or so cleaue to it, that notwithstanding there
is no necessitie of any of these: as for example,
before the killing of a man, commonly there
is some brawling and contention of words*
With the acte doth concurre the sighing or
groaning of him that is slaine, and the flight,
feare, lurking, trembling, and vnconstant answere
of him that did kill him do follow the
acte, howbeit some be slaine, without the concurrence
of these circumstances. There be
two sortes of adiunctes, some belonging to
the person, some to the thing it selfe, to the
person as the kinred, countrey, se^e, age, education,
the habit of the bodie, the fortune, the
estate, the qualities of his minde, the manner
of his life. The adiuncts of the thing are the

causes, the place, the time, the manner of
doing a thing, and such like. Of these, some
be common, and some be proper: common,
as if one should commend Achilles, because
he was of good birth, because he was a great
captaine, because he was in fight against the
Troians, for euery of whiche, Diomedes is
as much to be commended as Achilles. Proper
adiuncts be, as if thou shouldest commend
Achilles for his great valor in killing Hector
the stoutest of the Troians, and for his good
fortune in killing Cygnus, who being inuulnerable,
did barre all the Gretians from comming
downe the wall, and because beeing
young, and not bound by any othe or leageance,
he fought so valiantly for the Gretians.
These two later of the proper adiuncts, I
call externall, as not flowing from the essence
of a thing, but befalling externally
to it when it is in esse. Of this kinde there
are two in the Analysis, the seconde and
fourth.



The Analysis of Littletons Chapiter of Fee taile.

Fee taile
may be diuers
waies
considered
By the
first originall.
Tenant in fee taile is by force of the statute W. 2. cap. 1. for at the common Law before the said statute, all
inheritances were fee simple.A
By the
definition.
Inuented.
Feodum taliatum est haereditas in quadam certitudine limitata.Expounded
after ij. sorts.
1 If tenant in taile die without issue, the donor or his heires shall inherite as in their reuersion,
for in euery gift in the taile the reuersion of the fee simple is in the donor.2 If a man giue lands or tenements to an other to haue and to hold to him and to his heires
males or females, he to whom such gift is made hath fee simple, for that it is not limitted by the
gift of what bodie the issue male or female shall be.By the
diuerse
kindes
thereof
In respect
of
the nature
of
the entaile.
Taile
general
which
is to be
considered
by
the
Definition.
Inuented.
Taile general is where landes be giuen to one and to the heires of
his bodie begotten.Expounded.
Therefore it is called generall taile, because whatsouer woman
the tenant taketh to wife, if he haue many wiues, and by each of the^
haue issue, yet any of these issues by possibility may inherite the tenements
by force of the said gift, because that euery such issue is of
his body ingendred. So if lands be giuen to a woman, and to the
heires of her body, howbeit that she haue many husbands, yet the
issue that she hath by each husband may inherite.By an example
or speciall kinde
thereof
If tenements be giuen to a man and to his wife, and to the heires
of the body of the man ingendred, in this case the husband hath estate
in the general taile, and the wife estate but for terme of life.Taile
speciall
which
is to be
examined
according
to the
Definition.
Inuented.
Tenant in taile special is where lands and tenements be giuen to a
man and his wife (iointly or seuerally) and to the heires of their two
bodies begotten.Expou^ded
after
two
sorts.
1 In such case none may enherite by force of such gift, but those
which be engendred betweene them two, and it is called special taile:
for that if the wife die and he take an other wife, and hath issu, the
issue of the second wife shal neuer inherite by force of such gift, nor
also the issue of the second husband if the first die.2 In the same maner it is where lands and tenements be giuen by a
man vnto another with a wife, which is the daughter or cousin to
the giuer in frankmariage, which gift hath inheritance by this word
(Frankma^) vnto it annexed, howbeit they be not expressely said
nor rehearsed in the gift, that is to say, that these donees shall haue

these lands or tenements to them and to their (...) betweene them
two ingengred, and this is called special tail, because the issue of the second
wife may not inherit, and the woman donee in frankma^ must
be of kin to the donor, and they shal do no seruice but feal it, till the
4. degree to be accompted from the donor be past.Diuerse
kindes
thereof.
1 If lands be giuen to the husband and to the wife, and to the heires of the
husband which he begetteth of the body of ye wife, in this case the husba^d hath
estate in special taile, and the wife but for terme of life.2 If the gift be made to the husband and to the wife, and to the heires of
the wife of her body by the husband ingendred, the wife hath estate in special
taile, and the husband but for terme of life.3 If lands be giuen to the husband and the wife, and to the heires which the
husband hath by his wife in this case, both haue estate in taile special, for that
this word (heires) is not limited more to the one then to the other.4 If lands begiuen to a mau and his heirs wt he enge^dreth on the body of his
wife in this case ye husba^d hath estate in the tail special, and ye wife nothing at al.In respect
of
the persons
to
whom
the taile
belongeth.
Taile to the
heire male
which is two
fold.
1. If landes be giuen to a man and his heires males of his body ingendred, in such
case his heire male shall inherite, but his issue female shal neuer inherite.2 If lands be giuen to a man and to his heires males of his body engendred, and he
hath issu ij. sonnes and deceaseth, and the elder sonne entreth as heire male, and hath
issue a daughter and deceaseth, his brother shall haue the land and not the daughter,
for that the brother is heire male.Taile to the
heire female
wt is to bee
co^sidered by
ye definition.
Taile to the heire female, is where lands be giuen to a man and to his heires females
of his body ingendred, in this case his issue female shall inherite by force and forme
of the said gift, and not the issue male, for that in such cases where the gift is, who
ought to inherite, and who not, the will of the donor shall be obserued.By the
properties.
1 Whosoeuer shal inherite
by force of a gift in the taile
made vnto ye heires males it
behoueth him to co^uey his
discent by ye males wt may
be illustrated by 2. exa^ples.
1 If lands be giuen to a man and to his heires males of his body ingendred,
and he hath issue a daughter, who hath issue a sonne, and deceaseth, in this case
the sonne of the daughter shall not inherite by force of the taile, but in such case
the donor shall enter.2 If lands be giuen to a man and his wife, and to the heires males of their two
bodies begotten, and they haue issue after the like sort, the like shall happen.2 The death of a man taketh not away the estate of those that be in the tail, as if a man haue issue a sonne and
deceaseth, and land is giuen to the sonne, and to the heires of the body of his father ingendred, this is a good tail,
and yet the father was dead at the time of the gift.3 The donees and their issue shall hold of the donor and his heires as he holdeth of the Lord Paramount.




Obseruations vpon the
Analysis.
THis definition, which Maister
Littleton maketh of estate taile,
consisteth likewise of genus, and
of a difference. The genus is haereditas,
which is common both to it and to
fee simple: the difference in quadam certitudine
limitata, by which it is distinguished from
fee simple, for that is non limitata and sine certitudine,
and by this definition a man may
know what a fee simple is, and by the definition
of fee simple what fee taile is, so that the
rules of arte are well obserued, which are that
Rectum est iudex sui obliqui, and opposita iuxta
se posita magis illucescunt.
Though the diuision or tenure of estate taile
doth in the Table precedent consist of two
members, or two differences, yet the especiall
taile is deuided into more partes: and that
manner of deuiding is not contrary to the
rules of methode, for it is too much curiositie
to exact in euery diuision two onely opposed
essentiall differences, and two distinct kindes.

There be three causes wherefore a diuision
cannot be made by two differences. First because
of noe kind of thing, both the essential
differences cannot certainly bee knowen, but
the one of them wee doe expresse by a negatiue.
Secondly, because that difference which
wee set downe in the affirmatiue is not alway
the true difference. Thirdly, because the
diuerse nature of diuerse immediate kindes
of one thing wil not alwaies permit a twofold
diuision, for though the diuision of Animal in
hominem and brutum bee bimembris and according
to rigorous exaction, yet sithe there be
many kindes of brutish creatures, some that
swimme, some that flye, some that goe, some
that creepe, and the particulars of these
kindes doe differ in the quintessence of their
nature, surely to comprehend all these distinct
thinges vnder two differences is not to be
required, because it is either impossible, or
a thing of exceeding difficultie. But when
things are to be handled by way of disputation,
as the arguing of cases which is of great
vse in the lawe, another methode and course
must be vsed then hath bene taken in the framing
of this Analysis, for there the principall
case must be fully set downe, the points
of ^awe orderly distinguished, the reasons on
the one part must be first set downe, with answeres
annexed vnto them, then the reasons

on the other part, with answeres likewise in
their due places: and lastly, the conclusion of
the whole controuersie debated, whether it
were by iudgement, adiournement, or by the
concord of the parties, or by other speciall
meane, and for better direction herein (I am
desirous to profit others if I could) I haue
set downe an homely paterne according to
the plaines of my conceit, in the disposing
and ordering of a case, famous in our yeare
bookes, and of great weight and vse, being
the Prior of Mertons case, being very often
at large argued, namely, in the eightenth,
ninetenth, twentith, and twentie one yeares
of the raigne of King Edward the fourth at
seuerall times, and was likewise touched the
second yeare of Richard the third, and all the
contents of the arguments vpon this case deliuered,
as many as did concerne the principall
points then in question (for by matters
are to be reposed in a seuerall place by themselues)
I haue brought into the compasse of
a fewe lines, if you respect the large leafes
wherein they are handled.



Le case enter le Prior de
Merton plaintife, and le
Prior de Bingham
defendant.
EN le. 3. an de H. le. 3.Scir. faci. 18. E. 4. 22. 19. E. 4. 2. 47. 20. E. 4. 16. 21. E. 4. 60. 2. R. 3. 5. vn fine fuit leuie parenter
le Prior de Merton pl. et le Prior
de Bingham deforceant sur vn briefe de
couent, que fuit en ceux parolls: cest le finall
concorde pare^ter le Prior de Merton querentem
et le Prior de Bingham deforceantem de
5. Markes, et v. s^. rent cu^ pertinentiis en S.
et R. sur que vn brief de couenant fuit sum^on
enter eux que fuit que lauantdit Prior de
Bingham acknowledge et grante pur luy et
ses successors que touts iours, apres ils payer
chescun an al esglise de Merton pur les teneme^ts
queux il tient del dit prior et pur les teneme^ts
queux W. de W. ascun foits tient del
dit Prior en les villages auantdits cinque
markes, et v. s^. a deux termes dans, pur touts
suites et seruices, et que il ferroit a le chiefe
seign^or del fee pur lauantdit Prior de M. et
ses successors touts seruices queux apperteignont
a les dits teneme^ts: et pur cest graunt le
dit Prior de M. grant pur luy, et ses successors,
que ils violent garrant^ al auantdit Prior
de Bingham et ses successors touts lauantdits
tenements pur les auantdits seruices contra

omnes gentes: sur que vient en le courte vn
I. Prior de Merton et prya scire faci. enuers
W. Prior de Bingham dauer execution darrerages
del dit rent, que fuero^t due en les ans
darrein passe, et il auoit: et fuit returne etc.
a quel iour le Prior de Bingham vient eins,
et dit que le fine prooue le rente grant a le
predecessors del pl. destre vn rent seruice on
a^^une auter rent issuant hors de terre et nemy
vn annuitie, per que entant que il auoit
acknowledge, que cest rent fuit execute, il doit
auer vn Assise ou Distres, et nemy vn brief
que est en nature de briefe dannuitie* et sur
cest ils demurront.

Les quaestions de ley.

1. Si le fine fuit bien leuie.
2. Si le rent soit vn annuitie.


1. Negat. Que le fine ne fuit bien
leuie.

Littleton.
Fines he sont bon e^^eant leuies de choses
queux ne sont in rerum natura al temps del
fine leuie,A. et le rent de que cest fine fuit ^eu^e
ne fuit in esse al temps pe^ que etc.Ratio prima.



Brian.
Ceo ne besoigne.B. Car si ieo auoy in Islington
20. li. rent issuant de terres de twentie homes
per seuerall grauntes,Responsum. si ieo graunt per fine
a vous 20. li. rent hors de lour terres ou tenements
in Islington vous naueres 20. li. rent
queur ieo auoy in Islington mes vous aueres
vn nouell rent: mes est diuersitie ou le chose
de que le fine est destre leuie gist en demesne,
et ou nemy. Car lou gist en demesne, la doit
estre in esse al temps del fine leuie, come si ies
leuie fine de mon terre en dale lou ieo nauera
ascun terre en dale, cest fine est voide, mes de
chose que poit issuer hors de terre vn fine poit
estre leuie, coment que ne soit in rerum natura,
come de rent ou common in dale, ou en fait
il nauoit ascun common ou rent in dale al
temps etc. mes sil auoit common in grosse en
(...) le ville, et graunt a moy vn common, et ne
monstra quel common, ceo serra construe le
common que il auoit en (...) le ville.


Neale.
Cest fine est leuie de vn mere annuitie,C. et
pur ceo est male,Ratio. 2. cont^ si de chose naturallment
surdant hors de terre come si ieo conust tout
mon dr^t en vn acre de terre auous et vous per
(...) le fine graunt a moy vn annual re^t de 20. s^.

hors de (...) le terre, cest bon grant, vn^ ne fuit
ascun originall de ceo: per que etc.


Brian.
En auncient temps home puissoit auer
conus vn fine sans originall,Respons. et sil soit leuie a
cest iour il poit auer scire facias et si aduowso^
discend al coparceners et ils per indenture enrolle
voilent agree de presenter per turne, chescun
de eux quant son temps vient auera scire
facias: per que etc.


Piggot.
En auncient temps fines fue^ leuie deo et
ecclesie,Replicat ad hoc respons. mes le ley estore alter: mes come ieo
pensa chescun fine doit auer originall et de
accorder a ^. Car le note est placitum conuentionis,
et en nostre case nest ascun couen^ dun
annuitie, mes dun rent solement, et si le originall
seit de 20. acres et le fine soit leuie de
40. acres quant al 20. le partie ser^ discharge:
car ne fuit ascun originall de eux, et en praecipe
quod reddat le fine poit estre leuie del chose en
demaunde, car le originall conteigne et concerne
c^. Issint si brief de couen^ soit de 20 acres
en dale et le fine est leuie, de 20 acres en sale
le fine nest bon, ou si le originall soit de terre
arable, et le counusans de pasture.




1. Affirmat'. Que le fine fuit bien
leuie.D. Ratio 1.

Sulyarde.
Si en vn brief de couen^ port dun mannor, le
plaintif graunt le mannor al le deforceant, et
graunt oustre a discharger le dit mannor enuers
le seignior del fee, cest bon fine, et vnc^ le
clause de discharging ne fuit en le briefe de
couen^, donques en cest case etc.


Sulyarde.
E. Ratio 2.Si en vn briefe de droit de customes et seruices
le seignior poit releaser per fine tout son
droit, que il ad en le terre, et le ten^ poit graunt
per (...) le fine 20. ^. annualment, donques etc.


Catesby.R. 3.
Quant vn home acknowledge le droit de
terre a vn et vn re^t est reserue sur le graunt et
ren^, ou vn common, ou tot carectae ligni destre
prise del ter^, cest bon, car ils sont conteigne
implicatiue, en le originall, mes si le
fine est leuie dun chose nient expresse ne implide
en le originall cest voide, donques en cest
case, pur c^ que le fine est dun rent seruice, car
le fine est pro omnibus alijs seruitijs per cest
peroll (alijs) est implide, que le rent est aliquod*
seruitium.




2. Negat. Que le rent en cest ^ase
nest vn annuitie.

Piggot.
Le fine est que le Prior de Merton pur les
seruices auant dits acquite le Prior de Bingham
de touts seruices enuers le seignour del
fee,F. et pur ceo cest rent seruice et nemie
rent secke.Ratio. 1.


Collowe.
Le rent est change per le fine,Respons. Car ambideur
les parties serront estoppe de denyer lestate
prise per le fine, come si home soit seise de terre
en fee, et vn fine soit leuie perenter est^ et luy,
per que lestraunge acknowledge m^ le terre a
luy et a les heires de son corps ingendres, ore
son estate est change, issint si home tient per
seruice de chiualer, et le signior per fine acknowledge
que il tient en soccage ore le tenure
est alter, et il tiendra en socage, et en cest
case le rent ne poit estre rent seruice, car donques
le partie poit distr sur le terre et ceo ne
poit estre. Car touts suits quant al terre sont
discharge per le fine: et ne poit estre rent
charge. Car nul terre est charge oue distr: et
rent secke ne poit estre: car donques il serra

demaund sur le terre: et annuitie ne poit estre:
Car le Priour ne poit charge lemeas^^.


Pigot.
Si le Prior ne B. ^e poit extinguisher les
seruices per ses parolles,G. on per^son act,Rat. 2. le ^ent
seruice continue, per q^ etc.
Si home tient de moy per xx. s^,H. et ies confirme
son estate de tener per vn denier pur
touts maners de seruices,Rat. 3. il ferra fealtie, and cest
rent est parcel del auncient rent, per que etc.



2. Affirmat'. Que le rent est vn
annuitie.

Starkey.
Si vn home ne poit graunt al auter ceo g^
il auoit deuant,I. donques le rent g^ le Prior de
Bingham graunt a le Prior de Merton ne
poit estre launcient rent,Rat. 1. mes vn nouel rent ou
vn annuitie, per que etc.
Si ieo teigne de vous per homage,Con^ir. ratio. fealtie, et
^. s^. rent, et ieo voile graunter a vous per fine
xii. d. rent pur les tenements queux ieo teigne
de vous, cest vn nouel rent, and nemy launcient
rent, per que etc.



Vauisor.
Si per fine sur conusans de droit come ceo,
vn nouel rent poit este graunt, car cesty a que
le conusans est fait poit graunt vn rent a le conusor,R.
et le cause est pur ceo que il serra intende
que cesty a que le coNusans est fait est
seisie vel terre:Rat. 2. Mes auterment est de fine sur
graunt and render, car le ley ne i^tende que le
grauntee est seisie del terre, donques en cest
^ase le rent est vn nouel rent.


Choke.
Si ceux parolx, que le Prior de Bingham
ferra touts les seruices pur le Prior de Merton,Rat. 3.
ne prouant ceo destre rent seruice: Car si
soient seignior et tenant, et le seignior release
a le tenant per fait indent tout son droit que il
auoit, reddendo vnum denarium, and faciendo
capitali domino seruitia etc. en le behalfe del
seignior ^eux parolx sont voides, Car per le
release son seigniorie est extinct, donques en
cest case etc.


Iudgement.
Trois des Iustices agarderont g^ le pl poit
suer execution per Scire facias, et issint iudgement
fuit enter* e^maintenant sedente curia,
vn briefe Derror fuit mise eins. Et fuit touche
en le bank del Roy 2. R. 3. mes nest la decids,
ne argue.






Obseruations vpon the
precedent forme of arguing.
A. The first reason made by Mast. Littleton
is drawen from the cause of the thing generally,
and specially from the material cause:
For if the onely material causes of fines be
thinges which are in esse, it is a probable conclusion
to say that of this rent being not in
esse, a fine could not be leuied. And as the rule
of Logicke is, Quae eadem sunt eorum generationes
et corruptiones, causae constituentes et corrumpentes
eaedem sunt:Arist. Top. 7. c. 1. So of such thinges
which be the same in kind, the causes material
are the same: and therfore the material causes
of fines, that is the thing whereof they are
leuied, ought to be the same.
B. The aunswere of Brian to Mast. Littletons
reason is by way of distinguishing, for
euery aunswere must be either by direct granting,
or direct denying, or els by distinguishing
which is partly a granting partly a denying.
C. Mast. Neale his reason is drawen from
the same place of Logicke, from which Mast.
Littletons was deriued: for he supposeth that
an Ammitie is no fit materiall cause whereof
a fine may be leuied.
D. Sulyards reason is drawen a comparatis
patibus from thinges alike probable: For
if a man in a writ of Couenant brought of a
manor, may graunt and couenant to discharge
the said mannor against the Lord of the fee,
though in the writ of couenant there were no
mentioning of any such discharge: by the like
reason a man may leuie a fine of a thing which
is not mentioned in the writ of couenant, and
which was no^ in Esse before. And this maner
of reasoning is grounded vpon that rule in
Logike, Si duo duobus aeque conueniant, and hoc
huic conueniat, etiam illud illi conueniet.Arist. Top. 2 c. 4.
E. Sulyards second reason is drawen a simili:
For like as in a fine leuied vpon a writ
of Right brought of customes and seruices, the
tenant may graunt a rent which was not in
Esse before: so likewise in this case the fine
might be leuied of a rent, which had no being
before. And this consequens is warranted by
this rule, Si in vno eorum quae similia sunt aliquo
modo se res habeat, eodem etiam modo in
alijs se habebit.Arist. Top. 2 c. 4.
F. The first reason whereby Pigot goeth
about to prooue that the rent is not an Annuitie
is deduced a genere: For if it be truely
named by the generall name of seruice in the
fine, it must be intended to be a speciall kind
of rent seruice, and not a rent secke, according
to the rule, Si aliquid sit genus, species ab e^

comprehensa participabit natura eius, sed non
natura eius quod est contrarium generi. h.
G. Pigot his second reason is drawen a
comparatis paribus.
H. His third reason is drawen a simili.
I. Starkey his first reason is drawen a
comparatis paribus.
K. The reasons vsed by Vauisour and
Choke to prooue the rent to be an Annuitie
are drawen a simili.


FINIS.

