


THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE FIRST BOOKE.
A Philosophicall and Theologicall discourse, concerning the reuolution of things. Lewis the second of that name, King of Hungarie and Bohemia: of his descent and qualities. The gouernours and Councellors of his estate. Solyman prepareth to inuade Hungarie. The diligence of Paul Tomoree Lieutenant generall of the Kings armie. Lewis soliciteth the Christian Princes for ayde. Ecclesiasticall treasure is leuied for the warre. The Turkes armie passed the riuer Sauus. The description of Hungarie. A briefe recitall of the places, where happened the greatest force of the warre. The riches of Hungarie. Aduertisements to the King for the ordering  of this warre against the Turkes. Lewis goeth into the field. Varadin Peter taken by the Turkes. Souldiours repayred from all parts to the King lying at Tholne. Wylak taken by the Turkes. The priuiledges of the Barons of Hungarie. The King determined to goe into the field with a small force, and the Souldiours importune to fight. The description of the towne of Mohaz, where the King fought and lost the battaile. A disswasion from fight, and further consideration thereof. Tomoree aduiseth to fight. The Christian Armie no more but 25000. men: and the Turkes were 300000. The meanes to preserue the King in battaile: the order and place of the battaile. The King is shewne to the Hungarian Souldiours. A deliberation of the enemies purposes, and of his appearing in the field. Tomoree importuneth to fight:  the beginning of the battaile, the losse of the King, and ouerthrow of the Hungars. The Kings bodie found dead. A certaine Ghost appeared in mans shape. The Turkes spoyle and harrie all ouer Hungarie. Buda taken by the Turkes: 200000. Christians ouerthrowne, slaine, and taken prisoners in this expedition.

SEeing the Heauen is such as it representeth it selfe to our sight, that is, proportioned like vnto a Sphericall or round forme: and sith the same Heauen enuironeth, besides the meane of this great concauitie  (which being betweene it and vs is filled with ayre) this wonderfull frame which wee name the world (little I confesse in respect of that which enuironeth it about, and wonderfull great in consideration of the naturall apprehension which we may haue of it) it is not without cause that The reuolution of al things. certaine auncient Philosophers esteemed that all things had their reuolutions.

For sith so it is, that the lowest part of a circle is that, which is in the middest thereof: and that the lower parts or bodies are gouerned by the superiour  (which thing also is found true by naturall reasons knowne, and diligently obserued in all handie workes and engines:) it is not without reason, that some haue inferred of this, that this world is subiect to the motion of the Heauens, and that we perceiue amongst vs, the things passed to returne againe, and represent themselues to our viewes. For Heauen being round, his period or full point is no other, but a continuall begininng againe, euen as prest and readie as his ende: which the Aegyptians by their Hierogyphicall figures meant to represent vnto vs, and namely by a serpent holding the end of his tayle with his teeth. Now this world being heauie and ponderous of his owne proper nature, and yet (in the middest of this  great, soft, and light ayre) firme, stable, and immoueable by diuine disposition, which is incomprehensible to vs: this world, I say, receiueth by certaine reuolutions, in the same place and quarters, the same and like passions, which it hath once receiued from the influence of Heauen; euen as, by the ordinarie circumuolution of it, it commeth more neere vnto vs with his beames. The volubilitie which is in the one, and the stabilitie that is in the other, is the cause of the effecting and bringing forth of such passions: these two contraries being so ordained and disposed of, to the end that that which is the patient might make the other to become the agent; it being not possible that the one should subsist, except the other were in essence. And as the patient, to  the end it may suffer, ought to stand fast, and not shake: so, the agent on the the other side is alwaies in action, being not able to stay it selfe. And if they were both alike in soliditie and firmenes, or of the same motion, their qualities would be without any effect. And for this cause God meaning that the world should be gouerned, according to the nature of it, by Heauen, he hath created the world stable for the patient, and the Heauen moueable for the agent; and all this, to the end the world should receiue this benefit of God by the meanes of Heauen, through certaine reuolutions of it, in as much as this great circumuolution might still remaine and returne againe. Whereupon proceedeth this auncient prouerbe, which telleth vs, That nothing Sentence.  is done, nor nothing sayd, which hath not been done, or sayd before.

What is there now that hath not been?
And shall not that, at last,
Which is to be, receiue his being
From that which once is past?
That which is made vnmade shall be,
And eke againe be made:
And, being made againe, it shall

Be seene to waste and fade.



And this is that which oftentimes vpholdeth many good spirits, which otherwise would be terrified through the innumerable euils, wherewith men are often times enuironed. For, wrestling against such torments, they are supported by a certaine hope against such terrors, namely this, that one day good shall come in steed of euill: like as when it raineth, we still hope for faire weather. These reuolutions, neuerthelesse, are not alwaies equall,

or of like perfection, by reason of the multiplicitie of meteores and  heauenly starres, which in their sphericall courses haue euery one their proper motion, more soone or later one then the other, and that in such wise, that thorough many ages we doe not finde two equall situations or aspects of the same starres streaming vpon vs. For this cause the effects of such reuolutions doe not manifest themselues agreeable in euery circumstance to the first. There be also some of these reuolutions, which haue not their neerest causes from these heauenly influences, but they succeede onely by a 2 The diuersitie of reuolutio^s. certaine combining togither, or be as a consequence of things fore-happened; as for example, in time of warre many euils doe infallibly accompanie it, and are ingendred thereby. Other reuolutions there be which are  not natural, but proceed from the only and free will of God; and these we may 3 name supernaturall, although we see the^ to happen by the sequell of certaine precedent causes, and to haue bin practised before in certaine worldly matters. These reuolutions sometimes fall out sooner then the naturall course of the starres: because that Gods iustice (whereof they do depend) doth hasten and addresse it selfe to punishment, euen as the waight of the misdeedes requireth. The two first kindes of these reuolutions may be noted to happen many times naturally in those who are altogether abandoned and forsaken of God, and are by him left to the course of their owne lust, as we see amongst the Barbarians, and in the person of Pharaoh. The third kind was inflicted vpon the children of Israell, who haue often felt one selfe same iustice  and diuine punishment, for that their fault was the same and equall to the former, such being the will and pleasure of God, to chasten those who^ he loueth.
The calamitie happening to the kingdome of Hungarie, (whereof I vndertake to write the historie) may well bee referred to one of these three punishments. For when this countrie at an instant was ouerthrowne, there was not in Europe (yea it may be not in all the world) any place, where the people was more proude, effeminate, and cold of courage then in this; they giuing themselues ouer to such infamous vices, through the great riches and maruelous abundance and wealth of the countrie, (which is the cause of all wickednes) and because they did (to say the trueth) often make head against the  Turks, and many times repulsed them: from whence proceeded their pride, and from the same, the despising and contemning of their enemie. The seruice of God was not then obserued but in pompe and sumptuous riches. The Pastors and Prelates of the Church behaued themselues like souldiours, vnder colour that it was for defence of it, against their enemies. Iustice was made an ordinarie sale. The Nobilitie peremptorie and vntolerable. And the simple people, no more simple, but hollow, perfidious, and wicked. For these and such like enormous vices, it is likely (considering that which ensued) that God (to commence and begin his chasticement) sent to this people a yong King, according to that wise saying of Salomon, who assureth vs,  That cursed is that countrie whose King is an infant. Notwithstanding as yong as Sentence. he was, yet was he soone taken out of the world, leauing no certaine heires behinde him, but vnfortunate and cankered hatred, yea a desire in the hearts of certaine Princes to raigne, which continued and perfected the vtter subuersion of this miserable Prouince.

But discoursing thus freely vpon ye euil of another, it may be obiected, that I haue matter enough at home, without borrowing from elsewhere, to make the like discourse. There is (truly) enough, and more then we should desire:  but I willingly answer as the wiseman, who saith, That it is unseemely for a man Sentence. to be iudge in his owne causes, or make his owne accounts. For to write and discouer our vices, is a vaine foolishnes: and to magnifie and extoll our praises, is no other but meere flatterie. I had rather imitate those, who vse the good examples of others to inrich their narration, and know so wel to accommodate them to the subiect or matter which is propounded, that the auditors are more drawne by them, then by their principall and chiefe arguments. Nay, I will speake boldly; as similitudes are not in all respects alike, so it seemeth France miserable. that we are in worse condition, then was Hungarie: for that the miserie  thereof did not happen but by one of these reuolutions, and the euill fortune which doth enuiron vs, doth depend vpon all the three, because it seemeth rather to ouerthrow vs, then to correct vs: so that we know not which is more true, whether we are chasticed for our faults by the pleasure and will of God, as if he loued vs, or whether he doth vtterly abandon and forsake vs, as he did the Barbarians of Peru, leauing vs to our owne motiues of lust, and by consequence to the naturall course of the starres: the great Coniunction of which (as hath been obserued by the Astronomers) should happen in this miserable time, bringing with it nothing but a great alteration of kingdomes and estates, with a consequence of a thousand and a thousand miseries. At  the falling out of such Coniunctions, wee reade that the Romane commonweale hath changed the estate vnder Iulius and Augustus: as afterward this French Monarchie did vnder Pepin, and Charlemaigne: and as, before that, Italie did vnder Romulus: and Assyria vnder Merodach: and before them, the like mutations happened vnder Ianus, and vnder Moses. The miseries that accompanied the alteration of the Romane state are sufficiently knowne. The cruelties were not such vnder Pepin, as they were vnder Hugh Capet. The reuolution of diuine Iustice did not extend it selfe, but vpon the three sonnes of Philip the faire, (for the punishment of their wicked liues) who successiuely were kings of France, and dying without issue the kingdome was transferred  to those of the house of Valoys. Also it is a necessary and vsuall thing, that when a good or bad State is come to his complete perfection, it presently declineth and reuolueth, by reason of this circumuolution, commonly called in all ages the wheele of Fortune, to which reuolution God hath fastned The wheele of Fortune. all humane actions, as well actiue as passiue, as to a fashion or forme the certainest of all others: so that we neither see nor reade of any thing, but a continuall returning of good and euill, hauing his course or period more short or long, according to the varietie of things, or disposition of Gods will. When we see Religion, Iustice, or Policie to be in his full force of vertue, we may assure our selues to rest in good estate and great content. But of the contrarie,  when superstition and Atheisme, when oppression and denying of Iustice, when tyrannie and disorder are come to their full points, wee ought to expect for no other but great ruine and miserie, and yet the same decaying and declining by little and little. I will not in particular here recite, deuotion turned to hypocrisie; the sacred Ministerie and the goods therof committed

to Captaines and men of warre, and conuerted to the dowries of women; vnlawfull bargaines, and fowle enormities couered with the vaile of Iustice,  the execution thereof committed to the ignorant, in that the same is valued rather at the price of money, then of knowledge; the gouernments of Prouinces and Captainships of fiftie men of armes brought to a set price: in fine, that the royall seate is the onely shop of all ruinous inuentions, and the charges and exactions of the simple people without limite or reason. The euill, which infallibly followeth such like infortunate operations, proceedeth not but by diuine prouidence; who minding afterward to introduce good, must first cast out and purge the euill by punishment and chasticement, which bringeth with it such miserie. Notwithstanding, all these naturall violences and iust chasticements may bee mitigated and asswaged by  some other gentle and discreete meanes. The first sort of reuolutions, being naturall, are subiect to supernaturall effects, which proceede from our immortall The immortall spirits not subiect to the starres. spirits, which by reason doe stay or chaunge them; it falling out that a wiseman commaundeth euen the starres, not causing them to chaunge their naturall course, as some heretofore haue thought of Sorcerers, but in making their naturall power frustrate and without effect, through a good and aduised foresight. Concerning such chasticements, as ordinarily fall vpon vs by diuine iustice for like faults, euen those neuerthelesse may bee somewhat stayed by good and true repentance, contrition, and daily praiers, seeing that God is altogether good and full of mercie. Also when such vertues  faile vs, we may well be assured, that like faults preuailing, or such comming vpon vs as draw neere to them, we must look for the like effects, namely, that we should see the like celestiall courses in our time, which were in our predecessors daies, since the first great Coniunction happened after the creation of the world. This power, which is thus in man by the permission of the diuine bountie, is cause of the diuersitie which wee see as well in diuine chasticements as heauenly influences, although the causes and courses thereof be alike: otherwise, wee must conclude that, such heauenly courses happening, these mutations would be vniuersall and alike vnto euery one: and that for one and the same fault the like punishment would alwaies  follow. But now, the miserie, which wee see in France, redoubleth it The miserie of France. selfe and daily increaseth: because that together with celestiall influence, rancour, malice, and all manner of wickednes hath in such sort seazed and possessed the spirits of men, that all manner of foresight, of wisedome, of prudence, of humilitie and patience doth abandon it selfe from thence, euen as it happened at the time of the deluge: in so much that it truly seemeth that this vnhappie countrie (at the least for his owne particular) is readie to receiue euen as great a fall, as then did the whole world: except some (in whom wee see some sparke of wisedome yet to shine) doe take the bridle in their hands to stay the violent course of this heauenly chariot, and by  their good meanes this poore ship (willingly exposed to the windes and waues of a manifest shipwracke) bee harboured in some safe roade, by contemplating the euill fortune of another diuulged in this historie; we endeuouring our selues by their examples, as on our own behalfe to take courage, and to inforce our selues, as the good shipmen doe in a tempest, who then

laying apart and casting from amongst themselues all disagreements and priuie A necessarie vnion. grudges, (which they pretend one against another) doe alike for their  owne safetie put to their helping hands as brothers and true friends. Sith man also for his excellencie is endowed with amitie, (which, as I thinke, containeth Friendship containeth in it selfe all vertue. in it all vertues, especially when the same hath relation to two things, that is to say, towards God and our countrie, for which we are not bound to trauaile only in all kindes of businesses, but also to expose our liues, as well men as women, yea children themselues, as it is often seene at sieges and assaults of townes, where both the one and the other sex doe imploy themselues with one minde and great courage) euery one which is nobly borne, ought to endeuour himselfe to cause his excellencie the more to appeare.  For else he should shew himselfe worse then a beast, and he who is disfournished of such vertue, meriteth not any thing at all to be ranged or reckoned amongst men. We see the proofe thereof by the workes of charitie, which Charitie. proceeding of naturall friendship is deeply rooted, and that not onely amongst Christians, but also amongst Iewes and Painims, and euen amongst the Atheists themselues, which also maketh vs by this meanes greatly to differ from bruite beasts. According to this wee may conclude, that it is not without cause that a graue personage said, That we were not altogether borne for Sentence. our selues, but for one another: as if euery man (who hath in him any sparke of such amitie) ought according to his abilitie (whilest he is in this life) to endeuour  himselfe to bring some profit to the common-weale. For my part, I meane verely to propound to all men, as a fit medicine for the malady of this age, the accidents of a like fortune: to the end, that by the acknowledging of them, euery man may be able to fortifie himselfe against the foule and cruell 1 shocke of common calamitie, and particularly without falling into dispayre, which often proceedeth of vnthankfulnes and forgetting of God: and also to the end that others more discreete and aduised, may by another mans harme auoide the inconuenience to come, or at the least may prepare themselues 2 to receiue it in such sort, that their noisome wound bee not to them ouer dangerous, offensiue, or preiudiciall: and also to the end that those who  doe manage and gouerne States, may learne by the example of others not 3 The preseruation of another and of his owne gouernment necessarie for a State. only to preserue and maintaine their owne, but also to bee vigilant that the next neighbour be not inuaded by any other, least that by their negligence and carelesnes, the third increasing by the ouerthrow of another, he doe not afterwards ouerthrow their State, and in the end bring it vnder his gouernment: as those who haue aspired to great Monarchies know well how to practise this, and whereunto they could neuer attaine, if euery neighbour State would maintaine and assist one another, as sometime they well doe when necessitie constraineth them, and when they are not possessed or incensed with any mutuall hatred. But this vice not leauing them any long  time, in the end they giue place to a mightie man to set foote by little and little within the territories of their neighbours, and then euen within themselues: which thing also wee may note euen in this kingdome of Hungarie, which heretofore hath been rich and puissant, and at this present fallen into such pouertie, as it is nothing else but euen a mirrour of perfect desolation and miserie: as you may vnderstand by this historie which I haue rather taken

in hand to write of, then the historie of any other strange countrie, to the end that it being Christian, it may with more remorse wound and pierce our  hearts, if we any thing esteeme or fauour our religion: considering also that the same example (because it concerneth vs) is so much the more commended to vs by God and men: whilest it representeth and setteth before our eyes that which our predecessors thought worthy to be followed, to the end wee should imitate them; and also the euill which they did, to the end wee may auoide it: and because that by occasion thereof so many great personages (be they warriours or others) haue from time to time recorded the good and euill actions of their predecessors, and of those who liued in their time (as the Barbarians of America vse the like in their songs) to the end they A historie serueth for instruction. might leaue to their posteritie some faire and large memoriall, within the  which they may with more facilitie and pleasure behold the good which accompanied vertue, and the euill which vice bringeth with it. Now following, in this, their footsteps, and for the reasons which I haue before alleadged, I doe with an intyre deuotion present to the Common-weale this lamentable Broderic Chancellour of Hungarie, Castalde Lieutenant vnto Ferdinand. historie, collected out of the records of Broderic, the Chauncellor of Hungarie, and out of the memorials of Castalde Lieutenant vnto Ferdinand in the same countrie, and of sundrie other writers.
LEwis the second of that name, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, the sonne Lewis the second, and of his birth. Anne of Candale, Queene of Hungarie. Anno. Dom.of Vladislaus and of Anne of Candale who came out of France; after he  had lost his father in his noneage, and his mother at his birth, was now one and twentie yeares of age, in the yeare of our Lord 1526. when Soliman Emperour of the Turkes, inuaded Hungarie with a great and puisant armie. He, a little before his father dyed, was betrothed to Marie, sister to the Emperour 1526. Charles, and Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, whom he afterward maried Marie Queene of Hungarie. being come to yeares of discretion, giuing at the same time his sister Anne in mariage to Ferdinand. Lewis was a comely young Prince, tall and well Anne Archdutches of Austria. The qualities of Lewis. formed, excelling any of his age, hauing a singular and naturall bountie, and adorned with so many goodly vertues, that certainely he had proued a most excellent Prince, if he had liued but a longer time. He was of a sweete  and milde spirite, not any thing crooked or wayward, easilie drawne to all things which were honest and iust, being thereto naturally inclined of himselfe. He was greatly delighted in managing of Horses, and to beare armes, to hunt, and all other exercises worthie and commendable in a young man. In his words he was true and iust, and no way variable or inconstant, neither would he disclose any thing which had been imparted to him in secret. Notwithstanding all these goodly vertues, he was in contempt and dislike among the greatest of his court, who abusing his young yeares did pill and spoyle his estate, whilest they liued in all excessiue lust and pleasure. 
At that time the dignitie and honour of Counte Palatine (which is the Counte Palatine. chiefe among the seculars next to his royall Maiestie) was in the possession of Stephen Battor, sonne of Andrew Battor, and nephew to Stephen Battor, Stephen Battor, Counte Palatine. Iohn Zapoly, Vayuode of Transiluania. who immediately before him possessed the same dignitie, and gouerned Transiluania with his great honour vnder King Mathias. Iohn Zapoly Counte of Sepusa (who afterward was King of Hungarie) gouerned then

Transiluania, hauing in his possession great store of wealth to be diuided with his brother George, which they had gotten by the death and succession  of Stephen their father. He had in such sort procured the fauour and good will of all the Nobles and States of that countrie, that, euen from his youth, euery one set their eye vpon him, as the right inheritour of that kingdome, if it so happened that, for want of lawfull heyres, it should be vacant. Stephen commaunded in great Walachia, which is named Moldauia, and among Stephen of Walachia. Raoul of Transalpina. Francis Bathian Ban of Slauonia. the Turkes Carabogdania; and Raoul gouerned the lesse Walachia, otherwise named Transalpina; both the one and the other neuerthelesse being subiect to the kingdome of Hungarie. Francis Bathian, (well esteemed of the King, in respect of his continuall and faithfull seruice from his youth)  was Ban of Dalmatia, Croatia, and Slauonia, which three Prouinces were altogether gouerned by this onely dignitie; which dignitie we otherwise tearme Admiraltie, although now this word Ban may properly be applied to all gouernours established in euery Prouince that is of late added to this kingdome. The low Marches, and the fortresse of Themeshwar, Peter Peren gouernour of Themeshwar. were vnder the defence and gouernement of Peter Peren, who with the Counte of Sepusa did keepe the royall Crowne, which was left vnto him by Emeric Peren his father. Paul Tomoree a gray Friar, and Archbishop of Colocense, Paul Tomoree, a gray Fryer, and Archbishop of Colocense, gouernour of Sirmia. commaunded Sirmia, and all that circuite which is betweene the riuers of Sauus, Drauus, and Danubius. This Archbishop was a great personage,  and of like esteeme, and one who, before he tooke vpon him the habite of Saint Frauncis, had made sufficient proofe of his vertue in many exploits, valiantly many times fighting against the enemie. The Archbishopricke of Colocense being vacant, and the possessions and profits thereof hauing no lesse neede of a good defender, then of a Pastor and dispenser of sacred and holy things, for the late losse of the towne and fortresse of Belgrade: in a publike assemblie of the kingdome it was by euery one importuned, that Tomoree should be forced (if he would not otherwise) out of his Monasterie, and by the authoritie and commaunde of the Pope should take the Paul taken against his will out of his Couent. charge of this Church, and defend the goods and reuenewes thereof.  This man resisted along time their perswasions; but in the end he was constrained to obey the Kings pleasure, with the rest of the kingdome; and he behaued himselfe so wisely and valiantly in this charge, in euery mans iudgement, yea euen of those which hated him (as excellent vertue is neuer without enuie) that he forgat nothing which appertained to a good and aduised Chiefetaine, and executed no more then was seeming the pietie of a religious man, and a godly Bishop, not any thing changing from the austeritie of his first life, neither in person nor in any other thing. Counte Christopher of Francapine (being certaine moneths before drawne to the Counte Christopher of Francapine. seruice of the Realme with faire promises, whereupon they had caused him  to forsake the Courte of the Archduke Ferdinand) in steede of receiuing some preferment according to their promises, in the ende was rewarded with a great iniurie, and returned againe vnto Ferdinand. Stephen Broderic, Stephen Broderic Chauncelor. (borne in that part of high Panonia which some particularly call Slauonia) after he had been Embassadour for the King to the Popes holines, and had a few moneths before been created Chauncelor, had more affection to a

zealous life, then to earthly things. Alexis Thurson (a man greatly abounding  Alexis Thurson Treasurer. in wealth according to common opinion) was Treasurer, and had in former time executed this office very diligently. The Castles of Poson and John Bornemissa gouernour of King Leuis. Buda were in the custodie of Iohn Bornemissa, who had so great authoritie with the King, that he could incline his will to which side he would, because he had the gouernement of him from his cradle. He was also very well esteemed of euery one, as well for his reuerend olde age, as for the seueritie which was seene in him, accompanied with great bountie, and for the fidelitie which he bare towards his King. Beholde here, these were they who then managed the greatest places of the kingdome.
The other Prelates and Barons gaue themselues euery one to their priuate Lasdilas Salcane Archbishop of Strigonium, Metropolitaine of Hungarie. affaires, except Lasdilas Salcane, Archbishop of Strigonium, Metropolitane  of the kingdome, and great Chaunceler, who, whether he was not able to execute that office any longer, or whether he had a desire to passe the remainder of his life in greater content and quiet, certaine moneths before hauing restored to the Kings hands the priuie Seale, which then was giuen to Stephen Broderic, had neuerthelesse a good part of the ouerseeing of all the affaires, which were for the most part gouerned by his aduise and councell. Also the King reposed great trust in him, as well for his dignitie, age, and wisedome, as for the experience which he had, hauing a long time managed the affaires of the State. 
In this sort was Hungarie gouerned, when newes came to King Lewis, that Solimon, hauing made peace with all his other neighbours for many yeares, prepared himselfe to make warre against the Hungarians by land and water, the passage being sufficiently open to perfourme this, by reason of the townes of Belgrade and Sabasia which not long since were vnder his gouernement; and the fortresse of Zalankemen, and all other townes on this side the riuer of Sauus, vnto Varadine Peter, being raced and throwne to the ground; which compasse or circuite of the Countrie is yet, vntill this day, called by the auncient name of Sirmia. All this ruine and losse gaue Sirmia. the enemie such entrance into Hungarie, that it was a difficult matter for him to be hindered from any his attempts, but as often as he thought good,  he might with ease thrust himselfe into the bowels thereof. In this low Pannonia did then gouerne Paul Tomoree, who not content to haue aduertised The diligence of Paul Tomoree. From whence commeth this word Coche. the King, by many messages, of the Turkes comming into his Realme, with all speede transported himselfe with poste in little wagons, named Kotcze (which beare the name of the place, from whence the first of them came) towards the King, who was then at Vicegrade the twentith day of March, vnto whom he gaue notice of the Turkes enterprise, of his preparations, and how great the danger would be, into which he saw the Realme might then easily fall, aduertising him of the small force which he had in his gouernement to hinder them; that it was needfull to vse all possible diligence;  that it was requisite neere Belgrade to hinder the passage of the riuer Sauus; and that such a matter, although it was difficill, yet neuerthelesse might be prouided for, so that he gaue order for it in due time; and withall promised to employ himselfe in that busines, if he would giue him necessaries for that purpose.

The King being much troubled with this newes, which elsewhere in many places was confirmed for certaine and true, appoynted a publike assemblie  to be held vpon Saint George his day. At that time and thither repaired all the States of euery Prouince, and determined of all things which apperteined to the defence of the kingdome: and, among other things, it was concluded, that all the Princes, as well ecclesiasticall as secular, and all the nobles with good store of able peasants, should be at Tholne, at the feast of the visitation of our Lady the blessed Virgine Marie, which is the second of Iune, and to march all with the King himselfe, against their enemies. In the meane time the King aduised of that which was necessarie for the maintenance of the warre. He sent his Embassadors to the Christian Princes (especially to  Lewis soliciteth the Christian Princes. his neighbours) declaring to them the danger and perill, which was to them imminent. By pithie and perswasiue letters, and by experienced men, he solicited the Bohemians, Morauians, and Slesians, to send him what ayde they ought him, and vrged them with their promises and assurances, which they had before giuen him to the like effect. He solicited the Pope as much as he could, that he would encrease the treasure which he disbursed in Hungarie for the leuie of Souldiours, whereby he might haue the better meanes to defend himselfe. But he solicited not Sigismond King of Polonia his Sigismond King of Polonia confederate with the Turke. Vncle, for that he a little before had made truce with the Turke, minding by that meanes to chase out of his kingdome the ruine and losse of it; since that  otherwise he could not heale it, in respect of the many dissensions and quarrels which were among the Christian Princes: and Lewis very well knew the integritie of this Prince, that he was an obseruer of his faith, and did assure himselfe he would affoord him no ayde against him, with whom he was confederate. Also he had the like opinion of the Venetians.
In this aforesaid assemblie, it was graunted to the King, to take a portion of the Churches treasure (if want did vrge him to it) to supplie the want of The Ecclesiasticall treasure leuied for the warre. his owne treasure, which was but little, his cofers being wasted by those who had very careleslie gouerned the common wealth. This permission and graunt was confirmed and approued by the Pope, for discharge of their  consciences. Among those who were of the Kings court, two had the Christopher Francapine. Nicolas Counte Salms. charge of this warre, namely Counte Christopher (of whome we haue spoken before that he went to Ferdinand) and Nicholas Counte Salms.
These things and many other being thus disposed of in this assemblie, the King, after he had aduised with himself, gaue euery one leaue to retire themselues; and for his part, he put in practise and executed (as speedily as hee could) that which had been determined of in the assemblie. And first of all, hee writ to the Christian Princes, informing them of the present daunger which he saw, demaunding ayde of all, and chiefly of the Emperour Charles, and of Francis King of France, who a little before was deliuered out of prison.  He instantly requested them both, that they would not forsake him in such and so great a perill. He put the French King in minde of this, that, while he was yet prisoner, he did, by his Ambassadour in the towne of Piczigyton, promise concerning the defence and preseruation of Hungarie; for the Francis the first, King of France, challenged of his promise. which hee frankly made him offer, and assured to aide him with forces and succours, if God did restore him to his full and whole libertie. Declaring to

him that the time did now present it selfe to performe his friendly promises,  hauing now (by Gods assistance) the authoritie to put it in execution, and the rather, he being vrged on his part so vehemently to importune him thervnto. He also sent vnto his brother in law Ferdinand, and to other Princes of the Empire, who then were assembled at the Emperiall diet at Spire. He dispatched letters againe into Bohemia, Morauia, and Slesia. He treated with Iohn Anthonie, Baron of Bourgh, the Popes Nuntio, Lieger with his Maiestie, to solicite and intreate his holines, that he would aide him with greater summes of money, to support the burden of this warre. He gaue commission to Lasdilas Macedonien to take halfe the treasure of the Churches, who, a Lasdilas Macedonien Bishop of the 5. Churches. little before being Bishop of Sirmia, was chosen Bishop of the fiue Churches,  by the fauour of the Chauncellor, and many other; and gaue charge to Nicholas Gerendi, to haue a care of such summes of money as should bee collected, Nicholas Gerendi. and to distribute and dispose of it onely for the maintenance of the warre, with the Nuntioes consent. Certaine summes of money were also demaunded of the Abbots, of the gouernours of townes, and of the corporations Summes of money. of Villages, who said they were free: and the like was demaunded of the Saxons, the Transiluanians, and the Iewes. In fine, they did on euery side so seeke out money, the sinewes of warre, that within few daies was collected no small quantitie of treasure.
During this time, letters were daily brought, messengers came aswell from  the Archbishop of Colocense, as fro^ the Vayuode of Transiluania, by which vpon their knowledge they assured, that the Turke approched neere vnto Belgrade, and that part of his armie, which marched before, had alreadie passed the riuer Sauus. The King and his Councell, vpon this vnwelcommed newes, hasted all things, and principally to defend the passage of Drauus, seeing the passage of Sauus could not now bee hindered. But seeing that wee must often make mention of the riuers Sauus and Drauus, and of other places, it is necessarie that we describe the situation of Hungarie, and, amongst others, the parts and countries by which the enemie directed his course against the Hungarians, and by which they all marched towards him, and wherein battaile was giuen. 
All Hungarie (which for certaine is now held to haue receiued this name by the Hunes, or Hungers, a people come out of Scithia, who there made The description of Hungarie. The riuer Danubius. their aboade) is parted and diuided in two, by the insition of Danubius, which is the greatest riuer in Europe, taking his originall in the forrest of Martian, nigh the towne of Vlmes, and so making his source ouerthwart Buda the capitall towne of Hungarie. Hungarie on this side the riuer. Germanie. By this diuision Hungarie doth part it self into two parts, whereof the one is on this side the riuer, and the other beyond; and we write it, as if we were at Buda, which is the capitall towne of the kingdome.
That part on this side the riuer is anciently called Pannonia, and is separated from that, which we call beyond the riuer, by Danubius, by Austria, Bauaria,  The riuer Drauus. Slauonia. The riuer Sauus. Bosnia. Rascia. Walko. Posegan, and Sirmia. and the skirts of the hill Cecien. The riuer Drauus separateth it from Slauonia; and the riuer Sauus from Bosnia and Rascia. For, along the riuer of Danubius, drawing towards Belgrade, euen vnto the mouth of the riuer Sauus, doe these three goodly countries stretch themselues, that is to say, Walko, Posegan, and Sirmia, which are named Counties, and which do part

Hungarie from Slauonia. The principall towne on this hither part and side of the riuer is Buda, which is the capitall seate of the kingdome. The  most noted townes of fame are Alberegalis, recommended in respect it is The towne of Alberegalis, the place of Coronation and buriall of the Kings. the place of Coronation, and sepultures of the Kings; Strigonium which holdeth the Metropolitane place; Fiue Churches, which is a Bishops seate. Besides there are Sopronia, Iauerin, Sabaria, and Stridon: which last is noted to be the place where S. Hierome was borne, and in that last sauing one Saint Martin tooke his birth. Besides the riuers of Drauus and Danubius, there are Strigonium. Fiue Churches. others worthie of note. There bee also two great Lakes of speciall note named Balator, and Freton, one of which is about thirtie miles long, but the Sopronia. Iauerin. Sabaria. Stridon. Balator and Freton two great Lakes. Slauonia. other not being so long hath a more large compasse. When you haue passed  and ioyned aboue Drauus, you shall enter into Slauonia, which in that quarter doth coast this hither part beyond the riuer, which of ancient time did make part of high Pannonia, going along the side of Hungarie vnto the riuer Sauus; and passing yet further, it doth stretch it selfe euen vnto ye riuer of Hune, vpon which Croatia bordereth, and is adioyned vnto Dalmatia, lying along Croatia. Dalmatia. the Adriatique sea; part whereof is vnder the obeysance of the Venetians, and part vnder the Turkish gouernment, and the lesser part thereof is subiect Bosnia. Rascia. The towne of Zagrabia. to the King of Hungarie. The Bosnians and Rascians, who in times past haue been called high Missians, doe possesse the countries which are within the same, and are further from the sea. The principall towne of Slauonia is  The towne of Bigihon. called Zagrabia. That of Croatia is now called Bigihon, and in times past it was named Fumium. That part of Dalmatia, which doth obey the Hungers, The towne of Segnia. hath for the chiefe towne Segnia. Bosnia hath Iaycza. And that of Rassia or The towne of Iaycza. Seruia. Seruia hath Belgrade. And such is the situation of Hungarie on this side the riuer, and of the countries which are betweene Danubius and the Adriatique Gulfe. The towne of Belgrade.
As for the other part which is beyond Danubius, that is, by the hils Carpathes, The further Hungarie. which begin aboue Poson, and by a long soyle stretch themselues The riuer Tibiscus. vnto the Euxine Sea, separated from Morauia, Sclesia, Polonia, and Russia vnto this Prouince, which we name Maromarusia, in which the other mountaines The riuer Zamosse. and forrests, aduancing themselues towards Seuerin, doe seuer it from  The riuer Marosse. Transiluania, and from Valachia Transalpina. This furthest Hungarie is The townes of Poson. Tirnauia. Trincin. watered in the midst of it by the riuer Tibiscus, the which, of al those that are in that North part, doth most abound in fish. It doth spring from the mountaines Maromarusians, and, besides many other lesser streames, he receiueth The Ile of Comar. Nitria. Bistricia. Vacchia. Pesthe. Agria. Cassouia. Colocia. Bacchia. Zegedin. Varadin. Debrecin. Chenadin. into him the riuers of Zamosse and Marosse, comming both from beyond Transiluania. In this part of Hungarie are seated towards the North these most noted townes, namely, Poson, Tirnauia, Trincin nigh ye riuer of Vagus, (which glideth towards the Ile of Comar, falling into Danubius) Nitria, Bistricia with certaine others, situate among the mountaines, wherein are the Mines of Siluer and Copper. Besides there is Vacchia Pesthe which is right  ouer against Buda: Agria, Cassouia, and certaine others of the Countie of Sepusa. Towards the South are seated those of Colocia, Bacchia, Zegedin: and, beyond the riuer of Tibiscus, Varadin, Debrecin, the Ladies brooke, with the Mines of gold and siluer: Chenadin, and the Fortresse of Themesuar, Themesuar. Mines of gold, siluer, and tinne. which is a gouernment that possesseth the third place among al those

of the kingdome. Seuerin is in the same preciuct, where one may see at this Seuerine. present, the reliques of a bridge, built by the commaund of the Emperour  Traian, and many other townes, which for the breuitie of this historie The bridge of the Emperour Traian. I will omit. Tibiscus doth mingle it selfe within Danubius, neere to the towne of Titulia, seated on the other side vpon the shore, not farre from Varadin Titulia. Peter. On the other side of these mountaines which wee haue said to extend themselues from the hils Carpathes, vnto Seuerin, is Transiluania, Transiluania. the which in former time did make a part of Dacia, and for this cause it was anciently called Pannodacia, a name compounded of Pannonia and Dacia, Dacia. and at this day it is commonly called by the Hungars, Ortell. The principall towne thereof is Albe-iula, so called of Iulius Caesar, or rather of Hijula, Albe-iula. Prince of the Huns. Besides this towne, there bee others which are rich  and wealthie, namely, Sibinio, Brassouia, Colosuar, Bistricia, and many other, Sibinio. Brassouia. Colosuar. Bistricia. Saxon. Sicilians. founded and built by the Germanes, whom we call Saxons. There doth also inhabite in this Prouince, Sicilians, who are a people austere, stoute, and warlike; they haue not any distinction of Nobilitie, nor of peasants, but they follow the same conditions as the Swissers doe. Transiluania is abounding in all things, principally in Mines of gold and siluer, and other mettals, and of The riches of Transiluania. Salt Mines. It breedeth couragious and excellent horses, and bringeth forth great quantitie of wine, but not so excellent as that of Hungaria, or of Slauonia. It is compassed about with both the Valacchians, Transalpina, and Moldauia.  Valacchia. Transalpina. Moldauia. Transalpina is vpon Danubius, and Moldauia by the Euxin Sea. These two with Transiluania, doe now comprehend this part of Europe, which by ancient writers was called Dacia. Therefore all this great circute, that is beyond Danubius, which containeth not only further Hungarie, but Dacia. also Transiluania, with both the Valacchians, is inclosed of Danubius, of the hils Carpathes, and of the Euxin Sea, but specially of Danubius. And thus much for the generall scituation of Hungarie.
Now wee must a little discourse more particularly of the places, wherein happened all the force and vigour of the warre. Beneath Buda, a long the riuer side (besides other villages) is the towne of Rakos, and neere vnto that, Rakos. Tholne. Batha. Mohacz. is Tholne, which is threescore Hungrish miles from Buda: after that, followeth  Batha, and consequently Mohacz, otherwise called Mugach, scituate vpon the stroude of Danubius. Mohacz towards the right hand regardeth the towne of 5. Churches, which before the losse of Hungary was of great fame; it is foure miles from Danubius, and three from Drauus. Towards Drauus is the towne Soclosia; and beyond Drauus is built the Fortresse of Valpo. Soclosia. Valpo. Beyond Mugach vnto Drauus is counted foure miles, and a little more. On the other side the mouth of Drauus, vpon the shoare, is seated the towne of Ezeck, and in the same quarter, in times past, was to be seene, the Monuments Ezeck. or remembrances of a certaine towne, built in the time when the Romanes enioyed the Pannoniaes, which (it may be) was a Romane Colonie.  These ruines are seene two miles of, from the entring of Drauus into Danubius. At the place where this towne of Ezeck is, the riuer Drauus doth close himselfe narrow, giuing commodity to the Hungars to erect a bridge, where their armie passed ouer, when Belgrade was taken by the Turkes. After the towne of Ezeck, followeth the Castle of Erdunde, belonging to the Prouost Erdunde.

of Thitetie. This place is enuironed with a Forrest, and in respect of the scituation thereof, with a little labour, it may bee made very strong. Beneath  this Castle is Baroth, Walko, Zatha, and next Bachia, which is one of the Baroth. Walko. Zatha. Bachia an Archbishoprick. Wilak. Sirmia a wealthie countrie. Metropolitane townes of Hungary, situate in the plaine, so that it is naturally all the whole circuite of the countrie, which is betweene Tibiscus and Danubius, and for this cause it is very commodious to breede store of cattell. Along Danubius, beneath Zatha, is seene Wilak, with his excellent Fortresse, and there beginneth this fortunate and firtile countrie of Sirmia, not onely abounding in wine, the most commended of all the Northerne parts, but also in all necessarie things for the vse of man: and hath been renowmed by so many Emperours, and from whence is sprong a man who hath greatly adorned the Romane and Apostolike sea. The countries of the same, yeeld  pleasant and delightfull places; the land is fat, and fruitfull, as may bee; the ayre is so temperate, that it is not easily to bee credited: the which falleth out, by reason this Region is but three or foure daies iourney at the most from the Adriatique sea. It had in former time a towne which carried his name, of the which, at this present is seene no more, but the foundatio^ or reliques thereof. When you are past Wilake, you enter into this Prouince, and the first towne you come into is Bannomostra, where is the Bishops Bannomostra. Varadin Peter. seate of Sirmia: and before you arriue at Varadin Peter we finde by the way Kamanche, a towne of good account. This towne of Varadin Peter, with Kamanche. Zalonkemen. the Castle, is subiect to the Church of Colosence, and for the losse of Belgrade,  it was afterward called the place of Belgrade. After Varadin is the towne of Zalonkemen, and certaine others which haue bin ruinated by the late losse happened to Belgrade. On this side the riuer Sauus, is the Castle of Zemlen, and betweene that and the towne of Belgrade, is the mouth of Sauus, Zemlen. Belgrade. which in that place, by reason of the entrance thereof into Danubius, maketh it a large and deepe current, which is enioyed by the towne of Belgrade, so much renowmed for famous battailes, being fought in that place against the Turke, which being once almost surprised by the enemie, Iohn Huniades, then gouernour of Hungarie, father to King Mathias, with his brother Iohn Capistrum, chased out of Hungarie Amurath the Turkish Emperour, Iohn Capistrum.  leauing, by that valorous meanes, an immortall glorie to the name of Hungarie. The Hungars call this Fortresse Nandor-Albe, and some Albegrecque: Nandor-Albe. Albe-grecque. Taurinum. the ancients call it Taurinum, and at this day it is called Griechsuueisneburg. It is placed vpon a steepe Rock, which on that side Hungarie is seene, and at the foote thereof is the towne, hauing on the one side Sauus, and on the other Danubius.
And thus much for the situation of Hungarie, and the places wherein the Hungars haue receiued an incurable and desperate wound. As for the riches of this countrie, to say the trueth, it exceedeth all the Prouinces in Europe. But we will say no more hereof at this time, for that it would require a large  volume: but let vs content our selues with the situation which wee haue alreadie described, to the end the reader of this historie may the better comprehend the discourse following.
And now to come to the subiect of our discourse. The King vnderstanding that certaine troupes of Turkes had alreadie passed Sauus, fearing that

they marched to Drauus, and that (before his comming) they should seaze  vpon the towne of Ezeck, aduised with himselfe to defend that place with a strong garrison. And this charge was giuen to the Counte Palatine, who at that time was remaining in a Castle not farre from Drauus, which belonged to his brother. He willingly receiued this commaundement, although hee was much troubled with the gowte, which a long time had molested him. But those that should haue been put into that place, or sent their people thither, were not so diligent as the necessitie required: in regard whereof Counte Palatine could not execute that which hee desired to performe: whereupon hee went to the King at Buda, who made recitall of the negligence and slouthfulnes of those who had no will to assist and aide him, to  effect the charge which was committed to his custodie. Whereupon it followed that he went not from the Court, but staied there to accompanie the King in his iourney. In this time, and euen at the same instant, the King by letters was aduertised from a certaine person (who had ample and sufficient knowledge of the counsell and affayres of the enemie) that there was no better policie for him, then to cause the Vayuode of Transiluania to march forward with Transalpina (the fidelitie and alleadgance of whom towards the King was most assured) either to assaile the enemie behinde (of which they nothing mistrusted) or else they leauing them, to iourney into Thrace (which was naked of souldiours) whilest the Turkes aduanced themselues against the King. For by this meanes the enemie should either bee ouerthrowne  and defeated, (being inclosed betweene two armies) or else forced to forsake his enterprise, and returne to defend his owne. This counsell at the beginning was suspected for certaine causes, which would be too long to rehearse: but afterward imparted to the Bishop of Strigonium, and approued by him, the Vayuode of Transiluania was commanded by Vrbine Batian (who then was dispatched to go into Moldauia) to aduise vpo^ this what was most expedient and behoofull to be done for the safegard of the kingdome. And if he esteemed the counsell good, he was commanded to turne his forces, and those of Transiluania, with Transalpina also towards that quarter: and this in part was a speciall cause that the Vayuode could not be present at  the day of battaile. During these counsels, the time of the assemblie, and the rende vous appointed to be at Tholne, was already expired: yet neuerthelesse they were not yet in readines, and it seemed that all were not plyable therevnto, but only the King: neither (said they) ought they to come to Tholne, before they vnderstood of the Kings being there.
In the meane while the bruite of the Turkes approaching, and of his passage of Sauus daily increased, in such sort, that in the end certaine newes came, that after, hee passing the riuer, and hauing throwne downe certaine Castles, hee held on his course towards Varadin Peter, and did besiege it both by land and water, though it were a towne of no great force. In the end  the King, although not any were come neither from Bohemia, nor from any other place, and though he had with him but few companies of souldiours, Lewis goeth into the field. yet not willing to be reproued as tardie or negligent concerning this matter of import, he departed from Buda (called at this day Ofen) the 24. of Iuly, Ofen. marching along the shoare of Danubius, comming by little and little to

Tholne, hoping that the other would shortly come to him.
A little before the King went from Buda, Stephen Battor of Somlie was  sent to the Vayuode of Transiluania, by whom hee was commaunded, that leauing the first assignements, he should haste himselfe towards his Maiestie with all his Transiluanian forces, seeing the sudden ariuall of the enemie did require it.
When the King departed from Buda he had but 3000. men as well foote as horse, counting those that did belong to Queene Marie, and the Archbishop of Strigonium. The first day that they departed from Buda, they made their nights rest at the village of Ambroise Sarkan, named Erd, distant from Buda two miles. In that place the Kings best horse, and that which he loued most, suddenly dyed, whereupon he was much disquieted, and many diuined  it to presage euill hap. The King hauing made his aboade there certaine daies, and no aide comming to him, proceeded on, with those small troupes which he had, to the next village named Erchij. There hauing spent many daies, without effecting any good, in the meane time there arriued Andrew Battor, one of the principall of that kingdome, with a good number of souldiours, and they marched along Danubius vnto Pantelee (which is a place, as we haue said, of Ezeck) where is to be seene the remaindes of an auncient Romane Colonie. There George Basi (comming from the Vayuode of Transiluania) found the King, who imparted vnto his Maiestie that the Vayuode was in great care what he should doe, in respect of the diuersitie of messages  which hee had sent him, hauing first receiued letters from his Maiestie, and afterwards by many Curreers, and namely by Iaspar Horuuath of Wimgard, one of his chiefe gentlemen, by which he was commaunded to come to the King; and that afterwards there arriued Vrbain Batian, who brought him certaine specialties, that according to the former, he might assaile the enemie behinde with the Transalpinians: after him there arriued Stephen Battor of Somlie, who brought him the same and first commaund, but did not make it openly knowne to him, that the King did meane, that the aduertisements sent by Batian should come to effect; and for that occasion he was vncertaine what to doe in so many alterations, not knowing which to follow, being neuerthelesse  readie and willing to doe what his Maiestie would commaund him. And that neuerthelesse he found not any thing of more importance, then with all speede to come to the King, that it was now too late to assaile the Turkes behinde: and in as much as that enterprise was daungerous, so was it also more hard now to execute it, then at the first, for that the Transalpinian (with whom he was commaunded to ioyne himselfe) was alreadie forced to send his only sonne in hostage to the Turkes Campe. The King vnderstanding the charge of George Basi, dislodged, and arriued the same morning at the towne of Felduar, situated by Danubius: and there conferred with his Councell of that which Basi had reported to him. At the same  instant he also commanded Basi to iourney day and night with as great diligence as he could to the Vayuode, and to tell him that the King allowed wel of his counsell, and that it was sound and good, considering that the enemie had alreadie entered into the kingdome, and marched towards him: and that therefore he leauing all other determinations, he should as well with all

all the Transiluanians, as those which he met in the way comming towards  him, make haste, and with all expedition come to the Campe, bringing with him not onely the Nobilitie and priuate souldiours, but also euen the peasants themselues.
To this effect letters were dispatched vnto the Transiluanians, to Iohn Gozthan, Chauncellor to the Queene, and Bishop of that Prouince, and to the Vayuode, by the perswasion of George, who desired the same, according to the aduice that he had receiued of the King his master. These letters were of purpose framed sharpe and seuere, and sent, to the end that the Vayuode should shew them to all, whereby to excite and animate euery one. He was specially commanded by them, vpon paine of disloialtie and treason, that he  should day and night march to the King. To incourage euery one the more, there was sent with George Basi, Iohn Statile, a man of readie and quicke wit, and well seene in learning. He was, by meanes of their sister, nephew to Peter Berizlas Bishop of Vesprimie, and to Martin Ban, a man greatly esteemed both in the affayres of peace and warre.
These messengers were not yet departed, when euen then euill tidings Varadin Poter taken by the Turkes. came of the taking of Varadin Peter, which the Hungars otherwise call Petrouar, after it had been valiantly defended for many daies, and all those who were within it, for the defence thereof, were cruelly put to the sword; the Castle being old and decayed, was the more ruinated by the force of the Cannon; and further, that the enemies did aduance themselues by water  and land against other neighbour places, and were determined, amongst others, to besiege the Castle of Wylatz. The King greatly perplexed at these newes, gaue expresse commandement to those who were to goe to the Vayuode, that they should poste in the greatest haste they could. Letters were also sent to all places; Curriers were dispatched towards George Counte of Sepusa, who was said not to be farre from Alberegalis with 5000. men. Also vnto Francis Bathian Ban of Croatia. Vnto Counte Christopher, who was thought to be departed from Ferdinand, and to bee alreadie in Croatia with his father, vnto whom hee was first of all retired, with an intent to haue drawne from thence armour, horses, and souldiours, that so he might with  better abilitie present himselfe in brauer equipage before the King. Ladislas the Macedonian, was commanded to go with speed towards the Queene, who then was at Buda. She was willed to importune her brother Ferdinand, and in his absence the gouernours of Austria, to the end that it would please him presently to send him aide, and especially Artillerie, for which hee had been before required, and whereof the Hungars stood greatly in neede, and the Turkes to the contrarie were plentifully furnished. Moreouer, she was intreated to hasten the Bohemians with their troupes, for the leauying of whom the Queene had disbursed of her owne charges great summes of money to Mezericie. Thomas Nadasdy was written vnto, that he should solicite  Ferdinand, vnto whom he was sent, and to declare to him the double linage and affinitie which was betweene them two, and the common perill like to happen; in consideration whereof, he importuned that he would not leaue his master in such and so great necessitie, giuing him sufficient notice of the danger of his person, of the kingdome, and the losse of Varadin Peter.

In the meane while Paul Tomoree (who before the taking of Varadin, hauing with him 3000. men, left within the Castle of that towne 1000. footmen,  and certaine horse, who were (as wee haue said) all put to the sword) esteeming it now a great rashnes, if he should aduenture to oppose and affront himselfe with 2000. horse against so great a multitude, he passed to the other side of Danubius, and there, as much as was possible for him, he withstood the enemie both by land and water: for he had vpon Danubius certaine numbers of sea souldiours in vessels, which are called Nazadies; but they were nothing to bee compared to the infinite multitude of the enemies.
The King, after he had vnderstoode of the losse of Varadin Peter, marched  along Danubius, to that place which before we haue named Rakos, where he remained two dayes, and vpon the transfiguration of our Lord, he arriued at Tholne, hauing now a little encreased his armie, so that then he could make 4000. horse, or somewhat more. As his Maiestie was neere to Tholne, Counte Palatine, with those few men which were alreadie come and arriued with the first at that towne, went before. During the Kings abode there, from all the Prouinces (which are called Counties) Prouinces called Counties. in Hungarie, as well on this side Danubius, as on the other, repaired great store of Souldiours to this towne. Counte George of Sepusa was also there with 300. horse good and bad, and 1200. foote, or there abouts. Thither Succours from the Pope. also came Hanibal Carthaginois of Cyprus, with 1300. Souldiours, leauied  at the Pope charges, besides other companies that were there payed by his Holines. They altogether made 4000. men well appointed. Of that number there was 1500. Polanders or Pollacques, who in all that, for which Pollanders came to the succour. they are helde commendable people, surpasse all the rest, they were vnder the conduct of Leonard Gnomsky, who was sayd to be a man very expert and ingenious to lodge and seate a Campe, for which experience he was chosen and allowed. At the same instant came to that towne Paul Vardagy Bishop of Agria: Francis Peren Bishop of Varadin, and many other, as well Bishops as Seculars. During their abode, almost euery day they sate in  Councell, to whom were assisting the most renowned persons then in the Campe. In this said assemblie, the affayres of the Realme were consulted vpon, namely, of the aduauncing and marching of the Armie, of the custodie and defence of the passage of Drauus, seeing it was now no question of that of Sauus, and also by reason of the losse of Varadin Peter, and for that at the same time, it was sayd the Turkes marched to Ezek, hauing alreadie vnder his gouernment the Fortresse of Wylak, and ruinated all the other Wylak taken by the Turks. Castles which were along Danubius. The sayd Counte Palatine was then presently dispatched to seize vpon the passage of Drauus, before the enemie approaced. Many of the principall men were commaunded to follow  The priueledges of the Barons of Hungarie. with their troupes; but many notwithstanding repugned the Kings commaunde, vnder the colour of their priueledges and custome of the Barons, which is, not to goe to the warre, but vnder the Royall ensigne: in regarde whereof this enterprise was omitted, although that the Palatine, notwithstanding his griefe, did endeauour himselfe, and gaue sufficient demonstration, not to refuse any trauaile or labour. He being on his iourney to goe

before to Mugach or Mohacz, and not being followed by any of those,  who were commaunded to accompanie him, alleadging their priueledges, as we haue sayd: the King euen in open Councell, where the affayres were treated of, being moued by their vndutifull allegeance, sayd; I see, quoth he, (being willing to put his words in writing) that euery one would assure his owne head, by the danger of mine. But as for my part, I am marched, as you see, euen vnto this place, and doe willingly thrust my selfe into this danger, and to expose my person against all hazards of fortune, for the safetie of you and the kingdome. For feare then least any should excuse his owne cowardlines vpon the safetie of my life, and that nothing should be imputed to my proceedings in time to come, I will (by Gods grace) march to morrow with you in person, into that place which you would not  goe vnto without me.
These vehement words being spoken, and this suddaine resolution being apprehended by the applauding of many, but with the admiration of all those present; proclamation was presently made of his departure the next day. Certaine of the wiser and grauer heads, who were not ignorant of the great inconuenience which might happen of this vnconsiderate voyage, importuned to disswade the contrarie, but it was in vaine. The Armie being then dislodged from Tholne, vpon the euen of the assumption of our Ladie, they arriued at the towne of Zeckzard, and the day following at Batha. Vpon this bruite and certaine knowledge which was had of the Turkish  Armie, which daily approached, commaund was giuen to gather the Hungars together (who were dispersed in the Villages) and to repaire all to Batha. George Pauline Bishop of Boznia, a man of good and commendable life, and well seene in the ciuill Law, was sent vnto Paul Tomoree to aduertise him of what he knew, and that he should finde the King in that place.
They being all arriued in this towne, and the time requiring to make election of some one to commaunde the Armie (which was deferred vntill that day, not without great ill hap of ouersight:) the King hauing heard the particular aduise of euery one, and seeing the greatest part esteemed the Paul Tomoree a graie Fryer chiefe commaunder of the Armie.  Frier to be sufficient for this charge, proclaymed him chiefe commaunder of the Armie, ioyning with him for his colleague, Counte George of Sepusa, brother to the Vayuode. Yet all of them notwithstanding approued not this election, and chiefly they disliked that election which was made of the Fryer: neuerthelesse all willingly obeyed these Chiefetaines commaund.
Tomoree knowing the pleasure of the King to be such, for his owne parte refused of a long time this charge, sometime alleadging his profession and ignorance, then the corporall imbecilitie which was in him, not being able to endure so great trauaile; saying further, that the King had excellent secular Lords, to whom this charge did better appertaine. He named the  Counte Palatine there present, and the Vayuode absent, both well experienced in the conduct of Armies, and that they were the most practised and experienced in all Hungarie, to employ their commaund in such actions. He also named Counte George, and Peren, who although they were young, yet neuerthelesse had no defect of vnderstanding, and men who were more

worthie to manage and conduct this armie then he. Further, he declared  the disabilitie which was in himselfe, to performe the due of such a charge, hauing neuer seene the manner of such warre, as now presented it selfe vnto his Maiestie: and in the end he concluded he was not able, neither would he vse that authoritie, although the King commaunded it, no, if his Maiestie would cut off his head.
Hauing thus as well in publike, as in priuate, vsed these or the like speeches, with like protestations in vaine: the King notwithstanding proclaymed him Lieutenant of the Armie, giuing him (as we haue sayd) Counte George, brother of the Vayuode, for his companion and colleague. He also would not haue accepted of this charge, and instantly desired that his Maiestie  would not doe him that honour. But in the end he submitted himselfe to doe therein his endeauour, with this condition, that he might haue no other companion but his brother Paul (for so he called him) and that so soone as his owne brother the Vayuode should arriue, it should be permitted him to be dismissed of his charge. This was easily graunted him, for that alreadie it was determined at the beginning to make the Vayuode, with Paul Tomoree and Counte Christopher, commaunders of the Armie.
After the election of these Chieftaines, they went together to take councell, concerning a place conuenient and commodious to incampe themselues neere the towne of Mohacz. This towne apperteyned to the Bishopricke  of fiue Churches, and is scituated vpon the side of Danubius, betweene The discription of Mohacz and the place of the battaile. Batha and the mouth of Drauus. A little aboue Batha, Danubius doth begin to open, and make two currants, of which the largest streame runneth a long the further Hungrie, and passeth with a gentle calme source, stretching it selfe in those great and large plaines. The other part watereth the townes of Batha and Mohacz. These two armes of one riuer, ioyning together againe in one, and shutting vp beneath Mohacz, make an Iland. This borrowgh or towne of Mohacz, is sufficiently knowen: it is enuironed on all sides with a great plaine, which is not any thing couered either with woods or hills. Towards the West, it looketh to the towne of fiue Churches, a towne of good fame  before the losse thereof. On the North side there is the towne of Batha; and towards the Leauant, it is bathed with that arme of Danubius, which we haue sayd to be the lesse of the two. Towards the South, it doth behold the waters of Drauus, which is foure miles from it. Betweene that and this towne, are certaine little hilles, planted with Vines and Marishes there abouts. In this compasse there is not farre from the towne a water, which seemed rather to be a Marish, then a water or riuer that did runne: and the inhabitants doe call it Krasso. Beneath that stange, Tomoree was incamped with fiue or 6000. horse, who were part of those which at the first were gathered together, and part of others, who with Peter Peren, and other Captaines,  he caused to come from beyond Danubius by the Kings commaund, to ioyne together with the bodie of the Armie.
The place then being chosen commodious, to lodge the Armie by Mohacz, and the same being directed and appointed by Leonard Gnomsky, and the quarters thereof for euery companie: Tomoree went with Peter Peren to his Souldiours, who were yet incamped beyond the Marishes (as hath been

said) to leade them, if they could, to the Kings Campe. They being now arriued  at that place, and giuing notice to the Captaines, that it was the Kings pleasure, and his also, to commaund them to retire, and ioyne themselues to the bodie of the armie, wherein the King was in person. Hereupon the souldiours began to murmure, and be angrie, saying, that they would make them abandon the enemie, against whom it was more needfull to march, and with whom it was expedient forthwith to ioyne their hands, if they would shew themselues men: and in doing the contrarie, it were an imagination of flying, and not to fight: that those Princes who counselled his Maiestie to such effeminate things, were giuen much to slouth: that the King (said they) should come presently and affront the enemie with them: the victorie is  within our hands: we sufficiently know that they are infinite in number, and that they haue as many Cannons with them as is possible, but they are without armour, and not any thing exercised to the warre: there is not the tenth, no not the twentith of them, which hath a weapon wherewith to offend or harme vs: they further alleadged, that they were assured that those braue and valiant souldiours, which the Turke had, were all dead and slaine at the siege of Belgrade, and after that at Rhodes: that the valiant and couragious Commaunders of the armie should doe (said they) with their companions, that which beseemed wise and vertuous Captaines, and we assure our selues that all things shall frame to our desires: that he would bring the King, and  withdraw him, and all the other hardy combattants out of the throng of those idle Priests, and others who refuseth the fight, who go about by their fashions and counsels, which is cowardly and effeminate, to corrupt and discourage our King, who is indued with corporall beautie, and marueilous courage, and by this their idle meanes, of a fayre and well accomplished yong Prince, they should make him answerable vnto themselues.
Whilest these souldiours did thus vaunt themselues, all the armie was lodged almost intirely together, euery man in his quarter. The King did not yet depart from the towne of Ville-neufue of the Macedonians, which is betweene Batha and Mohacz, hauing with him but a small troupe, being there in great danger, if the enemie, who was not farre of, might haue discouered  him. But fortune reserued the death of the King vntill some other time, wherein he should dye more gloriously for the good of his countrie. In the meane while, in the night whe^ the King was asleep, there arriued at the same time Michael Podnamisky, co^ming from the Campe, and sent on the behalfe of the Commanders, who came to giue aduertisement, that the Turk had alreadie passed the riuer of Drauus, with the greatest part of his armie, and that the rest followed with all expedition; that the fight could not be deferred; that all the Captaines vrgently importuned his Maiestie to come with all diligence to the Campe, and aduise with them concerning the battaile. 
The King vnderstanding this newes by Podnamisky, called to councell that small companie that was with him, acquainting them with this busines, demaunding of them what was to be done in so doubtfull and vrgent a matter. His Maiestie then did call to minde the counsell and opinion which the Vayuode and Counte Christopher had sent him, by those who were dispatched towards them, who certaine daies before were returned, by which aduertisement

from them both, they greatly blamed the counsell of those who had brought the King into that place so neere the enemy, before it was time,  and that it had been better for him to remaine at Buda, or to encampe himselfe further fro^ the enemie, vntill all the forces of the kingdome were vnited together. They had also, by the same messengers, exhorted the King not to fight with the enemie, at least not before their comming. The Vayuode particularly sent him word by Iohn Statile, that hee would bring with him from Transiluania great troupes of souldiours, who for force and number should be so secure, that the King, vpon their fidelitie and valour, might haue a speciall hope of victorie. This came into the Kings minde, and he well considered of this counsell; and of the other part he well weighed that which the Chiefes of the armie did importune him, to whom if he condiscended not,  the enemie being so nigh, and his souldiours hauing so great a desire to fight, he well saw that the blame and euill of all that might happen, would bee imputed to him, and that he should bee found culpable in omitting so good an occasion. His minde being disturbed with these difficulties, he determined (before hee resolued of any thing) to proue his Leaders and Chieftaines of the armie, if they thought it good to attend the Vayuode of Transiluania, and Counte Christopher, and that if in the meane time the enemie approached neerer, or pressed, them, whither they should remoue the Campe into some other place of better safetie. For this cause he sent to the Campe (euen at the same instant that Podnamisky was come) the Chauncellor (who was  then with the King) to perswade the principall of the armie, yea the Commanders themselues, namely, the Archbishop of Strigonium, and Counte Palatine (vpon whose opinion all the others depended) that they should find out some good meane to retire and deferre the fight. He was commaunded further to let them vnderstand, all which was reported to the King, concerning the Vayuode and Counte Christopher, and to explaine vnto them how cleere and apparant the ruine of the kingdome was, if the King, with so many Princes, and the flower of all the Nobilitie of the realme, should expose themselues to so eminent a daunger. For if it happened (which we ought to be mindfull of, considering the multitude of souldiours, and the great preparation  for warre of the enemies, in comparison of the small number of his Maiesties forces which he now hath) that the King should bee ouercome, who should afterwards hold backe or hinder the enemie, but that with little difficultie he might enioy all Hungarie? He declared vnto them, that it was most expedient the Campe should bee remoued into some other place of better securitie, or to retire backe a little, if the enemie should inforce them thereto, vntill the Vayuode with the Transiluanians, the Ban with the Slauonians, Counte Christopher with the Croatians, Bohemians, Morauians, Slesians, and other succours should come: that Hungarie should  receiue lesse losse, though the enemies should ouerharrie from Mohacz vnto Poson, putting all whatsoeuer they did incounter to fire and sword, then that such an armie should miscarrie and bee ouerthrowne by one battaile, in which the King himselfe, and so many great Princes, and chiefe persons of the realme should be. For they being slaine, what hope of reenforcing new succours, could rest to the kingdome? But the King, with

so many Lords, and such braue souldiours remaining safe, and preseruing all  things in good estate, they may finde singular content and securitie vnder the gouernment of such a King, who both for his parentage and alliance, is respected throughout all Christendome.
The Chauncellor hauing the same night made this speech, first of all to the chiefest, visiting and talking with them apart, and after in generall to all the Councell: his reasons neuerthelesse were of so small efficacie, as if he had said nothing to them: such was the haughtie courage of euery one, being eager to fight vnder a vaine hope of victorie, being notwithstanding otherwise by a certaine feare withheld, which did hinder them from disswading the fight, although the contrarie was so earnestly desired by the souldiours. 
The King then came by breake of day to his Campe, and for that the vessels which did bring by water his Maiesties Tents and Pauilions, were not yet come from Buda, he retired himself for the present into a Bishops house, which was adioyning to the towne, there to proue that, which as yet he vnderstood not by the Chauncellor. They commaunded the Councellors of all estates and nations, to assemble before the King, which failed not presently to visit him with many expert Captaines and hardie souldiours, among whom were certaine Bohemians and Morauians, who were alreadie arriued there. In this assemblie it was propounded to the Councellors and souldiours what was needfull to be done, not any being yet come from  Transiluania, Slauonia, Croatia, Bohemia, nor Germanie, whereof the greater part were presently to arriue, as was assuredly expected: yet notwithstanding the enemie was very nigh, being no more then two miles from the Kings Campe, who vpon this occasion, as it was thought, could not, nor would not, deferre the battaile vntill another time. Vpon this, their opinion was asked which of these two seemed most expedient, either to remoue the Campe elsewhere, and for the present to delay the fight, attending those which daily were expected; or else to make triall of fortune in giuing the enemie battaile. At this councell was present Paul Tomoree, who Paul Tomoree aduiseth to fight. the night before, was commaunded to come from the other Campe for the  same purpose. Hee thought it not amisse to fight. The King marueiling vpon what hope he had such courage, would willingly haue disswaded him from such a purpose, and demanded of him, in the presence of all the Councell, of what strength his forces were, and the strength of the enemie. For there was no doubt but that he very well knew it, yea better then any other, by meanes of his discouerers and spials, which alwaies he sent and had in the enemies Campe, and by reason also of many enemies which daily resorted to him. Tomoree answered; touching the first point, in his iudgement, he thought that there were no more but 20000. fighting men, as well in the Kings Campe, as in his (those two being diuided, as wee haue sayd):  but that for certaine he knew the enemie was 300000. The standers by being greatly astonished to heare their number so small, in respect of the great multitude of the enemies: Tomoree presently adioyned vnto his former speeches, that for al their multitude they were not to feare the^, in regard that their great number was for the most part without armour, and not any thing

acquainted with the warre. The King further demaunded, how many he thought the enemies were, armed, and in state to fight. Tomoree answered,  that they were 70000. This number seemed yet to all, ouer great, in respect of the Kings armie, euery one affirming, that Tomoree said, the Turkes had 300. great Cannons.
In the meane time whilest that these affaires were considered of, as well by the cousell and instigation of the Fryer, as by the desire, and courage of all the souldiours, greatly importuning to fight (except such, whowere, I know not how, possest by a foolish feare, that durst not proffer themselues, nor openly declare their opinions:) there came at that time certaine messengers from the other Campe, who being admitted before the Councell, sayd, that  they were charged to impart some matter in the behalfe of those of the other Campe, as well to the King, as to the Councell, and then being in place apart, acquainted the King with the effect of their message, and after went in againe with the King to the Councell, who in the name of all the rest which had sent them, aduertised them not to disswade the King from fight: that they were well assured of the enemies force, although they were of farre greater number: that the victorie was alreadie in their hands, so that they would presently ayde them with that good fortune, which God did present vnto them. Besides, they encouraged all the Lords who were of the Councell, to march forward with the King, and ioyne his Campe  to theirs, which was neerer the enemie, and lodged in a place more commodious to assaile them. In the end, insteed of gentle perswations, they vsed threatning tearmes against those, who disswaded the King to the contrarie, denouncing to them death, and assuring them, that if they would not presently ioyne the Kings Campe with theirs, they would without delay march against them, and force the enemies to acquite themselues from thence.
Vpon such speeches so vehemently vrged in the Counell, the Kings presence, and of all the other Lords; there being also those among them, who were of a founder and deeper iudgement, for the good of the common  weale, and yet being greatly terrified by such vnciuill threatning: they concluded to giue them battaile, without expecting that the Vayuode, Counte Christopher, or the Bohemians, could in time arriue at the day of battaile. Francis Bathian, Ban of Croatia, (who was at that time not farre from the fiue Churches with his troupes of Slauonians) gaue some hope to be at the Campe within two daies, as it afterward fell out. There were some among them (after all things being determined, and the Councell risen) that did greatly blame the resolution, which was determined, so suddainely to fight. Francis Peren Bishop of Varadin was one of them, a man young, quicke, and of a braue spirite, who wrote and indited his letters so excellently  well, that not any Hungar whosoeuer, did surpasse him in that art, except it were Thomas Zalahazy Bishop of Vesprimia. But yet he had been farre more commended, if he had as well imployed his wit to vertue, as he otherwaies spent his time in slourh, and other friuolous matters, in the which young men of good parentage, doe too often take pleasure in, to their owne ruine, and ouerthrow of their Countrie. He then, as it were,

diuining of that which presently happened; said to the King, and not without great admiration of all the standers by: that that day which was appointed  Spoken merily and earnestly. to fight (sith their resolution was such) should be dedicated vnto 20000. Hungarian Martyrs (the number of the Armie being no more) slaine for the religion of Iesus Christ, vnder the conduct of Paul Tomoree, and that they should send the Chauncelor to Rome, to haue them canonised (as men say) if so be he then escaped the battaile, for that he was well knowne to the Pope, and Cardinals, by reason of an ambassage which he had been vsed in, to his Holines.
I would to God that this Bishop had been a false Prophet. There may Reason perswading vnto fight. be some that would accuse the Hungarians of ouer much temeritie, for that they so feruently desired the Battaile, and they say this hardnes ought rather  to be named rashnes and foolishnes, then by the name of vertue. And surely I see not, but that they haue reason to maintaine at this present, such their sayings. But yet they may be ignorant of many things which incited the Hungers thereunto, whereby they might easily haue drawne vnto such a resolution, yea euen the wisest and greatest Captaines among them: and amongst other things this marueilous and incredible ardencie (as fatall to all souldiours) and the hope of victorie, which euery one in his own conceite, thought himselfe certaine and sure of. Besides it was thought, that Tomoree, had some secret notice, and speciall practises with many of the Turkish armie, namely with those who were Christians, or with such as were borne of Christian parents,  and also with those who had the conduct and gouernment of the artillerie, part of whom were Almaignes, and part Italians. It was also further considered, that the retraict (the enemie being so nigh) could not be done, without putting themselues in great daunger, specially the Turke hauing such nimble and swift horse to charge vpon the backe of those who should be in the rerewarde, in which kinde of fight they are more strong and fierce, then in an incountering charge. The battaile then being thus determined and appointed, order was giuen for all things necessarie thereunto. First of all Tomoree went to his Campe, which, as we haue said, was not farre from thence, and with much a doe perswaded his men to retyre a little backe, and  that he would ioyne with the armie of the Kings. The day following, their Campe was ioyned with the bodie of the armie, halfe a mile beneath Mohacz, neuerthelesse there was some little space betweene the one and the other. At the same instant came from Buda the Vessels fraughted with Cannon, powder, and other munition for the warre. With those also were sent downe nine peeces of Artillerie, which came from Vienna. A little after came also 200. souldiours of Alexis Turzon with certaine Cannons: himselfe with the Bishop of Vesprimia were remayning at Buda with the Queene. These two were appoynted for the guarde and securitie of her Maiestie, and did serue her at the retraict and flight, which afterward she was constrayned  to take, and continued a long time in her seruice. The Ban of Croatia arriued the Sonday before the Battaile with three gallant troupes. There was of them 3000. horse, and not so many of foote. He was accompanied with Iohn Tahy, Iohn Banfy, and certaine other of the principall Lords of the kingdome of Slauonia. The day following, there came also in the morning to the

Campe (the King being there and ranged his men in Battaile, for that it was thought the same day the enemie would fight) Simon Erdeund Bishop of  Zagrabia, with his brother Peter Erdeund, bringing with them in good order and well armed, more then 700. horse. At the same time came thither Stephen Azel with 300. horse, which Iohn Bornemisse had sent to the ayde of the King, with many thousands of crownes, which was the last present, made by the father to his nursling. About the euening of the same day Iohn Zerechen came with 2000. foote, which he had gathered along the riuer Drauus, aswell in his owne territories, as in the Chapter of the Church of the fiue Churches, they being reported to be very good archers. During these three daies, many other came to the Campe, especially those who were nigh, among whom  was Philip More Bishop of the fiue Churches, and his brother Vladislas More. The forces of Lewis and of Solyman. This Armie being thus assembled together to the number of 24. or 25000. men, not counting the companies which were on the water, who serued not at the day of Battaile, the enemie being with his puissant Armie of 300000. men, no further from them then two miles: three dayes were expyred before the Battaile was begun, during which time, daylie skirmishes, and fine stratagems interchangeably past betweene them, wherein still the Turks receiued more damage then the Hungars. In the time of their aboade, it was also consulted how and in what place they should fight with the enemie, and in what sort they should ordaine and range the Battaile, and in what place thereof they should appoint the King to be: where and how they should  range the Caualarie and Infantrie, and where they should plant the artillerie, whereof the Hungars had but 24. pieces, which were little to be compared to those of the enemies. Before, they determined and aduised, for the safegard The meanes to preserue the Kings person in the Battaile. of his Maiestie, some were of opinion, that it was conuenient for him to be a good distance from the Battaile, with some thousands of his best troupes, but seeing the Armie could not spare them, and for that the souldiours would haue him present therein, (following their auncient custome) it was aduised that some one should represent his person in his coate-armour: but presently they thought that the same could not be done without being discouered, and without great tumult of the Armie; the which by this deede would be  greatly discouraged. But in the ende it was concluded, that seeing the fight did seeme doubtfull, some purposely appointed should haue the charge to preserue the King, if euill did betide, and that then they should conduct him out of the throng, as soone as they saw the Battalions so broken that there could be noe more hope to reassure and encourage them, being so terrified. This charge was committed to Iasper Raskay, to Valentine Toronke, and to Iohn Kalay, most excellent men, and doubtlesse very faithfull to the King. There was also appointed certaine swift and light horses, by meanes of which the King might escape, if neede required. 
But now to come to the order of the battaile: there were many, and amongst The order of the Bataile. others, Leonard Gnomsky was of opinion, that it should be very needfull to inskonse the armie with the wagons (whereof the Campe was sufficiently furnished) like the fight at Barriers and vpon a Bulwarke, alleadging, that by that meanes they should frustrate and annoy the enemie from their hemming them in, which was the onely and materiall thing they most feared.

Radich Bosich did well allow of this deuise, as also Paul Bacchie, who was  said to haue been in three seuerall battailes giuen by Soliman against his enemies. This counsell then was accepted of, and thought good by all; the execution whereof was committed to Gnomsky, and certaine other, but it was effected more slowly then was needfull, for it was but thought vpon the night before the battaile: and so this policie, among many other, was quite neglected. The 29. of August (which is dedicated to the beheadding of S. Iohn) being the day of battaile, the armie of the Hungars was ranged and lead by those (which wee haue spoken of) in such sort, that they aduanced the front of their armie as farre as was possible, to the end, they might bee the lesse inclosed by the enemie, and after they diuided it into two battalions. In the first, the Commanders thereof had no certaine place of aboade, but thought  it more needful to be vigilant ouer those places, wherin their presence might strengthen and incourage their souldiours. On the right wing of it, was the Ban of Croatia, with Iohn Tahy; and the left wing was gouerned by Peter Peren, in the absence of the Vayuode of Transiluania. In the first battalion there was many of the principallest of the armie, and among them there was Anthony Poloczy, Francis Hommonay, Gabriel Peren, Thomas Zechy, Andrew Battor, Emeric Cibak, and many others. The artillerie was planted next after the first rankes.
The second Battalion, which we commonly name the maine battaile, and in which was placed the King, was more furnished with horsemen then  footmen, who for the small number they had, were placed in the flankes of the horsemen. Betweene this Battalion and the other (which we will name the Vauntgard) there was no more distance then one might throw a stone. In the battaile before the rankes (wherein the King was) there was three other rankes, who all of them, for the most part, were gentlemen of the Kings chamber, and many Barons of the countrie, who were vnder the charge of Nicholas Tharczay, a man of good courage, and very faithfull to his Prince. There were also the two Controlers of the Kings house, Peter Korlatkey, and Andrew Trepka, Polanders. Stephen Slijk, a Bohemian, was with the Bohemians and Morauians hard by the Kings person, and before him. After the  three rankes followed that of the Kings, in the midst of which was his Maiestie.

Of spirit, beautie, and vertue all one
With that which is celestiall,
Bearing a minde to his countries boone,
But Destinies made deniall.

Vpon the right hand of the King was the Archbishop of Strigonium, and the Bishop of Zagrabia; and the Bishop of Agria was sent from Batha to Buda. Next vnto him of Zagrabia, were the Bishops of Varadine, the fiue Churches, and of Sirmia. Those of Iauarin and Vacchia, were vpon the left  hand. Behinde the Chauncellor were placed the Bishops of Nitria, and Bosnia, and the Prouost of Albe; after whom were the Secretaries, and the Groomes of the chamber. On the left side of the King, and neere vnto his person, there was a place voyde for the Counte Palatine, who although he had the gowte, and not without great paine could sit vpon his horse, yet notwithstanding

he did valiantly his dutie, sometimes being in the Vauntgard, and by and by in the battaile. Whilest the Palatine continued not in his  place, there were certaine Barons kept themselues about the King, and those two Bishops which we haue before named; behind the King were Czetricz, Malliart, and Horuuath, Master of his horse. All these Lords had behind them the best and most resolute men they could chuse for their gard and defence. In the midst of this battaile was seene the Ensigne royall, which was borne by Iohn Dragfy, Marshall of the Kings house, which among the Seculars is the third dignitie next to the King. This battaile was enuironed with light horse, and certaine footmen vpon the flankes. Vpon the right wing, after the Bishops and Secretaries, were ranged these three rankes, in which (as we haue set downe) was placed the Kings person. The place wherein this armie was  thus seated and ranged in battaile, was distant from Mohacz one mile, and The place of the battaile. from Danubius halfe a mile, hauing neere vnto it a long and large plaine, which was not any thing annoyed with wood, bushes, hils, or water; but only vpon the left hand towards Danubius, there was a muddie marish, and ouergrowne with rushes, within the which afterward many men lost their liues. Before the armie, a farre off, was a little hill, which was of great length, and in forme of a Theater, behinde the which Soliman was incamped. At the foote of this hill there was a little village with a Church, it was named Feulduuar, and in that village was planted the artillerie of the enemie, with many souldiours, specially of Ianisaries, who on this side the houses of the  village, tooke vp a large place of ground, by reason of their long and thicke troupes: among those was Soliman, as after was knowne. This artillerie being thus planted, was as in a valley, and for that cause was lesse offensiue to the Hungars, then if it had been vpon the plaine, in so much that the feare thereof was more offensiue, then the hurt. The armie being thus ranged in good order, in the morning presently after the Sunne was vp, the day being cleere and calme, Counte Palatine lead the King out of his place, and did Counte Palatine sheweth the person of the King, to encourage the Hungars. shew him to all the souldiours, riding along the rankes of the armie, as he had done the same three daies before, to the end, to frustrate the distrust which some had, that his Maiestie was not present in the battaile, openly shewing  him to all with his hand, and publishing aloude, that the King was resolute, and readie to endure all extremities, and euen death it selfe, for his countries weale, for the vnspotted religion of Iesus Christ, and for their wiues and children: declaring to them, on his part, that they must shew themselues men, and bee mindfull that they were Hungars: and to be such, who oftentimes, as hardie and valiant defenders of the Christian publike weale, had heretofore brought away so many and so excellent Trophees, from such and the like enemies, as these were, who they saw before their eyes: that they should not be astonished at the multitude of their enemies, for that the victorie  consisted not in the pluralitie, but in the dexteritie and courge of the souldiours: that God on high would assist them, they fighting for his holy religion; that the safetie, not onely of their owne countrie (which the Turks would vsurpe and tyrannize) but also of all Christendome, was now in their vnconquerable hands.
After that the King and Counte Palatine had thus reuisited all the rankes

of his men of armes and footmen, and vsed to all of them the like orations, the King retired to his former place. A great part of the day was spent in attending  the enemie, who hauing onely sent a small troupe of his people to skirmish, he himselfe kept behinde the hils, imagining (as it appeared) either 1 to draw the Hungars within the straights of these hils; or faining to deferre 2 the fight vntill the next day; he might in the meane time assaile them, and in the night following (they being vnprouided) to set vpon them in their Campe, which he might easily doe, as well for the infinit number of his people, as also for the great store of Cannon which he had: or else that he might 3 rather molest them by a protracting fight. They knew not which of these three deuises the enemie would execute, but all the day the Hungars were in  great doubt of the Turkes resolution, vntill, towards euening, they perceiued the troupes of the enemie to approach by a valley, which was on the right hand vnder those hils, being onely discouered by the tops of their launces.
The Frier thinking that they which now came in sight were of the Vauntgard, to force and breake his Campe, or to enuiron his people, commaunded Iasper Raskay, with two others, who were appointed for the gard of the Kings person (as is said before) to discouer what the enemie would attempt, and force them take some other way. Iasper knowing what charge was committed to him, to haue a speciall eye and care of the Kings person, most honestly refused (as much as he could) that commission: but in the end perceiuing  the Frier did greatly presse him thereto, and that the King did not contradict his commaund, disdaining least the refusing he made vpon so good and iust a cause, should be imputed to him as fearfull and cowardly, suddenly he set spurres to his horse, and with his two companions, being followed of all the companies of souldiours which he commaunded, aduanced themselues, with this hope neuerthelesse (wherof they held themselues assured) that they should be able to returne in time, before the King should haue need of them. They being set forward, although they were vncertaine whether the enemie would giue battaile that day or no, for it was alreadie three houres past noone: besides, there were certaine of the principall of the armie, who being  tired with so long an expectation of fight, were of opinion to sound a retraict, and retire themselues to the Campe. The Frier hearing this sudden Paul doth importune the fight. motion, came with his companion towards the King, and did aduise him in any case not to delay the fight, alleadging, that there was lesse daunger to fight now with part of the enemies armie, then to stay vntill the next day, at which time he was to fight against all their armie, and as for the rest, he needed not to doubt of victorie. At this his speeches, the King incontinently commanded to sound the alarme, and presently all the Trumpets, Clarions, and Drummes made a marueilous and terrifying noise, and al the souldiours (following their accustomed manner) inuocating the name of Iesus, made a  confused noise of crying, and at the same instant one might perceiue the enemies to descend the hill, which was opposite against the Hungars, seeming by their rankes an infinite number, among whom was Soliman himselfe. Then they gaue the King his head-peece, who vpon the receipt thereof, looked very pale, as a presaging of euill fortune at hand. And then the signall to A signe of euill hap to the King.

fight was giuen to those who were in front, who very couragiously charged The beginning of the battaile. the enemie, and all their artillerie was also made readie and discharged. But  this first incounter was not greatly offensiue to the enemies: neuerthelesse there was more slaine of them, then of the Hungars, in so much that they were forced to retire, being so hardly pressed by the Christians: whether it was by the force and courage of the Hungars, or the subtiltie of the enemie, endeuouring by that meanes to draw them on to the mouth of their Cannon, that I know not. Then presently Andrew Battor hasted to the King, declaring to him that the Turkes had turned their backes, that the victorie was now in him, that he should not doubt but set forward, and that it was needfull presently to second his men, who were in chase of the enemie that fled.  Whereupon the King aduaunced forward in hap hazard: but when they came to the place where the first charge was giuen, there might you haue seene many bodies of the Hungars dispersed ouer all the field, some maimed, others halfe aliue, yet breathing. In the meane while, those of the Vandgard pursuing the enemie, and valiantly fighting, the battaile of the Hungars approached to them with as much speede as armed men could make, the left wing began to bend, and many quitted themselues and fled, being feared (which I well beleeue) with the enemies Cannon, which then began to play among them. This did not a little astonish the battaile, whilest those who were in it, did heare the continuall and horrible whistling  of the bullets which passed through their rankes, and ouer their heads: and then the King was seene no more in the ranke where he was; whether it was The losse of the King. for that he passed beyond the first rankes, which were before him, (as wee haue noted, and as was before determined vpon, to the end that he should not bee too much knowne, remaining in the same place) or whether that he was forced from the daunger by those who were behinde him, for both the one and the other might well bee. Some said, that hauing gone beyond the rankes which were neere him, he thrust himselfe into the front of the battaile, where hee valiantly fought with the enemie: but neither dare I affirme it, nor altogether denie it. For my part I know this for trueth, that  These are the words of Broderic, Chauncellor of Hungarie, who was present at the battaile. he was not found in that place, neither in the ranke wherein he was at the beginning, after the Cannon of the enemie began to play, and when those of the left wing of the Vandgard were seene to flye. At the same instant was missing the Archbishop of Strigonium, who was side by side by the King, and also certaine others who were by his Maiestie. I will not impose this fault of the losse of our King vpon those, to whom he was committed in custodie, nor to those (which may be) carried him by force, or ill hap out of the battile; but euen to the hard fortune of the Hungars, to the end that together with the losse of their King, they might not onely suffer that which they endured of a stranger, but also endure the infinite euill which they afterward  felt, by their factious and domesticall dissentions, for the election of a new King, in place of him whom they had lost; their sinnes, no doubt, being more worthie of a greater scourge and punishment. For wee know that both the one and the other, who had the charge to respect the Kings safetie, were most faithfull vnto his Maiestie, and very desirous to preserue his life. And concerning those three, who ought to haue had a watchfull eye vpon

him, it is most certaine they could not returne from the enemie, against whom they had been sent, before our armie was put to flight: yea one of  them was taken and suddenly deliuered. That which causeth mee to discourse more particularly of this action, is, through the vehemencie of griefe which I haue, by reason of a certaine man, who in a praier which he set forth, was not afeard falsely to call the Hungars, the forsakers of their King. But should one esteeme those to haue forsaken and abandoned their King, who shewed vnto him all the duties that good and faithfull subiects owe vnto their Prince, and who also were well neere all slaine in that field, wherein his Maiestie was found dead, and who also by their death declared, how true and faithfull they were to their King, and what great loue they beare to their countrie? But this goodly Oratour, who hath couched this in writing, and who  so greatly iniurieth this nation, doth besides so largely write such a discourse of this ouerthrow, that I am ashamed of him: so impudently dareth he diuulge to the worlds view, the historie of a thing which was altogether vnknowne to him. But to our purpose.
The battaile of the Hungars being greatly troubled by this inconuenience, as wee haue said, and shaken in such manner, that it altogether tended to a flight; neuerthelesse they fought a long time, not in that large plaine, but euen before the Cannons mouth of the enemie, which was but ten paces from them: so that the Hungars, as well for the feare which they had thereof, as for the smoake which darkened them, were forced, for the most  part, to descend into a valley adioyning to those aforesaid marishes, the rest (notwithstanding) continued still fighting before the Cannon. In the end, those who were retired into this valley, being returned againe to the fight, and seeing there was no meanes to support the violence of the artillerie, and the smoake which still thickened; one part of the armie being alreadie put The discomfiture of the Hungars. to flight, they also were forced to turne their backes. Euery man then, as his commoditie would serue, began to flye, drawing for the most part towards that place, wherein an houre before they had passed in great mirth and brauings, and full of hope to obtaine the victorie, trauersing their Camp, which was now alreadie sacked and rased by the enemies, wherein there was nothing  remaining, but onely their footsteps and dead bodies.
The Turkes seeing the flight of the Hungars, thinking it to bee but some stratagem, or else feeling themselues wearie of the fight, continued a long time at a stay, in so much that they did not pursue them, in respect of the night, which had alreadie couered all the earth. This partly was the cause, and also the vehement raine that fell that night, for the safegard and preseruation of many. The violence of the fight endured at the most but an houre and a halfe, and many were swallowed vp and smothered within that marish. The bodie of the King (who was said to haue ended his daies in that The bodie of the King found dead. place) was afterward found in a great whirle, or rift of earth, aboue Mohacz,  halfe a mile on this side a little village which is called Czelie, the which medow was then ouerflowed, more then it was wont to be, with Danubius: in that place he was stifled with his horse vnder the water, being armed as he was at the battaile. And seeing wee shall speake no more of this King, I will adde to, in this historie, one thing of him worthie the noting: and that is,

when he was newly borne, he had no skinne that couered his bodie, which he neuerthelesse recouered by the helpe of Phisitions, who by their art succoured  and helped the want and defect of nature. We haue heretofore noted a certaine presage of the pittifull end which should happen to him, but the same might well haue been told him before as a destenie of that which afterward happened to him, during the time he gaue order for his affaires to resist the enemies, according to the first newes which he had receiued. For he being at Buda, when he was at dinner, the gates of his Castle being shut, A strange aparation. (as the custome was) a certaine Ghost in forme and shape of a man, euill fauoured, with crookedlegs, came haulting and knocked at the gate, and with a loude shrill voyce, desired to speake with the King, to acquainte him with  things which neerely concerned both the good of himselfe and of the kingdome. His speeches being not at the first heard by the guard, who were at the gate, (as it is the vse in Princes courts) hee cried lowder, and with a horrible voyce demaunded againe whether they gaue the King notice thereof. In the end certaine of the companie being moued by the importunitie of this deformed Ghost: they demaunded of him what he would haue; but he replying, sayd, that he would not reueale his secrets to any but to the King. This message was presently carried to his Maiestie; who vnderstanding thereof, sent vnto him one of his seruants, in the best and richest apparell, and one who was next himselfe, faining that he was the King,  commaunding him to enquire what this fellow would say. This messenger comming before this Ghost, and asking of him in priuate what secret he would impart vnto him: the other denying that he was King (whereby he thought to abuse him) with a high and loude voyce, he sayd, that since the King would not heare him, he should shortly perish. These words being pronounced, he vanished away, to the great astonishment of all that were present. It is a discourse somewhat neere vnto that of Saule; but yet different, for that which the one required was not offered to him; but this of it selfe, was presented without seeking for it, which one may enterpret diuers waies.
But let vs returne againe to the subiect of our historie. In this place where  the Kings bodie was founde, many others also lost their liues. A little beyond, was also found the bodies of Andrew Trepka, and Stephen Azel. It is said that the Frier ended his life valliantly fighting in the Vauntgard; the day following his head being cut off, was carryed vpon the top of a launce round about the enemies Campe, in token of ioy, and some said, that it was for a time placed before the Pauilion of Soliman. The day after the Battaile 1500. Hungers who were taken prisoners, among whom were the chiefest of the Nobilitie, being all commaunded to be set in a rounde forme, were presently beheaded, their bloud, seruing in stead of a sacrifice to the Gods of these Infidels. Very few prisoners had been saued, if it had not been to informe  and giue them notice of some speciall matters which Soliman, and Abraham Bascha were desirous to knowe. Among those was Nicholas surnamed Hertzek, which in the Hungarish language signifieth Duke, as he was indeede, and the Kings Treasorer. Iohn Pileczky, and Iohn Maczieouusky Polanders were also of that number. They were gentelmen of the Kings chamber, and being returned vnto the Queene, they discouered many matters, which

for the breuitie of this historie we will omit to write of. Michael Fekete, and  Bartholmew Martine were also saued from death, and within a while after were redeemed, paying a great ransome. Among those which dyed in the fight and flight, besides the King, were these: Ladislas Salcane Archbishop These slaine in the Battaile. of Strigonium; Paul Tomoree Bishop of Colocense and Lieutenaunt generall of the Armie: Francis Peren Bishop of Varadine: Philip More Bishop of the fiue Churches: Blaise Paxy Bishop of Iauerin: Francis Gzacholy Bishop of Chenat: George of Pauline Bishop of Bosnia: George of Zapolia Count of Sepusa the other commaunder of the Armie: Iohn Dragfy Prouost of the Kings house: Francis Orzag chiefe gentelmen of the Kings chamber: Peter Corlathy, and Andrew Trepka Captaines of the watch at the gate: Simon Horuuath the  chiefe taster: Thomas Zechy: Gabriel Peren: Ambriose Zarchan: Anthonie Poloczy: Mathias Czethingny, Counte of Francapin: Sigismonde Bransy: Francis Hampo: Iohn Bathian: Stephen Slyk a Bohemian, with certaine other Bohemians and Morauians. And these were the principall Barons of Hungarie. Among the Nobles and other Lords of the Countrie, there are worthie of note Francis Balasse: Nicholas Tharza: Iohn Paxy: Iohn Istuuanfy: Emeric Warday: Michael Podnamisky: George Orlouuchicz Captaine of Segin: Stephen Azel Castelane of Poson: Sigismonde Pogan: Iohn Torualy: Iohn and Stephen Kalnay: Nicholas Forgach, and besides these about 500. other. As for the foote men, there escaped three or foure thousand, and they were in all 12. or  13000. There was remayning of their Captaines no more then Hanibal Cypryan. All the peeces of Artillerie as well those which were planted before the Battaile, as those which were remayning within the Campe, and in the boates, were all taken by the enemie; the charge thereof was giuen too late, being but the night before the fight, to Iohn Hadek, a man of good courage, and well managed in such affaires, and who had alwaies frequented the Kings court, of whom he was so loued, that few had the like fauour of his Maiestie. The night and day after this vnfortunate Battaile, the enemies running all ouer, made wonderfull waste and ruine of all the neighbour countries, set fire on all, not sparing any person, hauing no regarde to sexe nor age, nor to  any religion, executing vpon the poore people all cruell and inhumaine acts. My wit cannot sufficiently write and bewayle the calamitie of this whole night, and the dayes following, being so great and intollerable for all this part of Hungarie, which we haue named to be on this side the riuer: that I cannot be perswaded, that euer any barberous enemie, hath elsewhere vsed the like crueltie. Amongst such miseries, there happened one extreame and vnnaturallaccident, the like whereof was neuer heard before, and this it was; that the poore and wretched mothers buried aliue their sucking Infants, for feare themselues should be discouered by their crying, and they poore babes dyed, whilst their mothers being in no better saftie, dispersed themselues heare  and there, to auoyde the tyrannie of the Infidels. The enemie proceeded euen vnto the lake of Balator, and in passing by, they fired the citie of the fiue Churches, which was all burnt, onely the Castell and the faire Temple reserued. Whilest the execution of this vnfortunate Battaile (and of all those which we haue recited) was in doing: the Vayuode was almost at Segedin with all the forces of Transiluania, who not being able with all his troupes to

march with that expedition as he would, and desiring notwithstanding to be at this battaile, which, as he vnderstood, could not in any sort be deferred,  he being in a swift and light Coach, and followed with few men in the like wagons, went in the greatest haste he could to seeke the King. Counte Christopher was also arriued at Zagrabia. One part of the Bohemians which came to succour the King, were about Iauerine, and the rest were not farre from Alberegalis. George Marquese of Brandenburg, and the Chauncellor of Bohemia named Adam Newhuis, were about the same quarter.
The Queene vnderstanding this vntimely newes, of such an vnfortunate The retraict of Queene Marie. ouerthrow, suddenly retired her selfe, with the Bishop of Vesprimia, Alexis Thurson, and the Popes Nuntio, to Poson, which the Hungars name Presburge, and transported the best and richest of her mouables by Danubius,  not yet knowing any thing of the death of the King her husband. These moueables, and other goods which appertained to the citizens of Buda, were rifled, and some of them staied by Andrew Orbancz, who commaunded the Castle of Strigonium, which at this day is called Gran. Neuerthelesse, he that writeth this historie, and reciteth this vile and infamous outrage, doth greatly erre, when he added to it, that certaine of his light horsemen (who are commonly called Vssarons) behaued themselues towards the Queenes maides, otherwise then their honours required, for that in a meriment they put off their shooes to daunce with them. 
The Emperour Soliman soiourning there a certaine time where the battaile was fought, and after hauing reunited together all his companies, the which he had sent here and there to ruinate and spoyle the countrie, set forward towards Buda, and there within sixe or seuen nights hee arriued himselfe, marching along the shore of Danubius, fiering all the townes, boroughes, Buda taken by the Turkes. and villages by the which he passed. He found this towne forsaken of all the garrison, and caused it to bee fired, not any thing being exempted from the violence therof, but the Castle, and the Kings stables, and the house of wilde beasts.
From thence the Turke sent many horsemen to spoyle and rob the countrie on this side the riuer. They put all to fire and sword whom they met betweene Waste made through all Hungarie by the Turkes.  Danubius and the Lake of Balator, euen vnto Iauarine. The Castle (notwithstanding) of Strigonium was cowardly left by Andrew Orbancz, of whom wee haue spoken before, neuerthelesse it was valiantly defended and Places forsaken by the Captaines, and preserued by men of meane condition. preserued by a man of base and seruile condition, and who a little before lead to the warre the footmen of the Chapter of the great Church of the towne called Mathieu Nagh, he being retired thither with a few men. The Fortresse of Vissegrade, wherein the royall Crowne was alwaies kept, was also saued by the Peasants, and Friers, it being forsaken of the souldiours: so greatly was euery man amazed at the Turkes comming vnto Buda. These  strong places which we haue noted, together with those of Thata, Comora, and Alberegalis, were not forced of the enemie, for that he, I know not by what counsell, did content himselfe onely to spoyle the countrie, and little respected to assaile the Castles and strong holds.
As these Barbarians did exercise their enormious cruelties in euery corner, so there was no place in Hungarie where they had more resistance, then

at Maroth by Strigonium. This was a fine place of retyre, and pleasantly  The great massacre of the Hungars happened in Maroth. seated, belonging to the Archbishop of Strigonium, situated in the midst of those Forrests, which we name Wiertesies, with which it is compassed about. Into the said place certaine thousands of Hungars retired themselues, with their wiues and children, trusting vpon the straight and narrow passages which were strongly shut vp. With those the enemie often came to handy strokes, and alwaies they receiued the worst, and were put to the foile. In the end, the Turks seeing by no meanes they could force the barracado, which the Hungars had made with their wagons, they were constrained to bring thither their artillerie, by meanes wherof al those wagons and other such defences were broken and ouerthwrone to the ground, and almost all the people  put to the sword. The great heapes of bones, which is to be seene at this day, in that place, doth sufficiently witnes the greatnes of the massacre, the which, as those few reporte that escaped, was 25000. persons one and other. And he who would account the whole number of those which had bin slaine, violently put to death, retained prisoners, or yt remained in captiuitie, I dare well affirme (according to that which I haue vnderstood) they were wel neere 200000. That part of Hungarie on this side the riuer from the mouth 200000. Hungars slaine and ouerthrowne. of Drauus vnto Iauerine, being thus spoyled and harried with the Infidels (as wee haue said) not without the great astonishment of the neighbour countries adioyning, others further remote, and euen of those of Vienna:  Soliman also causing a bridge to be made ouer Danubius, which reached to Pesthe, the 14. day after hee was arriued at Buda, transported his men to the other side of Hungarie, where he made the like waste, as he made on this side.
The end of the first Booke.



THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE SECOND BOOKE.
AFter that the Hungarians were thus ouerthrowne, Solyman inuesteth Iohn Zapoly (who was Vayuode of Transiluania) in the kingdome of Hungarie, and then he returned to Constantinople: whereupon Ferdinand of Austria pretending title to that kingdome, and seeing he could not obtaine it by peace, entreth thereinto with a great armie, and Iohn forsaketh Buda, and retireth into Transiluania, is pursued by Ferdinandoes forces, and ouerthrowne, who then flyeth into Polonia, and Ferdinand is crowned King of Hungarie. Iohn seeketh aide of Solyman,  who vndertaketh his defence: whereupon Ferdinand sendeth to Solyman for peace, but he denounceth warre against him, and entreth into Hungarie with a puissant armie, who taketh Buda and Altenburg, and besiegeth Vienna, from whence he is repulsed and discouraged by the gallant exploytes and resolution of the assieged, and in the end retireth from thence. Many hostilities passe betweene Ferdinand and Iohn, and after an agreement made betweene them, Iohn dyeth, and left a sonne named Stephen, to whom was gouernour Izabella his mother, and one Frier George. After Iohns death, Ferdinand sent to the Queene for the yeelding vp of the kingdome of Hungarie, which now he pretended title vnto, but is denied by George, who, to withstand him, demaundeth aide of the Turke. Ferdinand sendeth  forces into Hungarie, besiegeth Buda, and is there ouerthrowne by Solymans armie, who taketh Pesthe. Mustafa warreth in Transiluania against Malliat, Ferdinandoes Lieutenant there. Malliat is betrayed, taken, and sent with other prisoners to Constantinople, who there dyed, and the Transiluanians sweare homage to young Stephen, whom Solyman greatly desireth to see, who is sent, accompanied with many of the Nobilitie, and are all detained prisoners but onely Stephen, whom he returneth againe to his mother at Buda, which treacherously is taken by the Turkes, and Queene Izabella dispossessed thereof, and sent into Transiluania to gouerne there. Ferdinand againe sendeth to Solyman to demaund peace, and to be inuested King of Hungarie by him, who returneth him a most scornefull answer.  The Queene being receiued into Transiluania, George manageth all things, and little esteemeth the Queene.

AFter that the Hungarians had receiued this cruell ouerthrow at Mohacz, wherein were slaine about 30000. men, with many of the chiefest Lords and gentlemen of the countrie; and after that Lewis their last King

was thus stifled in this Quagmire or Marish of the aforesaid place, Solyman  not fearing any who could oppose themselues against his forces, being now with his victorious armie arriued in the towne of Buda, (which with the Fortresse, without any resistance, was presently reduced vnder his subiection) that he might the better obserue the ancient custome of the Ottomans, The custome of the Turkish Emperours. (which is, that the Prince ought rather to repose himselfe in his armie, then to be inclosed within a wall) would not therefore rest himselfe therein one night, but presently retired himselfe into his Pauilions in the middest of his Campe, which was hard adioyning to the towne; whither being come, there was presented to him seuen Bishops heads, and the heads of other Hungars, being of the number of those who were left dead in the field,  where the Battaile was fought; among which, was that of Ladislas Salcane Archbishop of Strigonium, who for his extreame couetousnes was greatly The censure of Solyman concerning the Hungarish Lords, who were slaine in the battaile. blamed of Solyman, in respect he would neither aide the King, nor himselfe, with his treasure, which was found about him to be very great. There was also much fault imputed to George Sepusa, brother to Iohn Vayuode of Transiluania, for his riches: and also to Paul Tomoree, Bishop of Colocense, for his riches, who further was condemned for his imprudencie and rashnes, hauing so foolishly, and without reason, counselled Lewis to fight with so little an armie, against one who was eight times as great and mightie. But on the other side, Peter Peren Bishop of Varadin, was greatly commended and esteemed, for that contradicting the opinion of Tomoree, he aduised in any  case not to giue battaile, but to temporise and strengthen his holds, and to put his people therein for safetie, and to fortifie the towne of Buda with a strong and sufficient garrison: because in thus doing he might the better resist his enemie.
And after that Solyman had seene and viewed all those, and had giuen his souldiours leaue to spoyle and massacre (who failed not presently to cut, mangle, and cruelly teare them in peeces) they presented vnto him the pictures of Lewis and Marie his wife, vpon which casting his eyes, and considering their The compassion of Solyman vpon the fortune of Lewis and Mary. young yeeres, he lamented their sinister fortune, greatly blaming all their Councellors, who rashly aduised them to fall into such extreame miserie:  affirming with an oth, that he was not come to expell him out of his kingdome, but onely to reuenge his men of the iniuries which the Hungars had done them, greatly complaining for the death of Lewis, the which had taken from him all meanes wherby in effect he might shew the truth of his words, the which were, that he would haue placed him againe in his fathers kingdome, vnder certaine good conditions of an honest and reasonable tribute. But he now seeing this Realme to bee vnprouided of a King, and that there was not any of the blood, to whom it ought of right to be giuen; it seemed that he was willingly enclined to inuest Iohn the Vayuode therein: alwaies prouided that he were found to be of the blood of Lewis, or at the least, to be  dissended of his race, by some collaterall line one or other.
Whilest he retayned his Campe about Buda, he sent into diuers quarters the greatest part of his Armie, to pill and wast the champian Countrie and neighboring places, leading with them an infinit number of prisoners, and an inestimable bootie, giuing to all the Prouinces thereabouts an incredible

amazement, there being by so cruell and suddaine a surprise, taken and put to death more then 250000. soules. After which he minding to retire into  Thrace, he caused to be taken away from the Castle of Buda, those three faire Brazen Statues caried from Buda to Constantinople. brazen Statues of Apollo, Diana, and Hercules, which with marueilous art and iudgement were made by King Mathias Coruin, for an ornament of that place. And besides those, he caused to be caried away certaine brazen Colombes, with some great peeces of Artillerie, (which in times past were belonging to the King of Bosnia) and caused them in token of victorie to be Solyman his returning to Constantinople. transported to Constantinople, and he willed they should be erected in the market place, to the ende they should publikely be seene and admired; and not long after, himselfe arriued in the same Citie in great triumph. 
In this time Iohn Sepusa the Vayuode, conducting the Souldiours of Iohn Zapoly Counte of Sepusa, Vayuod of Transiluania, aspyred to the crowne of Hungarie. Transiluania to the ayde of the King, and being arriued too late, euen at the time they were defeated, and brought into the extremitie of miserie: seeing now there was none left of the bloud royall, who might succeed in the Kingdome, began then in himselfe to aspire to that high degree: and this did he so much the rather, for that he found himselfe amongst these people in great esteeme, and conceiued no small hope of it, by reason of the victorie which he a little before had against the Peasants, who did rise against the gentlemen; (in respect whereof the principall of the land bore him some fauour) thus taking heart and courage to him (vsing notwithstanding wise  and prouident counsell) he hoped in the ende thereby to obtaine that kingdome, and be crowned King: further endeauouring himselfe by all meanes to win the good liking of the Nobilitie (as he did) and to draw them to his intention, perswading them they should neuer tollerate, that such degree and dignitie, (which aunciently had been maintayned by the Hungars) should now come vnder the gouernment of a stranger, and that they should not obey any other commaund, then that which should be appointed by their owne proper nation. With such good perswasions, and friendly admonitions, he gayned the hearts almost of all: and so aptly did he manage all things, that at the next assemblie, they all in his fauour determined to negotiate  and treat of this affaire: and the absence of Stephen Battor fell out fitly for his purpose, who was gone towards Ferdinand, and vnto whom (because Stephen Battor the chiefest among the Princes of Hungarie. both in respect of his Nobilitie, and of his bloud, being one of the principall) the administration and gouernment of the kingdome appertained rather, then vnto Iohn. There being then assembled at the Dyet, held at Alberegalis, all the great Lords of Hungarie: whither was brought the dead bodie of the vnfortunat Lewis, which a little before was drawne out of the Marish at Mugach, to be there enterred with royall pompe, and intombed in the Sepulcher of his auncestors; and where (after such magnificall and sumptuous The funerall of Lewis. funeralls were selebrated, accustomably done for so great a King, there was incontinently published the foresayd Dyet, and the Councell of the Souldiours  (which in their language is commonly named Rhakos) was called thither by the authoritie and disposition whereof the King ought to be chosen. In this assemblie Iohn the Vayuode not finding any Competitour, with Iohn Zapoly Vayuode, chosen King of Hungarie. the generall consent and good liking of euery one, was chosen King, and crowned with the auncient crowne of golde, (which then was in the coustodie

of Peter Peren) by Paul Archbishop of Strigonium, and by Stephen Broderic  Bishop of Vacchy, who afterward was chosen Chauncellor of Hungarie; and by these two he was annoynted.
After that the feasts and triumphs (accustomed to be done at such Coronations) were consummated, King Iohn made Iohn Emeric Cibacchy Bishop of Emeric Cibacchy Bishop Varadin, and Vayuode of Transiluania. Varadin, and Vayuode of Transiluania, disposing afterward among gentlemen of other degree (according to their qualities) martiall preferments, and in like sort with great discretion and indifferencie, in generall towards the people, and especially towards those who were at his Coronation, and who were the principall cause and meanes for him to aspire vnto that puissant dignitie of such a kingdome. Of the number of those were Stephen  Verbetz, Nicholas Glesse, Gregorie Peschen, Paul Artand, and all the Colonels, Captaines of souldiours and men of warre, who were come out of Transiluania, and many other. Whilest he was intentiue to confirme and strengthen his forces in this his new inuestiture of the kingdome, by all good and vigilant meanes, Ferdinand, who not long since as heire of Ladislas (who by the deceit of George Pogghy Bracchy, aspiring to such a Seigniorie, was vpon The pretences of Ferdinand of Austria to the Crowne of Hungarie. the day of his mariage poysoned) setting before him his reasons (notwithstanding the ancient strife which had been betweene Mathias Coruin and the Emperour Frederick his great grandfather) was chosen King of Bohemia, and perceiuing himselfe to waxe great, and more puissant and mightie,  by the forces which he was able to leauie from that kingdome, began now to thinke vpon the conquest of Hungarie, which appertained to him by the right of Prince Albert of Austria, and of Anne his wife, sister to the late King Lewis, wanting not thereto the ayde of many great Hungarian personages, who being alreadie pricked with new alterations, and extreame greedines of nouelties, and besides, for the secret enuie they bore to King Iohn, were retired to Ferdinand, instantly inciting him to make warre vpon Iohn, assuring him also that he was created King more tumultuarily, then legitimately, by the common people, being deceiued therein by his craft and subtiltie, there being (besides Battor) many other within the  Realme, more noblie borne then he, vnto whom in right it also appertained to be King, as well as to Iohn: and namely, those were Balthasar Pamphille, Iaspar Sered, Paul Bacchit, Ference Guena, Valentine Turky, Stephen Maillat, and Iohn Salle, besides many other whom they named not. At the vehement perswasion Ferdinand entereth Hungarie with a great armie. of those, Ferdinand (who of himselfe was willingly inclined therevnto) gathering together a great armie, as well foote, as men of armes of Bohemia, Austria, Germanie, and other places, drew himselfe directly towards Buda. Vpon his arriuall, Iohn finding himselfe enuironed with extreame lacke of all necessaries, was greatly troubled, wanting sufficient forces to resist the mightines of his enemie: and seeing all things in a feeble and weake  estate for his succour and aide, by reason of the lightnes of that nation, who naturally are inclined to suspition; and hauing no leisure nor time, for want of money, to leauie any souldiours, determined with himselfe not to attend his enemie at Buda, but to transport himselfe with all his people to Pesthe, Iohn forsaketh Buda, and retireth himselfe into Transiluania. and there (as the shortnes of the time serued) exhorted and desired his Captaines, not to forsake him during these turbulent broyles, in the midst whereof

they saw himselfe deeply plunged: and thus in great haste they flying, passed the riuer of Thyssa, anciently called Tibiscus, and lodged in a Castle  named Thoccay, situate almost vpon the riuers side, in a large and spacious plaine. The newes of this retraict being posted to Ferdinand, incontinently he caused his armie to enter and possesse the towne of Buda, who without the losse of any one man, was master thereof. He stayed not there long, but the Councell assembled together, to know whether they should follow King Iohn, or no. Among the diuersitie of opinions, it was thought best that at all aduentures they should pursue him, before he migth bee able to encrease his forces, and to admit him no time to repose himselfe in any one place, nor to expect for any ayde out of any place, and to performe that euen now, while he was disfurnished of men and counsell, and in a manner put to  flight. According to which resolution, Ferdinand gaue leaue to his people to follow King Iohn, as farre as they thought it conuenient: whereupon they presently set forward on their iourney, and with great trauaile, without any delay, arriued at the riuer of Thyssa, which they passed with boates that they brought with them vpon wagons, and they in camped by King Iohn, before he was aware, who, for the little or no inckling he had of them, neuer dreamt of so sudden a thing. Being astonished at so present an arriuall, he began now to conferre with his people, what course was best to be taken. They answered, that they would fight, and that he should withdraw himselfe from the danger thereof, that if it should fall out ill, he might haue sufficient time to  saue himselfe: and on the contrarie, if it should alter and fall out well, hee might with his presence, ayde and succour them the better; and so by that meanes he should in euery case finde himselfe safe and in good securitie. At that time among all his Commanders, he had one whose name was Ference Bode, a man of great reputation and well esteemed, to whom (for his vertue, Ference Bode a valiant Captaine. fidelitie, and experience) King Iohn had committed his Standard royall, and the Lieutenantship Generall ouer his armie. He foreseeing the miserable successe which might happen of this warre, did deliberate and resolue with himselfe to dye, rather then to flye or forsake his King by a cowardly and dishonest flight. And among many opinions and aduises which were propounded  before the King (and the same it may be more necessary, then profitable) this Captaine turning himselfe towards the King, said: Most excellent Prince, the vertue and force which may come by counsell, is not then necessarie, when the effect thereof must goe before mens opinions. For this cause (since our enemies are so readie to fight) it is in like sort conuenient, and that for two causes, that we also prepare our selues to the combat. The one 1 is, that wee ought to preserue your Maiestie safe and sound: and the other, 2 that wee may maintaine our honour and reputation; for it would bee imputed as a base and seruile thing, for vs Hungars (who are borne and alwaies  accustomed to manage armes) now to flye, or refuse the battaile which the enemie offereth vs. And for this respect it behoueth vs both with bodie and courage to fight with our inuincible forces, and especially now, since the commoditie of further aduise is taken from vs, (the which would greatly haue besteaded vs in this affayre) considering that either a memorable victorie must happen to vs, or else a glorious death to all: and so much the rather

also, as the necessitie of this war doth take away all benefit and commoditie of the time, by the suddaine arriuall of our enemies: and yet more then  that, considering that there is nothing lesse thought of, the^ the interest which the one and the other pretendeth to the gouernment and rule of this kingdome, which cannot acknowledge two Lords, and indeed demaundeth but one. For these causes, although the enemies far exceed vs in number, it is necessarie that euery one fight for the glorie and renowne of his Countrie, and for the good and quiet repose of the publike weale, to the ende that it may not bee thought that we would flie the burthen and daunger of a Battaile, and also we ought this day, for the benefit and commoditie of euery one, rather to hope for a memorable victorie by the point of the sworde, then to saue our selues by a cowardly flight: and if fortune be fauourable to vs,  we shall gaine a perpetuall peace; or else in dying, obtaine an honorable end, considering the custome of fortune is such, that among those who fight couragiously for the preseruation and defence of their Countrie, she doth rather fauour them, whose number is but small, then those who are followed by thousands of souldiours.
These speeches being ended, presently he began to forme and order his Battaile, committing the right and left wings to the Transiluanian souldiours, The appointment of the Battaile. and to ye Caualary of the same Countrie, as reposing greater affiance in them, then in the other, and he impaled himselfe in the midst of the Hungarish and other souldiours, newly gathered together. Opposite to these Battalions: the  Captaines of Ferdinand ordained their squadrons in forme of two wings, giuing the right to the souldiours of Austria, and to the horsemen of Bohemia, and the left wing to the souldiours of Stiria, and to the horsemen of Carinthia, and Valentine was placed in the midst of all with the royall Standard, enuironed and followed of all the Hungars, and Paul Bacchie (a man expert in feates of war, being wel acquainted with Turkish deceites) with a good co^panie of Vsarons (who are like our light horsemen) withdrew himselfe into a secret ambush, where he might (as he did) suddainely assayle the hinder part of the Armie of King Iohn, and according to the accidents of fortune, annoy him. At this instant the souldiours, aswell on the one part as on the other (without  being requested thereunto by their Captaines) were inflamed to fight, and began now couragiously to march one against the other, and after the Artillerie had interchaungeably played, not being greatly offensiue to either part, they incountred in such rude and fierce maner, that the Stirians could not sustaine the violence of the Transiluanians, but bega^ to turne their backes, and their Caualarie to disperse here and there. But on the otherside, the Carinthian men of armes bore the shocke and force of Ference Bode his squadrons (who were but fresh-water souldiours lately leauied) and passed through them, and brake their arraies. In the meane while the Hungars aswell on the one part as on the other, valiantly fought with equal art and industry, force and courage,  (none being able to iudge on which side the victory would fal) and that with such obstinacie, that there was sinall or no difference at al betwixt them, in respect of their valour and courage. Neuerthelesse, al the Hungarish Battalion of King Iohns, was broken and ouerthrowne by the Bohemian armed men, who came in to the skirmish. At this alteration offortune, Bode inforced himselfe

to reunite certaine companies which were dispersed, and againe to make head against the enemie, and to pursue the battaile: in executing of which,  he was suddenly surprised and enuironed by the light horsemen of Paul Bacchie, who, vntill then, held himselfe in couert, and there Bode was the second The ouerthrow of King Iohns armie. time broken, and himselfe taken prisoner, and all his armie defeated and cut in peeces, and the royall Ensigne of Iohns taken, with all the Artillerie and baggage. King Iohn seeing fortune incline to Ferdinand, and to bee opposite to him, and all his armie ouerthrowne; and that there was now no more hope left vnto him of any good, tooke his flight towards the confines of Sarmatia, Iohn flyeth into Polonia. (which wee at this day call Polonia) and the Conquerors ranging all ouer the countrie, reduced Transiluania, with the rest of Hungarie, vnder  the obedience of Ferdinand, to whom was sent Ference Bode, with all the Ensignes wonne in the battaile, and many other persons of note, whereof he receiued great content: and causing the fidelitie of Ference Bode to bee sounded, to see if he would forsake Iohns part, and sweare alleageance to him. But not being able to draw from him in any sort that he had a meaning to breake his oth and promise, which he had giuen vnto Iohn, he was in the end, by his commaund, sent prisoner to a Castle, where, in great penurie, and not without a pitifull example of fortune (and to the great ignominie of him, by whom he was imprisoned) he ended there his life, hauing been a man of singular vertue and wisedome, who well might haue been compared to any The death of Ference Bode one of the ancient or worthie Captaines; and one might iustly iudge, that  such calamitie was farre vnfitting such an excellent and worthie man.
Ferdinand obtaining this victorie, and publishing at the same time a Diet of the Hungars, to be held at Alberegalis, was in like sort, after the same manner, as Iohn was, with Anne his wife, crowned King of Hungarie, and that Ferdinand crowned King of Hungarie. by the hands of the same Archbishop of Strigonium, and of Peter Peren, who had forsaken King Iohn, who being brought into poore and meane estate, was retired into Polonia, he being entertained by Hieromic Lasky, a Hieromic Lasky receiueth Iohn. mightie man both in possessions, and also well followed in those countries, who exceedingly reioyced at the arriuall of so great a personage, and receiued  him very curteously, and did greatly comfort him for the paines and miserie, whereinto hee was so deeply fallen, and entertained him in such friendly sort, that it well appeared he wanted nothing else, but onely the dignitie and state of a King, and did so much honor him as was possible. But Lasky being of a haughtie spirit, and a man who with deepe iudgement had often managed affayres of great import, as well in the warres, as in the peaceable gouernment of a kingdome, and other publike Estates: perswaded Iohn that he saw no other meanes more behoofull to redresse and reduce this present extremitie of his affayres into better order, nor none more proper nor conuenient for the recouerie of his kingdome, then that which might befall him by the ayde and helpe of Solyman the Turkish Emperour. And therefore  instantly aduised him, not to forsake the meanes and oportunitie, but to vse it in his necessitie: for that he assured him, in respect of the extreame ambition, glorie, and couetousnes, to increase the limits of his Empire, and in hope to make himselfe a greater Monarke, he would by no meanes faile or omit to giue him ayde and succour: so as himselfe would offer and vow to

hold his kingdome of him by faith and homage, as depending vpon the Ottoman house, and to pay him some reasonable tribute, such as Solyman himselfe  would impose vpon him. Which being concluded and determined I asky practiseth at Constantinople to obtaine some succour for Iohn his guest. betweene them, Lasky desiring greatly to fauour and ayde the cause of his friend, and receiuing of Iohn the summe and charge of an Ambassage, he set forward to goe towards Constantinople with a good traine, where at the length being arriued, he presently endeuoured himselfe, by gifts, to win the fauour and grace of all the Bashaes, and of the Captaines of the grand Seigniours Port, and of all other principall persons of his Court, who with his presents he in such sort gained, that they serued him as a ladder to mount to the top of his desires, who being at last admitted to the Turkes presence, and after humble reuerence to him made, was by him (according to the custome)  sent againe to the Bashaes, among whom, Luflefy and Abraham had the most authoritie, commaund, and credit, the one being alied to the grand Seigniour, because hee had maried his sister, and the other being a Visir, Visit. which is the chiefe of all officers, and one that keepeth the Turkes seale, and signeth all expeditions, or dispatches, Lasky gained, and that beyond all expectation, these mens amitie, by meanes of their wiues, whom he had possest and corrupted with rich and costly presents, with whom also hee discoursed so familiarly in the Slauonian and Turkish languages, as if hee had been naturally bred and brought vp among them. His fayre and good speeches caused him to be gratious and amiable to all, and by such pleasing courses,  he began with all his endeuour to treate of the affayres of King Iohn, specially tending to this purpose, that hee might bee restored againe to his kingdome, being vniustly chased out of it by the forces of Ferdinand, and by the enuie and wickednes of certaine Hungars, being before by them iuridically chosen, and crowned King; for the recouering of which, he did offer (besides a reasonable tribute) to acknowledge and hold it of the grand Seigniour, and to be called the subiect of the Ottoman house; and in token of true fidelitie and alleageance, and for the perpetuall memorie of such a benefit, he would yeeld himselfe to bee his subiect. Lasky further declaring, that it was better for Solyman to haue King Iohn, with a weake force, for his neighbour  and friend, then Ferdinand, who because he was brother to the Emperour Charles, and King of Bohemia, and Archduke of Austria, and Lord of many other countries, would make shew rather to be feared and redoubted by his neighbours: and he further declared, that if he would not listen therevnto, it might possible be, that one day he would vex and disturbe him more, then he now presently thought of. And besides that, he should doe in this, as beseemed a magnanimious and vertuous Emperour, in ayding those, who by others are wrongfully oppressed and iniured, and to fauour the iust cause of him, who for euer should remaine his bounden and loyall subiect. These reasons being heard by the Bashaes, and reported to Solyman (who by a secret  window had alreadie vnderstood all that passed). did so set him on fire with the glorie which hee hoped for by such an expedition, that incontinent he Solyman vndertaketh the defence of Iohn. resolued to vndertake it; with such conditions notwithstanding, that King Iohn should obserue from point to point, all that which he had caused to be promised him.

In the meane time, Ferdinand not without cause mistrusting (the which indeede happened) that Iohn might seeke ayde of the Turke against  him, did deliberate (thinking to preuent the deseignes of his enemie) to send to the grand Seigneor, to demaund of him truce, and to confirme the amitie Ferdinand sendeth to Solyman. and friendship that Ladislas and Lewis, Kings of Hungarie, had in former time sworne with the house of Ottoman, and the which truce the King of Polonia then enioyed, not doubting but he would willingly condiscend to his demaund, if he would sufficiently apprehend his reasons. For this cause he sent his Embassador Iohn Oberdansch to Solyman, to practise and negotiate this confederacie. He being dispatched, with good expedition arriued at Constantinople, and was honorably entertayned as was fitting for an Ambassadour.  But publishing the occasion of his comming, he well perceiued the rigour of Solyman, and the little credit he had amongst his people, and hee manifestly knew that King Iohn had alreadie preuented his purpose. And receiuing his aunswere, that the grand Seigniour would not by any meanes accept into friendship, them who in former time had been such and so great enemies to his house, and by whom his people had receiued infinite outrages; and especially considering his Master had so vniustly vsurped that kingdome, which he possessed not, but onely by force expulsing the true King; the iust titles and allegations of whom, being before from him concealed by the late victorie which his Master obtayned against him,  and being afterwardes better acquainted with the cause, by the information of credible people, he was forced by pittie and Iustice of his sworde, to reinueste the sayd Iohn in his true and lawfull possession. For these causes Solyman Solyman denounceth war against Ferdinand speaking to his Ambassadour. absolutely denyed Ferdinand all his demaundes, as vnworthie of his frendship, and instead of peace, he denounced open war, commaunding presently his Ambassadour from Constantinople; who with all expedition departed, and within a short time came to Vienna, imparting to the Kings Counsell what was the issue of his Ambassage. The councellours giuing no credit to his words, but iudging his reporte to bee false, sent vnto Ferdinand, who then was at the diet at Spire, and when he heard it, he was greatly  astonished thereat.
The Spring time approaching, Solyman caused to be proclaimed, that al his The Armie of Solymans in Hungarie. forces of Europe and of Asia should resort to Andrionoplis, where he would make a generall muster, and presently after with great diligence to march to Belgarde (which is in Hungarie) with all his forces where he so iourned not long, but incontinently King Iohn with a great companie of the Hungarian Nobilitie, which he brought with him, came to kisse his hands, and to Iohn kisseth the hands of Solyman. acknowledge himselfe to him, as his subiect and tributarie. He found him sitting vnder a Canapie where hee made no great countenance to moue himselfe at the reuerences which he made, but showing a great Maiestie,  he gaue him his right hand in signe of amitie, the which he kissed, and after some courtesies, Solyman said to him; that he doubted not but with ease to reconquer all that which vniustly had been taken from him, and that by the iustice of his forces, which being done, he would liberally render it to him againe. King Iohn departing from Solyman, went to visit Abraham Basha, whose friendship he had alreadie obtayned, (as is sayd before) by meanes

of Lasky, who also was the onely cause to procure him such fauour with  Solyman, and drew to him Lewis Gritty, who was the sonne of Andrew Gritty, Lewis Gritty a Venetian, with the fauour of Solyman, ayded Iohn. then Duke of Venice, and who easily and friendly ruled Abraham, and so familiarly also, that it seemed he could not liue without his companie. Also Lasky, as hauing intelligence of the Bashaes affayres, and with the Lords of Solymans Court, had specially practised the friendship of the said Gritty, for by the industrie of him (by meanes of Abraham Basha) he obtained of the grand Seigniour that which he desired. And King Iohn had in this so good successe, that he found in this armie the aforesaid Abraham.
After that Solyman had reposed himselfe with his armie certaine daies at Belgrade, he marched directly to Buda, which was forsaken by the citizens,  as soone as euer they heard of the report of his comming; and so it came Buda taken by the Turks. vnder the gouernment of the enemie, without any resistance: only the Fortresse was kept by 700. Germanes, who very couragiously for a time did their endeuour to defend it. The Turkes seeing they could not so soone be masters thereof as they thought, began to myne and sap it, whereby they might make the defences and wals saultable, and hauing throughly performed it, the fire and the thicke smoake which darkened the element, ascended euen to the noses of the assieged, who greatly feared to be destroyed therein, and seeing their companions alreadie begin to flye in the ayre, caused them (maugre Nadasky their Captaine, who commaunded that place) to sound a parley and treatie of a composition with the Turkes, conditionally,  that in deliuering that hold, they might in safetie depart with their baggage, and retire themselues into some place of safetie. Which being accorded and concluded, they rendred vp the Castle and departed. In the meane time it being reported to Solyman, that this composition was onely made by the souldiours, without the agreement of Nadasky their Captaine, he presently sent after them, in the way towards Poson (to which place they would make their retraict) his Ianisaries to put them to the sword, as vnworthie to liue, hauing alreadie suffered them too long to breathe.
This towne and Fortresse being thus taken, the armie marched directly towards Vienna, all the Campe resting in the way before Alteburg, which  was a towne defended by the Bohemians, who at the first manfully withstood certaine assaults; but seeing that in one of those assaults their Captaine had lost his life, they began then to lose their courage, and waxe faint, and feeling themselues wearie, for that they were continually at the fight, and finding themselues more straightned then before, and assailed with greater furie, they forsooke the Rampiers and gaue place to the enemie, who with Alteburg taken by the Turks. such a furie entred the towne, that they put all to the sword. This towne being wonne, the grand Seigniour was aduertised, that he should not now find any hinderance neither in townes nor field: whereupon he sent before the Accanges to the quarters of Vienna (which are, as in former times, like the Accanges.  aduenturers of France, and not much vnlike our Scottish borderers) to fire and spoyle all the countrie. These people serue not for wages, but in time of warre are leauied among the peasants (as the Ayduches in Hungarie are): they are not paid any wages, neither are they taxed, but of the bootie which they get, they giue the tenth part thereof to the grand Seigniour, as they do

of all their goods besides. They now following the commaund which was prescribed them, executed incredible cruelties, bearing away with them all  kinde of bootie. After that, they made towards the fiue Churches, where they committed no lesse outrage to the inhabitants of the countrie, then they did to the other, who fearing such and the like deuastations, and enormious cruelties, forsooke their houses, seeking by diuers meanes to saue themselues. In this sort the Accanges continuing their pilling, robbing, and massacring, at last arriued before Vienna, by the riuer of Lints, where they were no more mercifull, then in other places.
Ferdinand along time foreseeing these euents, had put into Vienna all that little ayde which then he had, causing new Rampiers and fortifications to be built, and fearing worse would afterward ensue, he trauailed to al the townes  of Germanie, not as a King, but as a Post or messenger to demaund speedie ayde. At the request of whom, and vpon the bruite which was dispersed of the taking of Buda, all the Germanes with one accord sent the Counte Palatine Counte Palatine of Rhene entereth into Vienna. with 20000. Launsquenets, and 2000. horse, to the end himselfe, with many other Captaines of marke, might enter into Vienna, to take possession and defend it, and hinder the Turkes further proceedings, as it was an easie matter for him to doe. Among other voluntaries, there went William Roccandolph, Comptroler of King Ferdinands house, Iohn Gazianer a Slauonian, Hector Ransach, Nicholas Salm, who was at the taking of the King of France at Pauia, Leonard Velsch, and Nicholas Turian, and many other renowned  through Germanie for their vertue and prowesse: they put into the citie 100. peeces of great Artillerie, and about 200. lesser, all which were in good order planted about the towne.
In the meane while, the enemie not being able to march so fast as was requisite for them, in respect of the great store of raine that fell in the moneth of September, and especially by reason of the passage of Danubius, which was then ouerflowed; in the end they arriued before Vienna, vpon the 13. day of the same moneth, who with al their army enuironed it, diuiding their The Turke before Vienna. Campe into foure quarters, the circuite of which was so great, that one could not see nothing but the ground couered with Tents and Pauilions  for foure miles compasse. Abraham Basha was incamped vnder a hill right ouer against the citie, that he might the more commodiously obserue 1 and take view therof, himselfe being lodged in a little ruinated Castle which was thereby, where also was lodged all his people, as well foote as horse. On the otherside, towards the Port of Purgatorie, right ouer against S. Vlderios Church, was the Beglerby of Natolia, with the choisest souldiours of the armie. 2 The third siege was towards Saint Vit, vnder the conduct of Micalogly, within the village of Smireng, aboue the which, vpon the descent of the hils, 3 was lodged a strong squadron of souldiours. The fourth was towards the Scottish Port, where were many Asapes, (who are Archers very expert) and  4 amongst them were also some Ianisaries, along the riuers side of Danubius. Those of this side suffered not any within the towne to appeare vpon the wals, but straight they were brought to the ground, and sometime they sent such an hayle of arrowes into the citie, that those who walked in the streetes, were grieuously annoyed and wounded, except they had on some head-piece

for their heads, or armour for their bodies. The last squadron, which was the most warlike, and valiantest of all the armie, and wherein was Solyman 5  himselfe, was lodged right ouer against S. Markes Church, within a great cloase, walled with bricke, where was fixed the Turkes chiefe Standard. On that side, the Asapes began to remoue the earth, that so they might ouerthrow the wals into the ditch, by meanes of their mynes and other inuentions: but hauing no Artillerie to batter, their trauell and labour did not greatly profit them.
During these approaches, as another part of Solymans armie came in boates rowing vp Danubius, Wolfang Oder (who was then Gouernour of Poson) being Wolfang Oder defeated the Turkish vessels vpon Danubius. aduertised thereof, caused a good co^pany of Launsquenets, with certaine peeces of Artillerie, and some few horsemen, to lie in Ambuscado vnder the  banke of Danubius, in a place secret and commodious for that purpose, where suddenly he assailed the Turkish armie, who were vnprouided, and so throughly did he effect it, that he sunke many vessels fraught with Artillerie and Munition, staining the water with the blood of a great number of souldiours and Turkish Captaines, who were there slaine, causing also such disorder and confusion in that army, that euen through the feare of their Artillerie they were ouerthrowne and broken: which victorie was a speciall cause of sauing Vienna. In this surprise and canuisado, the enemie lost the gallantest and most esteemed men among them, and Wolfang in this victorie not losing any one of his owne people, retired himselfe with his companie  safe and sound to Poson. The remnant of those that escaped, proceeded on their iourney to Vienna, and at their arriuall, they brake all the bridges of the Iles, which was made ouer Danubius before the towne, to go and come more commodiously in and out of the citie: which being done, they placed themselues before the Castle, to the end none by this place should neither go nor come without great daunger, either to be killed, or taken prisoners: euen as it happened to the companie of Iohn Ardech, who sallying out on that side to skirmish with the Turkes, had such ill successe, that it little wanted that they were not wholly ouerthrowne by the thick shot of the Accanges and Ianisaries; he who bore the Cornet was taken, and after sent backe (not without  some suttle deuise) clothed in a gowne of gold and silke, after the Turkish habit, with an intent, that by such outward shewes and dissembling fauours, he might the better perswade the Viennians to yeeld themselues. But the constancie The constancie of the citizens of Vienna. and courage of euery one was such, that they had all rather dye, then heare of any such disloyall matter: hauing this firme hope, not onely to warrant the towne, but also to effect incredible damage (as they after did) to Solyman. The citizens seeing that the greatest violence of the enemies (being depriued of Artillerie) did consist in mynes, began to looke well to that, and with diuers instruments to discouer the places where they were made, and to this end they vsed basons full of water, dice vpon a Drumme,  and many other inuentions, by which they might know where the enemie myned, and by that meanes they might presently remedie any inconuenience The meanes to discouer a myne. which might happen, by making countermynes, which would frustrate the other, and make the enemies labour friuolous and to no effect; and fortifying behinde the wals with counter wals of rootes and trees, in such

forcible manner, that the assaylants should receiue more losse and damage then the assayled; and with such dexteritie they rampired behinde, that they  thereby preuented the determination of the enemie, as it afterward happened. For they setting fire to the mynes, and a great part of the wall falling, they thought by that ruine, without any great daunger or losse to giue the assault. And vpon this imagination, they ran presently with great fiercenes and courage to assaile the breach. But the Viennians being well fortified and retrenched within, contrarie to the opinion and expectation of the enemies, they receiued thereby an incredible losse, tumbling them downe from the top to the ground, and inforced them with a great slaughter and shame to recoyle backe, and acknowledge the valour and courage which was in the hearts of the assieged. Euen almost at the same time, towards Saint Clares  Church, did also fall a great canton of the wall, so large and wide, that the enemie did easily see the Germanes well ranged in Battaile to maintaine the assault, which incontinent was giuen by the Turkes, with a merueilous desire to make themselues masters of the towne, contemning all the sinister accidents which were presented to them, forcing themselues by all violent meanes to enter, and to incounter those souldiours whom they saw so well martialled. But their courage was quickly abated, for they were valiantly repulsed by those who defended that breach, giuing them iust cause to buie their bolde attempt at a deare rate. And although this multitude of assaylants were as it were almost without armour, yet were they so audacious  and bolde, that scornfully disdayning our people, and foolishly fighting, they did in the ende force them sometimes to retyre, although that they were slaine so thicke, that bodie couered bodie, and in place of those who fell to the ground and were slaine, others ran to possesse their roomes with incredible furie, and with such dexteritie, that their rankes neuer seemed naked nor emptie.
In this manner both the one part and the other, with great effusion of blood did often fight, and amongst others at the Port of Carinthia, where was also fallen downe a great part of the Courtian; at the fall whereof, the enemies presently gaue the assault, onely with sword and target, hauing forsaken  the harquebuz and bow, they running to it in such a multitude, as if they had been grashoppers, and began an assault mort cruell and bloodie then the former, where on both parts they fought with such hatred and desire of victorie, that both the one and the other encountring so rudely together, weare often repelled, this being one of the bloudiest assaults that euer was heard of; but in the ende, the force and courage of the Germanes increased, the Turks being constrayned to yeeld, notwithstanding the admonitions, prayers, exhortations, and threatnings of the Sangiacs, and other Captaines, who with blowes of their Semitaries, forced them to returne againe  to the assault, not being able otherwise to stay them from turning their backes. Thus while the ayre resounded, and the earth shaked, by reason of the wonderfull thunder the Artillerie made, and by the noyse, and sound of bels and drums, the enemie with greater obstinacie then before, returned to the assault, which was long and couragiously maintayned, more then foure houers continually, not without great slaughter on both

sides. During which assault, there was slaine (with Ambust Ottinge a valiant Colonell) many Captaines and men of speciall marke: and of those without,  many Captaines of the Ianisaries, and of the Asapes, and many Sangiacs, who for their vertue and renoune were greatly esteemed among their Nation. These being prouoked with furie and courage, put themselues on foote with their sword and target only, to animate and encourage others the more to the fight. In the ende the Turks not being able any longer to resist the prowesse and valour of the assiedged, abandoning all shame of dishonor, and dispising all iniurious vpbrayding, not respecting the blowes which they receiued of their Captaines, they tumbled downe through and from the ruines and breach of the wall, flying directly to their lodgings. Solyman throughly vexed to see such a bucherie of his people, vrged by a kinde of  deepe reuenge, did purpose to put in execution his last endeauored violence, wholy to destroy the towne. And to that effect he caused all the Captaines and principals of his Armie to come before him, who seuerely and with sharpe speeches reprehending them in great choler, that they so villanously and infamously, and by a more then womanish cowardlynes, hauing almost the victorie in their hands, suffered now themselues to be depriued thereof, and put to flight, commaunding them within a short time, to make themselues readie and renew the assault with greater courage; euery one either resoluing to die there, or else to regaine the victorie euen as it behooued them more then any other nation. At this cruell commaund, which was pronounced  to the extreame feare of all, euery man furnished himselfe with armes, and with all necessarie things for fight, and the prefixed time being come to begin this horrible assault, which was the 13. of October, Anno 1529. the The generall and last assault giuen to Vienna. Anno 1529. Turkes with all their force and last endeauour in diuers places, and especially by the Port of Carinthia, began again to assaile the towne with so great a multitude and furie of the souldiours, that it seemed the world would presently haue ended, thinking by their shouting and fearefull cries, to enter the towne, and darkening the day by the great cloudes of arrowes, with which they filled the ayre. But the Germanes who held themselues gallantly aloft, were aduaunced before the insolencie and boldnes of the enemie, opposing  their thicke squadrons against their force and multitude, and by such valarous meanes, frustrated their violence, making with their Cannon and handy strokes a great butcherie of them; which would cause great maruaile and amazement in those, who could beholde the infinite number of them that were slaine and wounded: notwithstanding, the Turkes abated nothing of their courage, but to the contrarie, abandoning all feare of death, more hardie, rash, and more inflamed with pride then before, redoubled the assault, and so fiercely they persisted in their obstinacie, that many times our men were constrained to yeeld a little backe. But at last, by the vollies of the harquebuziers, and the violence of the Artillerie (which by  good discresion was disposed about the walles, especially where they saw the greatest force of the Turkes fighting) the enemies were forced to retire, miserably falling in heapes by the ruines of the breach, making themselues a pittifull spectacle; the ditch being filled with the dead bodies of these Infidels, and the stones stained with their bloud. Thus hauing lost all their courage

and hope of winning the towne, and no more dreading the threates and menaces, nor the blowes of their commanders, of two extreames, they chose  rather to be killed of their Captaines, then by those of the towne, whereupon tumultuously they retired themselues in great confusion from that terrible assault, flying in great hurly burly to their lodgings. By this confused retraict, behold how this bloodie fight that day tooke an end, which did very deere and infinitly cost the Turkes, by the death of his brauest and valiantest Captaines. Wherefore Solyman seeing fortune contrarie to him, and considering the vallour of the assiedged; not willing to attempt any more so cruell a losse, determined to packe vp and depart. And before his departure, he caused certaine prisoners to be apparaled in robes of Veluct and  cloth of golde, who liberally were sent home againe into the towne, whereby they might informe the Citizens, that his intent was not to take Vienna, but onely to be reuenged of the iniuries which he had receiued of Ferdinand, and specially, because hee meant to possesse those kingdomes which were not his; and further, that he was so much the more displeased that his enemie was retired into the midst of Germanie, and had not attended him in Hungarie, that there he might be reuenged the better of the iniuries offered to Kind Iohn his friend: and that if they would yeeld to him, hee assured them, that he would not enter into their towne, but leaue them in full libertie, promising to the souldiours who were within, that they should retire themselues to any secure place where they would, and that afterward  he would incontinently returne againe. These speeches being by the prisoners recited, in the assemblie of all the people and souldiours, gaue notice to them that the forces of the Turkes were greatly weakned, and by that they iudged the losse which he had receiued, and that he vsed this deceite, but onely to win them to his lure, and so nothing but laughing at it, they made account of his words as they deserued, knowing well by reason of the winter which was at hand, that the siege could not long continue. And so within two dayes after, which was the thirtieth day of the siege, the Turke raysed his Campe from before Vienna, deuiding it into  Solyman departeth from Vienna. three partes, (and hee tooke the way towards Constantinople) one part whereof marched by Strigonium, the other by Gran, and the third by Bosnia. And in order, with such an innumerable quantitie of spoyle and prisoners, Solyman retired himselfe from Vienna, and Abraham Basha remained in the rerewarde, to defend that none should charge or assaile the squadron of the grand Seigniour marching along Danubius; vpon the which also softly floted another part of the Armie, to giue reliefe of victualls, munition, and of men, to those who were on land if neede should require it.
At the departure of so great and puissant an enemie, all Germanie and Hungarie greatly reioyced. But when newes was brought how the Turkes lead captiue more then 60000. prisoners, that all the villages and houses in  the champion were burnt and ouerthrowne, their ioy was presently turned into sadnes, beholding with great compassion all the fields to bee disfurnished of men, ^easts, trees, and houses, not any remayning to till the ground, which miserable spectacle gaue occasion to euery one to lament and sigh bitterly.

The great Turke being arriued at Buda, and willing to performe his promise  Iohn confirmed King of Hungarie by Solymon. which he had made, confirmed Iohn King of Hungarie, with priuiledges written in letters of gold, and inuested him in his kingdome, calling him his friend and vassall of his house, leauing with him Lewis Gritty to aduise and ayde him in all necessarie things, and to be an assistant to him in his kingdome. Gritty remaineth with Iohn. And after proceeding on his way with tedious iourneys, by reason of the vehemencie of the winter (which with snow and frosts was alreadie at hand) at length he arriued at Constantinople, where with great reioycings and triumphs, he was as well receiued of his subiects, as if he had conquered all Austria.
Now after that Lewis Gritty had soiourned a certaine time with King Iohn,  in the administration and gouernment of the kingdome of Hungary, he was called home by Solyman. He attained to this honour by the meanes of Abraham Basha, The sauour of Solyman to Gritty. (a speciall friend of the Duke his father) through whose friendship he was so conuersant with the grand Seigniour, that one day he inuited him to a feast at his house, vnto whom the said Seigniour vouchsafed him the fauour to go, the rather in respect of the haughtie spirit, and deepe iudgement in all things, which he knew was naturally grafted in him: in regard of which, he had oftentimes sent him to execute great enterprises, as this was one, wherein he vsed such marueilous wisedome and great expedition, and carried himselfe so indifferent to all, that his greatnes was not enuied of any  one. Now the cause of his calling to Constantinople, was only to discourse Gritty called to Constantinople, and after sent into Hungarie againe. with him of many matters, which were of no small importance, which when they had aduised vpon, he was presently dispatched againe into Hungarie to his charge, with ample commission and great authoritie; being, among other things, commanded to remaine at Buda, and with his vttermost abilitie to maintaine in those quarters, the glorie and renowne of the Ottoman house; charging him to bee continually present at all the Councels, which should bee held, as well for warre as for peace; the grand Seigniour furthermore not minding that they should alter any thing in that kingdome, whilest he was absent in making warre against the Persians. Moreouer, he was commanded to enquire if the report which was bruited, were true: namely,  that Iohn (at the instance and request of the Hungars) would accord with Ferdinand, and haue peace with the Germanes and Bohemians, who continually made incursions into his countrie, vpon these conditions, that as long as he liued, he should peaceably enioy all Hungarie; and that after his death he should leaue the possession, and all such right as he could any way pretend therein, to the children of Ferdinand, as we shall hereafter more at large treate of.
At the time when Solyman went into Armenia, Gritty arriued in Valachia, hauing for his conuoy certaine Turkish horsemen, and companies of Ianisaries, and those of the grand Seigniours guard sufficiently tried, with some  of his owne familiar acquaintance, and other Italian companies, who of their owne accord, being well armed, followed him, and he had also with him two famous Hungarian Captaines, namely, Vrbain Batian, and Iohn Doce with their companies, they in all making about 7000. men, as well horse as foote. He was besides, in outward shew for warre, well furnished with Camels,

Mules, Horses, cattell, and other munition for the seruice and reliefe of his Campe. And with this traine (which rather seemed an armie) he caused  great suspition as well among his friends as his enemies: and before he departed from Valachia, he made peace with Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, friend to Solyman and Gritty. (who before was made Solymans friend) he hauing sent vnto him many rich presents, to request his fauourable assistance for his going into Hungarie, and to ayde him with men and victuals, and with all other necessaries which he stood in neede of, vntill he had accorded the strife of Ferdinand, for the loue of whom he vndertooke this voyage. This league being confirmed by oth of either side, Gritty thinking himselfe to be sufficiently strong in those parts, to manage such affayres at his pleasure, entered presently into Transiluania,  Gritty entereth into Transiluania. causing open proclamation euery where to bee made through all the prouinces of Hungary, belonging to the Emperour Solyman, that all the townes, Comminalties, and Lords of that kingdome, should haue recourse to him, as an Arbitrator and Lieutenant for all the prouinces of Hungarie, for the grand Seigniour, and as the sole Iudge of all their debates, strifes, processe, and discords. But this did not greatly please King Iohn, and it was afterward the cause of Grittys fall.
At this time liued Emeric Cibacchy Bishop of Varadin, and Vayuode of Emeric Vayuoyde of Transiluania and Gritty were enemies. Transiluania, a man who for his noblenes, puissance, and vertue, was very famous among his people, being (in regard of his calling) the second person  next the King. Against him, Iohn Doce bore speciall hatred and open malice, for receiuing a blow of him with his fist vpon the nose, about a certaine question and controuersie moued betweene them. He vpon the bruite of the comming of Gritty to Bresouia, made no such haste (it may bee) as Gritty expected he should haue done, in respect of the honour he looked for: but making slow speede, it thereby seemed that he little regarded those whom the grand Seigniour had sent, which made him odious and displeasing to Gritty, who sought nothing more, then to increase the authoritie which he had, and to make it appeare how greatly, aboue others, the Transiluanians had honoured and reuerenced him. Vpon this, a common opinion went,  that Emeric vsed this manner as beseemed a good Christian, being greatly displeased in his heart to see the Turkes in his countrie, where they neuer came before, and that he should consent to open to them a passage, whereby they might haue more ample knowledge of the store of townes, boroughs, and villages; of the infinite number of horses, of the fertilenes of the land, and the fat pastures which are therein, by the which they might bee inticed in time to make themselues masters thereof. But all such opinions were in the end found false, for that without any suspition he went as a friend to receiue and visite him. When Gritty was alreadie arriued at Bresouia, and that from thence he meant to goe to Megest, where he was by many messengers informed, that Emeric would come to see him, and that he marched well accompanied,  being lodged but fiue miles from him with a great companie, and furnished with many troupes of Caualarie, all the chiefe of the prouince being come to him, to honour him the more in this voyage, as was fitting to their Vayuode and supreame Bishop, and especially vnderstanding that this was to goe before Gritty. These men, together with Emerics traine, ranged

in the middest of a field, seemed in a manner a good armie. This wonderfully  moued the tyrannicall spirit of Gritty, who ambitiously aspired to haughtie attempts, and probably to the vsurpation of that Countrie, considering that the authoritie of that Bishop might molest and frustrate the greatest part of his deseignes; and imagining that it was necessarie to parlie with him in the plaine field with an appointed battaile, as it were against his professed enemies. For this cause, after Gritty had dined, not being able any longer to smother the vehemencie of his cholor and arrogancie, he tooke his hat off his head, which was agglated and made of Martens Sables, after the Turkish manner, and with a swelling pride cast it on the ground; saying, That that hat could not serue for two heads, since it was so necessarie that but one alone  should haue the vse thereof: and threatning all those who would not obey to his commaund, he put it on his head againe. By these and such like speeches, Iohn Doce incensed Gritty against Emeric. Iohn Doce tooke occasion to reuenge himselfe vpon Emeric, and answered him thus: Truly Seigniour Gritty, a man cannot better applie this which you haue said to any thing, then to this Realme, which by no meanes can tolerate two Lords, nor two gouernours. And I assure you by the liuing God, that you can neuer vse your puissant and magnificall authoritie so maiestically, as long as Emeric shall remaine aliue, against whom you ought this day to maintaine the authoritie and royaltie of Solyman, and your selfe. I now perceiue by this his insolencie, which I haue long before knowne, what this cruell beast Emeric is, the boldnes and pride of whom (if you please) shall  soone bee abated, and I will make him lie full low, as he well deserueth, for that he so peremptorily refuseth obedience to Solyman, and that dareth to despise thy name, manifesting thereby, that he rather aspireth to make himselfe an absolute King, then to maintaine the dignitie of a Vayuode. Therefore it is necessarie by some deuise to make him away, whereby euery one may be freed from his insolencie and pride. This counsaile was specially praised by Gritty, who incouraged him to execute it. And the better, and in more safetie to attaine to the period of his enterprise, he caused to bee giuen vnto him, by Vrbain Batian, a good troupe of Hungarish horse. And although it is said that
Gritty commaunded not Doce to kill Emeric, but onely  to take him prisoner, and that afterward he might send him chained to Constantinople to the grand Seigniour, minding to create in his place Hierome Lasky Vayuode (who then was with him, and by whom, as wee haue before recited, the affayres of King Iohn was greatly furthered) neuerthelesse, the Lasky aspyred to be Vayuode of Transiluania. common bruite was, that Gritty, by enuie and the false suggestion which was reported to him, gaue commaund to Doce to kill him, feining of his part an intent but to goe and visite him. Thus Doce secretly in the night dislodged, and came on a sudden to the Campe of Emeric, being a little before aduertised by his spyes, that Emeric was without guard, or any feare, being  lodged in the fields vnder the shadow of trees, to auoyde the heat which then was, and that he was accustomed to lye alone in his Tent, onely with the groomes and pages of his chamber, and all the rest of his people dispersed in co^modious places, as euery man found it most profitable to himselfe, little distrusting any treacherie, thinking that they should the next morning haue time enough (considering the distance of places) to assemble themselues,

before they should encounter with Gritty. This little mistrust of Emeric, increased the courage of Doce, and gaue him good hope to execute his  diuellish enterprise. Whilest that Bishop Emeric dreamed not on such vnhappie and miserable fortune, which by the wickednes of another, vntimely happened to him, he was layd vpon his bed to take his rest, when suddenly Doce and his souldiours were within his Tents, who, before himselfe, orany of his household were awaked, or before any noyse or neighing of horses were heard, seized presently on his bodie, without hauing any reuerence Emeric Vayuode of Transiluania slaine by Doce. to the qualitie and condition of his calling, and forgetting all Christian pietie, he cut off his head, afterward giuing leaue to those Turkes, who had accompanied him in this murther, to sacke and pill all the moueables and baggage of this poore Bishop, and to leade away his horses. All the rest of  this goodly companie, being greatly astonished at this detestable accident, betooke themselues to flight. This being done, Doce retired himselfe to Bresouia, carying the head of Emeric hanging by one of the eares, and presented it to Gritty, who laughing, did behold it with Hierome Lasky, who Lasky moued at the death of Emeric. was then with him. This man stirred vp with so vilanous and infamous an act, conceiued in him a great indignitie, at the miserable fortune happened vnto so venerable a man. But dissembling ye griefe, which touched him at the hart, and which of a friend made him an enemy, made semblance as though he little cared therefore. Gritty turning himselfe to him, said: Seigniour Lasky, doe you know this shauen head? beleeue me it was the head of a great  personage, but yet besides ambitious and proud. At these speeches, Lasky oppressed both with anger and griefe at one time, answered, that it was then at no hand like to that which he had seene when it was aliue standing on his shoulders. These words neerely touched Gritty, who presently replied, as one repenting himselfe of that deede, and that he could not containe himselfe from shame, in respect he was so vniustly put to death, and that he gaue no such commaund that he should be slaine, but onely taken prisoner. After he caused certaine Hungarish and Turkish horsemen to seaze vpon a Castle, which was reported to bee the place where his treasure was. By this time the issue of this pitifull and lamentable death, was diuulged into the  eares of euery one, in respect whereof, all the nations of that prouince, as Saxons, Sicilians, Transalpinians, and Podolians (who are vpon the confines The Transiluanians in armes for the death of Emeric. of Polonia) with all possible discontent felt themselues greatly outraged with griefe, and assembled together against Gritty, to reuenge the death of so honourable and reuerend a man, and within few daies they were about 40000. men, they hauing for their Commaunders Gottart a Saxon, and Stephen Gottart. Maillat, who alwaies bore great affection and honour to Emeric, and in Stephen Maillat. their publike Diet condemned this foule act and detestable crueltie, iudging Gritty worthie of any kinde of infamouse death, and his adherents as murtherers and theeues, ought to bee pursued and punnished with death. Gritty  vnderstanding this tumult of the Transiluanians, and the great assemblie of souldiours, and preparations which were determined of against him, was greatly troubled therewith, and withall being vncertaine what to doe in his defence, with great expedition retired himselfe to the towne of Megest. The inhabitants whereof discouering a farre off the Turkes following Gritty retired himselfe to Megest.

him, and that his companie might amount vnto some 4000. men, they shut the gates against him: but in the end, by the intreaties and perswasions of  Doce and Batian, they condiscended to lodge them below in the towne, reseruing to the^selues the aduantage of a hill, where they had a large Church, walled about, and well furnished of houses, into the which they all retired with their richest moueables, fortifying themselues within as well as they could. And as afterward they vnderstood when Gritty tooke the way to this towne, he had an intention to seize vpon that hill, and to fortifie it, as wel as the shortnes of the time would permit him, there to defend and keepe himself, vntill some little aide should come to relieue him, by meanes whereof he might for a time saue himselfe, either by a little brooke which ran not farre from thence; or by the riuer of Alute, which doth passe vpon the left  hand, and from thence doth cast it selfe vpon one side into Moldauia; or of another into Valachia, which countries he might easily winne, without any feare of the Turkes power. Whilest his braine was busied vpon such vrgent necessities, he ceassed not from fortifying himselfe very strongly, and incouraged those who were with him, to labour and employ themselues in all affayres, which should bee thought fitting for so present a necessitie, sending letters and messages to all parts to ayde him, as neede should require. But the Transiluanians, who desired to preue^t him, being stirred vp through a deepe reuenge, by a iust indignation, to see their Vayuode so cruelly murthered, and the Turkes (their capitall enemies) in their countrie, into the  which they neuer yet before entered; came with such great diligence, that he beheld himselfe rather assailed, then enuironed: notwithstanding so sudden an attempt, he lost no courage, but animating his people, he so couragiously defended himselfe, that he forced his enemies to retyre, a great number of them being slaine, or wounded by the arrowes and harquebuziers of the Ianisaries. Maillat and the Saxon seeing the assault to be too hard and sharpe for them, gaue ouer, and would attempt it no more, and willing to proue better fortune, caused their people to retire from the towne, and intrenched themselues so closely about it, that none could neither enter nor sally forth. During this siege, Gritty daily expected that he should haue such  succour sent him, as he demaunded: but seeing his hope to bee frustrate and none came, and that victuals began to faile them, and the forces to defend the towne were weakened, and that the inhabitants declared themselues to be his enemies, began to fall into extreame despayre, and although he had not then his health very perfect, notwithstanding he omitted no meanes to attempt, by gifts and promises, to appease the mindes of those who did besiege him. But he laboured in vaine, for the furie and rage which fomed in their courages for the premised matters, was so great, that by no meanes they would hearken to any such inticements. But seeing himselfe forsaken of Solymans officers, (who said it was not in their power to send him any ayde,  without some commission or authoritie from their Master) and being also abandoned of King Iohn, (who in his heart reioyced to see such a tumult) of the Moldauian (of whom he more relied then of any other, for the aliance and peace which he had made with him) and withall being forsaken by Vrbain Batian, (who fearing likewise that which happened, saued himselfe by

flight, by meanes of certaine Hungars his friends) he secretly by a poste practised with the Moldauian, that he should commaund his people, who were  in that siege with the Transiluanians, to let him passe, and that they should endeuour to saue him, when he atte^pted to come forth. He assuring himselfe in vaine vpon such an vncertaine promise, and being constrained by his fatall destinie, euen as soone as all the citizens of Megest were risen in armes against him, and had opened one gate to them without, he was forced to open another, from whence desirous to passe through the Moldauians (as had been accorded) he saw no person that shewed him any fauour: but on the contrarie, (answerable to the faith of a Barbarian) denying vnto him all promise Gritty taken by the Transiluanians, and afterwards executed. and safetie, did massacre his people, and as it were by a publike edict condemned them to death, suffering him to fall directly into the hands of  Micola, Francis Chendy, and Maillat, cousin of Counte Thomas Nadasdy then Palatine of Hungarie, before whom being brought, that cap which he did weare of Martens Sables, made after the Turkish maner, being from his head cast down to the ground, he was by a generall consent left in the custodie of Chendy, to see him executed. Being lead all about the Armie, he was in the middest thereof stayed: and being demaunded for what cause he willed Emeric to be slaine; he answered, that he commaunded no such thing: but in the end he was made a president to all the world (according to the example of Polixena, sacrificed vpon the tombe of Achilles) for an oblation to appease the ghost of Emeric; and in cutting off his head he spoke nothing else  but these words: Ah our Ladie, to what point am I now brought vnto? In memoriall of such a reuenge, euery one dipped either his helmet, or some The custome of the Transiluanians. Iohn Doce torne in peeces. peece of his harnesse in his blood. With the same coyne was also Iohn Doce payed, who was not onely beheaded, but, as a sauage beast, was torne and drawne in peeces, in such pitifull manner, as though he had neuer bin in the world. He which executed them, vnclothing Gritty, found within his skarlet breeches, which he was wont to weare, a purse full of pretious stones, as Rubies, Diamonds, and Emeraulds, which, by estimation, were worth 25. or 30000. Duckets, and those afterward were giuen King Iohn. This being performed, Chendy Ference, one of the principallest and richest Lords among the  Hungars and Transiluanians, who was among the other at the death of the said murtherers, caused presently his people to march on, and at last assayled the sonnes of Gritty, remayning at Seghesuar with 500. Turkes, which did alwaies accompanie them, who being aduertised of their fathers lamentable death, and how Chendy Ference did pursue them, began with all diligence to search the meanes to saue themselues: but in the end they were intrapped and taken in a plaine, saying one to another; Wee greatly misdoubted our selues of the Turkes, and now we shall dye by the hands of Christians. And they were presently, without any compassion, beheaded, and all those who The children of Gritty beheadded. accompanied them slaine. Behold the miserable end of Grittyes intolerable  pride, who by his euill gouernment lost that within a moment, which in many yeeres he endeuoured himselfe to aspire vnto. Many were of opinion (yet I hold it false) that Grittyes returning into Hungarie, by the appointment of the grand Seigniour, was permitted him by the meanes of Abraham Basha, The deseignes of Abraham Basha. who determining to haue slaine Solyman, and made himselfe Emperour of

Constantinople, had alreadie acquainted Gritty with part of his determinations,  whereby he might the rather consent vnto his practises: because such a matter falling out, he thought by the force of his Armie to haue held all Hungarie in peace: and therefore it was said, that this was the occasion that moued Gritty, to put all those to death whome he esteemed great in reputation, and such who might oppose themselues against him, and somewhat impeach his enterprises. But often it is seene that humaine practises, although they be not periudiciall to any, doe seldome happen according to the desire of the partie who manageth them. And therefore how much lesse ought those to succeede to a wished end, which are wicked and detestable? which for the most part light vpon the backes of those who inuent them, to  their great shame and confusion. King Ferdinand of Aragon said, That euill Sentence. councell doth for the most part bring more damage to him who giueth it, then to him who doth execute it: as it happened to these two, far from that which their ambitious mindes forethought vpon, for one of them died miserably, as hath been said, and the death of the other needed not to be any occasion of enuie to the suruiuour: For that not long after, Abraham Basha was accused by an Eunuch, verie domesticall with the great Turke, to whom he discouered his intention, thinking he could not execute his practise without his assistance: and vpon this accusation (although it was then said, that it was for negligent gouerning the martiall affaires of Persia) or as some say,  for a certaine Carcanet of precious stones which he bought for his wife, for enuie whereof, Rosa, Solymans concubine, was greatly incensed against him; saying that this was done in contempt of her, in that she would first haue bought it, before it was showne to him, he was in the night strangled as he slept in one of the grand Seigniours chambers, who also presently commaunded Abraham Basha strangled. all his goods to be confiscat, leauing his wife in great care and distresse for want of the benefit and commoditie of her dowrie.
Gritty being thus defeated, the Transiluanians determined not to admit into their kingdome any of those two Kings; namely King Iohn, and King Ferdinand; but to maintaine themselues Neuters, electing a Captaine, who should rule and gouerne them, vntill it might be determined which of  those two should be their lawfull King; and thus they gouerned a certaine time. But King Iohn within a while after, reduced them vnder his obedience. In the meane time, these two Princes did daylie make war one vpon the other, fortune being now fauorable to one, and immediatly to the other, and neuer any intermission was of their quarrels, vntill it was concluded betweene them, that Iohn as long as he liued, should enioy all that then he possessed, and after his death, all should succeed to Ferdinand, The agreement betweene Ferdinand and Iohn. or to his successors, with such conditions neuerthelesse, that if Iohn left any children legitimat, Ferdinand was bound to giue them in recompence, so much of the reuenew of his patrimonie in townes and castles,  which should be conuenient, honorably to maintaine their estate; and besides, The death of Iohn King of Hungarie. Stephen the sonne of Iohn, also called Iohn. the Vayuodship of Transiluania. Within few dayes after, occasion presented it selfe to execute these agreements, by the death of King Iohn, who left one only sonne, borne eleuen daies before his death, named Stephen, who afterward by the commandement of the Turke, was also called Iohn, in

memorie of his Father. This Infant was borne of Queene Izabella, the Izabella daughter of the King of Polonia, and mother of Stephen. daughter of Sigismonde Kind of Polonia, who was his gardian and gouernesse  of the kingdome with George, who commonly was called the Frier, for so he was by profession. This George was a Croatian borne, and discended of a noble family, but in great pouertie, and brought vp in the house of Iohns Mother, where he was employed in seruile and meane affaires, George the Frier, tutor of Stephen surnamed Iohn. A discourse of the life of George. and he neuer had, during his youth, a more liberall imployment then the carrying of wood and coales to offices, and making fires. He seeing by this kinde of life, he could attaine to no higher promotion, being vrged with dispaire, or incited by destinie, (which may be did prouoke him to doe it) became a Frier, of the order of Saint Benedic, in the Monasterie of Saint Paul  by Buda; in which place during the first yeares, he had no better office, then in distributing the almes to the poore at the Abbey gate: and as he himselfe some time said, he bestowed the better part to his friends, rather then to others. But he being of a liuely spirit and haughtie courage, knowing this his present fortune not to be sufficient to attaine to any honor, or to be ranged amongst worthie men, imagined in himselfe, that certainely he should neuer be aduanced to any place of esteeme, as long as he was in such obscure estate. For this cause desirous to put in practise his deuises which were impressed in his thoughts, he studied to write faire, and to learne as much latine as would serue him to sing a Masse. Which hauing  now sufficiently obtained for his content, by meanes whereof attayning to the degree of a singing Priest, he endeuoured himselfe so much, that he was entertained into the seruice of King Iohn, whilest he was in Polonia chased from his kingdome; for whose affaires he trauailed into many places, and alwaies returned againe with quicke and faithfull expedition, ayding himselfe greatly with his habit, vnder the colour of which he freely passed through euery place, for none suspected, that vnder that habite he could performe such waightie affaires, and it helped him much to escape from many great daungers and trauailes. After Iohn was returned into Transiluania, and that he had recouered his kingdome, he was then mindefull of  the seruice which the Frier had done him, and considering he had been so faithfull to him in his aduersities, and knowing that all the daungers which he was often subiect vnto, and all the troubles which he had endured for his sake, proceeded not but of a great loue and good affection, began now specially to fauour and to accept of him to be neere about his owne person. And although that at the beginning, King Iohn gaue him not so great meanes, as willingly he would haue done; yet neuerthelesse by his diligent seruices (being a man who well could temper himselfe, and who had a passing subtile wit, and who naturally in his minde aspired to great things) gayned the fauour of the King in such sorte, who noting in him such great prudence and excellent wisedome, made him of his counsell, and gaue him the  Treasurership: and not long after he was chosen Bishop of Varadin. By such dignities he came to so high authoritie, that he was in generall, greatly esteemed and honored of all. And thus continuing his dutifull seruice, King Iohn drawing neere his end, not seeing any about him that was more prouident and circumspect then Frier George, left him to be his sonnes gardian,

and coadiutor in the administration and gouernment of his kingdome,  with Queene Izabella his wife. But he (who was of a turbulent and subtile conceite; and one who would not be satisfied with a little) disposed of the affaires in such cunning manner, that within few daies he had them all in his gouernment, and nothing was dispatched without his consent and appointment. Thus the affaires of the common weale being directed by his onely Councell, Ferdinand had now sent to the Queene to demaund that part of the kingdome, which she yet possessed in the name of her sonne Stephen, the lawfull inheritour of Iohn, offering to giue him of his patrimonie, all that which in his fathers life time he promised him, and to performe all the couenants which was concluded betweene them. The Queene with  good will receiued these offers; saying, she was content to satisfie all that which had been agreed vpon betweene him, and the King her husband. But Frier George, as Protector, would by no meanes consent thereto, for that George hindereth the performance of the agreement which was betweene Ferdinand and Iohn. he would not lose his reputation wherein he now was, considering that he should not so easily strip his puple of such a kingdome, and also seeing that by such a surrender, he should greatly abate his owne estate and dignitie. Wherefore he retired himselfe with the Queene and her sonne into Buda, entertayning Ferdinand with delatorie words, and euery day alledging to his Ambassadours new excuses, and in the meane time, gaue notice to the George demaundeth aide of the Turke against Ferdinand. Turke of all that which had passed, requesting of him present ayde, foreseeing that the end of this busines could no wayes be determined, but by  warre. Ferdinand seeing how with vaine hopes he was delayed from day to day, in prolonging the time, and knowing all these things to be wrought by the subtiltie of the Friers inuention, would no longer temporize in the matter, but assembled 40000. men, and 40. great peeces of Artillerie, vnder the conduct of a Germane Lord, called William Roccandolph, high steward of his house, (who, as is a foresaid, was with Counte Palatine within Vienna, when William Roccandolph Lieutenant for Ferdinand in Hungarie. it was besieged by the Turkes) and sent him as his Lieuetenant generall with this Armie, to assaile the towne of Buda, commaunding him to doe all that was possible to take the Frier who was within it, and to send him vnto him  to be reuenged of the mockeries which he vsed towards him. Roccandolph being departed, marched with his Armie directly to Buda, where being Buda besieged by Roccandolph. come, he besieged it on all sides, making two batteries where the Artillerie did desperatly batter, finding the towne well repaired, and otherwise then it was in former time. For Iohn by the arte and industrie of an ingenious Boullenois, had so strongly fortefied it with Bulwarkes, inuironed it with walls, and inclosed it with deepe ditches, that it seemed verie hard for those to win it, that did beholde the difficultie thereof. Towards one side of the towne there was a hill of some little height, as high as the walls, hauing a little valley which pleasantly reached vnto the side of the ditch of the fortresse of the towne. Vpon the top of that hill was built a Church, named  Saint Girrard, from whence one might see the roofes of the Kings Pallace, and the gilded porches. Vpon that hill, Roccandolph (the more to amaze and terrefie the Queene) caused there to be planted certaine peeces of Artillerie, wherewith he battered the Pallace, and especially a towre, which he so greatly shaked, that it was like to haue line on the ground (if the day following

he had continued his batterie) by the fall whereof it had broken and greatly ruinated the Palace. But fearing the losse of such a worke, he caused his batterie  to cease, respecting the infinite charges it would haue cost in reedifying of it againe. And in the meane time he sent to the Queene to incite her to keepe and performe the couenants, and to flie from the pestilent aduises of Frier George, who vnder the colour of an ouerseer and gardian of his Ward, aymed at no other thing but her ruine and vtter ouerthrow, assuring her (in the bountie of Ferdinand) that he had appointed a goodly principalitie for her and her son, where they both should liue in great pleasure and friendship with their neighbours; declaring to her, that if she was not determined to accept of these honourable conditions, he should be forced presently to plant greater batterie against the towne, and to ouerthrow and ruinate all  the fayrest buildings which were within it. To these perswasions, Frier George made answere, that the Queene should shew little iudgement, to change a kingdome for a Sepusian principalitie, and from the royall dignitie of a Queene, to become an ordinarie Ladie. Thus the Frier deriding Roccandolph, did so spite and prouoke him, that he swore he would destroy and vtterly ruinate the towne, and caused all the force of his Artillerie to be brought to the place where the Iewes were buried, towards the Iewes Port, lying betweene the East and South, by the gate of Sabatia, where was the strength of the Hungars, and good store of Bohemians, vnder the conduct of Peren, and commaunded that without any intermission the Cannon  should play; and he with his Germanes made another batterie at the Port of the Iewes towards the Castle wall, behinde the which were the Queenes gardens. This batterie was maintained with so great violence, that the greatest part of the Curtaine fell within the ditch, which so amazed the besieged, that they thought rather to yeeld, then defend themselues. But the night being come, Frier George seeing the Germanes retired, and that they prepared Frier George a diligent Captaine. themselues the next morning to giue assault; during the night, he caused certaine trenches and rampiers to bee cast vp behinde the breach, sufficient to hinder and annoy the victorie of Roccandolph, which fortune had presented to their sight. When the dawning of the day was come, the Germanes  with their ladders ranne to the breach, and gaue the assault, the like being done on the other side at the Port of Sabatia by Peren, against whom those of Buda gallantly opposing themselues, they behaued themselues so brauely, that they constrained their enemies to retire, who lost at that assault about 900. men, and 2000. were wounded. By this disgrace, Roccandolph being greatly incensed, co^manded that all violence should be vsed to conquer the towne by art and cunning, seeing that by force he could not effect his purpose, wherefore he began to apply himselfe to mynes. But the Budians being aduertised of this practise, tooke such diligent care thereof, that all their  worke and labour turned to nothing.
There was at that time within Buda a Hungar very wealthie, named Bornemisse, who harboured a speciall hate against Frier George, for some iniurie which he pretended he had done him. He, to bee reuenged, caused secret Bornemisse a traytor to the Budians was executed. notice to bee giuen to Francis Ryuall his friend, who was in the Campe of Roccandolph, that if he liked thereof, he would in the night deliuer into their

hands the Port, which was by the Church of the Germanes, called S. Marie.  Roccandolph vnderstanding of this complot by Ryuall, well allowed thereof, and hauing concluded betweene themselues touching the manner that should be obserued therein: the same night, vpon which they had agreed of amongst themselues, Bornemisse failed not to open a posterne which was in the wall, by which the enemie entered into the towne. But the watch walking the round, perceiuing this surprise, began to make an alarme, so that euery man had speedie notice thereof. At this bruite and tumult, Vrbain Batian, and Peter Vicchy (who for that night were Captaines of the watch) ran presently to the place, where the one part and the other were fighting with great obstinacie: but in the end the Germanes were forced to turne their  backes, and saue themselues by the same port wherein they entered. In the throng there was taken certaine prisoners, among whom were knowne some of familiar acquaintance with Bornemisse. Those, after due examination, discouered the treason of Bornemisse, who was presently attached, and all his goods seazed and confiscate, who after, by diuers torments, confessed all the fact, and was by the commaund of Frier George cruelly tormented and executed as a Traytor to his countrie. Roccandolph seeing all his purposes came to no effect, and that fortune hourely did chaunge from prosperitie to aduersitie, determined with his Captaines to auoyde the occasions of handy strokes, and onely by a long siege to attempt that, which by force of armes he could not performe. 
In the meane time, Solyman vnderstanding the euill entreatie which was vsed to the Queene, and how greatly Ferdinand forced himselfe to take that kingdome from him, which he had giuen to her husband; after setting his affayres in order, which he had against the Persians, leauing Archane an Eunuch in Mesopotamia, to make head against them, if they attempted any thing, sent Mahomet Basha to ayde the Queene with all his Europian souldiours, Mahomet Basha came to succour Queene Izabella. who among the Turkes are commonly called Rumilar, or Rumiler, and vulgarly Vrumilar, of this word Romania, which they call all Greece.
Izabella not being assured of any such succors, was brought into great feare and extremitie, not knowing well what might betide her in this behalfe:  knowing also all their doings would but badly succeed, and neuer come to good issue, if they were intangled by armes: and especially seeing that Ferdinand, for former matters, was grieuously offended, and that he conceiued of this matter at the heart against her, which also did not a little trouble her, because she knew that she maintained an vniust cause, in not obseruing the conditions made with him, during her husbands life. Vpon these considerations she was often incited to render the towne, and especially knowing Ferdinand to be a Prince so meeke and curteous, that he would commit no act which should be any thing derogating from her honour, she determined  to yeeld her selfe into his hands. But Frier George would by no meanes consent thereto, for that he daily expected succours from the Turke, who at last hauing notice of their comming, he then thought that these matters were not so slightly built, but that his affayres would be well ordered, as they had been alreadie begun.
Thus during the siege, Solyman came to Andrionopolis, to be more neere

if need required it, retaining with him Rostan Basha; and he sent Mustafa into Mustafa Basha sent into Tra^siluania. Transiluania against Maillat, and commaunded Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia,  that he should ayde him with all such succours, as Mustafa should haue Forces of Mahomet. neede of. Peter with all expedition, after he had receiued this commaund, failed not in his fauour to furnish him with 30000. horse. Mahomet, whilest Peter Vayuode of Moldauia. Solyman came to Andrionopolis, and Mustafa drawing towards Transiluania, hasting on his voyage with the greatest expedition he could, got to Belgrade, in which place he ioyned with the Sangiac of that prouince, who also was called Mahomet. Among them hee found sufficient men of warre of Bosnia, of whom Oliman a Persian was Sangiac. This name of Sangiac, or Oliman a Persian. Sanzac, doth properly signifie an Ensigne of warre, made of a round peece  of copper guilt ouer, and fixed vpon the top of a staffe, from which there hangeth downe in great tresses of long haires, or horse tailes, and vpon the top of that round peece of copper, there is sometimes fastned a halfe Moone. Mahomet being together with all his troupes, made a good armie, and marched in great iourneys towards Buda. Vpon his comming, the Germanes of Roccandolph being therof certified, began amo^g themselues to take aduice what was best to do. Some counselled to forsake the siege, and others to incounter and giue battaile to the Turks. After such and like opinions, that of Roccandolphs was followed, which was, that it was more expedient to preserue the armie whole and safe, then so rashly to aduenture it, and to doe an act which  might afterward be found dishonourable to them all. According to this opinion he remoued his Campe from the other side of the towne to the foote Roccandolph remoueth his Campe. of S. Gerrards hill, hauing the riuer Danubius on the one side, and on the other side towards the East a great plaine, where he was well intrenched, being first possest of the top of the said hill, where he well furnished himselfe with Artillerie. And in this manner he attended his enemies, with this determination, that if they should assaile him, he would fight with them, and molest them with his Artillerie from the top of that hill, and if hee should be the weaker, or in any perill, he would retire himselfe to the riuer, where he had many boates for that purpose, to goe and come to Pesthe, from whence  with more men he might reenforce his Campe, and entertaine the Turkes with little skirmishes, and in the meane time by a long siege to annoy the towne. Roccandolph being thus busied, the Turkes began to approach, and Mahomet had sent to view the situation of his Campe, and what courage his people were of. Roccandolph performed the like by Mahomet, who approched so neere him, that his Tents were no further from the Germanes then halfe Mahomet incamped by Roccandolph. a mile, causing all his Campe to bee enuironed by the Asapes with a trench, and certaine rampiers. The other Mahomet of Belgrade was lodged vpon the next hils which compassed that plaine, where Roccandolph was incamped, and lodged himselfe right ouer against S. Gerrards hill, neere vnto the Hungars of Ferdinand, who were lodged in that quarter. After that the  enemies were thus seated, the two Mahomets sent their Ambassadours to salute the Queene, and presented her with a great quantitie of Sheepe and Presents sent to Queene Izabella by Mahomet. Lambes, which they had brought along with them out of the countrie. These Ambassadours entering into Buda, greatly admired at the diligent preparations and defences which they saw made in the towne, for the defence

thereof, greatly commending the force and constancie of the Budians,  that had so gallantly resisted the forces of Ferdinand, saying vnto them, that they alwaies bore them speciall good will, and that they came for no other intent, then to reuenge all the wrong and iniuries which was offered to them. And hauing conferred with the Queene of all that which was giuen them in charge, they returned againe, receiuing presents double as rich as those which they brought with them, being honourably and pleasantly entertained. The Turkes, by many assaults, suffered Roccandolph to take no rest, whilest on both sides he was hindered by prouiding boates and barkes to keepe firme before one part of the Turkish armie which came vp Danubius, and was alreadie arriued at an Iland called Chep, nigh vnto the banke side,  which, if he had followed the aduice that the Hungars prescribed, should haue been fortified and well planted with Artillerie, before the enemies had been masters thereof, for by that meanes they might haue endamaged their armie, and easily defended that they should not haue incamped there, by reason they should haue been constrained (maugre their wils) to forsake that plaine, and retire backe, considering that from that Ile, the Cannon might scoure the plaine in any part wheresoeuer. But wicked and aduerse destinie, willing that Buda should by any meanes whatsoeuer fall into the hands of Solyman, and that the armie of Ferdinand, by the carelesnes of the Commaunders, should bee broken and ouerthrowne, blinded Roccandolph  that he had no care to fortifie it, but onely with certaine souldiours, and a few field peeces. Mahomet, who was not in any thing negligent, perceiuing another hill, which was by the Iland where the Germanes had the guard (being very drowsie and sluggish in their charge) did deliberate with himselfe to assaile them on the sudden, whilest in another place he caused the alarme to be giuen to the whole bodie of Roccandolphs Campe. Following this determination, before the dawning of the day he commaunded his vessels to saile before the Ile, and giue the assault vpon those of Roccandolph, which were also by the Ile, and against the bridge, which he caused to bee built, that vpon any occasion he might saue himselfe and retire to Pesthe.  The Ianisaries entring suddenly within this Ile, began to cut the throates of The Ile of Chep taken by the Turks. the souldiours who had the guard thereof, and of whom before they were wakened from their dead sleepe, and that they were somewhat safe from the feare that had before possessed the^, there remained slaine vpon the place well neere 600. The bruite of this alarme being spread abroad, our souldiours, who were on the other side, putting themselues in order, began to discharge certaine peeces of Artillerie, which were vnder the couert of a wood, lately cut, by the riuers side, and so greatly annoyed the armie of the Turkes, that they were very rudely disordered: and if those of Roccandolphs armie had that day acquited themselues of their vttermost deuoire, they had quite ouerthrowne  all their enemies, who in the end, by the disorder that happened amongst ours, and by the dexteritie of the Ianisarie harquebuziers, remained victorious, all the vessels of Roccandolph being taken and broken, the greatest part of the bridges cut off, and the Ile vnder the Turkes command. At the same instant Mahomet commaunded that the rest of Roccandolphs Campe should be assailed in two places, which then by the prowesse and valiantnes

of the Bohemians and Hungars, and certaine Germane Captaines, they held good, and for that time maintained firme and sure footing. But  the tediousnes of the fight was an occasion that the forces of Ferdinand waxed faint and wearie: and to the contrarie, those of Buda, by reason of the Turkish ayde, increased their courage.
Solyman being aduertised of all that which passed vntill then, departed Solyman entereth into Hungarie. from Andrionopolis in great iourneys with 200000. men to come to Buda, and marching with great diligence, gaue notice to Mahomet of his departure, which being also knowne to Peren, who was one of the chiefest of Roccandolphs armie, caused presently the Councel to assemble, perswading them instantly to retire to Pesthe, and not to attend the arriuall of all the Turkish  force. To this opinion Roccandolph answered, that he could not depart without the commaund of Ferdinand: and vpon that resolution, Salm was dispatched to goe towards Vienna, and whilest within a Brigantine he went a long Danubius, feare and necessitie in the end constrained Roccandolph to raise and retire himselfe to Pesthe, beginning in this manner to march with Roccandolph raiseth his Campe. his people. First, he sent before all the Hungars with the great Artillerie, waggons, and other baggage, which should any thing annoy his armie vpon the way: after those, all the Germane and Bohemian Caualarie marched, with a good troupe of infantrie: and in the rereward marched all the footmen, with the rest of the baggage. Euen now the Vauntgard and battaile  were alreadie (by the obscuritie of the night) arriued at Danubius, causing bridges of boates to be made. When the two Mahomets were aduertised thereof, by two Vsaron horsemen (who fled from Roccandolphs Campe) they presently assembled together, and caused their people to march in two places, sending the Ianisaries of one side, with a good troupe of Caualarie: and on the other side, the remainder of al the horse, with all the infantrie that The ouerthrow of Roccandolphs armie. remained. The beginning of their assault was with cryes and horrible shrikings directed vpon the Germane quarter, which they presently fired. The Germanes and Bohemians, who alreadie were at the riuers side, were greatly astonished at so sudden a charge, endeuouring themselues to dissemble  their flight, they began valiantly to make head. But all the rest of the armie in the Tents was out of order, and especially those a long the side of Danubius, where euery one, without order or shame, endeuoured to saue himselfe by pressing into the boates, and neither by blowes, threates, nor intreaties, were any able to draw them back, much lesse to make them stand and turne their faces: so great was the feare they were possest withall, and the more, in respect of the astonishment which the fearfull thundring of the Cannon made that night in euery place, and euery one was so degenerated and discouraged, that neither Roccandolph nor his commaunds were of any force or authoritie to stay them, who also, besides the incomparable griefe which greatly oppressed him, was sore wounded, and by his indisposition, the rest  of the souldiours, who were appointed to fight, being aduertised of this generall feare, retired themselues by little and little, seeking by flight to saue themselues as well as they could. Thus all in the end went to the spoyle and ruine of fortune. The souldiours of Peren were the first that were charged by those of Belgrade; and the Germanes, who kept S. Gerrards hill, were

ouerthrowne by the Ianisaries and Turkish Caualarie, and with great  slaughter were throwne headlong downe. The Budians sallying forth by the Port of the water towre (so called for that it was continually beaten vpon with the waues of Danubius) and taking a couert way, which was made before by King Iohn, charged vpon the flankes of the Bohemians, ouerthrowing all those who were before them. The Turkes who were at the guard of the Ile of Chep, vnderstanding of this tumult, caused their vessels to flote vp against those of Roccandolphs, vnder the charge of Casson their Captaine, who after a long fight against their enemies, and seeing the disgrace of fortune (which vpon all sides was poured out against our souldiours) vnloosing themselues from the hands of the Turkes, and being more  light and swift then they, began to cut the water with the force of their oares, and with a speedie swiftnes saued themselues in the Ile of Comar. Frier George in the meane time, in another part set fire on the Kings stables, which were possessed by Roccandolphs people, and which was full of hay, which burnt so cruelly, that the light thereof was seene in Pesthe, and by the vehemencie thereof, it seemed all Danubius had been on fire. By such an vnlooked for alteration of fortune, all the rest of Roccandolphs Armie hauing lost both courage and men, they fled in great route, and 3000. souldiours of seuerall nations, (who flying the crueltie of the enemie, retired themselues into the Church of Saint Gerrard) were all cut in peeces, not sparing the life of any, but those which they could sell or keepe for slaues. Casson  with his people and vessels pursuing them that did flie, and arriuing by Pesthe, gaue such a feare to the souldiours and Citizens, and to those who Pesthe taken by the Turkes. were newly saued, that presently forsaking their habitation, they left him to be Master of the towne, without any further impeachment. Vpon his entering into this towne, he committed the most horrible massacres amongst the poore inhabitants, that euer was heard of, and so generall was the slaughter, that the bloud ran downe the streetes like a little brooke, not sparing any of what degree of sexe so euer.
Roccandolph now seeing his Armie to be wholly discomfited, was constrained to take a Brygantine, and saue himselfe in the Ile of Comar, where  within few dayes after, he ended his life in the towne of Samar, leauing to The death of Roccandolph. the Turkes, with great losse of his nation, victorie, in which defeature, besides the losse of 36. great peeces of Artillerie, and 150. lesser, there was slaine 25000. men, not counting the infinit number of those who were made slaues. Solyman (who greatly desired to giue such a checke) vnder the colour to aide the Queene and the Frier, marched with as great diligence as he could, and made verie great haste; but first conceiued with himselfe, to be secure of the suspition which he had of Stephen Maillat, (who at that time gouerned Transiluania in the name of Ferdinand) against whom (as we  haue sayd before, not willing to leaue behinde him such an enemie) he sent Mustafa. This man assisted with 30000. horse by Peter, Vayuode of Moldauia, with the Vayuodes of Transalpina and Valachia, and with the Mustafa warreth in Transiluania. men of Achomet, who was Sangiac of Nicopolis, together with this Armie, which besides the infantrie, amounted to 50000. horse, set forward against Transiluania, whereinto he entered by Sicilia, notifying to the Transiluanians,

that he was not come with any intention to spoyle or destroy them, but only to negotiate and treate of certaine important affaires with Vayuod  Maillat: against whom notwithstanding he caused his people to march. Maillat seeing himselfe enuironed with so great a multitude of enemies, Maillat Lieutenant for Ferdinand in Transiluania. and finding himselfe in feriour both in men and other forces, and being out of hope to haue that aide which Ferdinand promised him, (by reason of his late ouerthrow before Buda) doubting of that which afterward happened, determined with himselfe to retire to Fogar (a Castle in Transiluania) which by reason of scituation and art, being marueilous strong and defensible, was presently enuironed by Mustafaes Armie, and furiously battered Fogar besieged by Mustafa. with Artillerie. But the enemies seeing neither by 1000. assaults, which in vaine they had attempted, nor by any force they could win it, aduised with  Achomet, to vse some cunning and deceit, to effect his enterprise; whereupon they sent to Maillat, perswading him by all effectuall reasons, that he should yeeld himselfe to Solyman, and to seeke this reputation and fauour, rather to be in the number of his friends, then of his enemies, and from whom he could not chuse but hope for infinite clemencie and many great fauours; they further assuring him that he would freely leaue him the degree of Vayuodship, with the whole seignorie of that prouince, and that he would demaund of him no other thing, but a certaine reasonable and honest tribute: and besides they perswaded certaine Transiluanians, to goe and negotiate with him about this busines, if they would haue peace and quietnes  betweene them; and aboue all they should endeauor that he might come to parley with them, because if he did otherwise, they would with fire and sword, in the worst sort they could make war vpon them. These messengers endeauored so far, that they entered into Fogar, and conferred with Maillat of all that which they had incharge, greatly importuning him with earnest entreaties, that if he respected the loue and good of the whole countrie, he would not refuse so honest and large conditions of peace, nor yet contemne the friendship which in the name of Solyman, was liberally offered to him. Maillat although he reposed no trust in the words of Mustafa and Achomet, in respect of their inconstancie, nor in those of the Moldauian, who  seemed to be the onely meanes; neither in like sort in the offers which were offered to him: thought notwithstanding not altogether to dispise the conditions of peace, and promised to come forth, and offer himselfe to Mustafa, if Achomet would giue his sonne for pledge. But it was refused by Achomet: saying, that he had alreadie giuen him to Solyman, and that he was not now in his gouernment, therefore he could not dispose of him without his commaundement; but in place of him, and that he should thinke himselfe well satisfied, he would giue him foure principall Captaines of his Caualarie for hostages and performance of his faith; which offer Maillat refused. But the earnest entreaties of the Transiluanians, (who perswaded him  to goe) tooke such effect in him, that like a good Captaine and faithfull to his Countrie, careles of all future mishaps which might befall him, for the generall and common good of all, he was content to accept of this offer, and he (good man) as one ignorant of the sinister fortune, and treason which was wrought against him, after he had receiued the hostages, went forth

with a goodly companie to the Turkes Campe, he being conducted to Mustafa  and Achomet, of whom he was honourably receiued. And for the more commodious treating of such things as should bee concluded vpon betweene them, vpon the conditions which were offered to him, the parley was deferred vntill another day, and vpon that day the Moldauian inuited him to dinner, and he in the meane time returned to Fogar. The appointed day being come, the Moldauian caused a sumptuous banquet to bee prepared, and commanded those who should be present, that at the sitting downe at the table, they should propound certaine pleasant and facetious speeches, and that from them they should proceede to outragious words, and after that to armes, and that vpon this tumult they should seize vpon Maillat, and  take him prisoner. Which from point to point was fully performed, as had been before determined of. For Maillat being come to the Tent of the Moldauian, was by him entertained with great mirth, and cheerefully. And dinner time being come, he placed him at the table with all the other inuited: who, after they had exhilerated themselues with pleasant discourses, performed that so well which they had in charge, as taking armes in hand, they would needes offer violence to Maillat, who in such an act minding to Maillat arested prisoner among the Turkes by treason. crie out treason, and to defend himselfe (being a very strong and stout man) and to accuse the Moldauian of that infamous deede, he was presently seized vpon, and bound, and spoyled of the richest things he brought with him, he exclaiming that he had thus vilanously, and vnder pretence of friendship,  so treacherously deceiued him. Achomet came in, who, faining bitterly to reprehend the Moldauian for such a dishonourable act, aduised him not to violate that faith, for confirmation whereof, pledges had been giuen, and that he should not be an occasion of the death of those Captaines which were sent to Fogar. To whom (in manner of disdaine) the Moldauian made answere, that he caused him to bee apprehended for certaine iniuries which he had receiued of him, and that he would keepe him aliue, and send him to Solyman, who afterwards should iudge whether hee were iustly taken or no. 
This being done, the Castle of Fogar (after the pledges were set at libertie) by the treason and wickednes of those who commaunded it in the absence of Maillat, was within a while after yeelded to the Turkes: although some say that it was for the deliuerie of Maillat, and those of his traine. By Fogar taken. this meanes Maillat, and (as we shall hereafter speake of) Valentine also (who were the two principallest of the Hungars, and who alone were remaining of the ancient Huns) vnfortunately happened at one time vnder the tyrannie of their enemies, who caused them to dye in prison at Constantinople: and not being able otherwise to vanquish them by armes, they were in the end subdued by the deceit and treacherie of Peter the Moldauian. 
Mustafa and Achomet hauing the possession of Fogar, and not seeing The Transiluanias sweare fidelitie to Stephen. any who opposed themselues against them, caused all the Transiluanians to sweare fealtie to Stephen, the sonne of King Iohn, vnder whose gouernment euery one liued peaceably, hauing been, before that, thirtie yeeres in subiection to his father, vnto whom they were very affectionate and faithfull subiects.

These things being thus pacified in Transiluania, the two Mahomets tooke their way towards Solyman, who trauailing in great hast, receiued  newes of the victorie which the two Mahomets obtained at Buda, which was the cause that afterward he marched more slowly, and performed his iourney at his owne ease, and with great pleasure. In the end, at the beginning of August, Anno 1531. he arriued within two miles and a halfe of Solyman arriued neere vnto Buda, Anno, 1531. Buda, where he lodged his Campe, being come, not so much to restore the Queene and her sonne to their first estate and tranquillitie (as to euery one hee bruited abroade) as to reduce this towne vnder his tiranny, and to settle himselfe there, without any great expence, knowing the commoditie and succours that he might receiue thereby in his warres, which he hoped to commence against Ferdinand. The Armies of the two victorious  Mahomets being ioyned to his Campe, he did highly commend them; and also Mustafa and Achomet, because without effusion of blood, they had with such good expedition, brought the affaires of Transiluania to so wished an end: and after that, they presented to him Maillat as a prisoner, who within Maillat sent to Constantinople. a while after was sent to Constantinople with Valentine Turkey. Afterwards there were brought before him, and before the Sangiacs and Bashaes, all the other prisoners who were taken at the ouerthrow of Roccandolph, and were bound with long cordes foure and foure together, being about 800. amongst whom were certaine Captaines of marke, namely Baltasar The massacre of prisoners executed by the Turkes. Pocan, Taisch, Bursicchy a Bohemian, and others, whose liues were saued  at the instance of the Queene, and all the rest (as those who contemning the peace and friendship, which by his Ambassadours he offered vnto them) were by him condemned to die, which presently was performed by the Ianisaries, in such sort, that in an instant they were beheaded; which certainly was a miserable spectacle.
This being done, Solyman sent three fayre horses to King Iohns sonne, furnished Presents of Soliman to Stephen, and to the Hungarish Lords. with golden harnesse, pearles, pretious stones, and rich plumes, apparell, and cloath of gold. He also sent to other Hungarish Lords, and the chiefe men of his Court, certaine fayre long gownes after the Turkish manner, and chaines of gold. His Ambassadours being admitted to ye Queenes presence,  presented, in the name of their Lord and Master, to euery one the presents which they brought, and courteously intreated the Queene to send her son with the chiefest of her Court to Solyman, who greatly desired to see him, Soliman requested that Stephen might be sent him. and that she would not distrust any thing; assuring her, that all should fortunately succeede to her owne content; this being his vsuall manner, not only to maintaine and increase the kingdomes and estates of his friends, but also to defend and preserue them: and that for that cause hee desired to know and imbrace his sonne, who had been so great a friend vnto him, and in token of perpetuall amitie, to be acquainted with him: and in respect of her, that he bare no lesse regard and honour vnto her, then if she were his owne  daughter or childe: and that he would willingly haue come to visite her, if it were not forbidden him by his law, and that also to preserue her honour, and to auoyde all suspition, he would by no meanes that she should come and visite him in his Pauilion, contenting himselfe to haue the child sent him with his Nurse. Solyman made this request, to the end that he might with

more ease get possession of the towne of Buda, (as within a while after by a certaine deceit he did) and also to see if this childe were a sonne or daughter,  for that it was bruited to bee a daughter, and the rather so suspected, because the Queene would not suffer any to see it, and therefore she had it priuately nursed, and to know the certaintie thereof, he was desirous that she should send the child to him. The Queene being greatly troubled by such a demaund, would willingly haue made a resolute answer to the contrarie, that she would doe nothing therein: but presently Frier George interrupted her, and praied her that for the auoyding of doubt in the mindes of the barbarous Stephen, by the perswasio^ of George, is sent to Solyman. Turkes, she would not faile but send him, offering to accompanie him himselfe, and to bring him backe againe safe and sound. By such speeches the Queene was somewhat appeased, and caused her sonne to be richly  apparelled, as beseemed the maiestie of a King, and sent him in a faire Coach richly gilt, hauing with him his Nurse, and certaine Ladies; and in this equipage she sent him, accompanied with all those who had receiued presents from the Turke. He approaching nigh the Turkes Campe, certaine troupes of horse, in excellent good order, and followed of many bands of Ianifaries, were sent before to meete him, and doe him all honour, and he was placed in the middest of them, and conducted with this pompe to Solyman, who, with all lenitie and curtesie, friendly receiued him as a Vassall of his house, and sonne of a King, which had been his great friend, being also willing that his children, Selim and Baiazet, (borne of Rosa his wife) should doe him the like  honour. These two children onely were in the Campe with their father: Mustafa his eldest sonne, and borne of Cercassa his first wife, was then sent into Amasia, vpon the frontiers of Persia, by the subtiltie of the said Rosa, who aspired to exalt her owne children, and debase and suppresse the other. Solyman hauing curteously entertained this childe, and making shew to him of all possible good will, commaunded the Bashaes to inuite all the Hungarish Lords to dine with them, and that they should prepare a bountiful banquet, furnished with all sorts of daintie cates. Afterward he commaunded certaine Captaines, that (during this feast) they should faine themselues to goe and see the towne of Buda, and also finde the meanes to seize thereon without  Buda taken by the Turkes with deceit. any bruite or tumult, making shew, that as some entered, others should come forth, to the end that the Budians might not distrust this matter, which was wisely performed. For many entered by troupes by the Port of Sabatia, with semblance onely, as though they had been strangers desirous to be hold nouelties and the singularitie of a towne: but few came forth, and many of them remained within, in so much that for one of them that came out, there entered seuen. And by this policie (when they thought themselues of sufficient number) they suddenly forced the guard of that Port, who nothing distrusting such a treacherie, were content to yeeld, and these being seized thereof, they gaue thereby enterance to a good troupe of souldiours,  who were not farre from thence ambushed, attending the issue thereof. They being now masters of the towne, they presently passed to the place and Palace of the King, and the Captaine of the Ianifaries made proclamation through the towne, that none should come out of his house, but that euery one should peaceably stay therein, and that if the citizens would liue in

quiet, they should render vp their armes into his custodie, which was presently done; and in token of their fidelitie, euery citizen tooke a Turke into  his house to lodge, and they all carried themselues so mildly, that it seemed The marueilous obedience of the Turkes. there was neuer enemie entered into the towne, nor any Turke whosoeuer durst giue his host a foule word.
Solyman vnderstanding that Buda was taken, and all things quiet therein, (although it was almost night) sent the Queene her sonne againe, retaining Stephen sent back to Buda, and the Hungarish Lords were stayed. with him all those Princes and Lords who accompanied the King, namely, Frier George Bishop of Varadin, Peter Vicchy, neere kinsman to King Iohn, and one whom the Queene greatly respected, Batian Vrbain, Gouernour of Buda, Stephen Verbetz, great Chauncellor of Hungarie, and Valentine Turky,  Lieutenant generall of the Kings armie, with many other. The Queene seeing by this craft and deceit her towne taken, and those great personages who accompanied her sonne, to bee detained prisoners by those, of whom she thought to finde ayde and comfort, knew not for the present what to do, being as much as was possible, surprised with a feare of the worst, and with a certaine griefe which happened by such an vnexpected aduersitie: she, duly considering of these premises, fearing least the rest should also be taken away fro^ her, writ very humble and submissiue letters to Solyman, instantly requesting him not to violate or offer iniurie to the fidelitie, which she had reposed in him, and which he confirmed vnto her by many his Letters patents, and  that in like sort he would be mindful of his accustomed clemencie and magnanimitie on the behalfe of his childe, who of his owne accord made himselfe the friend and Vassall of his house: and that it would please him to release those Lords, which he detained as prisoners, who had so well serued and defended her, during the passed warres, considering that vpon his faith and royall promise she had sent them with her sonne. This letter being sent, was sufficient to mollifie the outragious furie of the Turke, who, vpon the receipt thereof, held a Councell to consult thereupon. And opinions A Councell held vpon the deliuerie of the prisoners. were different, and did not agree together. Mahomet, Gouernour of Belgrade, with many other, would that all those Lords that were prisoners  should be beheaded, and that they should send the Queene and her sonne to Constantinople; that hee should place a Basha in Buda, with a good and strong garrison to gouerne and defend it against the assaults of the Christians. On the other side, Rostan Basha (vnto whom the Queene had sent rich presents) refuted the opinion of Mahomet, and of his adherents: saying, that if Solyman followed their aduice, he would greatly blemish the reputation of his renowne, and that his faith and promise would not bee any whit at all esteemed among other nations, when they should so apparantly see that it was not obserued, especially to those, vnto whom at their owne requests and intreaties, he had giuen it for ayde and succour; and that the example of Buda considered, neuer any would afterwards call him to succour  them, fearing that the like surpise would happen to them: and therefore he thought it better to suffer the Queene to enioy her state in peace, with some augmentation of tribute, and by that meanes he should auoyde the infamie of infidelity, whereinto euery one of them should fall with euerlasting ignomie. By meanes of such diuersitie of opinions, the Bashaes could not agree,

Solyman not determined of any resolution, dissolued the Councel, seeing the  time was come wherein (according to his law) he should offer sacrifice to God, which was the 30. of August: and to that end he sent into Buda his Sacrifice made by Solyman in the great Church of Buda. Priests, to consecrate for him the great Church, according to the Mahometaine manner. And they ouerthrew all the Aulters, and pulled downe all the Images, clensing and hallowing the Church after their custome. That being done, Solyman with his Sacrificers entered into the towne, taking therevpon occasion to dismisse the Councell, and would not execute any thing, concerning that which his Bashes had counselled him vnto. But taking a more milde and pleasing course, hee gaue notice to the Queene, that she Solyman sent Queene Izabella and her sonne Stephen to gouerne in Transiluania. and her sonne should presently depart the Castle, and that she should retyre to Lippa, which is beyond Tibiscus, to gouerne the kingdome of Transiluania,  where she might liue in better securitie and content, then at Buda, and where she should be a neighbour to the kingdome of Sigismond King of Polonia her father, and there they should remaine vntill her sonne should come to age, and be able to gouerne and rule that kingdome, of which he offered himselfe to bee an ouerseer and protector, promising to make restitution thereof vnto him at that time; alleadging for his excuse, that it imported her sonne no lesse to haue sufficient and carefull ouerseers to gouerne Hungarie, then of other persons able to defend and preserue it for him. Whereupon he nominated Peter Vicchy to be Gouernour of the County of Themesuar, and of Peter Vicchy Gouernour of Transiluania. the neighbour countries bordering thereon, and willed that Stephen Verbetz,  a man in yeeres, wise, and prouident, should remaine at Buda to execute Iustice, and to haue respect to the Hungars. And to encourage her the more to depart, and beginne her iourney with best conuenience, hee offered her waggons and horse, as many as should bee sufficient to carrie her baggage, and other moueables, and besides, he appointed her a sufficient conuoy of Caualarie, and Ianisaries to accompanie her vnto Tibiscus, he hauing (notwithstanding those his fained promises) another secret intention in himselfe, that within a while he would make himselfe absolute Lord, not only of Transiluania, but also of all Hungarie, which was on the other side of Danubius towards Vienna, not being able at that time to prosecute so difficult a  matter, in respect of many occasions and impediments, which did then greatly hinder him from it. Afterwards he named King Stephen his Vayuode, and George with the Queene ouerseer of Stephen. confirmed the Queene to bee his gouernesse, raigning in Transiluania, and made Frier George her coadiutor and Treasurer, following therein the last will of King Iohn, bequeathed to him by his Testament, of which he said he was and would be an executor. The Queene hauing vnderstood this cruell and vnlooked for commaund, and bathing her face with teares, did extreamely blame and grieuously crie out against the naturall impietie of so damnable and faithles a Lord, who (against his vowed faith) depriued her both of her kingdome, and of all that which she held most deere: but seeing no remedie,  she patiently yeelded to fortune her enemie, and left the Fortresse (out The Queene departeth from Buda. of the which the Turkes would not suffer her to take any Artillerie nor munition, but onely her moueables) and tooke her iourney out of the towne of Buda, with such prouision of waggons and horse, as Solyman would appoint her.

Vpon her departure, the Turke presently set at libertie all those Lords The Hungarish Lords set at libertie. which he kept prisoners, except Valantine Turky, who, as hath been said, was  sent prisoner with Maillat to Constantinople, where within a while after they both dyed. The other, although they were greatly offended to see The death of Maillat. themselues so fraudulently depriued of their lands and goods, yet were they exceeding ioyous, seeing themselues free and secure of their liues, whereof they stood in great dread. They being thus at libertie, they presently went to the Queene, who, together with them and the Frier, and certaine other of her household, tooke their way towards Transiluania, being often constrained for want of horses, to draw her Coach with oxen, which she notwithstanding endured with an inuincible and noble courage: alreadie very well The constancie of the Queene. perceiuing that her affayres were in a manner declining; and besides, seeing  her selfe (according to womans nature) to bee a weake and tender woman, not able to resist so sad and heauie blowes, which fortune began alreadie to torment her with. But being now fully resolued to make small account of al misfortunes that might betide her, took notwithstanding alwaies good heede (during these aduersities) to preserue her authoritie and royall gouernment, in such decent and discreete manner, that during her life she was greatly honoured therefore, as her dignitie well merited.
In the meane time while the Queene with these complaintes and griefes drew neere Transiluania, Ferdinand hauing receiued vnder the conduct of Roccandolph this bloudie ouerthrow, and wonderfull losse of people,  Artillerie, Munition, and speciall townes of importance, distrusting the Turk would amasse together all his Armie before Vienna, presently dispatched Leonard Velsh to the Ile of Comar, (after the death of Roccandolph) to reallie Ferdinand sent to Solyman to demaund peace. the remnant of his Armie, and with all speed to conduct them to Vienna, and to fortifie the said Ile with the best defence he could. And seeing on the other side his brother the Emperour Charles so busied in the affaires of Germanie, that he could not then send him any succours, did deliberate with himselfe by Ambassages to require peace, and to proue how Solyman was affected towards him. To this end he sent an Ambassage by Nicholas Rich presents sent to Solyman by Ferdinand. Salm, and Sigismond Litestan with rich and excellent presents to him, among  which was a cup of golde, beautified and enriched with pretious stones of great valew, furnished with a couer, vpon the which was a diall, that did not onely containe in it the course of the howers, Moone, and Sunne; but also of all the other Starres and Planets. It was a worke made with such excellent and marueilous art, that it seemed a miracle of nature to them, who could seriously contemplate of the rarenes thereof; and it came by succession from the Emperour Maximilian. These Ambassadours arriuing at the Turkes Campe, first presented themselues to Rostan Basha, and afterward to Basha Casson, who lodged them in honorable tents, and the day following,  they dined with the Bashaes at their owne table. The feast being ended, they tooke from them their weapons, and also their kniues, (according The manner to present an Ambassadour before the Turke. to their custome) and were by the Bashaes (euery one of them betweene two Bashaes that lead them arme in arme) presented before Solyman, whose hand they kissed, and after offered him their presents, which greatly pleased him, and especially the vessell of golde, that bore this admirable

dial, which he so curiously beheld, that he could not therewith sufficiently  satisfie his greedie sight (so often did he view and reuiew it, both within and without) by meanes of him who vsually kept it, who purposely came with the Ambassadours, curiously demonstrating vnto Solyman the exquisitnes thereof, and caused him to see the excellent workemanship that was with in it, and how wonderfull the worke was. Solyman after hee had sufficiently perused this rare iewell, gaue audience to Nicholas and Sigismond. They demaunded Ferdinand demandeth to be inuested King! of Hungarie by Solyman. that he would giue to Ferdinand, together with Buda, the kingdome of Hungarie, with the same charges and conditions, vpon which before he had agreed with Iohn, promising that the Emperour his brother, for his greater suretie, should send Ambassadours to be comprised in the same peace, and that he would yeeld to the conditions that should be mentioned  therein, whereby he might more liberally and without suspition, by force of armes, enlarge the limits of his Empire towards the East. And the rather to perswade him vnto it, they declared to him, how Iohn acknowledging to possesse that kingdome vniustly, had in the time of his life, of his owne accord compacted with their Master, that after his death, it should be rendered to him, allotting to his sonne such a reuenew as should be conuenient to maintaine his estate, he knowing himselfe to be chosen King, rather by the fauour of fortune, then by his owne demerits. Therefore they besought Solyman to accept into that kingdome, rather their Master for his friend and Vassall, then for his neighbour and enemie, considering he was  alreadie created King of Bohemia, and elected by the Germanes King of the Romanes, and that he was by the Hungers themselues, rather desired to be their King then any other.
Solyman hauing well vnderstood their demaunds, and greatly commending their presents, aunswered them that within three dayes they shuld know further of his pleasure. When two dayes were expired, he caused Rostan Basha to impart vnto them his whole intention, who tolde them, that Ferdinand should render all the townes which had been in the possession of King Lewis, which he did enioy, and that he should vtterly renounce the kingdom of Hungarie; and that Solyman for the iniuries which he had receiued of  him (by reason whereof he was often forced to take armes) was content notwithstanding to pardon him with a light penaltie; to wit, in paying tribute for the Countrie of Austria for the time to come. Vpon such conditions, Rostan said that Solyman was content to entertaine peace and friendship with their Master, or else if he would not accept thereof, that then he would not cease to make continuall warre vpon him, and would presently send to destroy, and wholly to ruinate all the Countrie of Austria.
The Ambassadours seeing they could not obtaine any thing worthie their comming, and that all these their proceedings would dissolue into  winde, demaunded respite to answer this so vnworthie answer, so farre out of peaceable tearmes, and withall to send vnto Ferdinand; which was not granted to them. They thought verely that the Turkes in denying all that they demaunded, would easily notwithstanding entertaine truce, considering that the winter approached, and that to auoyde the inconuenience thereof, he should bee forced to take his iourney towards Constantinople.

But these Ambassadours made shew as though they vnderstoode it not, and in stead of propounding other matters, they tooke occasion to demaund  Balthasar Taish, who was taken at the ouerthrow of Roccandolph, and put in chaines among other slaues. Rostan answered them, that he should be restored without any ransome, when the premised conditions of peace should be entertained; or if warre happened, that then occasion would bee offered to exchange him for some of their owne. Thus they being excluded from all agreement, and depriued of all hope of concluding peace, they in this sort returned to Ferdinand.
Whilest those were in their way to Vienna, Solyman after he had fortified all the frontiers, dislodged from Buda with his armie, taking the way towards Solyman returneth to Constantinople.  Constandinople, leauing within the towne of Buda a strong garrison, vnder the commaund of a Hungar named Solyman, who was turned Turke, and who for martiall affayres should defend and gouerne the towne; appointing besides for the executing of iustice (willing thereby to gratifie the Budians) Stephen Verbetz, whom they all knew to bee a man of sincere life.
As these affayres were dispatched at Buda by Solyman, the Queene trauailed continually vntill she approached neere vnto Transiluania, when she was aduertised by all the principall of the kingdome, that they would not suffer her to enter thereinto, least by the like deceit it should happen to them,  as it fortuned to those of Buda: whereupon she was constrained after so long a iourney, to repose her selfe at Lippa, where being arriued with her sonne, she presently sent to seeke Frier George, that by the friendship and fauour of The Queene was receiued into Transiluania by the fauour of George. certaine of the chiefest, who were specially affected to his part, and many other of his friends, she might by their good liking enter peaceably into the kingdome. George, by the helpe of his friends, effected so much, that the Transiluanians were content to receiue her as their Queene, and vse obedience to her sonne, with no lesse dutie, then if he had been Iohn his father, allowing him as their King, and his mother as his gouernesse. Besides, the Frier managed the affayres so well, that he was againe elected and confirmed by  the countrie, great Treasure, and generall gouernour of that prouince: and within a while he returned to the Queene, who presently after his arriuall, ceased not to iourney vntill she came to Transiluania, leauing to Peter Vicchy the gouernment of the Countie of Lippa, and Themesuar, in respect of the confidence she reposed in him, to the end that he receiuing so large a commaund of her, she might haue more confidence that he would hold and defend it in her sonnes name and to his vse. But this gouernment did, together with the time, so puffe vp his heart with pride, that he durst aduenture to possesse those places as his owne inheritance, and not as things moueable, or depending vpon the Crowne of that kingdome; and yet notwithstanding he did not this but by some secret consent of the Queene. She being arriued  in this countrie, began now to take the rule and administration of the kingdome, in such manner, that she had onely but the name and title thereof, all the puissance and authoritie being in the hands of the Frier, who, vnder the colour of his estate of Treasurership, receiued into his custodie all the reuenewes of the kingdome, and so little did he distribute and allow to the

Queene, that much adoe she had wherewithall to suffice her owne wants. George vseth the treasure of the kingdome and beginneth to gouerne, and little respecteth the Queene.  And hee determining to rule all things, ayded himselfe by all the suttlest meanes, which he thought could any way profit him, to commaund ouer the mightiest of the kingdome, endeuouring himselfe in the beginning, by infinit curtesies, to draw all the gentlemen to his part, and make his faction great, who, after hee had wonne and intised them to his dispose, then vsed them like slaues: and if it happened that they at any time complained thereof, presently he excused and cleered himselfe, saying, that it was not needfull to vse such curtesies and ceremonies with those who were his familiar and kinde friends, but rather to such who were not in any sort bound to him by so strict and faithfull a league. And if he had notice of any one who would  not be allured and wonne to his faction, but rather was enclined to the seruice of the Queene, he straight pursued them with all violence euen vnto death. All this behauiour of the Friers was well knowne to the Queene, in regard whereof she deeply maliced him: and although she could hardly support the griefe and discontent of such a burdensome yoke, yet neuerthelesse she endured all his arrogancie and peremptorie behauiour with incomparable patience, still hoping that time (according to custome) would remedie all: all Empires, estates, riches, honours, pouerties, glories, triumphs, and all prosperous and aduerse things, being subiect continually to inconstant alteration, and there being nothing vnder the concauitie and cope of  heauen, which continueth long in one and the same estate, but is forced within a short time to chaunge the forme, habit, and colour, and which sheweth not the instabilitie of humane actions to bee conformable to the naturall chaunge of her course.
The end of the second Booke.



THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE THIRD BOOKE.
THe Queene complaineth to Solyman of George; he seeketh the fauour and ayde of Ferdinand; of which the Queene hauing notice, aduertiseth Solyman thereof; whose puissance George fearing, he retireth and fortifieth himselfe in Sassebasse, and the Queene leauieth forces against him. Solyman sendeth a Chiauss into Transiluania in fauour of the Queene: the Transiluanians forsake her, and incline to George, who accordeth with the Queene for feare of the Turkes power marching towards him; against whom George taketh armes, and forceth them to retire, and he still vseth the Queene after his accustomed manner: she incenseth the  Transiluanians against him: whereupon he vniteth himselfe to Ferdinand, who maketh Iohn Baptista Castalde his Lieutenant, and sendeth him into Hungarie. The Queene publisheth a Diet, and George interrupteth and dissolueth it. Castalde besiegeth the Castle of Dalmas, which is yeelded to him. The Queene accordeth with George, and Albe-iula is yeelded to him. Many suspitions passeth betweene Castalde and Frier George, and the Queene yeeldeth her selfe to Ferdinand: but George seeketh to frustrate that agreement, who in the end is made Vayuode of Transiluania, and created Cardinall. The Queene resigneth all the royall ornaments to Castalde with the Crowne, which are sent to Ferdinand, vnto  whom the Hungars sweare homage. The Queene departeth out of Hungarie, and George seeketh againe the fauour of the Turkes, who lye in waite for the Queene trauailing to Cassouia.

QVeene Izabella seeing the affayres betweene her selfe and Frier George succeede from worse to worse; and also diligently obseruing his bad and euil demeanour, which was more then her patience could digest or tolerate; and that notwithstanding shee knew not any meanes how to withdraw him from his obstinate wilfull course, being highly offended therewith: had no  other recourse or helpe of redresse, but writ to the Turke, greatly complaining her selfe of the bad entreatie which he vsed towards The Queene complaineth of George to Solyman. her; desiring him that since he was content to appoint and leaue her in possession of that kingdome, that in like sort he would vouchsafe to assist and ayde her out of such a miserable subiection, wherein she was now fallen

into, specially in suffering the cruell tyrannie of the Frier, which was more  burdensome to her, then the iniurie of her professed enemies; and if it were not speedily preuented, it might in time bee the cause of some sinister and ominous fortune: wherefore wholly relying vpon his fauour and clemencie, she effectually prayed him to relieue her against so great a calamitie, whereby she might quietly enioy the same peace, which many times he had promised her, with a faithfull and sincere affection.
Solyman vnderstanding these complaints, made no other shew at that time for the redresse of them, but onely writ to the Frier, that he should vse the Queene as was fitting and answerable to her calling; and that so much the rather, for that she was recommended to him: and if he did to the contrarie,  he would teach him how to behaue himself, yea it might be, he would make him an exa^ple to others, to take better heede for the like presumption. These letters, in stead of causing him to alter his peremptorie behauiour towards her, confirmed him the rather in a more malicious and obstinate will then before. He now notwithstanding seeing all his actions were discouered to the Turke, and that it was behoofull for him to liue more neere and priuate to himselfe, determined (perceuering still in his peremptorie resolution to vse the Queene after his accustomed manner) to assist himselfe, by the fauour George seeketh againe the fauour of Ferdinand. of Ferdinand, who was alreadie crowned King of the Romanes, with an intention to be able by his meanes (at euery assay that might be offered)  to resist and onely defend himselfe against the Turke; and the rather being induced thereunto, through a continuall vexation which he receiued of Solyman, demaunding of him oftentimes (besides the yeerely tribute which was payd him) sometimes victuall, sometime munition, and other extraordinarie subsidies which were infinit, by reason whereof, not being able to satisfie his greedy ambitious minde, the treasure was in the end spent and consumed, in so much that there remained little or nothing thereof; so that he to content his barbarous appetites, was constrained to impose vpon the kingdome new taxes, and tributes, whereby he procured the dislike and hate of euery one. 
In this time was Counte Nicholas Salm Lieutenant generall for Ferdinand Nicholas Salm Lieutenant generall for Ferdinand in Hungarie. Tocchay. in Hungarie, who (as hath been said) was sent vpon an Ambassage to Solyman, to treate of a peace with him. Long before, Frier George desired conference with him in the Castle of Tocchay, where King Iohn (as wee haue said in the first booke) was ouerthrowne by Ferdinands Lieutenant, where (by the meanes of a riuer) Hungarie doth diuide it selfe from Transiluania. But there neuer falling out any oportunitie to see one another; one day (as they both desired) it happened (they nothing thinking therof) but either of them minding to goe some other way, that they met in the middest of a way The conference between George and Counte Salm. comming from Hungarie to that place, the Frier continually soliciting the  Counte, that he might come to him and speake with him for the Kings seruice; and hauing instantly vrged him thereto, the Counte would neuer seeme to hearken thereunto, as not reposing much trust in him, knowing that he was mutable, inconstant, and a friend not much to bee trusted. Notwithstanding, setting at that time before his eyes the great and often solicitation which he daily vsed, to cause him to come to parley; and seeing himselfe

well accompanied with sufficient bands of footmen, and troupes of Caualarie, refused not to hearken to the Frier: whereupon he went to lie at Tocchay  with George, who all the whole night continued together in priuate, with long conference concerning his purpose, saying, that hee had notice that Peter Vicchy, Gouernour of Lippa and Themesuar, had intelligence with the Turke, and vnder colour to giue vp these countries (into which he had inuested himselfe, as if it had been into his owne inheritance) vnder the Crowne of King Iohns sonne: and to comfort and ayde the Queene the more, he would wholly take away the care and administration of the kingdom from him, and reduce it into extreame calamitie, and transferre it (as already he saw some likelihood thereof) vnder the gouernment of the Turke: which did not much displease him for his owne particular, as for the great damage  which all Christendome should receiue thereby, this being manifest that Transiluania is the Port that giueth large enterance to annoy it, which being vnder the hands of so puissant an enemie, Ferdinand might then with griefe easily discerne what preparation and meane this would bee, to enter into his countrie of Austria and Germanie, which he could by no meanes hinder: considering the weakenes of his forces, and his brother the Emperour Charles greatly incombred by the dissentions of Germanie, in regard whereof, he could by no meanes send such succour as was needfull for him; and that for his part he saw him alreadie to be old and sickly, and without meanes to defend this countrie, against the mightie puissance of such an enemy, who  not onely by force, but also by deceit and subtiltie would not cease, vntill he had reduced it vnder his gouernment: And that vpon this occasion, before he would see such an indignitie, and receiue so great a losse, and especially not being able, by reason of the great bonds wherein he was obliged to King Iohn, to doe otherwise then procure that this kingdome might remaine free and peaceable to his sonne Stephen, hee had aduised and determined with himselfe, to haue recourse to the maiestie and princely regalitie of Ferdinand, desiring his helpe to frustrate and dissolue such enterprises, importuning the Counte to recite amply this waightie matter to him, praying him hee  would not faile to fauour a deede so holy and iust: the issue whereof would not onely bee profitable to the seruice of God, and to the good of all Christendome, but also a speciall profit and commoditie to his Maiestie, in whose royall fauour he offered to doe him all possible seruice, to the end that that which hee alreadie had negotiated with the Queene, might take effect, to wit, in perswading her to relinquish that State, according to that which King Iohn had by his last will and Testament decreed; excusing and acquiting himselfe by such like offers, of al dislikes which before had passed, promising to doe him faithfull seruice in time to come, and to obserue and entertaine inuiolably, whatsoeuer it would please his Maiestie to commaund  him.
Counte Salms made him answer, that he would very willingly vndertake to aduertise Ferdinand of all which had passed betweene them two. And to animate and confirme him the more in this his good purpose, he promised him to performe it, both by word and deede, assuring him that Ferdinand would not faile but condiscend to all that which he had demaunded: neuerthelesse

with this condition, that he should still perseuer in his faith and promise,  and effectually obserue all which he had promised him. With this conclusion they both departed, the Frier taking his iourney towards Transiluania, and the Counte towards Vienna, to impart vnto Ferdinand the whole discourse which had passed betweene them.
This conference was not so priuate, but the Queene had present notice thereof: and well knowing that the Frier sounded all the meanes to doe her the greatest mischiefe and spite he could, she vnderstood that he secretly practised to accomplish fully his thoughts, and put her to all trauaile and paine, which hee thought good and meete to chase her out of her kingdome: she well knowing that for this end, and not to doe him seruice, nor for any other occasion, then that which he falsely and wickedly pretended,  practised to ioyne with Ferdinand, and take part with him: and knowing her selfe to be a Queene of weake force, and a woman without the ayde of any Christian Prince, and euen of Ferdinand himselfe, by the friendship and fauour of whom she hoped to preuaile in her necessities, being depriued therof by the subtilties and crafts of the Frier; she was constrained that she might not behold a man (to whom she wished so much ill) to triumph ouer her and her sonne; rather to serue her present neede with the promise and offer of the Turke, esteeming it better for her to endure all that which should happen to her, by the violence of this great disaster, then the euill (although it would proue but little) which might betide her by the Friers wicked policies  and practises. Vpon this resolution, she presently dispatched Iohn Solanze (a man of good esteeme, and greatly renowned in those countries, The Queene sent to Solyman, aduertising him of the Friers practises. and who was very much deuoted to her) to goe to Constantinople, and acquaint Solyman with the practises that Frier George wrought against her. He trauailing with good expedition, arriued in short time before the Turke, to whom he imparted all the effect of his Ambassage. Solyman, who by his owne people had beene alreadie aduertised of all the affayres which were done in Transiluania, and namely of the Friers proceedings, was at this new information, prouoked and incensed the more, and sent presently one of his Chiauses to the Basha of Buda, with expresse commaund that he should  either take the Frier aliue or dead; he also writing to the Transiluanians, that they should fauour and assist his Chiauss in all things which he might neede from them: and charged him that if he did see that they could not execute that which he would, that then he should shew them other Letters Patents, by which he depriued the Frier of all his degree, dignitie, and state, and commanded them all no longer to obey him, but to oppose themselues against him, and according to the manner of that countrie, that they should endeuour to kill him as a traytor, and theefe, and if any refused to execute this commaund, he should threaten them all with death, and ruinate and  quite subuert the whole countrie. He writ in like sort to the Vayuodes of Moldauia, and Transalpina, and to the Basha of Buda, that as often as the Queene required them, they should presently take armes and ayde her against the Frier, with the greatest force they could.
The Chiauss was scarcely departed from Constantinople, and these commaunds dispatched by Solyman, but Frier George had presently secret and particular

notice thereof by many his friends. Vpon which occasion, being well aduised, he retired himselfe from the Queenes Court, to a towne of  good strength called Sassebesse, which he presently caused to be well victualled George retireth and fortifieth himselfe with Sassebesse. and fortified, putting therein a good strong garrison, clensing and deepning the ditches, heightning the rampiers, repayring the wals where they were decayed, and furnishing it with Artillerie, sufficiently to sustaine the brunt of a siege; and in the meane while, he forgot not by the best meanes that he could deuise, and particularly by good words, to cleere himselfe to the Turke. During this time, whilest hee was carefull with expedition to effect this matter, yet neuerthelesse (as being very vigilant) he omitted not to practise on the other side what was fitting for him, that he might not be surprised. Therefore he called together all his friends, and especially the Sicilians  (who are the warlikest people in that kingdome) and from amongst them he tooke into his pay 4000. first causing them to sweare that they should bee faithfull to him. By these and others, he so encreased his forces, that he began to be feared neere and farre off.
The Queene vnderstanding of all these preparations, and certainly knowing, by such intelligence as was brought her, that the Frier made full account to possesse all, and that then for the present she had no other meanes but take him by force, and fearing withall that she should bee chased out of her kingdome, before any succours could come to her ayde; writ with all speede to the Basha of Buda, and to the two Vayuodes, that according vnto the ordinance  which they had receiued from the grand Seigniour, they should send The Queene gathereth forces against George. her present ayde, she speedily aduertising them in what estate the Friers affayres were. They not omitting any time, caused their people to be in a readines, and in the meane time, while they were in comming, the Queene leauied 7000. men, and sent them to besiege the Castles of Brancich and Vincky, which Frier George had built from the ground, vpon the riuer side of Marosse.
Peter Vicchy vnderstanding of all that passed, as well on the Queenes part, as on the Friers, assembled as many men as he could in his gouernment of Lippa and Themesuar, and through his perswasions drew to his partie Serpietre  Vicchy, who was a Ratian, and one of the greatest of his country, and who before time expected to haue been King: he brought with him 8000. Ratians, and ioyned himselfe and his forces with Peter Vicchy, and they went to Peter Vicchy besiegeth Senath. besiege the Castle of Senath, which was belonging to ye Bishop of Varadine, situated in the lower Transiluania, which was kept for the Frier, Bishop of Varadine, by Iasper Perusicchy a Captaine of his, who failed not valiantly to defend it, vntill he was relieued by Thomas Varcocce, although Serpietre vsed all his skill to winne it by batterie. This man being particularly certified of the estate and manner of this siege, was sent with all expedition by the Frier  into the Bishopricke of Varadine, to make a present, leauie of as many persons as could bee found able to beare armes, to relieue Senath. Varcocce hauing diligently ordered all things, and hauing gathered a sufficient number of foote and horse, as well hirelings, as others bound to performe that seruice, and seeing himselfe no lesse gallant and forward to fight, then his emies, as a valiant and prudent Captaine, that would not through his negligence

let passe any fauourable occasion of fortune, after a thousand deliberations, and as many premeditations, resolued vpon the sudden to set vpon  the Ratians in many places, and by the vertue and dexteritie of himselfe, and fauour of the assieged, to make a direct and quicke dispatch to the victorie. Vpon this resolution, he sent in the night certaine Spies, diligently to view and consider the order and martialing of his enemies Campe, the guards, watch, and number, and in conclusion their qualitie and condition, whether they were hirelings, or of the number of those who were to performe such a dutie, and whether they were more of foote or horse, and in what place, and how they were lodged, to the end, that as occasion serued, he might more commodiously fight with them, without preiudice of his owne people. These Spies in the night entering into the Campe of the Ratians, perceiued Thomas Varcocce defeated the armie of Vicchy.  nothing else amongst them but disorder, and that aboue all very great carelesnes, in so much that they were of present opinion, that Varcocce might with great facilitie ouerthrow and defeate them. They hauing with good vigilancie suruaied this drowsie leager, returned againe to Varcocce, acquainting him with all that they had seene and knowne. This increased his courage, and redoubled his desire to giue them battaile: and in the meane time giuing notice to those of Senath, of that which he determined to doe, martialed his squadrons in three parts; placing in the first good store of Caualarie, with many Infantrie; and in the other (which was towards a little hill) making a left wing thereof, he placed the rest of his Infantrie, which were flanked with  a good troupe of horse, to the end, that as the first squadron should charge vpon the flankes of the enemie, this should spread it selfe in forme of a Cressant, and with one of the hornes thereof to beare in vpon the taile of the enemie, and with the other to force the left flanke; and as for himselfe, with the best horse and foote he had, was placed in the middest, and purposed to assaile the enemie before. Disposing of his people in this manner, one morning two houres before day, he marched with so great silence, that his arriuall was sooner felt, then they had any inckling of his comming, and arriued euen by day breake among the Ratians, who thought themselues secure, and charged them at one instant in three sundrie places, with such courage  and furie, and with so great a noyse of Trumpets, Drummes, Phifes, and cryes, that it seemed the world would haue turned topsie turuie. The Ratians seeing themselues (contrary to their expectation) to be assailed in three places, and furiously charged, they could not so soone, as necessitie required, put themselues in battaile for their defence, but began wholly to bee discomforted, and sought their priuate safetie by an ignominious flight, which they bought deere at Varcocces hand, who thereupon made a great butcherie and slaughter of them, pursuing them euen to their homes, and ranging the countrie as victorious, and in his retraict led with him 4000. prisoners, with great and rich spoyles of his enemies, of whom he put to the sword  2500. Hauing by this ouerthrow reduced the countrie to his true and ancient obedience; and hauing assured it from the assaults of warre, and infranchised this Castle from such an extremitie, he victoriously returned to Varadine.
Nicholas Serpietre, chiefe leader of these Ratians, escaping halfe naked

from this tempest, retired himselfe safe and sound into a Castle of his owne,  where his wife was remaining, to whom (almost with teares) he sorrowfully recounted all the successe of his disgrace, vnfortunately happened to him, imputing to fortune the losse of his people, which indeede happened by his euill and negligent gouernment. His wife hearing this discourse, in stead of condoling and comforting his hard disaster, began, not as a woman, but as a man of courage, resolute to vpbraide and reprehend his womanish spirit: saying to him, that he should for shame returne, and recouer the honour of The marueilous courage of a Ratian wife. his blood and house, which chiesly he had lost, otherwise, that she would neuer consent to bee called the wife of him, that was worse then the basest and cowardliest woman whosoeuer, and that he deserued not to haue an  heire of his linage, since so basely he shewed himselfe in such an act. The husband would willingly haue replied and alleadged some excuse for himselfe, whereupon she more inflamed with ire then before, added presently: I would to God (said she) that thou hadst rather beene brought to me in a thousand peeces, if thou hadst dyed in glorie and renowne, rather then to liue in health, as I now behold thee, bringing with thee nought but dishonor and ignomie: knowing well that thou neuer tookest this reproachfull example of thy forefathers, who neuer yet fell into such vnseemely cowardlines, whereinto thy selfe art now deeply plunged. And who of our time is he, that by so base and vile a courage hath committed so foule and enormious a fault? and who hath euer left vnto his heires so great and infamous an outrage,  without being reuenged, as they selfe? Doest thou not thinke that it would rather haue reioyced and contented me, if thou hadst with thine owne hands slaine our enemies, and that my selfe, euen with my mouth might haue sucked their blood, then to see them so cruelly murthering ours, and to sucke the blood of mine? And neuerthelesse, thou leauing all thine dead in the place, darest now presume to come crying before me as a little girle, euen as sound and whole as when thou didst depart from thy house. Auoyde infamous man, and cause that mine eyes doe neuer behold thee, for they shall haue as great shame to see thee to bee my husband, as my selfe to  behold my selfe to bee thy wife, since the condition and noblenes of my blood abhorreth the indignitie of thy person, whom (if it had pleased God) I would in regard of so shameles a fact, I had neuer knowne thee, and so I would esteeme my selfe more proud and ioyfull, then now I am, and in stead of life, I should not bee so vrged, as now I am, to desire death. She hauing ended these words, inflamed with ire and great indignation, departed from him, being many daies and moneths before she would once vouchsafe to see him againe.
Whilest fortune in this sort fauoured the affayres of Varcocce, the Frier went to Megest, not in respect he misdoubted the strength of Sassebesse, but onely to be more neere vnto the Sicilians, vpon whose forces he greatly reposed  himselfe, there being the principall of the kingdome ranged on the The Chiauss of Solyman in fauour of the Queene threatneth the Transiluanians. Queenes part, to who^ they were very fauourable, vntill the Chiauss (of who^ we haue before spoken) being without hope any longer to delude the Frier, or obtaine him by any stratagem, did diuulge to them the Turkes commaund, telling them, that if all of them did not presently take armes against

the Frier, he would procure the Basha of Buda, and the two Vayuodes of  Moldauia and Transalpina, to chastice and handle them, as the deserts of disobedient persons merited, destroying all their townes, and ruinating the whole countrie, as they were wont to doe. But these threatnings little profited the Queene, but to the contrarie, so incensed the hearts of those who were adhearing to her part to succour her, that seeing the Turke began to take vpon him to ayde her, they wholly dismissed themselues from her seruice, in respect of the naturall hate which they bore to the Turkes. Vpon this occasion the Frier omitted no oportunitie, but thereby did the better The Transiluanians forsake the Queene. shadow his ambitious proceedings, imparting to those Lords, that if they any longer fauoured the Queenes part, they might be well assured, that it  would be the manifest ruine and vtter subuersion of their countrie, seeing it was apparant, that vnder the colour of ayde, she endeuoured to bring the Turkes in among them, who once knowing the Fortresses and difficult passages, the condition and fertilnes of the countrie, and prying by all deuises into their commodities, and their other actions, they might within short time finde the meanes to patronize themselues of all Transiluania, euen as by the like facts they tyrannously haue made themselues masters of all Greece.
By these and such like perswasions, the Lords were drawne vnto his faction, absolutely leauing the Queene, and they amassed and vnited themselues  with the Frier, that within few daies he assembled a good armie, and incamped before Albe-iula, where for the most part the Queene made her George incamped before Albeiula. abode, with such few men as she had of the countrie, the chiefe and Captaine generall of whom was Peter Vicchy. Both parties being thus certaine daies without performing any memorable act, the one against the other, the Sicilians began to mutinie; saying, they would returne home againe, and that they would no longer remaine in that place against the Queene. The Frier not knowing the cause of this mutinie, armed himselfe with his Curasse, and being well mounted, went into the middest of the mutiners, who vnderstanding the cause that did thus moue them to this tumult, answered them in this sort; that they should not bee astonished at so great  a delay, the which was not done without speciall aduice and benefit to the whole countrie, and that thereof, there should proceede great good and quiet to euery one, for that now in the meane time an agreement was laboured betweene himselfe and the Queene, which was almost well brought to passe. And for that cause he prayed them a while to haue patience, not doubting but this busines would effect to good end, and that afterward they should returne with great content and quiet. By such and many other sweete perswasions (which he well knew at pleasure how to vse both in time and place) he appeased all this tumult, yet not without great trauaile and labour. But seeing it was no easie matter for him to entertaine  them with words, but that he must in the end conclude by deedes, for that these dissentions were like to continue long, and end by warre and battaile, (which the Sicilians by no meanes would endure) he began (knowing it greatly imported him, in respect the Basha of Buda, the Moldauian, and the Transalpinian were comming against him with three armies) diligently

to seeke an agreement betweene himselfe and the Queene, who also was The agreement between the Queene and George. greatly inclined to peace, (for that she doubted no ayde would come from  the Turke) and she presently accepted of the conditions which the Frier offered her; and the rather, in regard she was disfurnished of necessaries for the maintenance of warre, as of men, money, fauour, and forsaken (as she thought) of the Turke, in whom she reposed but little trust. And being a sole woman, not hauing any whom she might assure her selfe to relie vpon, she thought that the continuance of this peace would be very momentarie; notwithstanding of two euils she determined to chuse the least, and the rather accepted of this agreement which was concluded betweene them; and both willingly dismissed all their forces. 
Whilest Frier George and the Queene were in tearmes of reconciliation, the Basha of Buda on the one part, and the two Vayuodes on the other, being carefully solicited by the Queene, were alreadie in their way, whilest these broyles were in motion, and euery one of them brought a sufficient armie to relieue her: and although she was aduertised thereof, yet in stead of comming forward, she writ vnto them that they should retire, because the Frier and her selfe were now accorded and in tearmes of agreement, and that their comming would bee little profit or commoditie to her. But neither the one nor the other would hearken thereunto, for that they determined among themselues, before their retraict, to enter into Transiluania. The Queene imagining nothing lesse, then of the euill which might ensue of  their proceeding forward, and fearing that it would happen to her, during the peace, which had not chanced to her during the time of warre, to wit, to bee absolutely depriued of her kingdome; sent with all expedition to the Frier, to informe him, that he should vse some present meanes to preuent this inconuenience, and to endeuour himselfe with all expedition, that these forces might returne into their countries, and that she might not neede to send them any presents, whereby they would the willinger retire. The Frier little respecting her request, did not greatly busie himselfe about it, but answered The arrogan cie of the Frier coldly, that they should cause them to returne, who were the cause of their comming: and as for presents, he was not accustomed to send any to  the Turkes, but onely to Christians. And although he made so seuere and obstinate an answere to the Queene to vexe her the more, (shewing his peruerse nature) yet neuerthelesse did he not omit, although it was in vaine, to attempt that which the Queene had commaunded him. But neither the Basha, nor the Vayuodes made no great account of his words nor gifts, but still came marching on, desirous with their armies to enuiron and subdue the kingdome. Vpon such obstinacie of theirs, Frier George seeing it was not George taketh armes against the Turkes. behoouefull for him to omit any time, presently leauied his people at Torde and Egneth, which are two great townes of Transiluania, and instantly thervpon  gaue commaund to all the prouinces of the countrie, that euery one should betake himselfe to armes, for the common good and defence of the countrie, for that the Basha of Buda, the Moldauian, and the Transalpinian, would euery one enter vpon that side next adioynant to him, and spoile and ruinate the countrie. He so diligently applied this busines, that within few daies he had gathered together 50000. men, with who^ he went to Sassebesse,

that from thence he might march against the Basha of Buda, of whom (by  reason he was a good souldiour, and experimented in the warre, although he had fewer men) he had more dread then of both the other, who were not reputed to be so expert souldiours. This Basha arriued with his Campe almost at Deua, a Castle of good strength, situated vpon the riuer of Marosse, which Deua. is one of the principallest riuers of that countrie. When the Frier dislodging from Sassebesse and began to march against him, he dispatched vpon the way Iohn Chendy (a man of good regarde, and of a noble house among the Hungars) with a good troupe of horse and foote against the Transalpinian, Chendy, Lieutenant of George, defeareth the Transalpinians. to defend and stop the passages, whereby he must of necessitie passe, if hee would enter into Transiluania, and also to hinder him that he should not  ioyne with the Basha. Chendy diligently proceeding on his iourney, and gathering together of the next townes (besides the number which he brought with him) almost 4000. men, arriued priuately with them, hard adioyning to the enemie, where they were (as they thought) securely incamped without any feare: and being assured by certaine Spies, what forme and order they held, he appointed his companies to bee stretched forth at large, and so gallant was the shew, that they appeared to bee infinit; and about day breaking, he began to assaile the Transalpinians with great noyse of Trumpets and Drummes, that with the number of men, whereof they were greatly afeard, and the long troupes of their enemies which descended from certaine hils, ranging themselues in battaile, they seemed thrice as great as they were, they  verely thinking the Frier had been there in person with his whole armie: whereupon their hearts presently fainted, and they by no meanes would attend the issue of the battaile, but disbanding themselues they began to flye, and with such disorder, that Chendies souldiours taking courage and following the victorie, pursued them so nigh, that in this confusion of slight, they killed more then 5000. and tooke as many prisoners, bringing with them from their chase 3000. horse, and many Ensignes. By this victorie, Chendy so terrified the Transalpinian, that flying from this ouerthrow, through the cowardlines of his people, he drust not in a lo^g time after take armes against the Transiluanians. The enemie being thus chased on this side the countrie,  he incontinently returned backe to Frier George, inriched with many prisoners, and so great spoyle, as it was a woonder to see. The Frier after he had dispatched Chendy against the Transalpinian, at the same instant commaunded the Sicilians, with all expedition they should repayre to defend their most important townes, which they thought the Moldauian would assaile; that they should fortifie the passages, which naturally by the fauour of the steepy mountaines, were very inaccessible, and such that they might well defend with few men. The Sicilians, who naturally are ancient enemies to The Sicilians and Saxons naturall enemies. the Saxons, being continually catching the one from the other, seeing they must passe by Sassebesse, a principall towne of the said Saxons, and from  thence with violence to proceede through their countrie, leauing that honest regard which they ought to haue had, for the defence of their countrie, they proceeded on to a reuenge, in such sort, that as soone as they arriued at Robet, they began to ransacke all the houses which belonged to the Saxons, burning and ruinating the townes they passed by, insomuch that they did

not a little waste and endamage that people, carrying with them all the bootie which they got. 
Whilest they were thus occupied in such enormious cruelties, they gaue leisure to the Moldauian to enter into their countrie, and without any impediment, to ruinate and pill their townes, and in destroying and burning all their villages, to turne all topsie turuie, which thing (to say trueth) was iustly permitted of God, to the end, that in reason they might endure from their enemies the same calamities and miseries, which so vniustly they had caused those to suffer, who in consideration of common safetie, ought then at the least to haue been reputed their friends. Whilest the Sicilians and Moldauians practised these cruell exploites, Frier George with tedious  iourneys aduanced his Campe against the Basha of Buda, hauing sent before Thomas Varcocce into the County of Varadine, to gather what force he could, as well Infantrie as horse, with intent, that if the Basha would perhaps attempt to passe the riuer of Marosse, being receiued at the halfe passage, he should assaile and fight with him before and behinde, or else that hee should bee forced to retire halfe broken and ouerthrowne. But the Basha also distrusting The retraict of the Basha of Buda. the same, and being aduertised that the Frier came in person to fight with him; and fearing that if he proceeded any further, he imagined he might be (as he well considered thereof) surprised in the middest, and charged in the rereward, by the companies that were vnder the conduct of Varcocce, assuring himsefe that he was deceiued by the Queene: whereupon  in the greatest haste he could, passing a little arme of Marosse, he retired, and iournied as farre in one day, as he marched before in sixe, and went againe to Buda, not without the losse of 300. horse, who were defeated by Turchy Iohn, the which before his Vauntgard dislodged, he had sent into the countrie Turchy Iohn. of Deue, to range as well for victuals, as also to discouer if there were no ambushments to hinder or annoy his retraict. This Turchy was sent by the Frier to preuent him of the passage, and to annoy him in his rereward: but the quicknes of the Basha caused that hee arriued too late, and tooke away from him all occasion of being able to ioyne with Varcocce, much lesse to  endamage his rereward, which might easily haue been broken and defeated, if these two had been vnited.
The Frier being now assured by these two, that the Basha was retired in the greatest expedition he could, turned his Campe against the Moldauian, who (as we haue said) spoyled and burned the countrie and townes of the Sicilians, and went forward with a vehement resolution, cruelly to bee reuenged of the iniurie, which he esteemed more intolerable, then any that euer he receiued. But the Moldauian hauing notice of the Friers intent, and knowing besides what had happened to the Transalpinian, found it good The retraict of the Moldauian. by the aduice of his Councell, not to attend his comming: whereupon, after great spoyle made in the countrie, he speedily retired himselfe with his  people, as well horse as foote, who were about 30000. leading with them a great bootie of moueables, and beasts, with more then a thousand prisoners, who were taken by a Chiauss of the Turkes, that, in respect of the loue and kindnes he bore to him, came thither with certaine troupes of Turkish Caualarie.

After that Frier George had thus chased all the enemies out of Transiluania, he retired towards the Queene, where with consent of all, in respect of  his valour and prowesse (which vndoubtedly was very great) the peace was The peace confirmed betweene the Queene and George. againe confirmed betweene them two, with such conditions which should like them both: among which he importuned, that the Queene would write to the Turke, and acquite and cleere him of all such matters, whereof before he had been accused. Which request, though it was contrarie to her disposition (for women like not to countermaund their owne proceedings) yet notwithstanding she presently did it. But the Turke being well informed of the veritie of the cause, and of all that which passed; and withall seeing how mightie and puissant the Frier was, and that the greatest part of the kingdome was fauourably addicted to his part; he smoothly dissembling  the matter, reserued the chasticement thereof, vntill better oportunitie, and made shew to the Frier as though he held himselfe satisfied with his fidelitie, and that he very well knew, he of his part was not faultie in any of the late broyles. Whereupon hee sent another Chiauss with Letters Patents Solyman sendeth to the Transiluanians that they should obey George. directed to all the kingdome, by which he commaunded that euery one should obey and reuerence him, as being againe confirmed in all his former honours and degrees. But yet the peace lasted not long, for the Queene in the end seeing the Frier respected not any thing which he had promised by the last agreement, omitted no time, but by the occasion of his absence, (being then in his Bishopricke of Varadine to recreate and solace himselfe)  she began priuately and vnder hand to raise and incense the greatest Lords of the kindome, with intent to assist her, to chase the Frier out of that prouince, The Queene incenseth the Transiluanians against George. and especially those whom she reputed most faithfull and affectionate to her, and most opposite against the Friers proceedings, manifesting to them how his naturall disposition was inconstant and cruell, and how he vsed her badly, not willing to keepe nor obserue any lawes, couenants, promises, nor faith, but aspiring to the vniuersall tyrannie of that countrie, he did thus wickedly demeane and behaue himselfe towards her, with this intent to chase both her and her sonne out of the kingdome, and to remaine sole and absolute Lord himselfe; assuring her selfe, that for the loue and fidelitie  which they in former time vsed to King Iohn her husband, and alwaies maintained the same (notwithstanding all sinister fortune) in the behalfe of Stephen her sonne and her selfe; in regard whereof they would neuer endure this iniurie, nor tolerate such a crueltie farre surmounting all other practised against her person, in falling from so high and eminent dignitie of a Queene, to become an ordinarie and poore Ladie, and their King of Transiluania to become a seruant: esteeming it of greater moment, that they should rather desire to haue the sonne of him and their naturall Prince, for their Lord and Patrone, then a Frier voyde of all faith and honestie, and onely gorged with ambition. 
By such like demonstrations, she so awakened the spirits of euery one, that all in generall (not willing to submit themselues to any other Lord, then to King Stephen and her selfe) concluded to take armes against the Frier, with intent to expell him the kingdome. George hauing notice of this, and of all their other proceedings which was practised against him, and seeing himselfe

weakened of men, and depriued of such forces, which were necessarie to resist the scourges and assaults of such vnlooked for fortune; after he hauing  long pondered vpon these affayres, determined vpon this resolution, to George agreeth and vnited himselfe with Ferdinand. accorde and linke himselfe with Ferdinand, and to conclude with him the practises, which oftentimes without effecting, he before had acquainted him with, he being induced and in a manner constrained thereunto by his extreame ambition and troublesome minde (the enemie of quiet repose) it being tolde him, that if by that meanes he could expell the Queene, he might easily compasse his intention; which was, to see himselfe absolute Lord of Transiluania, which he so much esteemed, that he would often say, he cared neither to be Pope nor Emperour, and that he would neuer goe out of it. By  these deuises one might manifestly discerne the insatiable desire of his ambitious nature, which tended to no other end, then to the sole gouernment of this kingdome.
Now, Counte Salm being dead (with whom hee had alreadie begun to treate of this affayre) and knowing not how to effect his determination, finding himself now neerely driuen, resolued to negotiate this busines by Ambassadours, sending secretly to Ferdinand one of his gentlemen, by whom he gaue him to vnderstand, that he greatly desired that either one way or other, they would put in practise that which he before time had giuen him notice of by Counte Salm, instantly praying him againe, that he would not faile to  send speedie succours, and that it would please him to commit this charge to such a one, that was sufficient and able to withstand the Queene, who had againe begun to bandie against him. And further he shewed him, that if he did not allow and ratifie of his former motions, he should in short time see all Transiluania vnder the Turks gouernment: also willing him, that in the meane while he would send such a man as might bee capable, and haue authoritie to manage such affayres, because it might so fall out, that that which he had often desired might be effected; to wit, that Queene Izabella should wholly and intirely yeeld to him the possession of that kingdome: but with this condition, to obserue such couenants as he had before offered, and concluded  with King Iohn: which if he did execute and performe, then he did not onely promise, but also liberally offer (giuing him quiet possession of all the places and Fortresses which were in his gouernment) to vse such meanes, that he should be thereof absolute Lord and King: and swearing not to faile him in this, he greatly importuned him that he should quickly resolue.
Now Ferdinand (although he knew well the mutabilitie of the Friers disposition, and that he might not repose any great credence in his words) well remembring how many times before he had cunningly deceiued him: and that he apparantly saw that he was not moued to doe him so good a deede for that purpose which he propounded vnto him, but only for his owne priuate interest and commoditie, and that hee might mount to the top of that,  which he alreadie had imprinted in his circumuenting braine, and execute his deseignes: neuerthelesse, seeing on the other side if he did not take hold and credit his words, hee should let him slide out of his hands, in respect whereof he would by no meanes contradict him, especially holding it alwaies for a thing commendable in himselfe, not to bee reproached nor blamed

of any, for not doing his vttermost abilitie, which belonged to a true  and Christian King, to hinder and withstand that the kingdome should not come vnder the Turks gouernment, and that they should not report of him, that by his fault or negligence, he should leaue the ports open to Infidels, and bring into seruitude, not only Austria and the rest of Hungarie, but also ruinate and burne Germanie, with other Prouinces.
Thus vpon these considerations he tooke vpon him the charge of this honourable and godly enterprise, and respecting not the inconstancie of Frier George, but the trauaile and perill which might circumuent him, if he deferred time, presently sent to the Frier 1000. Hungarish horse, payed for foure Ferdinand sendeth ayde to George. moneths, and certaine peeces of Artillerie, to maintaine and defend himself,  vntill he might send him such a man with a puissant armie as he demanded, assuring him that there should bee no fault nor want of any thing, which before he had promised and offered, willing him to perseuer in his good opinion which he had manifested to the world.
Behold now the state wherein this poore and miserable Transiluania was, which (as a man may plainly perceiue from the death of King Lewis, vntill now) was tormented with so many discords, ciuill warres, and assaults, that it was ruthfull for any Christian to behold, seeing of the one side the Turke, and on the other side Ferdinand, and the Lords themselues of the countrie (bandying themselues with one, and then against the other) continually practised al manner of crueltie in it, vsing against it such rigour and violence,  that oftentimes one would iudge it to be almost lost and quite ouerthrowne by her owne euill misfortune; not counting the great losses and damages which she receiued in euery vaine and corner, as well in the fauour and behalfe of Iohn, as in that of Ferdinand, as it oftentimes happeneth in such broyles, where surely the fauour that men beare to the victorious, is no lesse hurtfull and offensiue to either part, then the disgrace into which he vanquished falleth: because that neither the one nor the other receiueth any thing, but with the losse and damage of the very inhabitants and naturals of the countrie. 
Ferdinand with a resolute determination, willing to prepare a remedie for so many mischiefes, and to vnfold and vntagle himselfe from those who had been the cause thereof, and not to omit the occasion which fortune so fauourably presented vnto him, for the conquest of that kingdome (which iustly by succession, by election, and by an agreement appertained to him) determined to vndertake this enterprise, and therein to employ his vttermost endeuour with all his skill and force. And for that this expedition required a man that should bee very wise and circumspect, and one who had good experience in martiall affayres, and who should be vigilant and warie in resisting and apposing himselfe against the Turkish ambushments, and be  able to auoyde and preuent them as occasion should require, and such an one also as should be able to behaue himselfe with that circumspect modestie in this busines with the Frier, that he should giue him no occasion of any new inuention to practise his inconstant wickednes. And besides, seeing that at that time he had none such with him, as the Frier demaunded, he determined to write to his brother the Emperour Charles the fift, that it would



please him to assist, and not to faile him in this so important busines, and withall to send him so sufficient a man, who could with good discretion conduct  this warre to a glorious and happie end, as he desired, well knowing he had many a famous and renowned Captaine with him. He hauing resolued vpon this conclusion, dispatched one of his gentlemen with letters, and besides commaunded his Ambassadour, who was at Auspurg at the Emperours Court, that he should throughly acquaint him with the discourse of this warre, and whatsoeuer else should be giuen him in charge. The Ambassadour, as soone as the genleman was arriued, diligently performed his Masters commaund.
The Emperour vnderstanding at large this enterprise, and considering of what importance this warre was of, and regarding the distrust which he had  of Frederick Duke of Saxon, and of Philip Lantgraue of Hesse (whom as yet he held prisoners) he could not of a sudden so well determine what to doe, not willing to forsake those Commaunders, whom he knew in all stirrings and tumults to be necessarie for him: and further vnderstanding of certaine motions of warre, that Henry King of France intended against him: and besides, the dislike of Duke Maurice, whom he had in great ielousie, for that he would not deliuer his father in law, obseruing the promise which he had made to him before, which was a thing that within short time after (as in place conuenient wee shall at large more speake of) procured him such hate and toyle, as neuer in all his life time he endured the like. Hauing well considered  and weighed all these things, and willing to helpe his brother in his necessitie, specially against the Infidels, determined in the end to send to him Iohn Baptiste Castalde, Counte of Piadene, whom he a little before created Iohn Baptiste Castalde chosen to goe Lieutenant into Hungarie for Ferdinand. Marquesse of Cassan, and who at that time was Master of his Campe, and of the Councell for warre, a man sufficiently experienced in all the former warres vnder the old Marquesse of Pescara: who being called to him, he commaunded that he should prepare and employ himselfe in the expedition of his brother Ferdinand, making him Lieutenant and Captaine generall to his nephew Maximilian King of Bohemia. 
Castalde gratiously accepted this charge which the Emperour had imposed vpon him, and being well furnished with good store of horse and armes, which were bestowed vpon him by many Lords of the Court, of whom he was well beloued and fauored. And among others of the Duke of Alba, the Bishop of Arras, the Marquesse Iohn of Pescara, and of the Duke of Sessa, he put himselfe in good equipage: and taking his leaue of the Emperour, he set forward towards Vienna: where being at last arriued, with a reasonable companie, he was receiued of Ferdinand, and with great mirth and sports by the King Maximilian, with whom spending certaine daies, he was instructed by them of all things which were needfull for this warre, and of the manner which he ought to vse towards the Frier, and how he should gouerne and  commaund this Prouince, and the meanes to entertaine in loue and kindnes the Lords thereof. After that, Ferdinand promised him yeerely 8400. Florins of gold, to maintaine his estate, besides the rewards that should particularly bee giuen him to dispose among men of marke and authoritie who followed him. And to the ende there should bee no default for the true

payment of this money, he made him a more ample and sure assignation.  He hauing thus confirmed his estate and authoritie, he specially commaunded him that he should peaceably and friendly manage his affayres with Frier George, according to his nature, but with speciall discretion, whereby he might at the beginning the better know and enter into his conditions; according to which, and to the experience and practise of things, which daily would present themselues to him, he might gouerne and behaue himselfe, and not to contradict him in any thing, but agreeing to all reasonable matters which he demaunded, he should alwaies shew himselfe towards him liberall, milde, and gratious, knowing well that he was ambitious and couetous: that being the onely way whereby he must walke and temper with him. He also commaunded him that hee should make a memoriall of all  such things which were necessarie for this warre, as well for the commoditie and defence of footmen as horsemen, whereby there might bee prouision made therefore, and all things to be in a readines by that time he should set forward on his iourney: which was presently done, and presented to his Maiestie, according to the articles which here follow.




Instructions for the conduct of an Armie, and maintenance of the same.
1 That first speciall choise is to be made of a good and discreet Generall Lieutenant generall of a Campe. of a Campe, who before hath been practised and experienced in that office,  and knoweth what belongs to that charge, as well to lodge and dispose of a Campe, as also to minister and execute iustice, and to set a reasonable rate of victuals. It is necessarie for him to haue two good Auditors, besides his Secretaries, Notaries, Sergeants, Archers, Masters of iustice, Iaylors, and such other officers, as for example are ouerseers of the Campe, Suruayors of victuals, and such like, by whom all the Campe ought to bee gouerned and subiect vnto, obeying vnto the precept of the ordinances, which daily ought to be set downe. That in like sort all the other officers of the Campe, of what nation soeuer, ought to receiue from the foresaid Generall his ordinances  and commaundements, and to execute them in their quarters, whereby all things may proceede in their right and due course, not at any hand tolerating the retaylers to lodge within the Campe, for feare of famine, and bringing of them to necessitie, or victuals or other marchandise to be heigthned in their price, vpon which things they ought to haue speciall care.
2 That he must haue a generall Comissarie ouer victuals, one that hath A generall Comissarie of victuals. experience therein, who hath the charge to distribute them; and to haue Bakers to make and bake bread; Butchers to giue euery one a sufficient quantitie of flesh; Victulars, Tauerners, Hostlers, and others who are accustomed  to carrie wine, flesh, poultrie, egges, salt meates, cheese, rice, salt, pulse, and other such marchandise: for which necessaries there must bee conuenient roomes, and market places; to make euen measures, waights, and to moderate their prices, seuerally chastising those who shall exceede and infringe the said edicts, or offer violence, or shall inhaunce their marchandise

aboue the price which the Generall hath alreadie rated them at. 
3 Also that he ought to be prouided of a faithfull and politike Treasurer A generall Treasurer. generall, who knoweth meanes to get and bring in money when there shall be need thereof, and to negotiate with Marchants, or others, to haue it at the lowest rate, whereby the souldiours shall not altogether be entertained with words and hopes, but with deedes themselues, suppressing thereby the mutinies and tumults, which often vpon that occasion are stirred vp in a campe.
4 That he ought to haue a diligent and carefull Secretarie, who is to A secretarie. haue the bookes, accounts, and registers of the whole armie, and to keepe the roles of payments that are made to the Generals officers of the Campe, Colonels, Captaines, Ensigne-bearers, Comissaries, Sergeants, and other officers. 
5 Also hee ought to make choise of a wise and suttle Comissarie, who A Comissarie. should haue the charge to know and vnderstand, whether all the Colonels and Captaines, as well of foote as horse, haue as much and the same pay, as their roles bindeth and prescribeth vnto them, whereby the King shall not any waies be defrauded, nor the souldiours deceiued of their pay: and that the Captaines do cause their Colours to be well guarded by the souldiours, to whom they shall bee committed vnto, punishing those who doe not their dutie therein. And that to the said Secretarie and Comissarie, he ought to allow as many officers and clarkes to bee vnder them, as they shall neede, to the end euery man may bee furnished of their due; and that vpon any occasion  they may be readie at hand according to their charge.
6 That he ought to haue a good and experienced Generall of the Artillerie, A Generall of the Artillerie. who may haue the charge to cause it to bee conducted and planted, where want is thereof, and to bestow them in such conuenient places as shall bee appointed. This Generall of the Artillerie ought to haue such officers as is needfull for him, and to euery peece a Canonier, with his Pioners and ouerseers to gouerne them, as well in their iournies, as in places where they are lodged, and euery number of Artillerie ought to haue his Captaine, with so many Pioners as shall be needfull for the voyage, and for the occasion of time. 
7 Besides, he ought to appoint a sufficient guard for the Artillerie, as well footmen as horsemen, vnder the charge of two Captaines, who ought The conduct or guard of Artillerie. to haue a speciall care often to visit and ouersee them, to the end that they be not choked, and that the munition be not fiered.
8 That the Canoniers ought to bee lock Smiths, black Smiths, Carpenters, Canoniers. and Masons, because such men are necessarie for a Campe, to shooe the Artillerie and horses, when neede shall require, to build bridges, Bulwarkes, wals, and other engins vpon any occasion.
9 And because that oftentimes it happeneth vpon the way, that the Artillerie,  Ingins to mount and dismount Artillerie. by default of the wheeles and carriages, doth breake and faile, by which inconueniences it doth much hinder the speed of an armie: therfore to auoyde such lets, he ought alwaies to haue (in such necessitie) other instruments and engins which are fit and necessarie to mount and dismount the Artillerie.
10 The manner being, that after the Artillerie, the munition and instruments

follow: therefore he ought to make prouision of as many waggons Waggons and carts.  and carts, drawne by horses or oxen, as shall serue to beare the powder, bullets, lines or ropes, tooles to mend the wheeles, cariages, axeltrees, and scourers; veriuice, vineger, leade, nayles, and other necessarie things; as boords, double wheeles, double cariages and axeltrees, barrels, spokes and staues of wheeles, hammers, peeces of iron, anuils, pincers, and many such instruments, and to haue them alwaies in a readines.
11 He ought to haue ouer the said munition, a wise and prouident Comissarie, A Comissarie ouer the munition. who particularly may haue the charge to distribute and dispose of them, according to the oportunitie and necessitie of the time, and a good Saltpeter or gunpowder maker, and others who can make and inuent al sorts of artificiall fires, and to beate the powder for the Artillerie and small shot,  whereby no inconuenience should happen through his negligence: and to the contrarie, by the good store of prouision, the armie shall not onely haue sufficient for it selfe, but also that it may be able to send to the neighbour fortresses some reliefe, if neede require.
12 And considering that it is well knowne what profit Pioners bring to Pioners. a Campe, to make trenches, rampiers, mynes, and countermynes; to make plaine and mend the bad waies, to sappe the walles, and holds of townes, or Castles that are besieged; to cut trees, and necessarie wood for the fortification of any place; to digge pits for the commoditie of souldiours, as well to haue water, as also to throw thereinto all the filth and ordure of the Campe.  For these occasions he ought to be prouided of as many as he can, to whom he must appoint a Captaine and other Commaunders, such as it behoueth to haue some knowledge and art to fortifie a Campe, and to make bastions when occasion serueth: which kinde of people are most necessarie for a Campe.
13 That he ought to chuse a Captaine who may haue the care and charge Captaine of the Spies. of the Spies, and another to haue regard to the Guides, they both being very necessarie, and among other things to conduct the Interpreters. These two Captaines shall haue the charge to dispatch all the Spies and Guides that they will employ, to enquire and know by their voyages and trauailes, that  which the enemie intendeth to enterprise against their King and Lord. Vnder these, the Spies (which the Lieutenant generall would keepe by himself) must not be comprised.
14 In like sort he ought to ordaine and appoint certaine officers to clense Officers to clense the Campe. the Campe of the filth and excrements, which is done as well by men as beasts, (which oftentimes causeth a great mortalitie) for that the ayre should not bee corrupted, nor the souldiours fall sicke, and they ought to carrie it by waggons or carts to the riuer, or to throw it into deepe ditches made for that purpose. 
15 That hee ought also to make prouision of good store of waggons, Waggons or carts to carrie victuals. drawne either with horse or oxen, furnished with coffers for bread, bisket, meale, salt flesh, salt fish, cheese, oyle, pulses, and other kinde of victuals: with wine, vineger, and salt, to vse as occasion serueth, and also to carry prouender.
16 He ought also to haue carts to carrie piles, stakes, pickaxes, hatchets, Carts to carry implements and tooles. sawes, pincers, and other instruments fit for Pioners; and good store of

helues for piles, stakes, and other iron instruments, as occasion shall serue in  time and place to vse them.
17 He ought also to carrie with him in the carts, Mils to grinde corne, Mils and Ouens. and Ouens to bake bread on the way, where they can finde no such necessaries, and to leaue them as they passe by in Castles and strong Forts, where they haue none, and to assist them therewith in time of necessitie, which often happeneth vnlooked for.
18 That he ought to be furnished with boates and bridges portable; of Boates and bridges. beames, boords, cords and cables to binde them together; which things he ought in like sort to haue carried vpon the carts, whereby he may bee the better able to passe any riuer, ditch, bogge, or any bad passage. 
19 He ought also to make good prouision of Pikes, Launces, Caliuers, Pikes, Launces, Caliuers, etc. Swords, Murrions, Burgonets, and Corselets, and also good store of Harquebuzes a crock, and men who are able to vse them, and serue therewith at neede. These weapons ought to bee carried in carts after the Campe. He ought also to haue good store of Saddles, Bridles, Bits, Stirrops, Spurres, and all such like necessaries which are fitting for a Campe.
20 That he ought to haue with the armie good Phisitions, Surgions, Barbers, and Apothecaries, to attend and heale the sicke and wounded. Phisitions, Surgions, Barbers, etc.
21 He ought also to appoint a diligent Master of the Post, who ought continually to bee well prouided of good horses, and to follow the Campe,  A Master of the Post. and still hourely with diligence to carrie the aduertisements and answers which come to his hands.
22 And to the ende that the souldiours doe not of a greedie minde Priests. robbe and spoyle others, it is necessarie that they forget not what appertaineth to good Christians. Therefore he ought to make choise of Priests to follow the Campe, with their Vestments and other ornaments, fit publikely to sing Masse, whereby they enclining and addicting themselues somewhat to religion, may vndertake the warre for honor and glorie, and not for spoile, or to inrich themselues vniustly by the goods of their neighbours: seeing that in euery armie, the feare of God, the respect of religion, and the obseruation  of iustice, are the true foundations and pillers of all commendable vertue.
23 That the said Priests ought to haue the charge of the Hospitall, which That the Priests haue charge of the poore and sick louldiours. for the common good of the poore souldiours, shall be ordained in three or foure Tents, at the Kings cost and charges, and the Campe to bee prouided of Phisitions, Surgions, and Barbers to heale those who are sicke and wounded: and that they also bee prouided of seruants sufficient for their turne. And if any of the sicke bee at the point of death, the Priests shall be readie at hand to confesse them, and minister the Communion and al the Sacraments to them, as is fitting for good Christians: and if they dye, to be buried with as great honour as may be. 
24 He ought also to giue commaund to certaine officers, not to suffer Commaunds that none disbandeth themselues. any to disband themselues out of their ranks, and especially when the campe marcheth, and that they may haue authoritie to punish them accordinglie.
25 And lastly, he ought to make choise of a Captaine for the baggage, A Captaine of the baggage.

who shall conduct them vnder an Ensigne, but in such sort, that by the way he doe not intermeddle himselfe with the armie. 




I haue hither vnto written more amply of this note, to the ende it may serue to all Kings and Princes who would manage and exercise martiall discipline, whereby they may know how to prouide and conduct their armies in their iourneys. And whosoeuer hath a desire to see more of this subiect, I referre them to the fiue treatises that the Lord Ascagne Centorio hath made of warre, wherein hee shall more at large see all things distinctlie written.
These Articles being finished and presented to Fredinand, he gaue speciall order to execute them, if not in all places, yet at least in as many as for that time they could conueniently. And whilest they were busie in these  affayres, Frier George fearing, that by too long a delay of succours, which he daily expected, the Queene should assemble so great forces, that the preparation of Ferdinand would bee in vaine, and to little effect to ayde him: wherefore he ceased not by messenger vpon messenger to solicite and vrge him, that his armie should march towards him with as great expedition as was possible, because that in temporising and deferring time, hee feared the losse of so fayre an occasion in the conquest of the kingdome. Ferdinand being aduertised of this, and iudging it best not to omit any time; after the accomplishment and deliuerie of the said Articles which they presented vnto him, and perceiuing that it was best that Castalde should depart with such  men and munition, as for the present he then had, he caused to be dispatched to Castalde a very large Commission, by which he gaue him power and authoritie to cause him to bee obeyed, and to commaund euery one, not onely in Hungarie, and Dalmatia, but also through all Croatia, and euen to the other parts of Slauonia, and lower Austria, minding that he should be chiefe in all the Councels and assemblies which were held in those countries: and hee commaunded him that before he went to the Campe, he should visit the Ile of Comar, and other holds, and enquire in what estate the frontire places were, that so hee might diligently prouide what was necessarie for them; because that they were then but meanly munitioned, through the sloth and  carelesnes of those who had the commaund of them.
Following this commaund, the first day of May Anno 1551. Castalde departed Castalde goeth into Hungary An. 1551. from Vienna, and tooke the way leading towards Agria, where the souldiours were that he should leade into Transiluania, first going himselfe to the frontier places (as we haue said) which he commaunded to be repaired the best hee could, foreseeing that a time would shortly come, which would manifestly declare how profitable it might be, not to haue been slothfull and negligent in these things, which in semblance are thought little and of no validitie, and yet afterward doe cost very deare: for besides the losse of honour, men many times lose for them, both State and life it selfe. Castalde  being arriued at Agria, he found there Bernard Aldene, Campe master of seuen Companies of Spaniards, which Ferdinand at his costs and charges entertained in those quarters, and those to attend him were lodged by the towne. He spent there certaine daies, vntill hee had gathered all his souldiours together, and in the meane time he laboured to furnish himselfe of all

necessaries, which was behoouefull for a battaile. And he seeing this towne Castalde caused Agria to be fortified. to bee one of the most important of Hungarie, and that it was neither  strong by situation nor rampier, and that there was no industrie nor art vsed for the remedie thereof, and that the walles (such as they were) were not yet very well flanked, being rather built after the ancient manner of fortification, then such as of our time: for the remedy of so many inconueniences, he committed the charge therof to Erasmus Teufl to fortifie it, and (by the commaund of Ferdinand) not to omit nor deferre the fortifying thereof, vntill he had fully finished it.
Hauing gathered together all his armie, and seeing that in expecting the Cannons (which by the negligence of those who had the charge to send them, were not yet arriued, and which might bee the cause of some  inconuenience) he determined neuerthelesse to depart without them, giuing notice to Ferdinand, that he should cause them to bee sent with as great expedition as could be. Resting vpon this determination, he departed from Agria the 26. of May, appointing his armie to march in this manner. Hee placed in the Vauntgard seuen Ensignes of Spaniards, who were in number 1200. and 500. Hungars, called Aiduchs, and 1000. of light Hungarish horsemen, named Vsarons, who after the Turkish manner fought with Targets, Aiduchs. Vsarons. Turkish Launces, Maces of iron, Sables, and Murrions: they were vnder the The armie of Castalde. conduct of a Lord of Slesia, named Captaine Christopher, and after them followed 4. field peeces. The Battaile was led by Counte Felix of Arco, and  Counte Iohn Baptista of Arco, they had vnder them one Regiment of 3000. Almaines, all good experienced souldiours and well armed, with 4. other field peeces, and two small Culuerins, with 400. horse, whereof were 300. of Launces, and 100. Pistoliers. He caused to march in the Rereward, the Hungarish Infantrie, with 300. light horse, and the baggage with three field peeces, the whole armie making 5700. souldiours, and 1700. horse. With this small armie, Castalde proceeded on his iourney to conquer Transiluania, against so puissant a Prince as the Turke. And hereof may bee said, as King Tygranes scoffingly said of the Romanes armie, which came to incounter  him, vnder the conduct of Lucullus: That they were too many for Ambassadours, and too few for fighters, for that they seemed but a handfull of men, in respect of his which were 250000. Castalde being arriued in this Militarie order at Tisse, anciently called Tibiscus, which is a large and deepe riuer, which taketh The riuer Tibiscus or Tisse. The hill Carpatus. his beginning in Poland, at the foote of the hill Carpatus, and thwarteth Hungarie, and stretcheth it selfe towards the South, vntill it entereth into Danubius betweene Belgrade and Cenedin, where then it loseth his name. It is in some places eight miles broade, by reason of Quagmires, and Marishes which it maketh, as it findeth the ground there flat and euen, and it glideth so soft and smooth away, that one can scantly see it moue. The water  thereof is very fayre and cleere, and greatly abounding in fish. Castalde by this riuer a while reposed his Campe, and willing himselfe the first to passe it, the better to encourage his Captaines and souldiours: some say that vpon the shore of this riuer he made to them this or the like speech.

If I had not knowne (my braue and valiant souldiours) that your spirit The oratio^ of Castalde to his souldiours. and courage desireth rather the glorie and renowne of God, then your own

proper safeties, I would neuer haue ventured my selfe thus farre vnder your  affiance and valour. And for that I well know the renowne and fame of your predecessors, who haue obtained in this countrie so many victories, will stirre vp in you (my louing companions) courage to follow their steps and honourable endeuours, and that the memorie of their exploites and glorious acts may be as preuailent in you, as they haue been in your predecessors, in co^sidering the things which may now eternise you, I doubt not at any hand but you will cause your valiantnes and vertues to appeare through the world, and specially in these quarters, where we may see more store of enemies then friends, and where in respect of the common enemie, we must with the edge of the sworde make our passage, being now in a Prouince which wee haue neuer seene nor sought after; where is no great suretie  to repose any confidence; where it is a noueltie to see a new kingdome erected; and where infinit daungers doe abound, necessitie forceth, and the warres which now alreadie are prepared against the Infidels threatneth vs; which are motiues (albeit they seeme very fearfull) of which wee ought to make our benefit, to cause our prudence, wisedome, and dexteritie of spirit to bee knowne, (which are vertues more desired then any other) in that thereby men shall see the boldnes and courage of you (my louing souldiours) and the faith and end of that inuiolable oth which we all haue made to our King. Behold we are here vpon Tibiscus, the passage whereof should  cause vs all to reioyce; wee our selues being now out of Italic, you out of Spaine, and the other forth of Germanie, not to follow corporall and effeminate pleasures, which make a man weake, sickly, effeminate, tender, and bleakish: but, to aspire to honour, riches, and victorie, and to haue the reward of our honourable deedes, such as shall bee yeelded to vs by prosperous fortune, which I doubt not but it will bee such towards vs, that ofterrestriall men, it will make vs celestiall, and sound in the ayre so honourable a bruite of our worthie names, that neither time, nor death shall obscure nor rake it vp in obliuion, but wee shall liue time out of memorie, yea eternally. And for that wee are now to deale with people, who are diuerse from our customes and manner of liuing, of whom it behoueth vs to winne their loue  and liking by policie and discretion, and to whom, to the end our manner of life and estate ought to bee an example and myrrour: it seemeth to me not to be vnfitting or vnworthie, but rather necessarie and commendable (discoursing of this with you, and reducing the whole to the first glorie of true Militarie discipline) to aduertise you, that after we haue passed this riuer, and begun to enter into the countrie, (which by vs, in the name of our King, ought to be defended and conquered) to draw the hearts of the inhabitants (which are diuided into three Prouinces; namely, the Sicilians, Saxons, and Subalpinians) to our deuotion, will, and friendship, we must bee with all of  them very modest, temperate, and quiet, and must banish auarice, despise voluptuousnes, and contemne the pleasures of the body, and aboue all, must flye all idlenes; which how hurtfull it is to an armie, and how many euils it bringeth with it, you sufficiently conceiue. Besides, we must auoide robberies, preserue the honour of women, respect ancient persons, haue care of poore children, to liue amongst your selues as obseruers of true religion, to

fauour the friends thereof, and pursue the enemies: and thinke that wee being in a strange countrie, and in another mans house, to doe but that which  you would doe at home: wee seeing by experience that euery beast, though neuer so little, being in his denne becommeth as a Lyon, in defending himselfe from the iniurie and oppression which is offered him: and iudging thereby how much more they ought and will become couragious and hardie in their owne houses, if they see or feele themselues outraged by vs. Besides, ye ought in all your actions to haue God alwaies before your eyes, for the loue and honour of whom we ought to expose our bodies and liues; and thereby manifesting our selues meeke and curteous one to another; and towards our enemies, fierce, bold, horrible, fearfull, prompt, and  hardie, to cause others to know that wee are couragious without feare, wise, and full of vnderstanding, that by such meanes you may alwaies haue together with health, a high way to vertue set open before you, and that euery one of you may with me carrie into his countrie renowne and eternall memorie: not refusing any paine or trauaile, for that no wearines nor any incommodities, or crosses, can, or ought euer to enter into such vigilant or heroicall spirits, whereby to darken or deface the desire and earnest affection which proceedeth from true honour and glorie: and specially, I being with you, not as a Commaunder amongst you, but as a father, brother, and companion as well in aduersitie as in prosperitie. And to the end you may assure  your selues that it is true which I haue said, my selfe will be the first that will passe ouer this water, and will not refuse the first danger that may befall me; to the end that by this example, euery one of you may learne rather to esteeme honour and reputation, then his owne proper life, and preferre an honourable death before a vile and dishonest life.

Hauing thus ended his speech, he presently passed to the other side of the riuer, causing also the rest of his armie to follow, which was eight daies in Castalde entereth into Transiluania. passing, in respect of the largenes of the riuer. After they were all beyond the water, they continually marched in battaile, vntill they came to Debrezen, Debrezen. a small towne of no great strength, where they found Andrew Battor, and  Thomas Nadasdy, who were the greatest and richest Lords of Hungarie, and Andrew Battor. such who alreadie had obtained great reputation through the whole countrie. Thomas Nadasdy. One of them was Generall of the Hungarish Caualarie, and great Comissarie; and the other was Lieutenant generall. These two were in this towne with 500. horse to receiue Castalde, and to conduct him into Transiluania, according to the meanes and experiences which they had in that kingdome. Castalde knowing that they would at their entrance into the towne, obserue and note what number his armie might be of, commaunded the Sergeant Maior, and Campe master, that they should presently cause the armie to march in the best order and forme they could, and so, that it might seeme hee had more men, then in trueth hee had. This presently was done  with such dexteritie and iudgement, that those Lords esteemed the armie to be of farre greater number, then indeed it was, and seeing all the souldiours well ordered and marching with a graue and settled countenance, they highly commended their ordinance. The armie being certaine daies refreshed in this towne, they all together continued on their iourney, vntill

they came to Zalnoch, which is a Castle enuironed with water, where, for Zalnoch. the guard and safetie thereof (before he departed) he left 50. Spaniards. 
During the march of this armie, and that they hasted to arriue at the place The Queene caused a Diet to be held at Egneth. where Frier George was, the Queene had published a Diet to bee held at Egneth, (which is one of the greatest townes of Transiluania) there to deliberate and aduise what meanes was best to chase and expell the Frier out of that Prouince. He at that time (as wee haue said) was at his Bishopricke of Varadine, and vnderstanding the drift of the Queene, and to what purpose she laboured, omitting all things, which then he was greatly busied about, called for his Coach, and in the greatest haste he could, tooke the way that lead towards Cheresuania. Vpon the way, passing a little brooke which runneth by a valley, it happened that his Coach ouerturned in such dangerous  manner, that if hee had not instantly been helped by his men, he had there been drowned. Certaine gentlemen of his traine, ill interpreting this accident, aduised him to returne from thence: but hee smiling, made them this answer: That such diuinations as were grounded vpon Chariots, were exceeding miserable; knowing that they had in heauen another Chariot, which by his influence would warrant him: minding by his pleasant countenance to inferre, that the Chariot of Erictonius placed in heauen, should among other signes stand him in stead of a guide: and so with expedition continuing on his iourney, within short time he approached neere to Torde, from whence hee wrote to all the Lords, who were with the  Queene, and specially to his friends, that if they would see the safegard and defence of their countrie, and that the whole kingdome should not bee ouerthrowne and lost, and fall into the puissant commaund of the Infidels, George dissolueth the Diet at Egneth. they would not faile, but presently come to the place where hee was, and where hee daily expected them, that they might speedily prouide for the common good of all. Within a while after, there came to him certaine bands of souldiours and companies of horse, which hee caused to come from Varadine, which being come together, made a good number of men, with whom he determined to goe to this Diet, shadowing his intent, that they came with him for no other cause, but onely to bee a guard for his person.  Thus against the opinion and liking of all, he came from thence to Egneth, where being arriued, he so throughly dissolued and brake off the Diet, that not any (so great and mightie was hee) durst stay there any longer, least the Frier should stomacke and malice them: and by this meanes he ouerthrew all the Queenes deseignes, which vanished into smoke. She vnderstanding the arriuall of the Frier, and seeing she could come to no better end of that, which to her great charges and trauaile she had alreadie begun, suddenly dislodged from that towne with her sonne, and retired her selfe to Albe-iula, with such force as she had, of which Peter Vicchy was Captaine  generall, who caused the towne to be well fortified. But after fearing to be besieged therein by the Frier, leauing there as many men as was thought necessary for the defence therof, she thought it better to make her retraict to Sassebesse, (a place for the situation farre stronger then Albe-iula) where she determined to stay and expect what would be the issue of her fortune. The Frier being aduertised of all this, and also vnderstanding certaine newes, that



the forces which Ferdinand had sent were alreadie on their way, and that Castalde came with no small ayde, presently determined vpon this occasion to  George besiegeth Albeiula. besiege Albe-iula, thinking that if he were able to be master thereof, he had effected the greatest part of his desires. Being there arriued, with this resolution he very straightly besieged and battered it in many places with great store of Cannon. But those within being nothing possest with feare, valiantly defended themselues, and more couragiously then the Frier expected. He now seeing the constancie and resolution of the besieged to bee such, and that Castalde made but slow speede, although euery day by letters and Posts vpon Posts, he willed him to hasten on his iourney, and so much the rather because he besieged this towne, which defended it selfe so gallantly, that it  was greatly needfull for him to haue the helpe of his forces; hee againe thought it sitting to seek out meanes once more to accord with the Queene. Whilest these matters were treated of, Castalde arriued at the confines of Transiluania. But since it now very fitly falleth out, I will for a while leaue the continuation of this historie, and will largely describe the situation, the inhabitants, the strength, the qualitie, and fertilitie of that countrie.
Transiluania is a Prouince of the kingdome of Hungarie, making a part The description of Transiluania. thereof, enuironed on all sides with high mountaines, resembling a well walled towne, hauing all his entries and passages very difficill and narrow, which maketh me thinke that it tooke his name thereof, being anciently named  Dacia, of King Docus, who was Lord and King thereof. Towards the North it boundeth vpon Polonia, and of one part of Moldauia, hauing in the midst the hils Carpates. Towards the West it doth confine vpon Hungarie: and towards the East it stretcheth it selfe to the shores of Danubius, and taketh his ending against Walachia: the inhabitants whereof are called Walachians, Walachia. anciently dissended of some Romane Colonie, sprung from the familie of the Flacchians, who were sent to subdue that countrie, of whom that Prouince afterward tooke the name of Flaccia, which at this present is corrupted into the name of Walachia, which also containeth in it Moldauia, being Moldauia. two seuerall Prouinces, which now are separated, comprised in time past vnder  the name of Flacchia. Towards the South it neighboureth vpon the Transalpinia^s. Transalpinians, and Seruians named Slauons, and the Rascians, vulgarly called Rhatians, who in a manner are as naturall Walachians, for that they all Rhatians. liue vnder one law and custome: they are Christians, and obserue the decrees and ceremonies of the Greeke Church, they obey the Patriarke of Constantinople; they vse the Italian language, but so corrupted, that it is hardly vnderstood to be the same; they vse armes like to those of the Turks; they haue been and are yet a warlike nation, cruell, and endureth trauaile and wearines of warre more then any other people, for that they are naturally very strong. Within Transiluania there is a Prouince in a manner linked to a mountaine, which separateth it from Moldauia, which is named Ceculia,  and the inhabitants thereof are called Ceculians, and at this day they are called Ceculians. Sicilians, who are of the Hungarian nation, and of the same qualitie and Sicilians. disposition, liuing according to the lawes and customes of Hungarie. The other part of the kingdome, which is the greatest, is inhabited by the Saxons, Saxons. who euer since the time that Charlemaine ouerthrew them, by meane of

that great battaile which hee obtained against them nigh the mountaine of  Ouege, haue alwaies remained there. For Charlemaine defeating them, caused a good number of them to be led into Gaule, and forced the other who would not obserue and obey the lawes (which he would haue established) to goe seeke some other habitations. Of these a great part entered into Transiluania to conquer it, and making themselues masters thereof by force of armes, they there set vp their abode, and built seuen townes or Castles, whereof for a long time that Prouince tooke the name, which continueth vntil this day, and in respect whereof, it is called in their language Sibemburgen. These liue after the Germane manner, and obserue their customes, speaking the ancient Saxon language; they are affable people, and of great  trueth and fidelitie. They are not alwaies in league with the Hungarians, neither will they suffer them to build in their townes. Their mountaines are inhabited by the Walachians, to whom the Saxons (who are of the greatest authoritie and rule in that kingdome) would not permit them to build any of their houses with chalke and stones, nor haue nor possesse much about them. And therefore they dwelt in little houses and cottages, which they made themselues, without any Mason or Carpenter, and are but thatched with straw and rushes. They labour not nor till the fields in hope of any gaine, but onely to gather together so much as is necessarie to nourish and sustaine their familie, and the Slaues which they get. This kingdome greatly aboundeth in corne, wine, flesh, venison, and all manner of fruites, and  breedeth very many strong and goodly horses. There is found in many of those mountaines, mynes of gold, siluer, iron, and salt is fetched from thence in so great abundance, that most part of Hungarie and Polonia are serued therewith, which is an exceeding rich commoditie, and bringeth great profit to the King. These mynes are not farre from Isembergh, Clausemburgh, and Saltzburgh. Victuals are there sold ordinarily at so cheape a rate, that it is a thing incredible. The Marchants of this Prouince, during the peace and truce, might trafficke with their marchandise through all the Turkes dominions, and continually haue entercourse with Germanie, Hungarie, Pololonia, and Italie. The ayre is many times intemperate, by the extreame cold,  and excessiue heate, which often is felt there: the cold though neuerthelesse it bee terrible and sharpe, yet it dureth not long, and happeneth not but at certaine times, which being past, the heate preuaileth more then the cold. All the countrie is vneuen or hillie, and the greatest part is like to Tuscane, or hillie Spayne, and is full of great forrests, which yeelde store of wood, as well to build, as for other priuate commodities. There be two great riuers which be nauigable; the one runneth through the middest of the kingdome and is called Marosse, which springeth from the mountaines of Moldauia towards The riuer of Marosse. the North, and runneth from one side to another of that countrie, vntill it entereth into Tibiscus, neere the frontier townes of Lippa and Themesuar,  which are two strong holds, and so named, for that they are situated beyond the mountaines towards the West. The other is named Alto, and The riuer of Cheres. at this day the inhabitants call it Cheres, which springeth at the foote of Mount Carpatus, about the place where it ioyneth with the other hils of Moldauia. There is also other small riuers, wherein are found amongst the

grauell, many graines of gold of great value and price. Towards the South dwelleth certaine people named Rhatians, which were relikes of the ancient  Rhatians. Rascians, who remaine vntill this day, since the time they were chased foorth of their natiue countrie of Macedonia, by Lysimachus. They are to bee hired of any who will giue most: one while they take part with Ferdinand, and then againe they are in the Turkes pay. They are vnconstant people and of little faith; they are Christians, and liue after the Greeke Church; they are poore, hauing no townes peculiar to themselues, and they are in great dislike with all other nations for their inconstancie and perfidiousnes. They dwell among the Bulgarians and Seruians in two places of the kingdome, and on the other side among the mountaines by the Transiluanians,  which stretch themselues towards Walachia.
This kingdome of Transiluania, after it was reduced to the faith of Iesus Christ, was subiect to the Crowne of Hungarie; for the gouernment and rule whereof, one of the principallest of the Court was deputed and nominated with the title of Vayuode. The capitall towne is called Sibinium, taking Sibinium called Hermenstat. Pressouia called Cronenstat. that name of a riuer which passeth by it. This towne is named by the Germanes Hermenstat, others call it Pressouia, alias Cronenstat, and it is of great trafficke. Thither is brought great store of marchandise from Greece, which from thence is dispersed throughout Hungarie. There are many other townes, as Corone, Torde, Cassouia, and Albe-iula, which was built by  Corone. Torde. Cassouia. Albe-iula. the Romanes, and established for one of their Colonies. This Prouince had no absolute King but Iohn, who raigned after the death of Lewis King of Hungarie; and after that, Stephen possessed it, (who for the present is King) Stephen King of Transiluania called Iohn. who also was called Iohn in memorie of his father, and by the Turkes fauour and assistance enioyeth it peaceably: and from hence forward wee will call him Iohn, and not Stephen.
Castalde (as a little before hath been said) being arriued in Transiluania, sent Andrew Battor and Thomas Nadasdy before, to foresee and suruay the passages of the mountaines, by which hee must of necessitie passe, giuing them a good troupe of horses, with other souldiours. Which being well foreseene by the Queene, she sent the Marquesse of Balasse, a great Lord of  Hungarie (who a little before was entertained into her seruice, through The Marquesse of Balasse. some disgrace offered by Ferdinand, for that hee had thrust him out of certaine Castles situated in Hungarie, vnder the colour of rebellion, which was said to haue been pretended against his Maiestie) to possesse those passages with 700. horse, and a good troupe of souldiours. Castalde being assuredly informed of this, was by the aduice of two (although it was a thing very tedious and difficult) constrained to seeke other passages and waies, which being in the end found, he commaunded them to bee repayred the best they could, which assuredly was a worke long and tedious: but neuerthelesse  they laboured so diligently and commodiously, that by the same way, all the Artillerie might passe without any great labour. Whilest the Marquesse kept the most frequent passages, Castalde by that new vnaccustomed way, entered with all his armie into Transiluania, without any disturbance, and the day following marched in battaile, and was forced to passe by a Castle of Dalmas besieged by the people of Ferdinand. the Queenes named Dalmas, seated in the way vpon the top of a mountaine,

from when he was saluted with the force of the Cannon: hee being  not willing to tolerate such a brauado, went himselfe to view the place, and to see if he could take it by assault, with intent to leaue nothing behinde that hereafter might annoy him. But he seeing it was more strong then he tooke it to be, and that it was of no small importance by reason of that passage, and being needfull to haue Cannons to batter it, whereof hee was altogether vnprouided, was forced, without doing any other thing, to depart, leauing there Counte Felix, and Counte Iohn Baptista of Arco (who then led the rereward) to continue the siege with their Germanes, and to batter it with foure field peeces, and two small Culuerins which they brought with them, with intent to proue them, if through feare they would yeeld. Which thing  the Counte performed, by straightning the besieged, and battering it as he was commaunded. Whilest Counte Felix was thus busied about this place, Castalde proceeded on his iourney with the rest of his armie, and lodged by a towne named Colosuar, from whence he sent to the Counte 300. Haquebuziers of Spaniards, to be at the siege of Dalmas.
The Queene being perswaded by the Frier to accord with him, refused The Queene accordeth with George. not any agreement, specially after she vnderstood that there should come to his ayde 10000. Spanyards, and great store of Caualarie from many places: euen as Fame (a messenger as well of false as of true matters) is accustomed to increase and multiplie in the mouthes of men, sometimes stretching things beyond the compasse of trueth. And knowing that he was alreadie  arriued in her kingdome, and that her Castle of Dalmas was besieged, she was by this newes greatly troubled, seeing her selfe disfurnished of souldiours, and fearing to be expelled forth of her kingdome by the Frier, and to lose that which she held most deare, falling from the dignitie and maiestie of a Queene, to the state and condition of a miserable Ladie, being assured that Albe-iula (wherein were her Iewels, and moueables, and the Crowne of Hungarie, which aboue all things was specially desired of the Frier, and also greatly esteemed of her) could no longer hold out, she willingly accepted of such an agreement as was offered her; and gladly inclining thereunto, commaunded those of Albe-iula to surrender the towne, Albe-iula yeelded to George.  conditionally the goods and the rest of any worth that was therein to bee saued; whereunto her people obeyed the Frier in all things that he would. Whereupon hee permitted not that any souldiour should enter into the towne, vntill all the Queenes moueables were carried out: and to the end they might be carried to the place where she desired, he prouided them of many waggons for the more commodious carrying of their baggage.
Presently vpon the taking of this towne, hee failed not speedily to send aduertisement to Castalde of all that which had happend vntill then; and withall sent to him a certaine Comissarie to guide and direct him through  the passages of the countrie, and to march with his armie towards Egneth, where hee might at pleasure commodiously lodge and refresh his Campe certaine daies, the place being very pleasant and abounding in victuals. Castalde Castalde at Egneth. being there arriued, hee was lodged with the Spanyards within the towne, and disposed the Caualarie and the rest of the souldiours in places conuenient thereabout, whereby they might keepe euery man in the greater



securitie, attending there a certaine time, to finde the meanes to ioyne with the Frier, who after the taking of Albe-iula, went to see the Queene, and  gaue her notice of the comming of Castalde, further perswading her to commaund those of Dalmas, that they should yeeld to him, and not hold out any longer against them which did besiege it, nor against the Artillerie which greatly endamaged them; especially considering that she very well knew, that granting to their accord, this Fortresse should become hers. The Queene consented to it for two causes: the one, that she might not see those within the Castle so greatly oppressed for the loue and affection they bore to her, and the place to fall in decay and ruine: the other, to the end that the Counte (for the hope which the Frier gaue him) might not by the losse of  his people receiue any detriment, and for that respect hee might not shew himselfe too cruell towards her people. Thus by reason of such feare, she gaue commaund to all the souldiours of Dalmas to yeeld. They following Dalmas yeelded to Castalde. this commaund, failed not to surrender the place into Counte Felix possession, euen at the same instant when a myne was almost finished to haue blowen it vp, in stead of the Cannon; and withall to haue giuen a fierce assault.
As this Castle was yeelded, and Castalde remained at Egneth, the Frier came to conferre with him, who although hee was councelled to come vnlooked The meeting of George and Castalde. for into the place where he was lodged, yet was it not done so secretly, but it was discouered halfe an houre before his comming. Castalde hauing  notice therof, presently went forth of the towne well accompanied to meete him, the Frier comming in his Coach, drawne with eight great horses, as he was vsually wont to ride, there being in his company for his guard more then 400. horse, the most part of whom were Gentlemen and Knights, and of the principall and chiefe of the kingdome, hauing besides 200. Harquebuziers. In this equipage the Frier approaching Castalde, presently descended his Coach, and mounted vpon a well paced horse, which alwaies he caused to beled with him, and comming to Castalde, he imbraced him very kindly, manifesting what infinit content he receiued at his comming, there passing betweene them a thousand speeches full of curtesie, and shewing exceeding  honour one to another. After which salutations betweene them, the Frier turning himselfe towards Aldene Master of the Campe, and other Spanish Captaines who also were there present, entertaining them with many friendly and kinde speeches, hee made it knowne to them what singular comfort he receiued, in seeing them so safely arriued and conducted thither. After all these friendly salutations, they entered together into the towne, and went directly to Castaldes lodging: where after they were refreshed, and had discoursed together of many important things, Castalde shewed him the letters of Ferdinand, acquainting him with the authoritie and commaund that his Maiestie would he should haue in managing these affayres of the kingdome;  The subtilties betweene Castalde and George. in the administration and rule whereof, he was expressely charged to obey and submit himselfe to his iudgement, considering that for the time to come, all things should passe through his hands, as alreadie they had vntill then done; yeelding to him all authoritie to dispose of things at his pleasure, knowing that such was the will of Ferdinand, from whom hee had expresse

commaund, to content and gratifie him in any thing which should please  and satisfie his liking. Whereof the Frier was exceeding glad, and thought himselfe well apayd, as well in respect of Castalde himselfe, as also for the honour which was done him, and of the fayre words which (in the name of Ferdinand) was reported to him. For being by his naturall disposition of a proud and haughtie spirit, and puffed vp with honour and renowne, would by no meanes endure that any should bee his superiour. And considering the great authoritie and commaund that Castalde (as Lieutenant generall for the King of Bohemia) had, and the reuerence, honor, and submission which neuerthelesse he made shew to vse towards him, hee esteemed it a good beginning to continue his pride and greatnes, and that in all the affayres of the  kingdome he might commaund and dispose thereof according at his owne pleasure. Desirous then to enioy (according to his accustomed manner) such preheminence and authoritie, and to shew the commaund and greatnes which he had through all Transiluania (two daies after that he was departed from Castalde) he presently seized vpon Albe-iula for himselfe to lodge and remaine in, not acquainting Castalde therewith, saying, that that place was the most commodiest and fittest to finde him, when neede should require, and the necessariest to treate of all businesses that might fall out. That being George went to the Queen. done, he posted to the Queene to Sassebesse, to informe her of all which had passed betweene him and Castalde. 
During the time the Frier was on his way, the Queene (who nothing was idle nor slept) had by one of her Lords, who was a Polonian, a man of good esteeme in his countrie, sent another way to visit and salute Castalde. By him, and by the offers which she made to him, Castalde did prognosticate what the issue and euent of all the affayres of that countrie would sort vnto, and principally of those which concerned the Queene, he wel knew they would succeede to his desire, and haue such ending that Ferdinand should thinke himselfe well apayd therewithall. Certaine daies being passed before any newes was heard of the Frier, in the ende there arriued a messenger from him, who gaue notice to Castalde, that hee should not faile the 6. of Iuly to finde him at Albe-iula, to conferre together vpon their affayres. The time  being come, Castalde without any guard, onely accompanied with certaine Castalde went to seek George of his owne household, went to the place appointed. The manner of this departure was against the counsell of Andrew Battor and Thomas Nadasdy, and many other, who thought it not conuenient so slightly to repose himselfe in this man, who because they knew him to be so mutable in his opinions, and so variable in his doings, might bee able within a short time after, vnder the colour of any occasion whatsoeuer, to inuent and stirre vp some new matter, and be more hardie and bold to execute the same, seeing Castalde alone, then otherwise he would be, if his forces were with him: and for that cause they perswaded him, that he would not depart but with a good troupe. But Castalde  considering, that although he should haue all his people to guard him, yet was it little and to small purpose to resist the Frier, in case he would vse any treason against him: wherefore hee iudged it much better to goe so priuately, whereby he should outwardly manifest the great and speciall trust he reposed in him, rather then by a strong guard to giue him suspition and occasion

to stand vpon tearmes, an act which in no sort he found to bee conuenient for the beginning of such affayres, and specially seeing hee had to negotiate  with a man so giddie brained, who was almost of a childs condition, that for the least toy whatsoeuer, would bee offended and alter his opinion; resoluing that if he did otherwise, he would easily escape his hands, and all his purposes should be ouerthrowne.
But proceeding on his determinate iourney, in the end he arriued at Albe-iula, where (according to the foresaid aduertisement) hee found not the Frier, for that he was yet at Sassebesse with the Queene, vnto whom he was gone, without giuing him any notice thereof. Whereupon those of his companie thought it not amisse (since the Frier and the Queene were yet together)  that he should goe thither to them, where he might more commodiously, and with quicker dispatch, establish many important matters, and such which had neede of present and sudden resolution: wherefore they counselled him to goe to Sassebesse, where hee arriued about the third houre of Castalde went to seeke the Queene, and to declare his charge. the night, finding the Queene accompanied onely with those of her Court, for that a day before, Peter Vicchy (seeing he could not conclude any league with the Frier) retired himselfe to his commaund of Lippa and Themesuar, with all the men of warre, leauing thus the Queene alone at Sassebesse, in which place two daies after, Castalde sate in councell with Frier George, and many other great Lords of Transiluania, where he declared the occasion of his comming, which was tending to this end; that the Queene should restore  that Prouince to Ferdinand, according to the articles concluded with King Iohn her husband, he himselfe being readie to accomplish all which his Maiestie had promised, declaring that vpon the accomplishing of these couenants, it could not happen but (besides the generall contentment that euery one should receiue thereby) all things would succeed better and more expedient, and specially to her selfe profitable and commodious then to any other, if she would duly consider with what trauaile and sorrow she possessed those countries, and with what suspition and doubt she was maintained amongst them, onely depending but vpon the Turkes good liking,  who when he thought good might disposse her, and so in fine to bee alwaies in danger to lose both the one and other. And that therefore knowing Transiluania to be the key and bulwarke of all Christendome (as by apparant effect was to be seene) which if it were lost, not only the vtter ruine of the rest of Hungarie and Austria would follow, but also of Germanie, and of all other Christian countries. Wherefore for these respects she ought to desire, that this Prouince should fall into the gouernment and rule of a Christian Prince, great and puissant, as Ferdinand was, who might at all times be a curb against the force and violence of the Turke, and might hinder him from further proceedings: and the rather, that she ought to haue such a desire, for so much as she saw her selfe (though a Queene) yet of no force nor commaund  for such an enterprise, neither was she able to promise her selfe any defence, to maintaine that kingdome, without she craued ayde of others. Therefore all these things duly considered, it were much better for her to accept of Ferdinands offer, as the most sure and peaceable for her, although it were lesse, then remaine in continuall danger and trauaile, and to raigne

in a kingdome, which was not in her power to preserue nor keepe. Besides  these foresaid agreements, Castalde for the more assurance and confirmation Offers made to the Queen by Castalde in the name of Ferdinand. of both parties, offered the Queene in the name of his Maiestie the Infanta Ioane his youngest daughter, with 100000. Crownes for a dowrie, and to giue her in mariage to her sonne Iohn, and to enter into bonds to satisfie her in euery thing which he promised her, and to pay all the interest which she could pretend, and in like sort to satisfie all the debts which were found to be due since that time. These offers seemed generally good, and reasonable to all, and specially to Frier George, who also made shew to bee well pleased therewith. And after many aduertisements, it was concluded that he should cause the Queene to vnderstand thereof, and bring an answere from her.  This charge was committed to the Frier, who willingly accepted thereof; and being come to the Queene, he recited to her all which had been propounded in the Councell. She being attentiue, and vnderstanding what had passed, and withall considering the offer of Ferdinand, and that it was a meanes for her to wade out of that subiection, wherein the Frier so peremptorily held her: she presently answered, that whatsoeuer he did, she esteemed it greatly beneficiall to her, committing all her actions and affayres into his hands; of which particularly and by peecemeale they conferred together by the space of fifteene daies. But the Frier continued still without resolution, now saying this, then that, apparantly shewing that he had no other respect  but to his owne proper commoditie, which he shadowed by this, that he fained that herein he aymed at nothing, but that which particularly concerned the Queene and the good of her sonne, whom he protested he loued more then himselfe, in respect of the indissoluble bonds of gratitude that forced him to it, which oftentimes hee had receiued from his father King Iohn, who was his raiser and maker, and of whom depended all which he possessed in this world, being raised by him of nothing, and exalted to this high degree of honour wherein he was now. And thus cunningly did he dissemble and draw backe the most he could.
As these affayres proceeded on in this manner without any resolution, it happened one day the Queene, without the Friers knowledge, found oportunitie  The Queene conferreth with Castalde, and complaineth of George. to haue some priuate conference with Castalde, and in such a conuenient place where she might freely discouer and impart the conceptions of her owne minde; assuring him what singular contentment she receiued, in that Ferdinand King of the Romanes, had sent so sufficient and worthie a man as hee was, to negotiate in these affayres; the vertue and renowne of whom, she had before heard an exceeding good report of, and she thought her selfe thrice happie of his comming, greatly commending the choise that was made of him, and the iudgement of the King, in giuing him that absolute authoritie to dispose of things in his name as he thought good of, thinking thereby she should haue occasion speedily to bring her miseries to an  end, which vntill then had held her wrapped vp: effectuously importuning him that he would giue faith and credit to the integritie of her heart, which had alwaies desired and endeuoured her selfe to doe his Maiestie seruice. And afterward she earnestly desired Castalde, that for her discharge he would amplie aduertise his Maiestie, that for the time passed she was not of her selfe

withdrawne from the agreements betweene them, but that all proceeded through the Friers subtilties, who neuer would agree nor consent that they  should proceed to the execution of them; but to the contrarie intreated her so badly (as still he did) that finding none to whom she might haue recourse in such necessities, she was constrained (as being in despayre) to demaund ayde of the Turke, of whom she had been many times importuned and incited to leaue that kingdome peaceably vnto him, in exchaunge of another great estate, which he offered her, especially seeing it was in his power (as he said) to thrust her out of it. And although some great feare might giue her good occasion to thinke seriously thereof, yet neuerthelesse she meant not for all that to offer that displeasure to Ferdinand, especially considering  that she was a Christian borne, and that it was not conuenient for her to yeeld to any agreement with a Heathen Prince, she being greatly sorrowfull for that which was past.
Thus to release her self out of the Friers snares (which she reputed a worse and more intolerable subiection, then that of the Turkes) as she had been before constrained peaceably to depart from one part of her kingdome, so for The Queene yeeldeth her selfe to Ferdinand. the like effect, she would now willingly forsake the other, with a resolute determination to deale with him so, that besides the consideration of the seruice which shee meant to performe to Ferdinand, hee should finde great contentment freely by her meanes, thus without any condition to surrender  this Prouince, which by force of armes she would neuer haue yeelded to any. And yeelding all things into his Maiesties hands, she would intreate him that he would haue regard to her sonne, who was a King, a child, and an orphane, for which respects he should not refuse to be a Lord and father to him, and esteeme of him so in regarde of the time to come, as if hee were his naturall sonne, hauing that particular respect and care of him, as she would, and ought to haue of him her selfe: and specially acquainting him with the paines and torments whereinto she was fallen, yet withall hauing patience to see her selfe brought to that low ebbe, that of a great Queene (as in former time she saw her selfe to be) she was now forst to become a poore  Lady and a begger, hauing neuer since the time she was expulsed Buda, with her sonne in her armes, and accompanied with a small traine (leauing that towne (by the Friers iugling) in the gouernment of the Turke) receiued any comfort, vntill now that he gaue her occasion of exceeding consolation, seeing her self now readie to depart out of Transiluania, which she would leaue vnder the gouernment of such a King as Ferdinand was, who no doubt would defend it, and neuer lose it; and who might repute it for no small good fortune, seeing so voluntarily she suffered her selfe to bee by him depriued of her kingdome, with so small a number of men and Artillerie, of which others with great armies could not dispossesse her. Castalde in Ferdinands name answered her, that hee accepted of her good and sincere affection,  which she manifested in these proceedings, more then any rich kingdome whatsoeuer; promising her that in all fidelitie and sinceritie, he would performe all that had been treated of from point to point, and he firmely assured her (gaging his word) that his Maiestie from thence forward, would haue such respect to King Iohn, as to his owne children. And for his owne

particular, he offered in all her affayres to remaine her obedient and faithfull  seruant, and protector of her cause, desiring no lesse to satisfie her expectation and to please her, then Ferdinand himselfe who sent him thither.
After such like discourses, they tooke leaue one of another, the Queene retyring to her chamber, and Castalde to his lodging. In the meane time the Frier began to practise a dissoluing of all the agreements which already were The deuises of George to dissolue the agreements of the Queen and Castalde. but lately propounded, and mistrusting the disposition and humour of the he Queene, to bring that to better effect which he desired should happen, would neuer consent to any conclusion, but deferring it from day to day, busied his braine about no other things, then trifeling delayes. And that his purpose might not bee frustrate, and to the end also that he might not bee  thought he pressed so much for his owne particular commoditie, as for the good of the Queene and her sonne; he would that before any other thing, The second agreement betweene Ferdinand and Queene Izabella. they should begin to treate of that which concerned them, that so he might at the length perceiue what conclusio^ he might make, minding also that before any act of renouncing the kingdome to Ferdinand should passe, his Maiestie should be first bound to giue and performe to Iohn the Queenes sonne, a yeerely reuenew of 25000. crownes, to him, his heires, and successors, euen as had been alreadie promised him, and that out of such estates which were free, peaceable, and sure. Which was presently accepted of by Castalde, and promised (notwithstanding that when such offers were made, Buda was not then lost, nor other principall places of the kingdome, for the losse of which  the Crowne was shrodely weakened) there should bee giuen and assigned the Dutchie of Oppolia and Rhatibor, which are two pleasant and fertile countries, abounding in all things which can bee desired, and are within the Prouince of Slecia. The Frier thinking himselfe satisfied for that point, instantly propounded another motion; which was (besides the agreement offered and decreed vpon for the good of King Iohn) he should pay to the Queene the 150000. crownes, which for her dowrie was imposed vpon King Iohn her husband: and vntill she was fully satisfied and payed it, Ferdinand should be bound to giue her some towne in pawne, whither she might retire with her sonne, and remaine there vntil such time they had performed  all, and put them in possession of the aforesaid States, and discharged the said summe, with reasonable interest therefore, and in like sort the reuenew of 25000. crownes which was promised. This demaund was also agreed vpon, and immediatly she was appointed the towne of Cassouia, which is one of the greatest and richest in that countrie, wherein she might for her owne commoditie remaine, vntill an absolute accomplishment should bee, of all that which had been promised.
After they had concluded and decreed in this manner, of all which appertained George Vayuode of Transiluania. to the Queene and her sonne, the Frier began to negotiate and practise for himselfe, and demaunded that they would bestow vpon him the  Vayuodship of Transiluania, with the same condition that King Iohn was wont to giue it, which was 15000. crownes by the yeere; which request was graunted him, neuerthelesse with this condition, that he should haue for his copartner and companion Andrew Battor. But by no meanes he would admit thereof, alleadging that he had alwaies been accustomed to commaund

and rule alone, and not accompanied, neither would he receiue into his gouernment an equall, in respect it would rather be a charge and burthen to  him, then an honour. In the end, not to discontent him in any thing, he had his full asking. He hauing obtained this dignitie, he yet demaunded the Treasurership, which in former time he executed with ye ordinarie wages of 4000. crownes yeerely: and besides that, his demaund was that they should allow him aswell in peace as in warre 1500. horse for his guard and the countries: 1500. horse for the guard of George. and further, he desired to haue the Salt pits at Torde, which were exceeding profitable, and he at that time was in possession of them. He motioned this last demaund with such craft and subtiltie, that he thought thereby to finde some iust cause to frustrate the former conference, assuredly thinking  they would neuer agree vnto it. But herein his expectation failed him, The custome and maner of Princes. and discretion would he should haue credited the contrarie, in respect himselfe was often wont to say; That it was requisite for him who would raigne and gouerne, although he had not the gift to accomplish them, yet to giue fayre words and promises to euery one, and to performe but a little thereof: which well hee might imagine to be practised vpon him by Ferdinand, since hee saw that so readily they condiscended to all that he demaunded. He hauing now obtained all which he desired, yet could he not thus suppresse the great thirst of his couetous and greedie minde, but altering euery houre from the purpose, he often repented himselfe euen in a moment of that which hee had  done, not supposing that his inconstancy was any shame or discredit to him. Castalde being one day with him, marueiled greatly at his vncertaintie, and that he was so changeable in his proceedings, telling him that he was greatly astonished at this his mutabilitie, for that hee saw his nature was to speake of one particular matter, at one time this, and another time that, by this meanes causing euery one to bee doubtfull, and without any resolution he deferred the time, vntill he found the occasion such as hee desired, and seemed fauourable for his affayres.
Whilest these affayres were thus trauersed betweene them, one day hee acquainted Castalde, that hee greatly desired to be a Cardinall, and desiring  him greatly for that purpose hee would solicite Ferdinand to write to the Pope concerning it. Castalde promising him his best endeuour, speedily aduertised his Maiestie thereof, giuing direct intelligence of the Friers ambition, and of the speciall desire he had of the Cardinals hat. Ferdinand hauing notice hereof, lost no time, but presently dispatched a messenger, writing Ferdinand intreateth the Pope to make George a Cardinall. to Pope Iuly the third, that it would please his holines to receiue Frier George into the Colledge of Cardinals, amply reciting to him his vertue and prowesse, and how for many yeeres with his owne forces and industrie, hee had defended and maintained the kingdome of Transiluania against the puissance of the Turke, whom he had often foyled; greatly praising him, that from an vncredible pouertie (although hee was dissended of a noble  house) he had by his vertue and wisedome attained to these high degrees of honour, wherein he was now installed, in opposing himselfe for the generall good of Christendome against the Infidels (as appeared to all the world) as a prouident and valiant Captaine; shewing thereby to his holines, that in consideration of such commendable acts, he well deserued to be admitted

to that dignitie. He also writ to his Ambassadours who were at Rome, to vse the best meanes they could to further this suite, and to haue answer of the  Pope according to his desire.
Whilest this matter was negotiated at Rome, the Archbishop of Strigonium George made Archbishop of Strigonium. died, by whose death the Bishopricke was voyde, which was yeerely worth 150000. crownes. The Frier omitted no time, but presently made suite for it, which was as readily graunted by Castalde in Ferdinands name, to whom hee writ with all speede, praying him that with like diligence hee would send him the confirmation thereof, seeing they had to deale with so variable and inconstant a man, it was therefore requisite to make a briefe conclusion, for that in prolonging time to bestow it of him, and not to yeeld to that which he demaunded, was too much to aduenture and hazard the present  affayres. In the end, there remained not any thing for him to demaund more, but onely to bee King, thinking he had now well effected all his affaires, was at last content to allow and ratifie the articles made betweene them. Now to conclude or repent that which he had done, was all one to him, insomuch that euen at the same instant, he went to the Queene to perswade George disswadeth the Queene from the agreements made with Castalde. her, not so easily to passe these articles, which were alreadie accorded, telling her she might doe it without bringing her honour and name in question; in saying, that she would not depart out of the kingdome, vntill Ferdinand had accomplished all that which hee had promised: for the rest hee  would afterwards take it vpon himselfe, assuring her to finde the meanes to dismisse Castaldes armie out of Transiluania, and to deliuer her out of that subiection wherein she was, promising her by fayre words, that he would alwaies be faithfull to her, and neuer contrarie her in any thing, further perswading her, that this kingdome because it was iustly come by, did appertaine rather to her sonne Iohn, then to Ferdinand. Whereto the Queene made no great semblance neither with yea nor nay, giuing him thereby to vnderstand, that it was neither iust nor lawfull to halt and dissemble so often in his words: and on the other side she told him, that she had committed all her affayres into his hands, from which she rather desired to be deliuered  then from the Turkes. The Frier not perceiuing himselfe deceiued by her suttle fetch, and considering that hee could not worke so with Ferdinand, as he had effected with the Queene, and that he should not bee any more of that great commaund in those quarters, as hee had been, began to manifest exceeding great contentment of that which in priuate they had agreed vpon, faining afterward, that the Queene would neuer condiscend to such agreements. But the Queene much doubting that the Frier would not faile to practise most cunningly that which hee had said to her, caused Castalde The Queene accuseth George to Castalde. once againe to come and speake with her, aduertising him of all which had passed betweene her and the Frier since the time of their two meetings; plainly telling him, that those whom Ferdinand had chosen for arbitrators in  this busines, were the most opposite to his proceedings that possible could be, and especially Frier George, who brewed new inuentions to dissolue all that which had been concluded amongst them, acquainting him with some particulars of his disposition, and instructing him of that which was requisit for him to doe in time to come, that so he might the better treate of these affayres

with him, against the next Diet; because besides that which he vnderstood alreadie touching his condition, deceits, and subtilties, hee should yet  the further hee went on perceiue more and more: but yet not so well as others, who by their experience they haue had of him, haue discouered such his deceits. In fine, the Queene for conclusion added, that by no meanes he should repose any confidence in him, because that by how much the lesse he should thinke thereof, by so much the more he should finde himselfe to bee deceiued and sold.
The Frier seeing his deuises succeeded not to his liking, was in the end The agreements decreed. content to accept thereof, and conclude all the articles contained in their parley: that is to say, that the Queene among other points should depart  out of Transiluania within sixe daies, and retire her selfe to Cassouia. The premises being thus determined, notice by writing was giuen to Peter Vicchy, that the Queene would forsake the kingdome, and that also she would leaue to Ferdinand the low countries, wherein Lippa and Themesuar are situated, and that they would in recompence therof, giue her in Hungarie, or in some other places, so much as would satisfie and content her. And to the end that this busines might with better expedition be dispatched, there was safe conduct sent him, that he might with more securitie, and without any suspition come himselfe to the Court. Vicchy mistrusting that it was a traine of the Vicchy reposeth no trust in George. Frier to get him into his clutches, and not thinking that the Queene would  so soone aduance the King of the Romanes, and renounce and depriue her selfe of her owne kingdome, (which vntill then she had with many trauailes and cares defended and preserued): and not daring to come himselfe in person, hee sent two Ambassadours to know in what estate and condition the Queenes affayres were. They being come to Sassebesse, they vnderstood of all the occurrants which had passed vntill that day: and it was concluded with them, that seeing Peter Vicchy would not otherwise come, for his greater securitie, and also speedily to remoue all distrust, Andrew Battor should bee sent to manage those affayres with him. Thus they went together from thence, and Andrew Battor notwithstanding led with him 2000. horse for  his guard; and also because they vnderstood that Vicchy daily expected succour from the Turke (to breake all this agreement) who presently after, as he had aduertisement of that which the Frier practised with Ferdinand, gaue commaund to the Basha of Buda not to faile, but ayde him. And truly if these succours had been arriued before Battor had spoken with Vicchy, this peace had neuer been made, neither had they spoken any more of it.
Battor being now arriued at Lippa, whilest he conferred with Vicchy concerning Battor and Vicchy conferre together. the effect of his charge, there departed from Sassebesse a French gentleman, who was called Monsieur de Santon, whom Ferdinand had sent to be entertained amongst the Spanish companies, he being recommended A French Spie in the armie of Ferdinand, who aduertised the Turke of the occurrents of Transiluania. to him by the Emperour Charles his brother. This man (as it was reported)  had been a Captaine in France, whither (he said) he would not returne, vntill hee had reuenged certaine iniuries which was offered him; in memorie whereof he wore his haire so long, that it reached to his shoulders, and sayd, he would neuer cut it off, vntil he had first satisfied himself with reuenge. Castalde had great distrust of him, thinking (as it proued) he was a Spie for the

Turke, and sent thither by Henry King of France, to the end that hee might  take notice of all occurrances which passed in Transiluania, to aduertise the Turke thereof. And although he liked not, that one whom he so much distrusted, should bee suffered to practise and bee familiar amongst his souldiours, yet neuerthelesse would he not in any sort disturbe him, for that he was greatly recommended to him by Ferdinand. Within a while after hee was departed from Sassebesse, it was certainly knowne that hee was a Spie, and what diligence so euer was vsed to recouer him, yet hee could not bee found; and at the same time came commaund from Ferdinand, that his head should bee cut off, being aduertised by the Emperour that he was a Spie for the Turke. In the meane time, while they expected newes of him, hee saued  himselfe at Lippa with Peter Vicchy, to whom he was sent. Vicchy vnderstanding the decree, and the proclamation that was made against him, and how they sought him in euery place, gaue aduertisement to Castalde that he was arriued at Lippa, and that if hee so pleased, hee would send him to him: but during this message, he caused him safely to be conducted with a good guard to Belgrade, from whence he tooke the way directly to Constantinople, to aduertise the Turke of all which was done in that countrie.
At the same time the day came that was appointed for the Diet to be held A Diet held at Colosuar, where the Queene resigned all the royall ornaments to Castalde. at Colosuar, where should haue been all the principall of the kingdome, and where (as it was determined) the Queene should renounce and resigne to Ferdinand the kingdome, and acknowledge and approue himselfe King  thereof. After all the Deputies of those Prouinces and townes were arriued, the Queene the 28. of August departed from Sassebesse, accompanied with all the Knights and Gentlemen of the countrie, and also with Frier George and Castalde, the one riding on the right hand, the other on the left. Two daies after they were departed, they arriued at an Abbey, distant from Colosuar eight miles, where they lodged; and there it was concluded betweene them, to execute all that which before had been a greed vpon. And the beginning of this solemne resignation, was by the royall ornaments, which were, a Crowne made of plates of gold, mounting on high in forme of a The ornamets of the King of Hungarie. high crowned hat, inriched with stones and pearles, and hauing a little crosse  of gold on the top. The next was a Scepter of Iuorie, garnished with gold, and a Mantle of cloath of gold, after the ancient habite in manner of a Vestment, beset with many stones, but of small value. A gowne, and a payre of shooes of gold, which in respect of the worke were like to those made for the Apostolike Sea. Among all those Iewels, the Frier demanded of the Queene that she would commit the Crowne into his custodie and keeping. Which request she absolutely denyed him: saying, that she would neuer giue her consent, that a Frier should bee King of that kingdome, whereof she dispossessed her sonne; but she would that they should bee conueied to him, to whom in right that Prouince belonged. And causing them to bee brought  before them all, she tooke the Crowne in her hand, in the presence of the Frier, and many great personages, and after great effusion of teares, from her owne eyes, and from her yong sonne (who was present at the whole action) The sorrow of Iohn, seeing his mother giue ye Crowne to Castalde. turning her selfe towards Castalde, sayd in Italian, such or the like speeches.


Although inconstant Fortune following her cruell alterations, cutting off and confounding at her pleasure the affayres of this world, hath in such  sort subuerted mine, that now both my sonne and my selfe are forced to forsake this kingdome, this Crowne, and all these other royall ornaments, which in times past were belonging to my deare Lord and spouse King Iohn of most happie memorie (but now vnhappie that wee bee) and to resigne into the hands and protection of others: yet notwithstanding she shall not for all this hinder me, but that at the least in my troubles and anguishes, I may take this onely contentment, seeing them to fall into the hands of a Prince, who is not only a Christian, but also so puissant and benigne, as is the King of the Romanes, whom I repute for my Lord and father, who also shal  know with what zeale and affection they are giuen him, and whom by our good liking we reestablish in this State, praying God yt he may enioy it with greater tranquilitie and longer time, then we haue done. And thus Seigneur Iohn Baptista Castalde, I present them into your hands, with intent (of my part) they may bee sent to his Maiestie, giuing him to vnderstand, that wee yeeld him not this kingdome and Crowne, vnder the bond of any condition or couenant whatsoeuer, but freely. And we, my selfe and my sonne, cast our selues into his mercifull armes with all our fortune, beseeching him he would haue regard of our miserable destinie, which, besides that wee are Christians, hath caused vs to spring of royall and princely blood. And that  it would please him (following his accustomed bountie, which maketh him beloued of all the world) to receiue and account of vs for his children, and not denie vs the reliefe, fauour, and protection, which wee hope and expect from him, and which you your selfe many times in his name haue promised vs.

After these speeches of the Queene, her sonne being yet but young, and Iohn yet a childe manifesteth not to consent to the Queene his mother. knowing notwithstanding how greatly it imported him, to see himselfe depriued of his estate, and of that wherwith his father sometimes was crowned, making some resistance, he shewed to the Queene his mother the little contentment which he conceiued of this surrender, and appartly manifested  that he would not consent thereto.

But the Queene turning her selfe towards him, sayd: Since (O Iohn my deare and tender sonne) that I know thy fortune and mine is not sufficient and able to defend this kingdome, without the ayde and helpe of others, by occasion of the great number of those, who either by enuie, or of some certaine malice, or by some wicked disposition, make themselues masters of others, continually searching with the losse of the same, our ruine and destruction: Thou oughtest not to conceiue ill thereof, if hauing a care rather to publike good, then to our particular profit, which wee cannot maintaine against the Turkes power, who by the daily prouocation of our enemies  doth molest vs, and in a manner depriue vs of all. Therefore in the middest of so many assaults of miserie, which fortune hath bequeathed vs, I haue chosen this to be the best meanes, to giue and resigne this kingdome to the King of the Romanes, who will defend and deliuer it from the Turkes violent attempts, and who in recompence will assigne thee such estates, as he hath promised me, for the renouncing which I haue made to him; to the

end that thou maist (at the least) yet liue as a great Prince, if thou canst not  liue like a King: and I haue the rather yeelded to this, as not minding with common losse, to bee obstinate in warre, and to leaue and omit the certaine for the incertaintie in the disposition of Fortune: considering also the inconstancie and mutabilitie of her tickle gouernment, which is accustomed rashly to rule and gouerne Kings houses, which are fallen in disgrace and contempt with the world, and who oftentimes imprudently and without thinking thereon, suddenly doth depriue them of their kingdomes, and sendeth them into perpetuall exile. Therefore that on my part I may not behold such infelicitie, and not to fall into such an indignitie and miserie (being forsaken of all ayde and helpe) with the losse of the kingdome, I am  easily perswaded with a comfortable hope, to reserue thee to a perpetuall and quiet repose, with a lesse estate and condition, and to take thee out from so many troubles, amongst the which I doe not yet despayre, that for a kingdome which thou doest now leaue, it may bee in his power that taketh it from thee, to giue thee another, and happely of greater commaund. Let it not seeme strange to thee to leaue this kingdome wherein thou wert borne and nourished, being a thing which happeneth to many: but bee assured, that by the fauour and dignitie of vertue, a noble courage shall neuer be so much reiected of fortune, that he shall want any States or kingdoms. Therefore for the deliuerie of the poore people, which are afflicted and destroyed by our warres; for common repose, and for the preseruation of our  faith, thou oughtest not to withstand or gainsay it, but confirming all that, which for thy good I haue yeelded vnto, consent that these princely ornaments bee sent to his Maiestie. And although I haue good cause to mourne in giuing ouer this Mantle, this Scepter, and chiefly this royall Crowne, (which not long since adorned thy fathers head, and which also should haue been set vpon thine) yet shall I not for all that faile but greatly comfort my selfe, since they fall into the puissantnes of a King, who will embrace thee as his owne person, and maintaine thee against those enemies, who secretly (in respect of the alienation of thy estate) will now rest satisfied, and who (it may bee) in time to come, would notwithstanding thinke themselues but  little eased thereby, receiuing at the least from God in another world, besides iust punishment, that chastisement which they receiued not here, euen as notwithstanding they had well deserued by their iniquities and wicked trecheries. Therefore whilest we are floting in the middest of this turbulent sea, it is requisite we saile with aduised patience, as fortune will appoint the winde, and conforme our selues to Gods omnipotent pleasure, since that there is no felicitie durable to mortall men, nor any kingdome, nor principalitie permanent.

Hauing ended these penitrating speeches, which were of that efficacie to haue mollified a stonie heart, and could not be spoken without being interrupted,  with many deepe and lamentable sighs, great comisseration and teares of those who were present, and especially of Frier George, she gaue the Crowne and the other ornaments to Castalde, who kindly and with good words gaue her infinite thankes, as well for the good will he perceiued in her, as also for the magnanimitie which she had declared, and for the bountifull

liberalitie by which she did giue vnto Ferdinand this Crowne, and the absolute entering into this kingdome. And applying comforts to her aduersities,  he perswaded her not to attribute the renounciation of this kingdome to her misfortune, since she could by no meanes properly say, that she lost it, leauing it to Ferdinand, whom she drew and bound to be a continuall friend, and father vnto her, who would neuer forsake nor leaue her in all her needfull affayres; and incouraging her the more, hee assured her that he would intirely and religiously keepe it for him, and that he would performe to the vttermost all whatsoeuer he had promised her. And with this doubtfull hope, the poore afflicted Queene departed to goe towards Colosuar. 
Castalde hauing in this manner receiued the Crowne, caused it to be carefully kept, being aboue all things by the Kings of Hungarie highly esteemed, in respect of the vulgar opinion which is held thereof in that countrie: the report being, that an Angell brought it from heauen to S. Ladislas King The common opinion which is held in Hungarie of the royall Crowne. of Hungarie; and that the King which doth not possesse it, cannot bee the true nor lawfull King, nor iuridially gouerne the people, nor execute iustice to them. Men doe yet say further, that if by chance this Crowne should by some casualtie be lost, and found by any whosoeuer, although hee were the poorest in the world, presently without any other triall, he should be created King, and they should sweare fealtie and homage to him, as to their lawfull and vndoubted King. But whether this be true or no, I know not; yet vpon  this opinion, the Turkes haue a speciall desire to get it within the compasse of their custodie, as also Frier George had. All the Gentlemen and Lords who were present at the deliuerie of this Crowne, iudged that which the Queene had done, was of no small importance, esteeming the validitie of the Crown to be of equall price with the kingdome it selfe.
For this respect Castalde caused it continually to bee kept in his chamber with great vigilancie, vntill with a good conuoy he sent it to Ferdinand, by The Crowne of Hungarie sent to Ferdinand. the Lord Iohn Alpohnse Castalde Pescaire, his nephew. The Queene being arriued at Colosuar, Castalde also arriued there within a while after, where he remained certaine daies, attending those who should be there, and that were  called to the Diet, to know what their affection was to the King of the Romanes, and to confirme them in their good deuotion, and to satisfie the Queene of that which was promised her; to appease all the tumults which was amongst them, and to incite them to take armes against the Turke, and chase them from those parts, vnderstanding they would once againe attempt to enter thereinto. And after they were all arriued and assembled together, Castalde acquainted them with all the passed proceedings, whereof euery one was well contented. And if peraduenture there were some, yea, and of the chiefest, to whom it seemed not good what the Queene had  done, yet durst they not make shew to the contrarie, for that Ferdinands part was then the strongest. And thus they all with one accord did sweare fealtie The Hungarians sweare fealtie to Ferdinand. to his Maiestie, manifesting great ioy to see themselues returned vnder the gouernment of their natural Lord and King, to whom of right that kingdome belonged. And although Castalde discouered the affections of many (who rather inclined to the amitie and league of the Turke, then to that of

the King) yet faining notwithstanding to reduce and bring all to his deuotion,  and to shew them the inconuenience of the amitie and friendship of the Turke, and how hurtfull and preiudiciall it would bee to them, with a speech as eloquent, as his countenance and cariage was graue, hee vsed to them this oration.

I haue alwaies esteemed it (Lords, and chiefe Commanders of this kingdome) to be a thing very conuenient and necessary, not to speake at any time for any grace or friendship, which we haue purchased from other men; nor for the fauour which wee haue, or hope to receiue from them; nor for any instinct which we haue towards any: but only sincerely to explaine and declare what we take to bee good and praise worthie, as well for the particular, as publike benefit; and not at any time to perswade any thing which is not  both reasonable, iust, and holy, as well before God as men; which I for mine owne part haue practised as much as hath bin possible for me, and (by Gods assistance) will alwaies do it, chusing rather the good and glorie of the King (your Lord and mine) and the publike and generall quiet, then my owne proper life, as this day I meane to manifest to you, not minding to doe any thing, but that which shall bee sitting for the office of a louer of peace and publike tranquilitie, who ought not to omit vnspoken any speech, that may bee necessarie for the good and safetie of this countrie and kingdome, although with his owne proper blood, he should not faile to sustaine and assist it. Now, considering the present estate and condition into which you  are fallen, by the secret hatreds which raigne amongst you one towards an other, and by the dissentions sprung amongst you, and your former Lords: by occasion whereof you haue called the Turke to your ayde, and haue brought him into this countrie, with the ruine, not onely of the vulgar people, but also of your selues, and haue shewed him an open high way for the time to come, in a moment to be masters of you, he practising towards you that which he did to the Paleologians, Comins, Buccals, and other of the principall of Greece, who for their conceiued hatreds, thinking by the Turkes ayde wholly to banish and expulse their Emperour, did not only ruinate the Empire, but also lost their owne goods, honours, themselues, and liues, the  Turkes being allured with the goodlines and fertilitie of the countrie, and faining to fauour or support the discords of one faction or other, learning to make war after their maner, and hauing therewith in such diligent obseruance, noted the situation and passages of their countrie, that with little labour they thrust in vpon them, with such multitude and force, that after they had seene their young infants, their deare sisters, their beloued wiues and kindred to be prayes and slaues enchained; their townes burnt and destroyed, the countrie harried, and the common people made slaues, and they forced to flye and seeke other Prouinces to inhabite, wherein liuing in calamity they were forced to end their miserable life; of Lords to become seruants, and of libertie  to be in the thraldome of subiection, which is the greatest miserie and calamitie of all, and surely which in all the world hath not his like; being too painfull and intolerable a burthen, that a free man, fortunate, and rich, should become a seruant, miserable, afflicted, and begging to satisfie his necessitie. All which mischiefes had assuredly happened to you, if Gods goodnes, and

the bountie of the King had not foreseene it, opening the eyes of your vnderstanding, to remember the passed glorie and renowne which your Kings  haue vndoubtedly atchieued, by the victories and triumphs obtained against the Turkes. Considering, I say, this your poore state, and knowing that you are not ignorant with what abilitie and force I am come hither, and how his Maiestie hath sent me with an armie, to take care and charge of this Prouince, and to succour and assist it in her afflictions, and by your friendly ayde to deliuer it out of the hands of Infidels, our common enemies; I haue esteemed it necessarie to declare vnto you, that you ought to sweare fidelitie to Ferdinand your King and Lord, with such homage as you are bound to performe, and to perswade you, that you ought so much the more to settle  your selues in his fauour and clemencie, who will imbrace you not as his subiects, but will place you in his bosome, as his naturall and deare children, in such affectionate manner, that you may say, you haue rather gotten a father, then a Lord, who will not faile to assist you in your necessities, nor forsake you in all chances of fortune, counting himselfe happie if they be such: and on the other side, deeming himselfe wretched with you, if it should succeede otherwise (which God defend it should) seeing the fortune of men is variable and more mutable then the waues of the sea, and subiect to infinite hazards. But he esteeming you as deare as his owne members, it behoueth not you therefore to giue any credit to the dissembling promises of  Infidels; nor to the inticing perswasion of those who little affect your good, and lesse your quiet; nor by the instigation of those, who secretly practiseth your ruine, and would separate you from the bodie, of which depende the common health and life: but rather, it is needfull that you vnite and incorporate your selues into one resolute minde, and by that meanes valiantly redoubling your forces, you may shew your selues such, that in opposing your selues couragiously, you may bee able to chase out of this kingdome, those enemies who violate our Religion, dishonour your Churches, force your Virgins, and with as much possible wickednes as they can imagine, defame your wiues and children, neuer obseruing any faith. After this your  manifest and couragious fidelitie, it behoueth that you deliberate and consult with me for the publike libertie (although it bee a thing that seemeth daungerous) to denounce warre against them, which being iustly and discreetly managed, will promise to vs victorie, and immortall glorie with them that shall succeede vs, who learning of vs to esteeme honour and glorie, (more deare then their liues) will freely choose rather to die fighting for faith and libertie, then to bee as prayes to these inhumane Barbarians, liuing in continuall dishonour. And if these reasons are not so perswasiue, nor yet of that force to moue your courages, yet ought they at least to make them tremble, by reason of the horrible cruelties you shall receiue when the Turke shall become your Lord: for assure your selues you shall not for all  that enioy any great content or quiet, but euen daily your sorrowes and griefes will be redoubled with great and tedious impositions, for that he will not satisfie himselfe with an ordinarie and reasonable tribute: but with an absolute commaund hee will take away the dearest of your children, forcing them to denie our faith, and to forget both the father and mother,

who haue begotten, produced, and brought them vp; and will nousle them  among his Ianisaries, to increase by that meanes their wicked and heathenish opinion, and ouerthrow and suppresse ours, which is grounded vpon the blood of our deare Sauiour Iesus Christ. And besides, if you haue a fayre yong daughter, who is of seemely and well fauoured countenance, and enriched and adorned with vertue, she shall presently bee taken from you, and put into the Serraile, to satisfie the vnsatiable lust and incontinencie of this abominable Tyrant, who co^tinually will aspire to no other thing, then wholly to extirpate and ruinate you, and to make you in the end to become his seruants and perpetuall slaues, purloyning from you the best of whatsoeuer you haue, and the remainder of all which shall be left vnto you by your ancestors:  neither can you say any thing in defence of your selues, nor contradict them, which if you do, or make any shew of discontent, then shal you be straight in present danger of your life. Consider by this and firmly impresse it, what these calamities are, and how horrible and grieuous the effects be. Awake, awake therefore, I say, your drowsie spirits, and waite not vpon a vaine desire, and vpon a swelled pride, so willingly to yeeld your selues vnder so miserable a seruitude, yea much worse then death it selfe: but valiantly oppose your vttermost abilities against such enterprises, and giue not occasion to others to call you tyrants: for surely not onely he is a Tyrant, who is the cause of another mans seruitude, but also he who is able to oppose himselfe against the violence of another, and yet maketh no resistance. Call together with  you all the Sicilians and Transalpinians, making a league with your neighbours, and with those of whom in time you may hope for succour and ayde, and in defending your selues, offend the enemie; this being no dishonest thing nor worthie of blame, for defence of your selues, to enter into league with any straunge nation whatsoeuer. And resolue and vnite your selues quickly in one, considering that in the occurrances and aduentures of warre, too long remissenes increaseth more detriment then profit. And by such a sudden determination, doing that which in reason and courage ought to be done, you shall manifest to your King a quicknes of spirit, and declare how much your hearts are cleere and cleane, as well in prosperitie as in aduersitic,  those onely meriting to bee reputed truly couragious, and of a firme resolution, who perfectly discerning troublesome things, and things that are pleasant one of them from another, not doubting at any hand any perill, nor withdrawing themselues from the seruice of their Lord, as I assure my selfe you will not doe; making full account of this, that hauing before your eyes the pregnant experience of euils passed, and deeply thinking on the present labours, you will rather make choise to lose your liues by a iust and honourable warre, then liue with a vile peace and an infamous quiet.

These speeches animated Frier George, with all the rest and chiefest of Transiluania, presently to yeeld themselues (knowing the veritie of the  cause) to the Kings seruice, and he offered himselfe with them altogether to his deuotion, acknowledging him for their true Lord and King. The first who did sweare fealtie, were the Saxons and Sicilians, neuerthelesse with this condition, that he would confirme and obserue their priuiledges. Their chiefe Commaunder among them, named Ladislas Endef, was then greatly

recommended, because hee had induced them to such their acknowledgement. And they deliberating together vpon the warre, that they meant to  take against the Turke, (who, as it was said, would come and assaile them) it was concluded that they should send (as they had alreadie done through all the Prouinces) and publish that euery man should be in a readines vpon the first sommons that should be giuen them, to march against the common enemie. During this time, and whilest these things were discoursed of, Ferdinands The ratifying of Ferdinand vpon the agreements. packet of letters arriued, by which hee confirmed and ratified all that which Castalde had promised and agreed vpon with the Queene and Frier George. And besides, gaue thereby further authoritie to Castalde, that if possible it could be done by a Proctor or Deputie, to celebrate the espousals betweene the Infanta Ioane his daughter, and Iohn the Queenes sonne; which  The betrothing of the Infanta Ioane the daughter of Ferdinand, with Iohn the sonne of the Queene. within a short time euen in the very same place was after performed, with great ioy and contentment of all the kingdome, being the generall opinion, that this new aliance and agreement made betweene these Kings, would bring forth among them a perpetuall quiet.
These affayres being thus decreed and concluded, the day following, which was the 9. of September, the Queene departed from Colosuar, with a conuoy of 400. Hungarian horse, which Castalde sent with her, accompanying The departure of the Queene out of the kingdome with teares and sorrow. her himselfe from that place two miles, which maketh foure French. The Queene being thus accompanied and in a Coach with her sonne (who was very sicke) and trauailing on her iourney, she that day plainly manifested the  great sorrow and extreame discontent which she felt, to see herselfe depriued of her kingdome, and by agreement to leaue her owne, and to search after another mans, which was very apparant to euery one, by the mournfull plaints and deepe sighs which she powred out, together with abundance of teares falling from her eyes (true witnesses of her sorrow and distresse). They being all come to a way which led on two hands, the Queene and her sonne tooke leaue of Castalde, not without great redoubling of sorrow and teares, the one returning towards Colosuar, the other proceeding on their iourney towards Cassouia. 
Scarse was the Queene departed, but newes was brought her that Peter Vicchy had agreed with Andrew Battor, into whose custodie he had alreadie Vicchy yeeldeth the low countries to Battor. yeelded Lippa and Themesuar, with Becch, Becherech, and Chinad, and all the other Castles which were vnder his gouernment, not being willing before to come to this agreement, vntill hee was acertained by the Queenes letters, of all which had passed vntill then. And after he had thus yeelded his whole commaund, hee set forward on the way towards the Queene, to accompanie her to Cassouia. Whilest he was proceeding on his iourney, Battor entered into the said townes, and taking ample and sure possession of them, furnished the^ with a garrison of such souldiours, as he had drawne out  of certain Fortresses, and who for that purpose he had brought with him, being 800. Aiduchs, who are footmen bearing Halberts, Curasses, Bowes, Arrowes, Crosbowes, and Sables, and 300. horse. With this warlike companie he greatly assured the countrie, specially because the Caransebansses, the Lugasiens, and the Rathians (people very puissant) were reduced vnder the obedience of Ferdinand, and had declared that they were content to liue vnder

his Maiesties deuotion, and to serue him in all occasions of warre which  should be offered.
The affayres of Lippa and Themesuar being thus with diligence dispatched, Castalde thought then he had fully effected his most important busines; because that whilest these two Fortresses were not yet vnder the gouernment of Ferdinand, men thought, that that which he had negotiated before, was to little or no purpose, for that those two places were of great importance, Lippa and Themesuar townes of importance. and specially Lippa, which was esteemed and reputed the key and port of all Transiluania. The same, besides it was of great importance, was exceeding profitable and commodious, and therefore necessarie to be more carefully maintained and kept, in respect of the great reuenewes which come  from thence, because it is the Port where al the vessels of salt are laden, which is transported by the riuer Marosse through all Hungarie, and is a marchandise of the best and greatest trafficke dispersed into all those countries. Frier George demanded this toll of the King, importuning that his Maiestie would giue it him: but afterward the King vnderstanding it was yeerely worth 300000. Florins, hee would not intirely giue it him; but yet hee had it at a reasonable rate, although the other would not so accept thereof: and because he was not willing to giue him any occasion to complaine of him, hee liberally George had the third part of the toll of salt. gaue him the third part thereof. All Transiluania being reduced vnder the obedience of Ferdinand, and the Marquesse of Balasse, and Francis Chendy, men of speciall authoritie and credit in their countrie, being also entered  into amitie with him: Bernard Aldene Campe-master of the Spanyards, desired Bernard Aldene a Spanyard, sent to to commaund Themesuar and Lippa. Castalde, that since hee would send other Captaines for the defence of Themesuar and Lippa, that it would please him to send him thither, being the rather desirous to goe, for that he vnderstood he would send Spanyards thither. Castalde was therewith well content, and presently dispatching him, he gaue vnto him 300. Spanyards, and sent with him Captaine Rodrigo Vigliandrando, who then was come to the seruice of Ferdinand, during this expedition, and who was by the same Aldene, earnestly desired to haue him in his companie, and that to the end that he might assist him both by his vertue and good aduice in any Martiall affayres, for that he was a man of trust, experienced,  and very desirous of honour. Being thus dispatched, hauing with them two peeces of Artillerie, they set forward on the way from Colosuar, drawing towards Themesuar, which according to the iudgement of all, was of greatest importance, taking with them diuers Ingenors, to fortifie and repayre the other places which were of least strength. On the other side they caused to fortifie and strengthen Sibinio, Albe-iula, and Sassebesse, which are townes situated vpon little hils in the middest of great plaines, and which with little cost would bee made impregnable. Castalde caused these fortifications to bee repayred, to no other end, but onely to stop the Turkes incursions, in case he would enter into the kingdome; and that in the meane time  he might make other prouision and haue commoditie, to expect the succours which Ferdinand should send him, if need so required. And for that in the late Diet of Colosuar, the Transiluanians being for that particular cause required to ayde Ferdinand with certaine summes of money, they had excused themselues in respect of the great pouertie of the countrie, which was an

occasion they could not contribute thereunto: therefore by the commaund The reuenews of the Bishopricks employed to the fortification of the countrie. of the King it was ordained, that all the reuenewes of the Bishoprickes in  Transiluania, with the Bishopricke of Agria, should bee employed for the charges of such fortifications.
Whilest these things were thus in doing, the Frier made semblance as though he had been very glad thereof, but especially because he had thrust out the Queene before him: and thinking that his purposes had at the beginning taken good effect, hee hoped (as it many times chaunceth to men who often deceiue themselues in their owne affayres) that also the middest and the end would succeede fortunately, as his owne conceits had alreadie promised him. Now the Frier knowing that hee had greatly offended the  Turke, in bringing Ferdinand into this Prouince, hee endeuoured by all meanes to cleere himselfe thereof, and againe to creep into his former grace George seeketh againe the fauour of the Turke. and fauour. Thus by his subtilties thinking to hold Ferdinand in one sleeue, and the Turk in another, and to content them both, he meant now to kindle that, which afterward in the end hee could not extinguish. And to execute this his intention, he departed from Colosuar to go to a Castle of his owne, which he had built from the ground, named Wiuar. He had giuen order that there he would meete the Chiauss, which the Turke sent to receiue the tribute which that Prouince yeerely payed him, to the end they might liue in peace. The Chiauss was alreadie arriued at this Castle, whilest they negotiated  all the premised affayres. And the Frier caused him to be so priuately, yet well entertained, that none could speake with him, which he did in this respect, for feare that any should aduertise him of what had passed. For this cause he appointed him to bee lodged and friendly vsed in this place as the most commodious, being more solitarie and lesse frequented of waies, then any other in the kingdome. The Frier being arriued at this place, presently caused many sports and rich presents to bee shewed and giuen to this Chiauss, with sumptuous entertainment, and after he sent for Castalde, who presently came thither, and by their generall agreement and consent, he payed the tribute to the Turke, the time being almost expired, in which the said tribute  should be payed; and the truce yet continued, during which, it seemed Tribute payd to the Turke by the Transiluanians. not good to Castalde (and specially at that time) to giue the Turke any other occasion to infringe or breake it, then that he had alreadie done, which was, in lifting him out of Transiluania; which he meant not to doe for many respects, and specially because he had a purpose with speede to prouide for the fortifications of the places before mentioned; and because that in the meane while hee meant to gaine the good wils of the ablest and mightiest men in the countrie, and to increase himselfe both with men and money to maintaine and keepe it: but fortune would not suffer that he should long enioy his desire. For being one night at supper with the Frier, newes was brought The Turkes in field to take the Queene. him, that by the commaund of Achmeth Basha, there was gone out of Buda  3000. horse to assay to take the Queene, her sonne, and the Crowne of the kingdome, which was sent to Ferdinand, assuredly thinking that she would carrie it with her as a precious Iewell. But she (as good fortune was) tooke the way towards Cassouia, going in the poorest habite and painfullest trauaile The miserie of Queene Izabella. that could bee imagined, not any thing dissembling the extreame

griefe which still heauily opprest her. To her vttermost abilitie she manifested  this her immeasurable affliction, which hourely gnawed and sorely distempered her minde. Insomuch that one day passing a mountaine, which separateth Transiluania from Hungarie, and going downe the side thereof, which was very rough and tedious, by which ragged way her Coach could not passe, shee was constrained (during a great shewer) to goe on foote, and downe that side with her children and Ladies, and that not without great labour. Walking in this sort, she greatly complained her selfe of her aduerse fortune, who not contenting to be contrarie and opposite to her in great and waightie things, would yet afflict her in small and meane matters. And attributing this sorrow and discontent of minde, which vntimely happened  to her, to the wickednes of her destinie, she tooke a knife, and with the point thereof (to ease a little her vntolerable griefe) writ in the barke of a great tree (vnder which she was retired to repose and shrowd her selfe from the raine, which powred downe amaine) these Latin words; Sic fata volunt, So the Destinies will haue it, Izabella the Queene. and vnderneath it, Izabella Regina, which is as much to say, Ainsi le veulent les Destinees, Izabella Royne. After she had engrauen these words, she againe presently tooke her Coach and proceeded on her iourney, and arriued in The Queene arriued at Cassouia. safetie at Cassouia, making by that meanes the Turkes sallie out of Buda vaine and friuolous, who knew not what to doe, for that she tooke another way more vnusual and lesse frequented, and quite differing from that which they were of opinion she would take: but the Queene being exceeding  prouident and of good iudgement, preuented the Turkish subtilties, escaped their ambuscadoes, and fell not into their hands. And thus (by Gods prouidence) altering her way, she disgraced Achmeths friuolous enterprise, and his followers found little contentment of their laborious desires.
The end of the third Booke.



THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
SOlyman prepareth an army to inuade Hungary, and George (Vayuode of Transiluania) leauieth forces against him. Themesuar summoned by the Turkes, and diuers townes with Lippa is yeelded to them. Themesuar besieged by the Turk, but he raiseth his forces and retireth from thence. George is vehemently suspected by Ferdinand, who sent aduertisements to Castalde to kill him. The towne of Lippa besieged and taken by Castalde, but the Castle held out, and George endeuoureth to saue Oliman, who was Gouernour thereof, who in the end vpon composition departed in safetie from thence: but was set vpon by our men, who were ouerthrowne by him. Aldene made Gouernour of Lippa. The conspiracie of George, his death, who was slaine at Buise; his buriall, and his moueables seized vpon to Ferdinands vse, for whose death the Sicilians began to mutine: but were appeased by Chendies wisedom.

AFter that the agreement passed betweene Ferdinand King of the Romanes, and Queene Izabella was ended and concluded, and that the Queene peaceably leauing the kingdome, was wholly freed out thereof; the Transiluanians for two causes thought happely  to liue a long time in a peaceable tranquilitie, and to haue brought to fortunate issue, the bitter afflictions which they in former time, with many perturbations, sorrowfully endured. The first whereof was, because they saw the sonne of King Iohn in league with the now present King, and to haue taken in mariage the Infanta Ioane his daughter, which aliance and amitie did indifferently minister to euery one an assured expectation of a perpetuall and quiet repose, and that in time, by meanes of Ferdinands clemencie and bountie, the way should not altogether be taken from Iohn one day, to reenter againe into that kingdome. The other was, that for the late sustentation which by these new  agreements happened to them, they thought themselues so sufficiently assured in abilitie, that the Turk for feare of the puissant authoritie of Ferdinand, and of the Emperour Charles his brother, durst neuer more, or at the least not so often as hee had done, molest and spoyle them: but on the contrarie, in

consideration of this he would greatly feare and doubt them: so that by this  meanes they should haue time and leisure to fortifie and strengthen the passages, and furnish the low countrie townes in such warlike manner, that they should neuer hereafter stand in dread of the Ottoman violence.
But fortune not minding to satisfie their expectation, vnhappely shuffled all the cardes in their hands, and altered that sweete desire of peace, into a trembling feare and suspition of warre. For this Frenchman (of whom wee haue before spoken) being arriued at Constantinople, declared how he fled from Sassebesse, vpon suspition that he was a Spie for the King of France; and being retired to the grand Seigniour, informed him of all that which had passed betweene Ferdinand and the Queene. Solyman now knowing Solyman prepareth an armie to muade Hungarie.  that to bee true, which vntill then hee would not beleeue, commaunded with expedition to leauie an armie to send into Transiluania, vnder the conduct of the Belerbey of Greece, to whom hee gaue commaund, that with all diligence hee should with 12000. horse repayre vnto Belgrade, where the whole armie should bee ioyned and vnited together, which should bee sent him by the Sangiacs lying there about, and that hee should enter and assaile this Prouince on both sides: on the one side by the helpe and assistance of the Vayuode of Moldauia; and on the other, by the ayde of the Basha of Buda, and that he should with his vttermost abilitie endeuour himselfe to conquer it, and leauie such a masse of his people, and so continually imploy  them, that Ferdinand should haue no time to preuent it, norfortifie himselfe there.
Castalde hauing notice of this by speciall aduertisement, in the greatest haste he could, mustered his men of warre, and began to perswade with the Frier, that he should prepare his forces to incounter the enemie, and giue preuention the best he could to the sinister chances which shortly might ensue, because that they were not able to prouide for the time. The Frier greatly dreading the Turke, in respect hee was vehemently incensed against him, for his former proceedings: answered (dissembling his thoughts) Castalde, that hee would not faile him in any furtherance. But on the other side hee George negotiateth with the Bashnes. cunningly practised his attonement with the enemie, to whom faining to  write for the good and behalfe of Ferdinand, he onely writ for his owne safetie and commoditie, and sending certaine presents to Rostan Basha, and to him of Buda, to draw and allure them to his friendship, he assayed as much as he could to shake the blame from himselfe: saying, that if the Turke should send an armie into Transiluania to conquer it, because they had put the King of the Romanes into possession thereof, that for that purpose he neede not send thither, seeing that all was done by the Queene, and not by him; who had alreadie maried her sonne Iohn with Ferdinands daughter, to whose Lieutenants also she had freely, and from the perswasion of her owne opinion, intirely relinquished her countrie and crowne, and her selfe was retired  to Cassouia: and that for these reasons it was to no great purpose to send an armie to destroy the kingdome and spoyle the poore inhabitants, who were vtterly ignorant and guiltlesse of the said facts: and promised that hee would herein so carefully trauaile, that he would chase from thence all those

souldiours and men of warre which Ferdinand had sent thither, and that he would continually pay the ordinarie tribute, and that according to such order  as before was promised, and as they had alreadie begun to pay it: and further writing many other reasons for his excuse: and also to confirme this his deuice, he caused likewise certaine of the principallest of the kingdome, priuately to write to the said Bashaes to approue all that which he had said. Yet would it not induce the Belerbey to desist from marching on with his The Turks armie in Hungarie. troupes, which he brought with him from Constantinople. He being arriued at Belgrade, he began to muster and assemble his Campe, and after hauing prepared certaine bridges ouer Danubius, he passed to the other side, and went to lodge by the riuer Tibiscus, vpon which he also caused likewise another bridge to bee made, and from thence passing on a long, he came  neere to a Castle named Becche, situated almost vpon the riuers side. In the next plaine he pitched his Campe, and from thence gaue aduertisement to all the neighbour Prouinces which were subiect to the Turke, that they should not faile, but presently send him men and horses, such as they are bound to send in the like affayres.
Whilest the Belerbey busied himselfe to gather the rest of his Campe, Castalde commaunded Aldene the Master of the Campe (who then was in the low countries for the defence and assurance thereof) that Stephen Lozonse, a famous Knight among the Hungars, should with George Sotede enter into Lozonse Lieutenant for Ferdinand at Themesuar. Themesuar with 600. horse, for the guard and defence thereof. And further,  for the better assurance of the same, he commaunded that Aldene himselfe should enter thereinto with all the Spanyards which he had, making Lozonse Gouernour of those countries, and Generall ouer all the warlike affayres. He with Aldene caused Themesuar and other places to be fortified with the best defences they could: and knowing that the enemie was alreadie in the field, they daily laboured to fortifie the towne with Rampiers and Bulwarkes of good sufficient strength, giuing aduertisement of all things which he heard or they did to Andrew Battor, who was then at Lippa. Battor seeing the necessitie of the time that vrgently pressed euery one, began to leauie as many Battor at Lippa. men as he could, instantly soliciting all the people of his Prouince, and admonishing  them, that euery one should ayde him against the common enemie. He also drew to him the principall Lords of the Rhatians, not in respect to assist him with their powers, but for that they should not bee inuited to the seruice of the Belerbey, knowing their inconstancie to bee such, that they would affect and take part with the strongest. And hauing thus by all good meanes drawne them to him, and causing them to sweare fealtie to Ferdinand: that he might yet winne their good likings the more, he entertained 4000. of them into pay, with many Captaines, who voluntarily offered to be also entertained into Ferdina^ds seruice, as the others were. And hauing  with great diligence leauied 15000. men, who were most horsemen, he presently with these troupes put himselfe into the field, and went and lodged beneath Lippa, expecting there what the enemie was determined to doe, who also was incamped betweene the two aforesaid riuers. Castalde at the same time diligently suruaied and munitioned the fortifications, and specially

the frontier townes of Transiluania, as he saw was most needfull. And  being acertained yt the Belerbey would come to Themesuar, he sent another companie of Spanyards thither, and money to pay the Rhatians, whom hee knew were variable and inconstant, and such as were needfull to be entertained with many and often payes, which happely would procure them from reuolting. On the other side, he vsed his best labour to prouoke Frier George, George, Vayuoyde of Transiluania, raneth his armie against the Turks. that instantly (as being Vayuode) hee should assemble all the souldiours of the kingdome, to march with them and relieue Themesuar, commaunding Andrew Battor that he should send to Lozonse as many men as he could, wherby he might hinder and withstand the Belerbey from the passage of Tibiscus. The Frier was very slow, and fearefull to leauie the inhabitants of the  countrie, hauing before commaunded that none should stirre, without his appointment and expresse command, assuring them that the Belerbey would not passe Tibiscus, and that it was not needful of such an assemblie, which he the rather assured himselfe of, in regard of the letters which he had alreadie sent to the Turk and Bashaes. But after hauing certaine notice, that hee prepared two bridges vpon Tibiscus, hee went presently to Deua, leauying thereabouts 3000. horse, and with those hee incamped in the field, and presently writ to all the townes, that they should with all expedition send such men as they were bound by their custome to furnish, which was willingly executed with great celeritie. 
Now when they would by the authoritie of the superiour Lords raise amongst The custome of Transiluania to leauie the souldiours of the countrie. them such Infantrie and Caualarie, as euery towne is bound to furnish, and that specially for generall defence; the custome of this Prouince is, to send one Launce and a Sword stained with blood, and borne on horsebacke by one of the principallest officers of euery towne or place, and carrying them on high (in token of great and present necessitie) sheweth them to all thereabout, with another man on foote, who goeth crying; The common enemie commeth against vs all, let euery house prepare a man for generall good, and send him speedily to that place which is appointed you. At this crie euery one causeth speedily to depart, all those who are apt and able to beare armes, and sendeth them to the rende vous. And thus within a  short time they assembled a great number of men, as well foote as horse: the care that Castalde had thereof, greatly assisting them in that busines, who specially hastened the men, which hee caused to bee leauied through the kingdome, George suspected by Castalde. and so much the rather, because hee had vehement suspition of the Frier, who continually ceased not to his vttermost, to driue him out of those countries, whereof he was well aduertised by meanes of one who was very familiar with the Frier, and acquainted him with all such occurrants. Yet Castalde dissembling the matter, vsed Frier George in the greatest kindnes as was possible, and indeuoured himselfe by al meanes to gaine his good liking, and  the rather, for that hee knew him to bee fickle and inconstant, and stood in much awe of the Turke, hauing continuall distrust that for his inconstancie, he would exchaunge the fauour of his friends, to follow the ambitious wiles of his enemies. In respect whereof, he confirmed him generall Treasurer, States confirmed to George. with 4000. Florins by the yeere, and also Vaynode of the kingdome, with

15000. Florins by the yeere, as he had requested, and with authoritie in time of necessitie to haue 800. horse, and 500. foote for his guard; and besides, 200.  other horse which he should maintaine at Deua, and at Gherghe, two strong Castles and places which was giuen him to keepe. Being by such bountifulnes wonne to a dissembled fidelitie, he came to the Diet at Sibinio, (which a little before was appointed) where euery one being arriued, they required all the Prouinces of the kingdome; to wit, the Sicilians, Saxons, and Transalpinians, to contribute some money to maintaine the charges of the warre; which was agreed vnto by the most. And whilest the Frier by all good outward offices shewed himselfe seruiceable to Ferdinand, yet hee omitted not The inconstancie of George. secretly to practise with the Turke, to accord with him, and in recompence  of the good which was done him, he still caused such souldiours whom hee most trusted, to resort to him, with whom vnder the colour to chase and expell the Turke, hee endeuoured to thrust out of the kingdome Ferdinands people.
About that time came newes, how Maximilian King of Bohemia, was Maximilian espoused Marie daughter of Charles the Emperour. returned out of Spaine, with Mary daughter of Charles the Emperour, and that hauing passed through Italie, he arriued at Vienna, where, by reason thereof, was made him great feasts and sports: and how some brought letters from Rome to his Maiestie, by which (in the first creation of Cardinals) the Pope promised to include and create Frier George in the number. 
Ferdinand vnderstanding that the Basha of Buda laboured thus that hee might increase his armie, did (besides the people which he sent into Transiluania) reenforce the garrisons which were on the frontiers of Hungarie, for feare that the Basha turning his course on that quarter, yet should he not bee so soone master thereof as he imagined. Whereupon he dispatched Andrew Succours sent by Ferdinand to Castalde. Branday with a Regiment of 3000. Germanes, and Charles Seheretin, a Lord of Slesia, with 400. horse, the most part whereof were men of armes, and the rest Pistoliers, all vnder the conduct of the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin, who then was Comissarie generall of the Campe. Being all arriued at Varadine, they soiourned there a time, attending that which Castalde would command  them. He seeing that by no meanes he could depart out of the kingdome, without giuing the Frier great suspition of him, sent to tell the Marquesse Sforce, that with the people which hee brought out of Germanie, hee should come and ioyne with him where he was; and in the meane time, he leauing in Albe-iula one companie of Germanes, another at Sassebesse, and two at Sibinio (it being the greatest and most important towne of Transiluania) with those fewe Spanyards which hee brought with him, and the rest of the Germanes, he departed to goe and ioyne with the Frier. And then he vnderstood that the Belerbey had alreadie passed Tibiscus with a great armie of 80000. men, as well Infantrie as Caualarie (as the Spies, and those who secretly had knowledge of his Campe, reported): and that hee brought  with him 50. peeces of Artillerie great and small for batterie, and with this warlike traine, hee held on his course to Themesuar. The Belerbey hauing thus passed Tibiscus, presently commaunded Lozonse, that hee should without Themesuar summoned. any further delay, in the name of the Grand Seigniour, presently yeeld

this towne to him, and that if he would not, he protested to race it stone from  stone, and also both himselfe and those who were with him, to bee put to the sword, and that he would execute this according to the expresse command which he had thereof, without any mercie or fauour. And on the contrarie, that if liberally, and of his owne good will, he would yeeld it into his hands, besides the guerdon and assured recompence which hee should finde, hee would vse all curtesie and fauour, which according to fayre warres, was accustomably vsed to valiant and gallant souldiours: and by that meanes hee should assuredly winne the friendship of the Grand Seigniour, whose fauour he should neuer want.
Lozonse at this proud summons answered him thus: That that towne belonged to the King of the Romanes, and that in his behalfe hee would vndoubtedly  keepe and defend it to the death, acknowledging no other rightfull King, nor Grand Seigniour of that Prouince, but he: and that it were farre better discretion for him to retire backe againe, then to proceede with this crueltie to destroy the poore commons and countrie which were none of his, and ouer whom he had not any mite of interest: and therefore hee held it safest for him and his traine quietly to depart, and let those liue in peace, who did not any thing offend or annoy him. The Belerbey seeing the gallantnes of Lozonse, he made him no other answer, but onely sent to him by writing these foure verses taken out of Virgil. 

Ante leues ergo pascentur in aethere cerui,
Et freta destituent nudos in littore pisces,
Ante pererratis amborum finibus exul
Aut ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tygrim.

Minding thereby to demonstrate, that Harts should rather bruze in the ayre; the fishes forsake the sea; a banished man see the ende of the world; a Parthean drinke vp the riuer Saone; or a Germane, the riuer Tygris, rather then Saone, or Sagona, a riuer in France. hee would returne from his intended course. And so proceeding on his iourney, he came before a little Castle which standeth almost vpon the passage of the riuer, and is named (as is aboue said) Becche, and there in camped Becche taken by the Turks. himselfe before it, and seeing it would not yeeld, he began so rudely to  batter it with tenne Cannons, that the greatest part of the wall fell to the ground. Whereat the besieged being greatly astonished, and perceiuing themselues cast away, because the whole Castle was broken downe and layd open, they presently yeelded to the Belerbey, with this condition only that their liues might bee saued, who obseruing no promise towards them, were notwithstanding slaine by the Ianisaries, who after they were come forth, of 200. men left not one aliue, the Captaine excepted, whom the Belerbey with great difficultie saued. Going from thence with one part of his armie, and two double Cannons, hee came before another Castle named Becherech, Becherech taken. which being astonished at the late misfortune happened to Becche,  without induring the force of the Cannon, they presently yeelded. This Castle being thus rendered, the Belerbey speedily with all his armie marched directly to another Castle named Senath, otherwise Chinath, before which he made a stand with al his squadrons, to see if they would yeeld: and

whilest he was occupied about these attempts, the Rhatians of Ferdinands part, seeing the Turks Campe approched with great force and violence, and  thinking Ferdinands power deferred too much time before they came into the field, they all perswading themselues, that it was neither shame nor dishonour The Rhatians reuolt from Ferdinand, and incline to the Turkes. to breake their words and othes which they swore to the King (although they had receiued pay) they wholly retired to the Belerbey, sending to him for his greater assurance, their wiues and children, and that because the Turkes are not accustomed to repose ouer much trust in them, knowing their extreame inconstant dispositions. After he had entertained these Rhatians, he caused those of Senath to bee tempted to some agreement, promising them that if they would yeeld, he would preserue both their honours and liues, and he would permit that peaceably euery man should enioy their  owne proper goods. Vpon which condition they yeelded, and the Castle Senath yeelded to the Turkes. came vnder his commaund, and leauing therein a good garrison, he speedily marched towards Lippa, which was tenne miles distant from thence, leauing behinde him Themesuar, which then he would not besiege, but reserued that enterprise vntill better oportunitie, and performed no other thing, but diligently obserued the situation and commodities thereabouts, and after that proceeded on his iourney.
Euery one was of opinion that hee meant not to enterprise any thing against this towne, because that hee was certainly informed there was a strong garrison within it, and that it was sufficiently munitioned and fortified,  insomuch that hee esteemed the exployte very difficult, and perhaps he supposed he should neuer get it. Thus leauing the siege thereof, vntill a more commodious and fit time, he thought it more profitable to take from him all the Fortresses thereabouts, and especially Lippa, (which was the direct passage by which Castalde was forced to send all the succours that were necessarie for him) and that afterwards hee seeing himselfe depriued of all hope, hee made no doubt, but that either by force or composition he should carrie it. He being now within one daies iourney of Lippa, presently sent his Vauntgard, to know and suruiew the Campe of Andrew Battor, who was suddenly aduertised thereof by his Sentinels, which hee appointed  in certaine places, to bee assured when the Belerbey approched. They with all expedition in the beginning of the night brought newes to Battor (who was then at Lippa) that the Turkes drew neere to that towne, Battor confusedly quitteth Lippa. and that they had already discouered the Vauntgard. Battor vpon this newes euen the very selfesame night retired so confusedly with his people, yt all his Campe was in a manner quite defeated, because that euery one for his owne part sought the meanes how by flying he might saue himselfe. Dislodging in this confusion, he left in the Castle Captaine Pete a Hungarian to gouerne it, a man of good reputation as well to manage armes, as also for other politike affayres, with 300. horse, and certaine Aiduchs, who are (as wee before  haue shewed) footmen, who in their armes and manner of fight, imitate the Turkes; and commanded him with his people to defend both the towne and it, the best they could. Scarse was Andrew Battor departed, when in the morning the Burgomaster of Lippa (who is the principall officer of the

towne, and euery yeere one is chosen and created, for the administration and The Burgomaster of Lippa yeeldeth the towne to the Turkes.  gouernment thereof) went to seeke Pete, plainly (yea and like a iolly stoute Burger) telling him, that he would yeeld the towne to the Belerbey, since he saw no forces left to defend it, it being forsaken by Battor, and that there was not one citizen that would hazard the losse of their children, wiues, sisters, and reuenewes, all of them being well assured, that if they should stand vpon their guard, the Belerbey would without mercie put them all to the sword, and that for this feare, neither they, nor the other Rhatians who were remaining in the towne, would aduenture that, which within short time was probable to bring them to vtter confusion, nor foolishly hazard such a miserable end which now was eminent, if they stood vpon defensiue tearmes, well  knowing that they had neither force nor prouision sufficient to resist him: and that for these considerations he was resolued to present the keyes of the towne to the Belerbey; and as for him hee might doe with the Castle as hee thought good. Pete seeing the cowardly resolution of this Burger, and assuring himselfe, that the Turkes being in the towne, hee could not possible defend the Castle, esteemed it better and more profitable for the seruice of Ferdinand, in preseruing those souldiours which he had with him, to retire with safetie, then to expect and aduenture the losse of all. Vpon this deliberation he forsooke the Castle, and the greatest part of the towne, and so departed out of it with all his souldiours. And of the other side, the Burgomaster  went presently to seeke the Belerbey, vnto whom he yeelded the towne keyes, with many submissiue demonstrations of obedience; in recompence whereof, the Belerbey receiued it with kinde thankes, shewing him many pleasant sports, and also bestowing many presents of him, and presently after went accompanied to Lippa with the said Burgomaster, where hee lodged with all his armie, and soiourned there tenne daies, greatly reioycing himselfe, that without the losse of his people, all things were quietly yeelded to him: and supposing with himselfe that all the other places would doe the like, he endeuoured with his vttermost abilitie to take a little Castle, yet very strong, named Solimos, which was situated vpon a mountaine, distant from Solimos defended against the Turks. Lippa onely but a Culuerine shot. The souldiours who were within were  Hungars, and little regarding the Turkes Campe, valiantly defended themselues, hoping that within short time Castalde would relieue them (as for certaine he did) and shewing their valiantnes and courage, which was exceeding great, they daily made sallies out vpon the enemie, and endamaged and annoyed the Belerbey as much as they could, so that hee seeing neither by promises, good words, nor by more then reasonable offers he could winne it, he was forced in the end to depart, and let them liue in peace, perswading himselfe that he should in the end haue it either by a long siege, or of their owne good will. 
Thus leauing within Lippa 5000. horse, and 200. of the best Ianisaries which were in his Campe vnder the charge of Oliman Bech a Persian (who a little before for some indignation which hee conceiued against the Sophy, was come from Persia to one Turkes seruice) departed with the rest of his armie to besiege Themesuar, thinking that vpon the conquest thereof, hee

should not leaue any thing behinde him which was not firme and assured to him, and that hee should not haue any more occasion to conceiue any feare  or doubt to be staied by the succours which was hoped to bee sent by Ferdinand: and for the better notifying of this towne of Themesuar, I will make a briefe description thereof.
Themesuar is a little towne enuironed with the riuer Themes, whereof Themesuar. the towne taketh his name. The halfe whereof is inclosed with a mud wall, and built vp with wood in forme of a Rampier, and before it are great Ditches, Marishes, and Quagmires full of water, in regard wherof it maketh the towne in that place so strong, that by no meanes it can bee battered, and much lesse besieged. The other halfe is inclosed with a wall of quarters after  the ancient manner, which when they heard that the Belerbey would come to besiege, they presently began to repayre it, making within it a long Trench of 150. paces, and of bredth and depth a pike broad and deepe, with his trauerses and necessarie defences, and below at the foote of a tower (which was in the middest) was made a Casemet to defend the Ditch of either side, which was alreadie fortified with flankes, fit for the shot to play out of.
This towne being thus fortified, they got thereinto all the victuals which were in either of the Suburbes, and fiered the greater of them, for that the enemie should not finde commoditie to lodge therein; and the other part  which was enuironed with two armes of the riuer, remained whole vntill they saw where the Belerbey would incampe himselfe, with intention to defend it, as well for that it was of it selfe naturally very defensible, as also for the commoditie which they receiued thereby; and all of them determined to keep and defend that towne against the furie and force of the Barbarians, or else to make an honourable and glorious end. They being generally of Themesuar besieged. this firme resolution, behold the Vauntgard of the Turkes arriued the 14. of October, to peruse and suruay the place: and whilest they were busied and attentiue about their view, Lozonse sallied forth with 400. horse, somewhat against the liking of the Master of the Campe, Aldene. Captaine Vigliandrando  also issued forth with 50. Harquebuziers to skirmish with the enemie, and so effectually did hee pursue it, that that day hee performed the acts of a valiant and couragious Leader: as for the same valour there was renowned and commended a Spanish Knight, named Alphonse Perez of Saiauedra, to whom a little before Ferdinand had giuen a companie of Hungarish horse. Lozonse on the other side with his horse performed as much that day, as was possible for a man of experience and valour to doe against his enemie, so that being well seconded by the vigilancie and dexterie of the Harquebuziers, he forced the Turkes (which were 2000.) mauger their braueries, to retire themselues to their maine squadrons. And this skirmish continued vntill the Master of the Campe sent to them, with commaund to retire, fearing  that by their too much forwardnes, there might befall them some sinister fortune, because the Turkes were a great number, and considering also that they had giuen the enemie sufficient notice of their pr(...)esse. Obeying this commaund, they retired without the losse of any one of their men, although they

were very hotly charged euen to the very enterance of the Suburbes, where  Vigliandrando well foreseeing the euent, had placed certaine Harquebuziers to relieue them, when they should make their retraict. And this preuention stood them in singular good stead, and greatly endamaged the enemie, who for feare of the said shot, were forced to make a stand, and in the end retire
The day after this skirmish, the Belerbey presented himselfe before the towne with all his Campe in a well ordered battaile, who (by reason of the Rhatians that had forsaken and disbanded themselues from our part, and were linked to the Turks) was growne to the number of 90000. men, whereby he thought to amaze our people onely with the sight of their armie: and  minding to begin to take some knowledge of the place, was by the sallies of the assieged so sharply annoyed, that he could not at that time possibly performe what hee went about. The Master of the Campe in the meane time placed 100. Harquebuziers within the Suburbes to defend it against the Turkes, vntill the munition which was therein, was gotten and had into the towne, the better thereby to ayde themselues during the siege. The second day after, the Belerbey in the night time caused his batterie to be placed, and on that side which Lozonse and the Master of the Camp had begun (as good fortune was) to fortifie. Which thing when our men had vnderstood (by the confession of certaine prisoners, whom they had taken in their sallying  forth) they presently caused with all expedition that night, to lengthen the Trench which they had begun fiftie paces, and so diligently did they labour, that the next day they thought themselues sufficiently strong. The enemie hauing viewed the place, began at dawning of the day to batter with two Cannons, two Culuerines, and other small peeces, with which he battered against those defences to beate them downe. Our men seeing so weake a batterie (although that Aldene had alreadie sent to Castalde, to certifie him that if within 20. daies he was not relieued, he should be forced to render the towne) esteemed as nothing the Turkes violence, for that they assuredly thought, they were well able to maintaine the defence of their towne, vnlesse perhaps they should be so battered with a great number of Artillerie,  that by maine force the walles on all sides should be broken downe and laid open, whereof they had some distrust, fearing that the Belerbey would haue brought thither seuen other double Cannons, which they should bring from Belgrade for this warre, euen as they had vnderstood by the foresaid prisoners.
Now whilest these things passed thus at Themesuar, Castalde hauing first furnished all the Fortresses with Germane garrisons, and after that he had appeased the disorder which was at Bressouia by the souldiours (who were A tumult at Bresouia. risen against the citizens, and had offered them great outrage: and to appease  which mutinie, he was forced to vse seuere iustice against those who were authors thereof, and to manifest thereby an example vnto others, to liue more peaceably and in duer obedience: for some of them were executed, others banished, and others condemned for a certaine time to prison): After (I say) that Castalde had set in order these affayres, he came and ioyned

with the Frier, who with great diligence and promptnes had already leauied The armie of Castalde. as well horse as foote an armie of 70000. men, which daily increased, and  namely by the arriuall of the Marquesse Sforce Pallauicin, who came thither with 3000. Germanes, and of Charles Scerettin with 400. horse, and lastly by the arriuall of Andrew Battor with 10000. men, who after his retraict from Lippa, had thus redressed and reunited his armie, which so timerously and by such a confusion was disbanded and fled. By this augmentation Castalde and the Frier had in their Campe well neere 90000. men, as well those of his owne pay, as also those which were sent him by others, and 50. peeces of Artillerie. But although the number was great, yet were they of little abilitie to performe any matter of moment, for that they were men of small experience,  The Transiluanians for the most part are souldiours of small actio^. and such as were sent of euery house, (as the custome is in this kingdome alwaies to send vpon such necessitie) meanly armed, and meerely ignorant of any warlike discipline: so that they are more fit to moue trouble and flie, then to fight or pursue the enemie. For these respects Castalde had no great affiance in them, but only vpon a few men which were in the Kings pay, of whom, and of no other hee made speciall account for any important seruice, which number might amount vnto 15000. horse and foote of all nations: but specially he reposed singular confidence in 500. Spanyards which continually hee had with him, in whose quarter, as well in the field, as elsewhere, he alwaies pitched his Tent and lodged. And because that among so  many nations, which from diuers parts were come thither, men could not perceiue any great order or obseruation of Militarie discipline amongst them, but rather, by reason of the hatreds, quarels, priuate and publike enmitie, which they had one against another, they might behold an extreame confusion, because that one Prouince would not ioyne and consort with an other, but euery one would muster and range himselfe a part, the intreatings and perswasions of their Captaines and Officers nothing auailing: Castalde seeing the inconuenience thereof, and endeuouring to abate and suppresse all their particular dissentions, and to reduce and vnite them into one attonement, that he might not by the meanes of such tumults and disorders, cause  to grow the hope of the enemie, and weaken Ferdinands forces; caused the principall and chiefe men of marke among them to assemble before him, and vsed to them this or the like perswasiue admonitions.

My louing and friendly fellowes in armes, your famous predecessours in Castalde his oration. times past florished by good and commendable customes, and abounded in all excelling vertue, and specially in warlike affayres; where in former time they vsually attained to the period of eternall glorie: yea, and in such famous sort, that they thereby were greatly admired of all Nations, Kings, and Prouinces. But since, this path of vertue hath been left by their posteritie, and that it hath been couered on all sides, and darkened with innumerable vices;  this brightnes and light of true glorie (there being laid a part ancient Militarie discipline) remaineth so obfuscate amongst you the rest of the Dacians, that it hath ingendred in this Prouince a most infamous losse and markable damage. In considering of which, I now esteeme it no lesse necessarie then commendable to reforme this armie, and reestablish it in that estate and renowne,

which our ancient custome and obseruation requireth: which is vnpossible  to be done, without your assistance. Therefore I am very desirous to admonish and exhort you, that leauing all couetousnesse, forsaking all pleasures, auoyding all corporall delights; and aboue all, excluding the slothfulnes mixt with your priuate hates and dissentions, you would endeuour to reduce and submit your selues vnder obeysance and good order (vnder which, your ancestors with vnspeakable fame were wont to liue and manage armes: to the ende that following this infallible rule, by the helpe of your forcible armes, you might haue an open and free passage to a blisfull and most quiet repose, and that you might (being all vnited together) bring into your country (by the defeature and flight of the Turks) memorable triumphs,  and not by the meanes of your preiudiciall hatreds, increase their puissance. In performing of which, you may assure your selues, I will not be to you as a Captaine and Generall: but, as an affectionate father and deare companion, as well to comfort my self with your good and fortunate successe, as also patiently to take part with any euill (which God defend) that shall betide you.

By vertue of these and such like speeches, al the people which before were so disordered, did now vnite themselues louingly into one, hauing more respect to the person which did thus speake, then regard of their owne particulars, and were content to be ordered and mustered with the other. 
This done, Castalde and Frier George with this armie and Artillerie, began to march with great iournies, desirous in time to relieue Lozonse and Aldene, who were besieged at Themesuar. In the continuance of their marching, the Frier would alwaies leade the Vauntgard, hauing all his people with him. But when he approched the enemie, Castalde tooke the conduct with the best and approued souldiours which hee had, leauing the battaile to the other. And marching in this manner, hee himselfe appointed the quarters for the armie to lodge, alwaies chusing the places of most strength and commoditie, whereby his people should not receiue any detriment, continually causing his Campe to march in good order, although it was with some difficultie, for that the armie was great, and the way where they should passe very  narrow and tedious, and specially in some places which they found betweene the mountaine and the riuer, they being sometime 12. or 13000. in length, where they were so straightly crouded together, that very hardly a Coach could passe. In respect whereof the iournies were little, which did much trouble Castalde, seeing that thereby the succours which he determined should enter into Themesuar were slackened, which he knew to be violently battered by the Belerbey.
Now whilest the Campe marched, the Commaunders of the armie discoursed A consultation held among the Commanders of Ferdinands armie. among themselues, whether they should goe to Lippa or Themesuar: and after many and sundrie opinions, it was thought fittest that they  should direct their course to besiege Lippa, and others were of opinion to proceed on and succour Themesuar, and that afterward they would returne and assaile the other. Against which opinions, Frier George firmely opposed himselfe, saying, that it was much better directly to goe to Lippa; alleadging

for his reasons, that the Belerbey to relieue Oliman, would raise his Campe from before Themesuar, and that hee would assuredly come to them; and  by this meane they should auoyde a tedious and cumbersome iourney; and that afterward they might commodiously send such succours as they would to the besieged at Themesuar.
Castalde tooke these opinions not to bee good, and prouing his speeches by diuers reasons, in the end perswaded euery one to determine vpon this resolution, to leaue a Campe before Lippa, which should bee sufficient to maintaine a siege there, and so to hinder Oliman that he should not by sallies be greatly offensiue to them, neither escape himselfe: and with the rest of his people (since he had sufficient) he would march on towards Themesuar,  and that he would take the way which leade towards Caransebesse, which is a Castle situated in the confines of the Transalpinians, not farre from Themesuar, from whence he might within few houres send succours to Lozonse and Aldene, and that if he did otherwise, it would redound to small profit; and this enterprise could bee subiect to nothing else, but to inconstant fortune, voyde of all reason.
After (I say) such aduices discoursed and determined of, the Frier at the same instant called to him Battor, that he might bee present at that which he would speake; and said to Castalde, that he had altered his minde, and that he thought it not good to goe with this armie to relieue Themesuar, being assured  that this armie composed rather of people mustered together, who were but badly armed and vnexperienced, then of good and trained souldiours, (whereof the Turkes no doubt would bee aduertised) it would bee suddenly incountered by the enemie, and that these two armies rudely shocking together, our Campe without doubt would be broken and ouerthrowne, by the good order, practise, and long experience of the enemie. And thus publishing to them many other friuolous reasons, hee concluded in the end (appartly shewing) that he was mutabilitie it selfe, and that his disposition was not to bee long firmely stayed vpon one resolute purpose. 
Castalde answered him, that he had reason to be as he was, especially in important affayres, in which it was behoouefull to take good counsell, and vse a consideratiue foresight, it being commendable for him sometimes to change his opinion from good to better; but onely he now meant to perswade him to goe to Lippa, where (according to the euent of things) they would agree amongst themselues either to assaile Lippa, or relieue Themesuar. The Frier replied, saying, that he well knew Themesuar to be a place not very strong, and that by a Polacque, (whom he had of purpose sent thither; and after that hee had diligently considered all that which was done there, as well within as without, hee was againe returned to him) by whom he had also notice that the Turkes expected more Artillerie to be sent them,  and that the besieged, although they were couragious (and had good desire to fight) yet were they not able any longer to endure the siege, in respect of the intolerable and laborious toyles, which day and night they endured, in digging and fortifying with straw. Castalde hearing these things, with other

more colourable reasons, strengthening still his owne, tolde him he should  remember that which vsually hee was wont to say; that except Lippa were recouered, Transiluania would bee lost, and that it might please him not to deceiue Christendome of that speciall hope, which it had conceiued of him, and of that glorie which it should get, by the recouerie of this towne, and by the retraict of the enemie, being very well content that in this matter he himselfe should absolutely commaund, and that he would obey him as a priuate Captaine. By these reasons he endeuoured to perswade the Frier to march to Lippa, and specially because the time approched that hee should relieue Lozonse and Aldene, as they had demaunded, hauing protested, that if during the limited time of twentie daies, they were not relieued, they  could no longer hold out, but be forced to yeeld to the Belerbey. The Frier, whether it were that he feared to giue battaile to the Belerbey; or that it was for some consideration of the practises which hee had with him, that by his meanes he might reconcile himself againe to Solyman; or else that he thought not his Campe to be sufficiently furnished of such men, vpon whose valour he might aduenture the hazard of a combat, I know not, but for these reasons hee would not vpon had I wist, neither aduenture his person nor the kingdome, nor march any further, and lesse relieue Themesuar. But in the end he manifested with an euill will to goe towards Lippa, and thinking to escape from thence (since otherwise he could not doe it) he held on his pace  with slow speede, not without suspition, as it seemed, to giue leisure that Oliman might retire himself, for that he thought he would neuer aduenture nor attend him within so weak and vnfortified place. Thus the Friers idle excuses was not without some considerations best knowne to himselfe. And whilest some were disputing to proceede on, and others to make no haste, newes was brought how the Belerbey, after hee had battered Themesuar eight whole daies together, was now retired; notwithstanding there was brought The Turke retireth from Themesuar. him more Artillerie and munition, esteeming it to bee his best safetie not to attend there any longer, vnderstanding that Frier George and Castalde approched neere with a great armie. And thus vpon the day that our men thought to receiue the assault, at the dawning of the day, they perceiued the Turkes  had forsaken and quitted their Trenches, and left them disfurnished of their accustomed guards, and that they had drawne their Artillerie into those Castles which they had wonne before, and were in the night dislodged with so great a noyse and tumult, that our men thought they yet planted other Artillerie to endamage them the more. Lozonse and Aldene being aduertised of this departure, would not that any should yet goe out, fearing the enemie was not wholly retired; but caused certaine Aiduchs to goe forth to suruiew the Trenches, and discouer the occasion of so sudden a remouing. These being abroade, saw that the Turkes were assuredly retired, and that in  such great haste and disorder, that in token thereof they had left in their Trenches more then 200. iron bullets for Artillerie, which presently were taken into the towne by our men. The Frier taking courage by this dislodging, made shew to be very ioyfull thereof, and causing the day following an assemblie of the Councell, it was concluded then among them, more expedient

to assaile Lippa, (and not leaue it behinde) then to follow the enemie. The army proceeding on in this course towards Lippa, they had notice how  Oliman determined resolutely to defend it, and as they marched (being alreadie within foure miles of Lippa) there arriued the 20. of October in the night, a Currier, who brought newes, that Pope Iuly the third, at the request George made Cardinall. and instance of Ferdinand, had created Frier George a Cardinall, and brought him the red Hat, with many Cardinals letters, who not knowing him, but being onely induced thereunto by the good and commendable reports which were spoken of him, sent to him this newes, with great and magnificent salutations, aduertising him with what good affection of all their Colledge, the Hat was bestowed vpon him, assuring him also, that not onely this  dignitie was due to his worthie merits, but also an honour farre more renowned, for a man of that sincere Christianitie, and religious protector of the Romane faith, defending this kingdome with so great trauaile and industrie against the Turkes, whereof they generally receiued a singular contentment.
As these and Ferdinand had written to him these particulars, and that according to the great information which was reported of his vertue, greatnes, and courage, hee seeing such commendations to bee greatly to his renowne, could not so much containe himselfe within the bounds of temporance, but that hee apparantly declared to all men great tokens of ioy in his  countenance, considering that euery where men made so speciall an account of him, yea, and euen at Rome it selfe, whither all the world resorted. But on the other side he was much disquieted, fearing that the Turke, vpon aduertisement of these honourable fauours which he daily receiued of Ferdinand, should in respect thereof, and in time to come greatly suspect him, and vpon these reasons might haue iust occasion not to repose the like trust in him, as he before, euen vntill that time, had done. By reason of these two contrarieties which he had in his minde, there were contrarie shewes in him: for vnto them which did little knowe and vnderstand his practises, hee made shew as though hee little regarded the Hat: but to others who were of a deeper reach, hee to vaile their iudgements, endeuoured himselfe by many inuentions  to make it apparant to them, what singular pleasure he conceiued of it. The same night, in token of reioycing, Castalde commaunded that a Salue should bee made with all the Artillerie, to the end that the Frier being throughly prouoked with such signes of honour and ioy, he might resolue himselfe wholly to follow Ferdinands part, and that with such sinceritie as he ought, and that hee would wholly giue ouer himselfe to his seruice, and not haue so many Irons in the fire. But all this was done to small purpose. For with his deceits and shifts, he still continued to maske his falsehood, little regarding any person of what qualitie soeuer; which was a thing that greatly  displeased as well Castalde, as all the other Commaunders who were adhearing to the Kings part. This, and the ambitious desire of power and great The cause of the hate that Castalde had against George. places, were first the cause of the hate which was ingendred against him, and in the end procured his death, because that all the Commaunders seeing he did not any thing esteeme nor fauour them, but on the contrarie held them

in disdaine and contempt, began to apprehend a suspition of being betraied,  and in some place or other, when occasion serued, to be massacred.
Now while Frier George by his malice, in concealing his purposes, dissembled one thing, Castalde with as great policie and wisedome fained another, alwaies shadowing his intention with such discretion, that none had any perseuerance of the dislike which he conceiued in his heart against him; and hauing before noted the Friers deceitfull proceedings, as it was said, he reposed no trust in him at all, but continually had a vigilant and suspitious eye ouer his actions. As these affayres proceeded on in this sort, two daies after Aduertisement from Ferdinand to Castalde, to kill George. there arriued with Castalde a gentleman of Ferdinands retinue, named Iulius Salazar, who was come post from Vienna, with letters of credence, which  imported, that if Castalde was not then departed out of Transiluania, hee should not now stirre from thence, but resolue to keepe and maintaine himselfe there so strongly, that the Frier should finde no deuises to expell him out: and that he should inuent the best meanes he could presently to haue him slaine, for that he perceiued not onely by his owne letters, but also he vnderstood for certaine, by speciall aduertisements from those who were come from the Turkes Court, and from the King of Polonia, and some of his Secretaries, that he intended to enter league with the Turke, and to seeke the destruction of him and of all his armie, and thereby to make himselfe absolute Lord of Transiluania: and that before he should put in practise his determination, he aduertised him to haue a speciall and vigilant eye of his proceedings,  and that he should in such sort doe it, as though there were no such intended practise to intrap him; and that hee referred to his wisedome the meanes which hee should vse to effect it, skilfully endeuouring to deliuer himselfe from the danger in which he might behold his person and people at that time. Castalde then vnderstanding Ferdinands pleasure, he thought it no new or straunge thing, because that hee alreadie very well perceiued that the Frier vsed but little sinceritie and true dealing in those affaires which concerned the Kings seruice, which possest him in a confirmation of the distrust, which he not without cause conceiued of him. Now to frustrate his iealous braine from suspecting any intended practise against him, hee by  some new deuises, for his better satisfaction, dissembled the Kings message: and his temporising with him was so discreete and wise, that hee neuer gaue him the least occasion to suspect him, imparting to him what desire Ferdinand had to see a good ende of this warre, and what speciall hope he had of his valour and integritie, to obtaine by his meanes some renowned victorie, attributing all the glorie which should be gotten thereby, to his vertue and prowesse. With such colourable fictions he continually entertained him, vntill that time which then should present vnto him the meanes to execute his enterprise, euen as hee well hoped it would come to  effect, without any danger or losse, and after such manner, that by the execution of it he should neither hazard that kingdome nor his armie: which he knew so well to conduct and manage, and that with such suttletie and secresie, and to bring it so to end, that the Frier should neuer haue any suspition or coniecture of it, which might haue giuen him any trouble in his minde.

In the meane while the Campe approched very neere to Lippa, and then the Frier for that day would needes leade the Vauntgard, which Castalde by  no meanes would denie, but gratified him in any thing he demaunded. The Frier being arriued at a place where hee lodged that night, found the passage George and Castalde disagreeth for the conduct of the armie. to be exceeding bad for the Artillerie, the way being very narrow, by reason of the mountaine and riuer which fronted each other: but yet not so rough that it should bee any occasion to hinder or slacke that which hee desired to doe; yet did the Frier finde it to be a sufficient subiect, to execute his wauering intention. Thus he now seeing it was time to accomplish that which he had imprinted in his braine, hauing suruaied the passage, declared to Castalde that he thought it would bee impossible for the great Artillerie to passe that place, and that he was of minde that it was good to leaue it there, notwithstanding  with such a guard of horse and foote as might defend it, and that himselfe alone with the field peeces would proceede on the iourney. Castalde not liking of that which the Frier aduised him of, went himselfe to view the said passage, and saw it was not so bad, as that it should stay or hinder the Artillerie from passing: and thinking the Frier was not so simple, but that he knew this passage might easily be fitted, iudged in himselfe that he set before them these difficulties to no other end, but to slacken the deseignes of Ferdinand. Vpon which consideration, Castalde caused good store of Pioners to bee set on worke, and made them bring many pickaxes, who within a short  time so repayred and enlarged the way, that two horses might goe in front with a wagon, and so by little and little they cut so much of the Rocke, and made the passage so large, that the Artillerie might well passe without any inconuenience. Castalde with the other Captaines to bring the worke to an end, began themselues to set to their hands, and there they laboured so long, till it was farre in the night, in respect whereof he was forced there to lodge his Battaile and Rereward, and commaunded certaine Spanish Captaines who were then with him, that although it was not yet day, they should march with the Artillerie the rest of the night, notwithstanding it was then time rather to repose and rest themselues, in respect of the former daies wearines;  and himselfe, not being perceiued of any, with his owne guard departed secretly out of the Campe, and went from thence priuately to the place, where two miles from Lippa the Frier was lodged, and being entered into his Tent, accompanied with sundrie Spanish and Italian gentlemen (among whom was one Iulian de Carleual) he said to him, that he should not be astonished, although they came to him at that time of the night, and in that manner (as hee sawe) to speake with him, for it was for no other purpose, but to knowe the cause that moued him without any occasion, to wish him to leaue the great Artillerie, being so nigh the enemie, against whom notwithstanding couragiously marching, they should be sure to get vncredible  honor, and making themselues masters of Lippa, to obtaine so great and honorable reputation, as they might well hope for, from all this warre: and so much the rather, for that the enemie had raised his Campe from before Themesuar, vpon the bare bruite of their comming to relieue the besieged, which vndoubtedly had alreadie purchased to them inestimable honour,

and great astonishment to the enemie. The Frier answered him; that the occasion which moued him to come vnto that place with the armie, was, for  that hee thought the Belerbey would intirely retire himselfe: but, sith hee vnderstood that he had not yet passed Tibiscus, it gaue him to suspect some further matter, seeing that Oliman bouged not from Lippa, but resolued to withstand all the inconueniences and hazards of a siege, not beleeuing that such a resolution did proceede from any other thing, but onely of the confidence which the said Oliman reposed in the neere assistance of the Belerbey, and that if it were so, he could see no assurance to proceede any further, for that heretofore he neuer incountered with so great an armie, composed of so many warlike souldiours, as that of the Turkes was, and that for this occasion,  and also for the regard and care which they should haue of those souldiours which were vnder his commaund, hee was very confident that hee was not able to resist them, nor to reconquer the half of that which the Turks had inuaded and gotten, and that therefore hee would not so inconsiderately aduenture his person and the kingdome together, and that he thought it more expedient to make some truce with the enemie, without remouing from the place where they were, considering it was to their more aduantage, and that it could not chuse but bee greatly to the honour and reputation of them all.
Castalde tolde him, that specially they were to consider the foule offence which would be greatly imputed to them, if they retired without some iust  cause, it being reported through the world, that they two were in the field with so puissant an armie, as that was which they had conducted to this place, with a resolution to expulse the Turks out of that kingdom, and that in retyring and leauing Lippa in the enemies possession, it might be iustly said to bee done, not without some secret practise and conspiracie which wee should haue with them: and specially the same being a towne of great esteeme, and knowne to be the most important key of all Hungarie and Transiluania, and consequently of all Christendome, which being in the Turkes commaund, he might continually make incursions from thence, with returne of great spoyles and robbings, and by many inconueniences endamage  all the whole countries and subiects of Ferdinand. Therefore to auoyd that staine of dishonour, hee most instantly prayed him, that at the least he would goe to Lippa, and (by Gods assistance) he would promise him to deliuer it into his hands within sixe daies. In the end he pursued his perswasions so effectually, that he was content to goe as farre as Lippa, although he often alleadged the great inconuenience which might befall them for want of Artillerie, which by good fortune, and by the diligence of the Spanish Captaines, arriued that day at the Campe, to the great admiration of the Frier, who assuredly thought they could not bee there in eight daies. This animated Castalde presently to troupe on with 3000. Hungarish horse, and  400. men of armes to view Lippa, which of one side is square, and of the other Lippa. keepeth the circuite of an ouall forme, so that it is more long then broad. The length thereof is 720. paces, and the bredth 380. being of one part (for that the riuer Marosse watereth it) very strong, and of the other it seemeth

very weake, by reason of a mountaine which doth greatly commaund and annoy the defences thereof. It is altogether mured with a wall after the ancient  manner, without any defences and few turrets. There is in the lower part of the towne a little square Castle, garnished in euery corner with a tower, and is compassed about with a deepe Ditch full of water. Presently vpon Castaldes approaching, he lighted from his horse and walked on foote, and passing through certaine gardens, accompanied with Iulian Carleuall, and two other Spanish Captaines, he went to peruse the Ditch, hauing first sent a good troupe of those which he had brought, to dare the Turks to skirmish, who by no meanes would aduenture forth to fight, imploying themselues from the wall wholly to annoy our men with the harquebuze, and hinder  that none should haue a view of the towne. Castalde hauing well and diligently viewed all, and after he had caused his men to retire, the same night he returned againe to the Campe, where he found the Captaines Roderic Vigliandrando, and Francis Henry Tescieda, who were come forth of Themesuar to bee at the assault of this towne. He fully learned of them the aduentures which had passed in that place, and the manner of the Belerbeys retraict, hauing not before vnderstood any thing for certaine.
Vpon this newes, the 2. of Nouember they all marched to Lippa, where Lippa besieged by Castalde. all the Campe being arriued, Castalde martialled all his battalions and Artillerie before the Turks, with a marueilous crie and confused noise of all those barbarous nations, and continuing there a certaine time in such apparance,  they tooke possession of the Mountaine, and the Frier incamped with his people on the otherside towards the Castle. Castalde possessing all the hill, (which commaunded in manner of a Caualier) quartered those highest who were entertained by Ferdinand, namely the Spanyards, Germanes, and Hungars, and caused his Tent to be erected in the middest of them. Whilest the Campe lodged there, the Turkes came forth to fire one of the Suburbes, which was well prouided of victuals, and specially of wine which groweth in that quarter, as good as could be desired. Castalde vnderstanding hereof, commaunded Captaine Iohn Vilioa that presently he should take 100. Spanish  Harquebuziers, and so force the enemie to retire: and that after hee had quenched the fire (which alreadie began violently to burne and to spread it selfe vpon the houses) he should endeuour as much as he could to saue the victuals, for the better reliefe and prouision of the Camp, and that he should hinder that they might not bee spoyled by those nations. But they could not so well bee kept, neither take so good order, but that the Friers Aiduchs came and tooke their pleasure and fill of the wine, in such sort, as the superfluitie thereof so chafed and stirred vp their courages, that 500. of them being pricked with that Bacchinall furie, they ranne instantly to assaile the towne, without ladders or any order, thinking by their brauing tearmes  to subuert and ouerthrow the walles. By this sudden attempt, happened an alarme to the whole Campe, euery man thinking that the Turkes had made some sallie forth to skirmish with our men. On the other side, the Turkes also assuring themselues by this horrible bruite and noyse, to be assailed both with scallado and batterie, they presently stood vpon their defence,

couering the walles with men, and with their harquebuzes they made a great slaughter of these Aiduchs, who like beasts were easily discouered;  and grasping the wall, attempted to leape vp, vttering to the Turkes many iniurious speeches (as their manner is) who being couert and attentiue behind the wall, shewed them by their defences that they were in double safetie, so that they at pleasure slew whom they listed, vntill they were wearie of killing them. On the otherside, certaine horsemen stinged with the same mad humour, ranne with their Sables drawne in their hands euen to the Ditch, brauing and menacing the Turkes, who in the end seeing their order to be but disorder, made a great massacre of them, as well from the wall as within the Ditch, and with maine strength caused them to retire backe. But this retraict was presently staied by the courage which their companions gaue them,  who offering themselues to the like perill, seemed not any thing to shrinke from the daunger. This disorder had proceeded further then was imagined at the first, if the Frier had not hindered it, who speedily thrust in amongst them, and caused them to retire. And this was the end of this drunken alarme that proceeded of wine, which in the end being appeased, the armie was then quietly lodged.
During this time, there arriued at the Campe a Hungarish Lord named Patocche a Hungarian Captaine. Patocche, with 400. horse and 600. foote, which he leauied and brought with him at his owne proper charges, to be imployed in the seruice of Ferdinand, during this warre of Lippa. He also brought with him foure good peeces  of Artillerie, with which passing by a Castle that held for the Turkes, not farre from Lippa, he thought good to trie his fortune, and to see if he could by any meanes take it by force. Thus arriuing on a sudden, he assailed it with so great courage, and with so good order, that during the batterie his people behaued themselues so valiantly, that winning one port, and setting fire on another, they entered it, killing and vanquishing as many Turkes as they found therein, not sparing any, but onely the Captaine. This place being thus sacked and burnt, Patocche with his people proceeded on his iourney, leading prisoner with him the Captaine, by whom vnderstanding of what qualitie and condition he was of, he determined to giue him to Castalde. But  neither the one nor the other did long enioy him, because that vpon the day following, as this Captaine marched in the middest of the troupes, one of the souldiours who was at his taking, vnderstanding that he was of that qualitie and reputation, that hee might well pay a large raunsome, and that he should haue nothing thereof, for that Patocche had taken him from him: whereupon being possest with despayre, he suddenly discharged his peece against him, betweene his shoulders, and so mortall was the wound, that he suddenly fell dead to the ground, he not minding that any other should possesse that, which himselfe could not enioy. This Captaine, as it was afterward knowne, was of such qualitie and parentage, that if the line of the Ottomans  had failed, the succession of the Empire belonged to none but to him.
Patocche being arriued at the Campe, was honourably receiued by Castalde, and great mirth and ioy was made for the good successe and taking of

this Castle; and not without cause, since voluntarily and at his owne expences, without any particular hope of profit, but onely in regard and expectation  of honour, he was voluntarily come to serue his Prince. The same day they had newes also, that vpon the Belerbeys retraict, were gone forth of Themesuar 200. horse, with 26. Harquebuziers mounted, to cut of the straglers and those who were disbanded from the Turkes Campe, and that these returning without performing any thing, they came by a Castle named Gala, possest by the enemies: against which preparing themselues to see whether Gala a Castle taken by the Hungars, disguised in Turkish apparell. they could winne it, they enuironed it, who being discouered by the Sentinels, and perceiuing that the Turkes made not any shot of Cannon against them, nor no other shew for their owne safeties, they were determined to giue an assault to it, and force the Port, and assay if by that meanes  they could surprise it. Which did as fortunately succeed as they themselues desired: for that the Turkes (in a happie time for our people) expected that day certaine men, which they had sent to demaund of the Belerbey, power and succour to maintaine themselues against Ferdinands armie, which they knew should presently march against Lippa: and they seeing our men comming, did verely thinke that they had been the same which they expected, insomuch that they were not any thing moued or feared therewith, and the rather in respect of their habits, who were apparelled after the Turkish manner, which they had gotten of those who were dead in the Campe: and being by this traine deceiued, and thinking our people had come to their ayd,  they did not any thing furnish their guards with more men, but gaue place and commoditie to our souldiours to approach neere the Castle, and peaceably to enter into it by the Port: the guard of which Port, before that they were knowne, were discomforted, and afterwards the enemie perceiuing the deceit, and taking weapons in hand valiantly to defend themselues, our people were constrained to force the rest of the Castle by maine force, and carie the victorie not without great paine and hazard, compelling the Turkes (mauger their wils) to retire to the end of a streete, where, not being able any longer to desend themselues, were in the end ouercome by the Spanyards and Hungars, who were on foote, killing as many of them as they could  incounter, without receiuing any damage to themselues, but by the death of two Spanyards, who at the first incounter were shot with the enemies Harquebuziers: and after this execution they set fire on all, leading all the inhabitants prisoners, and then they retired to Themesuar. The taking of this Castle, although it were of small moment, yet it gaue speciall contentment to euery one, and greatly encouraged the Captaines; not in respect of the importance of the thing, as to see fortune so fauourable, and incline to them in euery place.
After such ioy and mirth, the night being come, it was decreed that during  the same, some should bee sent to suruiew Lippa, to approach more neere, and plant the batterie. Of one side thereof was sent Captaine Iohn Viglioa, Don Antonie Azinetta, and Thomas Varcocche. To another part were dispatched Captaine Vigliandrando, and the Alferus of Lewis Barientos. And Andrew Lopes Sergeant Maior, Iulian de Carleuall, and certaine other Spanish

Captaines, had the charge of another quarter. The diligence was great  of euery one to haue knowledge of the towne, and report thereof being made to Castalde, he caused the very same night certaine peeces of Artillerie to be planted vpon the hill which was aboue the towne, neere to the place of Iustice, with which the day following he made many a shot, to hinder and annoy the enemie that he should not fortifie himselfe, and to force him to quit the streetes and passages about the walles, which from that hill might easily be discouered. The second night being come, Castalde commaunded to begin the batterie on that side which Vigliandrando had viewed, as it was generally thought to be the weakest and least defencible of any part thereof. That being done, after the vapouring away of the fogge (which towards the  morning doth vsually rise vpon the riuer) they began vpon the 4. of Nouember to batter the towne with foure double Cannons, and two small Culuerines, with which it was battered al the day long, both in the night following and the morrow after. Castalde seeing that the Artillerie had sufficiently effected his purpose, was determined the same day to giue the assault, and not suffer the Turkes to haue so much leisure to fortifie themselues any better, and not minding to impart it to all, he tolde it notwithstanding to some few, in whose friendship he greatly affied for all that which he purposed to doe. But vpon this determination they discouered the Fort which the Turks had erected within, insomuch as they were forced to alter their opinions, and commaunded the Canoniers to increase their batterie and ruinate it,  saying, that he would not lose his people at the furie of an assault, but would preserue them for a battaile. The batterie being reenforced with two Cannons, they began to batter so terribly against these Rampiers, that in euery mans iudgement they thought it to be quite ouerthrowne.
Whilest they continued their batterie, and that Castalde was gone to Frier George, to giue order for that which should be fitting for an assault, fiftie Spanyards (who then were out of their quarters, within the Trenches for the guard of them, and to see what was done by the batterie) began to discourse and conferre among themselues of it: the breach seeming good and commodious to giue the assault: these men taking resolution, because they onely  would haue the glorie to goe thither first, were of this minde, that first they must view it, and that finding it to bee so as they verely beleeued, they presently would haue marched to the breach, without any other companie to assist them, if it had so pleased Castalde that they should haue gone alone to the assault. As they discoursed of this enterprise among themselues, a priuate souldiour greedie of glorie, offered himselfe to goe and view it: but he so badly viewed it, that he was afterwards the cause of great disorder (as wee shall presently declare) for he reported that it was very reasonable, not any thing perceiuing the Trench which the Turks had made within, halfe a pike in heigth, and a whole in breadth, raised vp with two rankes of baricadoes  one vpon the other full of earth, and well furnished with necessarie defences: vpon the which they had planted two small peeces of Artillerie, hoping thereby to warrant themselues from the assault which they hourely expected. At the report of this souldiour, the fiftie Spanyards being greatly incouraged,

were attentiue to the signall which should bee giuen, for that they  would be the first which should shew themselues vpon the breach.
While Castalde was with the Frier, accompanied with all the Colonels, Captaines, principall Lords, and many other souldiours of the armie, it was concluded to goe to the assault, and generally incouraging euery one, and promising to them liberall rewards, he spake vnto them after this manner.

If it bee true (as the trueth is so) that Gods goodnes neuer faileth those, Castalde his oration to encourage them to the assault of Lippa. who for the maintenance of infallible faith, for iustice, and for the good of many, imploy their vttermost endeuours: I make no doubt (my souldiours) but that this day, fighting for the defence of our Religion, the iust cause of the King our master and Lord, for the deliuerie of Lippa, and for the recouering and preseruation of this kingdome, that wee shall not onely receiue  of God this present victorie, which voluntarily prepareth it selfe fortunate to vs, but also after our death an euerlasting felicitie in the world to come. And this will be the day (although it seemeth somewhat perilous) if we fight couragiously, which will crowne vs with infinit honour, and infuse such a feare and terror into our quailing enemies, that increasing our reputation, it will cause the other to tremble, as well at our very names, as at our present warlike exploytes. Therefore let euery one of you dispose and prepare himselfe couragiously for the assault, and conceiue neither feare or horrour thereof. For it is necessarie to all those who are desirous of glorie, to oppose and thrust themselues into difficill and daungerous attempts, and not to bee  daunted by any base repulse. O souldiours, what a shame would it bee to you, hauing in time of peace accustomed your selues to martiall exercises, and in time of warre to subdue and conquer, to bee now vanquished and ouercome by the force and prowesse of the Turks, whom you now see alreadie full of feare, through the batterie and ruine of their walles? Therefore I promise to those who shall be the first that this day mount vpon the wall, or that shall performe a sufficient proofe of their valour, to prize and reward them, as their commendable acts doe proclaime them worthie. Thus you being confirmed in a resolute courage, feare not to goe to it, for that you see God is on our side, and opposite to our enemies, who alreadie begin to feele  his anger, which is manifestly seene to come vpon them by their broken and defaced walles; by the fearefull siege which they painfully, and with great horrour endure, in respect of the famine which they piningly suffer; by our warlike squadrons which we cause to march against them; and by the death which they within few houres shall receiue, to their perpetuall damnation: whereas we dying with valour, shall liue eternally. And whilest wee see the occasion fauourable to vs, euery one should assay to ouercome, all of vs animating one another: it being alwaies a commendable thing, that good and valiant souldiours in haughtie enterprises and difficult attempts, should exhort and encourage one another valiantly to performe his deuoire, to the  end, that through negligence, missing of the victorie, it bee not imputed to their dishonour: and by this meanes, euery one should bee in daunger of blame, if at the least once, he made not triall of his vertue and prowesse against the enemie. And you Hungarian souldiours, whom this siege doth

more import then any other, valiantly endeuour your selues this day to shew your vttermost vertue and courage; because that in this day you may in the  blood of the Turkes (our common enemies) reuenge the death of your parents, slaine and most horribly murthered by them, and take reuenge for the rauishment of your daughters, the taking away of your sonnes, the ruinating of your Temples, and the prophaning of your Monestaries. I doubt not but bearing your selues valiantly, you will carrie away the victorie, and that by the slaughter of your enemies, you will secure the liues of your countrimen, and reconquer the lost honour of your townes. Now then, you being all vnited and linked together with one like friendly league of amitie, refuse not these honourable perils, which may make you thrice happie, and of subiects make you free; since (I assure my selfe) you haue courages so much estranged  from feare: and know this, that only to haue a couragious and willing heart in great perils, giueth great hope vnto them to saue themselues; who despising death, count it all their glorie and renowne to die in an honorable battaile.

Presently after he had ended these speeches (and hauing heard the report of this Spanyard who had viewed the breach (as wee haue aforesaid) who had also certified that with little labour they might easily mount to assaile it) and that euery one had offered himselfe, either to winne it, or else there honourably to end his life; hee appointed the Ensignes should march to the Trenches, which he commaunded to be made in euery place, that the Turks  by no meanes should either saue themselues, or yet receiue any succours of any side. They being all come thither, he caused to be proclaimed, as well of his owne behalfe, as also of Frier Georges, that whosoeuer should first enter into Lippa, if hee were a gentleman, he should haue giuen him in recompence The meanes to incourage souldiours to an assault. 200. Duckets of yeerely reuenew, and 200. slaues: and if hee were meanly dissended, that the King would make him noble, and giue him 100. Crownes of yeerely reuenew, with 100. captiues. Vpon this proclamation, those who were in the Trenches, seeing the Ensignes to march towards them for the assault, desirous to winne glorie, and to bee the first, began directly to march to the breach. The others who came after with the Colours,  seeing those Spanyards to issue out of their Trenches, thinking that those by a certaine dexterie would carrie that honour away from them, did presently double their pace to ioyne with them: and thus both the one and the other confusedly in haste and without any order ran to the assault, the Captaines not being able to remedie it, nor stay those who were the first that went out of their Trenches, and who arriued there somewhat before the other. The Vauntgard being now come thither, Don Antonie de Enzinellia, and Captaine Vigliandrando, without further respect of the qualitie of the place, approched to the batterie, and thrust themselues in, and hauing with them 30.  approued souldiours, they perceiued how the Turks were retrenched within, and how strong their new fortification was, which hindered them from further proceeding; and duly considering their Rampiers, they knew that the Turkes had forsaken their Artillerie, and shot many arrowes with vollies of Harquebuziers against those who first attempted to enter. And of all

this they would willingly haue giuen notice to Castalde, to renue and strengthen the batterie with more Artillerie, and make the breach more large and  saultable, at what time Captaine Aldene arriued there with his Ensignes, with whom (not giuing respite to those to execute that, which they not without cause had aduised vpon) suddenly he began to renue the assault, and with certaine Hungarish gentlemen (who to be knowne from others in fighting, had fastned to their caskes certaine markes) resolutely entered with the Colours into the breach, couragiously forcing themselues vpon their enemies, it being bruited that these were the first who mounted vpon the wall: but among the Spanyards and Germanes, the honour thereof was giuen to Iulian de Carleuall to be the first that vaunted himselfe vpon the top of the ruines,  and euen vnto him Castalde gaue the due honour and promised reward. But the Frier would haue attributed the praise thereof to the Hungars. At this assault there began a horrible and bloodie fight, with great losse of our people, and aduantage to the Turkes, who were 3000. only to defend that little breach, and who also fought so couragiously, that they often durst sally out of their Fort or Baricadoes, to fight pell mell amongst our men, and that euen hand to hand. They first slew Captaine Aldene, and Don Antonie de Enzinellia, and many other valiant and expert souldiours. Captaine Vigliandrando was wounded in the foote with a shot, which forced him to fall downe among the dead, and he presently was striken with a greater bullet, which tooke away the creast of his murrion, and if a souldiour had not by  force drawne him from thence, he had in like sort ended there his life among others. They also slew a Sergeant of Captaine Peter de Auila, named Ferrant Botto, who in the absence of the right Alferus, that day bare the Colours, which alreadie he had fixed on the top of the Turks Fort, and a Turke causing him to fall with a harquebuze shot, and minding to pull it out of his hands, he neuer could doe it, vntill assisted by others, he cut off his head, lifting vp by that meanes his Ensigne all tainted with his blood, sprinkled vpon the Colours which were azure and sables. They also within a while after slew the Alferus of Captaine Aldene, and wounded those of Captaine Diego Velez, and Mendoze, out of whose hands they violently pluckt away  their Ensignes. The which those seeing who were had out of the throng, the wounded were forced to retire themselues, and after their retraict, the Turks sallied forth and cut off the heads of Aldene and Antonie, and of certaine others whom they thought to be of the principallest, either for that they saw them valiantly to fight, or else, in that they were better set forth in armes and abiliments then the other. And seeing they had wonne 4. of our Ensignes, they became by this victorie so peremptorie and proude, that they aduentured to come forth of the breach to fight with our people, and so shamefully to chase them from their walles and Ditches, with such a slaughter, that it  was incredible, and still they carefully kept their rankes. Whilest Ferdinands people were thus miserably beaten, and the Turkes so couragiously resisted their assaults, Castalde aduised and resolued that this night Lippa should be taken, how deare soeuer it cost him, in respect to auoyd the perill which might afterward ensue, vpon the comming of the Belerbey, who

was said to be on his way to relieue Oliman. Vpon which aduertisement, calling all the Captaines into his presence and the Friers, reprouing their cowardise,  and incouraging them to renue the assault; with such words thus deliuered, he put courage againe into them.

If euer the memorie of high exploytes and glorious acts of any whosoeuer, hath had the force to moue the hearts and courages of men, and to prick Castalde his oration to encourage the souldiours to the assault at Lippa. them forward to a like commendable desire; it is euen this day, and that by a more vehementer reason (my souldiours) by the vile and infamous retraict, that against all expectation, you haue vntimely shewen, which ought now to haue power and commaund ouer your. For which I see you, with an vnlooked for losse, so much discouraged, that hardly (containing my heart from breaking) can I with patience endure to behold you. And although that we  cannot alwaies haue in our power our owne desires and fortune vnited together, yet ought wee not for all that to suffer, that that courage which in vs should be inuincible, should remaine suppressed by this fortune, for any aduersitie whatsoeuer. Truly whosoeuer now should see these shamefull things in you (who alwaies heretofore haue been victorious, as if to vanquish were to you peculiar) I know not what they should censure, but that, considering your former victories, they might imagine that you haue rather wonne them by ominous fortune, then by your owne proper vertue; since that by so great dishonour you haue suffered your selues to be shamefully ouercome, and in the middest and furie of the fight, like women and children  to be beaten away by the Turks. You may well thereby thinke that the glorie of your precedent feates of armes, which (vntill now) appeared to the world by your great triumphs, is now darkened and obscured by this ignominious repulse, with which incouraging these enemies, whom so often you haue ouerthrowne and subdued, you are the only cause that in time to come they will not any more feare you, seeing your courage, your force, and agilitie is decayed. It seemeth to me a wonder and a great infamie, that the victorious dreadeth the vanquished. And beleeue me (souldiours) there is not in the world a greater ruine and confusion, then when an armie debasing it selfe, by giuing courage to his enemie, leaueth it selfe ouercome by pusalinimitie.  For then, in what disaduantage soeuer, it must dissolue and disperse it selfe, for that it often happeneth in warres, the valour and resolution of the minde, profiteth more then that of the bodie. If this day, and during these assaults, you duly consider of the honor and end of this warre, you will manifestly see it a sufficient motiue to incite you to recouer your first lost prowesse, and conceiue that subtiltie and wisedome nothing auaileth, where is an apparant defect of courage and valour. Therefore present necessitie doth vrge and constraine you this day, to shew your selues valiant and vertuous souldiours, for that you shall not now fight for a toy of nothing, but for life it selfe, for the countries good wherein you were nourished and brought vp,  for your wiues and children, for your sisters and kindred, and finally for all diuine and humane things, and for your goods: which if you remaine victorious, they remaine yours as they haue been before; and on the contrarie, they must bee a spoyle for the enemie if you will lose your selues. You alreadie

know how the Belerbey of Greece, and Basha Achmeth are on the way with an huge number of horse and foote to relieue Lippa; If they shuld  arriue, and wee not haue taken the towne, what might then become of vs? Therefore if you desire (as it is most requisite you should doe) to auoid these imminent dangers with an honourable victorie, to increase your reputation, and not to interre or obscure it; valiantly endeuour your selues to ouercome, and fight with an assured and manly courage, still bearding and facing the enemie: for those who are desirous of victorie, doe neuer turne their backes. And doe you thinke, that seeking the safetie of your liues, to finde it by flying? No, no, you haue alreadie seene by experience the contrarie, that more haue been slaine by flight, then fight. Assure your selues then, that if you doe not with your best abilities, endeuour your selues to ouercome, you  will neither finde place, mountaine, nor forrest which can preserue you in safetie, but all things shall be contrarie and aduerse to you, and in the end you shall leaue as a pray to your enemies, those things which you most dearely esteeme of: which neuerthelesse by meanes of victorie, winning this towne, you may preserue; and there is no doubt but the enemies wil be faint-harted and begin to humble themselues, and in their retiring they will giue you speciall meanes to recouer that, which hath been lost and possessed by euill hap; and to purchase with a glorious name (frustrating them from al hope euer to bee masters of you againe) this libertie, this quiet repose, and this happie  peace which you so much desire and long for, vnchaining your selues from the perpetuall seruitude, in which for present example, you may to your griefes beholde your neighbours. For there is not any thing that doth more astonish and terrifie an enemy, then a sudden onset and gallant charge; nor nothing which doth more animate a friend, then to recouer a despairing victorie, as this day may happen to you, if you will. Returne then (my souldiours) to the assault, with a prefixed desire to carie the victorie from thence, and not to flie at any hand, and rather aduenture to die honourably for it, then in losing, to suruiue with shame; considering that to die is common to all, but to die with reputation is bequeathed but to few. And I assure my selfe, that if you more respect that which I haue said vnto you, then the liberall  offers which I haue made you, you shall within few houres remaine victorious to your great glorie, and to the excessiue losse of our enemies, and you shall in the end see that no corporall force can euer surmount the vertue, which this day will make both you and me to be eternall.

This said, hauing first reenforced the batterie with more Artillerie, he presently caused an alarme in the whole Campe. At the bruite whereof, they all in good order went to the wall with ladders and other engines to mount vpon it, and to obtaine the breach, which now was somewhat inlarged, enuironing the towne with more then 40000. men. There was within it only  for the defence of the breach 3000. Turkes, and 100. Ianisaries, and in all with the people of Oliman, there was some 5000. men appointed in places conuenient. Thus they began cruelly to fight as well within as without, and very fiercely with so great cryes of those barbarous nations, and such a thunder of our Artillerie, sounding of Drummes and Trumpets, that it seemed

the world would presently haue ended. And the great disorder which  was committed in many places of the assault, being reported to Castalde, he presently caused all the men of armes and Caualarie to march with him, appointing both the one and the other where they should attend with their squadrons, considering that there was lesse perill and daunger in such disorder, then to cause his men to retire, vpon whose retraict he iudged greater inconuenience would ensue. And approaching nigh the breach, he saw that Oliman had appointed 600. horse in a place by, and very neere to them, well foreseeing the end which would betide him, who had appointed them there not onely to succour the breach, but with a resolute purpose also to saue himselfe with them, seeing alreadie he could not any longer resist, nor withstand  our men from entering by force into the towne, perceiuing that he was forsaken of the succours which hee expected from Buda: and with those horse, for the same respect, he had mixed certaine bands of Ianisaries. Castalde perceiuing this, and the more to expell Oliman from all hope of safetie and succours, he sent Iohn Turky with 4000. horse, and Charles Scheretin with his 400. men of armes to possesse the other side of the riuer Marosse, by which passage might come the ayde which he expected from the Basha of Buda and the Belerbey, and by which place also he might haue some hope to saue himselfe. And thus ioyntly with the Frier (who that day performed the acts of an expert and valiant Captaine) he prouided for all things which George a valiant Captain. were necessarie, now riding on this side, then on the other, as one that perfectly  vnderstood the proceedings of martiall affaires, who failed not to consider of all accidents which might befall him in any respect whatsoeuer, thinking on fit meanes to remedie the same. On the other side Oliman lost no time, but animating his people, he effected that the besieged fighting couragiously, endured a very sore assault, which was for foure houres very bloodie on both sides, in which the Turkes did not any thing yeeld to our people. Certaine Captaines of those who were the first that mounted vp the breach with Iulian de Carleual, seeing the Turkes so brauely defended themselues, and that it was now growing late, and not minding to see so many as they had alreadie lost, to be cast away, aduertised Castalde that their  aduice was to sound a retraict, seeing the fight had so long time endured, and that therein the Turkes had made a great slaughter of our people. Castalde returned them present answer, that they should firmely maintaine the fight, and that they should remember, that the assault which in former time they had giuen to Dure, had in like sort continued foure houres; and that by any meanes howsoeuer, they should not faile but that the towne might bee taken that night: and if they entered not that night, (besides the losse of their reputation, which is a thing of speciall importance in feates of warre) they should put themselues in daunger, to leaue there that glorie  with losse of their liues; which (in resisting) would assuredly shroud them from such sinister accidents: and that further he plainly saw, how the retraict would be farre more dangerous, then the entering.
At this time Frier George (couered then with a greene cassocke, by which he hid his habit, for feare of being knowne by the enemies) and Counte

Thomas Nadasdy came together to the assault, and to the quarter where the Germanes and Spaniards were mingled with other nations, who animating  them, said, that they should couragiously force themselues to enter into the towne, to reuenge the blood of their friends, who yet fresh before their eyes had been cruelly slaine and wounded, and in many places pitifully ouerthrowne by the Turkes. Whilest these two on the one side animated the souldiours, Castalde on the other side perceiued that the Caualarie, which Oliman had ordered in a squadron by the breach, began to recoyle and retire backe, which was a likelihood they could not any longer resist, and that they should be either forced to flie, or presently to yeeld. He taking hold of this oportunitie, commaunded presently that the 200. men of armes of Ourestolf  should dismount from their horses, and that one part of them taking the Target and Cutlace, and the other the Pike, should force the breach. He had also before appointed, that all the straglers of the Campe, only armed with the Hatchet, a la Hungresque, should goe to that hill which commaunded the towne, in forme of a Caualier, and that there with some brauing shew, they should make a view and front of souldiours, whereby the Turkes seeing them, they would iudge them to be souldiours indeede, who came to assaile that part of the wall which was opposite to them: these people made a shew of an infinit number of men. Castalde then presently sent to the Captaine that commaunded them, that instantly when hee should see the assault renued, that then he should descend from the hill with all his people, and with  the cries and shrikings, vsuall to that nation, he should directly march to the wall of the towne, to giue (although not effectuall) yet at the least, in shew, a feare of a cruell assault. That done, he went where he had caused those men of armes to dismount themselues, who were readie to goe to the breach, and said to them, enter, enter my companions, the houre is now come which will make vs, together with this victorie, very glorious. These speeches so kindled the heart and courage of euery man, that the Turkes, when they expected our men would haue retired, seeing them come with greater courage to the breach then before, and also perceiuing the others, who at the same  instant with great cries descended from the hill directly towards them, they began so faintly to abate their courage, that presently losing all heart and valour, they suffered our people to enter into the towne, some at the breach, and others in other places, with a great throng and presse of our Vauntgard, which then was conducted by the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin, who at the Sforce Palauicin. same time also behaued himselfe valiantly in the fight, as in all other his former actions he had done, discharging the Artillerie so effectually against the towne, that it was an incredible thing. Captaine Iohn Viglioa was the first that mounted vpon the wall, and presently he was seconded by Francis de Salcede who bore his Colours, and who was onely remaining, all the rest being taken away at the first assault by the Turkes. Carleual was also one of the  first vpon the breach, and in like sort entered many of the Hungars, and other Lippa taken by assault of Castalde. souldiours who were the first that aduanced themselues at the breach, vpon which was seene more then 1200. dead Turkes. All the Ianisaries, who were the last that shronke or retired, and the other who remained aliue with Oliman,

began with such feare and so tumultuously to flie to the Castle, that it was a marueilous thing to see those men so vilely forsake and disperse themselues,  that had before so gallantly defended their liues, by the space of more then fiue houres. Ferdinands people being entered into the towne, they found not any Turke who durst lift vp his sword against them, but suffered themselues to be beaten downe like beasts: and the noyse was so great both within and without, that nothing else was heard but grieuous sighings and groanes of those who gaue vp the ghost, and such a confused medly of others, who not finding any to incounter withall, and crying victoria, victoria, kill, kill, did runne vp and downe through all Lippa like mad men, and afterwards sacked the towne. The Turkes who were on horsebacke thinking  to saue themselues, forsooke the towne, and they fell into the ambuscado of those horses, which (as we haue aforesaid) were for that purpose sent by Castalde to guard the riuer, and there by these horsemen they were miserably disordered, and the greatest part of them slaine. The remainder willing to auoyde this bloodie perill, fell into another the like or more great, and for one death receiued two; because, that venturing into the riuer to saue themselues by swimming to the otherside, the Hungarians, Germanes, and Bohemians setting themselues against them, pearced both them and their horses with their Launces on euery side, insomuch that he who died not by dint of the sword, was forced pitifully to end his life in the water and to drowne  himselfe, a long time stayning the water with their blood. The other seeing their companions thus badly intreated, and returning vpon the spurre to the towne, with hope to saue themselues in the Castle, were by our men in all parts so cut off and slaine, that not a man could saue himselfe. Oliman (who also had forsaken the towne with a good troupe of horse, with intent to saue himselfe) seeing what was done to others, tooke for the last refuge, which fortune that day alotted to him to saue his life, (wherein most of his people lost their liues) a resolution to saue himselfe in the Castle. Flying thither a pace, he found there a great throng of his people, that as yet remained safe from this furious and bloodie tempest, who for the great prease to saue themselues from slaughter, endeuoured to enter in, many falling from the  railes of the bridge into the Ditch sorely brused and crusht in peeces, and by this time there was more then fiftie horse and men ouerthrowne therein, who with their masters there perished. Oliman being also arriued at that time, mixt himselfe with this throng, although he often saw himselfe almost troden downe by this multitude, and entered into the Castle vpon the bridge, whereon there was also some of our people mingled among them: and if then they had bin well aduised to haue throughly charged the^ on that side, they might easily that day (which was the 6. of Nouember) haue taken the Castle, and Oliman had neuer been saued. But the desire and couetousnes  of gaine (which too vsually happeneth in such cases) so blinded euery one, as it was omitted, and not any thing thought of. Now all the towne being sacked, (wherein was gotten great spoyle) and the night come, Castalde caused all the Castle to bee enuironed, and placed about it good and strong The Castle of Lippa besieged. guards, for feare least the enemie, by the obscuritie and fauour of the night,



(...)

occasion to bee incensed against this countrie, onely contenting themselues with this that they had alreadie done against him, in taking this towne by  force, and hauing killed therein so many valiant souldiours of his, and forcing the Belerbey to retire with shame: and on the contrarie, it was now more expedient to sweeten and temper his crueltie by milde courses; to effect which, he thought it good to let all those freely and in safetie passe, who were retired into that little Castle. Castalde replying, said vnto him, that by no meanes he would suffer such a stearne enemie as Oliman was to scape, seeing they now had him in their hands, and that none but God should free him thence: and that vsing such rigour and seueritie in his proceedings, he should begin to abate the pride and boldnes of the Turk, and by no meanes  he would suffer such fauourable occasions to slip away, which of a long time they found not so happy and fortunate to them as now; and that they should not haue (it might bee) in time to come so prosperous successe, as this which was now offered by this good occasion. The Frier neuerthelesse still contradicting him, and maintaining that it was needfull to saue Oliman, and the end at which he aymed being manifest to all the Campe, as that also which the Slauonian had confessed (who a little before was taken) he was in the end forced to discouer his wicked intent, and plainly to tell Castalde, that for no mans pleasure hee would not become enemie to the Turke, but that hee meant to set Oliman at libertie, and permit him freely to depart with his  armes, horse, and all his people who were with him, and that if this could not be done, he must be forced to defend him against any who would withstand it. Castalde answered him, that since he had determined to doe so, this was his aduice, that before hee would conclude any other thing, hee would cause all the principall Lords and Captaines of Ferdinands armie, and them of Transiluania, to bee called together in a publike assemblie, to the end that euery one might speake his opinion thereof, and that by this meanes they should haue no occasion to complaine, that they were depriued of that honour and profit, which they had dearly purchased with their owne blood and with extreame paine, without giuing them to vnderstand some good  matter therefore, and that they should not haue any occasion to complaine of them two. The Frier liked very well of this motion, assuring himselfe that none neither would nor durst contradict his will. And thus being in his Tent, accompanied with Castalde, Andrew Battor, Thomas Nadasdy (who not long before was made Palatine of Hungarie) Perein Peter, Iohn Turky, the Marquesse of Balasse, and other Lords and Captaines, as well Hungarians and Bohemians, as Spanyards and Germanes, and with them all the Deputies of townes and prouinces of the kingdome, Frier George in the presence of them all began thus to speake in Latin:

My louing Lords and friends, I perswade my selfe you are not ignorant, Frier George his oration. how much the force and terrour of the Grand Seigniour is to be redoubted  and Feared, in respect of his imperiall rule and command, which I know hath been by experience too soone proued by you, to your vnspeakeable detriment, by the ruinating of your townes, and death of your deare friends and kindred: and in like manner you know of the enormious cruelties, which at

his pleasure and in his furie he knoweth iustly or iniustly to vse against men  and women, sparing neither children nor virgins, vsing fire and sword not onely against you, but also against your Temples, houses, and lastly the very trees, plants, and beasts themselues, are not any thing warranted from the furie of his barbarous ire. For this cause I esteeme it to be more then necessarie, that wee wilfully draw not more hatefull indignation vpon our selues, then that which alreadie his people naturally are possest withall against our Religion, and former iniuries: but on the contrarie, that wee endeuour our selues by all meanes and manners to appease him, and to make him mild and mercifull, that in time to come, he contenting himselfe with the accustomed tribute, he may suffer vs to liue in peace, and quietly possesse our goods, without any  dread of warre. To accomplish which, I am of this minde to imploy therein this Oliman Bech, now straightned by you in this Castle of Lippa, to whom and to his people giuing libertie safely to depart, shall recite to the Grand Seigniour our good and friendly intention, who, in respect of so friendly a deliuerance, will rake vp in obliuion the reuenge, which otherwise he would violently vse against vs, for the wrongs which he hath receiued by vs in this warre, and no doubt he will let vs possesse this tranquiltie and peace, which is so vehemently desired of euery one. Therefore I earnestly desire you, that well considering of my words, you would follow my counsell, and imbrace this my good intention, which is sincerely spoken for  the publike good, and that you would not through any ambition seeke to put Oliman and his people to death, or retaine them prisoners: because that when you haue put them all to the sword, yet can you not cleere your selues neither of hate nor further trauaile, considering that the Grand Seigniour hath no want of other men and forces, hauing fifteene miles from hence more then 40000. men, readie to reuenge their deaths; and as I am certainly informed by a friend, (which euen at this time is come to me from their Campe) that the Belerbey and Basha of Buda, will within a short time come to assaile vs: which if it proueth to be so, what then shall become of vs? what hope of kindnes can we expect, hauing not vsed any curtesie towards their  people? Therefore we iudge it better for vs not to bee found besieging of them, knowing this, that besides all kinde of horrible and cruell death, they will reuenge vpon our heads, and deare friends, their mens blood which we haue shed. We may auoyde and suppresse these cruelties, by our clemencie and milde proceedings, and may thereby make him of an enemie, to become gentle, tractable, and gratious, there being not in this world any glorie more extolled and recommended then that, which is gotten in hauing compassion of an enemie, who feeleth himselfe reduced to the extreamitie of his honour and life; neither is there any magnanimitie more illustrious, then to pardon those, whose liues are in the victors power to dispose of. 

At these speeches of the Frier, Gastalde (as the chiefe and principall man among them) made this effectuall replie: It was not needfull that you (most Castalde his reply, reuerend Sir) should haue sent (not few moneths since) to the Emperour Charles the 5. to promise him vpon your faith, that you would alwaies be as well fauourable to the Christians, as on the other side a cruell and mortall

enemie to the Turkes: neither was it in like sort necessarie, that you should desire Ferdinand King of the Romanes to send you succours, and deliuer  this kingdome of Transiluania, from the tyrannicall oppression of the common enemie, if you would haue vsed these courses, which now with a dishonourable reputation I see you practise. And although that Ferdinand did not any thing doubt of your inconstancie, hauing before too truly had experience thereof: yet neuerthelesse not taking regard to this your sudden alteration, he was willing to assemble this armie together, and against the opinion and counsell of many to send it to your ayd. And this force hath been such, that not onely it hath holpen this kingdome, and you your selues from the tyrannie of Infidels; but also it hath recouered a great part of the countrie,  which by force and treacherie was vsurped by them. Now what occasion moueth you, being victorious, and hauing put your enemies to flight, wittingly to bring your selues into thraldome, and with shame procure that wee, and all you the rest, should bee subiect to those which wee now detaine prisoners, and are constrained to yeeld themselues to our discretion, and to intreate vs, that we should recommend our selues to him who is the capitall enemie, not onely of our libertie, but also of our holy and inuiolable faith: and to manifest so great cowardlines by fearefull words to those, who to our great glorie (manifesting our couragious hearts) we haue ouercome and tamed; and especially at this time, who as it were quite cast away, betake themselues  to such infamous compositions, that they shew themselues vnworthie of life, as assuredly they would esteeme of you, if you had bin vanquished by them, manifesting thereby, that they are not worthie to be heard of so noble and honourable personages as these Lords here present, and all these nations which are about vs, who not long since for their countrie, honour, life, libertie, and freedome from so horrible captiuitie, haue shed so much blood, that Marosse ranne coloured of another hew? What should auaile this famous reputation, which with so many trauailes, so many hazards, and with the death of so many valiant persons hath been atchieued, if now by a cowardly composition you would let it be lost? Doe you not see that in yeelding to  those who are you prisoners, you will wholly lose your boldnes hereafter to dare the enemie to the fight, neither shall you bee able at any time to make warre vpon them, for that they will alwaies presume to hold you in so great subiection and little esteeme, that tenne of them will not feare to assaile an hundred of you, in which you will the rather assure them, in respect of your fearfulnes; and so the conclusion will be, that of vanquishers, you are like to become vanquished. I would gladly know what doth incite and incourage souldiours, if it be not glorie and reputation, and to gaine therewith by their trauaile and industrie, honour, renowne, and recompence? And now, that with great admiration you haue atchieued it, and brought to happie end  this warre, would you with your great shame and losse, leaue to the enemie this triumphant victorie and reputed fame, which in euery place will raise you vp to the heape of all honour and praise? What will the Christians mutter among themselues, if not, but that you haue been fearefull to see the Turkes in your power, and that you rather haue fled away, then had the

courage to detaine them prisoners? Doe you not thinke, you Hungarians,  Saxons, and Sicilians, that the palme of victorie shall be giuen to the Spanyards, Germanes, and Bohemians, and that in stead hereof you shall be noted of infamie, suffering so shamefully the enemie to depart, and to haue accepted of so cowardly a composition which they demaund of you, cleerely thereby manifesting to euery one, the feare which you conceiue of him? Alas (my Lords) remember your fathers, children, brothers, and kindred, who haue been miserably slaine, or fastned in chaines by these Turkes, and thinke vpon your wiues, which not without your great dishonor, haue been violently carried away and rauished by those, whom you now hold in your seruitude: and if for the premised causes you will not vse to them the rigour  of iustice, eitherin killing, or detaining them prisoners, as at this present they hold your children, brothers, and friends; yet at the least make them acknowledge that their liues, liberties, their armes, horses, and Ensignes are at your mercie and dispose, which if you will needes graunt them these things, yet let them acknowledge by speciall grace and fauour to haue receiued them of you, and not by a forced constraint, or by some certaine feare. And neuer respect any false or fained aduertisements, nor threats which are bruted of the Bashaes and Belerbeys comming, for that he flying, hath alreadie passed Danubius with all his armie: and though he should returne againe, you shall manifestly see that our souldiours, tasting of the happie former successe,  will be more disposed to fight with him, then we expect for; insomuch that both in the one and in the other, we may frankly promise our selues certaine victorie; and that so much the rather, because that courage is wanting in him (in regard of the discomfortures which he hath receiued) and will be increased in vs, by reason of the victories which wee happely and valiantly haue performed and atchieued against them.
Vpon this declaration, all those of the Councell began to looke vpon Frier George, and to chaunge their opinions, seeing it was an infamous and foule fault, to let Oliman escape vnpunished for his wickednesses and cruelties, as the Frier earnestly importuned. And the conclusion was, that by no  meanes he should haue any libertie, but that they would so dispose of him, as he would doe of them, if they were in the like tearmes. Frier George seeing that neither in priuate nor publike hee could performe that which hee greatly desired, and that his reasons were not allowed of, presently said in great choler to Castalde; that although he would not graunt it, yet notwithstanding, in consideration of the publike good and tranquilitie of Transiluania, he meant to saue Oliman. Castalde would make him no answer, but increased in himselfe the hatred which he bare against him, and the great desire he had to hasten on his death, he manifestly knowing how much he fauoured the Turks affayres, and held those of Ferdinands in disgrace. Presently when the Councell was risen, the Frier dispatched a messenger to Oliman,  to informe him that he should presently send two of his principall Captaines, to treate with him of the composition which he demaunded, he hauing determined and concluded to saue him. They being come, the Frier obseruing the accord which alreadie he had secretly made with them, gaue

them safe conduct to come foorth and depart with their armes, horses, Ensignes, and baggage, accommodating them of waggons to carrie the wounded.  And that they might march with more safetie, he demaunded that Castalde would giue them some other safe conduct, wherby that Oliman should not in any sort bee disturbed by these nations which he commaunded. To which Castalde would by no meanes yeeld; and thereof excusing himselfe said vnto him, that hee would vpon no condition giue him words for payment, nor satisfie that his demaund, in respect of the cruell enmitie which he knew to bee naturally betweene the Turkes and his people, who thought it not good to let Oliman so securely depart, and that he distrusted it would be impossible to withstand them from following him. In the end the Frier pressed him so farre, that he was forced to promise for all those who were in Ferdinands  pay, after which he gaue a good conuoy to Oliman, to conduct him to the place of safetie. He at last came out of the Castle with 1000. Turkes, Oliman departeth in safetie from Lippa, by the meanes of George. Vercherez. which remained of 1300. who were slaine by the Artillerie, and causing all the baggage and wounded to bee martialled in the Vauntgard, they began to march towards the Castle of Vercherez (where that night the Belerbey was) and being lodged twelue miles from Lippa, he priuately came from thence in the night to see the Frier, who had sent before him a 1000. horse to conduct him with more safetie, and being in conference foure long houres together in the Friers Tent, he in the end tooke leaue, and retired himselfe where his people attended him, and remaining there the rest of the night, at  breake of day (in the best manner he could) he raunged his Turkes in battaile, and so departed thence, proceeding on his iourney towards the Belerbey.
At the same instant that Oliman departed forth of Lippa, the Marquesse of Balasse secretly went out of the Campe with his 200. horse, not acquainting any person therewith. With him also ioyned 2000. horse more, who stole forth of the armie, for the desire which they had to massacre these Turkes, because that they did not a little complaine for the agreement which the Frier had made, in suffering them so safely to depart, and warranting them  from the furie of these nations, who had receiued by them cruell burnings, irrecouerable losses, and infinit inconueniences. For the same exploite also went out of Themesuar 200. other horse, with whom was Alphonse Perez de Saianedra, who ioyned himselfe with the Marquesse. They being all in this manner assembled, and swiftly riding on, ouertooke Oliman in a plaine field, where was neither tree nor bush which hindered them from being discouered. When he perceiued our men, he began to march more closely together, the most part of his people being on foote, hauing in the middest of his squadron foure or fiue waggons, about which with the wounded he placed 35. Harquebuziers, that of the rest remained aliue vnto him. The Marquesse  (the better to set vpon him) presently ordered his people, and when he perceiued himselfe to draw neere Olimans squardron, he by good speech prouoked his owne people, placing himselfe in the fore ranke, thinking at this first shocke to force the Turkes, who not to spend their shot in vaine, made no great haste to discharge their Harquebuzes, but so effectually they

shot, that at the first vollie the Marquesse was wounded, and his horse slaine,  so that he fell to the ground. His followers seeing him fall, fearing the horses would runne ouer him, opened and diuided themselues in that manner, that of one strong squadron, they made two weake ones, and running with more furie then discretion against Oliman, not being able to reunite themselues againe, the one bare in vpon the Vauntgard of the Turkes, and the other vpon the Rereward, leauing the battaile of Oliman secure, and not any thing broken. The Turkes taking courage of this their vnlooked for aduantage, and seeing Oliman fought so gallantly, carefully endeuoured themselues still to march close together, and all the way they fought so brauely, that our men neuer durst returne to assaile them, but quietly suffered them to  depart to the place where the Belerbey expected them.
After that Oliman was thus departed from Lippa, they began from the The meanes that Castalde vsed to intrap George. next day after to permit those who were sent from the kingdome, to returne againe, and Castalde also demaunded of the Frier, that those who were of Ferdinands pay should be lodged in Transiluania. But the Frier would not that any of these nations should enter into those countries, but that rather they should be lodged in the Countie of Varadin, excusing himselfe by the charges which alreadie that kingdome had been at, and that in biliting his souldiours within that countrie, (it being now peaceable and quiet) would bee a beginning to ruinate and spoyle it, he thinking it farre better that they should be in garrison in places of his Bishopricke, where (in his iudgement)  they should liue more commodiously and profitably, it being a plentifull countrie, and neighbouring vpon the frontiers of the enemie, rather then to place them in Transiluania, where Ferdinand had not so much to doe, as in the foresaid places. Castalde seeing this speech did greatly discouer him, and being needfull for him to manage these affayres with more policie, then before he had done, said to the Frier, that he thought it good and conuenient that they should send backe the Artillerie into the kingdome, from whence it was brought, and that with so good a guard, as belonged to a matter of such moment. The Frier was well content therewith, but with this condition, that there should bee no more then one hundred Germanes to  conduct it: which Castalde agreed vnto, and presently sent word to his Captaines, that they should cause the Artillerie to march, before the Frier knew thereof, and that therewith should goe fiue Ensignes of Germanes, hauing charge to put one part within Albe-iula, and the other in neighbouring places by. And in the meane time, he with his best skill declared to Frier George, that it was very necessarie to leade the souldiours into the kingdome, not so much for the assurance thereof, as to recreate them, in recompence of their trauailes which they had endured, and for their exceeding valour which they had manifested at the assaults of Lippa, as he himselfe had seene: and also to the end that they should shew them some signe that they had good  regard of them, and were also mindfull of them. The Frier at these speeches was content to yeeld thereto, perswading himselfe, that they being so small a number, they should not bee able to disturbe that which he had secretly plotted in his minde.

Whilest the Artillerie was thus on the way, the Frier and Castalde began to giue directions for the affayres of Lippa, causing the dead bodies of the  Turks to be conuaied away, which were thickly spread in the towne streetes, within the Ditches, and at the breaches, and specially at the Castle, commanding that the walles should bee repayred the best they could. And because in this towne were many persons, who willingly, or by compulsion of the Turkes, had taken armes for their defence against Ferdinands Campe, the Frier depriued them all of their goods, and bestowed them in recompence vpon many his Captaines and souldiours. Among which was in like sort bestowed the goods of a certaine Marchant, who was slaine at the taking of Lippa, a man of good sufficient wealth, and one who had a wife, who besides  her beautie and youth, was also vertuous and of good reputation, as any was A vertuous wife. in that countrie. This woman seeing she had lost, by the sacke and spoyle of the towne, her whole substance, and that nothing was left her, but her apparell which she then did weare, and that also they had taken all her possessions from her, and that the Frier had distributed them betweene two of his Hungarian Captaines, who vnkindly had expulsed her out of her owne house; seeing her selfe very poore and beggerly, and not knowing what course to take, was counselled to make her complaint to Castalde. Vpon this she went, and being come to his Tent, and pressing to goe in and speake with him, was stayed and enquired by the Guard what her busines was. She answered,  that she would no other thing, but speake with the Lieutenant generall. The Guard seeing her very faire and seemely both of face and bodie, thought that she came for no other thing but to make shew of her beautie, and sale of her honestie, and the rather, considering the season which was somewhat late, and approaching towards night: whereupon they suffered her not to waite any longer, but let her presently goe in: who approaching the presence of Castalde, she heauily explained the cause of her comming, humbly intreating that hee would not suffer that shee should seeke her reliefe among charitable people: sorrowfully telling him, that although her husband was found with an ill wil to be at the wall of Lippa against him,  he had alreadie payd dearely for it, euen the price of his life: and that therefore she being a woman, and a Christian, she could not in any sort be found culpable thereof, neither beare the offences of another, being of her selfe cleerely innocent of that fault: and that therefore it would please his Excellencie to haue respect vnto her condition and honour, and that he would not permit, that for the inriching of two, who had no neede of her goods, she should bee vtterly spoyled, and bee forced to passe the remnant of her mournefull daies in perpetuall miserie, whereof he should receiue but small honour. She vttered these speeches with so good a grace and seemely behauiour, well fitting the subiect of her discourse, that she manifested to be no  lesse adorned with an inward vertue, then outwardly appeared in her countenance and bodie. Vpon which her pitifull complaint, Castalde caused presently these two Captaines to bee called for, to whom giuing as much and more of that which belonged to Ferdinands part, in recompence of this womans goods, he commaunded them that instantly they should restore al that

which they had of hers: which they willingly did, and one of the two, who  had offered her the greatest wrong, within a while after tooke her to his wife, in respect of her singular beautie and vertue, which he saw that naturally she was inriched with.
In this time the Campe-master Aldene, required Castalde to bestow the gouernment of Lippa vpon him, with such conditions as he had in charge to Lippa committed to the custodie of Aldene a Spanish Captain. bestow it vpo^ any other: which was presently granted him, and left there, with his companie to gouerne it, and he was commanded to fortifie it, and repayre the Castle, he recommending that place to him, as a thing of great importance to all the countrie, and especially because it was the only Bulwarke and Key of that kingdome, and therefore that for this cause he was to repayre it into such state, and as strong as it was before, and that he should giue order,  that the inhabitants who were fled from thence, should returne thither againe, and that he should haue a speciall care to vse all his neighbours friendly, vsing the like to those about the Castle of Solimos, within which he was to place his Ensigne, vntill the Castle of Lippa was well repayred and fortified; and leauing him good prouision of victuals, yea such as by it he might maintaine himselfe for many moneths: Castalde on the other side to prouide for Themesuar, sent thither Don Iasper Castelluio, with his companie of Spanyards, Iasper Castelluio Gouernour of Themesuar. raised of those who at the assault of Lippa had lost their Captaines, (as aboue is said, whereof Ferdinand not long before had prouided him) and gaue him speciall charge to fortifie this towne, and to take such order  that it might not want any thing, that might bee necessarie for any occasion.
Hauing sufficiently prouided for these two townes, he lodged his whole armie within the precinct of Varadin: and hauing well accommodated them, he caused the Spanish and Germane companies to march on the one side of the riuer Marosse, and on the other side (not to giue the Frier any suspition) he went himselfe alone with him, onely but with 25. Harquebuziers on horsebacke for his guard, causing to march on the other side 2000. horse, and 500. Harquebuziers, and in this manner they began to dislodge, they both (for the more assurance and lesse distrust) like good friends riding in  one Coach.
Now the time approached wherein he thought to kill Frier George, and so Ferdinand importuneth the death of Frier George. much the rather, for that he was earnestly solicited thereto by Ferdinand: who also at that time had sent another messenger from Vienna, that he should vse expedition in this attempt, and bereaue him of life, and specially because he vnderstood by Castaldes letters what he had done to and with Oliman. And to the end that the Frier should not distrust any thing vpon the comming of this new messenger, he told him that Ferdinand was very ioyfull for the taking of Lippa, and that he gaue him infinite thankes for the seruice  he had there done him, whereof he would neuer bee vngratefull to requite his loyaltie, hoping by effect to satisfie and recompence him so, that during his life he should thinke himselfe well satisfied.
Whilest by such disguised maskes he couered these his stratagems, Castalde Binse where George was slaine. in the end arriued with the Frier at Binse, a Castle which was built by him

in respect of the pleasant situation of the place. There Castalde obserued, that the occasion he waited for and so greatly desired, was now come, in a manner  assuring himselfe that it was alreadie performed. And although that many times he had an intent openly to massacre him in the plaine field as he trauailed through the kingdome, yet neuerthelesse he thought it not conuenient, and that he might not put himselfe nor his people inconsiderately vnder Fortunes pleasure, he did defer this execution vntill the Frier was come to this Castle, which hee esteemed the most fit and commodious place of any other to practise his death with the least danger. After then that they were both lodged in this said Castle, Castalde seeing the Spanish Infantrie arriued not so soone as he desired, (without which he could effect nothing to  the purpose) and specially seeing the short time the Frier would there abide, who thought to depart from thence within two daies: writ with great expedition, by a trustie messenger, to the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin, and to all the other Spanish Captaines, that in what place soeuer they were, they should presently dislodge with their souldiours, and without staying in any place, repayre to Binse. If the diligence of the messenger was great, that of the Captains was nothing inferiour, marching as farre in one day, as they could hardly haue done in two. This day Castalde behaued himselfe very pleasantly, finely entertaining the Frier with soothing and familiar discourses, who dreamed not of any thing but of his departure to go to a Diet, which he caused  to bee assembled at Wasrael, in which he was determined to treate and conferre with those of the countrie, concerning the meanes which should bee vsed to expulse Castalde and all his armie (which were in Ferdinands pay) out of the kingdome, and euen to the end (as might bee vehemently suspected) to defeate and cut them in peeces, imagining that thereby he should bee able to make himselfe absolute Lord of all those countries. The Frier was lodged in his Castle, as he was vsually accustomed, as often as he came thither, and in like sort Castalde. And in the towne by the Castle was lodged the Friers guard. And as they were there accomodated, the Spanyards arriued the same night, whom the Frier commaunded should be lodged in the  other towne, situated on the other side of the riuer, which runneth betweene these two townes, being not very broad nor deepe, but yet as cleere as Christall, it is called Sebesse, and a little beneath it casteth his streames into Marosse. The riuer Sebesse. This riuer hath a bridge of wood, for the commoditie of the Castle, passing from one of the townes to the other. These souldiours being thus lodged, Castalde required the Frier that he would appoint the place where the Germanes should winter, which by no meanes he would resolue vpon, not willing that any great companie of them should lodge in one place, but diuided into houses and villages, to wit, twentie in one place, fortie in another, and so consequently according to the proportion and receit of the  place: to the end, that (as Castaldes Courtiers said, and as afterward was vnderstood by them) euery towne taking his armes, might easily at the prefixed time kill all the souldiours they found therein; which was not concealed from Castalde by some who were about the Frier. But with great discretion he bore all patiently, dissembling in his countenance that which he had inwardly

purposed, he employed al his care (as being greatly desirous thereof)  to effect that execution, which many a moneth before he had resolued vpon, for the generall good of them all, might come to good end; knowing that if this exploite did well succeede, all his people might be well and commodiously lodged secure from any secret treasons. Hauing then vpon this point resolutely determined in his heart, he caused to come to him the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin, with whom he had expresse commaund from Ferdinand, to conferre about this deed, which he vntill then concealed from him, and reciting to him that which he was to doe, and shewing him the meanes that must be obserued therein, he told him in his Maiesties name, that it was necessarie that he himself should be an actor in a fact of so great importance,  and specially the time being now come, in which they were not to goe back, neither was it to bee omitted; and fortune also had offered the occasion, which of a long time he expected, the Frier being in the Castle (forth whereof he would by no meanes that he should come a liue) and he told him, that although he saw this enterprise exceeding difficult, (the end whereof could not well be iudged of) yet neuerthelesse ought he not for the seruice of Ferdinand to refuse it, it being more then necessary, that ye night following without delay it should bee effected. The Marquesse readily offered his owne person, and all his power, yea and with such a desire as could be expected in such a person, not contradicting any thing which was said to him; and answered Castalde, that he would appoint what he should doe, and as for that  which concerned his owne action, he would not in any thing faile of performing his vttermost: whereupon taking speciall care of this, he presently departed, and went to prouide for that which was necessarie therefore. And then Castalde, vnder colour of aduising touching ye placing of his souldiours in some garrisons, went to see the Frier, who^ he found readie to heare Masse, and suffering him to go quietly to his deuotions, stayed himselfe in another roome by, to conferre with certaine there. There some of them that were present came and told him, that the Priest being at the consecratio^ of the blessed Sacrament, forgetting to take the Host, he tooke the Chalice and eleuated it, Presages of George his death. which was a presage of the Friers death, and of the blood which hee  should shed on the ground. This ouersight was well perceiued by euery one, but not by the Frier himselfe, and none did diuine any thing thereby, but did rather attribute it to the negligence of the Priest, then as to a signe sent from God. The Masse being ended, they withdrew themselues to conferre together, and in the end not agreeing of places for garrisons, euery one withdrew himselfe to his owne lodging: whereupon Castalde presently sent for Captaine Andrew Lopez, to whom he imparted, that this night of necessitie the Frier must be slaine, and that it was the Kings pleasure it should bee instantly performed; and that for the good regard that he had of his person,  he made speciall choise of him, with Captaine Monin, Cheualier Campegge, The actors of George his death. and the Marquesse Sforce, that with all expedition this exploite, sans faute, should be put in practise, for that in omitting it, besides that the King should wholly lose both that kingdome and his reputation; all they themselues also should bee in daunger to bee slaine: and on the contrarie in executing it,

there could not possible betide of it, but singular good: and although that there might bee daunger by meanes thereof, to see some alteration among  the Transiluanians, yet he hoped to prouide therefore a prompt and fit remedie: assuring him further, that Ferdinand would gratefully accept thereof; and instructing him how he should carrie himselfe therein, he commaunded him that out of all the Spanish companies, he should onely make choise of 24. Harquebuziers, the most resolute amongst them, and lesse knowne of the Friers men, and that at the opening of the Castle gate, he should finde the meanes, as wisely as he could, to bring them in, and that being once entered, they should seize on foure towers, diuiding sixe to euery one, and that there they should keepe themselues quiet, vntill they were  commaunded to performe that which they should doe. On the other side, he called for Captaine Peter d' Auila, and commanded him that foure houres before the baggage was readie to march, he should goe to the Port of Sassebesse, to gather without sound of Drumme or any noyse, the souldiours who were within, and that afterwards vpon day breake, they should present themselues before the Castle gate of Binse, with their Colours displayed and ranged in battaile, and that there they should attend the charge which should be giuen them: which was presently done.
Now the night being come, which was very clowdie and darke, during which the element would demonstrate some signe of the Friers death. For  in that night the windes were so horrible, and the tempest and raine so strange, that in mans memorie the like was neuer seene. Nothing was heard but vnaccustomed sounds in the ayre, clapping of doores and windowes through all the Castle, and that so terrifying, as though the world would presently haue ended. In summe, as well in the ayre, as in ye vallies, this supernaturall tempest made such rude hauock, as though all the Furies in hell had been there vnchained. The tempest being ceased, and day light appearing, which in respect of the distempered night past, seemed not very cleere, and that the Frier was then vpon his departure; that day the Aiduchs, who were of the guard of the Castle, opened the gate somewhat before the accustomed  time, to let his waggons go forth. At the very instant Captaine Andrew Lopez performed to the full of all that which was commanded him, causing very slily those 24. Harquebuziers to enter in, so that as well for the comming forth of the waggons, as also for the desire to dislodge, not any tooke regard to them who entered in, they being all apparelled in Turkish habits in long and large gownes, which they had gotten at the taking of Lippa, and with these robes they couered their armes and harquebuzes. They being thus entered, Lopez disposed of them in places conuenient where they should keepe; and presently after, he went from thence to the place where Castalde expected him, with the Marquesse Sforce, who was the chiefe actor in the enterprise, and certainly knew the determined order which he should  obserue therein, hauing with him foure Italian gentlemen: one of them was named Captaine Monin, the second Cheualier Campeggio, the third Scaramuccia, and the fourth was called Piacentino, men of an approued resolution, and of as great confidence: and to be short, such were these men, as in a whole

world could not be found their like to effect such an attempt. Besides these,  there were yet foure other Spanish souldiours, which Lopez amongst many had culled out to bee the most valiant. With these, the Marquesse Sforce about day breake went towards the Friers chamber vpon the 18. of December, and the Friers Secretarie who perceiuing the drift of this rumour, went to giue him notice thereof, but he was turned againe by these conspirators. Before them all went Castaldes Secretarie, named Marc Antonie Ferraro of Alexandria, with certaine letters and fained patents in his hand, with intent to shew them to the Frier, and to request him to peruse the one, and seale the other, telling him that it was for the Marquesse Sforce, who that day shuld depart to go to Vienna, and who would not go without knowing  his pleasure, whither hee would commaund him any thing to Ferdinands Court. This Secretarie was accustomed early and late to haue free accesse to the Frier vpon any affayres, yea, and euen at vntimely houres, and the Frier bore him good affection, and alwaies vsed him familiarly, affoording him great fauour and many rich gifts, and reposed a speciall trust in him. For these respects he was sent with them, that the more colourably and with lesse suspition, the groomes of the Friers chamber might open his doore, they knowing the good affection that their master bore him, and that the said Secretarie not foure daies before, about the same houre was come to him to negotiate some important busines. Castalde had expressely sent him at such  an houre before, to the end, that when time should come to execute this enterprise, no suspition should grow by his comming, and that he might be the man who should kill him.
They being all thus arriued neere the Friers chamber, they presently locked in the guard of the Aiduchs into a hall thereby, who little suspected any such matter, for that they were all clustering about the chimney to warme them, and to refresh themselues, by reason of that troublesome night which they had endured. And after the Secretarie knocked at the doore, and being reported to the Frier who it was, he caused him presently to come in; the Marquesse Sforce following him, whom the groome would not let enter in,  but told him that he should attend him at the doore. The other thrusting his foote and knee betweene both, hindered that the groome could not shut it. The Marquesse keeping himselfe firmely there, the Secretarie in the meane time approached Frier George, who was in his shirt and night-gowne, he vsing no other circumstances to apparell him, but onely came presently out of his bed, and leaning then on the table, vpon which he had a little Clocke, a Breuiarie, and a booke of his notes, with an Inkehorne by. The Secretarie told him, that the Marquesse Sforce was to goe to the Court of Ferdinand, and before his departure he was come to kisse his hands, and would know his pleasure if he would commaund him any seruice: that being said,  he put into his hands the letters and patents (aforesaid) to seale them. After that the Frier had perused them, and taking penne and inke to subscribe his name, the Secretarie not omitting any time, with a poynard (which secretly he had) he gaue him a stab betweene the throate and the breast, but not so deepe that it was mortall. The Frier being greatly amazed herewith, and

comming to himselfe againe, and saying Virgo Maria, he pulled the dagger out of his breast, and for that he was a man of great strength, and of a bolde  resolution, he made the Secretarie retire to the end of the table. The Marquesse being very attentiue, hearing this bruite, entered presently into the chamber, and laying hand vpon his sword, gaue him so great a blow vpon the head, that he cleaued it. Whereupon all the rest entering with Captaine Lopez, discharged their Harquebuzes vpon him, which the Frier seeing, said no other thing but these words in Latin: What meaneth this my friends? The last words of George. and saying, Iesus Maria, he fell dead to the ground.
Behold now the end of the proudest and insolentest man in the world, and the greatest and closest Tyrant that euer liued, God permitting that he should in that very place end his daies, which he had caused to be built vpon  the foundations of an ancient Church and Monestarie of religious persons, which for that occasion he caused to be defaced and pulled down, and for the The death of George was foretold him. ruine whereof, his death was foretold vnto him by the Abbot of that place. And neither could his authoritie, wisedome, nor great wealth protect him from the action of so miserable an end, whereinto (his daies being almost come to a period) he suddenly fell. The bruite ranne, that this death inflicted on him, was rather by the enuie and malice of those who hated him, then by any act which he was culpable in: for that the defence which he vndertooke for Olimans protection and safetie, tended to no other end (as was afterward perceiued, and as wee shall hereafter more at large treate of) but  that by such curtesie vsed to Oliman and his people, he might pacifie the Turkes furie, and cause them to abstaine from further oppression of Transiluania, and suffer euery one to liue peaceably. This wee are sure on, that all those which were actors of his death, in time fell into great misfortunes. The Marquesse Sforce within a while after was ouerthrowne and taken prisoner by the Turkes, who inflicted great torments vpon him. Captaine Monin was Reuenge from God against the murtheres of George. beheaded at S. Germanes in Piemont. Marc Anthonie Ferraro in anno 1557. was also beheaded in Alexandria, by the Cardinall of Trent his commaund. Another was quartered by the Frenchmen in Prouence. Cheualier Campeggio in anno 1562. was in the presence of the Emperour Ferdinand mortally  wounded with a Bore in Bohemia. And the conclusion was, that in the end Transiluania remained not long vnder the obeysance of his Maiestie, but returned vnder the gouernment of yong King Iohn: so that the death of Frier George was more offensiue and preiudicial to the Christians, then profitable, as we will hereafter in his due place mention.
Returning then to the pursuite of our historie: whilest these were busied about their execution, Castalde was walking vpon the Castle wall to giue colour to their proceedings, and there to expect the issue of this bloodie enterprise. Being now assured that the Frier was dead, he presently came downe  and went to the Castle gate, where suddenly with his souldiours which were entered into it, and other gentlemen which he had with him, he caused all the Aiduchs (who then were appointed for the guard of it) to goe foorth, who hearing the bruite which was within, and seeing the Spanyards in battaile without, and that the Frier their Lord was dead, they so suddenly were

amazed, that without betaking themselues to armes, they most willingly  fled; and departing in this manner, aduertised the Friers guards, who were at the bridge on the other side of the Castle, of what had happened. This exploite being now finished, Castalde doubting that many of the Friers friends would depart: whereupon he presently went forth to finde Francis Chendy Francis Chendy. Ference, who was alreadie in his Coach to bee gone, and taking him by the hand, he desired him to stay. And surely if hee had not then at that instant staied him, he would haue fallen into a great daunger, for that he was one of the greatest friends Frier George had, and hee was of that might within the Realme, as he could stirre them vp against the souldiours of Ferdinand, to be reuenged of the Friers death. Hee hauing thus staied him, brought him to the place where the Spanyards and Germanes were, among whom  he placed him to see what would become of this tumult, that the gentlemen and seruants of the Friers would make, and specially his guard, who mounted all on horsebacke, and gathered together in the field, hauing for their Captaine Paul Bancchy, who at the siege of Lippa was the Friers Lieutenant. Paul Bancchy. They being thus all ranged in battaile in a plaine, began among themselues to deliberate what was best to bee done, and being acertained of the Friers death, made no other semblance against Castalde, doubting they could not make their partie good, in respect he had an infinit companie of men with him, and that this murther was not done without great intelligence: for  which cause, esteeming they could not greatly preuaile, but rather receiue more losse and damage, they resolued for the present to obscure this reuenge in silence, and reserue the chastisement thereof, vntill a more conuenienter time. And so this assemblie was discomfited, euery man taking his neerest and safest way, leauing their masters dead bodie to bee a pray and spoyle, and vnburied. It remained there many daies aboue ground all naked and The buriall of George. without light, there being not any who respected to couer or burie him, being so stiffe with cold, that he seemed as a man made out of Marble, hauing in the head, breast, and armes many wounds, vpon which was yet remaining the blood all frozen: which to say truly, was an obiect worthie of compassion; and on the other side, it was very execrable and enormious, to see so  great a personage so vily left without buriall, by those who (God knoweth for what cause) had practised his death. In the end, by some of his friends he was conuaied to the Church of Albe-iula, where Castalde, at the charges of Ferdinand, caused him to bee buried in a Tombe of stone, in the middest of the new great Church, by King Iohn Huniades Coruin. These Aiduchs and other of the Friers people being thus retired, Castalde seeing that in these alterations of fortune, there would not befall vnto him any great disturbance nor tumult for the death of the Frier, came on foote before the Spanish squadrons, hauing Francis Chendy by the hand, and began with him to set forward  to Sassebesse. He was not yet farre on his way, but a messenger came and told him that the Castle of Binse was rifled by those who were left in custodie thereof, and that the Friers Secretarie was taken by Iohn Alphonse The moueables of George scazed. Castalde, and warranted from death, and how that in the Friers chamber there was found a little Cabenet, within which was 12000. Hungarish Duckets,

which Captaine Andrew Lopez, with foure other souldiours, had taken and broken vp, and parted shares according to their qualities, reseruing the  greatest quantitie for himselfe. He vnderstanding this newes, presently sent Captaine Diego Velez to pacifie this disorder, and take the money againe from them who had thus stollen it, and to cause them to restoreal the moueables of the Frier, and establish them in the former estate, waiting till he should send a Comissarie, who should receiue all the Friers treasure to the vse of Ferdinand. By this meanes he caused the pillage to cease, and recouered againe much money, and other things to the value of 80000. Duckets, which was all committed to the charge of his Maiesties Treasurers. And marching thus along, very discontented with those who had rifled the Friers  chamber, within short time after hee arriued at Sassebesse, from whence he presently sent to the Captaines and Gouernours of such Castles and Forts, as were at the Friers deuotion, that they should yeeld to Ferdinand, threatning them, that if they would not obey his commaund, he would presently send his armie and Artillerie to subdue them. Among which places there was one called Wyuar, where the Frier had his treasure, and there hee also Wyuar. priuately kept an Ambassadour of the Turkes, which Castalde, presently after the Frier had yeelded vp the ghost, sent Captaine Diego Velez to apprehend and bring the said Ambassadour to him wheresoeuer he should be, to see if any matter of moment could bee learned out of him touching the Friers  proceedings, and whether there had been any intelligence and practise betweene them against Ferdinand, as was vehemently suspected, and specially in respect of the Diet of Wasrael, where they looked for the Sicilians, and in which (as the common bruite and speech amongst our people was) they should haue discoursed of the meanes which should be vsed to expulse Castalde out of Transiluania, with all the Spanyards, Germanes, Bohemians, and Hungars, who should be at that time found in it, and were payd by Ferdinand. This Ambassadour being vnder Castaldes commaund, and diligently examined, they could neither know nor finde in him any matter as they desired, but onely certaine letters of credit written in the Turkish language,  directed to Solyman, Rostan Basha, the Belerbey, and to certaine other of speciall credit in the Turkes Court, and sealed with the seale, which the Frier was wont to vse in all the affayres concerning the kingdome, which letters he had dispatched, without imparting any thing thereof to Castalde. He remained at Sassebesse one whole day, that by the meanes of Iulian de Carleual, he might aduertise Ferdinand of all that which happened, and writ to all the townes to acquaint them with the enterprises and death of the Frier, and to pray them to remaine in a loyall deuotion to the King. The day following, fearing the Sicilians (being speciall friends to the Frier) would rise against him, and that it was not in his power to auoyde the tumult, which he alreadie  saw stirred vp, determined to goe to Sibinio, for that it was a towne of Sibinio. good strength and most faithfull to Ferdinand, and lesse affected to the Frier, among all those which were in that quarter, in which he thought to temporise, while he might, together with his securitie, see what end these matters would haue: whereupon he left good garrisons of Germanes in Albe-iula,

and at Sassebesse, and he left also at Binse Captaine Diego Velez with his Spanish  companie, and went himselfe to Sibinio, where being arriued, he lodged the rest of his armie without the towne: but so neere at hand, that vpon any necessitie and first signe giuen, within foure houres he could bring them into the towne, onely retaining with him 50. Harquebuziers for his guard. There he was very friendly receiued of the citizens, who greatly reioyced with him, for that he had deliuered them from the subiection and feare of this stearne and proud Frier, promising not to faile him in all prosperous and aduerse accidents whatsoeuer, and offering him all that which should be any way necessary for him. Castalde gaue them many kind thanks, and was exceedingly pleased, for that hee found the Sibinians in so good an humour, and  such assured friends: and minding afterwards to depart from thence and go to Seghesuar, that so he might be more neere to Wasrael (where the Sicilians The Diet at Wasrael. were assembled, expecting the Friers arriuall) and also the better to vnderstand and know of them what their purpose might be: and whether after they vnderstood of the Friers death, they would continue in the friendship and deuotion of Ferdinand. The inhabitants of Sibinio would by no meanes permit him that he should goe out of their towne without a good guard, telling him, that to goe to such a Diet, it was very necessarie he should leade with him more men then he had, and that by no meanes he should repose any trust in the Sicilians, vntill he saw how they would take the Friers death, vrgently perswading him not to go to that Diet with lesse then 15000.  men. Vpon these considerations, Castalde sent to seeke the men of armes of Charles Scerettin, and certaine Spanyards and Germanes to the number of 1800. and went from thence with this troupe to Seghesuar, still hauing in Seghesuar. his companie Francis Chendy, whom he now had wonne, and by offers and kind vsage (although it might bee thought it was more by compulsion then loue) had drawne to the seruice of Ferdinand. They being arriued in this towne, they reposed themselues there the first day: and the day following Castalde sent Chendy to Wasrael, where alreadie were met the principall men The Sicilians mutinie for the death of George, and are appeased by Chendy. of Seculia, deuising together of the meanes which should be vsed to reuenge the death of the Frier. Chendy being now present, before them all, in Castaldes  name, said vnto them, that they should louingly and faithfully embrace Ferdinand, of whom they should receiue more pay, rewards, and curtesies in one houre, then they had receiued of the Frier in 20. yeeres, whose death fell vpon him in regard of his bad demeanour, hauing absolutely determined to bring the Turkes into these countries, and to make himselfe sole Lord of Transiluania: which would haue been not onely their particular ruine, but also an irreparable damage to all Christendome. With these friendlie speeches, and other plausible reasons which he alleadged to them, he wonne that abilitie ouer them, that he conuerted them from their former malice, to sweare all obeysance to his Maiestie, and to offer him to be faithfull and readie  hereafter in all his affayres, performing whatsoeuer Castalde should commaund them. The principals among them within a while after came together to visit Castalde at Seghesuar, to manifest vnto him in his presence the assurance of that true fidelitie, which in words they had by Chendy promised

vnto him. Castalde receiued them with infinit ioyes and demonstrations of kindnes, promising large pensions to those who were at the Friers pay, and  giuing honourable titles and liuings to others: and besides, at Ferdinands charges, he bestowed as well vpon the poore as rich many presents; to some, horses, robes of silke, apparell of cloath; to others, money, entertaining euery man with good loue and curteous words: and assuring them with great and ample hopes of a future and present acknowledgement of their subiection, hee made them in a manner so fauourable vnto him, that hee verely thought he might well trust them, and assist himselfe with them, in any enterprise whatsoeuer. Obseruing herein the custome of the ancient Romanes, who by meanes of curtesie and liberalitie, made all sorts of men, how proud  or insolent soeuer they were, to be tractable and louing friends, and by force of armes and feare, to become subiect and obedient.
The Sicilians being exceeding well satisfied by these speeches, shewed themselues so well contented with this new friendship, that it was an incredible thing and hardly to be beleeued, considering how within so short a time this barbarous and rude nation was wonne, and who (in all iudgement) was to bee greatly mistrusted. By such managings men may easily see how forcibly the industrie and gouernment of men are; and how greatly the prudence of Francis Chendy serued to reduce those, who for our destruction were purposely vnited together, and who also had sworne to destroy all Ferdinands  people, and to driue Castalde out of those regions: and also how great and excellent his foresight was, in so wisely tempering that people, that from that time forward they alwaies shewed themselues to be Ferdinands speciall friends. After then that these nations were thus appeased, Castalde began to diuide all the companies into commodious places of the kingdome, to the end that his souldiours, by the benefit of their safegards, might in part begin to restore themselues from their trauailes, which they had endured: and that after they were refreshed, they might prepare and finde themselues better disposed to the future warre, which alreadie was discerned to come from the Turkes. And although that all tumults seemed then to be pacified  and extinct, yet neuerthelesse there wanted not some, who secretly kindled the fire in many places, and practising with inward hatred many things, (according as time fitteth we shall write of) brought great detriment to Ferdinands affayres, and great paines and hatred as well to his people, as to the particular quarters of that kingdome.
The end of the fourth Booke.



THE FIFTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE FIFTH BOOKE.
THE Turke prepareth to make warre vpon Ferdinand. Castalde soliciteth for succours, and fortifieth the frontier townes of Transiluania. The great store of treasure of Frier George. Demaunds of Izabella to Ferdinand, for performance of couenants. Zegedin surprised from the Turkes, and the ouerthrow of our people there. The Pope excommunicateth the authors of George his death, and the information thereof. Mahomet Basha commeth into Hungarie. Castalde calleth a  Diet at Torde, and the custome there concerning adulterie. Duke Maurice of Saxonie raiseth forces against the Emperour Charles the 5. and forceth him to forsake his aboade, and in the end they are accorded. Izabella complaineth of Ferdinand, and Castalde soliciteth him for succours. Themesuar besieged by Mahomet, in the end yeelded, and the Gouernour thereof with all his people treacherously ouerthrowne and slaine by the Turkes. Caransebesse yeelded to the Turks. The cowardlines of Aldene Gouernour of Lippa, the forsaking thereof, and the burning of it by him, which was afterwards possessed by the Turks. Drigall besieged by the Palauicine, he is defeated there by Achmeth, Basha of Buda, and in the end he is taken, and ransomed. Zaluoch besieged by Mahomet, the cowardlines of the Germane souldiours there, and  braue resolution of the Castellan. Mahomet determineth to goe and besiege Agria.

IN the beginning of this yeere 1552. Ferdinand and his Lieutenants thought by the death of Frier George, to haue procured to Hungarie and Transiluania a long repose and perpetuall peace, seeing that some of those who were vehemently suspected, did not any thing oppose themselues, nor made any shew of insurrections: insomuch that they imagined that Fortune by that meanes had brought to euery one a happie life,  and sweete tranquilitie: euery man applauding the present time, and extreamely blaming the time past, not any manner of way considering that which might happen. Thus continuing in this their hope of a better life, it was not long, but that Fortune (according to her naturall inclination) gathered

together so much poyson, and spread abroad so many perturbations, that she gaue vniuersall notice, of how many mischiefes she had been the  cause. Then, after the discontent of the Sicilians was appeased, and that euery one was departed from the Diet of Wasrael, Castalde returned to Sibinio, when all the Castles and Fortresses (which in the Friers name for a time held out) they sent to him in the name of Ferdinand, and offered vnto him all obeysance, All the places of George acknowledge Ferdinand. and yeelded vp all the treasure which was found therein, that in any sort appertained to Frier George. In the end hauing accepted their offers, and reestablished the same Captaines in the said places, he presently certified Ferdinand thereof, to the end that with all expedition, he should dispatch certaine Comissaries, to receiue by account, all that which was found  in those places to haue been the Friers, and afterward to dispose of them as it pleased him.
Whilest hee expected these Comissaries, and that hee was at Sibinio, certaine newes came daily by Marchants of Tergonista, (a principall towne of Tergonista. the Transalpinians) concerning that which was done at Constantinople, and touching the great preparation that the Turke made, (being exceeding The Turke prepareth to make warre vpon Ferdinand. angrie and enraged for the death of the Frier) and caused to bee leauied two great armies to send them against the Transiluanians, with which he determined at one instant to assaile this Prouince on two sides, on the one side by the Moldauian, and on the other by the low Marishes.
Vpon this newes, Castalde both by letters and messengers vrgently pressed  Ferdinand for present reliefe, and that he would in time prouide himselfe Castalde soliciteth for succours. of sufficient men, and other fit necessaries, which should bee needfull for the warre, and that he should draw from the Emperour Charles as many Spanyards as he could. He also sent to his Maiestie the Marquesse Sforce, to the end he should acquaint him with all the particulars, and that it would please his Maiestie to giue him meanes to leauie some force of Italians, and that with such expedition, as he might bee able, before neede should require, to returne into Transiluania: and specially to tell him, that he should send good store of great Artillerie; for the conduct of which, there should not be vsed such detracting of time, as was in sending the other, to the end that by such  succour and preparations, they might be able to resist so puissant an enemie, who assuredly would make no shew of any sloth or negligence, to prepare for the ruine of this countrie and poore miserable people.
The Marquesse being now arriued at Vienna, he presently acquainted Ferdinand with all the occurrants of Transiluania, as also of that which was committed to his charge. His Maiestie being attentiue thereunto, and duly considering of these vnwelcomed nouelties, presently dispatched him into Italie, to leauie 4000. Italians, and to bring with him as many Spanyards as he could: and afterward writ to Castalde, that he would not faile to send him  such ayde as he demaunded against that time he required, hoping to send him no lesse then 50000. men: namely, 5000. men of armes of Bohemia, 20000. Hungarish horse, 20000. Launsquenets, and more then 5000. Spanyards and Italians, which should make vp the said number and more, of which he should also compose a good strong armie vpon Tibiscus, for the defence

of the passages, and of all those places, and that all these people should bee  payed for foure moneths: the which if Ferdinand had done, Hungarie for that time might haue been in good estate. But this good intended preparation could not sort to effect, in respect of the aduerse accidents that happened, and particularly that Duke Mauris brought to Germanie, by occasion whereof he was constrained to bee carefull ouer the affayres of his brother Charles the 5. which were in some hard tearmes, and to lend his aduice to appease that discord, happened for the not deliuering of the Lantgraue, and the Duke of Saxonie, being greatly busied on all sides by such vnlooked for broyles, which brought so great discommoditie to him, that he could neither send money, nor men sufficient for such an enterprise: which default  was partly the cause of the vnfortunate successe which happened this yeere in Transiluania, farre different from the former.
In the meane while, Castalde with the greatest expedition he could, caused the fortifications of Themesuar, Lippa, Colosuar, Sibinio, and many other places to be reered, and he omitted no time, but still carefully imployed his best endeuour to that which concerned him. During which imployments The treasure of George committed into the custodie of the Comissaries. about such munitions, the Comissaries arriued, which Ferdinand at his instance had dispatched to receiue the Friers treasure, which after his death was committed to safe keeping for his Maiesties vse; Castalde not willing to defile his hands therewith (although the bruite was that he had the tenth  part of the goods) knowing that such affayres were daungerous, and apt to giue occasion to slanderous tongues to accuse and detract euery man, yea although he should carrie himselfe therein a thousand times more sincerely then Iacob himselfe, and specially when any colourable occasion doth prouoke them to it: in regard whereof, and to auoyde all suspition, he altogether abstained, and by no meanes would haue them in his owne custodie.
His Comissaries being come, he caused them to receiue it by Inuentorie, opening with his owne hands certaine places which were yet fastened, as the Frier had left them, which vntill then were not opened, and which for the greater suretie he caused to be nailed vp and securely preserued. There  was found amongst them in wedges and ingots so much gold, as amounted to 1744. markes, and of siluer 4793. markes; 1000. ancient Meddals of Lysimachus, euery Meddall valued at three or foure Duckets; twentie stones or peeces of gold which were found in the riuers of Transiluania, which were valued to be more worth, then if they had bin altogether gold, and weighed 34. markes; 934. markes of siluer wedges of the myne; sixe very great vessels of siluer and guilt; certaine chaines of gold which in all weighed sixe markes and a halfe; 32. cups of siluer guilt ouer after the Hungarish fashion, wrought with faire and curious works; 60. gold rings, set with many precious stones; a faire coller of gold made in manner of a Crosse, inriched with faire Rubies  and Diamonds; 36. great siluer cups double guilt, so that one of them made two; twelue guilt Basons and Eures, great, and of a large receit; an infinit companie of siluer drinking cups, great and small dishes, bowles, spoones, trencher-plates parcel guilt, and some not guilt; 1534. of Hungarish Duckets; many bundles of Martine sable skins, there being in euery bundle 80. or 100.

skinnes: many other bundles of diuers skinnes of great value; certaine Saphirs and other Iewels inchased in gold; diuers ornaments of cloath of gold  and silke, and other goodly moueables for household, as clothes, Tapisterie, and Arras of incredible estimation. He also had a race of 300. Horses and Mares, and in his stables were found good store of Turkish Horses and others, and of Mules, which afterward were all giuen by Ferdinand to his sonne Maximilian King of Bohemia, and in his name deliuered into the custodie of Andrew Battor: and besides all these, there was found great store of victuals and munition, so that all things together (not counting that which was purloyned at Binse, at Varadin, at Wyuar, at Deua, and at other places by the Captaines, which was esteemed to bee worth more then 50000.  crownes) was valued at 250000. crownes.
Whilest these things were thus deliuered by Inuentorie, Queene Izabella writ to Ferdinand, that it would please him to commaund Castalde, that hee Izabella demaunded of Ferdinand the moueables of George, and also requested the accomplishment of that which he had promised her. should restore to her all the gold and siluer which was King Iohns her husbands, that was found amongst the Friers treasure, which he had purloyned and vsurped by force, and in like sort a portion of the Mares, and that hee would cause them presently to be deliuered her. And further, that he would obserue and performe all that which was promised to her, vpon the yeelding vp the kingdome of Transiluania. Ferdinand answered her, that for his part there should be no fault: whereupon he commanded Castalde, that  he should restore whatsoeuer might be found to belong to her, which was presently performed, and there was giuen to her of the breede and other things the halfe. Ferdinand also commaunded the Comissaries that they Castalde and the murtherers of George, recompenced with Georges moueables. should giue to Castalde 200. markes (to the end he should haue part of the spoyle of Frier George) in such vessels of the guilt plate, the best wrought that he would chuse, and eight guilded cups of the Hungarish fashion, and certaine great dishes of those which were found at Varadin, foure bundles of Martins skinnes, and other moueables: and besides, 400. golden Meddals of Lysimachus, whereof he was alreadie possessed, besides the 1000. which were in the hands of the Comissaries. He also caused to bee giuen to the  murtherers of the Frier, so good a portion of his moueables and siluer, that with it and the reuenew which he gaue them during their liues, they held themselues well contented and satisfied. The bruite went that the Frier had infinit treasure, but in the end it proued not so much as was reported, yea and it neuer amounted to the third part of that which was esteemed, and the issue proued, that the report exceeded the substance, and the fame thereof was much more then the effect it selfe. The Comissaries being dispatched, returned well contented, hauing in their custodie all these riches, and a good part of the money which was found at Binse in the Friers chamber, which were recouered by good diligence that some vsed therein, there being (by  occasion thereof) apprehended Captaine Andrew Lopez, Guydo Gozio, Master of Castaldes house, and certaine other souldiours, who afterward were constrained to restore all that which they had taken, and to submit themselues vnder Ferdinands mercie, who meant not, according to the seueritie of iustice, to chastise them, but with sweete and milde clemencie did pardon

them. Now for that the souldiours were to be payed a twelue moneths pay  for their content, they caused to be coyned all that golde and siluer which was found in wedges, and by that meanes they were payed the greatest part of their due, and they retained their affections vnder the oath of all fidelitie, which for want of payment were daily readie to mutinie and depart. As this payment was made, newes was brought that our forces had taken Zegedin, Zegedin surprised from the Turkes. which is a towne of Hungarie, not far from Lippa, containing about it 1000. households, and is furnished with a strong Castle built vpon the shoare of Tibiscus, neere the place where it entereth into Danubius. This towne is rich and of great traficke, and much frequented by occasion of these two riuers: the maner in taking of it, was thus. 
At the time that Castalde was incamped before Lippa, there came then to speake with him, in the presence of Andrew Battor, a Hungarian, named Ottomiall, (who at that time was Burgomaster of Debrecen, a towne in Hungarie, Ottomiall. hauing been also Burgomaster of Zegedin, before the Turkes were masters thereof) and he tolde him, that if he would vouchsafe him his consent and ayde, he would finde the meanes to surprise Zegedin, the Christian inhabitants being at his dispose, who also had conference with him about it: and besides had at his deuotion the neighbouring places, who desiring nothing but to vnwinde themselues from the Turkes slauerie, would at no hand faile him in his enterprise: he hauing alreadie receiued letters from them, by which they gaue him to vnderstand, that if he had the courage to  put in practise this exployte, he should not doubt, but that approaching to them with a good troupe of men, they would put the towne and Castle vnder his commaund. Castalde well considering hereof, and knowing of what great strength this place was, supposed this motion to be but a mockerie: neuerthelesse, not minding to repell him, but with good and friendly speeches, seeming to imbrace his aduice and councell, gaue him many heartie and intire thankes for his good affection in the attempting of so waightie an enterprise, and intreated him to continue the attempt of this practise, well hoping after the issue of Lippa, to furnish and prouide him of all whatsoeuer he demaunded, and that then he should not want of what succours he  would himselfe: and with this answere they departed.
After that Lippa was taken, Ottomiall returned againe to Castalde, to demaunde of him that which to fore he had put him in minde of. Castalde seeing he perseuered in this resolute opinion, and with so sincere affection, in offering his dutifull seruice to Ferdinand, as before he had made sufficient proofe thereof, and that he ceased not both by words and deedes, to shew himselfe very forward in all things, (although that at the first sight, he was not so entertained as he perswaded himselfe he should haue been) he tolde him, that he should haue as many men with him, as should be necessarie to  performe this exploite, aduising him, that if in case he got the towne, and that notwithstanding he could not get the Castle, that by no meanes he should lose any time for the batterie thereof, but hauing sackt the towne, he should set fire thereon, and afterward retire with the bootie, to the place where he should be, for feare of being charged by the Turkes, and that together

with his life, and the liues of his souldiours, he should not lose that which painfully he had gotten, esteeming the surprise, and the worthie managing  of this enterprise of no small importance. Ottomiall obtaining this suite, and hauing taken his leaue, assembled the souldiours which was appointed him at Lippa, to the number of 2000. foote, and 500. horse, and concealing from them the cause which led him thereto, offered to euery footeman foure crownes the moneth, and to euery horseman sixe: and hauing thus payd them, he caused their rende vous in a place commodious not farre from Lippa.
The Campe-master Aldene, who (as is aforesaid) was remaining for the defence and gouernment of Lippa, vnderstanding of this assemblie, and not  knowing the cause, gaue present aduertisement thereof to Castalde, who returned him answer, that he should not disturbe him, nor enquire any further of the occasion, since what he did, was for the seruice of Ferdinand. Vpon the receit of this answer, Aldene went presently to Ottomiall, of whom vnderstanding the particularitie of the enterprise, perswaded so much with him, that if it should fortunately succeede, he would giue him present notice thereof, to the end that he himselfe might come in person to relieue him. Ottomiall hauing set them all forward, and the one halfe of Zegedin being at his dispose, gaue secret notice to the inhabitants of the said towne, that hee had well commenced and proceeded in this attempt, and that they should at  any conuenient time send him word, when they would haue him to come vnto them. The townes-men presently prescribed a determined day to effect this practise. The time approaching, one day before he caused his people to march the whole night, and the day following he held them ambushed within a wood, and within two nights hee arriued so secretly, that his comming was neuer discerned: and comming before Zegedin at the prefixed houre, about day breake, he of one side disposed the greatest part of his people in ambuscado in the next by woods, and by another way he sent certaine souldiours to giue an alarme to the towne. Which being vnderstood by the Turkes, presently many of them sallied forth of the Castle and towne  to view the occasion of this alarme: and seeing so small a number of these souldiours, and being ignorant of the ambuscado, they boldly went forth against them; which when the other seeing, faining fearfully to retire, yet still fighting, vntill by little and little they trained them within the compasse of their ambuscado, where presently they were so enuironed, and on euery side beaten downe, that they had no meanes to defend themselues; and desirous to make a retraict to the towne, euery one made haste who should bee there first. But the inhabitants well vnderstanding this stratagem, hauing alreadie taken armes, they shut the ports against them, and ioyning with Ottomials men, they made such a slaughter amongst them, that of all those who were  gone forth, there remained not one aliue. The Turkes who were remaining for the guard and defence of the Castle, seeing this slaughter, retired themselues and stood vpon their guard, and drew vp the bridge, assuring themselues within it, giuing diligent order the best they could to present necessitie. Our people being entered into the towne, and not being able to take

the Castle in this manner, determined to sacke all the Turks houses, and specially  of the Marchants, who were very rich, there being come thither many Constantinopolitans to dwell there. Thus seazing vpon all their moueables, wiues, and children, and committing them into a great house, that afterwards they might share them amongst the souldiours, Ottomiall made himselfe master of Zegedin, who afterwards being desirous to assaile the Castle, found that the Turkes within would brauely defend themselues. For the place of it selfe was naturally very strong, and besides, well furnished with Artillerie, and it was in such sort defensible, that it caused Ottomiall to come short of his conquering purpose. Therefore seeing he could by no meanes winne it without other forces, he writ presently to the Camp-master Aldene  of all that he had done. He receiuing this newes, without expecting other Aldene relieueth Ottomiall. commaund from Castalde, calling to minde the promise which he made to Ottomiall to relieue him, determined with at speede to goe to him, and taking two hundred Spanyards out of Lippa and Themesuar, and foure field peeces, he began with all expedition to march towards Zegedin, perswading himselfe that with this supplie of men and Artillerie which he brought with him, hee might vpon reasonable tearmes get the possession of this Castle.
Whilest he iournied on, he acertained Castalde of this good newes, and how he marched thither, and desired him that he would not faile to send after him with all speede men and Artillerie, for that Ottomiall might not be  left destitute, and to the hazard of fortune, seeing he was now master of the towne, and assured him, by the meanes of succours which he demaunded, easily to get the Castle. Before this aduertisement from Aldene, Castalde had alreadie receiued newes thereof, by those which he sent with Ottomiall, that they should presently aduertise him of all the occurrants that should happen, hauing in the meane time prepared a good number of men, and of all other necessaries which should bee fitting, if in case the Castle were taken, that then he would presently send ayde. But vnderstanding that it was yet in the Turkes commaund, and that but onely the towne was taken, which he thought vnpossible to keepe without the Fortresse; sent to Ottomiall that he  should fire the towne, contenting himselfe with that which he had alreadie done, and sparing those who were friends, he should presently retire with the bootie which he had gotten, reputing it a great vanitie to lose his time in an opiniatiue iudgement for the conquest of impossibilities (and specially not being able to surprise it suddenly) which would require a greater armie then that which he had, not being able to furnish, together with foote and horse, more then 4000. men, neither he hauing any peeces of batterie to send him: and in the end he commaunded him that he should deferre no longer time in that place, for that if he did not speedily dislodge, he had  some doubt that the Turkes (by the succours which they prepared) would come in the meane while to charge them, they not thinking thereon, and so by that meanes to lose at one time both that which they gotten with their honour and liues.
As he had dispatched this commaund, came Aldenes Courier, by whom

he vnderstood that he was departed from Lippa, with such a number of men and Artillerie, as wee haue said, to relieue Ottomiall. By this Courier he instantly  intreated that he would send him more men and Artillerie, assuring him that the taking of this Castle was very easie. But Castalde by no meanes could be induced to credit it, hauing been sufficiently informed of the qualitie and situation of this said Fortresse, and that within there were yet 500. Turkes remaining of those who were slaine at the surprise of the towne; that it was well furnished with good store of Artillerie, and that the walles were very large and thick, and rampierd behinde with as much earth as they were high, insomuch that hee saw no possible meanes that the pursuite thereof could rest victorious to our people. And although he apparantly knew that  to send men thither was much time lost, esteeming it vnpossible to take the Castle in this manner, yet he determined at all aduentures to send them ayde and Artillerie, as Aldene requested. Which he was the rather content to performe (although he-esteemed it a friuolous thing) for that the fault should not bee imputed to him if they did not take it, and that they should not say that this fauourable occasion was lost, for not sending them in time such ayd as they demaunded. And thus in the greatest speede that could be (although it was still contrarie to his liking) he writ to Thomas Varcocce, that hee should presently take two Cannons out of Varadin where he was, and two out of Albe-iula, with certaine field peeces, and with all speed send them with their  munitions and other necessaries to Aldene, who was at Zegedin: which presently was commodiously sent, by meanes of the riuer Marosse. And afterwards commaunded Ourestolph (who then was in garrison in the Countie of Varadin) that he should presently march with the men of armes to succour Ottomiall and Aldene. In like sort he sent to Peter Vicchy (who was Colonell of the Infantrie, and who also at that time had his garrison at Varadin and Albe-iula) that he should march with Ourestolph. At this commaund, the one hauing with him 2000. foot and horse, and the other 200. men of armes, they proceeded on towards Zegedin, without permitting their troupes to repose themselues any time. 
After that Castalde had giuen directions, according as aforesaid, he also An offence to disfurnish a garrison. writ to Aldene, reprouing him for the fault which he had committed by leauing Lippa and Themesuar, because he had withdrawne from thence the garrisons, greatly marueiling at his folly, how he should be drawne to settle himselfe vpon so vaine an enterprise, which by all likelihoods could not fortunately succeede; and to thinke that with so few men hee could take that Castle, which in respect of the situation and strength thereof, would require sixe times as great a power: that hee had sent them those succours that hee demaunded, which he would not haue done, but onely to the end that none should accuse him, that because he had not sent them, this Fortresse could  not bee wonne, further assuring himselfe that time would witnes his iudgement true, and make the detriment to appeare, which was very probable would happen thereupon: and this he was so much the rather perswaded of, for that then he saw himselfe to bee in want both of men and money, so that in losing those which he had now sent him, he should finde himselfe out of

hope, vpon any occasion to reunite so many againe. This done, he departed  from Sibinio, and went and seated himselfe in Albe-iula, that so he might be more neere vnto Zegedin, and in the middest of the kingdome, to the end that hee might the better prouide for all places; and if happely the affayres succeeded well, that hee might presently transport himselfe thither, and giue both by his presence and by the ayde of the rest of his souldiours (which he had lodged about Albe-iula) vigour and courage to the enterprise. But hereof there was not any neede at all: for within a few daies after newes was brought, that all those who were at the expedition of Zegedin, were quite ouerthrowne by the Basha of Buda, without knowing the particular trueth how things had passed. Castalde although the displeasure which  he conceiued of this defeate was exceeding great, yet did he not entertaine this report as any noueltie, for that from the beginning euen to the end hee well foresaw what would happen, and the rather being induced thereunto, in respect of the absurditie which was committed from the first, which was not likely to effect any other end then such as it had. Now after that, besides he had more assured newes, that for certaine all his people were defeated and lost: for feare least the losse of Lippa and Themesuar might not follow, (which Aldene had left both disfurnished of souldiours and of a Commaunder) he sent in post to Captaine Roderic Vigliandrando, commaunding him that he should goe to Lippa, and that he would send him so many men  as was needfull for the defence thereof. He also commanded Diego Velez de Mendoza, that he should go to Themesuar with his companie, leading with him besides 300. Germanes, and 300. Hungarish horse, and of that troupe he should send a good part thereof to Lippa, and that he should be very vigilant vpon all that quarter.
These now marching on with tedious iourneys, met many people of diuers nations, who fled from about the townes of the low marches, for the feare which they had of the crueltie, which (as they vnderstood) the Basha of Buda had vsed in massacring an infinit companie of people: vpon which bruite they retired in great confusion and tumult towards the mountaines.  But they seeing there were succours sent to the quarters from whence they were fled, staied their fearefull course, and by little and little regained their courages againe; and being perswaded by these Captains to expell all feare, and to returne againe to their houses, they ceased their slight, and taking hart returned with them, and others went to Lippa and Themesuar: where being The defeate of Ferdinands people at Zegedin by the Turkes. all arriued, they vnderstood how Aldene saued himselfe, with all the Spanyards and Ourestolphs men of armes, with a true relation of all the disaster which happened in this sort:
It was now alreadie eight daies that Aldene had been about the Castle of Zegedin, and had enuironed it with a large trench, (expecting the arriuall of  the Artillerie, which approached with all speede) when a day before, Peter Vicchy arriued with those 2000. souldiours (as is aforesaid) and when also arriued from Canoth 100. Germane Harquebuziers, 30. Spanyards, and 100. horse. The tenth day Aldene early in the morning caused all his people to be mustered in a field, and he found his number to be 3000. horse, 230. Spanyards,

100. Germanes, and 2000. Hungarian footmen, besides the 200. men of armes of Ourestolphs, who at the same time arriued. Whilest that Aldene was  busied to dispose and lodge them, and before they were seated, the Turks appeared in a plaine by Zegedin, at the sight of whom the alarme was presently giuen in euery place, and our men sarried close vp together. They sent foorth some to take a view and notice of them, who discouered a squadron of 1500. horse, and many Coaches, within which they might also discerne men, and it was the Basha of Buda, who purposely came with succours to attempt the enterance into the Castle, and not to fight with our people, being not sufficiently accompanied for such a purpose: but he thinking he was alreadie discouered, made a stand in that place where our people  might well perceiue them, and of his whole troupe he made two squadrons, the one greater then the other, causing all the Ianisaries to mount vp into the Coaches, with which vpon the left hand he made a defence, among whom and with the greatest squadron he placed himselfe, and the lesser he set on the right hand, causing those Coaches and Waggons to couer and defend both the one and the other in manner of a Rampier: and being come but onely to relieue and succour his people, and not to fight with our men, he staied there to see what we would doe. Our men seeing the Turkes thus ranged in battaile, made a squadron of their Hungarian light horse, and Ourestolph made another with his men of armes, right opposite to that of the Basha. Ottomiall and Aldene made another strong bodie of all the Infantrie,  which they placed by the towne, without giuing them charge to fight, or any other directions what to doe. As these squadrons of Caualarie were before the enemies, and a good distance betweene them, Peter Vicchy said to Aldene: What shall we now doe? Aldene answered him, that in respect hee knew not the manner of the Hungars fight, he would commit all to him, to doe what hee thought fitting. Afterwards Peter Vicchy said; Since you know not our manner of fight, let me alone. Ourestolph seeing that Aldene (Generall of the armie) doubted not a little of that which he had to doe, being desirous of honour, and couetous not to bee the second that should  charge the Turkes, without further consideration of the matter, spurred on amaine with his men of armes against the Bashaes great squadron: but because those who were in the front tooke more vpon their left hand then on their right, they did not so fully incounter the said squadron in the middest, but made as it were a touch alongst the side of the squadron, but yet so forcibly, that they ouerthrew all those yt they incountred withall. The Hungars did second them, and charged but in the same place where the men of armes before them had attempted, without disordering any. This ouersight was the beginning of their disorder, indiscreetly pressing and incumbring one another, and seeing many Turkes dead on the ground, who not by them  (the Hungars) but by the people of Ourestolph were so ouerthrowne, and many horses coursing about the plaine, thinking that they had alreadie wonne the victorie, and not respecting the other squadron which was yet whole with ye Coaches, they seemed carelesse any more to fight or expect the issue of the battaile, so that many among them dismounting from their horses, began

to rifle the Turkes which were remaining on the place either hurt or  slaine. The Basha perceiuing this which was done at the first incounter, began to despayre, and thought the victorie inclined to the Christians: wherevpon he began to retire his squadrons and waggons to saue himselfe: but afterward seeing that none followed him, and that the Hungars did not orderly manage in the field, but with confusion thwarting one another without any discipline, being more attentiue to the spoyle, then to the pursuite of victorie, and considering that a good part of his squadron was yet intire and whole, determined to make head and returne to the charge, commaunding first to aduance 300. Turkes, with certaine Ianisaries and other souldiours which should enter into the Castle, (which they easily performed  without any hinderance) and after they kept close with their other squadrons in a strong battalion, and began with great courage and nimblenes to giue in among the Hungars, who alreadie were disbanded and dispersed euery where, to whom they gaue the greatest mate that could be imagined, putting all to the sword without any pitie, so that there were more horse seene straying vp and downe, then men running away, the plaine being so harried, that they could not finde any place to hide and saue themselues. The men of armes in the meane time reunited themselues into a strong squadron, and desirous againe to charge and thwart the Turkes, perceiued how the Hungars by their beastlines and couetousnes of spoyle were all ouerthrowne and slaine, and the rest that were remaining were put to slight.  In respect whereof, not willing to indaunger themselues to the euent of fortune, so slightly to aduenture a second charge, thought it more expedient to goe and ioyne with the Spanyards, who not once remoued from the place by the towne, but were still raunged in battaile all vnited together, and who now began with good speede to retire themselues to other places of more strength and securitie. The Basha of Buda seeing now the victorie to be his, and greatly marueiling that that which he neuer thought of, was happened to him, could not easily be induced to beleeue it; but without pausing he boldly ranged ouer the field as victorious, not sparing the life of any which he incountered, commanding the like to be done in the towne by the Turks who  were in the Castle, and by those which he had sent for their ayd, who therein imployed themselues so bloodily, that amongst those whom they knew their professed enemies, they so tyrannously dominered, that they neither spared men, women, nor children, causing all pitifully to end their liues by the edge of the sword. The Basha afterwards gathering all his people together againe, and making of them a great squadron, raunged the plaine all the rest of that day, and pursued the remainder of those souldiours that Ottomiall had brought with him, of whom he defeated and left vpon the ground there, more then 1500. dead and wounded, insomuch as for that day, as well without  as within the towne, there was more then 5000. persons that perished: and afterwards resting himselfe, as one tyred in shedding so much blood, and to see whether any thing else would offer it selfe vnto him, he descried a farre off to come towards the towne 300. Aiduchs (who are footmen) who two daies before that our men had receiued this ouerthrow, went to seeke their

fortunes in the Turkes countrie for spoyle: which they well performed with  great slaughter of the enemies, and returned from thence well laden, thinking to finde all things as they left them, not any thing dreaming that in so short a time and so miserably, Fortune had brought them to so vniuersall a ruine. Thus ioyfully continuing on their iourney, and hastning themselues to Zegedin, as though they had been to goe to their owne homes, they discouered the Bashaes squadron, whereat they were greatly astonished, doubting whether they were enemies or no: neuerthelesse perswading themselues they were of our people, who were there placed for some good purpose, they rested assured, and began againe to proceede on their way: they marched not much further, but they were perceiued by the Basha, who knowing  them to be of our Aiduchs, and a small number, and that they had no woods to saue themselues, but only a little Church, which was not farre from them, they began to prepare towards them, who seeing themselues so suddenly assailed and enuironed, contrarie to their expectation, were not any thing amazed thereat: but euery man taking the courage of a lyon, began so fiercely to fight, continually retyring towards the Church, that although there did not any one of them escape, yet neuerthelesse they sold their liues so deare, that there was not any one of them slaine, but first he killed a Turke or two, and many three or foure, and these did twice as much endamage the Bashes people, as all those which Ottomiall had brought against them, besides his  3000. horse.
These being thus defeated, the Basha remained entire Lord both of the field and towne: where being entered, he gaue in token of victorie to all his people, as well in money as in apparell, what he himselfe thought good. And after hauing thanked Fortune for such happy successe, he addressed himselfe to the repayring of the towne, and to mend vp that which our people had spoyled. Whilest the Basha was imployed in the defeate of these Aiduchs, Aldene retyred himselfe with his Spanyards and men of armes with so great haste and speede, as if the Basha had been at their backes, or all the Turkish Caualarie had pursued them, himselfe being the onely cause of this ouerthrow,  in respect of his negligence and small iudgement, because he had not caused these Aiduchs to stay and fight. Thus retyring and flying from Zegedin, he trauailed in one day and a night 16. miles, which maketh 32. French miles, and retyred himselfe to a Castle named Cornoch, not farre from Cornoch. Lippa.
During this said battaile, there happened a strange accident to a souldiour, which I would not let passe in silence, esteeming it worthie of memorie: and this it was. When Aldene passed Tibiscus to goe to Zegedin, he left a Corporall The cowardlines of a Spanish souldiour, who in the end killed himselfe. of a squadron, named Higueras, with certaine souldiours, who was esteemed a man of good sufficiencie, and very valiant, and he was left there to keepe the boates in which he had passed the riuer, to the end he should continually  haue them in readines, and as it were for any necessitie which might happen. Now this souldiour being in person at the guard of the passage, vpon the day that the defeate aforesaid happened, seeing a multitude of men to come towards him flying, and demaunding of them what was happened,

and for what cause they ranne so hastily. They answered him: that all our  people were quite defeated and cut in peeces by the Basha of Buda, and that to warrant themselues from his victorious hand, they fled in the greatest haste they could to saue themselues. This souldiour hearing this, without any other inquirie or information of the surplusage, assuredly beleeuing that the Spanyards were also defeated, vnloosed all the barkes for feare of being pursued, and presently passed to the other side of the water. These other souldiours who were with him did the like, and entering a wood together, they tooke the way towards Themesuar, the Corporall of the squadron hauing a boy with him who came somewhat behinde: and trauailing along with others a good while, he presently recalled his spirits to him, thinking of that  which cowardly hee had done; and set before his eyes the little esteeme which euery man would haue of him, in so vily forsaking those boates which Aldene had giuen him in charge, without making further inquirie how all things were passed at Zegedin: and further considering, that if happely the Spanyards were saued, he could neuer haue the courage to look the^ in the face: and on the other side, if they were lost, that those that shuld see him come so sound and safe, might demand of him the occasion and manner how his companions were so ouerthrowne, to which he could neither satisfie nor answer the^; he began now to turmoyle his braine vpon these considerations, and being plunged into the depth of shame for this his vile flight, so farre was he growne into horror thereof, that he resolued to kill himselfe: and  drawing out his sword for that purpose, he was in good time preuented by his boy, who fearing that his master would continue in his wicked purpose; to assure his life, hee tooke away his sword and poynard from him, which the other willingly suffered him to doe, dissembling that which gladly hee would haue executed. The boy not thinking of any other thing, and assuring himselfe of his masters life, by reason of his weapons which he had taken away, tooke no further care nor respect to him. But this souldiour perceiuing the little account that his seruant made of him, faining to repose himselfe a little out of the way, commaunded that he should there attend. Whilest the boy had no other regard of him, it was not long but, that he fell  on sleepe, being drowsie and wearie of his iourney. And when his master sawe himselfe alone, hee presently charged his harquebuze, and set the mouth of the peece against his stomacke, and discharged it with his foote, which shot him quite through, so that within a short time after he gaue vp the ghost; and so long as his life lasted, he did no other thing but instantly desire his boy (who at the noyse came running thither) that he would finish the killing of him, it being not fitting (said he) that a man should liue, who so dishonourably was fled, and especially being meerely ignorant for what cause, and vpon what occasion hee had so done: and with these words the  soule departed out of his bodie. Behold here the tragedie of this vnfortunate iourney, (which wee haue before described) which was the beginning and an vntimely forewarning of al the future and miserable accidents which happened in this yeere 1552.
About this time the newes of Frier George his death was brought to Rome,

by occasion whereof Pope Iulius the third, and all the Cardinals, made great  complaints against Ferdinand, and those who had slaine him, excommunicating The Pope excommunicateth the authors of George his death. them in the highest degree that could be. And although his Maiesties Ambassadours directly informed the Pope of the cause, for which he was put to death, his Holines notwithstanding for all that would not be appeased, demaunding whether Frier George was of that bad disposition as they deciphered him, and wherefore did their master write in his behalfe, for him to be a Cardinall, and being one, why did he tolerate him to bee slaine: and furthermore, for that he assured all the Colledge of Cardinals of his goodnes, fidelitie, and endeuour which hee had manifested against the Turkes, to the profit and commoditie of Christendome: for which good and commendable  reports, he could by no meanes be induced to beleeue that he was now fallen into that crime, whereof he was accused: but rather that he was slaine by enuie, and to rob him of his treasure and moueables, which were more worth then 300000. crownes: which in respect he was a Cardinall, The moueables of a Cardinall dying intestate, belong to the Pope. and dying intestate, they did of right belong to the Apostolike Sea. Moreouer, the Pope and Cardinals could not be silent concerning this, that with such ignominie had laid hands vpon the blood of a Cardinall, which by no meanes they could support or digest, in respect of the reuerend degree and honour due to that calling, and to giue example to others not to attempt the like enormitie. Thus they grieuously being incensed against Ferdinand, the  Pope by no meanes would suspend the excommunication: yet in the end, at the earnest instance of his Ambassadours, he was contented and agreed, that three Cardinals with the Deane (who was the Cardinall of Trany) should enquire and take notice of this fact, and should see whether the death of Frier George had been vniustly proceeded in or no, and that they should send appointed men to Vienna, and into those countries, to informe him of the offence; and that in the meane time the Friers moueables should be seazed in the name, and to the vse of the Apostolike Chamber. Against this last demaund of the Pope, the Ambassadours obiected, that Ferdinand had alreadie disposed of the said moueables, as well to pay his souldiours, as for  other necessarie occasions concerning the warre which daily he had against the Turks, and that they were not of that great value, nor so goodly and rich as was said, but farre inclining to a meaner proportion. This accord being thus concluded, there were presently some dispatched to iourney to Vienna, to informe and inquire out the cause, and to proceede therein. To these Commissioners, his Maiesties agents failed not to manifest the infidelitie of the Frier, and how hee would haue accorded with the Turke, and purloyne Information of George his death. Transiluania from Christendome, and make himselfe absolute Lord thereof, in paying tribute to the Infidels, and (as happely it was discouered by many of his letters writ to diuers Lords of the Turkes Court) to massacre all  those who in his Maiesties name were vnder the conduct of Castalde. And to agrauate the matter the more, they produced many horrible facts, and the death of certaine persons.
Against such accusations, the Pope in defence of the Frier obiected many things, and among others produced certaine letters of the Grand Viccar

of Albe-iula, and of certaine other persons, who assured him that he was slaine by the enuie and wickednes of Ferdinands Captaines, who doubting  that he meant to reestablish in the kingdome King Iohns sonne; and not being able to tolerate that he was so plausible and popular; and that they were in so little esteeme with him; and that hee disposed of all things as absolute Lord of the countrie, without conferring with them of the particularities; to thrust him out from among them, and to vsurpe his possessions, that absolutely they might haue the commaund, they accused him to Ferdinand of treason, who too lightly reposing credit in them, consented that hee should be thus cruelly slaine, it being afterward very apparant, that this treason was not inuented, but only to spoyle him of his treasure and moueables,  there neuer yet falling out any matter, which could in any thing blemish or obscure his honour.
Whilest vpon these particularities many assemblies were in the Deanes house, and that the Comissaries went to Vienna to inquire the manner of this said fact, Andrew Battor was created Vayuode of Transiluania, and Stephen Andrew Battor, Vayuode of Transiluania. Losonze Counte of Themesuar, who would not haue taken the charge of that towne, except Ferdinand would graunt him a sufficient companie of Spanish souldiours to remaine there with him: which was presently graunted. Losonze, Counte of Themesuar. And for that they were not in the kingdome, but in the confines and frontiers of the enemie, they were presently sent for: and they being arriued,  Losonze went from thence with them to Themesuar, to repayre the fortification of that towne; and the Vayuode tooke regard to the affayres of the kingdome.
Now it was alreadie diuulged in all parts, that Solyman had made Mahomet Basha (his Lieutenant generall) to come and besiege the townes of Themesuar Mahomet Basha commeth against Transiluania. and Lippa, and that he was onward on his way at Belgrade, where he amassed together a great armie to inuade that countrie. It was also euery where certainly bruited, that the Vayuode of Moldauia prepared the like to enter into the kingdome about Brassouia. About the same time arriued in Transiluania the Counte of Helfestaine with 4000. old Germane souldiours,  bringing with him tenne peeces of Artillerie. By him Ferdinand writ to Castalde, that very shortly he would send him 1500. men of armes, and 7. companies more of Germanes, and that the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin should also within a short time bee with him with 3000. Italians and 2000. Hungarian souldiours, and with as many Caualarie as possible he could send him. Whilest these preparations were directing on the one partie, Castalde and the Vayuode on the other made a decree, by which it was commaunded that all the gentlemen of the countrie should assemble at the towne of Torde, and A Diet at Torde. there to aduise and determine for the defence of the countrie, vnderstanding that Mahomet determined to enter at the same time in diuers places with  two armies: to wit, with his owne armie by the low Marches; and with the Moldauian armie by Brassouia. All the Nobilitie being (according to this commaundement) assembled, order was giuen for necessaries, for the preseruation of the publike weale; and it was concluded that the townes of Lippa and Themesuar should be well furnished with men and victuals, and that the

fortification should with all expedition be presently reared, for that the enemie might finde it well defended, and that the greatest force of the kingdome  should be assembled together, as the ancient custome was in such necessitie, and that they should be mingled with those who were in Ferdinands pay, and that of all they should make but one armie, with which they were to march directly against the Moldauian, to hinder him from entering into that quarter, where there was not any strong place to withstand him, but only Seghesuar, which neuerthelesse was not of that force that it could resist Seghesuar. nor hinder him, but that at the first vollic of the Cannon he must needes also be master of Brassouia, which was a towne of as great importance as any other Brassouia. in Transiluania; and that likewise he should not burne the Prouince of Seculia, possessed by the Sicilians, and in the middest of the kingdome. This  bruite and feare, although it had not brought with it any other inconuenience then a fabulous report, yet was it sufficient to infuse a dreadful amazement into the minds of the inhabitants, insomuch that euery one with great losse did alreadie begin to retire to some other aboades, and abandon their owne homes and goods. And for that Torde was a place strongly situated, Torde. commodious and abounding in all manner of victuals, it was concluded that there should bee the Rende vous for the armie, and that thither should come the Vayuode to receiue the souldiours according as they came thither. The gentlemen of the countrie being speedily departed, with charge  and commission to bring as many men as euery one was rated at: and being now arriued amongst their people, with great expedition (obseruing their commission) they performed their charge, and began to march with their people to be there at the prefixed time and place.
Whilest they were thus assembling, there happened a memorable accident, which I would not omit to speake of. There was at Torde an ancient custome, and which yet continueth; and that is, that if the husband findeth his wife in adulterie, he may cause her there to bee publikely executed, in manner as I will speake of: and also on the contrarie, if the wife finde her husband in the same fault, she may pursue that against him, which he would doe against her. It happened then at that time, that a certaine Tayler who  The custome betweene the husband and wife touching adulteric. was of Varadin, named Paul, found his wife in bed with one of his companions, and pursuing the custome of the said towne, he accused her of adulterie: and hauing proued the offence, it was permitted him to haue the course of law, to cut off her head with a Sable in the middest of the market place. She being brought thither by her husband, and by the course of Iustice, and the appointed houre being come for this execution; she with teares and sighs kneeling downe before him, began pitifully to desire that hee would pardon her notorious fault, faithfully promising him, that from that time Forward, she would hold his honour most deare, and that he should neuer  hereafter haue any occasion to bee offended against her; and that it would please him to giue her her life, in regard of the kinde affection which he alwaies bore her, during the time she liued in good reputation, and that she would euer after serue him, not as a husband, but as her Lord and master. (Good) Paul being surprised by these her wofull speeches, and moued

by a (natural) kindnes to pitie, was content to pardon her, exhorting and perswading  her to become a dutifull and louing wife: whereupon he absolutely remitting all her hainous offence, tooke her to him againe. When within a while after it happened that this (dutifull) wife found her said husband Paul in adulterie with a young wench: whereupon she accused him to the Iustice, who causing him to be apprehended, appointed that he should bee put into his wiues power, to execute him according to the foresaid manner. She hauing brought him with officers to the deputed place, hee kneeled downe, and there (good kinde Paul) pitifully intreated her that she would pardon him his offence; thinking that she would neuer bee so vnkinde or cruell to him, but that she would vse the like counterchange of mercie, as he before in his owne behalfe had done to her. But by no meanes she would  once vouchsafe to hearken to his complaints, but like an vngrateful monster, Saue one fro^ the gallowes, and he will seeke to hang thee. forgetting all loue, and the fauours which she had receiued of him, not moued with any loue or pitie, but followed the extremitie of the law of the place, lifting vp her arme on high, hauing a Sable in her hand, wherewith she gaue him a blow vpon the necke, and like an inraged Bitch she killed (kind) Paul. For this his death all the towne was greatly incensed against her monsterous ingratitude, censuring her to be very cruell, for so requiting the former good deede which she had receiued of her husband: and if she had not presently fled from thence, she had receiued some sinister and condigne inconuenience. And this seemed to many so vile an act, that the inhabitants  endeuoured to abolish this foule and infamous custome. But by no meanes it could bee done, for that it was of long continuance in that place.
In the meane time, Castalde sent Counte Iohn Baptistad' Archo, in place of Iohn Baptista of Archo co^maundeth within Brassouia. of Counte Felixd' Archo, with a companie of Launsquenets to Brassouia, to take the gouernment of that towne, in which vnder his charge hee also commaunded Charles Scerettin to goe with 200. men of armes, and another companie of Germanes, commaunding them that they should not bouge from thence, vntill hee arriued there with his Campe, expressely charging the said Counte, that with another companie of Germanes he should seaze  vpon that Fortresse, which he had commaunded to bee made vpon the top of a little hill that mastered the towne, and which not farre from it, within which he should afterwards place the great and small Artillerie, with as many people as he should thinke to be necessarie to be able to defend it against the Moldauian, and to annoy him that he should not incampe about it; because that if he performed it, it would be the preseruation of the towne, and the manifest ruine of the Moldauian, who (because by that meanes there should be taken from him the commoditie to lodge in that plaine) should be forced to march through the mountaines, among which he should endure  great incommodities, and trauaile much to passe through the same, and yet possibly he might be forced to retire.
While these things were in doing, Sibinio (the capitall towne of the Saxons) offered to Castalde all the succours and victuals which he should need of against the Belerbey, yea, both of souldiours and money: for which their

kindnes he gaue them many heartie thankes, and entertaining their offers, he  willed them to bee in a readines, vpon any necessitie which should bee offered.
Thus as Fortune at her pleasure ouerthrew the decrees and enterprises of Ferdinands Lieutenants and Captaines, with extreame daunger: so did she in like manner play her part worse in Germanie, where then was the Emperour Charles the 5. and Ferdinand King of the Romanes in the towne of Ispurch. Duke Mauris of Saxonie (an Elector of the Empire) incensed against Duke Mauris of Saxonie confederate with the King of France, raiseth forces against the Emperour Charles. the said Emperour, for that he would not deliuer the Lantgraue his father in law, who with Duke Frederick of Saxonie were detained prisoners, thinking that they had not performed their words, and finding himselfe to be greatly iniuried, he was determined, in some sort whatsoeuer, to set them at libertie,  being the rather incited thereunto, for that his said father in law was come to the Court, vnder the safegard of his word, crediting the Emperours fidelitie, in promising to set him at libertie within a while after: who seeing it was not performed in a yeere, nor many moneths after, and finding himselfe to bee thus mocked and abused: before hee came to that, which afterwards he was constrained to acco^plish, he went to seek Ferdinand at Lintz, to intreate him that it would please his Maiestie to negotiate with the Emperour so much, that he would not derogate from his faithfull promise, but set his father in law at libertie. Ferdinand was for the same occasion come to Ispurch, and conferring with the Emperour his brother about the request of  Duke Mauris, he could by no meanes draw any other thing from him, but onely a good hope of a speedie deliuerie. But Mauris esteeming of this as of a vaine hope, presently practised with William, the sonne of the said Lantgraue, and with the Duke of Mechelburge, and other Princes and kinsmen, as well of his father in lawes, as of the said Duke of Saxonie: with whom making a firme and resolute confederacie, seeing by loue and fayre intreaties they could not set these prisoners at libertie, but to deliuer them by force of armes, he made (by the ayd and assistance of his confederates, and other secret enemies of the Emperour) a good strong armie, hauing first negotiated and compacted with Henry King of France, that the said King should enter into  Germanie, to vphold and maintaine his affayres. According to this agreement, the King of France desirous to assist the Duke, and greatly aspiring to the Empire, failed not to bee present at the promised time with great forces. And on the other side, Mauris couertly brought his Campe to a little towne, which was but a mile from Spire, from whence with all diligence he departed towards Chiouze, and towards the Castle of Ambergh, which belonged to Ferdinand, and by the mountaines and other difficult passages, rude and vnknowne in the night time, in great silence he marched so farre, that then he thought he had the meanes and oportunitie to come in vpon the backes  of the Emperours people, and to cleere the way that might hinder and withstand his safetie. Thus being arriued on the sudden at Chiouze, he seazed on the gate thereof, which is betweene two mountaines in a deepe vallie, from whence hauing beaten the guard, he meant also to possesse the Castle. But being brauely defended by those within, he could not make himselfe

master thereof: whereupon leauing certaine people before it, hee went with  incredible diligence to Ispurch, where was the Emperour and Ferdinand, who being aduertised of this sudden noueltie, and greatly astonished, not knowing what to doe in such an vnlooked for accident of fortune, seeing themselues disarmed of forces, determined for his better securitie to retire towards Carinthia. And thus the Emperor departing in the night in a Litter, somewhat sickly, with Ferdinand, by Torch-light, he took the way of Villach, a towne situated vpon the riuer of Drauus: where being arriued, they soiourned there certaine daies, to see what course Duke Mauris tooke: who being now arriued in Ispurch, and not finding the Emperour there (who the night before was fled from that place) would not that any should offer violence  there, nor to no other place belonging to the King of the Romanes. Being a little from Ispurch, there came to him a gentleman of Ferdinands retinue, to know the occasion that incited him to take armes against the Emperour, and what his meaning was, and for what occasion he possessed certaine places of his, and entered into them as a publike enemie, and not as a friend. To these demaunds Mauris answered him, that he was not come to offend the Emperour, nor to withhold any of his townes or Lordships from him, neither had he taken armes against him, but onely against his enemies and aduersaries; among whom were the Bishop of Arras, the Duke of Albe, and certaine other Councellors of the Emperour, who were said to be in that quarter, and whom he would pursue and take, if it were possible: and that concerning  his sacred Maiestie, he had no other meaning but a good and sincere affection: and if he could not meete the said enemies by the 25. of May next insuing, hee would retire his armie, without offending him in the least thing whatsoeuer, and that hee would haue respect to his subiects, as to his owne, and that afterwards he would bee at the Diet, which his Maiestie had published, hoping (that being there, with many Princes and States) there might be made some good peace and reconciliation betweene the Emperour and him.
Whilest this accord was treated of betweene Ferdinand and Mauris, the  King of France still aduanced himselfe to further the proceedings of Mauris, The King of France compelled to forsake Germanie. when newes was brought him that Martin Rostan was entered with a great armie into Piccardie and Champagne, where he made great spoyle and waste, and had fiered three townes, and burned almost twentie Castles, putting all to fire and sword, and that with great iourneys he marched towards Paris. By occasion of this newes, the King was constrained (maugre his liking, and for all Fortune seemed to smile on him) to returne backe and defend his owne. Thus he who thought to make himselfe master of anothers, was in danger to lose his owne: and hauing left and retired from Germanie, hee forced Rostan to returne and leaue his countrie at libertie, which was alreadie  greatly astonished, yea and euen Paris it selfe, which (for feare) was in great disorder. Mauris hauing gotten little of his desired intendment, departed from Ispurch, and from the Countie of Tyroll, with his men: and leauing Chiouze went to the Diet, where Ferdinand himselfe was incontinently after. In this Diet were treated many important things, but especiallie the

peace of Mauris with the Emperour, which at the intreatie of Ferdinand, and many other Lords, it was concluded in this manner: that the Emperour  An agreement betweene the Emperor and Duke Mauris. willingly and freely should deliuer the Lantgraue to Mauris, and the Duke of Saxonie to his children, and that Mauris should bee bound to goe and serue Ferdinand against the Turke with 12000. Lansquenets, and 3000. horse all the whole summer. This conclusion ended, with many other articles, Mauris dismissed his souldiours, and the Lantgraues children went from thence with their people against a Captaine named Henstain, who in the Emperours name was entered into the land of Hesse, and who had defeated and ouerthrowne in battaile the Counte of Odemburg, who was in the field with 16. Germane Ensignes. But in regard of that ouerthrow, the Lantgraues  children were forced to retire to their places of more securitie; and Duke Mauris sent the rest of his armie to raise the siege from before Magdebourg in Saxonie, which was besieged by the Marquesse of Brandeburg and the Duke of Brunswick. Vpon the approaching of Mauris his people, the siege was presently raised, the towne remaining at libertie vnder certaine conditions, and then the Duke of Brunswick, and the Marquesse Albert tooke the Emperours part, with Counte Mansfield, and came to serue his Maiestie against France with 15. Ensignes of Lansquenets, 500. men of armes, and other light horsemen.
Behold the end of these tumults, which greatly blemished the renowne  and glorie of so great an Emperour, insomuch that it may seeme almost impossible for him (who would but consider his puissance, and the victories which he before had gotten) to beleeue that he should bee forced to flye to Villach. But men shall not neede much to maruaile at it, if they will duly consider the effects of mutable Fortune, which effects oftentimes cause such strange aduentures, and very often bring to passe that men fall into such labyrinths, for that they esteeme not of any other mans force: and such a man is accounted most happie, who can well gouerne and temper himselfe therein.
All these discords being thus appeased in Germanie, there began others to  spring vp in Transiluania, no lesse troublesome and daungerous then the former. For Queene Izabella complaining her selfe against Ferdinand, because that the promises and conditions to her graunted in the agreement which Izabella complaineth of Ferdinand. was made vpon her rendering the kingdome of Transiluania, were not in any respect kept nor performed, did greatly solicite the King of Polonia, and the Queene Bonna her mother, to require the performance of them, and incited the principallest of the Prouince to this, that her sonne might bee inuested into his kingdome: exclaiming of him that he had not giuen her free possession of the Dutchie of Oppolia, of Monsterberg, and Ratibor, with 20000. crownes of yeerely reuenew, as was promised her: and the better  to make vp this summe, they meant to reckon to her certaine reuenewes which consisted in woods, fowles, and the fishing of certaine Pooles and Lakes, which she esteemed vncertaine, and subiect to the hazard of times: she further complaining of them, that he had not paied her 150000. crownes for her dowrie and debts, for which Cassouia was ingaged to her: and vpon

these said complaints she sent Matthias Lobosky to Ferdinand, to solicite the last expedition. By him Ferdinand gaue her to vnderstand, that his meaning  was alwaies to satisfie her, according to that which hee had promised, and to giue her and her sonne more then was concluded vpon in their agreements: and if she had not the Dutchie of Rhatibor, and the rest giuen her in full possession, the fault was not in him, but rather proceeded from the Marquesse Iohn of Brandeburg, who was vnder the wardship of the Electors of Saxonie, and of Brandeburg, of Marquesse Albert, and of the Duke of Prussia, without whose consent there could bee nothing done, and the rather in respect of the far distance of their aboades; and also because that the troubles which lately happened by Duke Mauris, had slackned this busines, in regard whereof it were necessarie that she should a while expect; and that if she  would not haue this patience, hee would then alot her other Dukedomes and Demaines to her liking, with such reuenewes as was determined vpon in their agreement: greatly maruailing at this, that she was not contented with the reuenew of the Dutchie of Oppolia, and that with that she made no account of the fowle and fish, which he esteemed one of the greatest reuenewes in the whole countrie, for that they were wont to bee yeerely farmed at tenne or twelue thousand Dollers, the said summe amounting to tenne thousand crownes, or there abouts. As for her dowrie, he assured her it should be satisfied, in giuing him some respite, and that in the meane time hee would allow her sufficient consideration for it, as vpright men should  thinke meete: and that besides, he would esteeme her as his sister, and would account of her sonne, as of his owne begotten, perswading her with good and friendly speeches to liue contentedly. With this answer Lobosky returned, more inriched by a future hope, then a present effect. In the meane time, the King and Queene of Polonia ceased not to endeuour themselues for her satisfaction, and secretly in her behalfe practised, that she should remaine a Ladie and Queene as before.
It was then that the bruite greatly increased of the Turkes huge preparation: Castalde soliciteth Ferdinand for succours. for feare of which, Castalde considering the small force which was in the countrie to resist this common and tyrannicall enemie, gaue notice to  Ferdinand of the present necessitie he was in, desiring him he would not faile to send him the 50000. men which hee promised, and to cause Palauicin to hasten himselfe, that he should with all speede come vnto him, with the people and Artillerie which he could gather. Ferdinand returned him answer, that for that time he could not send him the succours which hee had promised, in respect of diuers lets which of late he had in Germanie: but that hee would solicite Palauicin, that hee would bring his people into Transiuania, and would also send others, as the commoditie and necessitie of the time would permit him, and that he hoped that Duke Mauris would very shortly come himselfe in person to this warre with 12000. Launsquenets,  and 3000. horse, according to the tenour of his Obligation: and in the meane time he exhorted him to doe his best endeuour to redresse the difficulties of that Prouince, which he wholly recommended to him, and that relying vpon his care and wisedome, he assured himselfe that he would giue

order when and where neede should require, and that he would prouide for  all necessaries, as was fitting for a prouident and expert Captaine, such an one as he esteemed him to bee, commaunding him that he should assist himselfe with the reuenewes of the Churches of that kingdome which were vacant and without Pastors: and for the notice whereof, he had deputed the Bishop of Vesprimia, and George Veruery, who should make a role of their values, and send the same to his Maiestie to make an equall deuision thereof: and further, commaunding him to render to all the officers and seruants of Frier George their moueables, and specially those which were found at Zaluoch, and that of the other he should cause to be made an Inuentorie: and further, that hee should pay the 400. Vssarons (who are light horsemen,  mounted and armed a la Hungresque) who were in the Friers seruice while he liued, for feare they should goe and serue the enemie, and that they should be vnder the commaund of Operstolph, who was the principall Captaine of Operstolph. the Caualarie in Transiluania, and who not long since was entertained on his Maiesties part: all which was presently performed.
Losonze being at Themesuar with 600. horse, and hauing with him Don Gasper, and the companie of Diego Velez, which was 300. men, (ouer whom the Losonze commandeth Themesuar, and furnisheth it with men. Ensigne commaunded) and 300. Bohemians, and two companies of Germanes, they in all making 1600. men, besides the inhabitants, who were apt and able to beare armes, who might amount vnto nine hundred men. Castalde sent him one moneths pay for all the souldiours, and two hundred other  Germane Harquebuziers, sending him word by a Spanyard, that he should not faile to get into the towne the greatest store of victuals he could, to maintaine a longer time all the sieges, which vpon a sudden might happen to him: and besides, he sent him so much Artillerie and munition, as was sufficient for him to withstand all the assaults the Turkes should offer him. In like sort he did aduertise him by Don Gasper, that he could not then succour him any more, in respect of the few men himselfe had, with whom he could not goe into the field against so puissant an armie as Mahomets was, for that he was disappoynted of the ayd he expected fro^ Ferdinand, by reason of the late troubles happened in Germanie, and that he had no other Infantric vpo^  whom he might trust, but a few Spanyards who remained vnto him, with 4000. Germanes which lately were come to him, and 1000. men of armes: therefore he willed him that he should rampier and fortifie himselfe the best he could, and prepare himselfe for the defence of that towne, which in the end would be the onely fountaine and cause of all his glorie and reputation: and that he should not expect to bee relieued by those of the countrie (who should presently be assembled) for that they were not esteemed such that any trust was to be reposed in them: and therefore he sent him word, that it was requisite that in any case hee should make of necessitie a vertue, and that  so much the rather, because he saw himselfe constrained to march with those few men which he had, against the Vayuode of Moldauia, who would enter into Transiluania by Brassouia, where he had not any Fortresse to stay him; those of the countrie supposing that the damage which they should receiue on that side would bee greater, then that which Mahomet could bring vnto

him about Themesuar, by reason of the strong places which were in that  quarter, and for the commoditie which was there to resist him: for which considerations he was forced to march against the Moldauian, to withstand him from entering into the countrie, and from the possession of that towne, and to goe into the field with as great force as he could, and that besides he was constrained to doe this, except he would see the kingdome vtterly lost, and because of the little content which he perceiued in the hearts of euery one, whom he saw more inclined to a reuolt then a defence: and also because he knew that this quarter was more commodious and fit for aduantages to keepe the field with a few men, by reason of woods, mountaines, and other hard passages, then was that about Lippa or Themesuar: for which difficulties  and aduantages, he not any thing feared the Moldauian, much lesse his Caualarie, which he doubted not but with his Infantrie to defeate and force them recoyle. And whereas he could not come to relieue him, without a like armie to that of Mahomets, that he and Don Gasper should doe their vttermost deuoyre to defend themselues, and valiantly to resist the enemie in that quarter, whilest he of his part should make resistance against the Moldauian, assuring him, that if his enterprise did fortunately succeede, (as hee trusted in God it would) he would presently come to succour him with as great an armie as hee could: and although hee might not come neere vnto Themesuar, for that the enemie was very strong, yet he would lodge neere to Lippa, where, causing a trench to be digged, going from thence to Solimos,  he would not (by reason of that Fortresse) feare the Turkish armie, thinking assuredly to seate his Campe in such a sure place, that the situation thereof should be able to defend him against the violence of the enemie, hauing on the left hand the riuer Marosse, and on the right the high mountaines; from whence he well hoped to be so offensiue to the enemie, that he would either constraine him to retire, or else somewhat neglect the siege, insomuch that he should be able to relieue and preserue it: earnestly importuning them both to be of good courage, and in like sort to perswade all the Spanyards whom he intreated, to remember what they were, and to thinke vpon that which  they were wont brauely to performe when they were in such wars as these, which through all the world had gained to them the name of valour, which they ought now to maintaine without spot or blemish, esteeming this successe no lesse glorious to them, then the former on his owne part; assuring himselfe that they would no lesse vertuously performe that now, then that which they had alwaies performed in such honourable exploytes. Besides, he sent them certaine aduertisements very profitable and necessarie, how they should behaue and gouerne themselues in fights and assaults which should bee offered them: and for that they were young and of little experience, he intreated them continually and onely to thinke vpon this, that he who fighteth couragiously to the end, doth maintaine his life in defending  himselfe.
Whilest these directions were giuen on the one side, Aldene on the other informed Castalde that hee was in meane estate, and that hee could not any Aldene fainthearted. longer remaine at Lippa to take charge thereof, and that he should send another

in his place to take that charge. Castalde conceiued of this with great sorow, for that the time was so short that hardly he could make prouision therfore,  considering that this was to incourage the enemie, and quaile his owne people, seeing before their eyes such a Chieftaine to forsake that Fortresse, and that another should come thereinto for defence, considering that such a worthie man for his owne honour was come to keepe and defend it. Neuerthelesse he returned him answer, that if he thought not himself sure within Lippa, for feare of the Basha (although it was now somewhat late) hee should giue him notice thereof, for that he would send such an one thither, who should defend it. Aldene remembring himselfe of the fault which he had committed, and chaunging his opinion sent him word, that seeing he  was now resident in the towne, he doubted not but to defend it. These things thus concluded on, Castalde presently departed from Torde and went to Colosuar, there to assemble the souldiours that were in Ferdinands pay, and which were sent him, in like sort giuing aduertisement to the Counte of Helfestaine, that he should speedily repayre to him with his Regiment of 4000. Germanes, sending him two payes of foure which they should receiue. He also sent to Zena (Generall of all the souldiours in that countrie) that he should presently and with all speede he could come to him, because he waited for no more but him, that so he might march into the field.
As these preparations (which we haue spoken of) were in hand in Transiluania,  Mahomet in the meane time (leauing Belgrade behinde him) was The armie of Mahomet Basha. now betweene the two riuers, and had alreadie erected a bridge vpon Tibiscus. He had in his Campe 100000. men, and 60. peeces of Artillerie, among which were thirtle double Cannons. With him also came the Belerbey of Greece, who the yeere before was Lieutenant generall in that countrie for the Grand Seigniour, and he brought with him vnder his conduct 20000. horse. He had also another great Captaine with him named Cassombassa, who likewise conducted 15000. horse, and 2000. Tartars, who anciently were called Scythians, which are a warlike people, cruel, and greatly redoubted Tartars. by these nations, and they fight on horsebacke with Bow and arrowes,  Sable and Mace.
The enemies being in this place, the souldiours of the kingdome were in a manner assembled altogether, when Counte of Helfestaine arriued with his Germanes, being halfe in a mutinie, and they were that night lodged in one of the Suburbes of the towne, which were very great. The day following, Castalde minding to depart, these by no meanes would dislodge; but mutining, they seazed on the Artillerie, (as their custome is, not willing to take one pay for two, which was due to them, which alone should then haue bin payed them) and after they imbattailed themselues to possesse and sacke the towne. And vpon this resolution they began to batter on the top of the  Colosuar battered by the Germane mutiners. walles. Which Castalde seeing, and that this was not done counterfeitly, he sent to the inhabitants that they should defend themselues. Whereupon they betaking themselues to armes, and comming to the walles, they began to discarge their Artillerie and good Harquebuzes among the Germanes, making a great slaughter of them: who seeing themselues put into disorder,

they determined to take Castalde: whereof being aduertised, hee speedily retired to Torde; sending them word, that if they would not be appeased,  Castalde constrained to retire to Torde, to auoide the daunger of the Germane mutiners. he would presently send his armie (which was alreadie at Torde) against them, to hew them in peeces, and after commaunded that the Caualarie should draw into the field, and made a shew to march towards Colosuar to suppresse the Germanes: who vnderstanding of this newes, and knowing they were in a place where they could neither helpe nor defend themselues, The mutinie appeased. and that this sedition was not any thing profitable to them, but to the contrarie very pernitious, and full of certaine daungers, they presently appeased and quieted themselues, without any further motion or soliciting them, and leading the Artillerie along, with their Ensignes displayed, came to  Torde, where (for all their mutinie) they got no other thing, but onely that the Counte did casheere fiftie of them: so that besides the death of many who were slaine at Colosuar, they receiued this condigne chastisement, which they worthely deserued for their rebellious temeritie.
Behold how in this yeere began the discord amongst vs, as though the comming of two such puissant armies against vs, was not sufficient to counterchecke our turbulent spirits, but we of our selues by another warre, worse then the first, must ouerthrow and make hauocke of one another.
Castalde being busied at Torde, in assembling his men to march against the Moldauian, who had alreadie passed the mountaines with 40000. men, The armie of the Moldauian. and entered into the countrie of Brassouia, newes was brought him how  Mahomet hauing passed Tibiscus, not without great difficultie, was alreadie incamped with all his armie before Themesuar, and that from S. Iohns day Themesuar besieged by Mahomet. vntill that present, he did batter it in three places with 70. peeces of Artillerie, and that those within did brauely defend themselues with great resolution, and that it was alreadie twelue daies since the batterie neither ceased day nor night, and that it still continued. This newes was brought to him by a Spanyard, consorted with a Rhatian souldiour, being both apparelled after one manner, and were in the night departed from Themesuar, being commaunded to come to Castalde, to demaund a new supplie of men,  for that the Artillerie had slaine many of them. Castalde vpon this report presently dispatched a messenger for Ottomiall, who then was at Iula, (a very Ottomiall. Iula, or Giula. strong towne enuironed with riuers) and desired him that with 400. Aiduchs he would endeuour to enter into Themesuar, promising him that if he could finde the meanes to relieue it with these succours, he should so well be rewarded, that during his life he would thinke himselfe well contented. This done, himselfe set forward against the Moldauian, hauing no more in Castaldes armie. his Campe then 12000. men, as well horse as foote. The Moldauian was alreadie incamped in a passage two miles from Brassouia, where Counte Iohn Baptisted' Archo entertained him with braue and fierce skirmishes, and bearded him so, that he suffered not any souldiour to disband himselfe from Iohn Baptiste d' Archo stayeth the Moldauian.  his battalion, but presently he bought it with the price of his life: and so much did he annoy him, that he neither could nor durst for his life march any further, nor ioyne himselfe with the Basha; which was a thing of no small importance, in respect of the miserie and trouble of the time. The

Counte had so well ordered his people, and those which were left him of Counte Felixd' Archo (who in Ianuarie last was gone to Vienna) that as often  as the enemies ranged in that place, they suffered not any of them to returne aliue, and he continuing still victorious, and valiantly fighting, gaue them so many routes and ouerthrowes, that they scarcely any more durst so suddenly assaile our men, as they were wont. And among other ouerthrowes which the enemies receiued, there was one which partly happened through the Countes prowes, for that the Moldauian retired himselfe behinde: and it fortuned in this sort. Counte Iohn Baptiste was aduertised that a troupe of Moldauians (among which were 300. Turkes, and as many Tartars) would goe and discouer Brassouia, and that they should goe by certaine passages, which of the one side had many marishes, and of the other  certaine hils very rough and tedious: among which hee appoynted an ambuscado of Germane Harquebuziers, and certaine Caualarie, who after that the Turkes were passed, they should make in vpon them at their returne, when they vnderstood that those of the towne were sallied forth to skirmish with them. This multitude then of Barbarians presenting themselues vpon these passages, and hauing passed them, they managed and ranged about the towne, and were presently assailed by a strong troupe of horse and foote, who sallied foorth to skirmish with them, and were so hotly charged, that they were forced to retire more then ordinarie: and comming to those places, of which I haue spoken, they were in such sort assailed behinde, without  thinking thereupon by those who were in ambuscado, that being inclosed betweene them, they were so throughly beaten, that there remained neither Moldauian, Tartar, nor Turke aliue, nor any who could carrie newes to the Moldauian of their ouerthrow, they being all either slaine or taken prisoners in the straites: and in token of this victorie, those of Brassouia sent three waggons laden with those heads (who were slaine) to Castalde, who was neere approached to the Moldauian, and so boldly, that the enemy thought he had more men then was reported vnto him, not being able to perswade himself, that a man of that qualitie (as was Castalde) durst appeare in the field, except  his armie were of more strength, or at the least equall to his. Vpon this opinion he was not so hardie to attend him, but speedily and with so great disorder retired, that he lost many men in his retraict, and had lost more in making The retraict of the Moldauian. passage for his Artillerie through the mountaines, if happely Counte Iohn Baptiste had had more men to haue followed him, seeing 500. horse which onely pursued him, had been sufficient to haue put him in disorder and into such hazard, that little would haue wanted but he would haue abandoned all his Artillerie to the chance and hazard of fortune. And if the Sicilians had then done their deuoire, and shewed themselues such as they should haue done, most certaine that day was come wherein the Moldauian  had lost his armie, his kingdome, together with his life, and Transiluania had been no more molested on that side: and this defeature might haue been a happie president for others neuer to attempt the like inuasion. Vpon the newes of this retraict, it was reported that Castalde would dislodge from Seghesuar, where he remained, vnderstanding that the enemie had not dissolued

his Campe, but that he with his people were incamped on the other side  of the mountaines, by reason whereof he was constrained to soiourne certaine daies in that towne, and there to expect what the Moldauian would doe: for that if he should then depart from thence, the other would presently returne againe into Transiluania, (as for certaine he vnderstood) and in respect of that feare and suspition, he durst not yet depart, so that he could not march to the reliefe of Themesuar.
Being thus stayed, continually there came aduertisements to him by the way of Caransebesse and Lippa, that the affayres of Themesuar were in bad Themesuar in bad termes. tearmes, in respect of those who were within, who had parlied with the Turkes, who told them that the succours of the 400. Aiduchs, which Castalde  had sent them, vnder the conduct of Ottomiall, were defeated and cut in Ottomiall defeated by the Turkes. peeces by them. Vpon this newes Francis Henriquez was presently dispatched to Lippa, that vpon his returne he might make recitall of the veritie of the fact, and in what state Themesuar stood, and how euery thing was there, and whether it could defend it selfe any longer: and also to informe him of the state, and condition of Lippa, to the end he might prouide therefore, in such sort that it might remaine intire and safe from being attained of Mahomets furie. At the same instant newes was brought that the Turkes had slaine Captaine Don Gasper, whose companie was giuen to Roderic Vigliandrando, with command to endeuour himselfe to enter into Themesuar, considering they were in danger to perish, and for no other cause then that there  was not any to gouerne them. They sent thither also with him Captaine Andrew Lopez with his companie, and 200. Germane Harquebuziers, to whom Castalde said, that he well knew this enterprise was difficult, specially considering the enemies being very vigilant to hinder that no succours could enter into Themesuar: and that they were very glad that those Aiduchs, which Ottomiall brought vnder his conduct to the reliefe of that towne, passed by the edge of the sword: and that neuerthelesse whatsoeuer hee should doe in this behalfe, was to no other purpose but that hee might faithfully discharge his dutie, and not giue any occasion to detracting tongues to censure hardly of him: and that to that end to relieue this towne (either  by one meanes or other) he sent them, greatly relying himselfe in the good esteeme which he conceiued of their manhoods; assuring himselfe that they would to the vttermost endeuour themselues to enter therein, and that either of them would now vse this commendable wisedome, which euen vntill this present was worthily noted in them, promising them, that within short time with as great force as he could leauie, he would come and lodge by the Castle of Lippa, to the end, that if the affayres of Themesuar did badly succeede, those of Lippa should at the least be preserued, and that towne (which so much imported the good and commoditie of euery one) should  bee maintained and kept. These Captaines thus dispatched, departed with their people. But the diligence and care of Castalde serued to small purpose at that time: for vpon the same day in which they tooke leaue of Castalde, Francis Henriquez (who a little before was sent to see how Lippa was victualled, munitioned, and fortified) arriued with newes of the taking of Themesuar. Themesuar taken by Mahomer.

The losse whereof made euery one very grieuous and heauie, as well for the loue and regard they bore to those valiant and excellent souldiours  who were within, as also for that it vntimely happened by the negligent gouernment of the Captaines. Vpon this griefe of minde, Castalde did indifferently comfort himselfe, vnderstanding that Aldene shewed himselfe to haue good courage valiantly to defend Lippa, and that the souldiours desired nothing more, then that the Basha would come and salute them, that they might make him vnderstand what their valour and courage was, and the desire they had to winne honor and renowne against him, and that they were all resolued to dye within it, rather then to see themselues brought to such an end, as was happened to those of Themesuar: the losse whereof  I will here set downe.
Losonze being Commaunder within this towne, with such a number of The description of the siege of Themesuar. men, as before is said, and imploying himselfe the best he could for the fortifying thereof: which for the contrarieties and hatreds, proceeding from the concurrence of qualities, and from some other precedent cause, could not be so well munitioned as it was necessarie; for that Aldene (for the foresaid occasion) had conuerted all the money to the affayres of Lippa, leauing this other Fortresse vnder the mercie and protection of Fortune. As one day at the rising of the Sunne he walked about the towne to visit it, Mahomet (the 24. of Iuly, which was dedicated to the feast of S. Iohn Baptist) then presented  himselfe with his Vauntgard, which was 15000. horse, conducted by Cassombassa. He presently caused to take notice of the situation of the towne, wherein was built fiue Bulwarkes of earth, some whereof were alreadie mounted to the heigth of the wall, but that which was lower was raised no higher then the length of an Halbert and a halfe: and of all these there were two very defencible, and the other were but in a meane. There was with Mahomet the Belerbey of Greece, who was greatly practised and perfect in that countrie. As they were thus arriued within the sight of Themesuar, he said to Mahomet; behold a part of the towne, the Spanyards who are within will shew you the rest: and marching about it, Alphonse Perez de Saianedra  presently sallied forth with 400. horse, and 100. Spanish Haquebuziers, and began to skirmish with the Turkes, entertaining them vntill they themselues were forced to retire. Vpon the 27. day following, all the Campe arriued with so great cryes, neighing of horses, clattering of armour, sounding of Drummes and Trumpets, that it seemed the world would haue turned topsie turuie, and presented themselues before our people in strong and fearfull squadrons, with great store of Artillerie: whereof those within seemed to make little account of, but receiuing them with a bloodie sallie, they gaue them sufficient notice of the little esteeme they conceiued of their proud and contemptuous puissance: but for all this their gallant resolution, Mahomet desisted not to incampe, lodging his people round about the towne, and  so straightly enuironing it, that not a man could enter in, to their reliefe, but onely by certaine marishes, where it could not so well be besieged, but that our people might enter in thereby. Vpon their approaching our people opposed themselues with a gallant resolution, and for the space of sixe daies

they made continuall sallies vpon the enemie, not without great effusion of  blood, during which time they assured the Suburbes. But in the end Mahomet vrged them hard, and caused thirtie great peeces of Artillerie, and many other lesser, to batter the defences, and made three batteries, one against the Castle, another against the towne-gate, which was not walled, and the third against the Bulwarke: which for that it was of least strength, was defended by the Spanyards. They in this sort battered the towne eight whole daies, and not any of the besieged making signe of faintnes, and so long vntill they appertly sawe the great ruine which the Artillerie had made, and that the towne in many parts was as it were all open, and that they had lost many a braue souldiour in two assaults which the Turkes had giuen  them, of whom were remaining within the Ditch more then two thousand, and many wounded. Lonsonze knowing then they could not long hold out, and that all the towne was sorely brused and battered by the Cannon, and that a good part of the Bulwarks, which maintained and defended the wall, were beaten to the ground, called to him all the Captaines, imparting to them the daunger wherein they were, and how within a short time they were likely to fall vnder the edge of the sword, or mercie of the enemies. And he told them, that before Mahomet had passed Danubius, the Vayuod of the Transalpinians on his part wrote to him, that the Campe had not come into those quarters, if Ferdinand had meant to haue payed Solyman the tribute, which Peter Vicchy was wont yeerely to pay him for the Countie of  Themesuar; to whom he would giue no answer, nor aduertise Castalde thereof, he beleeuing they were deuises and brauadoes of the Basha, as he was accustomed to doe, thinking with himselfe that he would not come thither with so great force, to content himselfe with that which another declared vnto him. But seeing himselfe deceiued in his opinion, and considering vnder what a miserable condition they were like to fall into, if the batterie continued, he said to them: that he was of opinion, they should send to the Basha to obtaine truce of him for foure daies, during which time they might aduertise Castalde of all the accidents, and solicite him to consent to pay the  yeerely tribute to the Turke, vpon condition he would raise his Campe and retire: and so by that meanes happely they should giue remedie to their distressed fortunes. This aduice was approued by some, and refuted by many others, as vsually it happeneth in councels, where is daily seene some contrarieties among opinions, in respect of the reasons and arguments which are alleadged either of the one part or other: in regard whereof, they could determine nothing that day.
The 3. of Iuly the Basha on the Castle side and towards the towne-gate, caused to be giuen an hot and fierce assault, which endured foure long houres, with the death of more then 1500. of the assailants, and about some  150. of those within. In this assault Losonze with the other Spanish and Germane Captaines valiantly defended themselues, and forced the enemies to retire to their Tents. After this retraict, and that all our people were dressed of their wounds, and somewhat refreshed, all the Captaines were againe assembled in councell to determine vpon the foresaid busines, and then there

were more then before of Losonzes opinion. Thus he perceiuing many to be of his minde, without expecting any more, sent by a trustie messenger to acquaint  the Basha with his intention: to whom he returned answer, that the Transalpinian had truly managed and conferred of this busines by his commaund: but he should haue conceiued, that this accord should haue been accepted of, before hee had assembled his armie, and passed Danubius and Tibiscus, and not at this present, he being now in the field and incamped before the towne: in consideration whereof, he would not that this expedition should haue any more respite, nor otherwise consent to raise the siege, nor depart from thence before he were master of the towne and Castle.
Losonze vnderstanding this answer, and perceiuing no meanes of agreement,  not willing to submit himselfe to the discretion and mercie of the Basha, set vp his rest to fight it out to the last man. Whereupon the Turkes began to renew the batterie more fiercely then before, without any intermission of daily assaults, and to doe the worst they could: and thinking that the great quantity of Artillerie which they had was not sufficient to satisfie their miserable crueltie, one night they put into the Ditch more then 2000. Pyoners, who began to myne the Bulwarke which the Spanyards kept, which was in such sort indamaged and impayred, that one might easily mount to the top of it by the ruines: for that all the defences and flankes which might annoy and withstand them, were all broken and throwne to the ground.  The Spanyards seeing this imminent daunger, and to giue redresse thereunto, with all speede they made within the said Bulwarke a Caue sufficiently large and deepe, in which they erected certaine defences, where in euery one of them eight Harquebuziers might be commodiously placed, without being impeached or indangered by the enemie. These (whilest that the Pyoners were most busie in their labour, and euen as they were readie to giue fire) began so effectually to discharge their shot amongst these Deluers, that it was a marueilous thing to behold, they falling one vpon another in such heapes, that the dead bodies hindered the rest of the liuing, in regard whereof they were forced to giue ouer the worke and be packing, without daring once to  returne thither againe. Insomuch that the Turkes seeing this deuice of the Christians, and that by this meanes they could not come to the conclusion of their intended purpose, gaue that ouer, and pursued another; daily sounding them by promises, assurances, and perswasions, that it were best to yeeld to them. But seeing in the end they could not bring them to yeeld, neither by letters, nor by gifts, nor by any other great offers, and that all their labours were to small purpose, they made vpon the Castle side two great Caualliars of Carpenters worke, in bignes tenne fadome, as any man would iudge, and brought and set them right ouer against the Bulwarke where the Spanyards were caued: vpon which they mounted certaine peeces of Artillerie, by reason whereof not any could be in safetie vpon the said Bulwark, nor remaine  vpon the defences, insomuch that the Spanyards were constrained to retire from one place to another, secretly to make Trenches and certaine Rampiers to couer themselues withall, when they should defend the towne, which Don Gasper Casteluio slaine. then was very open. Don Gasper at this instant was slaine with a small shot,

which strooke him in the forehead and pearced him quite through, and so  hotly did they shoot and neerely marked our men, that there were few Spanyards, Germanes, and Hungars left: yet neuerthelesse those which remained lost not any courage, but resolutely defended themselues, as though they had been a great number. But the Turkes for all their brauerie slacked not their endeuours to enter into the towne, and our men did no lesse then gallantly oppose themselues for the defence thereof. Thus both the one and the other tooke greater heede to themselues, continually indamaging one the other with diuers conflicts. But Mahomet distrusting himselfe, that he was not able to conquer this towne by force of armes, determined one day to haue some speech with Losonze, and to seeke him out to parley with him,  that so he might perswade him to some composition, which Losonze meant not to refuse: but the others not willing to consent thereto, were the cause that of the said conference proceeded no effect at that time. The Turkes neuerthelesse ceased not from daily assaults, which they alwaies renewed with greater force then before, hauing no want of able men more fresh and lustie then our people were, of whom they had few sound amongst them, and many cruelly wounded; and specially by meanes of those two mischieuous engins which they had made, who also caused more to bee made like vnto them, in place where our Bulwarkes and walles were, by the violence of their Artillerie ruinated: and the rather they were incouraged, because that victuals and munition greatly abounded in their Campe, whereas our men daily wanted  all: as it often happeneth after a long and tedious siege.
The Basha wearie (as I well beleeue) to see so great a slaughter of his people, and that he must fight so continually, earnestly desiring that our people would yeeld themselues to him, practised this deuice following. The day before, Ottomiall was defeated with his 400. Aiduchs, which hee brought with him to put into Themesuar (as is aforesaid) and they were by a strong squadron of Turkish Caualarie also cut in peeces, that not any one man of them escaped, the fight being perceiued by the Sentinels of the towne. The day following this ouerthrow, the Basha for the foresaid reasons, the more  to amaze and terrifie our people, caused 100. of these Aiduchs heads to bee most vily deformed, and to be set about the walles, with inscriptions that signified, those were the succours which came to them, and that they should not hope of any other, for that they would vse the like to al those who would attempt to come. Presently vpon this sauage deuice, certaine of the towne came forth, and beholding this horrible spectacle, and seeing that their present affayres were in desperate tearmes, had an apprehension of feare to fall into the like miserable end, as these poore Aiduchs were. The night following two Spanyards came foorth, one whereof had his wife and children at The treason of two Spanyards. Constantinople, where he was maried, after that he was taken at Castelnouo  and had denied his faith: and the other was a Moresque borne in Granado. These halfepeny fellowes hauing but faint hearts (by reason of the feare which doth ordinarily raigne in such base persons) louing rather to preserue their liues with a shamefull and miserable seruitude, then to lose it vnder an honest libertie, with a glorious death (as it is the guise of valiant and

magnanimious mindes, to finish their daies with the losse of their dearest blood) they went to the Basha, and acquainted him with the whole estate of  Themesuar, assuring him there were few men within it, and that their courages were cooled; and although they fought valiantly, yet were they greatly astonished, and that the towne was in diuers places so open, that it was impossible they could longer maintaine it, if they continued the siege and their assaults, but that they must of force yeeld. This aduertisement gaue some courage and hope to the Basha to winne this place, although he had commaundement from the Grand Seigniour to withdraw his Campe from thence to Belgrade, seeing it was so long in taking, and that he had lost so many men before it: whereupon it was said, that Solyman was somewhat incensed  against Mahomet: which if those within had had but some inckling thereof, and had been able to maintaine it sixe daies longer at the most, they had neuer tasted of this aduerse fortune, which within few daies after happened to them with so great effusion of blood, and the Basha had retired with his armie, as it was afterward certainly knowne. But Losonze seeing that Mahomet obstinately perseuered to molest him day and night, conferred with all the souldiours to yeeld; considering how they were all greatly wearied and timerous, by reason of the last assault which they receiued since the departure of the two Spanyards (who were fled from thence): during which, towards the Castle side they saw themselues in very great danger, the Turks  being entered in, who had possest and made themselues masters of that place, if certaine Spanyards and Germanes had not presently been sent to succour that breach, who vpon their arriuall forst them to retire, and pursued them euen to the entrie of their Trenches, making a great slaughter amongst them. Which being vnderstood by all the nations there, euery man fauoured Losonzes opinion to yeeld, his life, armes, and baggage saued, except the Spanyards, who said; that according to their iudgement, they ought not to seeke for any accord, but to be well aduised how they might escape in the night by the marishes adioynant to the Castle, which if they could passe, they should presently finde woods which would procure them safe passage  vnto Lippa, and that there was not any who could hinder or annoy them from going foorth, and from arriuing at that place: and this should bee so much the more easily performed, because that towards that side there was not any person lodged, by reason of the great marishes which were in that place, which was a thing they might easily compasse, and which was farre better for them, then to repose any trust in the Turkes faithlesse promises, euery one knowing by too many presidents, that very seldome or neuer they obserue or keepe them, which assuredly they will now much lesse performe, for that they will remember that our people halted in their promises to Oliman when he departed out of Lippa, this act being not any thing  concealed from the Basha, nor yet slipped from his memorie, whereof they thought good to aduertise them, whereby they should be the lesse deceiued and ouerthrowne. Losonze answered them, that they should not any thing doubt, but that they should giue him leaue to proceede therein; and that he would so order the matter, that his composition should bee so cleere and

euident, that euery one should securely depart with his honour: which was  liked of many, saying, that 27. whole daies they had couragiously fought, and were continually annoyed by the Artillerie, and receiued so many assaults, and slaine so many Turkes, that they might well with their great honour and commendation yeeld. Vpon this resolution, Losonze made signe againe vnto the Turks that he would parley with them, and tolde them that Losonze capitulateth. he was content to yeeld the towne, and that he would send a souldiour and an Hungarian to treate with them of an agreement. Mahomet was very glad to heare of this, for that he greatly distrusted his owne power, and was alreadie resolued not any more to thrust his men to the imminent daunger of slaughter, but rather to trusse vp his baggage and depart: and by them he returned  answer to Losonze, that he would sincerely from point to point obserue whatsoeuer he would demaund of him, and he sent them back againe apparelled in certaine long silke robes after the Turkish manner, which was by these souldiours taken for a good signe, with which they were sent backe, so deceiuing themselues, as it is incident vnto men to abuse and flatter themselues in their proper and particular affayres, oftentimes thinking that in their businesses all things should wishedly succeede: yea, and so much doe they blind themselues, that they cannot discerne the euill which often doth befall them, for want of due consideration. These souldiours being returned into the towne, they openly recited the large promises and fayre offers  that the Basha had made them. Losonze too lightly giuing credence therevnto, writ in a paper all the conditions which he esteemed to bee either necessarie or meete for him to demaund; which were these.
1 That it should be permitted him to carrie away all the Artillerie which was within Themesuar, and safely to conduct it, without any impeachment, The Articles of agreement. to the place he thought good.
2 That all the souldiours should goe forth with their armes, and Ensignes displayed, with all their baggage, and that the Basha should giue them safe conduct to some secure place.
3 That the towne should be held in some regard, and that there should  not any of the inhabitants bee molested: and to conclude, as well in comming forth, as in going on their iourney, there should not any bee annoyed or indangered by his armie.
All these articles were very willingly accepted of by the Basha, and accorded by oth to bee sincerely performed, and returned them to them againe signed and sealed, without contradicting any of the demaunds of Losonze, esteeming (as he that was determined to obserue neither faith nor promise) these couenants of small validitie, and to promise and deceiue of one consequence. Now these negotiations being dispatched, and agreements concluded, the 24. of Iuly, being the vigill of S. Iames, two daies after, about eight Losonze leaueth Themesuar to the Turkes.  of the clocke in the morning, they began to set forward their baggage and Artillerie, and Losonze followed after with all the Caualarie, among which marched the remnant of the Infantrie which was left, marching all in battaile with their armes and Ensignes displayed. In their comming forth, they perceiued two great squadrons of horse and foot, amounting to some 50000.

keeping and stopping the way where they should passe, which was a little hill on both sides. The Spaniards who marched last, perceuing so many men  in their way, and conceiuing hardly thereof, presaged what was like presently to befall them: whereupon they sent to tell Losonze that they would not forsake the towne, except the Basha would cause those squadrons to retyre out of their way: whereof the Basha being aduertised, answered them, that vpon paine of his head they might securely come forth, without receiuing any preiudice, and that he sent these troupes into that place to no other end, but onely that his souldiours seeing them goe forth of the towne, they might by them take example vpon the like and future occasion, to carrie themselues valiantly, considering that so few men had so wonderfull well  defended themselues against such an infinite multitude; and seeing they all professed armes, and were men that liued by war, it was necessarie they should be instructed therein, according as occasion serued. Vnder the protection of this assurance they all came forth, and began to march through the midst of these squadrons, being distant from the towne some 300. paces, which they had no sooner performed, but the treacherous signall was giuen with an harquebuze shot, as Mahomet had appoynted. At the report whereof one Losonze and all his people ouerthrowne. part of these squadrons presently enuironed the Artillerie and those who marched before, and the other part enuironed the rest, and so compassing thus our people in the midst of them, they began to execute their barbarous  tyrannie in massacring them, and specially those who offered to defend themselues, and who loued rather a famous libertie, honorably to dye fighting, then to remaine slaues during their liues, vnder so wicked a nation. Of this number were the most part Spanyards, and some Hungars, and Germanes, and those who would not defend themselues were presently forced away and lead prisoners, and among others Losonze was taken and conducted to the Basha. In this massacre there happened an accident which I will Losonze taken.A strange accident. recite, although it seemeth fabulous, and worthier to be registred in the bookes of Romancers, then in a true historie, being so incredible that a sole man could make passage and escape through so many thousands of men:  and yet neuerthelesse it was a true thing.
As the Turkes attempted to hewe our men in peeces, and to perfourme that, they began their accustomed high clamors. Captaine Alphonse Perez de Saianedra a strong and able man, being mounted vpon a good horse, tooke presently his sword in his hand, and at the first bruite and clamour of the enemies he thrust in among them, and with maine force he made himselfe place and way through the midst of the throng: and as some were busied in the slaughter of the other, he saued himselfe without touch of wound, running towards Lippa, being well armed and mounted vpon a horse, which ran exceedingly swift. The Turkes seeing that one man alone had thus stoutely made himselfe passage and was saued, passing in despight  through so many horses, being incensed with shame and anger, there pursued him more then 500. and although their horses were no lesse swifter to run, than his, yet neuer could they once come neere him. But in an ill houre as this Captaine was in his speedie course (almost out of danger) hauing little


(...)

Castalde hauing speedie newes of this losse, presently departed with great  iournies, to be more neere, and to prouide that the rest might be better defended and kept. He perceiued by the way that all the Hungarian Knights and nobilitie, who then followed him, were very pensiue and dismayed, insomuch that leauing all at randome, to the pleasure of Fortune, they seemed carelesse of any thing: whereupon turning himselfe towards them, he modestly reproued them with such milde speeches as he thought good, and gaue them some heart and hope that this losse should shortly be recouered by Ferdinands power (which daily was expected) and by their own force and vertue, exhorting them to defend the rest: hee so effectually perswaded them, that he expelled from them all feare and dispaire, and caused to increase  in them courage and boldnes, and to thinke more vpon the reuenging of Losonzes death, and the death of his Captaines and souldiours, then euer they had done. But Fortune (which is not alwaies permanent, but at her pleasure cutteth off the dessignes of men in the most flourishing time of their Aprill, and doth raise and abate humane actons as seemeth good to her) would that Aldene should not perseuer long in this his braue resolution, in which vntill then he was resolute in the defence of Lippa, against any strong and puissant armie whatsoeuer, the same being vnto Ferdinand of as great importance as the losse of an armie or kingdome, as we shall hereafter further speake of.
During the time that Mahomet besieged Themesuar, and that he was vpon The carlesnes of Aldene.  the point to capitulate with Losonze, Aldene perhaps thinking that this towne would neuer be taken, was nothing prouident to vse that diligence which was requisite for the due of his charge, neither yet did he imploy any spies to aduertise him: and now foure of fiue dayes were alreadie past, Spies necessarie. that he knew nothing of the enemies proceedings, neither had he any other newes then by the Rhatians or others, who by chaunce brought him a certaine Turke prisoner, who imparted to him as much as he desired: and when a Captaine of the Vssarons, named Demetre Vzarenky, exhorted him to vse greater diligence, and tolde him that he would accomodate him with such persons that should faithfully serue him in such affayres: he made sleight regard  thereof, neither did he endeauour himselfe to retaine them with giftes or rewards, nor yet so much as with any good words, so that the affayres of Lippa daily proceeded from euill to worse. In the end newes being come that Themesuar was reduced vnder the Turkes commaund, and of all other occurrances which passed there; Aldene thought that Mahomets campe The cowardlines of Aldene. would presently visite him, and thinking that the Castle was not so strong, as gladly he would haue had it, to resist his victorious enemie, and seeing the occasion conformable to his conceite; and perswading himselfe that the little hope which he had to defend himselfe (both by reason of the weakenes of the towne, and also of the Castle) would be a sufficient excuse to discharge  him of so vile and infamous a thing as this which he pretended to doe, he resolued in himselfe to leaue it. And to the end the Turkes should not ayde themselues by the Castle, he determined to fire it with all the Artillerie and munition, without acquainting any therewith, but onely at the

instant when he would execute his enterprise, (as he did) although he saw  not the Bashaes campe approaching, and notwithstanding that some tolde him that Mahomet should stay, that since Themesuar was so tedious to him, (although it was a place of no great strength) he would not now march towards Lippa, assuring himselfe that he should doe no good there, knowing the exceeding diligence and care which had been vsed to fortifie it, and the resolute souldiours of all nations which was within it, and the quantitie of Artillerie and munition that Castalde had caused it to bee furnished withall, and the great care which he had for the defence thereof: for all which reasons duly considered, he was in despayre that he should neuer be able to take it. This report neuerthelesse could not any thing diuert Aldene from his  wicked resolution, although he well perceiued that Iohn Turky and Bartholmew Coruatte made not any semblance to bouge from that place where they were, which was an Abbey of Monks, situated three miles from the enemie, where (during the siege of Themesuar) they daily with 1000. horse annoyed and endamaged the enemie as much as was possible for them. Which to him who had no eyes, it must needes serue for a sufficient argument to make him discerne, that the Basha was not determined to come against him: for that also some of our people, who were lodged foure or sixe miles off, neuer once offered to remoue or retire, hourely expecting what the Basha determined to doe. Notwithstanding all that, Aldene still perseuered in his infamous and shamefull fantasie. And as puissance and rule cannot long continue where  feare and cowardise preuaileth, sixe houres before hee meant to depart, he declared his conceit to certaine old Spanyards, who greatly blamed this aduice, telling him that in no case he should not remoue or disioyne himselfe from thence, before they saw whether the Basha would come or no, and that he should duly consider in what esteeme he should bee, if hee forsooke this place (at the least before he saw the enemie) which was recommended to him, in regard of speciall trust reposed in his worthines; and that if in this he would not haue respect to his owne reputation and honour, yet at the least he should haue regard to the credit of his nation; and that sith neuer any  Spanyard, vntill now, had committed so cowardly an act, that he would not be the first, into whose hart should fall an infamie so shamefull and villanous, which assuredly would equally redound vpon all, and specially in such a place, where honour should more preuaile, then any fearefull desire which was in him, in respect from being noted of pusillanimitie and cowardise among these barbarous nations, with a perpetuall and infamous blot. But these admonitions were not sufficient to withdraw him from his base determination: but continuing therein, other souldiours had notice thereof; and among others, Captaine Paul of Zaraz, a Germane Colonell, who went to see Aldene, desiring leaue that he might enter into the Castle with his souldiours, and other Spanyards, who were more desirous of glorie then  of life, and that he might cause all necessaries to bee put therein before the bridges, which were made for the bringing in of prouision needfull for the Rampiers, should bee broken. Aldene answered him, that he should enter therein when time should require. The souldiours seeing this disorder, began

to murmur, and say, that before they entered they would know what  quantitie of victuals there was within. The next day in the morning, they intreated him to goe vnto the souldiours (and as their Chiefe) to appease them, and to take an oth of euery one of them to liue and die in the seruice of God and Ferdinand, as by dutie they were all bound thereunto; and neuer to depart from Lippa, before the Turkes were gone from thence. Which being done, and the oth taken, certaine souldiours entered into the Castle to suruey the munition and victuall, whereof was found good store: by reason of which they were incouraged, and they againe redoubled the said oth, and after that, euery man retired to his lodging, where they were not long, but that they vnderstood the commaund that Aldene (the Camp-master) caused to be published: which was, that euery one should be readie with his armes,  and prepare himselfe to march. Whereupon all the nations who were in the towne began to set forward, not without some little mutinie, and Captaine Paul of Zaraz went againe to Aldene, to disswade him from the performance of such a dishonourable fact, telling him, that neither he, nor none of his did euer thinke to commit such a mischieuous treason against Ferdinand, and that if he would needs goe, he might, but as for himselfe he would with his people defend the Castle against Mahomet, or else he would there end his daies. All the Hungars assured him also that they would doe the like. To whom he answered, that they vnderstood him not, and that he well knew what he meant to do, and that the King should receiue more seruice by that  which he had determined to do, then by all yt which they had propounded. Vpon this the Spanish souldiours began to bee of diuers factions and opinions among themselues, the greatest part esteeming it a foule fault to dislodge themselues from thence, as Aldene had commaunded; and the fewer sort were of opinion to doe that which he determined, perswading the other to take part and goe with them, and not remaine to cast away themselues: which the Germanes and Hungars by no meanes thought conuenient, and gaue notice thereof to Aldene, who said to them, that he knew not what to doe therein, but hee would thinke thereon, and prouide for it. Now, there  was about Lippa some 10000. Hungarish and Rhatian waggons, within which they carried their wiues, children, and their best moueables, these being fled after this manner from their townes and houses, then when the Basha passed Tibiscus, and were come thither to saue themselues in Transiluania, and by the fauour of this strong place, beneath which they were lodged in a champion vnder their Tents and Pauillions in manner of an armie, expecting the issue of Themesuar. The principall of them vnderstanding that Aldene would forsake this towne, and remoue with his people from thence, went presently to him, to desire him not to depart, and importuned him, that if hee were resolued to forsake the Castle, yet that hee would not  race it, but rather deliuer it into their custodie, and that they would with their best endeuour defend it, or else resolutely to die within it. But all these intreaties, admonitions, and protestations had not any force to remoue him from his dishonest thought, but commaunded that all should bee in a readines to march at the first sound. The Germanes and Hungars perceiuing

the wicked and base intent of Aldene continued, said to him, that although  there were many inclined to obey him, yet they would not for all that cease from giuing him to vnderstand, that they determined to remaine and defend it, that so they might shunne and auoyde the shame, which without all doubt they should condignely receiue in dislodging so vily: whereupon Paul of Zaraz reenforcing the guards, tooke charge of the towne, through which walking in the night season, he saw many souldiours (who by Aldenes oppointment were with their horses sadled) readie to troupe on with their armes and baggage, to whom giuing incouragement, and perswading them not to bouge, hee went from thence to Aldenes lodging, whom hee found vpon his bed, and conferring with him, he desired to know why he  had commaunded that the Spanyards should be in such readines. For that, (said he) he had receiued newes that the enemies were alreadie approached within two miles of Lippa, with fifteene peeces of Artillerie, and that vpon this occasion he was resolued, that he would not at any hand attend them, because the place was not strong enough, he hauing before hand concluded presently to depart. To which, Paul replied, that he would stay, but vntill he had sent to know the certaintie thereof. And he did so much, that three houres before day hee presently dispatched two horsemen towards Themesuar, to discouer whether the Vauntgard of Mahomet approached or not. These souldiours posting with good speede, arriued at the place where were lodged Iohn Turky and Bartholmew Coruatte, and seeing them to  be at quiet, and not fearing any trouble of the enemies, they returned backe againe with great speede, to declare vnto Aldene that there was not any bruite or newes that the Bashaes Campe was risen from about Themesuar.
During the time that these two horsemen made this discouerie, Aldene caused all the Canoniers to come to him, commaunding them to charge the Cannons euen to the mouth, with intent to breake them, and that they should put the rest of the powder into the vautes and sellers of the towers and Bulwarkes, to blow them vp when neede should require: and being afterwards  to expect the returne of these two souldiours, who should bring certaine newes of all, a Sentinell (which was in the top of one of the towers at Sunne rising) discouered two horsemen who came spurring on amaine. These were the two souldiours, which we haue before spoken of, who rode in great post, thinking that if they deferred any time, Aldene would set fire on the Castle before they returned againe: and on the contrarie, the certaine newes which they should bring, would expell this wicked determination out of his cowardly mind, and this was the cause of their speed. Another Sentinell at the same instant, being not farre from the other, discouered a farre off a great dust in the ayre, which was raised by a number of Cowes,  which ranne wildly together in the fields without any keeper, and these two souldiours were neere the towne, crying with a loude voyce (although they could not perfectly be vnderstood) and said, that they should make stay, and not fire the munition nor Castle. The other souldiours crying (by the aduertisement of the Sentinell) that this dust was raised by some great battalion Base mindes suspitious of feare.

of the enemies, and that these two souldiours came posting before to giue notice thereof: they went presently to aduertise Aldene, who was the  Lippa forsaken and burned by Aldene. first that mounted vpon a good horse, and sent to Captaine Paul of Zaraz, that he should open the towne-gate, and let the waggons forth that were full of his moueables, and of certaine Marchants. It being opened, the Spaniards began softly to march, euery man ranging himselfe vnder his Colours, and presently vpon it he commaunded the Canoniers to giue fire to the Castle, and to all the Artillerie: wherein they vsed such haste, that giuing fire to the vaults of the towers, two among them (blinded with feare and smoke) remained vnder it burnt and consumed. By the violence of this fire, two great towers (which were at the enterance of the Castle) were blowne vp into the  ayre, and there were fiue or sixe peeces of Artillerie which were discharged against the walles, being laden euen to the mouth, and the Castle began to burne on all parts, and in like sort the towne, which caused a mournfull pitie among all those nations, who not without iust cause co^plained for such a losse, worthily blaming so vile an act, inueighing with great bitternes against the Spanyards and Germanes, deeply cursing Castalde that had placed them there, not knowing now where to dispose or turne themselues, or what might betide them by this lamentable inconuenience, they being with great cries and laments dis-vnited and seuered from thence, and with the greatest confusion and discontent that could be, they began to lode their waggons  with their wiues and children, and of those commodities which they had then with them, and to proceede on their iourney whither Fortune would guide them; and endeuouring to saue themselues, some went to one place, and others to another, and Aldene leauing Lippa behinde him (which miserably burned like a second Troy) tooke his way with his souldiours towards Transiluania, marching with so great speede, that not any taried to expect his companion; euery one speedily labouring for his owne safetie, and amongst them he was esteemed to be most valiant and sure, who better then the other could nimbly vse his legges, and their iourney was no lesse disordered, then their departure was inconsideratiue, and in such sort it was performed,  that the peasants, who inhabited among the mountaines, for the dispight which they had of so foule and execrable a fault, tooke courage to assaile and kill many of them, and to rob many Marchants of Lippa: so that they were in a manner all lost and perished, some remaining dead, others wounded and sore hurt: and this happened to them in reuenge of the ruine and losse of Lippa.
Bortholmew Gornatte (who as we haue said) was foure miles from Lippa, seeing the great fire which (as he thought) proceeded from this towne, was greatly astonished at the sight thereof, not being able to imagine what it could be, rather suspecting some other casualtie, then that which happened to be true: and presently mounting on horsebacke, spurred on to the place  from whence this flame came; and arriuing neere to Lippa, hee could not conceiue what the occasion should be of the burning thereof; and not able to thinke who should be he that had caused so great a losse, nor by what peruerse accident it should happen, he vehemently mistrusted some treason,

by meanes whereof he thought Aldene with all his souldiours might haue been  consumed in that fire. And demaunding of some that went wandring about the towne, who had comitted so vile an acte, they presently made relation to him of the whole matter as it was done, which he vnderstanding, and not minding (as a wise and prouident Captaine) to neglect any thing which should concerne the seruice of his Prince, and the noblenes of his owne minde, without being constrained by any commaund, but moued onely by a true compassion for such an vnspeakeable calamitie and suddaine ruine, began in the best sort hee could to giue order to cause to be retyred that Artillerie which remained whole from the violence of the fire, seeing he could not remedie any other thing, for that all was fallen to a marueilous  ruine. He remained within Lippa three dayes, and vntill he had seene all the Artillerie (which was dispersed in the towne that remained whole, to the number of fifteene peeces) conducted in safetie, of which there were some sound, and many broken and crakt, and with those and all his people he retyred to Iula, first causing fire to be set in euery place of the towne that remained vnburnt, to the end that the enemy might not in any sort reliue himselfe tierewith. Which being done, he presently gaue aduertisement thereof to Castalde, who alreadie vnderstood of this miserable ruine, which was exceeding displeasant to the armie, and to all Transiluania, and specially to the Spanyards, whose reputation it touched more then any other, considering  that he was a Spanyard which committed so infamous and dishonourable a thing; in regard whereof, they were alwaies held in contempt, and derided by all the nations of that Prouince, they being not able to alleadge any colourable reason for their excuse, which procured great discontent and irksomenes to Castalde, for that he reposed all his hope vpon this Fortresse; thinking, that in well defending it, all the Bashaes force would not haue been sufficient to haue wonne thereof one thumbes bredth of ground. And although he esteemed the kingdome, together with his armie and reputation to bee in a manner lost, yet was he not troubled, nor made any semblance of feare in his heart of so great a losse: and although the cowardise of another had thus euerted his deseignes, and that sudden and rash attempts commonly  bring more trouble and amaze, then those which are foreseene by an aduised consideration; yet neuerthelesse hee did not omit to aduertise Ferdinand of all these accidents, and present daunger wherein he was, for that the Port of the countrie being by the carelesnes of another opened to the enemie, to enter into that countrie, he being not able to withstand him, without another armie answerable to that of Mahomets, or at the least halfe as strong. In like sort he gaue aduertisement to Roderic Vigliandrando, and to Andrew Lopez, that they should march no further, because (as is aboue said) they were sent, who by some meanes or other they might enter into Themesuar;  and he commaunded Captaine Lopez to enter with his companie into the Castle of Deua, which next vnto Lippa was the strongest Fortresse in that quarter, and of the most importance for the enterance into the kingdome; Deua. commaunding in like manner Aldene, that he should remaine in that towne with the companies which he brought from Lippa, and that vntill he

knew further of his pleasure. The towne of Deua is very fayre and rich,  and situated in a place which participateth of a plaine and hill, hauing a Castle of good defence, neere vnto which, a few yeeres past, was found (by such meanes as we shall speake of) great store of treasure by the peasants of the countrie, vnder an old ancient Castle or Palace all ruinated and decaied. The raine continuing a long time, and the water running in great abundance with a forcible currant, by violence thereof there was discouered an infinit companie of golden Meddals, vpon one side of which was coyned the image of Lysimachus, and on the other side a victorie, euery one weighing Money of Lysimachus. two or three crownes. The storme and rage of the water being past, and the Sunne shining vpon these, they made a marueilous glistering: which being  perceiued by certaine peasants of the countrie, and they running to see what it might bee, they remained rauished with ioy, considering so great a quantitie of the golden Meddals, and offering to take them vp, they also Treasure found. found a golden Serpent, which afterward Castalde sent to Ferdinand, hauing had it at the death of Frier George, with a part of these ancient Meddals: this being an ancient custome amongst those who buried their treasure, to place Serpents there, in token of a faithfull keeper. And after that these peasants A custome of the Ancients. had taken no man knew what, others tooke from thence more then twentie thousand Duckets, and the report was, that they might haue taken more then 100000. for that this place had sometimes been Lysimachus aboade: whereof Ferdinand had (as wee haue said) 1000. and Castalde about  300. which coyne remained in this place from Lysimachus his time. Among other notable antiquities that was found, there were two Meddals of gold, the one was of Ninus, and the other of Queene Semiramis: which two were Meddals of Ninus and Semiramis. sent to the Emperour Charles the 5. And there was not any man in all that Prouince, of what authoritie or reputation soeuer, which had not some of these Meddals: so infinit was found this summe to be.
Now, Castalde hauing taken order for the most important affayres of the kingdome, he went from thence with the Vayuode of Transiluania to Seghesuar, from whence afterwards he went to Sassebessa. And being there arriued, he lodged in the best manner he could within the towne, it being seated  in the midst of the countrie, where he hastened the fortifications of those townes which were alreadie begun to be fortified, and into which places he determined to place garrisons, to defend them against the Basha, knowing he had not the force to incounter him in the field, and writ againe to all the townes that they should send him more souldiours, certifying them of the bad fortune which was lately happened to the low countries: and although they ceased not to send vnto him, yet could they neuer leauie but 16000. men.
In this time arriued 1500. men of armes, which Ferdinand had promised to Castalde, 1000. whereof were vnder the conduct of Fabian Schinach, and  the other 500. remained with the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin, who brought with him 3000. Germanes, and as many Italians, with certaine troupes of Hungarish horsemen, and some Artillerie, to succour Castalde, and marched with great iourneys, hauing alreadie passed Papau, which is a Fortresse vpon Papau.

the confines of Hungarie, neere to Vesprimia, and he marched very speedily.  There is found vpon the way (which is neerest out of Hungarie into Transiluania) a Castle named Drigal, situated iust in the way, which then Drigal. was kept by the Turkes, so that they could not conueniently passe that way, which was farre better, and the surest to conduct an armie into the countrie. Whereupon to finde some meanes to winne this Fort, Ferdinand commanded the Marquesse Sforce, that arriuing neere vnto the said Castle, he should with all his power make some stay there, and endeuour himselfe by all meanes possible to get it. Which Castalde vnderstanding, and knowing by many reports the strength of that place, by reason of the few men the Marquesse had with him, he writ presently vnto him, that he should not at that  time stay about that enterprise, vntill they were vnited together, because that they two ioyning in one, happely they might attempt some fortunate successe: which on the contrarie they could not possibly obtaine, if they were separated: for that one was not sufficient to make that conquest, but their vnion was likely to bee the cause of some good euent, and the time should not be lost in vaine (as it might happen) if he himselfe would onely bee opinionated to stay there, with daunger to lose it. Besides, aduertising him, that if in case he would persist in this enterprise, and that he saw the Basha of Buda attempted to succour that Castle, yet by no meanes he should fight, for feare of losing the battaile: but that he should endeuour himselfe to retire the best he could, it being now no time to hazard his men, seeing he very  well knew the great and present necessitie which himselfe had thereof. He also writ to Ferdinand concerning the same, desiring him that hee would cause Palauicin to depart from Drigal, and that hee would commaund him presently to march and ioyne with him, it being more necessarie then the taking of this Castle. This reason although in it selfe it was sound and true, yet was it not so apprehended by Ferdinand, nor receiued by such due obedience of the Marquesse: so that, for not inclining to this counsell, he fell into such calamitie, as we shall hereafter speake of.
Mahomet (who had not the heart to goe to besiege Lippa) knowing it  was very strong, and that the garrison was of Spanyards, Germanes, and Hungars, all chosen and approued souldiours, hauing at this instant had newes, that the master of the Campe (Aldene) had forsaken it, and set fire on the Castle; and not beleeuing that a Spanyard would commit such an indignitie, and so vnfit for him, sent (the same day that Bartholmew Coruatte had drawne out the Artillerie) to know the certaintie. The Turkes who went thither, approached so neere vnto it, that they perceiued that the towne and The Turkes seazed on Lippa. Castle had not receiued very great damage, and they began as well as they could to quench the fire, and presently aduertised the Basha that this fire had procured no great detriment to that which was newly fortified, and that although  the Castle was broken and rift in many places, the Bulwarkes and Curtaines neuerthelesse were sound and whole, and very defencible: onely that there was two old towers fallen downe, but not any thing of that ruinated which was fortified within, and that the Castle it selfe might easily be reduced into his former strength, and made sufficient to defend it selfe. The

Basha vpon this aduertisement was so well content, as if he had conquered the moitie of Transiluania, and presently dispatched Cassombassa with 5000.  horse to goe and enter into Lippa and defend it. Presently vpon this Captaines arriuall there, he commaunded certaine Turkes to goe and view Solimos, thinking for certaine that he should spend more time in taking of it, Solimos left to the Turks. then he did, and that it might proue so ill an neighbour to him, that he shuld scarcely hold Lippa in peace, because that although that Castle was very little, yet it was inexpugnable: for that it could neither bee battered by the Cannon, nor yet assaulted: and there was within the said Castle a Corporall of Aldenes squadron with 25. Spaniards, and about some 100. Hungars, which number was sufficient to defend it against all the world, they hauing victuals  for two yeeres, and of Artillerie and munition as much as should suffice them. But feare had alreadie possest euery mans heart, insomuch that newes being come that Cassombassa was within Lippa, the Corporall fearing the enemie would come directly to the Castle, did resolue to leaue it to the hazard of fortune, thinking that the former fault of others would excuse him from the reproach of any dishonourable act: vpon which resolution, he perswaded all the souldiours who were within to depart, who alreadie were so discouraged for the passed accidents, and for the faint-heart which they perceiued in him who commaunded them, that they were presently induced (without any vrgent perswasions) to credit his sayings: and began to goe  forth at the instant, when Cassombassa had sent 200. horse to summon them to yeeld: who being arriued before the Castle, and finding it open (although The cowardlines of the Spanish souldiours. they suspected some deceit) yet they boldly entered in, and without any resistance made themselues masters thereof: and considering that the garrison could not be farre off, vnderstanding that the night before they were within, presently they set themselues forward to follow them: and they had not gone farre, but that they ouertooke, and so intrapped them with such an assault, as wolues commonly giue to amazed sheepe being in flight, and put them all to the sword, except the Corporall, whom they led prisoner to Cassombassa: and thus was the desert of their shamefull cowardise duly rewarded,  yea euen at the time when seeking their owne safetie, they then found death: which then had not ended their daies, if they had remained within the Castle, and valiantly employed themselues for the defence therof, which men expect for at the hands of resolute souldiours: for thus in keeping Solimos, they might thereby with good securitie haue defended Lippa.
Castalde at that time alwaies remained about Sassebessa, with that small force which wee haue spoken of, daily expecting the arriuall of the Marquesse Sforce, and assuredly beleeuing that the Basha would not omit to attempt the enterance into the kingdome (and that so much the more boldly, because he saw himself Lord, without any impeachment of the place, which  he esteemed of most importance) he was attentiue to see what he would determine of, because that vntill then he could neuer vnderstand the drift of his intention, but onely then when he was at Themesuar, he heard that hee durst not enter into Transiluania, because it was reported that Castalde was therein with a good number of men, and that daily he expected more, and

that if he should then enter there, he could not so easily retire himselfe as he  would. This opinion of the Basha was grounded vpon certaine policies and stratagems, which Castalde, Andrew Battor, and Thomas Nadasily had vntill that time vsed, deceiuing thereby his Spies, causing his people daily to bee newly mustered, and stretching their squadrons at length, to the end that they might seeme double as great as they were, adding thereto very great The policie of warre. Salues of the Artillerie and Harquebuziers, hauing caused their Campe to be largely lodged, to the end that it should seeme greater then it was; further reporting that daily they expected ayde, and that Duke Mauris would shortly arriue with 20000. men, and Ferdinand in person with a great armie. By such and other like inuentions, Castalde greatly helped himselfe in the necessitie  wherein he then was, supplying therein by his owne industrie, that which he knew was wanting, by reason of the smalnes of his armie; and not being able therewith to resist the power of the Basha, he endeuoured to oppose himselfe against him, and to delude them by the subtelie of his fained shewes; which Mahomet supposing to be true, was in doubt what to doe. But at the last Castalde hauing vnderstood, that one day he would vpon a sudden enter into Transiluania, and send the Belerbey of Greece before with 25000. horse, to giue remedie to that, leauing the Vayuode Battor, with all his souldious of the kingdome in the same place, to the end he should maintaine the reputation of a Campe; and to the end also that that might alwaies appeare to bee true which the Spies reported to Mahomet, who vntill  then (in regard of the report, as we haue declared before) had put him into some feare and doubt, he departed with his Infantrie and men of armes, with this resolute determination, to meete the Belerbey, and to fight with him: and although it seemed an expresse rashnes, yet leauing the issue thereof in the hand of God, he was not any whit amazed or discouraged, but determined resolutely, either to ouerthrow the Belerbey, (and by that meanes to giue iust occasion to Mahomet; not to attempt any more the enterance into the kingdome) or else gloriously there to end his happie daies. For that if it happened that vnfortunately he should lose this battaile, yet for all that he would not censure himself to be vtterly subuerted, but as fierce as at the first,  because hee should leaue behinde him another armie, answerable vnto that which he met the Turkes withall.
As these things were thus a brewing, he went to take view of a lodging between Deua and Sassebessa, which he found very conuenient for his purpose, and commodious to fortifie with great aduantage for the safetie of his Infantrie, which he might well accommodate and lodge vpon certaine little pleasant hils, which would be as a Caualliar against the Belerbeys horse, and afterwards appointed a garrison at Deua, wherein he placed Counte Helfestin, and two Spanish companies, with Vayuode Battors Caualarie, to the  end that as occasion serued, they should make in vpon the Rereward and flanks, he being with his men of armes so well accommodated, that he might well offend and annoy the enemie, without any detriment to himselfe. But all these inuentions and troublesome conceits, which daily hammered in Castaldes braine, proceeding rather by necessitie then of free will, tooke no

effect, for that the Basha altering his determination, resolued of some other course, and went towards Hungarie, he being aduised, that if he tooke the  strong places thereof, Transiluania would then bee wonne with lesse paine and daunger, and without hazarding his armie, as then hee should hazard them, if he entered into that Prouince. And truly it was a work of God, that the Basha remained so blinded, and that he could not discerne so easie a way to conquer that countrie, because that Castalde not being of sufficient force to maintaine the field, it was necessary for him to retire his forces into strong holds, considering that all the gathering together of the powers which they could make out of all the countries of the kingdome, was not such as they might affront this barbarous tyrant: and yet though it had been sufficient  to incounter him withall, yet for all that they knew not how, neither at the enterance, nor at the retraict of the enemies Campe, to auoyde in that countrie very great desolation and ruine, which as well by reason of the one as of the other should haue happened, and specially if such an armie had made long aboade therein, it being composed of more then 90000. men, besides aduenturers, and other straglers, who to rob and steale doe vsually follow a Campe.
Whilest that Mahomet was determined to enter into Hungarie, and that Drigal besieged by the Palauicin. the Castle of Drigal was now besieged, and sorely battered by the Marquesse Sforce, and Erasmus Teifel, contratie to the liking of Castalde (as is aforesaid)  and being not yet taken, Achineth (Basha of Buda) vnderstanding of this violent battering, and that this siege was maintained against the aduice and liking of Castalde, he determined to relieue the assieged, and commaunding that all the Caualarie (which were vpon the frontiers) should make their Rendevous in a place by him appointed, who in the end were 15000. horse, with whom he marched towards our people, and at the dawning of the day he arriued neere to the Marquesse his Campe, sending before 500. horse to giue the alarme, and he with the rest of his troupe passed towards another side of the Castle, not being perceiued of any, to giue in vpon the Rereward of our men, if they would offer to come out of their Trenches to fight with  those who should giue the alarme. At the sight of these 500. horse, our men began to make some sallies and charges vpon them, and by little and little the alarme waxed so warme, that the greatest part of our people, either by necessitie or desire to fight, went out of their Trenches, and ranging themselues in battaile, they so fiercely charged the Turkes, that they slew most of them, and put the rest to a speedie flight, ouerthrowing many in the pursuite. And as it often happeneth, our souldiours thinking by the defeate of these few men they had the victorie assured in their owne hands, not foreseeing what might happen, they began to disband themselues and pursue the Turks, one getting a horse, another spoyling the dead; when to this medley the Basha  The Palauicin defeated by Achmeth, the Basha of Buda. (after that he saw the occasion to be such as he desired) came with such great furie and rage, that our people could not really themselues, nor resist so violent a charge, as well for that they were in disorder, as also because they saw themselues out and farre from their Trenches, which might haue warranted them from this crueltie. The Germanes of Erasmus Teifel, who made the

battalion, and were about 3000. were so at an instant ouerthrowne, as if lions  had entered into a parke of sheepe. The Marquesse Sforce, who was armed before the battalion of the Italians, seeing that our Caualarie and men of armes were all fled, and that also all the Germanes were defeated, and that on that side all was lost and ouerthrowne; like a prouident Captaine would not indanger the rest of his men, but would haue conducted them into some secure place, and caused them to take a wood which was there by, hoping by that meanes to saue them, his enterprise was by the Basha ouerthrowne, who cut off his way, and forced him in spight of his teeth to fight. Who seeing he could not remedie it, he in the best manner he could ordered his people in battaile, and incouraging the Captaines, and the Captaines the souldiours,  as a valiant and resolute Leader he placed himselfe in the most daungerous place, and began the fight, which scarcely was begun, but his men (by reason of the multitude of the enemies horse) were so disordered, that by no meanes they could not any more reunite themselues to fight, but tooke so desperate a flight, as though their onely safetie had consisted therein, notwithstanding the menaces and intreaties of the Marquesse did no good, and many Captaines (forgetting all shame) leauing their companies fighting on foote vnder their Ensignes, mounted vpon the first horses which by chance they found before them, (as there were many in the field disfurnished of their masters) and therewith leauing their souldiours as a pray, they did in such sort flie, that there were some of them that neuer looked backe nor  stayed, before they arriued at Vienna. The Marquesse Sforce seeing himselfe thus alone and forsaken of his people, although he had as good meanes to saue himselfe as others had, yet hauing a generous and a noble minde, did rather chuse to dye there with honour and glorie, then in flying to saue himselfe with shame and infamie. Wherefore seeing hee could not escape this certaine daunger, he determined to sell his life to the Turkes as deare as he could, and valiantly fighting he would neuer yeeld, although in many places he was very sore wounded, killing and hurting many of those who enuironed him: and as he was in reaching at the necke of one, another hurt him in the right hand, so that he was forced to let his sword fall, and so consequently  his courage decreased, that he was forced rather to yeeld his bodie, then his minde. He being thus taken prisoner, hee was presently led to the The Palauicin taken. Basha, not without the great admiration of all those who had seene him fight so brauely, being much astonished at his valour and prowesse, which most resolutely they had seene him performe, not being vntill then euer knowne to bee Generall, but onely for a man of some good respect and authoritie, and for such an one he was held by the Basha. As soone as Erasmus was taken, and knowne to bee a man of no small qualitie, hee was presently sent to Constantinople, where at his arriuall he had his head cut off. There  dyed in this ouerthrow many persons of marke, and among others the Bishop of Vaccia, who was Comissarie generall, and many other Germane Captaines. The prisoners were Hyppolitus Palauicin, Captaine Albert de Castello, a Boulonian, Captaine Bambino de Carpi, Captaine Maria de Tiuoli, Captaine Vincent Antiuory, a Florentine: and of the rest which fled I will not

make any mention of, in regard they deserue not commendations. 
After this route, the Basha at pleasure relieued those of Drigal, and hauing effected this vnfortunate iourney, which happened the 8. day of August, anno 1552. he sent to Buda all the pray and spoyle which he had gotten, and returned Anno 1552. another way to ioyne with Mahomet, who had willed him to come, that he might discourse with him vpon that which he desired to doe against Hungarie, for that Achmeth had the more knowledge in the discouery and passages of that countrie. Castalde in the meane time hourely receiued news, touching some bad chance (because he was not beleeued) of the succours which he expected in this great necessitie wherein he was: and during certaine daies, he assuredly beleeued that the Marquesse Sforce was slaine in battaile, but afterwards  he knew that he was liuing, and vnder the Basha of Buda his command, The Palauicin ransomed for 15000. Duckets. fro^ who^ certaine moneths after he was ransomed for 15000. Duckets.
Now Achmeth being come to Mahomet, (who was determining to march into Hungarie, but yet with a colde resolution, considering with himselfe that this yeare he had performed sufficiently in conquering of Lippa and Themesuar) he exhorted and perswaded him earnestly to follow on his first determination, with a resolution of conquest, promising him within few dayes to render the Castle of Zaluoch and the towne of Agria to him, possessing him that the greatest part of the townes of that Prouince would assuredly yeelde to him, in respect of the feare which was bruited in them, by the taking of the foresaid townes, and by the ouerthrowe of Palauicin, and  that by this meanes he should get infinite renowne and glorie, and such as he could not hope for, and that to that purpose he should be now incited, for that he saw Ferdinand busied in the Germane affayres, and oppressed by many reuolutions and garboyles, and by the losse of men and horses, which he apparantly saw was happened to him, and which he could not presently renew, being in extreame necessitie and want of money: so that by these incommodities which he knew to be most true, he had now all the meanes that might bee to make himselfe Lord of many townes, without any impeachment or danger to him, and to leade away infinite prisoners, and get inestimable bootie. Mahomet greatly incouraged by such hopes, presently  tooke the way to Zaluoch with all his armie, marching with tedious iournies. This Castle is very strong, and about some three yeares past it was reared Zaluoch besieged by Mahomet. and built by Ferdinand from the ground, in respect of the commoditie of the place, which by cause of the naturall situation, and by the shoares and bankes of Tibiscus, seemed as though it had been erected by hand. Ferdinand the rather was incited hereunto, because he knew that Solyman ment to possesse himselfe of that place for the same purpose, and for the fertillitie and pleasure of the countrie. And thus he preuenting the determination of his enemie, first possessed himselfe on this seate, and esteeming it worthie of a  Fortresse, procured with great diligence to builde that Castle, which certainely was esteemed inuincible, and one of the fairest workes that was in that kingdome, hauing about it fiue great Caualliars very high, watered on the one side by Tibiscus, and on another side enuironed with another riuer named Zagiua, and in two other places there was a ditch very deepe which

was filled with water from those two riuers; and there was within it a large  place to range or embattaile fortie thousand men: to be short, this place was reputed one of the strongest Forts that was in all Hungarie, and such a one Ferdinand did esteeme it, and alwaies maintained therein a strong garrison of men, Artillerie, victuals, and all sorts of munition for ten yeares. To answer which with like correspondence, if it had then been as well furnished of resolute souldiours, as it was well munitioned of other things, it should not haue come to such an vnfortunate end as it receiued, by the cowardise of those who were in garrison there. Besides these aforesaid preparations, Ferdinand had caused there to be kept 50. long narrow boates, with which they might vpon those riuers fish and fight if occasion serued; and within he had caused  to be placed at that time for an ordinarie garrison 300. Germans besides their Captaine who was absent, 100. Bohemians, 200. Aiduchs, and 50. Spanyards, besides 200. Hungarish horse, who in all amounted to 850. men.
Castalde vnderstanding that Mahomet marched towards Hungarie, certainely perswaded himselfe (as afterward was seene) that if then he retyred from Themesuar, he should not haue the like occasion and commoditie to enter into Transiluaniaas he had: and although he was glad to see him out of this Prouince, yet was he greatly perplexed in his minde, fearing that he would march directly towards Agria, because that that was a towne of little strength, but yet of great importance: notwithstanding he had a special hope  of this, that Mahomet would first (before he came to Agria) make some stay before Zaluoch, for that he would not leaue it behinde him; and he thought that this Castle would defend it selfe from his crueltie, because it was so well munitioned, and impregnable: so that he assured himselfe that Mahamet should consume the greatest part of his forces during the siege there, and that if those within it would shew their vttermost deuoire, he should be forced rather to retire with shame and losse, then remaine there with profit and honour.
Before that Mahomet approached Zaluoch, he sent 2000. horse to scoure and discouer the plaine, and gather what victuals they could for his armie, which stoode in some distresse, for that they had passed ruinated and dispeopled  Countries, from whence to auoide his tyrannie, all the people were fled into diuers places of safetie. Some of his Vaun-currers presenting themselues before Zaluoch, and being knowne to be such as they were, our people sallyed forth to skirmish with them, and tooke some of them who were scattered from their companie, by whom they vnderstoode that Mahomet would presently come and besiege them with all his armie. It happened the same day, that the Turkes Vauntgard arriued, a certaine Germane brusing in his lodging a little powder, fire tooke holde thereof and burnt the house, and almost all the Castle, because that the flame being carried with the winde (which then was very great) dispersed it selfe into all parts, and  suddainely flamed, for the greatest part thereof being built of wood, and filled with such other things which drew fire to it from a farre, and if they had not with great expedition slaked it, surely all had been consumed into ashes: and euen as the Vauntgard wherein Achmeth Basha was arriued, the fire was quenched, and then al those within put themselues in battaile and good order about the wals, and with the force of Artillerie and Harquebuziers, they

began to salute the enemy with such violence, that they brake that squadron, insomuch that he was forced to retire from approaching any neerer: and  forthwith sallying out, they made a great murder amo^gst the Turks. The day following arriued Mahomet himselfe with all the rest of his campe, lodging a good distance off, and in a place where the Artillerie could not offend him, and presently with a strong troupe of horse he went to view the Castle on the two sides that were not enuironed with water, but onely with drie Ditches, and the day following he caused all his armie to approach before that place, quartering them on these two sides, and they were so many in number, that all the ground within that compasse was couered with them: and afterward he sent by some of his people to certifie him who commaunded  within, that he shuld for certaine vnderstand, that that place where the Castle was built, appertained to the Grand Seigniour, and that Ferdinand erected it in a place which was none of his: and for that cause he commaunded them to yeeld it vnto him, offering vpon that condition some reasonable rewards, and that he would permit him, with all his souldiours, safely to depart with their armes and baggage; further admonishing him not to be obstinate, least he should plant the Artillerie: for if he expected that, he had sworne and protested not to make any accord with him at all, but the contrary, putting all to fire and sword, he would without mercie murther all those who fell into his hands. The Castellan made him this answer, that being borne Ferdinands  subiect, and by him placed in this Castle, and hauing sworne to him fidelitie, and giuen him assurance to keepe and defend it (which also he purposed to doe) he could not yeeld it to him: but if he would be master thereof he should winne it by force, and that he should not solicite him any more with the like friuolous messages, for that he had no dread nor feare of his words, and as little esteemed he of his deedes, but that he should doe his vttermost, and he for his part would also doe what he could to defend and maintain it, desiring rather to die Ferdinands seruant, the^ liue Solymans friend.
The Basha vnderstanding of this resolute answer, the day following he caused the Trenches to be made hard by the Ditches, on those two sides of  which we haue spoken, and that not without great labour, for that the Pyoners were forced to carrie the earth very farre, because the place was drie and stonie, and very vnfit for such a purpose. And after they had finished their worke, one morning before day-break, he caused his Artillery to be brought into them, and planted it against the Castle, and began very violently to batter: but the Cannon did no great harme, for that the Castle was well rampierd and enuironed with earth and faggots, which presently did quallifie the force of the bullet. About three daies after that the Turks had continued their batterie, the Germanes assembled together, and spake vnto the Captaine The cowardlines of the Germane souldiours. of the Spaniards, and to certaine other souldiours, telling them, that the most part of the Hungars were alreadie on horseback, and that when they thought  least of it, they would in the night depart and forsake them, and that if they did so, euery one might cleerely discerne, that they were not of sufficient strength to maintaine and keep it against so great an armie, as was that of the Turks: and that for that cause this was their counsell, that all should dislodge and endeuour to saue themselues, perswading this Captaine to speake of

this matter vnto him who commanded the place, and was the Castellan, who for that he was his friend would not refuse to hearken to him, and it might  be would yeeld to his opinion. The Spaniards replied, that as yet they saw no occasion that should moue them to depart from thence so vily, and they told them that they shuld not vse any more so dishonest and infamous speeches, but rather they should haue the courage to die honourably, then commit so cowardly an act; and that for their parts they would doe that which should seeme good to them, not being willing at any time to lend their eares to such vnfitting discourses. The Germanes then seeing that the Spaniards respected not their motion, went to the Bohemians to acquaint them with their determination, and there they caused it to finde such good entertainment,  that they easily drew them to their opinions: whereupon they altogether went to the Castellan, to tell him in few words that they would depart, for that they saw the Hungars had trussed vp their baggage in their wagons, and their horses were readie sadled, of which they knew not the meaning, except it were to begon, and leaue the rest as a pray to the Turkes: for that if they departed, who were the greatest and strongest part, it was not in their power to warrant and withstand the assaults of Mahomet, and to defend themselues against so puissant a force; in respect where of they thought it better to depart and retire in safetie, then to remaine in danger of so apparant a losse, which euery man might see readie to befall them with a cruell death. The Castellan willing to appease them, told them that the Hungars had not loded  their baggage, neither were their horses sadled to any other end, but onely for feare of the fire, which in that extremitie they might more conueniently transport them from place to place, and that if they thought otherwise, they deceiued themselues, and if they were of this opinion, hee himselfe would be the first that should burne their baggage, and maime all their horses, and would cause that the Hungars should euery one execute the like in his owne The braue resolution of the Castellan of Zaluoch euen to the end. behalfe, promising to recompence them in the end according to their deserts: and this he did to the end that they should be the more willing to put fire thereto, assuring them, that before he would depart from this Castle, he was resolued rather to die within it. The Germanes seeing that by this means  they could not compasse their drift, they presently replied, that they would not remaine, except they might haue their pay which was due to them. The Castellan made liberall promise to them thereof, and sounding the bottome of his friends purses, he got so much money as was needfull to satisfie them all that was their due.
In the meane time the Basha ceased not from continuall battering: but it was to no great purpose, for that the Cannon did little good; in regard wherof our people in stead of taking courage, they hourely seemed faint-hearted and more discouraged: and this batterie hauing dured 8. whole daies, they determined one night secretly to depart, and by the meanes of boates to saue  themselues on the other side of the riuer. Which the Spaniards perceiuing, they presently aduertised the Castellan thereof, who told them, that he had caused the boates to be sunck, for that they should not haue that meanes to flie, they being not able to goe forth at any other place, because the enemie had wholly enuironed them, who would hinder their passage; which they

found not true, and the Spaniards in the night time walking the round, about the Castle, and visiting the Sentinels, saw the Germanes in armes with their  baggage readie to depart, and comming to the Port, they met the Hungars (who were all on horsebacke) and the Castellan that vrgently intreated them that they would not depart, and leaue this Fortresse with so great shame and infamie to their nation, and with so great a losse to K. Ferdinand: by which speeches they in like manner saw that they preuailed not much with them, in their behalfe, for that they opening the Port by force, they all thrust themselues forth. The Turks who were for the watch within their Trenches, hearing first the bruite which was within the Castle, and presently after hearing no more therof, and not perceiuing any signe or token of any watch (as they  vsually perceiued it euery night before) went presently to breake open the Zaluoch cowardly left to the Turks. Port, which was opposit to that part which the Hungars and Germanes went forth at: and entering in, and not finding any person, they greatly marueiled thereat, and looking about them, they found the Castellan alone by the Port, who bega^ to shut it after his people, not meaning at any hand to depart with them, but rather to remaine and die therein, or else to be made a slaue, before he would commit so shamefull and disloyall a fact to his Prince. The Turks presently tooke him prisoner, and hauing bound him, they led him to Achmeth, Basha of Buda: who after he had vnderstood how all things had passed, he shewed him great honor, and entreated him curteously, esteeming it to be  a thing no lesse vertuous to vse clemencie towards his enemies, then kindnes to his friends; yea although a man hath power to suppresse or raise them vp, and specially when it is in the behalfe of those who haue not committed any dishonourable or vnworthie act, but on the contrarie haue performed that which was agreeable to their honour and reputation.
So soone as the Germanes were out, they went towards the boates, which because they were halfe on land and halfe in the water, they found very farre ingaged, and before they had drawne them out of their Docks into the water, they so filled them with their implements and their own persons, that they could by no meanes wagge them: and thus losing the time (whilest on  another side the Hungars saued themselues in passing the riuer with their horses at a foord) the Turks set vpon them as they were thus busied, and put them all to the sword, so that not a man escaped aliue. Whilest that the Turks inflicted this punishment vpon these miserable men (which they iustly deserued) the Spaniards were almost al saued, some by water, and others by land
Mahomet hauing in this sort won this Castle with lesse paine and trauaile then he expected (not conquering it by force, but by the cowardise and treacherie of the Germanes and Hungars who were there in garrison, and who rather desired to flie and forsake their King, then remaine fighting and get hohonour and glorie, being well able to make resistance without their losse or danger) reposed himselfe with his armie certaine daies in this place, and afterward  leauing in it a strong garrison, he tooke his way towards Agria, with intention to besiege it, thinking that those who were within, would doe as those of Zaluoch and Lippa had done. But God as an enemie to those who trust more in their forces, then in his assistance, would that all whatsoeuer we esteeme impregnable, should be lost: and againe, that all that which we think

vpon very good reason to be feeble and weake, forsaken of all helpe, and not  anything fortified by any humane industrie, should gallantly maintaine and preserue it selfe: as appeared by this towne which the Turks found so strong, that they had iust cause to bewaile that they were so euilly intreated there, as if they had receiued some bloodie ouerthrow in open field; this being an incredible thing how this towne could preserue it selfe, and so exceedingly endamage the enemie.
The losse then of Zaluoch ingendered in Ferdinands campe a great admiration, and generally no lesse astonishment to all, because this was a place (as we haue said) inuincible and impregnable, except by such a manner wherewith it was lost: and Castalde bare inwardly in his heart, in finit griefe and sorrow  for it, although outwardly he inforced himselfe to shew very exceeding valour; and knowing that amongst humane actions there commeth not one mischiefe alone, but that it is accompanied with another euen hard at the heeles, this being the qualitie of Fortune, neuer to begin her sports for a little while, he distrusted that this disgrace would be accompanied with another, and that so much the rather, because he saw so puissant an enemie, readie not onely to the ruine and subuersion of Transiluania and Hungarie, but also of all Christendome; and he supposed that he had done no small matter, if he could maintaine himselfe in such estate as then he tooke himselfe to be in, hauing but weake force and a very smal armie, which also then he could not pay, and daily seeing the Fortresses to be abandoned, and most cowardly left in the  Turks power; and on the other side, continually perceiuing war to approach vpon him, and that euen by them from whom he hoped to find most fauour and ayd to maintaine Ferdinands part, and to assure these countries vnder his obeisance, who on the contrarie wrought a dangerous reuolt, and secretly practised to depriue King Maximilian of al this prouince, to render it to King Iohns son, and to reinuest the Queene his mother into her first and royall dignity, they being not able any longer to support the wars, and other inconueniences which daily afflicted the^, labouring with al their skill to effect their purposes.
In respect of these vehement suspitions, Castalde was in great vexation and heauines, fearing that that would shortly happen to him which he had alwaies  before suspected, specially because he knew the nature of the Transiluanians to be much inclined to nouelties and alterations, and that more then any neighbour Prouince whatsoeuer; and that alreadie oftentimes the principall persons among them, vnder the colour of diuers vrgent occasions, retired into such places, where they gaue more suspition of reuolting, then assurance of true amitie; all this notwithstanding he omitted not to consult and deliberate with the Vayuode and others, touching all that which was necessarie, and to prouide for it accordingly, not minding that any fault should be attributed to him by his negligence or indiscretion, nor to be reproued for  that he had not as a skilfull Captaine foreseene euery inconuenience; as he very wisely managed matters, which thing hereafter we shall more amply treate of in his proper place.
The end of the fifth Booke.



THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE SIXTH BOOKE.
QVeene Izabella complaineth of Ferdinand, and she seeketh the Turkes ayde. The enterprise to kill the Vayuode of Moldauia. The Transiluanians reuolt from Ferdinand. Aldenes triall vpon life and death. Duke Maurice of Saxonie bringeth with him 15000. men into Hungarie for Ferdinands ayde. Mahomet besiegeth Agria, the resolution of the Citizens, and courage of the women there: in the end he is forced to raise his siege, and retire from thence with shame and losse. The  Hungars seeke peace with the Turke, and pay him tribute. The Popes absolution in fauour of Ferdinand for the murther of George. Solymans insolent answer to the Hungars vpon their request of peace, and the astonishment of the Transiluanians thereat. Castaldes present arriuall at Wasrael, and his oration there to the Hungars, by which they are reanimated against the Turkes. The pursuite against Aldene. Queene Izabella practiseth her returne into Transiluania, and is assisted by diuers of the nobilitie, who in respect of the many wrongs and iniuries offered them by Ferdinands people, incline to her.

WHilest Castalde was busied to redresse these casualties of  fortune which alreadie passed through the kingdome, and that Mahomet marched with his victorious armie towards Agria: Queene Izabella seeing that nothing Queene Izabella complaineth of Ferdinand. was performed of that which was promised her in the behalfe of Ferdinand, and that she could draw nothing from them but words, being greatly offended thereat, complained of Ferdinand to the King of Polonia her brother, and to Queene Bonna her mother, of the wrong which she receiued, and how by too credulent a beliefe she was cunningly lifted out of her estate, and in this sort deceiued and depriued of all humane helpe;  and also that they denied for wife to her sonne, the Infanta Ioane, and the estates which was offered to her, and the payment and disbursing of her ioynter and dowrie. For which respects she would not that the agreement and resignation compacted about Transiluania, should be any further proceeded in; saying, that she was not bound to obserue any condition with him,

who performed not any of his promises to her, and that it was reasonable for  her to breake with him, that had so often failed with her. With this choller and griefe she practised the meanes to set footing againe into this Prouince, and to draw the principallest States thereof to fauour the cause of her sonne, minding to assist her selfe with the offers which Mirce (Vayuode of the Mirce, Vayuode of the Transalpinia^s. Transalpinians) had made her, promising to ayde her both with men and money, and besides to performe, what possibly he could, to reinuest King Iohn into his former dignities. And before she discouered any the least inckling of her determination, she had caused Solyman secretly to bee intreated, Izabella again seeketh the Turkes ayde. that it would please him to fauour her cause, insinuating to him how great and vnfained had been the amitie and affection which King Iohn her deceased husband bore him, and the great confidence that after his death she alwaies  had in him, and that he would vouchsafe not now to denie her his ayd in so great necessitie, which for the present she was in, and especially seeing she was spoyled of all her goods, because she reposed too great trust in another: and that if for her sake he would not doe any thing, yet that at the least he would haue a princely regard of pitie to her sonne Iohn, who was a child and orphane, and expulsed from his owne inheritance, whom she committed into his armes, knowing that from the bountie of his princely disposition, she could not but hope of a remedie worthie of his excellent magnanimitie, there being not any thing more commendable among Princes and  Monarkes, then to defend the iust causes of afflicted widowes and poore orphanes, as she and her sonne were, in whose defence he should greatly inrich his renowne with perpetuall glorie, and adde to those his royall dignities, the surname of a pitifull and iust protector of those, who vniustly are oppressed by the wickednes and intrusion of others: it being more expedient and behoouefull for his affayres, to haue them for his neighbours and confederates, then Ferdinand, from whom he could expect nothing else but continuall warre and perpetuall trouble.
By these speeches and other like reasons which she caused to be alleadged to him, she (by the meanes and fauour of Achmeth Basha) crept so into the fauour of Solymans liking, that presently he writ to the Vayuode of Moldauia,  Stephen, Vayuoyde of Moldauia. named Stephen, that at all times, and as often as he should bee requested by the Queene of Transiluania to ayde her, he should not faile with the greatest force he could make, to doe her all possible fauour: and the like he also commaunded to the Basha of Buda.
Castalde (during these practises) had alreadie intelligence how Chendy Ference Vicchy and Chendy for Izabella. (one of the principall Peeres of the countrie) went often to visit Peter Vicchy, who made his aboade in one of his Castles, situated in the confines of Polonia, and that they were accorded and vnited together, and that alreadie they had leauied forces, with intention to enter into the kingdome, and to reduce it vnder the Queenes command, alleadging for their reasons,  that Ferdinand had obserued nothing of that which was promised. Which truly they published, not so much for the interest and fauour of the Queene, as to reuenge the death of Frier George, the which (and the authors thereof) Peter Vicchy thought much of, and meant to reuenge it vnder the fauour and

power of Chendy, who after the death of the said Frier, was growne puissant  in that countrie. And being thus vnited together, and strengthened with many gentlemen, who secretly retired to them, they purposed greatly to trouble the affayres of the kingdome, by reason of the succours which they assuredly hoped from the Moldauian, who as yet had not dismissed his armie, and who alwaies (by Mahomets commaund) entertained it in the field, concluding with him, that they would at one instant enter into this Prouince: further also that they had agreed with the Vayuode, that causing all the countrie to reuolt against Castalde, he should with al the other souldiours which were then with him, assaile those of Ferdinands part, and cut them in peeces in the same field where Castalde should be incamped. But Castaldes diligent care and vigilancie, vanished these deuices into smoake, so that this  conspiracie could take no effect; and specially because of the death of the Vayuode, which happened in the wishedest time that could be desired, the same being practised many daies before: and which was as here followeth.
Castalde being at Seghesuar then, when he went against the Moldauian, there came to him at that time a Moldauian gentleman, a man of good The enterprise to kill the Vayuode of Moldauia. countenance, well graced, and full of discretion. This man withdrew himselfe from Stephen the Vayuode, misdoubting to bee slaine, in respect he greatly fauoured him who was the rightfull inheritour of this Prouince, which was by the said Vayuode tyrannically vsurped. This gentleman  brought with him about some twentie horse, with which hee offered his seruice to Ferdinand, whereupon he was receiued into pay: and these which serue in this manner, and with such a number of men, are called in Moldauia, Bugerons. Within a while after this Bugeron found the meanes to haue Bugerons. long discourse with Castalde, concerning his affayres, to whom making an ample recitall of his estate and qualitie, said; that the Vayuode had not yet wholly dissolued his Campe, and that he yet entertained the greatest part thereof, vpon opinion once againe to enter into this kingdome, vpon any occasion when he should see it most incumbred and oppressed by the necessitie of warre; and that if he would promise him his fauour and assistance,  he would aduenture to kill him; with this condition neuerthelesse, that if in case he performed it, that then he should bee a Captaine of 200. horse in Ferdinands pay. Vpon this offer Castalde made him liberall promise thereof, and more then he demaunded, assuring him that besides his promise, he would bestow in reward of him 1000. crownes, if he returned hauing performed this enterprise. The Bugeron nourishing himselfe with this hope, returned into Moldauia, where he attempted many times to execute his enterprise: but yet could he not at that time attaine to the effect and issue thereof, for being discouered, hee was constrained to flie into Polonia, from  whence he writ to Castalde of all what had passed, and that if he would that this conspiracie should proceede, that then he should write to two of the Vayuodes household seruants, who were very familiar with him, without whose meanes this enterprise could hardly take any effect: and that the contents of the letters which they should write vnto them, should bee to

request them to hasten and performe that which they promised to him, and  of which they talked together, and that if it succeeded well, he promised to giue them all which he had offered, and a larger recompence then they expected, and that they should assure themselues he would not any thing dissemble or faile, in that whereof they should haue need.
This Bugeron meant that this letter should be sent ioyntly to them both, he practising by this policie to bring them in suspition, (although indeede they were innocent thereof, neither were they imbrewed with any spot of this treason) and by this deuice to make them enemies to the Vayuode, and to incense them against him. This counsell was presently practised, and that in such sort, that the Vayuode was as soone aduertised thereof, as Castalde  had written to these two familiar friends of his, who could not keepe close this letter, because it was deliuered to them in the presence of many. It also happened that when this letter was brought them, they were (as fortune would) both together, and presently opening and reading it together, and remaining (by reason of the contence and nouelties thereof) wonderfully astonished; and so much the more, because they vnderstood not what the letter meant, as men that had not any correspondence with him who wrote vnto them: and afterwards thinking with themselues what this might meane, and holding this letter still in their hands, by chaunce there was by them a young youth alied to the Vayuode, who for that he was young, they had not any suspition of him. This youth hauing neuerthelesse well vnderstood  the summe of their conference, went presently to the Vayuode, and in order recited to him what hee had heard and seene. Whereupon these two were presently sent for, and the Vayuode commaunding them to shew the letter that Castalde had writ to them, he interpreted it according to his owne minde; and so tooke them as traytors, and caused them presently to bee depriued of all their honors and dignities which they had in his countrie, with resolution to behead them, and wholly to extirpate their houses and goods; that by the horrible example of these, it might bee a iust president for others hereafter to bee better aduised from attempting so mischieuous and vile an  act.
As the Vayuode was inquisitiue about these practises, the Bugeron came from Polonia; and hauing vnderstood that this letter of Castaldes had produced such effect as hee desired; and that those to whom it was written were greatly incensed against Stephen the Vayuode, because that by him (beyond all limits of reason) they were very cruelly abused and falsely accused of treason; and that they could not tolerate this indignitie; and that they secretly conspired a cruell reuenge thereof: and so knowing that the things would succeede according to his desire, he meant not to omit this occasion, which Fortune so fauourably offered to him, but willingly imbracing it, he speedily writ to these two, that if they would ioyne with him to reue^ge the wrongs  which were done them by the Vayuode, hee would gladly consort with them, and especially knowing betweene them how the other had most iniuriously wronged them, and with what crueltie hee had much persecuted them euen to death: discouering to them, that it was farre more conuenient

to make him away by some deuice, then to looke for this that he should take  away their liues. These two greatly ioyed at this vnexpected offer, and determined to performe that vpon him, which vniustly he had imposed vpon them, and to reuenge themselues of the honours which were taken from them, and of the shame and obloquie, which vndeseruedly they had receiued against all right and reason. Many of their friends and kinsemen (who thought not wel of that which was done against them) conspired with them, as also many others who were kinsemen to him, who lawfully should haue been Vayuode. These altogether complotted with the Bugeron, concerning the meanes that should be vsed to put their conspiracie in execution: which was, that they should suddenly assaile their enemie and kill him; as within  short time they performed it, entering furiously one day into the Vayuods Tent, who was laid vpon his bed to repose himselfe, imagining that neuer any durst haue the face to offend or disturbe him; they gaue him so many The Moldauian murdered. stabs with a poynard, that they caused him presently to giue vp the ghost, and afterwards by the meanes of them that followed them, they set vpon 2000. Turks and Tartars, which he continually had for his guard, cutting and hewing them all in peeces, electing him for Vayuode, who indeed should be he: which being performed, they conuerted their furie against the Tyrants kindred, killing his mother, children, and friends (as the manner is in that countrie) not leauing aliue any of the contrarie faction, from whom afterwards  they might haue any occasion of mistrust.
This death seemed to all very profitable, and specially to the Transiluanians, who by meanes thereof saw themselues deliuered from very great dread and feare of being at any other time assailed by him: and on the contrarie, they saw this new Vayuode to make some shew to imbrace the amitie and friendship of Ferdinand, which possessed them with a speciall hope of a long and quiet repose. But all these vaine hopes in the end proued contrary, as wee shall more commodiously in another place speake of: for that this new Vayuode of Moldauia did not long continue in this league, which he brake within a short time after, that he might bee in the Turkes grace and fauour.  Also this death was the speciall cause which hindered the conspiracie that was wrought in Transiluania against Castalde; and also because that at that time it came to be discouered, insomuch that euery one knew all them that were actors therein, and who had promised him to enter thereinto: which made Peter Vicchy and Chendy to be greatly doubted, as all those likewise who were compacted in this conspiracie; of which number Castalde would not punish any therefore, knowing it was then no time, being on the one side withheld in regard of the feare and suspition of the future warre: and on the other side seeing himselfe more troubled then euer he was, by the vexations and discontents which his owne people hourely gaue him,  which farre exceeded those that he receiued by the enemie. For the Germanes in respect they were not payed, committed the greatest outrages that The Germanes muitnie. were possible, ranging and spoyling all the plaine countrie, killing the inhabitants of villages, and doing incredible things without any regard, committing vnworthie excesses, and such as are vnfit for a Christian, who is bound

rather to yeeld a rule and forme of an exemplarie and modest life, then of  wicked or infamous liuers, seeing that by the one they might gaine much, and by the other lose infinitly. From these so execrable extortions, proceeded the speciall cause that afterward incensed all the inhabitants of the kingdome The Transiluanians begin to reuolt from Ferdinand. to reuolt, and specially the Nobilitie, who seeing that their first enterprise taken in hand, vnder pretext of doing good, yet came to no effect, propounded one day before Castalde, that it was expedient (seeing they were all then in the field) to goe with all their people to besiege Lippa, and vse some stratagem or force to take it, it being reported that Cassombassa had few men within it, hauing sent from thence the greatest part of the garrison to Mahomet to the siege of Agria: importuning him that he would not omit this occasion and commoditie, whilest it shewed it selfe fauourable, fearing that  neuer after the time would bee so conuenient for such an enterprise: all of them very willingly offering themselues to this warre. They spake this with a dissembling heart, to deuise some meanes to worke Ferdinands armie out of the kingdome, with an intent (they being once out) not to suffer them to reenter againe. But Castalde (who well vnderstood these deuises, which they shadowed with a pretence of good, and which in effect had an outward appearance of trueth) would by no meanes consent to their perswasions: but dissembling and possessing them with hope to graunt their requests, deferred as much as he could their demaunds; and that so much the rather, for that he knew how greatly it imported him to remaine in that place where  he was then resident, from whence he might with good aduantages prouide for all distressed parts, and specially for the necessities which daily might happen, as also to consider the end to which Mahomets affayres against Agria might tend.
In this time there arriued at Vienna the Popes Nuntio and Comissaries, Information vpo^ the death of George. with articles drawne and propounded by Cardinals deputed thereto, touching the information of Frier George his death, vpon which they were to examine witnesses, and to bee informed by them, if it were true, that hee practised treason against Ferdinand, in fauour of the Turkes: and namely, to  cause him to lose and be depriued of the Realme, and so accordingly to censure, if the death of Frier George was iust or no. Hereupon Ferdinand and King Maximilian writ to Castalde, that he should send them the examination of the witnesses, which he had caused to be heard and examined, as well in Transiluania as elsewhere, to the end that thereby they might censure of the offence, as the qualitie and condition of the fact required. Castalde receiuing this message, caused to be examined one Emeric the Friers Secretarie, and an other that was his Chancellor named Adam, who deposed certaine things which might giue some shadow and colour of suspition: but in their examinations they were quite different the one from the other, and the said Emeric  vpon some displeasure which he conceiued against the Frier, was not accounted an vnblameable witnes. Castalde was greatly troubled to finde any who could verefie that which was imputed against the Frier: yet within certaine moneths after there were sent to Vienna certaine proceedings which they had passed touching that point, and afterwards they were presented to

the Comissaries, who with speede carried them to Rome. As these persons  departed from thence, Ferdinand being throughly informed of the vile and infamous losse of Lippa, and how it happened by Aldenes cowardlines: to the end therefore that this ignominious fact should not remaine vnpunished, he commaunded Castalde that Aldene should bee committed to prison, and that by the consent and aduice of the Vayuode, his processe should bee Aldenes triall vpon life and death. made against him; by meanes whereof he meant to make him vnderstand that he would punish him rigorously, to the end that others by his example, should learne more valiantly to maintaine their owne reputation, then hee had done. According to this commaund Aldene was examined, and demaunded vpon what occasion he fiered the munition and victuals, and why  (without seeing any enemie) he so cowardly left this Fortresse, and caused it to bee burnt. In answer of which demaunds, he alleadged for his excuse, that he was forced thereunto, by reason the most part of the souldiours were fled from thence, and that because he had not time commodious to carrie out the victuals, Artillerie, and munition, he commaunded them to be burnt after that manner, chusing rather to consume them so, then suffer them to be a spoyle to the enemie, and that for the same consideration he had performed the like to the Castle and towne, thinking that the Turkes seeing such an apparant ruine, they would neuer afterwards make account of it, nor regard to fortifie it; he for his part purposing, that after they were departed thence, he would returne thither againe, and establish it in the former  estate, and fortifie it stronger then before: and that for these reasons he was incited and constrained to doe that which he did. But more fully to know the trueth of all these matters, and to the end he should not any thing complaine of iniurie that might bee done him, certaine Iudges were deputed to know and vnderstand his cause, and to examine the souldiours who had been with him in Lippa.
During all these proceedings which were managed at Vienna, concerning Frier George his death, and in Transiluania vpon Aldenes fact, Mahomet seeing how all things did euen vntill the^ prosperously succeed with him, and how much Fortune did fauour him in his conquests, which he achieued  with small labour; and how besides she had wonne him that honour and glorie, which he neuer expected to haue, perceiuing himselfe by such euents to be greatly redoubted and feared, did not one mite esteeme the towne of Agria, perswading himselfe to haue wonne it easier, then he had done the other townes: and in the end (although he was greatly vrged thervnto) he marched thither, dismissing a good part of his armie, assuring himselfe he should little neede so many men, nor such a power of Caualarie, as vntill then he had, knowing this place to bee of no strength, nor such that it could long resist his forces: whereupon he sent the Basha of Buda before  with certaine troupes of horse to view the countrie, and to assure the frontiers thereof, hauing had aduertisement that Duke Mauris was arriued at Duke Mauris of Saxonie arriued in Hungarie with 15000. men for Ferdinand. Iauarin, where he was lodged with 10000. Lansquenets, and 5000. horse, according to the promise which he made to Ferdinand, to whom he had assured that he would performe in Hungarie some profitable matter for the generall

good, as it was also accorded at Ispurch betweene the Emperour and  him. This Duke had alreadie caused a bridge to bee built ouer Danubius, bruting it abroad that he would march to besiege Strigonium. But although that at the beginning the Turkes had some feare and doubt thereof, yet this siege in the end was found to be nothing else but a particular ruine of this prouince, and it was the cause of a thousand inconueniences and griefes to Ferdinand, and made him to consume and spend all that treasure which he had leauied to pay the armie which he entertained in Transiluania: and that was the cause also yt neither on the one side nor on the other, could any good be done. In the end the Basha of Buda presented himselfe before Mauris, not with intent to fight (for his force was then but weake) but onely to discerne  his countenance, and whither he would march, that he might speedily relieue that place, and in the meane time somewhat to bridle his proceedings.
Whilest these two expected each others attempts, in such sort as you haue Mahomet besiegeth the towne of Agria. heard, Mahomet incamped himselfe about Agria with 60000. men, and 50. peeces of Artillerie. This towne was in a manner all open, with a Castle after the ancient fortification, without any defences or Bulwarkes, but onely certaine towers, and it is commaunded by a hill, the descent of which commeth within a stones cast of the wall. This default of Rampiers and other weake meanes, was supplied by the inuincible courages of those that were within, who were Hungars, to the number of 2000. of whom there were  500. gentlemen well dissended, and no lesse esteemed in the countrie for their vertue and prowesse, who were retired thither with their wiues, children, and moueables, hauing no other place of strength in the countrie but that, where they could finde any safetie for their goods and liues. These, with the inhabitants of the towne and other souldiours, swore and protested The resolution of the Agrians. among themselues, that not any one vpon their liues should aduenture to speake of any agreement, nor yeeld vpon no composition, nor yet to make replie to the enemies speeches, but onely with Harquebuze and Cannon: and in case that by the length and tediousnes of the siege, they should  bee brought to extremitie of victuals, they should first eate one another, rather then cowardly to yeeld. And that daily (after intercession to God, and hearing Masse) both men and women, without intermission, should labour the strengthening of the Rampiers and fortifications: and to auoyde all treason, they did expressely prohibit that none should assemble aboue three or foure in a companie. Besides, they ordained that all the prouision, as well for the munition as for the particular houses, should equally bee distributed by weight, and so much for a day: and that the Doues, Hens, Capons, Pullets, and other like victuals, should safely bee kept and reserued for the sicke and wounded: and that all the spoyles which should be gotten vpon the enemie, should be put into a place apart, to make equall diuision therof among those  who had best defended their countrie (comprehending therein the women also) who daily were marked and obserued by a certaine Preacher, who during that siege shewed himselfe valiant and resolute in fighting, and was the speciall cause (by his exhortations) of this great effect, that those of Agria

brauely indured thirteene most cruell and bloodie assaults, and that they  shewed themselues so gallant as they did, as presently we shall speake of. Being all of this resolution, rather to dye, then yeeld themselues vnder the faithlesse mercie of the Basha, they kept themselues in continuall readines, to answer him with like armes to those wherewith he saluted them.
Mahomet (before he enterprised any thing against the towne) sent to those of the Castle, that if they would yeeld to him, he would then vse them curteously, and with fayre warres suffer them to depart in all securitie with their baggage, and he would yeeld them such recompence, that they should haue good occasion to thinke well of him: and if they stood out and performed the contrarie, he assured them he would put them all to death, and pitch them vpon stakes, if they fell into his hands. But those within would giue no  eare to this summons, neither would they make any answer, but onely by signe, causing a beare or coffin, couered with blacke, to be fastned vpon two Launces, and in this sort to be shewed ouer the wall to the Trumpetter who spake to them, they not speaking any one word to him, thereby giuing him to vnderstand, that that Castle should bee their sepulcher, rather then they would yeeld it to them; it being then a custome to vse such a ceremonie, when they would not accept of any conditions of yeelding, but rather die in libertie, then liue vnder the commaund of their enemies.
Mahomet vnderstanding of this their determination, and seeing in vaine he sought composition with them, sent that night to view the Castle, and  afterward appointed two batteries, the one towards the Church, and the other towards the hill, and in each batterie he planted 25. peeces, which continually played the space of 40. daies. All the top and heigth of the Castle was wholly ruinated and so open, that the assieged could not any longer bee in safetie, in respect the Artillerie did greatly endamage them, and specially that which was vpon the hill; which to warrant themselues from the violence thereof, they within made a large and deepe Trench along the walles, where they rampierd themselues, and in the night kept good watch without being farre from it, neither to eate nor sleepe vntill the others were come thither to relieue them, which euery sixe houres they carefully performed. 
Presently after, Basha Achmeth and Mahomet caused in one day to be giuen three assaults in diuers places, in which they lost 8000. Turkes, who were climed vp to the top of the walles, and mounted vpon the breach, with many of their principall Commanders, for whose deaths the Turkes were more inraged and incensed then before, and yet they ceased not without intermission, to trie the assieged with new assaults and reenforcing of Cannons: and one day they gaue in foure places one of the horriblest assaults that euer was heard of, to which ranne all the men and women of the towne, who with no  lesse courage then the men themselues desperatly fought like Lionesses with The courage of the women of Agria. weapon, stones, and skalding water, making so great a massacre of the enemies, that it was a dreadfull and most horrible thing, and worthie of commiseration to beholde. During these assaults they performed many notable acts, and worthie to bee registred in all volumes, of which the first was,

that the mother, the daughter, and sonne in law fighting vpon the wall, the  husband of the said daughter was killed, and the mother with compassion saying to her daughter, that she should goe and burie him: she replied, that it was now no time to vse obsequies, nor to attend vpon funerals, but rather to performe some cruell reuenge: whereupon taking her husbands sword and his target vpon her arme, she thrust her selfe into the place of the dead, where she shewed incredible valour, and by no meanes she would depart from thence, before she had reuenged the death of her husband by the defeate of three Turkes: which being done, she withdrew herselfe, and tooke the bodie of her dead husband in her armes, and carried it to the Church, causing him to be buried according to his degree. 
It happened also in another place, that a woman carying a great stone vppon her head, with intent to throw it downe from the wall vpon the Turkes, a Cannon bullet strooke off her head, and falling dead at her daughters feet, who taking that stone vpon her head all bloodie as it was, without omitting any time to bewaile the death of her mother, saying, that her death ought not to bee vnreuenged, and that it was not fitting for her (being her daughter) to liue, without reuenging her death vpon another: and thus being inflamed, and as it were inraged, she ranne thence with great furie where the greatest throng and prease of Turks were, and killed two of them, and wounded many other, imitating a true Amazon, or woman of Lacedemonia, and bestirring her selfe from one place to another, she exhorted euery one to  performe their vttermost valour, putting them in minde of the oth which they had taken, and the glorious reputation which before God and the world they should obtaine: and by this meanes she preuailed so farre, that the enemies were shamefully repulsed and forced, maugre their brauerie, to retire and forsake their Artillerie, in such sort, that there was two of their greatest peeces lipped. The courages now of the assieged was marueilous great, and specially of the women, who with their husbands, fathers, children, and brothers, fought so couragiously, that they feared not any danger how great so euer it was. And as one day the Turkes gaue an assault to the towne (they being, as commonly they were wont to be, vpon the wall, armed with dead  mens armour) it happened that a shot of Artillerie brought three or foure of those to the ground, who were the formost and most readie to throw stones vpon the enemie; and although the blood and peeces of those did much hinder the trauailes of them that were their companions, yet notwithstanding they made not any semblance or token of feare, but rather in stead of hiding themselues, they more inraged then before, presented themselues to the fight to reuenge their companions, and taking the same stones, all besprinkled with their blood, they mounted vpon the top of the wall, performing incredible valour. 
By these heroicall acts, we may easily conceiue how great is the loue of our natiue countrie, and what commaund it hath ouer vs, since it incourageth for the defence thereof, a thing so feeble and weake as is a woman, appertly manifesting to euery one, that there is not any thing in the world more deare or pretious, then our natiue countrie: for the good and preseruation

of which, we are bound with our goods, honours, and liues to defend and preserue. 
Those of Agria remained in this sort so constant in their defence, (not willing at any time to speake or lend their eare to any Turke, notwithstanding they were greatly importuned thereto) that in the end they put Mahomet and the Basha of Buda in despayre for euer getting them vnder their puissance. And thus these two Commaunders of the Turkish armie, seeing the assieged would by no meanes yeeld, and that by strength they could not subdue them nor force the towne, by reason of the losse which they had made of their people at the former assaults, and that the time now was against them, for that the cold weather being now well forward, and the  ground often couered with snow, and their Campe sorely infected with great mortalitie of men and horses, they determined to dislodge and speedily to retire. According to this resolution, Mahomet one night (being the Mahomet raiseth his siege from before Agria. 18. of October 1552.) raised his whole Campe, and permitting Achmeth Basha to march towards Buda, he himselfe tooke the way of Belgrade, discharging by this meanes the enterprise of Agria, not without great shame and dishonour. The assieged not satisfied to see themselues at libertie by such a departure, the same day that the Basha dislodged, they caused to sallie out of the Castle 1000. men, that charged those in the Rereward, that kept not close together, and killed many of them, and afterwards they returned  loden with Turkish apparell, bringing with them many Camels and other beasts loden with spoyle, and many prisoners, which was as a Trophie of their countrie, which they had well defended, and a glorie which worthely they achieued, meriting a glorious renowne, and an eternall memorie of a most excellent president to others, who may by so vertuous and honorable an act imitate them, causing to themselues at the end of their honorable endeuours, a like triumph, as happened to those of Agria, and a generall praise amongst all liuing people.
Whilest Agria was thus battered by the Turkes, Castalde aduised Ferdinand, to commaund Duke Mauris that he should with his armie of the one  side march against Mahomet, whilest he with his people would assaile him on the other, assuredly thinking by this meanes to pursue and chase him, considering the poore and weake estate wherein he then was, by reason of the great losse of men which he had receiued at the assaults of Agria, and of the sorrow and griefe which was among those that remained, by reason of the famine that was in his Campe, it being brought into such state, that the scarcitie increased more and more; insomuch that for these considerations it would be very easie for Castalde and Mauris ioyned together, with the assistance of the besieged, to obtaine the famousest victorie in the world, and in such sort to haue weakened the Turke, that for many yeeres after they should liue securely from receiuing any damage by him. But this counsell  was not so followed as it should haue been, whereby they lost one of the fittest oportunities that euer valiant Captaine could desire. For Castalde was not onely readie to assaile the enemie, but then had he the meanes to giue him battaile in the field, for that Ferdinand had sent him a good troupe of

light horse: for want of which it hindered Mauris and Castalde to giue battaile,  not willing rashly to be subiect to the hazard of fortune.
In stead of this counsell, it was commaunded to harrie the countrie of Alberegalis and Vesprimia, with intent to diuert the siege from Agria, which could not be executed for the contrarietie of the times.
During the time that Mahomet was incamped before Agria, the gentlemen of the countrie and all the townes, with the consent of Castalde, had sent The Hungars seeke peace with the Turk. to Ferdinand, that by his permission they might (by meanes of Aly Chiauss) treate of a peace and agreement with the Grand Seigniour. This Chiauss was then with Mirce, Vayuode of the Transalpinians, and was come thither in Solymans name, to pacifie the people who were reuolted against their  Lord. Ferdinand was well content at this request, and willingly consented to them; alwaies prouided it should be with the accustomed conditions and articles, and with the same tribute that he had before times made peace with K. Iohn, and also with charge that they shuld restore the townes, Castles, and places of Vesprimia, Drigal, Lippa, Themesuar, Zaluoch, and others which were taken by the Turks. He demaunded this, to the end that the truce or peace which was treated of, should bring more honour then infamie to his reputation. This commaund being come, Castalde permitted them to negotiate whatsoeuer should seeme behoouefull for them, forbidding them neuerthelesse, to name Ferdinand or himselfe after any manner in this treatie, esteeming it not conuenient to the reputation of his Maiestie, nor himselfe being  of that qualitie, as then hee was. The Deputies of the kingdome being thus dispatched, they went to seeke the Chiauss, to whom they manifested the effect of their comming. Aly hauing vnderstood the summe of their demaund, answered them, that willingly he would negotiate this affayre with the Grand Seigniour, and that at the furthest they should haue answer the 25. of October, and full resolution of the whole: and that for that occasion they should all then assemble at Wasrael, and not depart from thence vntill he made returne, or vntill such time as he sent to them.
At the same time Cassombassa leauied as many men about Lippa as hee  could, assembling all the frontier garrisons, with intention to make incursion into Transiluania to spoyle the countrie, and to erect a Fort vpon the way betweene Lippa and Deua, that hereafter it might make his proceedings more easie to him, by meanes of a strong garrison which he would maintaine therein. Castalde to withstand such an enterprise, thought of many plots: and willing to reenforce the garrison of Deua, he commaunded there should goe thither three Ensignes of Germanes of Andrew Brandis Regiment. But for want of three payes which was owing them, they did mutinie: whereupon assembling altogether, they seazed on the Artillerie, and The Germanes mutinie. the most part of them came and sacked the Spaniards lodgings, and namely  that of Castaldes, giuing them to vnderstand that they would keepe him prisoner and detaine him, vntill all the Germanes were fully satisfied their due. Castalde being aduertised of this tumult, mounted vpon a good horse and went into the field, sending after to them Counte Iohn Baptisted Arco to appease them. He being now come to them, sharply reproued them for that

they meant to commit so infamous an act, specially for this that all were equally  fallen by meanes thereof into the like suspition; and seuerely blaming the authors of that sedition, he so farre preuailed that he appeased them, and procured their former obedience; neuerthelesse assuring them that they should receiue money, which presently was payed them. Yet for all that they would not march on, so that they were constrained to send thither three other companies of Counte Helfestaines Regiment, who were better disciplined in obeying their Commaunders. With these were sent 400. Pistoliers, and they altogether marched to Deua, where Iohn Turky and Paul Banchy attended them with 500. horse of their owne, and other companies which Castalde had alreadie sent thither: and hauing made one bodie of all  these souldiours, they marched towards Lippa, with a full resolution to incounter Cassombassa, and they proceeded on euen to Perias, which is a strong Castle kept by the Turkes, situated eight miles from Lippa, harrying all the countrie, ruinating this new Fort which the Turkes had vndertaken to erect betweene Lippa and Deua, killing all those they found within; and proceeding yet further, they perceiued not any enemie whatsoeuer: for that Cassombassa hauing vnderstood that Castalde was not any thing sleepie or carelesse for the safetie of this Prouince, durst not enter any further, fearing to be cut off at the retraict, distrusting himselfe that the boldnes of those who were so forward vpon his borders, was nothing else but some traine to delude and intice him to proceede on, that afterward they might circumuent and intrap  his deseignes. For these respects he proceeded no further, and our men returned againe from thence without any other profit, but onely endamaging their friends possessions, consuming their victuals, and spoyling them of those little goods which they had, leauing to these poore villages (by this disorder) a perpetuall memorie of the euill effects of warre.
They being now all returned, the Captaine generall of the armie of the countrie would stay no longer in that kingdome: whereupon hee went to demaund leaue of Castalde, who by no meanes would permit him to depart, saying, it should bee ill done of him to forsake him in such a manner, being now alone in the field with so few men, specially then because it was certaine  that the Basha was not yet wholly retired; desiring him to haue patience and expect a while, vntill the said Basha was at the least further remoued from that quarter, from whence he was assured that he must shortly bee forced to depart, by reason of the Persian warre which Solyman had determined to make against the Sophy, to recouer the countries which were taken from him; and to warrant himselfe from his eldest sonne Mustapha (of whom he had great mistrust) fearing that he would make himselfe Lord and master of his Empire. But all these perswasions and intreaties were of no force to keep him there: for that those reasons which Castalde vsed, thinking thereby to  hinder him from going, did also serue him to hasten his departure, as he did at the end of eight daies, all his Caualarie following him, not any thing respecting all the protestations which Castalde could vse, to disswade him therefrom. Notwithstanding all this, Castaldes determination was not to remoue out of the field, neither to depart, before he had heard certaine newes that

Mahomet was passed Tibiscus and Danubius, because that since the raising of his siege from before Agria, he had aduertisement that he vsed long and tedious  iourneys to passe them. And expecting this issue, Castalde endured great discommodities, and extreame colds, for the high and deepe snowes which daily fell in great abundance, which made the souldiours passionate, and specially for that they were not payed. Being then largely certified that Mahomet was entirely out of that part of Hungarie, he presently licensed all the souldiours of the kingdome to depart, and lodged the Germanes and Spaniards by Sibinio, and reenforced the garrison of Deua, sending thither a certaine number of Aiduchs to bee mingled amongst the Germanes, and with the Caualarie that was therein, to the end that the one for the loue of the other should bee more vigilant and carefull for the defence thereof, and  he gaue the commaund of all the horse to Iohn Turky, and the gouernment of the towne and foote to Paul Banchy. Hee also sent certaine horse to Branchich, and commaunded that Deua should be wholly enuironed with a wall made of earth and wood mingled together by equall distances, to the end that the Caualarie should not so easily approach thereunto, and that the Infantrie should not offend them.
Now he seeing that all the people of Transiluania began greatly to murmur for the taxes which they daily paied to maintaine the burthen and charges of the warre (and both that he might giue time to his people to fortifie themselues, and to resist such tumults, and also that he might certainly know  whether the Turke would enterprise the warre of Persia) caused (the better to temper and mollifie the hearts of euery one) to bee published, that all the principall Peeres of the countrie should assemble at Wasrael, to attend there the answer of Solyman, and to know if he would be content to accept (with the foresaid conditions) the yeerely tribute of 20000. Duckets, and so to Tribute which was payed to the Turke by the Hungars. make truce with them, which he did thinke would be more expedient and behoouefull for Ferdinands affayres, then for the benefit of that people, matters being full of stirres and doubtfulnes, and specially for that he saw himselfe disfurnished of men and money, and out of hope to haue any succours; further considering, that though the same would not serue to any other end,  but to bring with it a great commoditie of gaining time, that in the meane while he might cause to be aduanced and finished the fortifications begun about the townes; yet neuerthelesse it would be a speciall cause of great profit to Ferdinand, as well to accommodate and negotiate his matters in Germanie, as also to demaund ayde both of men and money, and likewise to remedie the great necessities which then were dispersed through all the parts of that Prouince, which now tended rather to reuolt, then maintaine obedience and former faith giuen to Ferdinand. According to these considerations, he by the meanes of sundrie persons solicited, that this busines might take effect, yet he would not be openly seene therein himselfe, for feare least  the Turke should conceiue in him some relenting, and should see the necessities which enuironed him on all sides. But on the contrarie he made an outward semblance, as though he no whit at all feared his enemie, vsing this course, to the end that the Turke fearing they would spoyle the countrie,

whilest he should bee busied in the Persian warre, which was farre from this countrie, he would the more willingly bee inclined vnto peace. After this  publication he went and lodged at Albe-iula, from whence he might more commodiously prouide for all places, hauing for his guard 500. Spanish Harquebuziers, and one companie of 200. Aiduchs, to put into garrison in that towne.
At this very same time there was brought to Rome the proceedings taken The Popes absolution in fauour of Ferdinand for the murther of George. touching Frier George his death, and vpon the continuall soliciting of Ferdinands Ambassadours, the Cardinals (appointed for that purpose) assembled to giue a finall sentence of this fact, this cause being alreadie very grieuous in the Court of Rome: and notwithstanding that they found many  things and allegations worthie of good oppositions, yet neuerthelesse not to ingender more grieuous inconuenience, and for many other reasons besides, which I will not write of, they ceased not (considering it was a deed which could be no otherwise then done) to absolue Ferdinand, with all the conspirators, adding notwithstanding this clause in their sentence; that if the defences and allegations propounded by Ferdinand were true. Which the soliciters of his Maiestie liked not of, who so much importuned the Pope, that in the end they had it absolute without limit of any condition. And although the Pope refused to absolue the complices of this death, yet in the end at the earnest intreaties of the said Ambassadours, this matter was ended,  and the absolution for them all was sent to Vienna. Which was not performed but with Ferdinands great content, who vntill then was prohibited to heare Masse, and all other diuine seruice, yea and he was forbidden to enter into the Church.
During this season there happened a thing, which I will not forget to make recitall of, although it doth somewhat estrange it selfe fro^ the subiect of this my discourse. It happened in former time that one Raoul, a gentleman of Transalpinia, was dispossessed from the Vayuodship of the Transalpinians, Raoul expulsed from his Vayuodship of Transalpinia by Mirce: he recouereth it, and discomfiteth Mirce. which before his time was maintained and kept by his father, and which by right of succession the office belonged to him. This man seeing himselfe  expulsed by force and treacherie from that kingdome, by the crueltie and wickednes of Marc (which in their language is called Mirce) an arrogant and proud tyrant, who had made himselfe Vayuode, and who had constrained Raoul shamefully to flie away, and to seeke elsewhere how he might maintaine his life, leauing his house and possessions vnder the commaund of his mortallest enemies: and thinking in himselfe many thoughts concerning this his miserable fortune, and apprehending a thousand deliberations in his minde, that he might bee able to reenter againe into his possessions, and imagining that there was not any of sufficient strength to ayde him thereto; in the end he resolued to preuaile (if he could) by the meanes and fauour  of Castalde, to whom he was alreadie retired, and had serued him during the passed warres, with fiue or sixe seruants onely, and some few horses: and although he was held in good regard, and entertained as well as might be, yet was it nothing in comparison of his passed greatnes, being respected and hohoured as a King; so that he esteemed of this small entertainment, no otherwise

then of a certaine miserie: which caused a great commiseration among  all the nations, seeing a man that had gouerned and managed a kingdome, euen as his owne, to bee brought (by the crueltie of wicked Fortune) into such extreame pouertie, as to haue so few seruants, to whom oftentimes he could doe no more but prouide them foode. And euery man seeing this his miserie to continue so long, they esteemed him a man of small resolution, and such an one as could not haue in himselfe any aspiring thoughts. But in the end, feeling himselfe spurred on with such a shame, and he being informed of the good successe happened to Stephen, Vayuode of Moldauia, tooke courage by this president, and began to thinke how he could make away his enemie: and intreating Castalde for a certaine number of footmen  and horse, and that he would further him with his meanes in the enterprise which hee would execute touching the death of Mirce, not being able any longer to tolerate this pouertie, which by hard fortune he was fallen into: and comming one day vnto him, he began in this sort to speake.

Sir, it is some yeeres since that I haue been out of my hereditarie estate, expulsed from thence by the fraud and treason of that cruell and tyrannicall Mirce, who now by the support and fauour of the Turkes possesseth it, daily vsing therein monsterous cruelties, farre vnfitting all humane proceedings, and which indeede farre exceed all barbarous custome, hauing a while since (for feare I should bee ayded to recouer that which I haue lost) put to death by diuers torments, more then 3000. men, besides an infinit company of women,  with most horrible crueltie, not minding euer to eate before he had satisfied his crueltie in cutting off the head of some great Lord. And with such tyrannous behauiour he dominereth ouer that my poore and miserable people, who for feare of losing their liues, are constrained either to abandon their naturall homes, continually roming here and there, or else contrarie to their likings to doe that which he commaundeth them. Now considering these wicked and detestable actions, I not being able to containe my selfe any longer within the bounds of patience, I am determined to assaile my fortune, which I trust will yeeld me mine owne estate, or else I will depriue my bodie of this mortall life, which is not able any longer to tolerate this his insolencie.  And in regard thereof, I earnestly entreate you by the faith of Iesus Christ (according to which we liue, and in which my enemie beleeueth not, but rather vtterly despiseth) that you would not forsake me in this necessitie, but assist me with what succours you can, to the end that by the meanes thereof I may be able to recouer my kingdome, and reuenge the blood shed of so many noble gentlemen, as for my sake haue been most vily and against all equitie cruelly massacred. And if the victorie happely inclineth to my part, it shall be for the generall good of all Christians, and specially for Ferdinands seruice. And if it succeedeth otherwise (which God defend) I  had rather die fighting within mine owne countrie, then to liue in this exile, expulsed by the treacherie of this cruell monster Mirce.

Castalde comforting and exhorting him to pursue this enterprise, answered him, that considering the iust causes which he alleadged, and of which he was sufficiently informed, he need not to doubt to haue good issue thereof,

by reason of the succours which he promised him, and specially by the assistance of Iesus Christ, which was the most sure and certaine helpe, because  he was worshipped by him, and not by his enemie: and secondly, that support which he might get by the force and vertue of his owne arme, and by the valiantnes of his combattants: and for the last, he offered him a good number of souldiours, and summes of money, exhorting him to hasten this expedition, whilest the Turk was busied in the Persian affayres, and that he should not lose this occasion which so fauourably presented it selfe: for that before the Turke could come to giue any reliefe to Mirce, he should bee more then a yeere setled and possessed of the Seigniorie, and should haue the meanes so firmely to assure and reestablish his forces there, that he would  bee well content to haue him for his friend. He gladly condiscended to all that which he demaunded, and rather by reason of the compassion which he had of him, then that he thought he could become victorious in such an enterprise. Whereupon he gaue him 700. horse, and 1500. Aiduchs, the best souldiours that he had, and who had very well witnessed their valour during these warres, they being continually employed about Themesuar, keeping Mahomets Campe still in larums, and many times put them to shamefull foyles. The Captaine of which companie was named Nicholas, a most gallant and resolute man in fight, although very often he would bee drunke, according to the custome of those nations. Raoul hauing obtained his desire,  tooke leaue of Castalde, and with his souldiours, and others his confederates that were adhering to him, he resolued either to conquer, or dye.
As these marched on, Mirce had notice of the forces that Raoul leauied in all parts, and how he came to seeke him, and with what intention. Which being duly considered of, he presently caused (by the meanes and assistance of his friends) to leauie as many men as he could, making an armie of 24000. men, with whom, and with 36. peeces of Artillerie, he went into the field, lodging about Tergouista, with resolution there to attend his enemie, for that the place was most commodious to dispose and range his people in battaile. Raoul on the other side, notwithstanding all his attempts and diligence,  could leauy no more (euen with Castaldes people) then 12000. men, although he had many friends, and was generally the best liked of among all the Transalpinians. For none durst shew him any fauour, seeing he was of so weake a force, and his enemie so braue and gallant; euery one fearing that the issue of this enterprise would not succeede to his honour: and to fall into the danger of Mirces displeasure, whose horrible and execrable crueltie euery one greatly feared. With these few men neuerthelesse he desisted not from marching to incounter his enemie, who had for his Vauntgard 600. Turkes on horsebacke: and being resolued to giue him battaile, and not to bee amazed at any hand with the great preparation of his enemie, he being one morning by dawning of the day arriued vpon certaine hils, was discouered by  the Sentinels of Mirce, who then suddenly caused his people to bee ranged The battaile betweene Raoul and Mirce. and ordered, seeing he could by no meanes refuse the battaile, and knowing that his enemies were resolutely determined to fight: and although it was so that he might haue auoyded it, yet would he not retire, although he had

some doubt and suspition to fight, being aduertised that Raoul brought with  him both Spaniards and Germanes which Castalde had giuen him, assuring himselfe that those few souldiours which were with him were most valiant and expert, and not easie to bee ouercome; yea and hee did also distrust of some other succours. While such thoughts were in hammering, Raoul in the end made two squadrons of his armie, each squadron being of 5000. foote and 1000. horse, the most part of which were Harquebuziers; and causing the^ to march within harquebuze shot, they made a stand vpon a hill, causing them in such sort to be stretched out, that they made shew of 14. or 15000. men. Which being perceiued by Mirce, and esteeming that number to bee greater then they shewed themselues before, he began to distrust himselfe of  some deceit, and that he had not at the first certaine intelligence; commaunding his people to stand more close then ordinary, when the Harquebuziers of Raoul, more confusedly then disciplinarily, without expecting any other commaund or signall to fight, were resolued (as before they promised) either to ouercome, or die, and gaue so furious a charge vpon one of Mirces squadrons, as wolues vsually doe amongst a thousand flocke of sheepe, and breaking the first rankes, and quashing many a Turke (who as the most resolute men were in the fore rankes, and vpon whom Mirce reposed his greatest confidence) the others began presently to recoyle, and in flying they committed such disorder, that there was none amongst them who thought not flying to be his best safetie. Raoul on the other side at the same instant with  his Infantrie and Caualarie, most fiercely entered into another squadron of his enemies horse, with no lesse courage then the said Harquebuziers did, and breaking the first rankes, he forced the other to turne their backes, being on all sides gaulled and pearced with the thicke haile of the Harquebuziers, who made not any shot in vaine. This flight was of so great efficacie for Raouls good, that Mirces squadron seeing these two thus quite defeated, being possest with feare, without further expectance of the enemie, bequeathed themselues so to flight and confusion, that happie was he that could best Mirce ouerthrowne. flie, and he esteemed himselfe most fortunate, who supposed that he should  be saued rather then others: this ouerthrow thus happening, because that the greatest part of this armie was composed of men sent by the townes and Lords of the countrie, who are rather fit to make a number and shadow, then to winne a victorie.
Thus wee often see that multitudes of such who are thus rawly sent, are for the most part ouercome and subdued by a lesser number of souldiours, well disciplined and practised in warre, who to obtaine honour, refuse neither perill of sword, fire, nor yet death it selfe: and by this wee may iudge how dangerous and pestilent, feare and cowardise is in an armie; and how much on the contrarie, vertue and valour, and the prowesse of a noble and generous courage, ioyned with the force and dexteritie of the bodie, are extolled:  by which commendable qualities, wee may auoyde the detraction and infamie of this world, and purchase this true glorie, which beautifieth and adorneth euery one, and which raised Raoul to the type of honour, winning so easily thereby this victorie, that it seemed it was a true miracle of Iesus

Christ, who to punish this tyrant (an enemie of his faith) iustly permitted  this ruine to befall him.
The souldiours of Raoul seeing then that Mirces armie was quite ouerthrowne, and that there were not now any who opposed themselues against them, forbearing the execution and slaughter of their enemies, they began to search and ransacke those who fell into their hands, and they performed so much for their owne profit, that euery one of them became very rich thereby. All those of Mirces faction who were aliue, presently ranged themselues vnder the Victors Ensigne: as it is alwaies the custome of the vulgar sort to follow new fortunes, and daily desire new Lords. And making together a great army, they determined to pursue Mirce, who saued himselfe with  the rest of the 500. Turkes, which before is spoken of, and had now passed Danubius. There died in this battaile about 7. or 8000. men of Mirces part, and Raoul lost about some 700. Raoul thus achieuing this notable victorie, he presently got possession of all the moueables of his enemie, which were said to be more worth then 200000. Duckets, with which he bettered his former necessitie, and recouered all his kingdome: the principall Peeres thereof, with all his kindred and friends, came to receiue and acknowledge him for their true and liege Lord, and after that they conducted him with pompe to Tergouista, where friendly and willingly they all swore fidelitie to him, and Tergouista the capitall towne of the Transalpinians. did him all the honours as was fitting for them.
Behold here the mutations and changes of fortune, with which she exalteth  and abaseth whom it pleaseth her, and giueth example to Potentates of the world, after what sort they are to dispose of their actions, and how little they ought to trust in her; because that throwing them to the ground, they cannot esteeme any thing firme and stable. A Bugeron followed Mirce, and incountring with another Bugeron, who was well apparelled and richly armed, he killed him, verely beleeuing it had been Mirce himselfe; and reporting this newes, it caused generally euery one to reioyce. But presently after it was knowne not to bee true, and that he was saued in manner as wee haue said.
Certaine daies after, Raoul hauing pacified all the troubles in his kingdome,  dispatched his Ambassadours to Castalde, to giue him heartie thankes for all his former fauours hee had shewed him, and for the ayde that hee gaue him, with which hee wonne this victorie, which had yeelded him his kingdome, and preserued his life: whereupon he entirely offered himselfe vnto him, assuring him to bee alwaies readie vpon any occasion whatsoeuer to accompanie him: and besides, swearing to him all fidelitie, and that for his owne part and his countries, he would continually obserue good peace and amitie with him.
Whilest he was in this dispatch, there arriued at Wasrael the Chiauss,  who should negotiate this peace between Ferdinand, Solyman, and the Transiluanians, as a little before is recited. He being returned from Constantinople, and come to this place, he found there assembled (according to the former order) most of all the principall States of that countrie, who attended him with great desire and hope of peace. This negotiator was very honourably

entertained by them, and after he had reposed himselfe one day, he  was conducted into the assemblie, where in stead of peace and truce, hee The answer of Solyman to the request that the Hungars made for peace. brought such feare and astonishment into the mindes of euery one, that it was an incredible thing: for that in stead of accepting the tribute, he spoke to them all in the name of Solyman, that his pleasure was they should receiue King Iohns sonne and Queene Izabella his mother as their true and lawfull Lords, and should expulse Castalde out of Transiluania, and cut all the souldiours in peeces which were payed by Ferdinand, and that then he would receiue the ordinarie tribute, and would esteeme them worthie of his grace and fauour: and if they otherwise did, that hee would then cause them to know what his indignation would bee, and that his abilitie and Maiestie  had the power to reuenge himselfe against them all, putting all to fire and sword, trampling and pacing his horses ouer their bodies, reducing their countrie into a miserable destruction. And hauing thus said vnto them, he gaue them a letter written in Latin, directed to Vayuode Battor, and to all the other Lords and Peeres of the kingdome, which verbatim I haue truly written, without altering or corrupting any thing therein contained. It was written in parchment, shining like glasse, in letters of gold after the Turkish manner, in legible Latin. The superscription whereof was thus.

Letters of Solyman to Battor, Vayuode of Transiluania.MANDATVM INVICTISSIMI IMPERATORIS Turcharum ad Dominum Battorem Andream Capitaneum in Transiluania, ac ad alios illius Regni dominos, etc. 

FIdelis in fide Christi, and inter Christianos in regno Transiluaniae prudens, and generose domine Battor Andreas, and caeteri alij Domini nobis dilectissimi, etc. Exmandato celsitudinis nostrae intelligitis quod vobis multoties notificauimus; quod postquam frater Georgius Thesaurarius noster crudeliter, ac per insidias mortuus fuit, antequam Germanos, quos propter discordias vestras introduxeratis, expellere posset, vos, and alij domini Transiluaniae communi consilio, and auxilio ipsos Germanos ex patria vestra secundum fidelitatem, quam excelsae Portae nostrae debetis, eijcere debeatis. Verum cum hoc hactenus factum non sit, vos nunc ad id exequendum adhortari

placuit, quoniam vobis omne peccatum remittendo, and delictum huc vsque commissum, omnem libertatem, quam antea in regno Transiluaniae habuistis, iterum concedere, and conseruare pollicemur, and vos subditi, and Domini apud nos semper in honore, and sub nostra protectione eritis. Regnum autem Transiluaniae quemadmodum ante sub Rege Ioanne, and filio suo, subditis, and fidelibus nostris, in libertate, and quiete fuit, sic, and nunc esse disponemus, and ipsum Regis Ioannis filium inter vos regnare pro certo promittemus. Cum enim ipse Rex Ioannes subditus, and seruitor noster nobis sincere, and fideliter seruiret, non solum a nullo molestari passi non sumus, sed post eius mortem filio suo paruulo adhuc, paternam patriam, and Regnum ex gratia, and clementia nostra concessimus, and Transiluania sic temporibus illis pacifica fuit. Sed

post modum introductis Germanis maxima discordia inter vos orta est, ob quam, and ad introducendum Regis Ioannis filium, and matrem ipsius, ac ad liberandam Transiluaniam ab inimicis suis naturalibus Dei gratia maximum, and potentissimum exercitum ordinari, and congregari mandauimus. Necesse est ergo pro fidelitate vestra

diligentem vos curam habere vt Germanos regno vestro gladio propulsetis, and donec

filius Regis Ioannis introducatur in locum ipsius, inter vos dignum, and honoratum hominem in generalem illius regni Capitaneum eligatis eique omnes obediatis vt inimicum vestrum naturalem apud vos esse non permittatis, sed illos, qui tantae discordiae in ipso regno sunt causa, communi consilio expellite, and regnum filij Regis Domini vestri diligenter gubernare curabitis. Quod si signum istud fidelitatis, and obedientiae a vobis acceperimus, non solum in regno Transiluaniae libertatem vestram antiquam, sed maximam gratiam, and honorem ab Imperiali Celsitudine nostra obtinebitis. Nos interim exercitum nostrum innumerabilem pro regno, and filio Regis conseruabimus, and iam nunc pro libertate ipsius a manibus inimicorum moueri ordinauimus, quia nullo modo assentire voluimus vt inimici in ea Prouincia regnent.

Et cum Ioannem Regem subditum, and fidelem seruum suum nostrum, ac filium etiam idem esse nouerimus, decreuimus omnino vt in Regnum reuertatur, ac in ipsum per nos restitutus regnet, and Deo concedente inimicum suum auxilio nostro semper debellet, and vincat. Idcirco nunc iam gratia Omnipotentis Dei magnificum, and maxime potentem, and obedientem subditum, fidelemque seruitorem Celsitudinis nostrae Illustrissimum Achmeten. Bassam secundum Consiliarium Maiestatis nostrae, tum multos nostros, tum proprios aulicos, Iannisserosque Imperialis potentissimae, ac inuictissimae Portae Celsitudinis nostrae, and cum maximo exercitu de Grecia, and Buda, simul cum Capitaneis generalibus, and cum omnibus Sangiacchis mouere fecimus, adeo quod cum dicto Consiliario nostro, antequam contra hostem persona nostra moueatur, exercitum ducentorum millium hominum bene instructorum habebimus.

Preterea mandauimus serenissimo Principi de Tartaria, Vaiuodisque Valacchiae, and Moldauiae cum omnibus Sangiacchis, qui sunt in illis partibus vltra, and citra Danubium, vt cum omni eorum peditatu, and equitatu se cum dicto Veserio nostro coniungant, and vos etiam necesse est secundum fidelitatem vestram dicto Bassae seruiatis, and nuncios tam ad excelsam Portam nostram, quam ad eum decernatis. Quod si mandato nostro huic in obedientes, and cum inimicis nostris concordes eritis, crudelitatem, and stragem, quam Transiluaniae regnum videbit, ex demeritis vestris processisse credatis. Nam gratia Creatoris omnipotentis Dei speramus Christianis, and regno Transiluaniae iram, and potentiam nostram ostendere. Etsi ipsi Transiluani ad

pristinam obedientiam, and fidelitatem nobis adiuuantibus reuerti recusabunt, nusquam tuti erunt, and per totum mundum debitas luent poenas. Iurauimus enim Omnipotenti Deo quod in Transiluania lapis super lapidem non relinquetur, homines omnes in ore gladij dari, pueros, and faeminas in captiuitatem, omniaque loca solo aequari faciemus. Propter quod vti inuictissimum, and potentissimum Imperatorem decet ne tantarum animarum exitum super nostram animam fiat, vos omnes prius monendos esse sensuimus. Iam multoties vobis mandata talia misimus, quae neglexistis, sed si mandato huic vltimo obedientes non eritis, acerbitatem, and ruinam, quam videbitis non nobis, sed vobis ipsis attribuite. Omnia igitur cum tempore bene consulite, nam caetera prudentiae vestrae examinanda relinquimus.



Datum Constantinopoli septima Lunae Octobris.


The english of which is this that followeth.


THE MANDATE OF THE INVINCIBLE EMPErour of the Turks, to Lord Andrew Battor, Captaine in Transiluania, and to all the other Lords and Peeres of that countrie.
BY the authoritie and expresse commaund of our greatnes and highnes, you shall vnderstand (you faithfull in the faith of Christ Andrew Battor, wise and knightly Lord amongst all the Christians inhabiting in Transiluania, and all you the residue of our louing Lords) how that many times wee haue made knowne to you (since that Frier George our Treasurer was cruelly and by treason murdered, before he could chase out the Germanes, which  you by your dissentions vntimely haue brought into the kingdome) that you your selues, and all the rest of the Lords of Transiluania, should by common consent and mutuall ayd, expulse the said Germanes out of your countrie, according to the fidelitie which you owe to our Port and statelines. Which not being as yet performed by you, wee were very carefull now to incite you to doe it, pardoning you of all the former offences and faults, which vntill now you haue committed against vs, and promising to giue it you againe, and to preserue all the libertie which heretofore you haue had in that kingdome of Transiluania: and you our Lords and subiects shall alwaies be vnder our protection and safegard, and we will hold you in such regard,  as shall be fitting for you. And concerning the kingdome of Transiluania, as vnder the gouernment of King Iohn, and of his sonne our faithfull subiects, it was in peace and freedome: euen so wee will ordaine that at this present it shall so continue: and we assuredly promise you, that the said sonne of King Iohn shall raigne and gouerne amongst you. For so long as King Solyman for Queene Izabella. Iohn (our Vassall and subiect) serued vs faithfully and sincerely, we neuer suffered that any should molest or trouble you: but further after his death, wee of our singular grace and clemencie, gaue to his sonne (being yet in minoritie) his fathers countrie and that kingdome, and then Transiluania was alwaies quiet. But after that you had called in the Germanes amongst you, great dissentions were stirred vp betweene you: in respect whereof, and to  reestablish King Iohns sonne and his mother, and to deliuer Transiluania from her naturall enemies; we by the grace of God, haue commaunded to leauie a very great and puissant armie. It behoueth you therefore, in consideration of your loyaltie, that your care and diligence bee, with force of armes to expulse out of your kingdome the Germanes, and whilest that King Iohns sonne bee reestablished in his place and dignitie, that you elect a generall Captaine in that kingdome, to whom you may all obey, and not suffer any longer your naturall enemies to bee amongst you, but by a common consent to banish from thence, those, who are the cause of so many garboyles  amongst you, and that euery one of you endeuour himselfe (according to his abilitie) well and diligently to gouerne the kingdome of King Iohns sonne your Lord. And if we receiue from you this marke and token of fidelitie and obedience, you shall not onely obtaine of vs your ancient libertie in this your kingdome of Transiluania, but also receiue further from

our imperiall Maiestie, speciall honour and fauour. In the meane time wee will entertaine our mightie armie for the affayres of that kingdome, and for  the ayde and assistance of King Iohns sonne; and we haue alreadie commanded that it should presently march for the deliuerie thereof, from out of his enemies hands. For wee will by no meanes tolerate, that his enemies shall raigne and gouerne in this Prouince. And being sufficiently ascertained how much King Iohn our Vassall hath been to vs a faithfull seruant, and also his sonne, wee haue determined to reinstall him into his kingdome, and to cause him to raigne in it by our meanes, and afford him such ayde, that (by Gods permission) he shall bee able to ouercome and surmount his enemie. To this intent (by Gods assistance) wee haue caused to march the magnificall  and puissant, our obedient subiect and faithfull seruant to our Highnes, the most illustrious Achmeth Basha, second Councellor to our excellent Maiestie, and many other our subiects and Courtiers, with a great number of Ianisaries of the most mightie and inuincible Port of our greatnes and highnes, hauing also commaunded all our generall Captaines and Sangiachs to cause to come from Greece and Buda a great armie, insomuch, that with our said Councellor, we shall haue an armie of 200000. men well appointed, before wee march in person against our enemie. And further, wee haue commaunded the most excellent Prince of Tartaria, the Vayuodes of Vallachia and Moldauia, with all the Sangiachs which are in those countries on this  side and beyond Danubius, that with all their Infantrie and Caualarie they shall ioyne with our said Vizir. And it is also necessarie that you obey (according to your fidelitie) the said Basha, and that you send your Ambassadours as well towards our royall Port, as also to him. But if you perseuer disobedient to our mandate, and that you accord and adherre to our enemies, then assuredly thinke, that the ruine, losse, and crueltie which the kingdome of Transiluania shall endure, shall not ensue but by your demerits. For by the grace of God the almightie Creator, wee hope to giue sufficient testimonie to Christians, and to the kingdome of Transiluania, what our indignation and puissance is. And if the Transiluanians (we affoording them our ayde)  will not returne to their ancient obedience and loyaltie, they shall neuer be on any side sure or safe, but shall endure through the world the iust punishments which they haue merited. For wee haue sworne to God almightie, that there shall not remaine in Transiluania one stone vpon another, that all the men shall be put to the sword, the women and children shall bee led captiue, and wee will that all be throwne downe and leauied with the ground: whereof wee thought it fitting, first to aduertise you, as it belongeth to a most inuincible and victorious Emperour, to the end that the losse of so many soules should not bee imputed to vs. We haue before times sent you the like Edicts, which you haue neglected. But if to this last Mandate you  are not tractable and obedient, attribute to your selues, and not to vs, the crueltie and ruine which in short time shall be inflicted vpon you. Aduisedly then consider in time on all things, for wee leaue the rest to bee duly examined by your wisedomes. 

Giuen at Constantinople, the 7. day of the Moone of October.



This Letter did so much daunt the mindes of euery one, that it little wanted  The Transiluanians astonished at the letters of Solyman. there followed not a generall reuolt, as well for that Vayuode Battor was not there in person (he being absent in respect of sicknes) as also by reason that there was a speech of the returne of King Iohns sonne and of his mother. Castalde, who was yet at Albe-iula, (where he was lodged, the better to passe a good part of the winter) hauing receiued letters, by which he was certified of all this matter, and aduised to come with all speede to take order therefore: further intimating vnto him, that the Transiluanians did no longer affect him, and that the most part of them would adherre to the Turke, and recall Iohn to bee their King: he presently departed from Albe-iula the 2. of December, not respecting the rage and violence of the winter (which  then was extreame) and with great iourneys came to Wasrael, arriuing the same morning that the Diet should haue been concluded, and that euery man should haue deliuered his opinion. His arriuall greatly troubled the minds of the principallest amo^g them, and stayed them a little for that time, hindering that the conclusion was not so presently performed (which neuerthelesse was alreadie wholly resolued among them) and counselled them to thinke further thereon. The day following, the better to expell from them this feare, and to reassure and confirme them in the deuotion and amitie of Ferdinand, he reproued the pride and vanitie of this said letter, causing them all to be called to the Diet: and he spake to them in this sort. 

I know not (O you Lords and Peeres of Hungarie, Saxonie, and Sicilia) The oratio^ of Castalde to those of the Diet of Wasrael. vpon what occasion you are so suddenly astonished, and so much amazed, that I cannot but extreamely maruaile thereat, seeing that if for such vaine boasting words, you are so discouraged, and in a manner halfe dead; what I should thinke of you if it happened to come to deedes: for dread of which you can doe no worse: and for feare of the mischiefe which the Turk denounceth to you, you should with such cowardlines, yeeld your neckes subiect vnder the yoke of his tyrannicall Empire, minding vpon so light an occasion to defraud your selues of this glorie, which partly hath been seene to bee achieued by you vntill this present, and which in many armies hath shined euery where: not considering that some will boldly say, that your  feare hath been in part the cause, that such iniurious writings and horrible menacies, should haue the force with you to kill you, and cause you to dye, as men without seeing any sword. But if it be your minde that men should not so thinke of you, and that indeede you would not giue any occasion thereof; why like women or children doe you suffer your selues to bee so amazed? Are you not men like vnto them? Haue you not the like equall courage, force, and vigour which they haue? Or what (I pray) haue they more then you? What maketh you thus so suddenly to feare, you whom in times past haue so many times beaten and ouerthrowne them? Doe you  not manage and beare the same armes? and ride you not on the same horses, with which you haue often forst them to many labours and toyles: so that they haue more occasion to feare you, then you thus to lose your courage in respect of them? What blame and disgrace will this be to you, I say, who so many times haue been victorious, and often haue defeated and chased

the Turke out of this kingdome, to agree now to him, by reason of the brauado of a simple vaine letter, which by force of armes you would neuer  heretofore haue condiscended vnto, and thus sillily like simple lambes to throw your selues into the wolues mouth? Shall not this (trow you) bee a perpetuall dishonor to you all? It behoueth you therefore to haue this constant opinion, that before you fall into this great indignitie and calamitie, that you expose your owne liues for your religion, countrie, children, brothers, wiues, sisters, and kinsefolkes, rather then remaining aliue, you should become a laughing stocke to all the world. For those shall alwaies be esteemed glorious, and worthie of all praise, who fighting for the libertie of their countrie, and common good, shall not refuse an honourable death, to auoyd  a miserable and dishonest life. It is apparant to you that the Turke hath alreadie sounded all violent meanes, and not being able to ouercome you by force, he now goeth about by these his other subtelties to subdue and bring you vnder, to the end that you might proue by this his horrible crueltie, that which his owne naturall children are fallen into. And beleeue me, he that is cruell against his owne flesh and blood, cannot bee milde and mercifull to others, as assuredly he will not be towards you at any hand: but he will carrie himselfe so (seeing the dissentions of you all not very well accorded amongst your selues) as he and his predecessours behaued themselues then, when they saw the dissentions betweene the Christian Princes, which haue thus increased this Empire vnto them, as with griefe too apparantly is seene  at this day. And assure your selues he will doe with you, as he hath done in Greece, which for her last refuge took a like resolution to this of yours, the end of which, ought to be more manifest and euident then euer heretofore, by reason of the experience you haue had of former miserie. And on the contrarie, if you will consorte in a good and friendly vnion, these loftie and furious speeches cannot any way hurt you. For a generall vnion and setled concord, doth alwaies feare and terrifie the enemie; and on the contrarie, discord and dissention giueth him hope to ouercome: whereas by the meanes of a mutuall vnderstanding and amitie among your selues, you may  bee assured he shall not haue the power to flesh himselfe in your blood, nor glut himselfe amongst you with all kinde of incontinencie, as his predecessors haue done in the principall houses of Greece. Now, seeing it is naturally giuen to all, to be more inclined to chuse of the worst, rather then the best, I haue thought it fitting to aduertise you, with the best and pleasingest perswasions that possibly I can, that you haue no need thus to neglect your former force and vertue, for brauadoes which are but forged and full of winde. Considering in what repose and quiet you now are, enioying your full libertie, and the same peaceably, and that vnder the wing and protection of your King, who is so milde and iust, that not any whosoeuer may be compared to him: and imagining on the contrarie, that you shall neuer finde rest  or safetie vnder the gouernment of this cruell and barbarous Lord; holding it for most certaine, that it is a vaine conceit for strangers (such as you are esteemed of him) once to thinke that they are able to finde any clemencie and pitie in him, who towards his owne naturall children hath manifested himselfe

most cruell. Therefore you ought to animate, defend, and support your selues with a firme and stoute assurance, worthie of your former prowesses,  against these accidents of Fortune, that so you may gaine a glorious life: for things that haue bin done by like tyrants, ought to be tolerated as mischiefes, which suddenly proceed from nature. And stay your selues vpon the King my Lord and master, who will neuer faile to send you what possible ayde he can, with which he is alreadie become master of Albe-iula, Ahnas, Engedin, and Lippa, and hath forced the Turk to recoile and raise his Campe from before Themesuar, constraining him in great haste to auoide this kingdome (which vndoubtedly hee meant then to haue reduced to a miserable and perpetuall bondage) and preseruing you in this liberty, in which through his grace and  fauour you liue, and for which both your selues and children should be for euer bound to him. And considering the aduertisement that shall be giuen to our King of all these affayres, expell and banish from your idle fancies these feares and momentarie conceits, and doe not any whit dread these theeues and robbers, which with so great furie they menace to send vnto you. Beleeue me their armies haue no wings to flie, neither can they so readily assemble themselues as they haue writ of. And as once (to our great glorie) wee haue chased them out of this Realme, with so great losse of his people, as cannot well be recounted: so I assuredly hope, that for the time to come we shall againe performe the like, and that with our farre greater praise and renowne; and then he in good earnest tasting of your resolution, and  stoutnes of courage, and inuincible vertue, he leauing you there in peace, will chaunge his intention like fortune, plainly knowing that he hath not to manage warre with effeminate or cowardly people, but with men experienced as well in warre as in peace, and who through the world shall yeeld a deare account to him of their persons, while they doe as resolute mindes are wont to doe, who being vniustly iniuried, and feeling the outrage that they haue receiued, doe for peace willingly imbrace warre.

All the Lords present being reanimated by these speeches, sent to tell the The Transiluanians reanimated against the Turkes. great Turke, Achmeth Basha, the Moldauian, and the Belerbey of Greece, that they should come no further, because that they were resolutely determined  to resist them as much as they could, hauing determined together to die in battaile, rather then to liue vnder their lawes. They also answered the Chiauss, that they were content to pay him the ordinarie tribute, if so it pleased the Grand Seigniour to accept of such as was offered him: which if he would not accept, that then he should presently depart.
The Chiauss receiuing this answer, and seeing he could then accomplish no other thing, accepted of the ordinarie tribute, which was yeerely 20000. crownes, and so retired to Belgrade, and from thence to Constantinople, leauing the kingdome free of a great feare and suspition. 
Castalde hauing thus (though not altogether) gained the hearts of the Transiluanians, and confirmed them in the league and deuotion of Ferdinand, retired againe to his accustomed aboade at Albe-iula: where he had not been long, but that he had newes how Achmeth (Basha of Buda) writ

a familiar letter full of a thousand kind and liberall offers to Patocchy, containing  certaine hidden and secret words, as if there had been some great intelligence and correspondence betweene them two. Which the Basha purposely practised, to the end that Ferdinand and Castalde should vpon that occasion, iustly conceiue some mistrust against him. But his former proceedings being sufficiently iustified, hee was alwaies held and reputed by them very loyall and faithfull, and they committed vnto him the Castle of Iula, with the gouernment of the towne, that he might keepe it (as in former time hee had done) faithfully, and therein to remaine his wife and children.
The Castles of Iula, Panchotto, Varadin, and others began to bee in some distresse for want of victuals, and it was most necessarie to make prouision  for them: which was not done without great discommoditie, for that they were constrained to employ thereupon the money which was appointed for the musters, and payment of the souldiours: so that the time to muster being come, and this said money spent in these affayres, it was not possible to recouer or get any more: and that was the cause (as hereafter we shall speake) of great tumults, and specially because Vayuode Battor by his indisposition, or for that it so pleased him, would no longer execute the office of Vayuodship, and requested that they would prouide themselues of another therefore, although Castalde instantly desired him to continue in this office, which greatly troubled him. 
During these troubles, letters came from Ferdinand, by which he commanded them to begin a trial and proceed therein against Aldene the Campmaster, The pursuice against Aldene. who was still prisoner, and yt afterwards he shuld be sent to him, with all the proceedings against him. Aldene reprouing (as suspected) certaine of the Iudges, required his Maiestie that his triall might bee referred to others: which being granted him, they began to examine many witnesses, and concluded his triall, by which in the end he was condemned to die, and euen by the deposition of many who did proue against him the great treacherie and cowardlines which he vsed in abandoning Lippa, he being well able to defend it, who also set open and declared the great losse and damage which he  had committed against Ferdinand, in causing the Castle and Artillerie and all the munition to bee consumed with fire, which were the materiall causes that he was condemned to death for. His triall being thus fully concluded, he was sent to Vienna with the sentence of the Iudges: which being allowed by his Maiestie, declared that he should be sent vnder a sure guard, who presently after, according to that commaund, was surely conducted in chaines to Vienna, where hee remained prisoner so long, that the continuance thereof in the end was the cause (as hereafter wee shall speake) of his libertie. Queene Izabella practiseth her returne into Transiluania. Peter Vicchy and Chendy for Izabella.
In the meane while, Queene Izabella was not any thing idle, but practised  all the meanes she could to reenter againe with her sonne, greatly assisting her selfe by the meanes and fauour of Peter Vicchy, and Chendy Ference, and other principall men, who secretly affected her cause. And although Ferdinand

writ to her, that he was readie at all times to performe that which he  promised her, and besides to giue her the Dutchie of Monsterberg, yet she would by no meanes accept any whit thereof, saying, that since within the presixed time the premised bargaines and agreements were not of his part performed, she for her part meant no lesse to obserue and keepe them, and that she was determined againe to haue her owne. Vpon which, there was newes that the Sicilians intended some treacheries with the Turks in her fauour, and that they had sent some priuately to her, to restore Iohn into his kingdome. By occasion of these tumults there was a Diet assigned at Possouia, wherein the people of the kingdome of Transiluania greatly co^plained Euill intreatie caused the rebellion of the Transiluania^s against Ferdinand. of the griefes and wrongs which they daily endured, as wel by the warre and  fortifications, as also for the insolencies which they receiued by Ferdinands souldiours, importuning to haue redresse thereof, and not to taske them with such impositions; promising if he did so, not to faile his Maiestie, but willingly to take armes against the Turkes, and valiantly to defend themselues against them, and sincerely to maintaine the dutie and homage which they had sworne to his Maiestie. Vpon these complaints and demaunds, Ferdinand caused them to bee answered, that he would not faile as much as he could, to ease them of that burthen, and that he would cause it to appeare vnto them, that his pleasure was no other but alwaies to ayde and defend them against the violence of the common enemie; against whom they should not for all that faile to take armes, as he for his part would not bee  wanting to send them forces, and to come in his owne person (if necessitie did so require it) for their deliuerie, or else to send them the King of Bohemia his sonne; that presently he would giue order to all those inconueniences of which they complained, and that in the meane time they should not omit to persist in the faith and deuotion wherein they had vntill then continued, and that there should be no fault in him, but that he would vse them as most loyall and faithfull subiects. Whereupon euery one held himselfe well contented with these promises. Yet for all that, these humours slided not out of their braines, but increased more and more, specially because it was manifest that Bartholmew Coruatte (who had the guard of Iula with two Germane  companies) badly behaued himselfe in this towne, spoyling, murthering, and killing the poore inhabitants thereof, preaching to them the Lutheran religion, with which opinion he was infected. To remedie which, Castalde was constrained to depute Paul Banchy in that quarter for Vice Vayuode, and commaund Coruatte to depart out of Iula, and sent him farre off, leauing the charge of this towne to Francis Patocchy, who bore himselfe so familiarly amongst the inhabitants, that they found themselues greatly reioyced and comforted therewith.
If on this side Ferdinands souldiours did minister exceeding griefe and  disquiet to Castalde, they yet on the other side gaue him daily more and more for want of pay, he being greatly tormented by Duke Mauris for the payment of his souldiours that was due to them, from the time that the siege was raised from before Agria, he neuer hauing receiued any seruice from

them, but rather great damage and infinit ruine through the whole Realme.  For the redresse and dispatch of which (although the winter was come) he Duke Mauris dismissed. meant indeede fully to content him, and to dissolue his armie, which was dismissed from Iauerin, and there was put therein another garrison. This was the cause, that he being desirous to keepe his word with this Duke, he could not then satisfie with pay his owne Campe which he had in Transiluania, of which, for that it was composed of the vassals and subiects of his king and that countrie, he had more assurance in their patience, then in the other which were straungers and not subiect to him, who at their departure, although they were well payed, yet for all that they desisted not from committing great inormities. And although Castalde did what possibly he could  to keepe his souldiours in peace, prouiding them of good lodgings, and causing to bee distributed through the countrie ordinarie victuall, more then was sufficient, yet could he not so farre preuaile with them, as to cause them to desist from, or giue ouer their mutinies, conspiracies, or other horrible mischiefes, which did not onely hurt in particular, but also in generall: because that the inhabitants of the countrie receiuing such iniuries, hated and abhorred them greatly, and they spake of nothing else, but that occasion would offer it self for them to take armes, and giue them cause to vnderstand their fault, by the massacring which in time they hoped to execute vpon them, all of them earnestly desiring (that they might the better wade out  of such calamities) the returning of Iohn into his kingdome. By reason of such mischiefes, many Captaines and principals of the countrie, who in former time had been Ferdinands friends, became secretly his deadly enemies, and raunged themselues on Queene Izabellaes partie, not a little increasing her forces and faction, which procured to Castalde infinit discontent.
Now, as Fortune in this quarter managed the actions of mortall men, she (in better manner then men could think for) disposed of them about Deua, because that those who were in garrison in this towne, hauing intelligence The garrison of Deua put in route some Turkish companies. that by the commaund of Cassombech, two companies of Turkish horse were  departed out of Lippa, to enter, harrie, and spoyle in Transiluania, they put themselues in order for an ambuscado, and to fight with them as they should passe through difficult places. And hauing thus disposed of their people, the Caualarie of Cassombech presented themselues with a greedie desire to pill and burne some neighbour places: and being now arriued at the passage, where they were expected, it was suddenly charged on all sides, and they all fighting a certaine time, not knowing who should haue the best, in the end the Turkes finding themselues in the middest of the other souldiours (who vntill then kept themselues close) began to retire themselues, and to leaue the victory to those of Deua, who omitted not to pursue them euen within sight  of Lippa, and slew of them 300. and tooke many prisoners. Our people being incouraged at this good fortune, and not satisfying themselues with that which they so happely achieued, passed further with incurtions into the enemies countrie, sacking some villages, and pilling all which came to their hands,

performing such warlike exploits, that besides the conquest of the prisoners,  and bootie which was not small, they put all that quarter in such a dread, that the Turkes a long time after durst not come to doe iniurie to the Transiluanians: for that they still distrusted themselues of some intended stratagems. By this defeate (which was all the good that happened this yeere 1552.) the arrogancie and rashnes of the enemy was bridled: but not that of Ferdinands souldiours, which daily increased, hauing no respect neither to Generall, Colonels, Captaines, nor any diuine or humane thing, minding by their disloyaltie to make themselues masters of their phantasies, and to goe euery where, without expecting the appointment and commaund of his Maiestie, or the leaue of Castalde, as more  amply we shall treate of in the successes which happened in the yeere 1553.
The end of the sixth Booke.



THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE SEVENTH BOOKE.
THe Transiluanians solicite Queene Izabella to returne into Transiluania, and Castalde (for the remedie thereof) appointeth a Diet at Colosuar. The Spaniards mutinie, and seeke to depart Transiluania. Aldene is brought to Vienna, whither Castalde (by Ferdinands appointment) also commeth: vpon whose departure out of Transiluania, the Transiluantans rise in armes in the behalfe of the Queene. Aldene condemned, but is saued by fauour. Castalde leaueth the seruice of Ferdinand, and returneth againe to the Emperour Charles. The historie of the death of Mustapha, eldest sonne of Solyman. Albe-iula and all Transiluania yeeld to the Queene. Charles the 5. renounceth the Empire to his brother Ferdinand; and his letter to the Cardinall of Mentz; his arriuall in Spaine; and the place where he retired himselfe to end his daies. Ferdinand crowned Emperour. The Turke commandeth Izabella to expell all new sects out of her kingdome. The death of the Emperour Charles, for whose death Philip his sonne King of Spaine made sumptuous funerals at Bruxels.

THe winter was now alreadie in a manner at the extreamest, and towards the end of Februarie in the yeere 1553.  when the Peeres and Lords of Transiluania not minding Anno 1553. any longer to suffer the Germanes and Spaniards amongst them, nor hauing now no more meanes to victuall them, as vsually they had done; they began secretly to send Ambassadours to Queene Izabella, to negotiate with her concerning her returne into this Prouince: The Transiluanians solicite Queene Izabella to returne into Transiluania. whereunto Peter Vicchy, Chendy, and others were greatly assisting. Castalde hauing notice of all this, and being thereof well assured, gaue present aduertisement thereof to Ferdinand, who also presently did not forget on  his part to vse all diligence to withstand and preuent these practises, sending Alphonse (nephew to Castalde) to the King of Polonia, and to Queene Bonna her mother, and to Queene Ioane, to intreate them to vse speedie meanes to diuert these clowdes which were thundring in the ayre. Ferdinand also

sent letters from Vienna to Queene Izabella, by which he offered her to performe  all that which was accorded betweene them, and specially certaine other articles or demaunds made by her, to which his Maiestie before would not accord. And the better to effect this busines, he writ againe to Francis Chendy, and to Thomas Varcocchy, desiring them to importune the Queene so much, that she would content her selfe with that which was agreed vpon, since that whatsoeuer was done, was not but to the profit of her and her sonne Iohn, and to the increasing of both their commodities. These two Lords made semblance as though they allowed it, and faining to shew their vttermost abilitie for Ferdinand, did altogether to the contrarie. And the Queene on the one side gaue good words, and on the other she hastened  her affayres as well as she could; the Turke hauing alreadie commaunded the Vayuode of Moldauia that he should prepare himselfe with all his best meanes to enter into Transiluania, and to Cassombech to doe the like, leauing as many men as he could in the low countries, and to fauour and assist the Queenes affayres, and to vse their vttermost abilitie to reinstall King Iohn into his kingdome, adding to his commaund, that if he could not compasse the effect of this enterprise, yet at the least he should vse the meanes to increase in this Prouince his Sangiacship, promising him succours from Buda.
Castalde being aduertised of all these deuises, that he might the better remedie them, and not suffer them to take further footing, appointed that the  principall Lords of the kingdome, should vpon the 15. of March next, bee at the Diet of Colosuar, to acquaint them with that which Ferdinand had commaunded them. Before the meeting of this Diet, Andrew Battor (who againe was confirmed in the estate of Vayuod, and withall was made Counte of Zalmar and Zalboc) hauing assembled a good troupe of men among the neighbour townes and Castles, and hauing vnderstood that certaine companies of Turkish Caualarie made some incurtions, pilling and burning all the villages, and minding to expulse them, hee caused his people to goe into the field, and to march towards the enemie. But in the end comming to handie strokes, not farre from Agria, he was so hotly charged, that  some of his people quitted the place, and others remained there either slaine or taken prisoners: and amongst others, some of his household seruants and familiar fauourits were taken; to redeeme whom, Castalde was forced to giue to the Basha of Buda a Chiauss, and a Mahometaine Priest, who were taken at the death of Frier George, and detained prisoners in the Castle of Wiuar, and to exchange them (by Ferdinands commaund) with the said fauourits, who by this meanes recouered their libertie.
By reason of this disorder, the Vayuod intreated Ferdinand that he would giue him the meanes and inable him to entertaine 1000. light horse, of the number of those which he payed in Transiluania: which was wholly granted  to him, and besides 1000. foote, that so he might be the better able to affront the Turkes forces in those quarters. Ferdinand also gaue him charge to conclude an end of a discord among the people called Cumans, who hauing been vnder the iurisdiction of Zaluoch, would not (seeing that this

Fortresse was reduced vnder the Turkes puissance) be vnder that of Agria,  but rather vnder that of Varadin. In the end, by the diligence of Castalde and the Vayuode, they were content to be obedient to Agria.
Now whilest that the Turke was greatly busied by the Sophy, and that he conuerted his forces for the defence of Amasia, into which the Persians were entered, they began againe (by the meanes and interposing of Haly The renewing of the procuring of peace. Chlauss) to negotiate the truce betweene Ferdinand and Solyman, there being safe conduct graunted both from the one and other, to send Ambassadours to either partie. There being for this purpose some appointed on both sides, it was in the end perceiued, that nothing else was done, but to entertaine the Transiluanians in some hope, whilest that the Turkes should dispatch their other intangled affayres, that afterwards they might assaile them,  according to their accustomed manner. For they had aduertisement how Cassombech (at the instance of the Queene) had assembled about him many Sangiacchs, and that with the troupes which daily came to him, hee meant to march directly to Deua, to reuenge himselfe of the losses which he had receiued of our people, and withall to make himselfe master of that place, to the end that so he might not haue any impeachment that might crosse his proceedings. Hereupon Castalde caused the Diet to be solicited, and earnestly to perswade all those that should be present thereat, to giue order that euery one should take armes, and ayde this towne and others, and specially to march to the frontiers which diuide Polonia from Transiluania, where it  was said, that there were 12000. Pollacques well armed, whose enterprise was knowne to be no other, but onely that they were there for the ayde of Queene Izabella.
The appointed day then for the Diet being come, Castalde was present at A Diet at Colosuar. Colosuar, where he found al those who were called thither, except the Vayuode, who in respect of his sicknes was excused, and there (by the expresse commaund of Ferdinand) hee demaunded of the Transiluanians ayde of men, to suppresse all these tumults, which couertly were dispersed in euery place, and to defend Deua and other places: he also demaunded money and victuals, to make at the least a reasonable armie, and such, that with his people  which then he had, he might bee able in many places to resist his enemies. Besides, he demaunded of them Pioners, to finish the fortifications of Sibinio, Albe-iula, and Sassebesse, admonishing them to attempt it, whilest the meanes were on foote, to obtaine some truce of the Turke.
Vpon which demaunds, he was thus answered: that because the kingdome was by a long warre sorely afflicted and distressed, and euery man reduced to extreame miserie, they could not succour him with money, nor victuals, because that in the last winter they were all spent and consumed by the souldiours: and as for the ayde of men, they would assist him therewith as farre as they could; notwithstanding it being necessarie that Ferdinand  should send some other succours from Germanie or Hungarie to resist the Turke: for that this Prouince was not of it selfe sufficient to withstand so great an assault, which on euery side would be giuen, and specially towards Lippa, Brassouia, and Hungarie, where in euery place it was very requisit to

haue a great armie, infinit heapes of money, and great store of victuals to entertaine  them: which by no meanes could not be found in this countrie, by reason of the extreame pouertie thereof, and specially of labourers, which in regard of the continuall warres were either dead or fled. And as concerning that which they were able to do, he well knew that all was in his power to commaund; they besides not iudging it vnfit to giue some repose to this discontented people, to imbrace truce with the Turkes, whereto they willingly offered themselues, and they promised on their parts to chuse Ambassadours to treate thereof with the Grand Seigniour, by the meanes of the Vayuode of Transalpinia, who for the same effect had many times offered himselfe to them. And as for the fortifications of those places alreadie begun,  they would speake thereof to the Burgomasters of those townes, that they would do so much, that they should send so many Pioners as was needfull for the finishing of them.
With this resolution this Diet ended, when the Spaniards for two payes which they should haue receiued, were more moued and mutinous then before, The Spaniards mutinie. and that in so strange a manner as the like was neuer heard of. For refusing the payment, and not minding to stay that they might bee satisfied in that kingdome for all that which was due to them, they tooke by force the Ensignes from those who bore them, and with them took their way towards Vienna, passing through Hungarie, where they performed infinit euils, committing the greatest riot in the world. And although that Castalde (that he  might haue brought this warre to an end) was daily vpon his departure out of Transiluania, yet he neuer could, neither by entreaties, nor by offers, or perswsions so farre preuaile with them, as that they would attend him but twentie daies, to the end that he might not leaue the kingdome vnprouided, and that for the time to come he might giue order to those places which had neede of garrisons, and generally to doe before his departure, all whatsoeuer appertained to the preseruation of that countrie.
But without respect to their Generall they dislodged, and passed by Colosuar, threatning to sacke this towne, who were greatly afeard thereof, although that Castalde was within it. And being arriued at the riuer of Marque,  Ferdinand was exceedingly offended thereat, and meant to send the Marquesse Sforce Palauicin (who was alreadie redeemed from the Turkes for 15000. Duckets) with all his people to haue cut them in peeces, and seuerely to chastise the authors of this so great a sedition. But he being appeased by by some, sent to tell these Spaniards, that they should repayre to Papau, where they should bee satisfied of all their pay, as within a while after they were.
A little before that Aldene was conducted to Vienna, and was imprisoned Aldene brought to Vienna. in a tower, Ferdinand minding that his condemnation should not be executed vntill Castaldes comming, to whom he had giuen license to depart out of  this Prouince, and to come from thence to Vienna, or to Sopronio. Whereto Castalde retired out of Transiluania, and returned to Ferdinand. he was very willing, leauing this kingdome in the moneth of Aprill, and arriued at Vienna in the end of May, where he was ioyfully receiued by Ferdinand and K. Maximilian, to whom afterward he made a large recitall of all

what was passed, to their great content. And because vertue and glorie haue alwaies enuie attending on them, some persons bruited amongst the greatest  of Ferdinands Court, that Castalde had heaped together a great quantitie of Castalde wrongfully accused. gold and siluer, and that he was not a little inriched by Frier Georges treasure, and by the presents which the Transiluanians had bestowed on him, and that he had sent great store thereof from him. This bruite did greatly grieue him, for that it was come to Ferdinands eares; and yet further for this, that some said that he had detained and kept backe pensions and wages which his Maiestie had granted to certaine that were his trustie seruants, and who had faithfully serued him during this warre. Vpon this bad and false suggestion, there was added many other vile and infamous things. By writing and speeches he endeuoured to expell these false suggestio^s from Ferdinands conceit,  and from all the principall of his Court, who in respect of such an obiect, deferred the recompence which was iustly duly to him, for the paine and labour which he had taken in discharge of his office: yet so it was that in the end he was rewarded with 3000. Florins of gold of yeerely reuenew to him and his heires, with certaine conditions to call them backe vpon some reasonable summes.
Presently after the departure of Castalde out of Transiluania, they had newes, that one Clement Athanase had (with a good troupe of men assotiated with him) by night taken the Castle of Tocchay (which by the situation  Tocchay. thereof and art is very strong) and that he durst attempt with ladders to surprise The Transiluanians rise in the behalfe of Queene Izabella. the towne of Agria, from whence he was repulsed by the inhabitants, in such manner that he could not enterprise any thing vpon it: this being attempted by the commaund of Queene Izabella, and her sonne Iohn. They had also newes how Peter Vicchy was accorded with the Turkes, and how he being accompanied with all his adherents, he tooke the way towards Lippa, with intention (in the Queenes name) to surprise the towne of Deua and Iula, and doe his vttermost endeuour in this, that it might returne to her, and that she might reenter into the kingdome. This man had great meanes, and vnder his colour many great matters were practised, which gaue sufficient  occasion to Ferdinand to thinke deeply thereof, who was sufficiently informed how all the Realme inclined to the Queenes part. The Saxons to haue some shadow to remoue their household, caused to bee demaunded of his Maiestie the Castle of Aluins, which, they said, did (according to their priuiledges) belong to them, and they requested that it might be confirmed to them by him. That he might not discontent them in this their demaund, but rather to hold them assured to him in some sound fidelitie, and that hee might not giue them occasion to mutinie, he yeelded to their demaund; and presently they of Iula, Agria, and other places were commaunded, that they should be vigilant and carefull, and not sleepie or slothfull, for feare of being suddenly surprised by the Queenes partie, who ceased not to performe  her vttermost endeuour, that euery one should take armes against the Officers, Gouernours, and Lieutenants of Ferdinand.
During these proceedings, it was ordained that the processe of Aldene Aldene condemned to death, and saued by fauour. should be renued, and that the sentence should haue his full and entire effect,

if the accusations were found true. This reuiuing being at a certaine day ended,  the first sentence, was by this second confirmed, and by consequence Aldene condemned to haue his head cut off. The prescribed day being come to end his life, he was in the sight of all Vienna led chained betweene two Friers (who did comfort him) to the place of iustice, hauing the executioner by, and was there vpon a scaffold to be beheaded. Mary Queene of Bohemia, and daughter of the Emperour Charles the 5. because he was a Spaniard and subiect to her father, preuailed so much with the King her husband, that he requested pardon of Ferdinand for him, with this condition neuerthelesse, that he should alwaies remaine prisoner. This fauour being thus granted, Aldene had his life saued, and within a while after by the same meanes  was wholly set at libertie, against Castaldes liking, who (to the end he might giue example to others, and to cause them learne by the negligence and cowardlines of Aldene, how they should be hardie, resolute, and couragious, imitating Torquatus) solicited that he should be publikely punished.
Now whilest Castalde recreated himselfe with Ferdinand, sometimes being with him in hunting, sometimes pursuing the Harts along Danubius, (which to saue themselues from the dogges, tooke soyle therein) letters came to him from the Emperour Charles, by which he commaunded him, that seeing the Transiluanian warres were ended, he should presently depart from Vienna, and iourney into Flanders (where he was greatly troubled by the people of King Henry of France) that so he might vse him in this warre. The  Emperour also writ to Ferdinand, how he had taken Hedin from the French Hedin taken by the Emperour Charles from the French. King, which is a place situate vpon the confines of Artois in the Low Countries, against which he had brought a puissant armie, and had enuironed it with his Campe, and battered it on all sides, and that in the end he had taken it, notwithstanding the marueilous defence of the assieged, making a great myne, wherein was buried Horatius Farnese Duke of Castres, and that he had caused it to bee ruinated and defaced, euen to the foundations, there being prisoners with him the Duke of Bouillon Marshall of France Lieutenant in the same for the King, the Lord of Riou Gouernour, the Counte of Villars, the Lord of Prye, the Baron of Culan, and many others; there being besides  slaine, the Lord of Magny, the Vicount of Martigues, the Lord of Moninuille, the Lord of Cizieux, the Lord of Dampierre, the Seneshal of Castres, and many others. For this newes, and the taking of Terouanne, which a little before was besieged, were great fires of solemnitie made at Vienna, and many such-like exhilerations: at the end whereof, Castalde (to obey the Emperour) tooke leaue of Ferdinand, and after being greatly honoured by Castalde returned to the Emperour in Flanders. him with many priuiledges, and inriched with many gifts, for the great valour which he had shewen in Transiluania against the Turkes, he trauailed towards Germanie, at the time that the warre of Sienna began to cease, by  meanes of Pope Iulius the 3.
In the Easterne parts Solyman was no lesse inflamed to the warre, then was Charles the 5. against France. He (as wee haue said) in the yeere 1552. The historie of the death of Mustapha, Solymans eldest sonne. caused euery where to be published (to get Mustapha his eldest sonne into his hands) that the Persians were entered into Amasia and Syria, and had

sacked many townes, and spoyled a great circuite of the plaine countrie, leading with them prisoners the poore inhabitants, and ruinating al which they  incountred. Vpon these newes he caused to be diuulged that he should be forced to goe in person into Amasia, and to send Rostan Basha with a strong armie into Syria, to force them to retire. But this deuice was to no other end, but speedily to haue the said Mustapha into his commaund, and to assure himselfe of his Empire and life, by putting him to death. But before wee come to this narration, it is necessarie that I recite some things of time past, that I may the more orderly descent to that which commeth now to be treated of, and to cause men better to vnderstand the cause that moued Solyman so cruelly to hate so vertuous and magnanimious a sonne. 
Solyman then hauing had this Mustapha his eldest sonne, by a slaue of Circassia, Mustapha the eldest sonne of Solyman. he gaue him the gouernment of the Prouince of Amasia, the better to maintaine himselfe and his mother. This yong Prince daily increasing with corporall abilitie, and with vertues of the minde, gaue of himselfe great expectation to all those who saw him, assuring themselues that one day he would proue a most valiant Captaine and couragious Lord. This infant being departed from Constantinople, and arriued in this Prouince, the Grand Seigniour began to be enamoured of another of his Slaues, named Rossa, so Rossa beloued of Solyman. hotly, that with the daily conuersation he had with her, he saw by her foure children, the one named Mahomet, who had the Prouince of Carmania; the  other Baiazet, to whom was giuen Mechoresia; the third Selim, who after the Mahomet, Baiazet, Selim, Zeangir, children of Solyman by Rossa. death of Mahomet had Carmania; and the fourth Zeangir, otherwise called crookbacke, by reason of two knobs he had vpon his shoulders and breast, and he was of an excellent spirit. He had also a daughter named Chameria, who was giuen in mariage to Rostan Basha, who after the death of Abraham Chameria daughter of Solyman maried Rostan Basha. Basha was principall Visir. This man made himselfe very odious to all the world in this office, because had cut off the pay of the Ianisaries, the wages of the officers of the Grand Seigniours house, the charges of armies, and the estate of Sangiachs; all these charges being very burdensome and excessiue. But in stead thereof he was very well liked of Solyman, and much in his fauour,  for vsing such frugalitie, and not in the fauour of Mustapha, of whom he did greatly distrust himselfe for the traine which he had, and for the loue which the souldiours bore him. This distrust and feare were the cause that he enterprised a conspiracie with Rossa his mother in law against the life of Mustapha, by the deceit and treacherie which wee shall now speake of. This Rossa seeing how dearely she was beloued of the great Turke, to aduance her children by a policie, and vnder a fained colour and zeale of religion, sent to Muplety (properly called by the Turkes Muphty, who among the Mahometanes Muplety an arch Presbiter of the Mahometanes. is, as the Pope is among the Christians) to signifie to him, how she had a marueilous desire to cause a Temple to bee built, and an Hospitall also for the poore pilgrimes, to the honour of God and of their Prophet: but by no  meanes she would vndertake this worke, vnlesse that first she were assured Gods reward for charitable workes done by Slaues, appertaine to their masters. from him, that such workes should bee beneficiall for her soules health and agreeable to God. Muplety answered her, that this enterprise would bee well pleasing to God, but not for her saluation, for that she was a Slaue of the

Grand Seighiour, who was master and Lord of all that she had, and in regard of which his power, all whatsoeuer she should do in this, shuld succeed to the  good of him, and not of her. Vpon this answer she seemed very pensiue, and to carrie in her heart extreame griefe, insomuch, that (she manifesting in her minde to bee greatly afflicted) the Turke had notice thereof, who moued with the loue he bore her, and with the displeasure of her griefe, sent her word that she should be of good cheere, assuring her that within shortime he would giue her occasion to comfort her selfe: whereupon causing a letter to bee written for her libertie, he sent it to her. This subtile and craftie woman Rossa made free. receiuing this gift, well knowing to take fit time and occasion, gaue him many kinde thanks, and presently employed workmen about her buildings, abstaining her selfe from carnall copulation with him. While she thus spent  the time, the Grand Seigniour had a great desire to lie with her, commaunding that the night following she should prepare her selfe to lie with him. Whereupon she caused word to be sent to him, that though he were the only Lord of her life, of her goods, and of her bodie, he should yet looke well to this (seeing he had made her free) that he did not contradict the law, nor To vse a free woman is sin. commit a sinne; it not being lawfull for him to vse a free woman, as more at large he might know of Muplety. This answer was greatly offensiue to the Grand Seigniour. For louing her extreamely, the more strict the prohibition was, the more his desire increased to be with her, and gnawing his heart with a thousand imaginations, sent to seeke Muplety, of whom he demanded  whither he might carnally vse a Slaue that was made free. The other made answer, that he might not, except he would take her for his spouse: for that doing otherwise he should commit a great sinne, by reason of the law, which willed it should bee so. This difficultie yet further increased a desire in the Turke to enioy his Rossa. And by that meanes, not being able any long to tolerate the passion which tormented him, he determined to satisfie, not his reason, but his appetites, and resolued to take her for his spouse, as publikely Rossa made the spouse of Solyman. he did, giuing her by the contract of mariage 5000. Duckets of yeerely reuenew for her dowrie, to the great maruaile of all, who knew that to be against the custome of the Ottomans, who because they would neuer haue any companion  The Turkish Emperours neuer marrie. in the Empire, doe neuer marrie, but in place of a spouse, they vse women Slaues who are very fayre, which from all parts of the world were brought to them, and they are shut vp within the Seraile (according to the custome of the Turkish Lords) where they were bountifully vsed and instructed in diuers vertuous things: and by these the Grand Seigniours haue their children, and those by whom they once haue had children, are more honoured and better serued then the other, and afterwards are married to Grand Seigniours of their owne sect and religion, as are the Bashaes, Sangiachs, Belerbeys, and such like. Now this Rossa from a Slaue (by the fauour of heauen and the benefit of Fortune) being become the wife of so great a  King, she determined of no other thing, then to inuent the meanes that one of her sonnes, after the death of Solyman, should remaine inheritour and successor of the Empire.
The greatnes and valour of Mustapha was much opposit to her deseignes,

and to abate this inconuenience, she thought that it was needfull to assist her  selfe by the helpe of Rostan Basha her sonne in law, as of one that would rather Rossa practiseth the death of Mustapha. desire that his brother in law might be Lord, then Mustapha, who bore him an euill grudge, for that he had cut off the reuenew which he was wont to haue out of his Prouince: by reason whereof he could not but doubt, that when the Turke dyed, and this man succeeding in his place, he would not onely depriue him from the dignitie of a Visir, but also of his goods and life.
Hauing then drawne him to her deuotion, and being accorded together, she effected so much with the Grand Seigniour, that her sonne in law had Rostan Basha conspireth with Rossa, the death of Mustapha. the managing of all the affayres and expeditions of that Prouince where Mustapha commanded, impressing afterward in the minde of Solyman, with  a fit and subtell inuention, a great distrust to lose both his state and life, especially by reason of Mustaphaes greatnes, and the good wil which euery one did beare him. For confirmation of which, Rostan commaunded all those who were chosen to goe into the Prouinces, and specially those who went into Ionia, a neighbour Prouince to Amasia, that for the contentment of the Grand Seigniour, they should write and make knowne particularly the proceedings of Mustapha, and his honours, to the end that he might take pleasure therein, and that they should highly commend him in certifying all the good they could of him. Which they did (not knowing the deceit) very willingly and often also: so that by their letters they cleerely discerned the  desire which the souldiours had, that one day he might for his liberalitie become their Emperour. Rostan after he had receiued such letters, gaue them to Rossa, to the end, that according to the oportunitie and occasion of the time, she might shew them to the Turke. She in shewing them these letters (as a subtell and malicious woman) made great shew to be exceedingly contented at the generositie and valiantnes of Mustapha, and to be very respectiue of his life and health: and then on the other side, as being carefull of the preseruation and puissance of her Lord and spouse, by wilie and subtell meanes she propounded to him the example of Selim, who by the like craft and industrie, depriued his father both of his Empire and life, desiring him  to finde the meanes to discouer the deseignes of Mustapha. But for this time her deuices tooke no great effect in Solyman, and she seeing that they came to nothing, thought to make him away by poyson, and sending him in his fathers name certaine presents, gaue charge to some to carrie them to him. But for that the houre of his death was not yet come, he would at no hand taste thereof, vntill the bringer had first made an assay, who presently fell downe stone dead: for which cause he made them to bee cast away, and so escaped the death. This treacherie falling out contrarie to the desire of Rossa, yet for all that she lost no courage, but inuented another, desiring her Lord that he would doe her this fauour, that sometimes one, and sometimes another of  his children might come to the Court to see him, and after that returne againe into their gouernment, thereby the rather to continue a reciprocall amitie betweene him and his children. This deuice tended to this end, that Mustapha comming thither, should with better commoditie bee dispatched

by some maner of meanes whatsoeuer, and not comming thither he should  be sent for. For the eldest sonnes of the Turkish Emperours are not accustomed The eldest sonnes of the Turkish Emperours remaine not at the Court. to depart out of their Prouinces to come to Constantinople, except they bee sent for to bee made Emperours with a strong and puissant armie: which they are not wont to doe, so long as the father liueth. Neuerthelesse she obtained that two of his children should come thither: and thus alwaies was one or two with Solyman, either in the towne, or in the armie, or in some other place where hee was. Zeangir the crookbacke, was oftner there then any of them, for that he was pleasant and merrie, and one that could fit all humours well, whereat the Grand Seigniour tooke great pleasure.
Now certaine yeeres after, Fortune (enuious of Mustaphaes magnanimitie, and fauouring the wickednes of this woman) caused a letter to bee  brought from the Basha the gouernour of Mustapha and of Amasia; it being The instructio^ of the Turkish Emperours sonnes. the custome, that when a sonne of the Grand Seigniour goeth into any gouernment, to giue him a Basha to instruct him in Militarie discipline, and a Doctor to teach him the liberall Arts, and other good erudiments. It was imported by this letter, that a mariage should bee treated of betweene the said Mustapha and the daughter of the King of Persia, whereof this Basha did diligently aduertise the Court and the Grand Seigniour, to the end that not any thing should be imputed to him, as if he had participated in this affayre. This letter being come into the hands of Rostan, esteeming that this was a subiect very fit for him to ouerthrow Mustapha withall, acquainted  Rossa with all the matter, with whom he hauing conferred of that which they should doe, they went both together to the Turke, shewing him the ambition of Mustapha, and that he had a purpose to inuest himselfe in the Empire, and by the affinitie contained in this letter, to ioyne the Persian armies with his, that so he might the better expulse him from Constantinople, adding at the end the little faith which was to be hoped of the Ianisaries, because they were corrupted by his great bountie. These so euident reasons were with words full of such great efficacie pronounced by them, that they so moued Solyman, that to assure his kingdome and life, he determined to put his sonne to death, and according to this resolution he caused Rostan Basha  to march before with a great armie towards Syria, with commaund and expresse charge (vnder the colour to driue away the Persians) to seaze vpon the person of Mustapha by some subtell dexteritie, and to conduct him to him. Rostan being come to the enterance of this Prouince, and Mustapha hauing vnderstood of his comming, presently marched towards him with 7000. of the valiantest souldiours that he had. Rostan seeing that then his enterprise could take no good issue, bruiting it abroad that he found all things in good tranquilitie, returned without any further expecting the comming of Mustapha, or without seeing the dust of his souldiours, and returned from  thence to Constantinople with more then ordinarie speede: where being arriued, he recited to the Grand Seigniour all that which was happened to him, and giuing colour to that which hee had alreadie practised with Rossa, he caused him to redouble his feare, telling him, that hauing found the armie which he led with him into Syria most readie and willing, and at the

deuotion of Mustapha, and they desired no other thing, but only that he were  absolute Lord; he by this occasion meant not to trust them to giue him any battaile, nor hazard any thing, by reason of the incredible good will which all the Ianisaries bore him, but that he thought it more expedient to returne from thence, and submit all vnder the aduice and iudgement of his Maiestie, as he did. These speeches ingendered in Solymans heart a most great indignation, and were the cause to bring to end that treason thus wrought against this innocent yong man.
This then being the yeere 1553. he commaunded that all the souldiours Anno 1553. should assemble, and that Achmeth Basha of Buda, with all the prouision of Hungarie, should march towards Amasia, to bring to end the Persian warre, it being expressely euery where bruited abroad, that the Persians were afresh  entered into Syria, with many great troupes, Solyman set himselfe onward on his iourney with all his armie: and being there arriued, he presently caused letters to be writ to Mustapha, that he should come to him at Aleppo; and endeuouring to conceale the hate, which through others malignitie he bore to his sonne, yet could he not so well dissemble it, but that Achmeth Basha, as of better iudgement then the other Bashaes were, did perceiue it, and conceiuing great displeasure that the father should be thus incensed against his sonne, because he was too generous, secretly aduertised Mustapha, that he should looke well to himselfe and his life, and not be too secure. This did greatly astonish the poore yong man, and the rather, considering the comming  of his father with so puissant an armie into that countrie, without any reasonable occasion, the Persians being then with them quiet and in peace; and he entering into great suspition, was many daies greatly tormented: in the end, although he was extreamely troubled in his minde and bodie, assuring himselfe vpon his innocencie, that he had neuer offended his father neither by deede, word, or thought, he was resolued (although he knew his death very certaine) with all obedience to performe the commaund of his father, iudging his death would be more glorious and honourable, dying obedient, The diuine resolution of Mustapha. then ending his life in rebellion, and contrarie to him. And hauing thus determined with himselfe, his Doctor being by him, after many  thoughts, he demaunded of him, which were best for a man to chuse, either the Empire of the whole world, or a happie life. This Doctor answered him, that he who with an vpright eye could contemplate the Empire of the world, should finde that it would bring with it no constant fidelitie, but only vaine shewes, and that hee should continually liue therein with infinit trauaile and distrust, and be constrained to commit diuers insolencies, murthers, destruction of townes and cities, and ruines of many miserable persons: for which mischiefes a man should lose a happie life. But in chusing a blessed life, a man should auoide all these disasters, and to those (who haue this grace to know humane frailtie, and the breuity of our life, in renouncing  the vanities of this world) God had prepared in heauen (as for his well beloued) a sweete and delectable place, full of all immortall ioy, where they should remaine perpetually with the blessed.
This answer greatly contented this yong man, and within a while after, in

great diligence he arriued where his father was, who was incamped three daies iourney from Aleppo, in a large field. By this so sudden arriuall of Mustapha,  Solyman was the more perplexed, and had a greater distrust, not thinking that he would haue come so soone. Rostan vpon this occasion failed not againe, and commaunded by signes the principals of the armie, and the Ianiaries to goe before Mustapha, and to doe him honour. These men being (according The Ianisaries obeying the signes of then Commaunders. to their custome) well disciplined, and obeying their Commaunders, (by whose signes onely they are conducted and gouerned) went in troupes (thinking to doe that which would bee agreeable to the Turke) to salute Mustapha, and to doe him reuerence, and to performe this, all the Campe remoued. Rostan seeming to bee greatly astonished at this, went to Solyman, to aduertise him how all the Ianisaries, and principals of his armie,  without his leaue, were gone to see Mustapha, and to receiue him, with great acclamations and excessiue ioyes, and that there rested to him nothing else, but to be Lord; desiring he would haue care of himselfe. Solyman changing his colour, and becomming all pale, went out of his Pauilion, and apartly saw that to be true, which Rostan had told him. Many say that Mustapha three daies before his death, had in his sleepe this vision a little before the rising of the Sunne: He thought that a Prophet, apparelled with habits shining as the The vision of Mustapha prognosticated his death. Sunne beames, tooke him by the hand, and conducted him into a most pleasant and delightfull place, where was a rich and sumptuous Palace, with a most faire garden, and that then that Prophet said to him, that there they did  remaine and perpetually inioy these delights, who were opposit to vices, had auoyded iniustice, and vertuously disposed of all their actions: and afterwards turning him to another side, he thought that he shewed him two very great riuers, whose waters were of the colour of iron and pitch, and it seemed that they boyled, within which there were an infinit companie of men which descended to the deepe, and after rising againe, cried pardon, and that then he further said to him, that there were those punished, who whilest they were liuing, had alwaies vsed iniustice and fauoured the wicked, and that he should know that those which he had seene there, were Princes, Kings, and great Emperours. And this being said, the vision vanished away. And because  that the Turkes are the most superstitious men in the world, and specially the Musulmans (who neuer drinke wine, and giue more credit to dreames, then other men doe) had interpreted by this vision, that some great danger should happen to Mustapha: and he hauing imparted it to his Doctor, he said to him, after that he well considered of the matter, that he greatly distrusted of his life, and that therefore he required him to looke well to himselfe. This yong man neuerthelesse assured, made him answer: Wherefore should I suffer my selfe to be vanquished by a vaine feare, and by the illusion of a dreame, and not to goe to see my father, he hauing caused me to bee called vnto him with so great mildnes, and hauing had (as it is fitting, and as my  dutie requireth it) alwaies his Maiestie in great reuerence, and neuer hauing turned my face, but to the part where his inclined, and neuer hauing offended him in any thing, nor aspired to his Empire, but only when it shall please God to take him to himselfe, and that the armie shall esteeme me worthie

thereof, and capable to enioy his greatnes with my brothers in perpetuall  peace and euerlasting concord, contenting my selfe, that though by this voiage I should die, to end rather my daies by innocencie and martyrdome, then liuing many yeeres in the Empire, to remaine disobedient to the will of my father; because if I goe not to him, I shall by the enuious persons of his Court bee condemned as a rebell, and by my enemies infinitly noted and marked.
With this deliberation he arriued neere the Pauilions and Tents of his father, with his traine, and caused his people to stay there; and clothing himself in a new white habit, in token of true fidelitie, and hauing put into his bosome certaine letters and writings, and laying apart all manner of weapons from about him, that so he might take away all occasion to vse them against  his father, he proceeded to goe and kisse his fathers hands; and entering into the first hall, he was very gratiously receiued by the Eunuches, and not seeing therein but a place only dressed and prepared, he began to be pale and moued, and being a while in suspence, demaunded where the Grand Seigniour was, and it was answered him, that he should presently see him. At that instant he saw enter by another part the seuen Muets, who continually are about Seuen Muets executors of the Grand Seigniours pleasure. the person of the Grand Seigniour, and only vnderstanding by signes, they executed his secret commissions. Mustapha seeing such persons to come directly to him, began greatly to bee afraid, and turning himselfe towards them, he said: Behold my apparant death. And minding to flye thence,  hee was as well by these Muets, as by the Eunuches, staied without the Pauilion, and brought in againe, where the Muets put a cord of a Turkish bow about his necke to strangle him: but he being very stout and strong, defended himselfe as well as he could, in throwing sometime one, and sometime another behinde him, pitifully intreating them that they would suffer him to speake but two words to his Lord and father. Whilest that the one sort endeuoured to take his life from him, and he on the other side assaied to defend himselfe, the most cruel and abominable father (who was on the one side of the Pauilion, very attentiue to see the end of so horrible and inhumane a tragedie) putting forth his head, spake with choler to these executioners:  Haue you not yet taken away the life from this Traytor, who for certaine The cruell words of a Tyrant. yeeres together hath not suffered me to sleepe in quiet? At these words the Muets and Eunuches taking courage, threw him on the ground, and by force drawed and stretched the corde which strangled him, there dying in Mustapha strangled. this manner the most liberall and magnificent Lord that euer was of the Ottoman house, a man truly both of minde and bodie very noble, and who by his vertuous qualities merited not to haue giuen to others so horrible a spectacle of himselfe, as hee gaue by the deceit and treacherie of his enemies. 
This cruell act being thus committed, the Turke caused presently to bee taken the Basha of Amasia, and a Venetian, of the house of Michely, who was taken a child in the iourney of Preuesa, and who then with great credit bore the Colonels Ensigne, and presently caused their heads to be publikely cut off, calling afterward to him Zeangir the crookbacke (who yet knew nothing

of this enormious crueltie) to whom he commanded to goe see his brother Zeangir killed himselfe, seeing his brother dead. who was in the Pauilion, and who was but lately arriued. He hauing vnderstood  of his brothers arriuall, ranne with a pleasant countenance to goe and imbrace him, and entering where the poore vnfortunate Mustapha lay thus euilly intreated, strangled on the ground, beholding him with great teares, Solyman sent presently to him that he should take the Treasures, Tents, and Pauilions, and the Prouince of Mustapha, bestowing them on him for a gift. But in stead of thanking those which brought him this message, he spake vnto them these words.
O cursed treacherous dogge, not a father, but a most cruell Tyger, enioy thou rather the Treasures, Moueables, Pauilions, and the Prouince of Mustapha, seeing this is fallen into thy inraged heart to put to death so vertuous  a sonne, and of so great hope, and such a one as there was neuer his like, neither yet shall be in the Ottoman house, I pray God that I poore crookbacke liue not, that thou maist doe the like to me. Whereupon drawing a little poynard which he had by his side, he thrust it into his owne breast, and so presently he died. The King vnderstanding of this vnexpected newes, fell into extreame sadnes. And this was the trueth of the crookbacks deed, although the world might not be filled with so vile an act, and for the reuerence of the Ottoman house, the Turkes say that he thus suddenly died of a Squinancie. 
The Grand Seigniour hauing afterward commaunded that the Pauilions and moueables of Mustapha should bee carried with his, while they whom he had commaunded to doe it went about to execute it, many were moued and opposed themselues against it, thinking that they meant to sacke them, A great tumult in Solymans armie. these valiant souldiours not yet knowing what was happened to their Lord; and seeing a great number of men to come towards them, fearing some sudden insolencie, put themselues in armes, repulsing those backe who were the formost, not without great slaughter. Those of the Kings Campe perceiuing the rumour which hourely increased, running to succour their fellowes, and the other part doing also the like, both Camps reenforcing themselues, with a terrible bruite they put themselues in armes, and gaue a great  assault, where remained slaine vpon the place more then 2000. men: and this skirmish had not thus ended, if Achmeth Basha (a graue man, and of great authoritie, for his renowned vertue generally knowne, and greatly esteemed among the souldiours) had not caused the Ianisaries to retire; and if turning himselfe towards the souldiours of Mustapha, he had not vsed to them such like gentle speeches.

What (my brethren and children) will you be of so bad a disposition, and so bold to resist the commaund of the Grand Seigniour, whose pleasure is, that his sonnes treasure should be taken out of his Pauilions, and carried to his? I cannot beleeue that you who so long haue knowne your selues to be  the most valiant and good Musulmans (as truly you are) would now shew your selues so insolent and perfidious to our common Lord, hauing so long a time with such fidelitie warred amongst the Ottoman armies, without being stained or defiled of any infamie for his preseruation, as by your vertuous

actions for his seruice you haue declared through all the world, he being  your Lord and mine? Therefore now lay downe your weapons, which are but too much sharpened for so vile an occasion.

These speeches of this couragious Basha had such force ouer them, that they were appeased, and as very obedient, they suffered to bee carried to the Turkes Tent all whatsoeuer was in Mustaphaes. But his death being within a little while after knowne amongst the Ianisaries, and bruited through the Campe, the occasion thereof, and the distrust of him, and because it was imposed vpon him, they all tooke armes againe, and making a great tumult, mingled with infinit teares and weepings, they approached very nigh to the Grand Seigniours Pauilion. This second commotion put him into such a maze, that losing his senses, he would gladly haue fled: but being stayed by  his people, not without great daunger to bee massacred in this furie, he resolued (constrained by necessitie) to doe that, which in an assured place hee would not haue done, and standing at the entrance of his Pauilion, although he was greatly pale, yet he boldly spake to them. Tell me (quoth he) what tumults are these here? What commotion is this? What insolencies do you thus inconsideratiuely offer to me? Doe you not peraduenture know me? Am I not your Lord, and he that ought to rule and gouerne you? Certaine of them answered him, that they well knew him to be such a Lord, who had a long time been chosen by them, whom they had reuerenced, and whose Empire they had by their vertue so greatly inlarged; to this end notwithstanding,  that he should rule ouer them with iustice, and not without occasion so inconsideratiuely and cruelly shed the blood of the good, and cause the innocent to bee slaine, and that these armes were iustly by them taken, sharply to reuenge the death of Mustapha, and to purge themselues from that treason which was imputed vpon them; and that they would neuer lay them downe, vntill the accusers should bee brought to iudgement, and he conuicted them to be culpable; and that then with all humilitie (if it so fell out) they promised (as worthie of seuere chastisement) to submit their liues to the most cruell and shamefullest death that could bee found, and that for a finall resolution they meant that that should bee auerred in the same  field.
These speaking so stoutly, by reason of the griefe which they felt, left not for all that to bathe their cheekes with bitter teares, and their friendly affectionated mournings constrained the Grand Seigniour (who for the feare Solyman in danger of his person. which he had receiued, and for the horrour of the deede, was almost besides himselfe) to promise them with sweet and inticing speeches, that he was readie to satisfie whatsoeuer they would demaund, and by that meanes appeased a great part of this tumult: neuerthelesse, all the armie with weapons in their hands omitted not to keepe carefull watch, for feare he should steale out of the Campe, and that they should bee deceiued of his promise which  he had made them of a desired iudgement.
Rostan (after he had by the commaund of the great Turk committed the seale into the hands of Achmeth, and that himselfe was depriued of the office and state of Visir) wholly possessed with feare for these tumults, fled to

the Pauilion of Achmeth, desiring him as his inward friend, and with great  instance, that it would please him to aduise him what he thought fitting to doe in so sudden a daunger. Achmeth answered him, that he should take counsell of the Grand Seigniour, and follow his pleasure, and not of any other. This pleased Rostan, and suddenly by a sufficient message he executed the counsel of his faithfull friend: and receiuing answer from the Seigniour, who commaunded that presently he should retire himselfe from him; he againe caused to bee told him, that he could not depart nor retire without his Pauilions, without commission, and without money. The Turke caused to be replied, that the necessitie required neither Pauilions nor money. Vpon this resolution hee mounted on horsebacke with eight of his faithfullest  friends, and in three daies he iournied so farre, as if in eight he could haue done by post, and retired to Constantinople, where he remained in great trouble and feare for these misaduentures. The Grand Seigniour afterward endeuoured wisely to appease the cholor of his souldiours; and not being able to achieue the same by reason of their obstinacie, and perceiuing himselfe depriued of hope, and in doubt of his person, sought three times with a few of his people to saue himselfe from their hands. But it was not possible for him, but on the contrary with very great instance and insolencie, they demaunded that their Lord should shew himselfe in this field, and that iudgement should be giuen, and iustice not delayed, and that they would not permit to saue himselfe either in townes or Fortresses, they not minding at any  hand to endure, that without cause they should thus falsely massacre the innocent, imputing to them slanders, and vniustly charging them with treason, whereof neither Mustapha, nor they did euer so much as thinke: furthermore obstinately perseuering in this, that they would not by any meanes depart from thence, except they were reuenged for the innocent blood, and that they might haue iustice. The Grand Seigniour seeing that after he had publikly and secretly practised with them all kinde of experiments, yet could he not for all that content them; and that there were alreadie many dayes past; and knowing their mindes to be more kindled to reuenge then before; and seeing that by his authoritie he could doe no more, meant yet further to  make triall of the graue wisedome of Achmeth, who knew so aptly to handle them, that he so farre preuailed in paying daily 1000. Aspres to euery souldiour Solyman escapeth from his mutinous souldiours. for three dayes to 4000. souldiours of the Port, they were agreed to accompanie their Lord to Aleppo, which was three daies iourney from thence; the Turke notwithstanding hauing giuen them his inuiolable promise and faith to chastise the false accuser, and to reuenge the innocent blood of Mustapha. With these conditions he retired to Aleppo, cleering himselfe from the hands of his souldiours, hauing before hee departed from his Campe, taken order for the bodies of his children, and commaunded they  should be carried to Bursia, where are the ancient Tombes of the Ottomans. Bursia a towne where is the sepulture of the Turkish Emperours. Those who had the charge thereof, vncloathing this miserable Mustapha, found the letters (which, as wee haue said, he had put into his bosome, when he went from his Pauilion to go kisse his fathers hands) and presenting them to the Grand Seigniour, he would not then open them. But after these tumults

were a little appeased, he caused them to bee brought vnto him, and read them, and found that from point to point were discouered therein, the  The innocencie of Mustapha discouered. deseignes and wicked practises of Rostan and Rossa against Mustapha: wherevpon he was so stroken at the heart, that for many daies he was so surprised with griefe, that he would not speake to any man; and if he had not had a respect to the state and ordering of things, as then they stood, he would not the^ haue put Rostan to death, as he deserued, but would haue giuen him aliue to bee deuoured of the dogges. But that which he did not then, he reserued vntill another time: and since the fact was remedilesse, he altered his minde to fauour and aduance Mahomet the sonne of Mustapha (which he had by a Ladie of Bosnia) of the age of 14. yeeres, who (during this tumult) was  brought vp by the mother of Mustapha in another countrie, fearing that the furie of the Grand Seigniour should also fall vpon him. And he presently recalled a certaine Captaine, whom he had alreadie dispatched to goe and kill him, and he hauing found this childe, caused him to bee brought vnto him, he gaue him for his entertainment the Sangiachship of Bursia. After that he departed from thence and marched towards Hierusalem, and being but foure daies iournie from thence, for some other accidents happened, he was constrained to returne to Aleppo, that he might prouide for the affayres of Syria, and euen then it was that he was alreadie freed from the mariage of Rossa. 
There was there a Chiauss who with all diligence departed from the Campe, thinking by the death of Mustapha, to bring good newes to Selim, who then was in Carmania. But Selim was so sad for this death, that he meant to leaue to the world a perpetuall witnesse thereof, causing the head of this Selim killeth him who brought the newes of his brothers death. messenger to be cut off, in stead of the good recompence that he expected: which truly was a famous act worthie to be recorded, and not worthy of this man who is enemie of our faith, whom if it had pleased God to haue conuerted him to his holy faith, assuredly he might haue been compared with any other, as well ancient as moderne.
About this time Peter Chendy was found culpable concerning the insurrection Chendy excuseth himselfe to Ferdinand concerning the insurrection of Transiluania. of the kingdome of Transiluania, as hauing put his hand thereto: and  minding to discharge himselfe thereof, he writ to Ferdinand about it, excusing himselfe, and assuring him that he neuer meant any such matter. His excuses (according to the necessitie of the time) were receiued. But within a while after the Queene desirous to recouer that which of her owne will she had left, effected her purposes so well, that causing a tumult among the people of the kingdome, within a short time she saw her selfe Ladie thereof, and chased from thence Ferdinands people; there increasing at the same time so horrible a plague in this Prouince, that it continued vntill the yeere 1555. whereof died so many men, horses, and other beasts, that it was an incredible thing. 
Vpon the occasion of this losse, the Turks being incouraged, tooke armes against Ferdinand, and entring into that countrie besieged Albe-iula, against Albe-iula yeelded to Queene Izabella, and all Transiluania. which they built a Fort, and the assieged being at the end of their victuals, were constrained to yeeld to the Queene, who in sauing them, she was by

that meanes made Ladie of that towne, and within a while after (in her sons  name) of all the rest of Transiluania, and there rested no more for her to conquer, but certaine Castles, situated in the confines of the Bishopricke of Varadin, and that of Tocchay which is very strong. And expecting a commodious time to goe and besiege them, she did no other thing in the meane while, but assure the minds of the principals of the kingdome in the deuotion of her selfe and her sonne, causing for this purpose to be published a generall Diet at Sibinio for all the nations of the countrie, wherein she shewed the wrong which she had receiued by the officers of the Emperour, because they had not kept with her the conditions and capitulations accorded betweene them, and the losse and ruine which had happened vnto them, because  they would take part with him: and on the contrarie, the good and profit which they should receiue in being retired to her, she assured in such sort her forces in this Prouince, that all wholly refusing the amitie of Ferdinand, and imbracing that of Iohns, as of their naturall Lord, all neuer ceased vntill they had cleansed Transiluania of the remainders of the Emperials, the Queene being for this purpose fauoured of the King of Polonia, and of the Queene Bonna her mother, who secretly (besides the Turke, who feared that Ferdinand should set footing in this countrie, and that in time he might greatly annoy him in that quarter) would not faile to assist her with all counsels and succours, which they should thinke necessarie and profitable for her, according to the condition of the time. She recompenced those  who had not abandoned her part, and (as a sage and prudent woman) she reserued to another time the commoditie to reuenge her selfe of the iniuries which she had receiued of those who so many times rebelled against her, and had been the occasion of all these inconueniences. And being confederate with the Vayuodes of Moldauia and Valachia, and by the expresse commaund of the Turke, hauing made a perfect alliance and friendship with the Basha of Buda, the Sangiach of Bossina and Belgrade, she began to giue order to the affayres of the kingdome, and to receiue the accounts of the reuenew thereof, to acquit her selfe, and pay those who had assisted her to enter thereinto, and also to giue presents to those who for diuers causes did  merit recompence, making her selfe by this meanes delightfull to euery one.
About this time her brother Sigismond King of Polonia, hauing refused for wife one of the daughters of the King of the Romanes, being inamoured of a gentlewoman his subiect, who was yong, and indowed with singular beautie, he tooke her to wife and spouse, and married her against the will of the Queene his mother, and of all the principals of his kingdome: for which occasion it happened, that the mother was long time incensed against him, vntill the death of this new Queene, who suddenly died, not without Sigismond the 2. King of Polonia in disgrace with his mother and Polanders for his wife. suspition of being poysoned, and by her death all the dissentions of the kingdome  were appeased, and the King was reconciled to Queene Bonna his mother, who hauing before greatly laboured to haue leaue to retire out of Polonia, and goe and repose her selfe in Italie, and to finish the remainder of her daies in her Dutchie of Barry, situated in the kingdome of Naples, she

was in the end (by meanes of the Emperour Charles, and of Ferdinand King The Queene of Polonia retireth into Italie. of the Romanes) licensed by her sonne: and in iourneying into Italie, she  passed by Venice, where (by this Common-weale) she was receiued within the A rich Barge wherein the Venetian Seigniorie expatiat themselues in the Adriatike sea, neere to their citie. Bucentaure with great pompe, and honoured by all the gentlewomen of the towne, who gorgiously attired, and dressed with stones and Iewels, presented themselues to her, and conducted her to the Palace of the Duke of Ferrara, vsing to her the greatest curtesies which could be imagined, she being further continually visited by euery one. And after being accompanied with certaine armed Gallies, which were giuen to her by the State of Venice to conduct her in suretie, for feare of Saala Rays the Pyrat, who then skoured those seas: and with a good winde she arriued at the Port of Barry, where  she liued not long, not being held in any good reputation, nor gaining a good name, by reason of one Pappacoda, to whom (forgetting her sonne and Pappacoda entertained Bonna the Queene of Polonia. daughter, so great is the fleshly desire of this world) she left all the good things that she had, remaining infinitly blamed for this act, and little commended among the liuing.
This happened then, when betweene the Emperour Charles, and Henry A truce betweene the Emperour Charles and the King of France. King of France, there was accorded (after many disputes and controuersies betweene the Commissioners) a truce for fiue yeeres: which was published in France, in Italie, and Flanders. And that they might the better reioyce and congratulate vpon the occasion thereof with these two great Princes, the Pope sent to the one of them for Legate, the Cardinall Mottola, and to  the other, the Cardinall Caraffa.
The Emperour laying aside armes, by occasion of this truce, with hope Charles the Emperour renounceth the Empire, to the end that Ferdinand might haue it. that it in the end would ingender a good peace, was resolued wholly to renounce all the affayres and pompes of this world, insomuch that according to this resolution, whilest he was at Gaunt, he dispatched certaine Lords to the Electors of the Empire, and to Ferdinand his brother, by whom he declared to them his determination, sending by them to Ferdinand the Crowne, Scepter, and the other Emperiall ornaments. By these he writ to the Cardinall of Mentz an Elector, the letter which followeth. 

My Lord Cardinall, seeing it hath pleased God to shew me so much grace at the end of my daies, as to graunt me rest, by the truce which I haue made with the King of France, the fruite whereof I hope for a good peace, betweene the subiects both of the one part and other, I am resolute to end the remainder of my yeeres with a life more sweete and fuller of tranquilitie; by meane of which I may applie my self to the contemplation of diuine things, from which (to my great sorrow) I haue been more distracted then I would haue bin, by the affayres which I haue had vpon me euen from my youth in so great abundance, that if diuine clemencie had not assisted and comforted me, I know it had been impossible for me to vnfold my selfe therefrom. The acknowledgement which I haue thereof, besides other benefits receiued fro^aboue,  hath more excited me to make this retraict, then any other consideration I could haue had: to which neuerthelesse I had not permitted my selfe to goe, if I had seene that my presence, and the administration committed into my hands, could yet haue brought any commoditie to the Commonweale.

But after so many victories which God (notwithstanding I was vnworthie  of them) gaue me, I more esteeme this grace which he hath shewed me, to haue fauoured me so much as to cause me to see a peace, or at least a generall truce, not onely among my subiects, and other Princes my friends and confederates: but also with those who say themselues to be my enemies, leauing now euery one in quiet, and in such patience, that not any hath need of my helpe. Considering this great fauour of God, and the imbecilitie which old age hath brought vpon me, and iudging that both the one and the other doe easily exempt me any longer to gouerne the rudder of this Christian Common-weale, I haue presently resolued with my selfe, vtterly also to forsake all other lesser affayres and pleasures of this world: and to employ this little time, which yet I haue here vpon earth, in spirituall contemplations,  that so I may by the meanes thereof, wipe away the faults which (it may bee) I haue committed against and besides the will of his diuine Maiestie, euen as they who haue the like charge that wee haue, doe so much the more fully fall, as the burthen which they beare vpon their shoulders is great and weightie. I am not ignorant but that (as we are subiect to bee abused) I haue giuen occasion to some to be discontented with me, insomuch that this is not sufficient for me that I am willing by my retraict to appease the diuine anger, (which I haue drawne vpon my selfe) except on the other part I endeuour to satisfie those that might complaine of me. This my affection hath pricked me forward to condiscend more easily to the accord, which I haue  made touching the conuentions set downe by the truce, by which I haue released to the King of France, not onely more then he demaunded, but also more then he hoped for: and how also my Commissioners (by my commaund) haue done towards his Holines, minding thereby first to content strangers, and after to haue regard of my subiects; whom the better to satisfie according to my abilitie, I haue sent the most part of the Lords (who are now here with me) to giue them to vnderstand this my good will, to the end that they not being ignorant thereof, might freely declare vnto me whatsoeuer they esteeme good for the accomplishment thereof: hauing also sent for my sonne to execute in this countrie of Flanders and Bourgundie, whatsoeuer  they shall discouer vnto me, for the comfort of my conscience, whilest that my selfe, after being arriued in Spaine (by Gods helpe) I hope to do the like there, and also in my other kingdomes. I should bee very glad if I were able to come into Germanie, and at a Diet there my selfe to make this my declaration, for the honour which I owe to such a Prouince. But the winter which approacheth, hindereth me from going thither. And since necessitie co^straineth me, I desire you to appoint the Diet to be held at Franckfort, and to call thither all the other Electors and Princes of the Empire: and you being there, to declare to them all (in my name) the indisposition of the approached  time, which doth not permit me to execute that good will which I had to come and meete them there, that so I might againe thanke them for the honour that they, or their predecessors haue done to me, in electing me to bee their Emperour, and withall to set out the good affection which their forefathers haue alwaies shewed by effect to those of our house, euen as also

I would they meant to continue it in the election which afterwards they  made of my brother, constituting him K. of the Romanes, and which good affection I intreate them to maintaine. And also I would haue you to declare vnto them, that my intention is (since all things are now in peace) to commit into the hands of my brother (now King of the Romanes) the Crowne, and all the other Emperiall ornaments, to the end that he taking wholly vpon him the care and charge of the Empire, my absence should not be the cause that any trouble should grow there, desiring them all that they would assist him, and that they would liue peaceably with him, and as true naturall brethren. And further that you would giue them to vnderstand, that this my departure from them (although it be farre off) yet is it not with intent to leaue or forsake them: but on the contrarie, they shall alwaies finde  me furnished and prouided of so good an affection towards them, as euer I had. And if there be any subiect of the Empire, who can complaine that I haue vsed any iniustice against him, I haue desired my brother to giue redresse thereunto, to whom for such complaints euery man may repayre. And for the last care which here I can haue touching the good of this Empire, I desire you to perswade them that they would accept of and ratifie the dimission which I make, and that to bee short, they would crowne for their Emperour him whom they haue alreadie chosen King of the Romanes, to the end that this great Prouince may see it selfe prouided of a head, who may haue an eye in euery place, as euery one hath also an eye vpon him, and  that by this meanes you may shut the Port against enterance of new enterprises, which may arise for want of the presence of the head who may bee able to resist them. Also further I desire them, that they would not faile my said brother of succours, for the conseruation of his kingdome of Hungarie, which is the Bulwarke of all Germanie against the common enemie. And in particular I desire you (most reuerend Cardinall) to set your hand thereto: as also more particularly I recommend vnto you (against some enuious persons) the defence of all that which I haue done and negotiated amongst the Electors, Princes, and Lords of the Empire, and Emperiall townes, knowing that you are not ignorant with what sinceritie I haue behaued my  selfe in my actions, whereof I will alwaies yeeld good account both before God and men: although I will not denie, but that there hath been sometime mingled therewithall some things of humane frailtie, not minding to attribute to my selfe such perfection, that I haue been exempted from naturall vice. But the one being ballanced with the other, I am assured that the wiser sort will not vse any seuere iudgement against me: and commending to your wisedome the vpholding of this my cause, I will not make to you any longer discourse thereof. And to conclude this present matter, I desire you to beleeue, that wheresoeuer I am, I will alwaies be mindfull and carefull to employ my selfe, and that towards my friends, in all that which I shall  know to be necessarie for you, whereof I desire you not to feare to aduertise and solicite me. In the meane time I recommend my selfe to your good fauour and prayers, and humbly desire God to keepe you my Lord Cardinall in long health and happie life. From Gaunt the 2. of September 1556.


According to the contence of this letter, Philip the only sonne of the Emperour  Philip came to seeke his father the Emperour. came to his father at Scuebourg in Zeland, whither from Gaunt he was come to imbark himselfe to sea. There the father instructed him how he should gouerne the affayres of his States, and how he should carrie himselfe to his subiects, and his confederates: after he had giuen him his blessing, and imbraced him for the last time, and dismissed all the Princes, Ambassadours, Gentlemen, and Captaines who were there present, his Maiestie the 14. of September, a little before the sunne rising, went aboord vnto a vessell prepared for him, together with the two Queenes, Elinor and Mary his sisters: and being accompanied with 60. saile, directed his course towards Biscay, where, with a fauourable winde, he arriued within few daies, hauing before passed  the sea sixe other times. He disimbarked at Larede, a Port of that Prouince, and there he was receiued with great honour by the Lords and Spanish Charles arriued in Spaine. gentlemen. Some say, that as soone as he set foote on land, he kneeled downe, thanking God for that in these last daies of his life he had shewed him this fauour to conduct him into this countrie, which aboue all others he held alwaies most deare, and by meanes whereof he was come to that high degree of the Empire, attributing to it (next to God) in a manneral his victories and honours, vsing these words: As naked I came out of my mothers wombe, so naked doe I returne to thee my second mother, and in recompence of many merits which thou hast vsed to me, I not being able for the present to bestow any other thing on thee, I giue thee this my sicke bodie,  and these my feeble and weake bones. After he had vsed these words, notwithout shedding some teares, he very kindly saluted all those Lords which were come thither to doe him that honour which they owed to him: and after being put into his Litter, he was conducted to the towne of Valladolid, Valladolid. where was the Prince Charles his yong sonne. In this towne (which next to that of Tolledo, is the principall towne of Spaine) his Maiestie was resident The Emperor Charles instructed his little sonne Charles. a while, during the which, he exhorted this yong Prince to imitate the footsteps of his predecessors, and charily to obserue and keepe the Christian and Catholike religion. After that, he went from thence into the Prouince of Estremadure, to a Monestarie of S. Hieromes, called the Heremite Friers, situated  The place where the Emperour Charles retired himselfe to end his dates. in a very solitarie place, and commodious to leade a holy life. Hauing in this place giuen leaue to the two Queenes his sisters to depart, and sent them backe to Valladolid, this great Emperour chused there his last aboade, and there ending the rest of his daies, with few domestike officers, giuing himselfe ouer to continuall contemplation of diuine things, and forsaking all the affayres of this world, he passed the rest of his time in prayer, almes deedes, and other charitable workes.
In the meane time, Ferdinand King of the Romanes, after he had receiued by the hands of the Prince of Orange the patents of the Emperour (by which  in his fauour he renounced the dignitie of the Empire) the Scepter, and Crowne, with the Emperiall Mantle, he went to the Diet of Franckfort, accompanied Ferdinand crowned Emperour. with the said Prince, with George Sigismond Sille Vice-chancellor, and Wolfang Haller Secretarie of the Empire, about the moneth of March. At this Diet were all the Electors, and the ceremonies accustomed in such solemne

acts being accomplished, his Maiestie with all his Princes went to Aix, where he was crowned Emperour, notwithstanding the refusall, which  Pope Paul the 4. made to ratifie this election; alleadging that it was not lawfull, for that the Heretike Electors (as he so called them) intermedled therewithall. But this no otherwise proceeded not from his Holines, but by an occasion of a certaine deuice betweene him, the King of France, and others, altogether against the house of Austria: according vnto which the Duke of Albe was euen now come to blowes with the Captaines of his Holines: and The truce broken betweene King Henry of France and Philip King of Spaine. within a while after followed the breach of the foresaid truce, vpon which occasion happened to the French this great losse which they sustained vpon S. Laurence his day, in the moneth of August, by the towne of Saint Quintins. 
About this time the Grand Seigniour declared to the Queene of Transiluania, that he vnderstood that certaine sects were crept into the religion Commaund from the Turk to Queene Izabella, to chase out of her kingdome the new sects. which she held, which by no meanes he would she should tolerate, if she would remaine in his fauour, knowing that such nouelties would bring nothing to her but tumult and losse of her kingdome, and to him much trauaile: and for this cause he commaunded her vtterly to extirpite them who were authors thereof, and in such manner to extinguish them, that there should not be any mention of them. This command was not without cause. For the Heretikes were alreadie nesled in this kingdome, and by their preachings had sowed their darnell, and withdrawne many from the vniuersall  Church: and if this commaund had not put them in great feare, all the kingdome had been replenished with them. But according to the will of the Turke, and obeying thereto, they were presently banished and chased from thence. By which wee may see how much a sudden and readie foresight (which is vsed with wisedome, in things stirred vp besides and against ancient custome) may infinitly profit in general, and at no hand preiudice in particular. If this had been obserued in Germanie, when the heresies there budded out, this Prouince had not so much bin giuen to troubles as it was, with the losse and damage of all Christendome. 
In this same time Charles King of Spaine, and not long since Emperour, The death of the Emperour Charles. being fallen sicke in the Monestarie of the Hieronimite Friers, after he had receiued all the Sacraments of the Church by the hands of the Archbishop of Tolledo, named Bartholmew Miranda, and not without the teares of those who were there present, the 21. of September he yeelded his soule to God, putting by his death an end to his great triumphs and victories, and leauing this perpetuall memorie of him, that of long time before him there was not any Emperour more valiant, couragious, wise, and fortunate then himselfe. His bodie was intombed in the towne of Granado, in the place where ordinarily are buried all the Kings of Spayne. His sonne Philip (onely heire of all his kingdomes and seigniories) after he vnderstood of his death, he made  Sumptuous funerals made at Bruxels by Philip King of Spaine, for the Emperour his father. a sumptuous preparation for his funerals in the Church of S. Iula at Bruxels. And among other magnificences, there was a great Ship which was made to goe through the streetes by art, which was round about filled with goodly tables shewing his victories, there was vpon the right side writtten these

words: Africke ruinated, Gelders taken, the sea cleered, Tremisan reestablished, Solyman chased. Vpon the left side were read these words: The new  world discouered, Millan recouered, Germanie and Bohemia appeased, Moron and Coron forced, Tunise taken and restored, and the captiues brought backe againe, the Christian Faith planted in India. After this great Vessell followed two Collomes placed vpon two Rockes, being crowned and drawne by Tritons. In one of them was written these verses.

Take thou well for thy deuise
The Herculian pillar of large size.

And in the other were those which here follow:

Taming the monster in this season of thine,

As Hercules did in his time.



And after were carried all the Ensignes of his kingdomes and seiguiories, which were followed by the gentlemen of his house in good order, of which I will make no large discourse, to auoide the tediousnes which the reader may take, in reading againe a thing which others by speciall writing haue alreadie heretofore exposed to the eyes of euery one. Onely I will say that in this ceremonie marched King Philip, the Duke of Sauoy, and all the other Knights of the Golden Fleece, with the Ambassadours of all the Potentates of Europe. In the said Church was seene both of one side and other, that which followeth, written in faire and great letters. 
To the Emperour Caes. Charles the 5. Religious, Happie, Aug. of the Gaules, great Lord of the Indies, of Tunise, of Africke, of Saxonie, mightie, victorious, and triumphant ouer many nations. Although that the things by him done by sea and land, his singular humanitie, his incomparable wisedome, his most feruent zeale, are sufficiently knowne to the world: neuerthelesse the Christian Common-weale, for the memorie of his iustice, pietie, and vertue, hath dedicated this Ship vnto him: Because he discouered to our world, a new world; and added to the name of Christ many strange nations, and inlarged the Empire of Spaine with many kingdomes and Prouinces. For that he preserued Germanie against 30000. horse, and 100000. footmen, with which Solyman the Turkish Emperour meant to haue inuaded  this Region: Because he entered with a strong Nauie into Morea, and tooke Patras and Coron Turkish townes: For that he ouercame the Tyrant Barbarossa in battaile by Carthage, who was accompanied with 200000. footmen, and 60000. horse. Because he put to flight 200. Gallies, and many other vessels of Pirates, and tooke the Fort of Goleta, with Tunise, and Hippo the new, and Hippo the royall. For that he tooke the kingdome of Tunise, and by it spoyled the Empire of Libia, and restored it to the lawfull King, and caused him to pay tribute to the Crowne of Spaine. Because he brought from thence free into their countrie 20000. captiues. For that he yeelded the kingdom of Tremisan to ye right King, after he had tamed the Mauritanians:  Because with a strong Nauie he won Africk, the most renowned port towne of Barbaria, with the townes of Susa, Monastaire, and Clupea, with other seatownes, and caused the Lords of them to pay tribute. For that he ouerthrew neere to Mauritania, and by the Ile of Sicilia, twice two Turkish Fleetes

scouring our seas. For that he made the sea peaceable against the continuall courses of Pirates. Because he reduced the Common-wealth of Genes to  her ancient libertie. Because after he had sixe times chased the enemies fleetes, and thrice in battaile defeated the enemies, twice reunited the Dutchie of Millan to the Empire, and once restored it to the D. Because with incredible celeritie he forced the towne of Dura, and ruduced vnder his puissance the Dutchie of Guelders. For that he suppressed many Princes of Germanie, and Prouinces which stirred the countrie to tumult and sedition, forcing their townes and Castles, and for that after he had taken the heads of their armies he pacified Germanie. For that he being Emperour passed the riuer of Albis, and after he had ouercome in battaile his enemies, and reduced  their townes vnder his puissance, and tooke their Commanders captiues, from thence he returned victorious. Because that of his owne good will he tooke armes against the enemies of Christendome, and neuer against the Christians, but by constraint, and to warrant himselfe from their outrages. To the most puissant, Catholike, and excellent Prince, this Christian Common-weale most affectionate to his Maiestie, hath erected these Titles and Trophees, adding to his Tombe the marks and Ensignes of his kingdomes, and the Tables of conquered nations: and to our Lord Emperour Caes. Charles the religious, happie, Aug. King of many kingdomes, triumphant ouer many nations, victorious ouer the Indies, Libia, Maur. Turkie; Deliuerer of Germanie, of Italie, of the Sea, of captiues; Pacifier of Germanie,  Italie, Spaine, and of the Sea; Reestablisher of many Princes, Arbitrer of many Princes, and to the most glorious Prince of Catholikes, the Christian Common-weale hath dedicated this for the example of Iustice, of Clemencie, and Valour, to his most religious sonne. Most gratious God, and most mightie, one and alone in Trinitie, the Christian people doe consecrate vnto thee these Titles and Trophees, for the memorie of the acts of Charles, Caes. Aug. whom thou madest Emperor of the Romanes, and King of many kingdomes, whose Pietie, Iustice, Clemencie, Prudencie, Magnanimitie, and Valour, is admired throughout the world: he by thy conduct hath augmented  this Empire, and his kingdomes, leauing the one to his brother, and the other to his sonne, with an example of his vertues, which he dying surrendereth to thee againe.
This great Emperour did well deserue, that such and so great honours should bee done him, there not being any since Charlemaine, who in force, puissance, and happines surpassed him. Within a while after died his sister Mary, who was married to Lewis King of Hungarie, slaine in the battaile of Mohaze.
The end of the seuenth Booke.



THE EIGHT BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE EIGHT BOOKE.
A Diet held at Ausbourg by the Emperour Ferdinand, wherein was graunted to him succours for the defence of Hungarie, against the Turke. Tocehay taken by King Iohn, betweene whom and Ferdinand there are motions of peace, but they come to nothing. Maximilian the sonne of Ferdinand is chosen King of the Romanes. Solyman seeketh peace of Ferdinand, in regard of the distrust he had of the Gouernour of Egypt. Maximilian created King of Hungarie: the death of his father Ferdinand, after which Maximilian is elected Emperour, who made warre vpon  King Iohn, and many places of strength are by these two taken from each other. Debatement of peace beeweene Maximilian, Solyman, Iohn, and Sigismond King of Polonia at Vienna. Erdeu besieged by the Turkes, and relieued by the Christians, but in the end is yeelded vpon composition. Many hostilities passe betweene Maximilian and Solyman; and continuation of peace betweene them. Counte Salm attempteth to surprise Alberegalis. The State of Germanie touching the Diets there held, and of the arriuall there of Princes Electors and others. The place and office of the Electors in publike assemblies. The Pope, and Princes of the Empire send to the ayde of the Emperour Maximilian. The manner and forme of the Spanish Inquisition. 

THe Emperour Ferdinand, brother to the deceased Emperour, about the very time and the death of his brother, had aduertisement that the Basha of Buda and the Moldauian, beyond all expectation, would come into the field, whilest his Maiestie held the Diet in the towne of Ausbourg, in which were present all the Electors, and almost all the Princes of the Empire, as well for his own Ambassadours of France at the Diet of Ausbourg. affayres, as to giue audience to an Ambassage sent from  the King of France, of which were chiefe the Bishop of Vienna named Marrillac, and the Lord of Bourdillon, which was vpon the 28. of March, the Emperour being in the great hall of Ausbourg in his Emperiall throne The seate of the Emperour and Princes of the Empire in the Diets. vnder the cloth of Estate, hauing on his right hand the Bishop of Mentz, the Ambassadour of the Bishop of Coullin, the Archduke Charles, the Bishop of

Saltzbourg, the Grand Master of Prussia, with many other great Lords. Vpon  his left hand was the Bishop of Treuers, the Duke of Saxonies Ambassadour, the Ambassadour of the Counte Palatin of Rhein, the Marquesse of Brandebourg, the Duke of Bauier, the Counte Palatin not the Elector, the Duke of Michelbourg, the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the three Marquesses of Baden, with other Lords. Before this great and renowned companie were honourably placed the Ambassadours of France. They offered in the name of their King all his abilitie and friendship for the seruie of the Empire, and they sought a perpetuall confederacie with him and the Electors. Answer was made them, that when they saw effects correspondent to his words, by restitution of the towne of Mets, they would then assuredly  thinke that their Master would bee their friend; and also that then they would be all readie to confirme good amitie him.
This Diet ended, the Emperour for feare of the daunger which might happen in his kingdome of Hungarie, vpon the said aduertisement, had present recourse to the ayde of his estates, and of the Empire. Bohemia, Morauia, Succours graunted to Ferdinand against the Turke. Stiria, and Carinthia offered vpon euery thousand crownes of value, twelue crownes to succour his Maiestie. And the Empire offered him men, horses, and money, if in case the warre should further proceede: and in the meane time while they could see what way these rumours would take, they yeelded to his Maiestie 600000. Dollors for three moneths, to be employed where his Maiestie thought good. These rumours were not in vaine. For  the warre betweene Ferdinand and King Iohn (otherwise called Stephen) was greatly inflamed: King Iohn hauing alreadie taken from the Emperour the strong Castle of Tocchay, and many other, minding continually to assay the Tocchay taken by K. Iohn from Ferdinand. recouerie of the surplusage of his kingdome, and to reuenge himselfe of the wrong which he thought he had receiued in this, that the Emperour held not promise with him touching the Infanta Ioane, whom he had promised vnto for spouse, with a dowrie conuenient to her greatnes: and with such reasons, being fauoured of the Hungars, who complained themselues to bee sorely oppressed by the Emperour: and hauing by the ayde of the Turke amassed  a great armie, he possessed a large countrie, and had become master of all Hungarie, if the Emperour had not before sent a sufficient Campe to resist and hinder them from further proceeding; notwithstanding the forces of the Basha of Buda, who was come into the field on his behalfe. But at the instance of the King of Polonia, and other Princes, who offered themselues to Debatement of peace betweene King Iohn and the Emperour Ferdinand. be mediatours of some good accord, for the desire which they had to que^ch that fire, for feare that the Turke vnder this occasion should not fasten himselfe further in this quarter, hee caused his armie to retire, as also King Iohn did, who by the aduice and perswasion of the said mediatours, was reduced to this point, that he would send Ambassadours to the Emperiall Maiestie, to effect their accord, and to demaund one of his daughters in mariage, which  he did: and his Ambassadours being arriued at Vienna, and audience being graunted them, being about to say that Iohn King of Hungarie and Transiluania had sent them vnto him; the Emperour would heare them no further, saying, that his Vayuode ought not to call himselfe King of Hungarie, that

kingdome being his inheritance, not vsurped, as it had been by the father of him who sent them: and that if they would haue audience, they should no  more call Iohn King of Hungarie, nor Transiluania, but onely Vayuode of that Prouince. The Ambassadours not minding to accept of these conditions, presently dispatched Couriers into Poland and into Transiluania, to giue the King notice of all this. Vpon this difficultie, the K. of Poland was of opinion, that the King of Transiluania his nephew shuld not for that time name himselfe K. of Hungarie, but only of that which he possessed: seeing it was not likely that he could iustly denie him the title of K. of Transiluania, he being thereunto called by the consent of all the people, and reinstalled by force of his armes, after that he had not kept, nor obserued the couenants and promises made as on his behalfe, betweene the Queene his mother  and the Emperour, in the time that Castalde was there. The Ambassadours following this aduice, alleadging the reasons of the King of Poland, and speaking of Castalde, they complained greatly of him, saying, that the Queene had been more deceiued by his perswasions and vaine speeches, then had been the dead King her husband by those who had crowned him K. of Hungarie, and those who were reuolted against him. The Emperour not minding to agree to this title of K. of Transiluania, but only of Vayuod, receiued notwithstanding those Ambassadours, who, treating of their charge, were not much content. They demaunded, that the Emperour should relinquish all that which he pretended in Transiluania, and that he  should make peace with their King, in giuing him his daughter in marriage with 100000. crownes, and vpon this condition, that all that which is situated beyond Tibiscus should bee his, and that which was on this side should remaine to his Maiestie: and that in the warres which might be betweene him and the Turke, he should be reputed neuter, not willing in this case to forsake the amitie of the Grand Seigniour, not to faile in the fidelitie and homage which he had done vnto him: neither was he willing to be bound to ioyne with his Maiestie, whensoeuer the Turke would make warre in Hungarie. They also further demaunded, that concerning that which the Emperour possessed of the rest of Hungarie, he should satisfie the dowrie and  debts of Queene Izabella, which she pretended from the time of the death of King Iohn her husband. To these demaunds the Emperour consented in part, and in part also meant not to consent to those which most imported him, and specially concerning the alliance, that he might not seeme thereby willing to yeeld vp his pretended right of Transiluania, and hoping that himselfe or his childre^ one day should be able to recouer it: and he preuailed so farre, that the enterprise of the Polish Ambassadours, and of other Princes came to nothing: and by that meanes the Ambassadours of Transiluania returned without any resolution. Which was a cause within a while after of great warre betweene him and the King of Transiluania, vnder the fauour  of the Turke: vpon which occasion he well knew what losse and damage it was to him, for that he would not then agree.
A certaine time after the Vayuode of Valachia was aduertised, that another Vayuode went about to dispossesse him of his estate, being assured of

succours from Ferdinand; and of the fauour of the nephew of that Lasky, who  Albert Lasky. laboured the friendship which was betweene Solyman and King Iohn. This nephew was also named Lasky. He for sundrie matters whereof he was attainted, was before constrained to forsake the kingdome of Polonia: vpon which occasion he was retired vnder the protection of his vncle to the Turk, of whom he was so well receiued, that he was made a Colonell of certaine Turkish troupes of horse and foote. But sometimes after forgetting all these honours and fauours, he forsooke that part, and tooke that of the Emperour Ferdinands, in whose seruice he then was, when he practised this subteltie, and enterprised without the knowledge of Ferdinand, against the Vayuode of Valachia, for the profit and commoditie of another, in whose fauour he had alreadie amassed 2000. horse, which he ioyned with the armie of the other  Vayuode, which was of 8000. footmen, and 4000. horse. These altogether marched with great speede, thinking to take the Vayuode vnprouided, and were alreadie arriued very neere him, attending the night which was fit to massacre them, and to seaze vpon his estate, in a pleasant and weake village, wherein for the present he then was. But the Vayuode being alreadie vpon his guard, and according to the first aduertisements, hauing assembled very secretly, to the number of 40000. men foote and horse, attending the issue of this enterprise, being aduertised of the place where his enemies were lodged, he caused that night all his people to march with speede, and in such manner so surprised his enemie, that he had neither leisure nor commoditie  to range himselfe in battaile, seeing himselfe assailed on all sides so suddenly and furiously, that he was constrained with his friend Lasky, to flie to the confines of Polonia, and to leaue the victorie to the Valachians, who with little losse of theirs, and great of their enemies, inriched themselus with the spoyle and bootie of this man: Lasky afterwards remaining dispossessed of many townes and Castles which he had by Cassouia, being depriued of those by meanes of the said Vayuode. And by this ill fortune so inconsideratiuely happened to him, falling into the indignation of Ferdinand, who dismissed him from his seruice, he retired into Moldauia, for that he would not fall into the hands of the King of Polonia, the Emperour, or of the Valachian;  these Princes not minding by the suffering of such an act, to draw vpon them any more the forces of Solyman, who neuerthelesse on his side, was not to demaund of them therefore any greater satisfaction, he hauing then a great distrust of the Gouernour of Egypt, against whom he had sent a great number of Ianisaries and other souldiours of his Port, fearing some commotion in that Prouince: and from other places he had some aduertisements of the enterprises of Baiazet his second sonne, who (some said) meant to inuade Syria, Solyman in trouble and doubt by Baiazet his son. with the succours and ayde of the Sophy, so that Solyman was againe constrained to send new garrisons into that quarter. 
Vpon the occasion of these troubles, he himselfe had great desire to seeke peace and truce with Ferdinand: although that his Lieutenants of Buda and of Bossina, with the Vayuodes of Valachia, Moldauia, and of Transalpina, in fauour of King Iohn, brought great damage to the Emperour, harrying and spoyling Hungarie, bringing into their hands many places thereof, his Maiestie

not being able to draw any succours from the Lords of that countrie, neither for the fortifications of the places, nor for the entertainment of his  souldiours: and if it had not been for the new garrisons which he put in better places, by the ayde of his subiects of Austria, the losse had been farre greater in that countrie. Solyman, notwithstanding the gaine which his people had in Hungarie, considering the perill whereinto he might fall, if he at one time had to doe against so puissant enemies as the Emperour and the Sophy were, resolued rather to seeke peace with the Christians, then with his subiects.
To this end (while they were at a Diet which was held at Franckfort, there Maximillian sonne of Ferdinand chosen King of the Romanes. was celebrated the solemnitie of the election, that the Electors had made of the person of Maximilian King of Bohemia, the eldest sonne of Ferdinand,  to bee King of the Romanes, and of his Coronation, after the accustomed promises by him made to be an obedient childe to the holy Church, according to the vse of his predecessors) an Ambassadour sent from Solyman was presented in this great assemblie, who offered a present to Ferdinand of certaine Solyman seeketh peace with Ferdinand. rich habiliments, and of straunge beasts: and after hauing ended some differences with his Maiestie, which imported Hungarie, the truce was concluded betweene them: and in consideration thereof, this Ambassadour caused to bee released and set at libertie many prisoners taken in warre, who by no meanes before could be redeemed for any money, nor exchaunge of others who were vnder the power of Ferdinand. 
After this truce, Ferdinand perceiuing himselfe to grow old and vnweildy of his bodie, yeelded the kingdome of Hungarie to his sonne Maximilian, Maximilian made King of Hungarie. with consent of all the Barons and Lords of the countrie, in acknowledging of which, all the Lords were gratified by Maximilian in all that which hee could doe. Whereupon some little while after, Ferdinand surprised with a great sicknes, ended his daies, hauing been a Prince of singular bountie and valour: and had not his example and wisedome been, Germanie (which The death of Ferdinand. was greatly estranged from the Catholike Church) had been wholly diuided from the vnion of the faithfull, and Ecclesiasticall ceremonies. This man although he was the sonne of Philip Duke of Burgongne, Counte of Flanders,  and Archduke of Austria, and of Ioane Queene of Spaine, and of other kingdomes: of al his fathers inheritance he had no more then the Archdukedome of Austria, with the Estates which are situated in Germanie: which was the ancient patrimonie of his house, the lawes of Spaine being of such qualitie, that the eldest haue onely the entire succession. Neuerthelesse, by meanes of his vertue he increased the inheritance of his house, adding thereto the kingdomes of Hungarie and Bohemia; augmenting by the addition of them, the greatnes of it farre more then it fell vnto him by his predecessors. By these actions he alwaies made it apparant, that he was endued with great constancie, especially towards religion, whereof he became protector,  in such sort, that laying aside all his other particular interest, he had speciall regard to the people which were committed to him, endeuouring himselfe to preserue them against heresies: and indeede not omitting any occasion or meanes to reduce those to the true knowledge, who were strayed from the

ancient Religion; his good disposition was so great towards all the Princes of the Empire, that with a reciprocall amitie he was so well affected of them,  that euen those who had important busines to negotiate with the Emperour Charles his brother, feared not to take him to arbitrate betweene his brother and them: so greatly did diuine iustice shine in him, which comprehendeth in it selfe all other vertues.
Also, not without cause of his good deedes, as well in generall, as towards particular Princes the Electors of the Empire, continued their election in his familie from the father to the sonne, almost making by this doing this succession, not as election, but as it were hereditarie. It is not to be doubted, but that his decease brought great griefe to the hearts of euery one, as it very euidently  appeared by the bewailing, which vniuersally was made for his death.
His sonne Maximilian (who alreadie was chosen King of the Romanes) succeeded him in the Empire. This man after he had taken the Crowne, Maximilian made Emperour. the Mantle, and other Emperiall ornaments, was confirmed Emperour by Pope Pius: and seeing himselfe aduanced by this goodly and great dignitie, with augmentation of goods and meanes, hauing of a long time nourished in himselfe a mortall hatred against King Iohn of Transiluania, he meant suddenly to vndertake the reuenge of many wrongs and losses receiued from him: and to doe this, he resolued to assaile him on a sudden. And for this purpose hauing amassed a great number of footmen vnder the conduct of  Maximilian made warre vpon K. Iohn. Melchior Ballassi, and causing them speedily to march towards Transiluania, he suddenly possessed certaine Fortresses. Iohn mightily prouoked at this, that against the compositions made with Ferdinand, he was so wronged by a new King, caused also his people very quickly to come into the field, and without delay, tooke the direct way against Sachmar, a strong place belonging Sachmar taken by Iohn. to Ballassi, who had not well prouided for it, mistrusting rather any other enterprise then this. This place was taken by a stratagem: Iohn hauing ranged all his people nigh to it about night in an Ambuscado so couert, that without being perceiued, they had commoditie to place themselues at the  Port, as they opened it to receiue in the Heardsmen, who from the fieldes brought their heards of beasts into this towne. Ballassi vexed at such a losse, went from thence and put himselfe into a great towne (yet not very strong) named Debrezen, in which ordinarily assembled many Marchants of diuers countries, and thereunto hauing put fire, he spoyled all there about. Debrezen burned by the Emperials.
In the meane time, the King of Transiluania hauing reenforced his army with 4000. Turkes, that the Basha of Buda sent him by the commaund of Solyman, came to force the towne of Hadao, and by composition he also made himselfe master of Atauiar: and leading about many prisoners, went Hadao and Atauiar taken by Iohn. and besieged the place of Vngar. The Emperour not ignorant of this that his enemie was suddenly fortified, with the ayde which was sent him from  Buda, had also dispatched a great number of Lansquenets, and some Caualarie, vnder the charge of Purchastaler, Captaine and Gouernour of Vngar. A good part of these troupes were alreadie entered into this place, when Iohn arriued there with his armie: and this succour came thither in so happie

a time, that the enemie (notwithstanding all his endeuour) was forced to  raise his siege, hauing lost there 4000. men at one charge, which Purchastaler came and gaue him, while he was not attentiue to any thing, but to the besieged: this Captaine hauing vsed this policie, that planting his Cannon vpon the flanke of the enemy, and couering it with his people, because he would not haue it discouered when they came to hand-strokes: at the first signall his people (as it were flying) retired themselues from before their Artillerie, which then being fitly discharged, made a great butcherie of his enemies, and put them into such disorder, that the Germanes had a great hand of those who were come out of the trenches of the Campe to fight with them. All this serued to no other end, but the more to kindle the fire betweene these two Princes, both the one and the other being willing to reuenge  themselues, whilest Iohn being succoured by the Turkes, who liked it better to haue a weake neighbour for their friend, then a neighbour who was strong and puissant. Maximilian also thinking, that thereby he lost much of his honour at the beginning of his Empire, did daily make new leauies of souldiours: and seeing he had to doe with a partie more strong then he thought for, made Lazare Schuendy (an ancient and very expert Captaine) his Lazare Schuendy Lieutenant generall in Hungarie for Maximilian. Lieutenant in this warre, and one who had attained great experience by the passed warres vnder the Emperour Ferdinand, in the same countrie of Hungarie, as wee before haue written. For the rest of the yeere, Schuendy could not enterprise any thing vpon Transiluania, because that he was come too  late into this armie, winter being alreadie come vpon them: so that the cold constrained him to lodge his people in garrisons vntill the Spring time, furnishing himselfe in the meane while with necessarie things for the next warre.
Sigismond King of Polonia, vncle to Iohn, by reason of his sister, considering that such preparations would bring but a desolation to Christendome, and desiring (for the auoyding of this euill) to pacifie these two Princes, enterposed himselfe to treate of an accord betweene them two: and for this effect sending his Ambassadours both to the one and other, he laboured his best to reduce them to a peace: but they being both greatly moued, he could  effect nothing. Therefore the Spring approaching, Schuendy (Lieutenant generall for the Emperour) drew his people out of garrison, and came into the field with an army, drawing towards Transiluania, to the end to assay the taking of the Castle of Tocchay, which is a Fortresse very renowned, situated vpon the frontire of Hungarie, betweene the riuers Thissa and Wodrog, which could not bee very easily besieged, except these two riuers were frozen, as then they were. This place was before taken by Cazzianet for the Emperour Ferdinand, who at the perswasion of some, had giuen it then to a Hungarian Baron of the familie of Scheredy, for recompence of certaine good and great seruices which he had done his Maiestie. This Lord being  deceased left one sonne, who for that he was of yong yeeres, was kept in this Castle vnder the gouernment of Francis Nemethy, who of a Tutor became a Nemethy a Tutor spoileth his pupil of Tocchay. Tyrant; and vsurping the place for himselfe, forsooke Maximilians part, and adhered to Iohn. This man being well ascertained that they would come

and besiege it, before the enemie presented himselfe, he caused to bee transported  all his moueables, his wife, and pupil, giuing order to that which belonged for the defence of this Fortresse. This is built after the manner of the greatest number of those of Hungarie, not hauing for all the Courtaines The siege of Tocchay by the Emperials. but one long rampier of earth flanked with certaine towers, with a good and large Ditch full of water, which then (and for the ruine of the place) was all frozen, and with so thicke an ice, that vpon it they might march to the assault as vpon plaine ground, and winter being not altogether passed, but hauing then his course yet very vehement, by reason that this countrie is of cold temperature: and when Schuendy made his approaches it was the 4. of Februarie. He had such store of Cannon, that therewith he so made his batterie, that on all sides the towne was battered. But this furie had not any force  against the ground, so that he was forced vpon the ice to come to the sap. Whilest this continued, the assieged sallied forth, and they so couragiously charged their enemies, that they laid 100. of them dead vpon the ground. But the great number surpassing their courage, they were constrained to retire: and seeing their rampiers broken, and the feare to lose them, caused them to parley and promise to yeeld themselues vpon some conditions, which (for that they were too much profitable for them) Schuendy would not agree vnto: but caused to reare the ladders, by meanes whereof the rampier was wonne, and the towne forced: and with great celeritie the Castle was assailed. Nemethy not forgetting any thing which might bee for the defence of  the place (as he was a braue souldiour, and a valiant and couragious Captaine) by his valour maintained a long time the violence of his enemies, vntill that going and comming here and there, to incourage his people, he was shot with a Harquebuze, which threw him dead to the ground. This death caused Nemethy slaine. presently his souldiours to lose their courage, who yeelded vpon this agreement, that euery one of them should haue his sword, and one suite of apparell. The Emperials being entered into this place, inriched themselues Tocchay yeelded. with good bootie, and there they found a quantitie of good and delicate wine. Schuendy sent the bodie of Nemethy to his wife, who was retired to a Castle of his, named Serentschin, which without any stroke giuen, became  vnder the Emperours puissance. Within a while after, the Emperials of the garrison of Agria being aduertised that the Turks were gone out of Zolnok, (which was not farre from the Campe) prepared for them a baite and an Ambuscado, which came so well to effect, that 300. Turkes remained there prisoners. On the other side, the garrison of Iauerin being abroad, cut as many in peeces.
Iohn seeing how all succeeded to the aduancement of his enemie, and that not any profit or commoditie could come to him in retaining the Castle of Sachmar (which alreadie had been taken and retaken twice) commaunded  Sachmar burned. those within to fire it, and to retire themselues by priuate and secret waies, while Schuendy passed Thissa (otherwise Tibiscus) with his armie. This passage did so much astonish those who kept the Fortresse of Eiden, that being Eiden yeelded to the Emperials. only besieged by ye space of one day, they yeelded without any defence, Ferdinand hauing in former time vsed al his force to get it, by reason of the great

reuenewes and profits which come thereof. This good fortune of the Emperour,  was greatly fauoured by the inundations and ouerflowings of Danubius, and of other riuers of Hungarie, and by the rigour of the winter, which in that yeere was so vehement, that the birds were found dead vpon A great winter. the ground through cold, and the peasants were taken lying vpon dunghils in great number halfe dead, who being brought to the fire, recouered their naturall spirits. And at the end the raines were so abundant, that the ice melting, all the countrie was in a manner drowned, in such sort, that on all sides, except the hils, one could see nothing but water, and the earth seemed to be conuerted to the great Ocean sea. These marueilous accidents were greatly incommodious for the enterprises of Iohn, because that the succours, which  on all sides were readie vpon the borders of the Turkes prouinces, and of those of his tributaries in the towne of Buda for him, were greatly slackened by these inconueniences.
Solyman, who was determined to succour and ayde Iohn, both with men and money, and euen with his owne person; neuerthelesse vpon these discommodities willing to entertaine Maximilian, sent to him an Ambassadour named Marc Libiniesa, a Transiluanian reneged Christian, who before time had been at Vienna in the same dignitie. His charge was openly to exhort Debatement of peace betweene Maximilian, Solyman, Iohn, and Sigismond. the Emperour, to preserue the pactions and agreements of the peace sworne by his father. He had also there with him for the same effect George Bathor  Ambassadour of Iohn: and for the same occasion the King of Polonia had also sent thither his Ambassadour.
In the meane time, Schuendy vpon these Ambassages, more then once, aduertised the Emperor, yt he should well aduise with himselfe before he made any conclusion tending to an agreement, for feare of being deceiued by the Turkes, vnder a pretence of an accord. Maximilian himselfe doubted the sleights of the Turke, knowing that it was but some policie to deceiue him. Neuerthelesse, that he might not seeme to haue a minde to disturbe this treatie of peace, he commanded that the frontier garrisons of Hungarie should not molest the Turkes, although that of their part such patience were not vsed, as it was not. For whilest that at Vienna they treated of pacifying the  differences, and assaied to grow to some reasonable agreement, the Turkes greatly endamaged Slauonia, and in Hungarie towards Iula, they made many incursions, being in the field with the Gouernour of Themesuar, who had with him 6000. men, two great peeces of Altillerie, and eight Faulcons: he spoyling all the countrie thereabouts. With these peeces this Gouernour battered and tooke the Castle of Pancor, also making himselfe master of two other named Seua and Deonec, situated by Iula, minding by those to further the siege, with which he pretended to enuiron the said place of Iula, towards which were marched 8000. Turkes by another way. 
During these treaties at Vienna, it happened that the souldiours of the garrison of Sighet went foorth vpon 200. Rhatians, which they put to the sword, and tooke two Agaes their Captaines: and as they returned to their garrison with their prisoners, there set vpon them 200. horse, who enuironed and charged them in such sort that they brake them, and pursued them so

fiercely, that of 600. which they were, there was no more but 200. saued.  This happened in the absence of Captaine Nicholas Esdrim Counte of Serin, Nicholas Esdrim Counte of Serin. who then was gone to the Court about some vrgent affayres of his own: and it is to be thought that his presence would haue hindered such distaster. As for Sachmar, which was halfe burned, and altogether abandoned by the Sachmar reestablished. Transiluanians, Schuendy caused it to bee repayred, iudging that that place would bring him some commoditie for many considerations. In the meane time, whilest his souldiours did daily labour to make it defencible, the enemies came towards that quarter to take a Castle thereby, and which was a very fit place greatly to annoy those of Sachmar. Against those, the Germanes of the said place of Sachmar going forth with great silence, suddenly charged their enemies, and they tooke from them 7. Ensignes, after they had  massacred the greatest part of them, and the rest being almost drowned in the riuer, into the which they threw themselues headlong inconsideratiuely by heapes to saue themselues.
Sachmar being reestablished, and Erasmus Meiger left there within to commaund, Schuendy tooke the way to Cassouia, hauing some distrust that the Turkes would come thither to besiege it, as there was some apparance thereof: and seeing that the forces of the Turke daily increased, he importunately solicited the Emperour to send him new succours, not finding himselfe furnished of that which was needfull for him to the entertainment of such a warre, and against so puissant an enemie. The Emperour sent him fiue Ensignes  of footmen, of whom was Colonell Iohn Bernard Rothman, with fiue peeces of Artillerie, all the horses being marked with the letter M. to the end A complot against the co^ductors of the Artillerie. that the waggoners and conductors thereof should not by deceit (as it is their custome) sell the good ones, or to vse them to some other purpose. In the meane time, the Turkes (who ouerranne all the countrie, and made there great spoyle) determined to take the Fort of Erdeu, neere to Sachmar, which then was in the commaund of Schuendy: and there hauing placed their siege Erdeu besieged by the Turkes. in the beginning of Iune, they made there many a shot against it, and finally they reared the ladders to enter by force. The assieged defended themselues valiantly, and often repulsing their enemies, they killed more then  800. of them: and fiercely sallying forth vpon them, they brought away two peeces of their Artillerie. Neuerthelesse, the Turks not any thing astonished thereat, but continuing the batterie more obstinately, in such sort that before the powder failed them, they made a great breach in the wall. Captaine Laubemberg, who commaunded in this place, seeing the obstinacie of the Turks, sent many times to demaund succour of Schuendy. He dispatched towards him 300. souldiours: and considering it was not possibly that they could enter without great daunger, willing neuerthelesse to assay some meanes which he had inuented to put them in, at what price soeuer, he commaunded them  to march all the night speedily and without noyse vnto a forrest, which was not farre from Erdeu, and where were placed the guards of the Turkish Campe: and as for himselfe, marching with the like diligence, he came to another quarter, from whence suddenly he gaue the alarme to the enemies Campe, who presently were frighted at this vnlooked for comming: and

vpon this rumour the Turkes failed not readily to raunge themselues vnder  their Ensignes, drawing all to that place from whence came the noyse of the enemies Drummes and Trumpets: and in the meane time by this stratagem, the succour which was vpon their watch, had commoditie to enter into the place. This succour being entered, the assieged were more couragious, and regarded nothing, although that the siege continued more then a moneth. The Turkes notwithstanding hotly pursuing the siege, procured much trauaile to the assieged, and there amongst others was wounded Laubemberg. A little before there entered a valiant and very expert Captaine named Weller, to second Laubemberg, and to commaund in his place, if any mishap should befall him. With Weller there was also entered Captaine Gossel,  who, in fighting valiantly there dyed. These couragiously defending themselues, maintained it a long time against the enemie, who also continuing the siege with a like courage, daily came to the walls to giue assaults: and hauing one night filled the Ditch with faggots, vpon the day following to mount more easily to the breach, the assieged did carefully lay good store of Cannon powder vpon and vnder the wood. The morning being come, the Turkes comming into the Ditch, with a hope to carrie the place at that time, and the fire also suddenly taking hold of these faggots, by the meanes of certaine sulphured Darts and burning Lances amongst the powder, with which this wood was seasoned, presently was seene in the ayre a great flame, which wholly broke the enemies enterprise, those remaining there burnt,  who thought to haue gotten the first honour, or best bootie, and were come thither too soone for themselues. The others retired to their Trenches, but not from the siege: but on the contrarie they were so selfe-willed, that causing their batterie to continue day and night, the Fortresse was seene all open without any defence, although the assieged did all their endeuour. In fine, these seeing themselues a pray, and certainly iudging that there was no more hope to maintaine themselues, as well for want of victuals, as men, as also by reason of the infection and horrible stinke which proceeded from the flesh of the Turkes dead bodies that remained in the Ditch, they came to parley, and the 4. of August they yeelded to the enemies, the Captaines remaining  prisoners, who also presently were conducted to Buda, and from thence to Erdeu yeelded to the Turkes by composition. Constantinople. Captaine Weller seeing they spake to yeeld, chose rather to dye fighting, then to come vnder the puissance and discretion of the Turks: this his resolution was followed by many other souldiours. The Emperour hauing had newes of this losse, and seeing that the treatie of peace which was on foote produced not any good, commanded Schuendy that he should well munition all the places, for feare of being surprised. And for this effect his Maiestie sent him other troupes, as well Caualarie as Infantrie, while in the meane time at Vienna, he caused to be celebrated the funerall pomps in honour of Ferdinand his father, where was the Duke Alphonse of Ferrara.  After which, he caused to bee throwne amongst the people certaine peeces of siluer, and other things of value, in token of largesse, vsing many other curtesies to the people.
And his Maiestie being now discharged from these ceremonies, his mind

was altogether attentiue to the warre which the Transiluanian made against him, being furthered and succoured by the forces of the Turkes: and to remedie  it, he caused then to be assembled all his men of warre, and particularly the Caualarie at Theschin, causing them to march from thence to Schuendy, whom he found at that time busied against the inhabitants of Debrezen the Emperour subiects, being greatly moued against those, because that for feare of the Turke they had many times giuen victuals to the enemies. To chastise them from such cowardlines, without giuing notice thereof vnto Debrezen burned by the Emperials. them, he marched towards them with his armie: and hauing surprised them, he first caused the towne to be sacked, and after that he fiered it, reducing all into ashes. The vessels and ornaments were carried to Tocchay, from thence  he tooke his way towards Moncat, belonging to Iohn. About this place the Emperours armie many times was badly intreated, the garrison therof boldly seazing vpon the Sutlers of the armie, whom they pilled, robbed, and lead away. Schuendy to reuenge himselfe vpon them, laid an Ambuscado, and after faining a skirmish, drew them to the fight, and by little and little retiring thence, he caused them to fall into the place where he desired they might be, and by this meanes he had some reuenge of them, the most part of them remaining dead in the field, the lesser part being saued by flight. Schuendy victorious with the spoyles of his enemies, retired to Sachmar. In which place, by reason of diuers accidens, there happened so many maladies among the  souldiours and inhabitants, that daily increasing, they were constrained to goe into the fields and forsake the towne. Vpon this occasion Schuendy went and incamped by Tibiscus, fortifying himselfe with many Trenches. But he was not long in this lodging, before he was surprised with a very sore feauer, which tormented him many moneths, not without great disquietnes to the Emperour, who greatly loued him, hauing iust cause so to doe, reposing himselfe wholly vpon him, for the experience which he knew to be in him for the affayres of warre.
Notwithstanding that in Transiluania the warre proceeded on in this sort, the treatie of peace was alwaies managed at Constanstinople. But  the Emperour well foreseeing that this negotiation was but onely to hold him in suspence, while the Grand Seigniour in other places disposed his affayres: and being further ascertained by Cornouuicchy (who was but come from the Turkes Court, that gentleman also assuring that they should not hope for any peace, although that after his departure there was giuen him some hope thereof) his Maiestie commaunded that his armie might be prepared, and appointed that 5. Ensignes of Germane Infantrie should muster at Lepanto, and 300. Vallachians at Posson, and 300. Hungarish horse about Iauerin. All these companies were newly leauied. These (after muster was taken of them) were charged to march into the field: to which did also goe Captaine Adam Iula, and Romer a Knight of Malta, with fiue other Ensignes  of foote. To these ioyned foure Ensignes of Germane horse, and Captaine Derssi with 300. other souldiours. With this supplie was furnished all the principal places. Within a while after there arriued 600. Germane horse, and other 500. vnder the conduct of Hoschirher. Also there went to Vienna

Counte Gonther Schuartsbourg, Counte Otting, and Counte Mansfert, Christopher  Liechtenstain, and many other great personages, who offered their seruice to his Maiestie to be employed in this warre.
The sicknes of Schuendy gaue in the meane time commoditie to the Turks more freely to harrie the countrie, then before time they had done, and they Newstat inriched with mynes of diuers mettals. greatly spoyled the countrie about Sachmar, and that of Newstat (called the Ladies brooke) where is seene the mynes of diuers mettals.
During such courses, King Iohn, and the Gouernour of Themesuar approaching very neere to Sachmar, were almost striken with an Artillerie bullet, euen as these two Lords rid side by side. The Turkes not yet content to commit such spoyle, tooke courage to goe in the night and assaile Schuendy  in his Campe. But he hauing notice of this attempt, prepared for them an Ambuscado, which was lodged so secretly in a forrest by, that the Turks not doubting any thing thereof, came iust vpon it, and being suddenly charged, they presently put themselues in route, there remaining notwithstanding in the place no lesse then 4000. not without daunger also that all had been lost there, if the night had not fauoured the slight of those who were best mounted, as also it greatly serued to the Emperials to make their retraict safe and sound into their Campe, after such a checke giuen.
The Turkish Caualarie passed further, and presented themselues before the walls of Iauerin, and for that it was yet night, it was not permitted to those within to goe forth: but the day being come, and the garrison sallying  out of their ports, the Turkes presently retired. While these skirmishes and enterprises were attempted one against another, Grassuen (a Captaine of 100. Hungarish horse) encountring 1000. Turks, and both the one and the other betaking themselues to their hands, 200. Turkes lost there their liues, among which was the Gouernour of Lippa, called in their language Beg. Those who were wounded with the shot of the Harquebuze, being conducted to the Campe, could not auoyde death, for that the bullets were besmeared Bullets annoynted with fat cause death. with larde. In the meane while the Saxon souldiours hearing this skirmish, were desirous to goe forth: but their Generall would not permit them, but hindered them with much adoe. These were onely arriued at the Campe,  well armed, vnder Colonell Henry Glasenthal, who had for his companion Don Sibotendorf, both men of valour and incomparable boldnes. Betweene them there were 1026. horse, which were payed by the Elector of Saxonie for fiue moneths. To these were ioyned 350. horse, who followed the Camp at their owne charges. The two armies were incamped no further one from another then a mile, the Emperials being lodged vpon Tibiscus by a village named Kizar, situated vpon the shore of the riuer, in the houses wherof were lodged the principals of the Campe, the whole being fortified with strong Trenches. That of the Turkes was planted beneath the said riuer, and they  had made a bridge vpon the riuer Somos.
At the same time Charles the Archduke of Austria being in Stiria, had his people in the field against the enemie, who had committed great spoyle in the countrie, if that Prince had not remedied it. On the other side, the Basha of Bossina, the Gouernour of Boschegne, and the Berbatberg being one day

assembled to ouerrunne Slauonia, and to carrie away the countrie people,  hauing encountred Peter Eborce Ban, which signifieth Gouernour, the charge was so hot, that the Turkes were put to slight with great slaughter of them, which was said to haue been 5000. and the Berbatberg was there sore wounded.
In another place 320. Turkes minding in the night to assaile Thrin, the Caualarie of Iaques Sach, with certaine Hungarish footmen, being gone forth to meete them, killed vpon the place 60. of them, and tooke 65. others of them prisoners.
During these rough skirmishes, on the other side they treated of peace at A continuation of the treatie of peace. Vienna, there being yet the foresaid Ambassadours. And the Emperour caused to be called thither the gentlemen of Hungarie, to consult with them  vpon the points of agreement which were propounded. And whereas Schuendy could not be rid of his sicknes, the Emperour sent to him Paul Veidner a Doctor of Phisicke, an excellent man in his profession. This man of a Paul Veidner a Phisition, of a Iew became a Christian. Iew became a Christian. Schuendy notwithstanding his want of health, forgot nothing of that which appertained for the entertainment of his armie, seeing that the Turkes desisted not from their courses, and to prouoke ours to fight with new iniuries. The Emperials on their behalfe did no lesse. Vpon this occasion there was betweene them and vs a fierce encounter, wherein were many Turkes slaine, and of the principall of the enemies, of whom the bodies were fauourably rendered by Schuendy to those who to demaund  them, were sent to him by the enemie.
At another time, as certaine souldiours were gone with waggons to forrage to bring straw and oates, they were taken by certaine Turkes who encountred them. This robberie was then done, when a Chiauss was arriued at the Campe, who was sent by the Turke to continue the treatie of peace begun. Schuendy requested him that he should procure to be rendered vnto him his souldiours and baggage which the Turkes had taken, telling him further, that this kinde of dealing did not manifest any signes nor effects of peace. The Chiauss answered him, that he should presently send some troupes after to recouer that which was taken, it being not the intention of  his Prince to breake the agreements of peace. Vpon this answer, Schuendy caused presently to mount on horsebacke Captaine Ruebert with his companie of light horse, to busie and entertaine the Turkes, and to doe so much, that they might not retire vntill he were seconded by others which should follow him. The diligence was so great both of the one and of the other, that hauing ouertaken the enemies, they had all their waggons which were on this side the bridge: but those who had alreadie passed the bridge, ended their voyage in safetie. This recouerie so braue and suddenly executed, caused the Turkes to remoue their Campe, which was neere to the Emperials,  who also did the like, marching towards Cassouia, that they might more commodiously haue victuals, which began to faile in their Campe: besides that, the souldiours were greatly troubled by diuers sicknesses: and amongst other, with bloodie fluxes and pestilent feauers. A little before the Transiluanian also was retired, and hauing put his people to winter in garrisons, he

retired into his kingdome, where hauing found that some of his subiects  and inhabitants secretly fauoured Maximilian, he caused them all to bee hanged.
At that time was released from Vienna his Ambassadour (who was retained Ambassadours are not to be retained for and in place of prisoners taken in the warre. there longer then he was willing) at the instance of Ballassi, who continually importuned the Emperor not to suffer him to depart vntil he had his wife and children, who were carried away at the taking of Sachmar. But this Ambassadour complaining of his detaining, his Maiestie meant not that he should be any longer detained against his liking, saying, that that would be a breach and violence offered against the law of nations, it being not reasonable to vse such reuenge for prisoners taken by the right of warre. For  the same consideration was also sent backe Alexander Kendy Secretarie to King Iohn, who iournying towards his masters Ambassadour, was taken in a skirmish made against certaine Transiluanians, who conducted him and endeuoured to bring him into some place of suretie, and who being thus taken, had been led to Vienna by Iohn Wolgazen.
In the meane time, Schuendy vigilant in his charge, did not cease to solicite the Emperour to this, that it would please him to appoint new companies and supplies, although the enemie laboured peace, shewing him by liuely reasons that the practises of the Turke were onely but in appearance, and to couer his enterprises and deseignes, knowing that he daily made new leauies of men, to assaile the armie of his Maiestie with the greatest force hee  could. The Commaunders of the Turkish armie knowing the distrust that this great Captaine had of their subtelties, writ to him a letter, by which they sent him word, that they greatly marueiled at him that he would trouble the peace, which was treated of betweene these two most puissant Emperours, which would bring to them both great commoditie. But Schuendy also giuing as little credit to their words as to their subtelties, ceased not (with the principals of the armie) to embrace all the occasions that might be offered, for the seruice of his Prince.
Vpon this resolution, Counte Ecchia of Salm (a most renowned Captaine) seeing himselfe to haue command ouer a good number of souldiours,  was departed from Iauerin the 12. of October, and tooke the way to Alberegalis, Counte Salm enterpriseth vpon Alberegalis. named in the language of that countrie Stulweijssuburg, distant eight Germane miles from the place from whence he came, being certainly aduertised that in this towne there was few men for the defence thereof, thinking by this want easily to take it. And as he was but three miles from thence, came a Courier sent from the Emperour, bringing him expresse commaund to returne with his people to Iauerin. The Counte sorie at the heart, left his voyage, with great discontentment of all those who followed him, for the good opinion which they all had to see themselues at ye top of that enterprise,  by reason of the few souldiours which they knew to be in this towne. A secret intelligence which the Counte had with the Iudge of this place, gaue them an assured hope of victorie, and the rather because that the Iudge (for assurance of his faith) had giuen his wife and children in hostage, he hauing giuen order that in the night one part of the Artillerie should be remoued,

and the rest choked, to the end that the Turkes should not therewith at  neede serue themselues, and in the morning as they droue the cattell forth to pasture, the Counte with his people should giue the assault to the ports of the towne, and if the Turks (who were but few in number) should put themselues in defence, the citizens presently should bandie against them, and by that meanes the towne should haue been taken without any great resistance. This exployt being thus giuen ouer by the commaund of the Emperour, there was a good occasion lost to recouer this place, which was of so great importance. The Iudge saued himselfe at Pallota, fearing his person, seeing the Emperials had failed in their practise. The Turkes hauing discouered this enterprise, caused 40. inhabitants of the towne to bee pitched vpon stakes, among which were comprised many innocent of the fact. This execution  was hindred, because that at that time was earnestly treated the peace with the Ambassadours, who for that purpose were come to Vienna: and indeede his Maiestie had sent to the Grand Seigniour for Ambassadour George Hossute, Councellor of the King in the chamber of Hungarie, a man George Hossute Ambassadour for Maxilian to the Turke. of good vnderstanding, and conuersant in the affayres of Princes. Vpon occasion whereof, it seemed not good to the Emperour to raise any trouble, vntill it was seene what end these things would take, which euery one looked vpon in hope of agreement: and for the same consideration, he had also commaunded that not any should molest the Turkes, and that onely they should rest themselues vpon their defence. This Ambassadour departing  from the Court, led with him 20. Turkes of good regard, who had been taken in the warre a little before, and were prisoners in the custodie of diuers Hungarish Lords. Being all arriued at Buda, the Basha receiued them with much honour, and great sports, and gaue them safe conduct. This negotiation of peace was the cause that Augustus the Elector and Duke of Saxonie countermaunded his Caualarie, since that vpon the firme hope which was had of the peace, he saw that it serued to no purpose in Hungarie. In like sort many other Captaines and Germane souldiours were dismissed by his Maiestie, thinking that they should not haue any more to doe. But within a while after such companies were greatly desired againe, the necessitie being  come to make new leauies of men: for that the Turkes desisted not from their ordinarie courses, and greatly to endamage the countrie, daily increasing new forces. A good part of these came and laid siege before Newstat, Newstat taken by the Turks. and inclosed those who were within, in such sort, that the Captaine, named Glesmuner, appointed for the guard of this place, seeing he could not defend it, did yeeld it to the enemie, departing foorth with his souldiours with a white staffe in his hand. By and by after this place was regained againe by the Emperials, and againe lost, and finally recouered: so that at this day it is in the Emperours commaund. The Turks of another part forraging euen to  Iauerin, led 800. head of cattell, which presently was recouered by the garrison. Dersfi (Gouernour of Nitria) seeing the Turks ouerrunning the countrie, and to approach nigh him, went forth, and affronting the enemie, on a sudden cut many of them in peeces, and led with him in his retraict two Agaes prisoners, which are two of the principall Captaines of the Ianisaries.

A little before was also taken a Turke by Sighet, who was come to spie this and other places of the countrie. This man being brought before the Archduke  Charles, among other things assured him, that his Lord would come in person into Hungarie, and that within a little time Sighet and Iula should be by him bes(...)d, and that his armie would bee of 600000. men, without counting those which rowed at the ores. Counte Salm had also taken certaine other Spies, which assured him the like. Another Turke named Scafir Vayda, chiefe Councellor of the Basha of Buda, and well knowne among all the Hungars to bee a man of singular vertue in the managing of warre, was taken, and discoursing with Francis Pesthy, had confirmed the speech and confession of the others: so that he saw not any more hope of peace or truce, but all appearance of warre. And that which made them the more to beleeue  Peasants paying custome to both parts. it, was, that the peasants (who are remaining vpon the frontiers betweene the Emperour and the Turk, who were wont to pay the tribute both to the one and to the other) had expresse commaund, vnder grieuous penalties, not to pay any thing to the Emperials: there being also taken by the Castle of Papa 80. of our souldiours by the Turkes, who did no other thing but daily forrage about Iauerin, and other places of Hungarie, doing infinit mischiefe: which was an euident signe that the hate daily increased, and that all hope of peace was cut off. Maximilian aduertised by diuers waies of all these accidents, and of the great preparatio^s which were appointed at Constantinople, gaue order that Iauerin should be fortified, as being of great importance,  and in which place he would make head of all his people. And through all Austria he caused to be published, that not any should sell either wine or corne out of the countrie, and that which was alreadie sold, and yet not being transported, should be retained. He sent to Sighet for the defence of that place certaine Bohemians and Hungars, with 600. souldiours, of whom were Captaines a Vicount of Millan, and a Germane Lord. He also dispatched commissions to Captaines to leauie new companies of souldiours. And further, considering the puissance of Solyman, in comparison of which all these preparations of warre could not long stand him in stead, if he were not succoured with the forces of the Empire (as in such cases his predecessors  had been): for to remedie so great a danger, he published a generall Diet of all the Empire in the towne of Ausbourg, to obtaine of all necessarie succour in so imminent a perill. The publication hereof was made through all the prouinces of Germanie, the more to hasten the conuocation.
This great region is diuided into three Estates, to wit, the Ecclesiasticall The Estate of Germanie touching the Diets. Lords, the Secular Lords, and the Lords of townes. These onely pay to the Emperour euery yeere a tribute, which is of no great value: and when necessitie requireth they extraordinarily contribute souldiours, weapons, and money: and these contributions are acc(...)d in such Diets, which ordinarily the Electors come vnto, diuided into tw^ orders, to wit, the Ecclesiasticall  and Secular. The first of the Ecclesiasticals is the Archbishop of Mentz, Chauncellor of the Germane nation: and all the registers of the Diets are Ecclesiasticall Electors. kept in his Chancerie. After him is the Archbishop of Colon, Chauncellor of Italie: and after this man is he of Treuers, also Chancellor of France. To

these doe ioyne certaine other rich and puissant Archbishops, as he of Salzbourg The Bishop of Salzburg rich. very ancient, who by reason of the mynes of salt, gold, and siluer,  which he hath in his countrie, may dispend 150000. Florins of yeerely reuenew. He of Magdebourg is called Primate of Germanie. There is also those The Bishop of Magdebourg Primate of Germanie. of Bremen and of Bizonce with about 25. Bishops all rich (...)eat and anuall reuenewes, who are called Princes of the Empire, by reason of the Castles, townes, and Prouinces which they hold.
As for the Seculars there is in like sort three, which haue the first place of Secular Electors. honour and authoritie, who are named Electors. These haue also some particular offices in the Emperours seruice. The Palatin is the first of all, and carrieth vp meate to the table. The Duke of Saxonie is the soueraigne Iudge  of the Court, and he hath besides the title of Mareshall: and the Marquesse of Brandebourg is high Chamberlaine. To these doe ioyne many other great Princes, who are dissended from the house and race of the Electors, as the Duke of Bauier, with the other Palatins, who are of one familie. The Dukes of Saxonie, the Marquesses, and the Burgraues of Brandebourg, and The Elector of Saxonie and the Duke of Bauier the richest of them all. then the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg, very noble and of the most ancient houses of Saxonie, with many other Dukes, Marquesses, Lantgraues, Burgraues, Countes, and Barons. Of all these the richest in reuenew is the Elector of Saxonie, hauing more then 500000. Dollors of yeerely reuenew, and is able to raise in his countrie 6000. horse, and 15000. footmen. After him, the Duke of Bauier is noted, hauing a large countrie, furnished  with goodly townes, out of which, besides the ordinarie reuenew, he draweth 600000. Florins. There is yet the Duke of Cleue, a very puissant Prince, who heretofore made warre vpon the Emperour Charles, vncle to Maximilian.
The free townes of the Empire are (as some doe count) 72. and in former time there was 85. These not acknowledging any other superiour then the Emperiall townes. Emperour, pay him yeerely certaine tribute: but so little, that all scantly commeth to 15000. Florins by the yeere. There bee certaine townes exempted Little tribute due by the Emperiall townes to the Emperour. from all payments, but onely when in generall they contribute to  the leauies which are laid vpon all in case of necessitie, and they haue their particular lawes, and all of them for the most part are gouerned by the popular Estate, or by that which is mixed. Some neuerthelesse, and amongst others Noremberg are gouerned by the Nobilitie. These townes haue gotten their freedome, buying their libertie by money, and bettering their condition by the fauour which they were able to draw from the Emperours, or Princes who ruled them: in such sort that the citizens thereof, by their industrie, trafficke, and bringing into their townes new arts, buying neighbouring Castles and Lordships, and performing some speciall seruice to their Lord, haue not onely inlarged t(...) walls, and amplified their territorie: but also hauing got their libertie, (...)e in such sort increased their force and puissance,  that they durst within a while after resist against the most mightie Princes of Germanie, as hath been seene by the citizens of Magdeburg, who endured more then a yeeres continuall warre, and the siege planted before Magdebourg puissant. their towne by the greatest Princes of Germanie, with the Emperiall Camp,

hauing taken prisoner Duke George of Michelbourg: and in the end the  towne had no worse condition then had the others after the Smalchaldigne warre. Other townes haue also sustained great warres, as that of Breme, Noremberg, and Lubec, which is situated vpon the Ocean, and is so puissant by Lubec wealthie. sea and land, that it hath alwaies in a manner at pleasure, chased and repulsed the Kings of Denmarke. There is also besides these, many other townes very famous, as Collon, and Ausbourg. Which last hath the richest citizens that are in Germanie. There is also of this number, Spire, Vormes, Ausbourg rich. Vlm, Rostoc, Ratisbone, with many other great cities, which for breuitie I omit. There is yet of others, which for the present are dismembred from the bodie of this great Prouince, and possessed by other Princes, or neighbour  States, as Metz, Thoul, Verdun, Basile, Geneua, Lucerna, Roteuilla, Moluze, and Cambray, which are vnder the dominion of the French, Spaniards, and Swisses. The towne of Danzic (situated at the mouth of the riuer Vistula within the Ocean sea, and being the Staple of the greatest part of Danzie. the North) and the towne of Eluine are reduced together with Prussia, since the yeere 1525. vnder the Crowne of Polonia. Constance is vnder the King of the Romanes, and many other vnder diuers Princes. All these Ecclesiasticall and Secular Princes, and free townes, appeare at these Diets published by the Emperours commaund, who, in that he cannot absolutely command them, procureth these assemblies, to the end that in them he might aduise what were profitable and beneficiall for all in generall. At these Diets as  there is three Estates, who are there, so also doe they make three seuerall The policie which is held at the Diets. Councels. In the first come none but the sixe Electors: into the other both the Ecclesiasticall and Secular Princes: and into the third, among all the Abbots of the Empire there entereth no more but two, and among all the Counts and Barons two others: and also there enter thereinto the Deligates of the free townes. To all of them is propounded by the Emperour, or by the King of the Romanes, all that which he thinketh of to be decided: and euery Councel diuided and retired apart, determineth vpon that which hath been propounded. It is true that the townes speake not their opinion, but by the voyce of the Councell, not hauing any voyce for resolution. 
All these States were thus assembled by Maximilian in the towne of Ausbourg, to the end to draw from them in so great and vrgent occasion, the ayde and succours which hee thought necessarie for generall good, and as his predecessors had obtained and gotten in time past vpon like occurrances. And to the end that by his example all the assembled should vse more diligence, he was the first that went to the Diet, well knowing that slacknes herein would bring imminent daunger, and that the Turk with great promtitude prepared his forces to come and charge him. And although it was  hardly to be beleeued that Solyman being so old and diseased, would himself in person execute this enterprise: yet neuerthelesse the great preparations which he made, were such, that they gaue sufficient occasion to think that there was something in hand. Therefore dutie and necessitie required, that Maximilian should at least be prepared to defend himselfe from the violence

of his enemie. Being then arriued at Ausbourg, he solicited the Electors  and other Princes and States of Germanie to make speede to come thither. But at the beginning, these Princes alleadged some lets, which hindered and retained them backe. The principall excuse was grounded vpon the warre which was betweene the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, by meanes wherof Warre betweene the Kings of Sweden and Denmarke. there were brewed in the confines of the territories and countries of the one and of the other, many practises. And it seemed that vpon this occasion this Diet should either be wholly dissolued, or at the least deferred vntill an other time, without ordaining any other thing.
These tumults of warre were a little before stirred vp betweene two brothers, Dukes of Michelbourg in Saxonie for the towne of Rostoch, which being possessed with great forces by the eldest sonne, was besieged by the  yonger. The one was fauoured by the King of Denmarke, for that he was of his alliance, and the other was succoured by the King of Sweden, who with fayre promises and money entertained these Princes in warre, with policie alwaies to hold the Prouince in trouble. The Emperour seeing that these warres brought great hurt to his enterprises, and great preiudice to the Empire, sent to these two Princes certaine Lords of his Court, to signifie to them that they should grow to agreement. This negotiation was so well managed, that within a little time all was pacified, to the praise of his Maiestie, and to the good and quiet of the countrie. This accord succeeding thus to effect, the Emperour also purposed to accord these two Kings. He of  Sweden thanking his Maiestie, for so good an affection which he manifested The King of Sweden referreth himselfe to the Emperour Maximilian. to the peace and vniuersall tranquilitie, offered to submit himselfe to all honest and reasonable conditions. And for this effect he dispatched to the Emperour the Duke of Pomeraine, and Duke Iohn Frederic of Saxonie his vncle by the mothers side, to whom he committed all his rights and titles to decide them with Maximilian.
The other difficultie (which held certaine Princes Electors not to come to this Diet) was by reason of a certaine contention stirred vp betweene two other brothers Dukes of Viuaria, sonnes in law to the Palatin, because of the diuision of their states and lands, and specially for certaine strong places,  which were in the gouernment of the eldest sonne, with euident losse of the yonger: for that of three brothers the last being dead, the other two, which were Iohn Frederic, and William, being accorded, now the eldest hauing begun to manage the estate of him that was dead one whole yeere together one after another, and gouerned by the space of the limited time, would not neuerthelesse yeeld to his brother, being moued with the sweetnes of commaund. The Elector Palatin was greatly busied to accord them, as also was the Elector of Saxonie, who had been requested thereunto by the Palatin: and to accomplish it, they did meete together at Lipsia, where the  younger brother was present. And for that in their allegations there were shewed many difficulties, which could not easily be resolued, the whole was remitted to the Diet. On the otherside, Philip Lantgraue of Hesse excused himselfe that he could not be at this assemblie, because of the nuptials of one of his sonnes with the Duke of Wirtembergs daughter. This very subiect

hindered 13. other Protestant Princes from being there, insomuch that for this occasion the beginning of this Diet was proroged. They celebrated  these nuptials at Maspurg, and by reason of the assembly of so many Princes, Protestant Princes in rumour against Count Palatin, for that he had changed his religion. the Emperour was greatly troubled to know what discourse they would vse therein, fearing least such a resort would bring some alteration in the affayres of religion, which would hinder his proceedings against the Turke. That which made his Maiestie most of all to distrust, was, that euery one knew wel enough that all these Princes had done their best endeuour to reduce the Count Palatin (who leauing the Confession of Ausbourg, had taken the religion of Geneua) not preuailing any thing with him thereby. These Princes were Philip Lantgraue of Hesse, with William and Lewis his children; Philip  Duke of Hulst; Hernest Duke of Brunswick; Christopher Duke of Wirtemberg, father of the married, and two of his children, and two of the Count Palatin; Wolfang Palatin Duke of Bipont, with his sonne; and Iohn George sonne of the Marquesse of Brandeburg, who for the indisposition and sicknes of his father returned presently to him.
These affayres held the Emperours minde in great suspence, in vaine expecting these Princes at Ausbourg, hauing none with him but the Empresse, the Duke of Bauier with the Dutches, and Ferdinand her sonne: and so much the more did it torment him, for that he daily heard the bruites to increase of Solymans preparation: and also he had certaine notice that the Transiluanian leauied men, in such sort that he was out of all doubt, but that  the next yeere he should haue all the warre vpon his shoulders.
The Princes of Germanie vnderstanding this newes, and seeing they could not be at the Diet so soone as their dutie required, sent their Deligates to the Emperour, with entire authoritie to negotiate in their name, vntill they could finde the meanes to come themselues in person to the Diet. But the Emperour would not begin any thing, desiring the presence of their persons in such important affayres. For this cause he often sent to them messenger vpon messenger.
They negotiated at the same time with his Maiestie an alliance with the A negotiation for the mariage of Charles the 9. King of France. King of France, and for the prosecuting of this, there came to the Court the  Bishop of Remes, who hauing left there his Agent and Secretarie, he returned into France, with determination to returne very quickly.
As the Emperour searched all the meanes to defend himselfe from the enemie, Sigismond King of Polonia on the other side endeuoured to make an Sigismond King of Polonia hindered by the Duke of Muscouia from making peace betweene the Emperour and King Iohn. accord betweene him and King Iohn his nephew. But this good worke was disswaded and drawne backe, to the great damage of Christendome, this Prince being constrained to employ all his thoughts for the defence of his countrie against the Duke of Muscouia, who notwithstanding the peace made betweene them, had taken away a part of Liuonia. The Bohemians and Hungars in the meane while by their King solicited the Emperour, offering  to ayde him in this warre, according to the necessitie and their abilities. As much also did the Kings of Denmarke and Sweden promise him, who had referred all their differences into his hands.
By these practises his Maiestie alwaies dispatched something tending to

the end of his intention, expecting the execution of this Diet, which he desired to be confirmed by the presence of all the Orders and States of the Empire:  for which neuerthelesse there was not any thing done of a long time; during which, Shrofetide was come. Many Lords of the Court (to make it appeare that they were not amazed for the newes which ranne of the Turks menaces) forgot not to solemnize this day (after the accustomed manner) with mummeries and pleasant sports. In the end, the Lords began to set forward to the Diet, and the first that came thither was the Marquesse of Brandebourg: but he againe falling sicke by the way, was constrained to returne, The Princes of the Empire arriued at the Diet. and sent thither his sonne George, and his nephewes with 300. horse, with commission not to stirre from the Court, vntill some new commandement.  There also arriued the Elector of Mentz, whom the Emperour went to meet halfe a mile out of the towne, and very curteously accompanied him euen The Emperor went to meete the Elector of Mentz. to his lodging. At the same time came thither Cardinall Commendon, he being come thither in post sent from the Pope: but in the state of a priuate man at the first, vntill such time as within a while after there came thither Iohn Andrew Calligny his Auditor, with the Crosse, and authoritie of Legate. This man was very well receiued and entertained by the Emperour, there being no other in the Popes name of such qualitie, although two other Cardinals were there present, to wit, he of Ausbourg, and he of Altemps, who were there as Princes of the Empire. 
In the meane time the Emperour considering the importance of this warre, besides the succours which he hoped from the Empire, meant also to haue obtained some other of the Pope: and to accomplish it, he gaue commission therefore to Rumiler his Chamberlaine, whom he sent to Rome to congratulate with the Pope, who was newly come to the Pontificall dignitie, and in like manner to require ayde and succours for the warre of Hungarie. The Pope very willingly promised him all fauour, assigning him 50000. Succours fro^ the Pope to the Emperor. crownes by yeere, and then sending him two payes, whereof the last was carried by the Lord of Billy, who went towards his Maiestie, in the place of a Nuncio. 
During this Lent, Maximilian often going to Sermons and Masse, according to the example of his predecessors, gaue proofe that he was very Catholike. Going to these deuotions, the Protestants forebore not to accompanie The manner of Protestant Princes accompanying the Emperour to ye Church. him, but at his entrie they retired apart, attending vntill Masse was said, to conduct him againe in his Palace: in which he often feasted them with royall banquets, there being assembled the Ecclesiasticall and Secular Princes, and being there together, they were set euery one at the table according to their degrees and qualities.
Seeing this falleth out so fitly to our purpose, it shall not bee a strange, but rather a pleasant thing for the beautifying of the historie, if I write the manner The place and office of the Electors in publike acts. of the placing of these Electors at such feasts, and especially in those  which are solemne, and doe depend of great Emperial ceremonies, in which the Emperour, or the King of the Romanes, solemnely holding their Court, the Princes Electors are to execute their offices and charges. In this case the order is thus. The Emperour, or King of the Romanes sitting in his Emperiall

throne, the Duke of Saxonie beginneth first to execute his office in this  sort. Before the erection of the Emperiall seate is laid a great heape of oates, of such heigth that it may touch the breast of the horse, vpon which the Duke shall be mounted, he holding in his hand a siluer staffe, and also a measure of siluer, they both weighing 12. markes, and vpon his horse there is set (taken from this heape) a measure of oates, and is giuen to the chiefe groome of the stable, who must bee present: and that being done, and he fixing his staffe within the heape, his Vicemarshall of Papenhein (or some other executing this charge in his absence) being Marshall of the Court, distributeth the rest of the oates. The Emperour, or the King being entered into his hall, and there set at the table, the Ecclesiasticall Electors being somewhat below,  and standing before it, with the other Prelates, must (according to their accustomed manner) say grace, euery one according to his place: to wit, euery one according to the antiquitie of his consecration in the Archiepiscopall dignitie. One alone neuerthelesse saieth grace for that day: and the day following (if the ceremonie continueth) the second that is consecrated to that honour doth it: and on the third day, the third blesseth the table. Grace being ended, these three Archbishop Electors take the Emperiall seales from the hand of the Chancellors of the Court: and he (in the Archchancellorship of whom this ceremonie and solemnitie is vsed) going in the middest, and the two other being of each hand, they all three raise with their hands a staffe, at which are hanging the Seales, and in this sort they reuerently carrie  it before the Emperour, laying them vpon the table. The Emperour, or the King doe presently redeliuer them to them againe, and he who then is in his Archchancellorie taketh the greatest of these Seales, and keepeth it till dinner be done, hanging it about his neck, vntill he returneth to his owne lodging. The staffe with which they carrie these Seales is of siluer, and weigheth twelue markes. The price thereof, as well for the substance as for the fashion of it, is at the charges of the three Archbishops, and is giuen within a while after by them with the Seales to the Chancellors of the Court, to doe therewith what they please. He of those three that shall carrie to his lodging the great Seale hanging about his necke, shall presently send it backe by one of  his seruants to the Chancellor of the Court on horseback, which horse shall remaine to the said Chancellor for a gift.
After that, the Marquesse of Brandebourg (great Chamberlaine) commeth riding, carrying in his hand siluer basons weighing twelue markes, and water, with a fayre towell: and afterwards lighting from his horse, he offereth the Emperour or the King to wash.
Count Palatin of Rhein doth in like sort enter on horsebacke, holding in his hand foure siluer dishes, euery one weighing three marks, wherein there is meate, who being dismounted, he setteth it vpon the table before the Emperour.  Afterwards also commeth on horsebacke the King of Bohemia the chiefe Taster, carrying in his hand a napkin, and a siluer cup couered, weighing twelue markes, full of wine mixed with water: and after being descended from his horse, he presenteth it to the Emperour to drinke. Now concerning all these siluer vessels, the office being ended by these Secular Lords,

the Vicechamberlaine of Falkenstein hath the Marquesses horse and basons  which he presents: the master of the kitchin of Noremberg hath the horse and the dishes of the Count: the Vicetaster of Lymbourg hath to his vse the horse, and the cup of the King of Bohemia: the Vicemarshall of Papenhein hath the horse, staffe, and the measure of the Duke. The Emperiall table is raised higher by sixe foote then the other: and thereat (during such solemne daies) no man doth sit but the Emperour. Neere his is that of the Empresse lower then the Emperours by three foote, and three foote higher then those of the Electors, for which there is 7. cubbords, to wit, three on the right hand of the Emperours table, and three on the left hand, and the last is right against the Emperour. At those also doe not any sit but the Princes Electors: and euery one of those stand before his owne table, vntill all  haue accomplished that which they ought to doe by their office, as we haue set downe, and then afterwards euery one sitteth downe at his owne table. The Archbishop of Treuers hath for his table that which is before the Emperour. The first table on the right side is for one of the two other Archbishops, in whose Archchancellorie this solemnitie is performed. The second of the same side is for the King of Bohemia: and the third is for the Count Palatin. The first of the other ranke (which is on the left hand) is for the other Archbishop: the second is for the Duke of Saxonie: and the third and last belongeth to the Marquesse of Brandebourg. And although it bee lawfull for one of the Electors that is kept backe by sicknes, or some other  lawfull inconuenience, to send an Ambassadour, with full commission in such solemnities and assemblies, neuerthelesse he who is sent doth not sit in the seate, nor in the place of his Master. These solemnities ended, the Master of the Court hath for his part all the building and preparations of wood, which hath been erected for the Emperiall seate. Dinner being ended, and graces said by him who blessed the table, and all these Princes rising vp to conduct the Emperiall Maiestie, the Archbishop of Treuers goeth alone before the Emperour, and between him and the Emperour the Duke of Saxonie holdeth his place. On the right hand of the Duke is Count Palatin, and on the left is the Marquesse of Brandebourg. Of the two other Archbishops  he which is in his Archchancellorie, is placed on the rightside of the Emperour, and the other is placed on the left: and behind the Emperour immediatly goeth the King of Bohemia. This manner of going amongst the Electors, is onely when in such solemnities the Secular carrie the markes and Emperiall Ensignes, to wit, the Duke of Saxonie the Emperiall or royall Sword: Count Palatin the Globe: and the Marquesse of Brandebourg the Scepter. But when these Emperiall Ensignes are not borne, the Duke of Saxonie goeth not betweene the Emperour and the Archbishop of Treuers, who then immediatly preceadeth and goeth alone before his Maiestie. And  in this case the other Seculars go in the same order which we haue set downe in their place. This order of placing them is ordinarily kept at the feasts and banquets which Maximilian made to the Electors and other Princes of the Empire: but not the foresaid ceremonies. And this order is so exactly obserued, that what King soeuer should happen to arriue in the Emperours

Court, he shall in no sort be permitted to goe before the King of Bohemia. 
Now to returne to this Diet of Ausbourg: After the Archbishop of Mentz, there came thither he of Colon, and also presently after he of Treuers. The Duke of Cleueland came after, and the Archbishop of Saltzbourg, and certaine other Princes. After these followed the Duke of Saxonie, who arriued honourably accompanied. After came the King of Denmarkes sonne, the Dukes of Holstain, and Litters, with about 900. horse. Then came thither George Frederic of Enispach, followed with a goodly troupe of horse, euen then when the Emperour, at the instance of the Elector of Saxonie, caused to be imprisoned Albert Rosemberg, a seditious man,  and a companion of Grompach, who was banished the Empire. Duke Iohn William of Venimarch, sonne in law of the Palatin Elector, and Count Francis Philip of Rhein, with a great traine of horse arriued there. There came afterwards the Cardinall of Ausbourg, and Count Palatin Elector, who was followed with a great troupe of horse. William Gonzague Duke of Mantua, well accompanied, came to this Diet to see and salute the Emperour, who The Duke of Sauoy and the Duke of Mantoa came to the ayde of the Emperor. gaue him very great entertainment: as also came thither Emanuell Philibert Duke of Sauoy, who offered himselfe to the warre which should be in Hungarie. Also there arriued the Abbot of Kempt, a Prince of the Empire. The Emperour gaue them all great entertainment, minding to gratifie them, to the end that they should all ayde him freely in this warre. 
They thus all appearing in this Diet conformable to his desire, his Maiestie the 26. of March caused them to assemble, and exposed to them the necessitie which constrained him to arme himselfe against the Turke, who making great preparation of all sorts of souldiours, was determined to come into Hungarie with the greatest armie they had yet euer seene, with intention to besiege Vienna, for which (because it was the Emperiall seate, and of very great importance to all the Empire and Germanie) it behoued him necessarily to prouide: because that besides the damage which might thereby befall, and would proue ineuitable to euery one, they should receiue infinit shame, when this should bee deliuered vnto posteritie, that Germanie  being so puissant, did not in so imminent a daunger employ it selfe to giue remedie thereto in season, and before the time of the ruine thereof. To remedie which, his Maiestie had caused all them to bee called at this present in a generall assemblie. And for this cause he exhorted them to lay apart all passions, and onely attend to the present necessitie, and to giue a briefe resolution vpon this point, which now pressed them more then any other. Afterwards the Duke of Bauier (in the name of the Emperour) propounded to the Electors and other Princes the articles which here follow.
That they should treate of the meanes which they should keepe to chase Demaunds of the Emperour in the Diet. out the heresies not comprised in the peace of the Religion, and which by  it had been prohibited. That the succours demaunded against the Turkes assaults should be 8000. horse, and 40000. footmen, payed for 8. moneths; and that the halfe of them should be payed afterwards for 6. whole yeeres: but the whole should be disbursed in money, that it might be employed afterwards

according to the vrgent affayres of the warre. That they should aduise  touching the reformation of the Emperiall Chamber, which is established at Spire, and to cause to be wholly obserued all that which should be there resolued vpon. That they should procure the entertainment of peace, and the impositions of money, and to accord the differences which were betweene certaine Princes concerning their places: and besides, that they should cause to be brought to effect the commaund giuen in the name of the Emperour to his subiects, that they should vtterly lay aside their armes: and for execution thereof, there should bee sent to them one of his Maiesties Councellors, with the Captaine of Trent. This last article was openly executed, and according thereunto they dispatched Doctor Parthin Councellor to the Emperour. Of all the said articles, the most important and the  most necessarie, was that of succours against the Turke. To this demaund it was thought, that of all the Princes there present, Count Palatin Elector Offers of succours made to the Emperour by the Princes of the Empire. would most oppose himselfe for certaine considerations, depending vpon the end which might bee concluded touching the first proposed article, which expressely touched him very nigh, by reason of the change which he had made in his religion. But euery one found himselfe deceiued in his opinion. For this Prince was so readie to consent to these succours, that presently he made offer of all his power and meanes. According to his example many promised to march in person to this warre: and all the Princes made answer vpon this article, that they would graunt the Emperour for this expedition  three Romane succours for eight moneths: to wit, 12000. horse. The Emperour contenting himselfe with this offer, required onely that in stead of the last succours for two yeeres and a halfe, he might haue them for three yeeres, taking eight moneths for euery yeere; desiring them to graunt the halfe of three succours before the time came. This was very willingly graunted to his Maiestie: for which he greatly thanked all these Princes, and promised them alwaies to remember their kindnes. The other articles were also concluded on, and there rested nothing else, but to treate of Religion. But considering the time and the necessitie of the Empire, it was resolued  to deferre this article vntill another time more commodious.
After that, they spake of the agreements of the Kings of Sweden and Denmarke, and commaundement was giuen to them both vnder grieuous Commaundement from the Emperour to the Kings of Sweden and Denmarke. penaltie to lay aside armes, and it was also ordained that not any other Prince of the Empire should giue them succours. Vpon this ordinance the King of Sweden (who so willingly had promised to obey the Emperour) went back from the accord, they both preparing more egerly then before for new warre.
There was also foure Ambassadours who came thither on the behalfe of the 13. Cantons of Switzes, and of those foure 3. were Catholikes, and the other The Switzes send to the Diet of Ausbourg.  was of the countrie of the Grisons, sent by the towne of Coire, who was in contention with the Bishop of the said place. The subiects of the Marquesse of Final were in like sort heard, who endeuoured that the Marquesse might be depriued of his Marquesship. The Duke of Mantoa also required the Emperour that he would end a controuersie which he had with the

Duke of Sauoy, by reason of Casal situated within the Marquesship of  Montferat. All these controuersies partly ended, his Maiestie solemnely gaue to certaine Princes the inuestitures of their fees or seruices, as by them he was required. The Cardinall of Constance was one of them, and the Inuestiture is giuen by the Emperour, and of that which is due for it. Lantgraue of Hesse, who receiued them by their Deligates. The Abbot of Kempt being there present, receiued them from his Maiestie in his owne person: as also did the Marquesse Iohn Frederic of Enispach, and the Prince of Anhalt. The Duke of Saxonie also tooke his with the accustomed ceremonies, making a magnificall and stately shew, being accompanied with 1500. horse, well prepared and richly furnished, causing to be borne 13. Ensignes. Count Palatin Elector (with many other Lords) receiued the like  inuestitures, as also did the Ambassadour of the Duke of Viuaria in the name of his Princes: they all taking by this meanes confirmation of their priuiledges. Those who take such inuestitures, if they bee Electors, they should pay nothing to the officers: but if they be others, they ought euery one to pay 63. markes of siluer, which are distributed by the Comptroller of the Court to the officers, in this sort: He first retaineth for himselfe 10. markes, and after that giueth 10. others to the Chancellor of the Emperiall Court; to the Masters, Notaries, and Doctors, 3. markes; to the Taster of Limbourg 10. markes; to the Master of the Kitchin of Noremberg 10. markes; to the Vicemarshall of Papenhein 10. markes; and to the Chamberlaine of Falkenstein 10. other markes: prouided that such officers be then present at the  Court executing their charges: and in their absence those which doe their office take this profit. The horse, or some other beast vpon which he is mounted who requireth his inuestiture, is due to the Duke of Saxonie, if he be present, or to the Vicemarshall, if he be there: and in absence both of the one and other, it is due to him who then doth execute their office. All these things being dispatched in this Diet, the Emperor gaue order at ye end thereof, that all that which had been determined vpon for the warre, should presently be in a readines. And after hauing dismissed euery one, and taken leaue of all, he went to Vienna, where he appointed a Diet to the subiects of his other Estates to bee held the 23. of Aprill. In it, his Maiestie being there  present, it was ordained that euery house should pay a florin: that a gentleman Ordinances made in Austria to draw succours against the Turkes. who had more then 100. florins of reuenew by the yeere, should keepe a good horse readie at his owne costs and charges: that the peasants should bee sent by certaine bands and daies to Vienna to fortifie it: that not any should receiue a seruant without testimonie of his life, and that from his last master: that for euery house, the 5. the 10. the 30. (if there were so many therein) should be inioyned to go to the warre: that throughout the whole countrie of Austria, Morauia, and the confines of Hungarie, all should be prohibited to take pay of the enemie: and that all the citizens and inhabitants of  Vienna, should prouide themselues of victuals for one yeere, and that he who had not the meanes should depart the countrie.
The Archduke Charles, brother to the Emperour, for the same occasion assembled another Diet at Poson in Hungarie, in which he found all the Hungarian Barons and Lords so disposed, that they offered him all the succours

which he demaunded, and promised to march all in person to this warre, when the Emperour, or any of his brothers should there bee present. 
We haue before written that Count Palatin the Elector was thought to be of opinion, that very hardly he would accord to the great succours which Maximilian demaunded. The interest which he might haue to this, that such Occasion which might cause Count Palatin to distrust so great a preparation for warre. forces should not bee vnited together by the consent of all the States of the Empire, was as in regard of his own particular fact, he fearing least this assemblie of Princes, and this armie might bee to his preiudice, vnder colour and false newes of the Turks enterprises: or that he changing his determination, because he saw himself hindered by the Sophy, or from some other place, or  by the meanes of some peace or truce made with the Emperour, would containe himselfe from assailing Hungarie, he saw then all these forces might turne vpon himselfe, because that he againe had changed his religion, which was conformable to the Confession of Ausbourg, and had taken that which followed the opinion of Zwinglius and Caluin: which was an act formally contrarie to that which was before ordained and concluded on in the yeere 1555. in the towne of Ausbourg by the States of the Empire, in the presence of Ferdinand the last deceased Emperour, who then was there assistant, as King of the Romanes, and as Lieutenant of the Emperour Charles his brother. Ordinance made in Germanie vpon the diuersitie of religion. This ordinance was made the 24. of September: and the tenour thereof  is this.
The Emperour and King Ferdinand, by reason of the doctrine, religion, and faith, depending on the Confession of Ausbourg, and the other Princes and Estates, shall not constraine nor force any subiect of the Empire to forsake their religion, their ceremonies, and lawes, which in their territories they haue alreadie instituted, or shall hereafter institute, being associated to that Confession: and by any commaunds, or other way not to force them to doe it, and not in any thing to contemne them. But shall freely permit them this religion, with their goods, faculties, tributes, tols, possessions, and rights, in such sort that they may enioy them peaceably. The controuersie  which is for religion, shall be composed with milde, amiable, and peaceable reasons. Those who follow the said Confession, shall in like sort beare themselues towards the Emperour, King Ferdinand, and other Princes and Estates (confederated together in the ancient religion) as well Ecclesiasticals as Seculars, and towards all the other Ecclesiasticals, and their Coleages, into what part soeuer they are gone to make their abode: so that they well and duly procure the ministrie therof, as afterwards it shall be set down. To these shall they permit in all libertie their religion, ceremonies, lawes, possessions, tributes, and al other rites: and by any meanes shall not hinder them, but that they may enioy them peaceably. 
All the suites, differences, and quarels which might rise betweene the one and other, should be ended, according to the vse, custome, and lawes of the Empire. Those who are not either of the one or other religion, are not comprised in this peace. This restraint was made to withstand new troubles, which easily ensue vpon the introduction of a new religion. That neuerthelesse

of Zwinglius being fuller of libertie, and further from the ancient faith  was afterwards more imbraced: and notwithstanding this ordinance, it hath found place in the countries and territories of the Palatin Elector, as also it hath done in Polonia, in Switzerland, in England, in Scotland, and in France: although that the ceremonies thereof are not in all alike, and that there is diuers opinions amongst the Doctors of it. And although that in Spaine there is great seueritie vsed for the preseruation of the ancient faith, yet neuerthelesse so it is, that about this time in this Prouince certaine were apprehended, who were conuicted by their Confession to hold and follow The opinion of Zwinglius or Caluin diuulged in Spaine, and the punishme^t of some Sectaries thereof. this new doctrine of Zwinglius: and the punishment which was inflicted vpon them, being accompanied with great ceremonies that they adde therevnto,  for a greater terror to the assistances. I am willing to write the order thereof, although it be from the discourse of this historie: but seeing it falleth out so fit to our purpose, and that in another place (it may be) I shall not haue the like commoditie nor occasion to set it downe in writing I desire the reader to take this in good part, and to thinke that I adde, and sometimes entermixe strange discourses, the rather to recreate his minde, then to content my selfe, euen as the eye doth more delight it selfe to see in a fayre medow diuersitie of flowers, then one onely kinde of colour in a corne field.
This exemplar punishment was performed in the towne of Valladolid, in which for it there is appointed a great Scaffold by the Councell house, The notable ceremonie touching the execution which is done in Spaine against Heretikes. and another adioyning thereto, wherein the Princes must be. About this  place were also raised other Scaffolds, vpon which must bee present the Councellors and persons of qualitie, officers of iustice, and Gentlemen not onely of the towne, but almost of all the realme. The abundance of people that was there was so great, that in mans memorie the like was not heard of. About ten of the clocke the 21. day of May, the Princesse Ioane, Gouernesse of Spaine, and the Prince Don Charles went forth of the Palace, accompanied with the Archbishop of S. Iames, the great Constable and Admirall of Castile, the Marquesse of Astorgne, of Denigne, and of Sarmia Comptroller of the Princesses house, and the Counts of Miranda, of Orsen, of Nieua,  of Modecgne, of Sardeigne, of Zibadea, of Andrade, of Don Garzia of Toledo Gouernour of the Prince, and of many other great persons. Before them marched two Vshers with their Maces, two Heraulds with the armes of Spaine, and the Count of Bondie carrying the Sword in his hand: and all this companie conducted the Princes to the lodging which was prepared, adioyning to the said great Scaffold. Vpon the Scaffolds were alreadie the Archbishop of Siuill, generall Inquisitor with those who were of the Councell of the Inquisition, Roderic Bishop of Ciuidad, the royall Councell, the Inquisitors, the Bishop of Oran, and the Bishop of Palence. The Princes being present at the windowes of their lodgings, they began to carrie a Crosse couered  with blacke, with the Ensigne of the Office of the Inquisition: and after marched the Clergie, and prisoners who had bin receiued to penance: and after them those who were condemned to death. This procession departed from the Inquisition house by a high raised way made of purpose going vnto the said Scaffold: where being all arriued, and euery one set therevpon,

Frier Melchior, who afterward was Bishop of Canaria, being of the  Iacobins Order, began a Sermon: and that ended, the Archbishop of Siuill rising vp, went to the Princesse and Prince, and caused them to make vpon a Crosse such an oth as followeth.

It being ordained by the Apostolicall decrees, and by the holy Canons, that the Kings ought to sweare to carrie all fauour to the Catholike faith and Christian religion, you conforming your selues to this holy ordinance, your Highnesses sweare in the name God, in the name of S. Marie, and by the holy Euangelists, and by the signe of the Crosse, vpon which you haue put your hands, to yeeld all fauour, and giue all necessarie helpe to the holy office of the Inquisition and ministers of the same, against Heretikes and Apostataes,  and against all those who fauour and defend them, and against all manner of persons who directly or indirectly hinder the progresse of this holy office: and to constraine all your subiects to obey and obserue the constitutions and Apostolike letters, giuen and published for the safetie and defence of our holy Catholike faith, against Heretikes, and against those who beleeue them, receiue, or defend them.

Vpon these speeches the two Princes made answer, that so they would sweare. And the Archbishop added these words. Because of your holy oth, our Lord prosper your royall persons, and the Estates of your Highnesses for many and long yeeres. By and by after one of the Registers, who is there present, demaunded of the companie whether they did not sweare the like  oth. They all made answere, I. Then they began to reade the condemnations and iudgements giuen against them all, and especially against those who were condemned to the fire. And these were, Doctor Augustine Cazagia, his Maiesties Chaplaine and Preacher, Francis d'Viuero, Dame Betrix d' Viuero, Dame Elenor de Viuero, Alonso Perez a Priest, Antonio Herrezuolo a bachelor, Christopher de Occampo a Licentiate, Francis de Herrera a Licentiate, Iohn Garzia, Christopher de Padillia, Izabella de Straba, Ioane Velasques Gonzala Vaes a Portugall, Catherin Roman, and Dame Catherin d'Ortegua. These, assoone as their iudgement was read, were throwne into the fire. But it being The forme of the Spanish Inquisition. not possible but that some would desire to know what manner of proceeding  this Inquisition is, I (minding therein to satisfie euery one, principally in that which may bring some vtilitie with delight to the reader) will here write of it as it is practised in Spaine, seeing it is lesse knowne then the name thereof in other kingdomes.
This office was first inuented by Ferdinand King of Aragon, who after he had chased, or at least subdued the kingdome of Granado, which (as almost all the rest of the kingdomes of Spaine) was for many yeeres in the hands of the Mores or Sarazins, who had tamed Spaine from the time that Count Iulian called them thither to reuenge himself of the rape and forcement, wherof  K. Roderic of Spaine (of the Gothish religion) had vsed against his daughter Cana. Ferdinand hauing by ten yeeres warre reduced this kingdome vnder his puissance, and permitting the inhabitants thereof to liue in their Mahometane religion, afterward fearing (following the aduice of his wisest Councell) that this permission would bring some annoyance to the Christian

religion, by the frequent fellowship that these inhabitants should haue  with his other subiects, resolued himselfe intirely to purge this kingdome either by preachings, or force. Some of them chused rather to passe the sea and retire into Africke, then to chaunge their religion. Others by effectuall reasons, or else preferring their safetie before their religion, were baptized. This charge to conuert them was giuen to the Iacobins. These imployed their time therein with great care. But seeing that their paines seemed vnprofitable to many, they found a way to search out the meanes, hoping that by feare they should keep them in the obseruation of the Christian faith, which otherwise they did not greatly regard. This way was authorised by the King, and confirmed by Pope Sixtus. After that the King himselfe hauing  vnderstood that these Friers vsed too seuere rigour, and that they indeede committed a great abuse therein. This finding them out, otherwise called an Inquisition, comming of this word enquire, was taken from them, and committed into the hands of the most sufficient Ecclesiasticall Seculars. To these if any be presented as thinking ill of the faith, he is presently summoned by a Sergeant, whom they call a Familier: and appearing at the day, (whereof he must not faile) if he auoucheth nothing of that whereof he is accused, he is sent backe againe: but there is charge secretly giuen to a Spye to haue an eye of him, and to note his doings, and know what talke he vseth in companie. If there be discouered against him any thing of euill, presently  the report thereof is made to the Inquisitors, who againe laie vpon him a new assignation. When he appeareth, the informour is hid behinde a tapistrie, to acknowledge whether he be the accused, and being acknowledged, whether he freely confesse yt wherof he is accused, or whether by subtell interrogations something is drawne from him: if he be a straunger, he is retained: but if he be of the countrie, he is often sent back againe. After that, they call for the Curate, because that they would not further enterprise against the sheepe without the knowledge of his Pastour, to whom they shew the information. Vpon which, all, or at the least three Inquisitors, ordaine vnder their signes a Habeas Corpus. If the accused flieth, there is sent after him a Sergeant of the Inquisition, to whom they describe the age, stature, face,  haire, and such other circumstances. This Sergeant, if the accused be of qualitie, and whose doctrine is feared, will follow him through euery place, and he will vse such diligence that he will attach him. Against the other the pursuit is not so hot. The accused being taken, he is presently dispossessed of his keyes, and they are giuen to a Sergeant and a Notarie, who goeth into his house to take an Inuentorie of all his moueables, papers, iewels, and such other things, which they sequester and commit it into the custodie of one of their richest neighbours, to answere it at the end of the cause. All these moueables are confiscated, if the accused bee conuicted. The Iaylor  putting this poore infortunate person in prison, searcheth whether there bee any thing about him, and taketh from him all but his outward garments. He remaineth there eight daies, and vntill that the Iaylor speaking vnto him counselleth him to demaund audience. Being before these Lords, he is by

them intreated to acknowledge his fact, to discharge his conscience, and to confesse his wickednes, promising him all fauour, so that he doe repent. If  he confesseth, they forbeare not to proceede in processe against him: if he saith nothing, he is returned to prison, admonishing him to thinke well of his fact. There is giuen to him at his request many such audiences without other effect: neither doe they acquaint him with that whereof he is accused, for that they had rather conuince him by his owne mouth, if by chance among so many interrogatories, it might fall out that he did discouer without thinking thereupon some matter of his fact. If they can draw nothing from him by this meanes, he is called, and they threaten him to send the Fiscall to him (and this is he whom we call the Kings Attourney) to pleade against  him, and that they will proceede against him by all direct courses of law. Besides these threatnings, they present to him the Crucifix, and a Missall, to cause him to sweare thereupon. If he sweareth not, he is conuicted: and if he sweareth, then they demaund of him of what countrie he is, of his kindred, and companions, and such other things, from whence they thinke to draw some arguments and presumptions. Those that be most subtell, and know their manner to proceede, doe not answer but after they haue seene the information against them. In the end they communicate vnto him the accusation to answer thereto; and he chuseth a Proctor and an Aduocate to doe it, who taketh his defence in hand, and setteth it downe in writing, adding  thereto reasons and testimonies of law: and after giueth them to the Inquisitors, who peruse them during three daies together, and afterward cause to come before them the accused, and the Aduocate who counselleth him to speake the trueth. If he saith nothing, he is againe committed to prison. Afterward at his request is read to him the information: but it is without naming of any witnesses, whom if he would take exceptions vnto, he must gesse, if hee will except against them. In which often happeneth that which they seeke for: which is, that he minding to purge himselfe he nameth and chargeth others, with whom he had communication of the faith. Those of the wiser sort demaund a coppie of the information, and  time to answer thereto. Two eye witnesses are sufficient to conclude his death, and the Iaylor alone. One sufficeth for torture, and euery one may accuse him. The Kings Attourney is a partie, and the informers are witnesses. Three daies after that he hath had a coppie of his information, he shall be called forth. His Aduocate discouereth to him the greatest offences, the strongest depositions, those which agree, and those which doe not: he telleth him that if he would take exceptions to his witnesses, he must gesse at them: whereupon they giue him certaine daies, during which he calleth to minde who are his enemies. Enmitie is receiued for sufficient exception: and the contradiction which is betweene these witnesses: and also if the partie accused proue, that hauing often resisted (specially as in regard of the  deed whereof he is accused) the same thing against him, that hath accused him. These daies being passed, he desireth the Iudges to see if such and such his enemies are not those who haue informed against him. If hee surmise

amisse, he is conuicted: but if he gesse well, they will not allow it: his Aduocate  onely (who dareth not speake to him but before them) will demaund of him what exceptions he can take against those whom he hath nominated. The Aduocate shall set downe the exceptions in forme: and further demaundeth of him whether he haue any meanes to purge himselfe by contrarie proofes; as that he hath alwaies been a friend of the Churchmen, obserued the ceremonies of the Church, heard Masses, to haue been at Confession, reuerenced the Crosse and Images, and done such other deedes. This proofe which is graunted to him, to wit, when he hath no strong and concluding proofe against him, must bee made within nine daies: and his counterwitnesses being heard, they conclude the triall after the Kings Attourney  hath taken his conclusions, and before iudgement be giuen, the Diuines (which in this respect examine very curiously the matter) must confirme the doctrine, and declare that the faith of the accused is conformable to the Catholike Church: and if the proofe be good, he is absolued. Neuerthelesse, for the suspition (which cannot easily be taken away) they agrauate, or mitigate the iudgement according as it remaineth: and notwithstanding his absolution, he is kept still in prison vntill after the act of the faith: and all this is done to the end that no man should thinke that the officers of the Inquisition had caused him to bee taken without occasion. But if the accused doe not sufficiently iustifie himselfe, he is condemned to torture:  afterwards with his Curate or Viccar, they cause him to enter by many wickets into a certaine place vnder the ground, very obscure and hidious, wherein he findeth the Iudges placed. There incontinently is present ye executioner, couered with a long blacke linnen robe very straight, like a sacke, hauing his head and face couered with a blacke hood, hauing but two holes before his eyes. This is done the more to amaze the patient, like as if a diuell should present himselfe to him for the punishment of his misdeedes. Then these Iudges perswade him to tell the trueth, otherwise they protest that if they breake him or disioynt some member, or if his life yeeldeth to the violence of torments, that the fault thereof shall not redound but vpon himselfe.  That done, he is vnclothed all naked, except the priuie parts, and by signes the Iudges notifie to the executioner what torments he should vse. During these, he is often admonished to speake the trueth: and if he will confesse nothing, they sometime martyr him more then two houres. In the end they carrie him to prison againe, where they haue a Surgeon, who while he applieth phisick to him, threatneth that he shall endure the next day farre greater paines. Oftentimes they put Spies with them in prison to discouer their actions, and euen they enquire of other prisoners if the accused hath discouered nothing to them of that whereof he is accused, promising them in case they would declare it, that they shall not bee punished for their misdeedes,  for which they haue been committed prisoners. If this accused person bee of qualitie and note, or that if he take vpon him to preach and to instruct, or that he hath learning, these officers doe cause this bruite to be spread abroad, that he hath declared on the torture all his complices, and others

who hath conferred with him concerning the faith: yea they cause to bee  witnessed by the neighbours of the prison, how they heard him crie in his torture. And vpon this deuice his confederates willing to preuent, and thinking to haue a more light punishment, (as the Inquisitors promise to those who voluntarily confesse their offence) come to accuse themselues. And while these prisoners are thus detained, if any among them fall sicke, they carrie him to the Hospitall, which is appointed for the^, where he is well vsed, vntill that afterwards hauing recouered his health, he is then brought backe againe to prison. And for feare they should bee wronged, the Inquisitors goe twice the moneth with the Iaylor and a Notarie, to visit them in prison, to informe themselues of their vsage, and to supplie their necessities,  and doe punish the Iaylor if he stealeth from them their victuals, or if he incomber them in any thing. In the end the solemne day being come, wherein they pronounce and execute their iudgements, naming this the Act of the faith, the night before they cause them who are repentant to be confessed, after that two daies before that they had declared vnto them what good things they haue in this world; and they cause to be clad at the dawning of the day appointed for the execution with the Sambenita those which are to be put to death, which is a yellow robe without sleeues, painted all ouer with blacke diuels, and vpon their heads they put a paper Miter made in forme of a tower, vpon which is figured a man burning, and diuels about him putting fire to him, and they gagge them with a pegge of wood to hinder  their speech, and with a strong corde they tye their necke and hands. Certaine amongst them, although they are not of that number which are condemned to death, cease not to weare the Sambenita according to the rigour which sometimes is vsed against them, only to shew that their life hath been subiect to the Inquisition, and not to death. These condemned being thus apparelled, they are conducted into the place, as wee haue aboue said. These Iudges haue no other iudgements, but to pronounce the sentence of cursing and irregularitie. And for this cause after they haue pronounced their iudgements, if it bee against a conuertite they adde these  words; that for so much as they doubt that he for feare maketh a good shew, and that he is but faintly conuerted, fearing to leaue a wolfe vnder a sheepes skinne, notwithstanding his conuersion they leaue him in the hands of Secular power, whom they pray to vse mercie towards him, not to breake any member of him, neither to draw from him any one drop of blood. If it bee against an obstinate person that they haue pronounced their sentence, they say besides that since it is thus, that their punishment hath not serued to conuert him, they deliuer him vnto the Secular power to punish him according to law, whom they pray neuerthelesse (if he acknowledge himselfe) to bee mercifull to him. These Iudges dare not appoint the torture against persons  of marke, and the King of Spaine sheweth fauour to all punishments which are not vnto death.
By this discourse which I haue made you of this Inquisition, some louing libertie aswell in their actions, as in their speeches, finde this manner strange;

others would that it were yet more rigorous, desirous that euery one should  be austere like themselues. But if the one and the other would duly consider the dangerous euents which further the subuersion of an Estate, by the altering of things established for the maintenance of religion, (which ordinarily doth master and exceede all humane passions, and doe draw them vnto it with a marueilous vehemencie) they should finde that it were most expedient for to keepe themselues free from such an Inquisition, to be silent, and not to dispute nor speake by forme (no not so much as onely of talke) of precepts, which wee ought to follow by commaundement: which the ancient Common-weales haue wel knowne to put in practise at Rome and Athens: and as it is yet obserued vnder the dominion of the Grand Seigniour, not  without a great establishment and maintaining of his Empire, it not being so much as permitted in all his territories and Seigniories to any, bee he Turke, Christian, or Iew, to preach or teach, but onely to liue in his law: as the Common-wealth of Venice by secret tradition doth keepe and obserue. It is not my subiect to wander further in such politike discourses, but I must returne to the pursuite of my historie.
The end of the eight Booke.



THE NINTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF HVNGARIE.

THE ARGVMENT OF THE NINTH BOOKE.
KIng Iohn endeuoreth to stir vp the Hungars against Maximilian. Solyman marcheth into Hungarie with a great armie. Pallota well defended by Tury against the Turkes. Succours come to the Emperour from forraine Princes. Solyman arriueth in Hungarie and besiegeth Sighet, before which he dyeth, whose death was concealed vntill Selim, Solymans eldest sonne was chosen Emperour. The last assault giuen to Sighet, where Countie Serin gouernour of the towne in sallying forth,  brauely endeth his happie dayes, and then Sighet is taken. A Diet in Austria in which was graunted succours to Maximilian for the war of Hungarie. Peace betweene Selim and Maximilian, who after the death of Iohn King of Transiluania, pretendeth title to that kingdome: but Stephen Battor (by the Turkes fauour) is chosen King thereof. The manner and coronation of a King of Hungarie, and namely of Rodulph sonne to Maximilian. Truce expyred betweene Maximilian and Selim and the death of him, Amurath his sonne succeedeth. Betweene whom and Rodulph (who after the death of his Father Maximilian, is chosen Emperour) a truce is concluded.

WHilest the Emperour Maximilian prepared to defend  himselfe against the iniuries of which he was threatned by the Turke, King Iohn also carefully fortefying King Iohn drew the Hungers to him. himselfe, daylie encreased his armie, aswell by new leauies of souldiours, as with many Hungarian Lords and Transiluanians, who came and voluntarely offered themselues to serue him in this war with good strength. Iohn had thus gayned many of them by particular letters sent to euery one: and to draw them the more to him, he caused letters to be published, in the name of the King of Hungarie directed to all the Nobilitie and people of the countrie, by which he endeauored  himselfe to proue that his cause was iust, and exhorted them to follow his part, adding that which here followeth.

The most puissant Emperour of the Turkes our most mercifull benifactour hath commaunded vs by his letters, and by Zeusic his Ambassadour,

that we should exhort al the estates of our Realmes and countrie to be faithfull  vnto vs, and yeelde vs that obedience which they owe vs: he hauing certified vs that that would be to him verie pleasant and agreeable, when he should know the Hungars to imbrace one another with a sincere affection, and to be desierous amongst them strictly to preserue it. Therefore if you feare to displease him who with infinit puissance is able to chastice them who prouoke him: and if you haue in any regarde the fidelitie which you owe to vs, we would councell you all to acknowledge vs for your King and Lord. In doing this, it will be a meanes to preserue and maintaine this kingdome so much afflicted, to restore vnto peace all the States thereof, and to giue particularly to euery one an assured aboade in his owne house: all of  vs cutting off the occasion which so often moueth Solymon to bring an armie into the fielde to ruinate them; and to come himselfe in person to make this waste with infinit cost, without respecting paynefull, long, and tedious iourneyes which it behoueth him to doe. For this cause you ought all to take good heede to your selues whilest the time and season is yet fit, before you haue vpon your shoulders this his great armie, which alreadie is departed from Constantinople. For when you shall see your fieldes harried, your houses burnt, your children captiues, and you seperated by violence from your wiues, you may then in vaine desire peace. To auoyde this miserable ruine, we haue been very willing to cause you expresly to vnderstand the will of the Grand Seigniour, and thereupon to shew in generall to all, what  is the present estate of publike matters, and to desire you in consideration thereof, to haue regarde to the peace and repose of euery one, and by that meanes to deliuer your selues from the perill of war, and of the daunger present, and to come, which hangeth ouer the heads of euery one.

By these and many other reasons, Iohn endeauored to stir vp the Hungars to follow his part, and to be himselfe at the Diet which he had appoynted in the towne of Torde in the moneth of March, in which place should assemble all the states of his kingdome, to aduise together of that which was necessarie for the preseruation of it. These letters being bruited abroade, and the knowledge thereof being come to Schuendy, who then was at Vnghar  with his armie. He presently fearing that these letters would alter the affection of some, and that the menaces of the Turkes greatnes comprised in them, should not possesse others with feare, caused these heere in his name to be published the fourth of March, directing them to the Barons and Lords of Hungarie.

My Lords, there is sent me from diuers parts the coppie of a letter diuulged vnder the name of Iohn Vayuod of Transiluania, full of apparant cullers, and of notorious and euident deceites, with which hee endeauoreth to astonish the Emperours subiects, as if Solyman were very curious of the  good and preseruation of the Hungars, whom these 100. yeares together he and his predicessors haue labored with all their power wholly to ruinate, aswell by their forces and armes, as by their deuisions and ciuill warres which he entertaineth amongst you. And although I make not any doubt but that by your fidelitie, wisedome, and for the greatnes of the neere and

imminent daunger, you cannot but consider whereto tendeth such subtilties  and deceites. Neuerthelesse to lighten you the more therein, I could not but aduertise you, that the Emperour with all diligence and industrie hath sought nothing more then peace with the Turkes and Prince of Transiluania; of which he hoped for a good end, to the content of you all, if the negotiation thereof had not been hindred by the false reports and continuall hatred of the Vayuod. And to make proofe thereof vnto you, it behoueth you to remember that this last winter his Maiestie commaunded that the truce should be so exactly kept, that for to take away all breach thereof, he caused to rayse the siege from before certaine Castles and Fortresses, which by our people were alreadie neerely driuen, and meant not that Transiluania should be forced by our armes; all this he did for the repose  and good of this kingdome. Now though the peace which was yet treated of with the Turkes, could not be effected, you ought not for that inconuenience to doubt, that the Emperour will not vndertake your defence, considering that the forces of the Empire, and of many other christian Princes (zealous of your good) will not fayle him no more then, I beleeue, you would fayle to the obseruance of that which dependeth on your fidelitie towards his Maiestie, in whose name, you doing that which belongeth vnto you, I can assure you of a peace and future repose: desiring and exhorting you rather to pursue that which is equall, then suffering your selues to follow (as little children doe) deceitfull amazements, you should imbrace  that which is built vpon a foundation erected against all right and reason: all of you setting before your eyes, that God in punishing the vniust, and fauoring the iust, will assist you, since that in this warre, besides the maintenance of that which appertaineth by lawfull succession to Maximilian, it is also a question for the entertayning of his religion, and of our libertie, which we see to be assayled with ayde from the Turke, by those who falsely would beare the name of Christians, who reposing themselues hitherunto in their armes, shall finally haue a miserable and tragike ende, according to their demerits. With these I pray you haue no communication, yea, I forbid you in the Emperours name to haue with them any intelligence,  and not to send to the Diet which the Vayuod pretendeth to cause to beheld at Torde, vpon paine to incurre the punishment due to those who shew themselues rebellious to their Prince.

About this time the Captaine of Ainathschen being gone about his Ainathschen taken by the Turkes. owne affayres in the towne of Agria, and hauing taken with him for guide the best souldiours of his garrison, the neighbouring Turkes being aduertised thereof by their spies of the Captaines departure, the day following which was Saint George his day, by dawning of the day, they were with ladders vpon the wall, and entring by force into this Fortresse, killed all those  whom they found within. At the same time the Turkes thinking that the Counte of Serin was also absent from Sighet, came and laide siege to that place: but he being retourned from Vienna, whether he was gone to conferre with the Emperour of many things, concerning the fortification of this Fortresse, the Turkes found greater resistance there, then they thought

for: and being come to handie strokes, they weare so hotly repulsed, and  with such slaughter, that among them there remayned two wagons loaden with heades which weare carried to Sighet: and at the bruite of so fierce an incounter, those who were at the 5. Churches vnderstanding of the great losse happened to their partie, began to flie and forsake the place. Daylie the Turkes enterprised such attempts now against Iula, then against Iauerin and other places of Hungarie, committing infinite euils.
In the meane time the Emperour had certaine aduertisments that Solyman was departed from Constantinople to march in person to this warre, and Solyman marcheth into Hungarie. that in great iourneyes with 70000. men he was come to Sophia, and by Misia into Bulgaria, causing Portau Basha to march before with one part of  the Armie, and many Sangiacchs: and that further he had commaunded the Belerbey of Natolia to passe by Galipoli, and to come and ioyne himselfe with him: and that alreadie he was marched almost to Buda, where the King of Transiluania was gone to meete him with 50. Coaches, 500. horse well armed, and 300. harquebuziers on horsebacke, carrying with him goodly and very rich presents in iewels and ouches.
When Solyman arriued in Hungarie with this equipage, Schuendy held the Forte of Huste besieged, which he had straightly shut vp, minding to preuent the Turkish endeauours; and on the other part in the moneth of Iune, the Basha of Buda being in fielde with 8000. footemen, and 25. peeces of Artillerie went to be siege Pallotta, which is situated by Alberegalis 8. miles  from Ianerin. The batterie was so furious for the space of 8. dayes, that all Pallotta well defended by Tury against the Turkes. the wals were throwen to the ground, the assieged remayning in extreame perill. George Tury a couragious Captaine, and of singular prowesse, Gouernour of this place, marching about it to repaire the breaches, and to giue such order thereto as neede required, was strooken on the side with a shiuer of a stone broken with a Cannon bullet: and the stroke was so violent that he there thought he should lose his life, whereof would haue been a great losse, he hauing many times sustayned and repulsed the violence of the enemie, as a little before this siege he had done, when pursuing the Turkes of the garrison of Alberegalis, together with the Beg, he had  beaten them euen to their towne gates, and in such sort constrayned them, that the Gouernour thereof was forced to throw his Turbant away to saue himselfe, he being scarcely knowen. Now although that the wound was daungerous, neuerthelesse he was within a little while after cured thereof, and while this siege lasted he made many sallies vpon the Turkes, who (after that they had giuen 6. assaultes) did nothing else but play with the Cannon: and they played so much with it while this siege lasted, that they gathered vp together within the towne 700. bullets. The Inhabitants were almost as a pray to the enemies, and whilest they thought they could  no longer resist, incontinently and as it were at an instant they saw themselues deliuered from that daunger, by reason of 12. Ensignes of foote newly arriued at Iauerin vnder Collonel George of Helfenstain, who the day after his arriuall, causing 90. wagons to goe forth, with 900. footemen marched to enter into this place. The vauntcourers of the Turkish Armie discouering

this troupe, and iudging it to bee farre greater then it was, by reason of  waggons which possessed a large roome among the souldiours, who couered and inclosed them, they sent certaine amongst them to aduertise the Basha thereof. These by their report making the daunger a great deale more then it was, presently the Basha taking an apprehension of feare, caused his people to retire, fearing to lose his Cannon. Neuerthelesse he left one cracked and broken peece there with 40. barrels of powder, and 40. sackes of meale. There also remained a great number of Tents and baggage. This was drawne into the towne. The breaches were so large, that scarcely a harquebuze would shoote from one side to another. At the raising of this siege the Turkes incamped by Alberegalis, and in the meane time the succours  entered into the towne. To repayre the breaches thereof, and to aduise vpon the consequence, they sent Ingenours thither to iudge of it, if it might be repayred, or whither it would be more expedient to forsake it, and to conclude to throw it all downe to the ground.
These accidents daily arriuing in Hungarie, caused the Emperour in the greatest diligence he could to hasten all the preparations of warre, according to which, he had there for that purpose 5. Regiments of Launsquenets. The first was vnder the conduct of Remer: the second was led by Balderdun: Claus of Hogast commaunded the third: the fourth was led by Count George of Helfenstain: and the fifth marched vnder Polbel. He also had there 20000. Reisters, and 4000. Hungars. 400. Harquebuziers on horseback were come  Succours come to the Emperour from forraine Princes. from Sauoy to serue the Emperour in this warre: as also were thither come a great number of Lords and Knights from many places of Christendome at their owne charges, and for the loue they bore to Christian religion. His Maiestie receiued them very curteously, and commaunded all his Barons and other Lords of his armie to vse the like in their places, considering how all these (for the onely affection to doe him seruice) were come to seeke so farre countries, without any respect had to the charge and trauaile.
Many Princes and Common-wealths of Italie sent him succours. The Succours of Italie. Duke of Mantua, Gennes, and Luca assisted him with money. The Duke of Florence sent him 3000. footmen payd. The Duke of Ferrara (besides that he left vnto him the dowrie and mariage of his wife the Dutchesse his Maiesties sister, which was 150000. Florins) went himselfe to serue him with a choise companie of 400. Gentlemen, 300. Harquebuziers on horsebacke, 100. Murrions, and 100. armed men: and there was not any one of these Gentlemen who brought not with him three or foure good souldiours. Alexander Bailon with foure Captaines came to his Maiestie. After him arriued Iohn Alphonse Castalde with his troupes. A little before also were presented to his Maiestie to doe him seruice, and to winne renowne amongst so many nations, certaine Lords and English Gentlemen: amongst whom was Englishmen Master Smith, Richard Greinuile, Henry Champernon, Philip Budshall, Thomas  Cotton, and William George a Captaine of singular prowesse. From all parts men might see this armie to bee increased, by the arriuall of so many Lords and Gentlemen. Albert Lasky a Polonian, by reason of many Castles which Polonians. he possessed in Hungarie, meant not to be wanting to so fit an occasion. He

brought with him twelue Coaches, and 3000. Pollacques, all apparelled a la  Hungresque, that he might not thereby preiudice the King of Poland, who was in league with the Turk (if they were knowne in the habit of their owne countrie). The Duke of Wolfang Palatin of Nuberg, and Richard his kinsman Germanes. came thither with 600. horse. The second sonne of the Duke of Bauier brought thither with him 400. Prosper Colonne, Ange Caesis, and certaine other Lords of Italie incontinently followed those who were come thither on the behalfe of the Duke of sauoy, conducted by the Duke of Camerin, as Sauonians. also did Count Nicholas Gambara, hauing in his traine twelue Gentlemen. On the behalfe of the kingdome of France was Henry of Loraine Duke of Guize, Count de Brissac, the Lord of Lansac, the Lord Strozzy, and many other  Frenchmen. French gentlemen all well armed, who were departed from France and were come to Malta in fauour of the Religion, for that from many places it was assured that the Turkish armie would returne thither. But these bruites being found false, these Lords after they had seene Italie tooke their way towards Hungarie, that they might bee in this warre, and salute his Maiestie, who made them great demonstration of the pleasure which he receiued by their comming.
Maximilian had prepared a nauall armie vpon Danubius of 12. Gallies, and 30. Nazadies, with other great boates, so well accommodated, that the A nauall armie vpon Danubius. souldiours who were within, might well warrant themselues from their enemies arrowes. In these vessels there was many peeces of great Artillerie,  with necessarie powder and bullets, and 3000. men, the most part Italians. Blach Allemand a Kight of Malta a valiant man, and greatly experienced in sea affayres, commaunded this armie. The land armie marched along Danubius towards Iauerin, in which place the bodie of the whole armie should stay to diuert the Turke from Transiluania, and to put him in doubt to lose Strigonium and Buda.
The Emperour at the same time commaunded all the Nobilitie of Austria to mount on horsebacke, and to march to the warre at their owne expences, preparing himselfe in the meane time to be in person in his Campe,  since that Solyman (although he was old) was in his. As this great concourse of men and of all munitions made, the Turkes who were in the field towards Alberegalis and Sighet, (where they expected the Beglerbey of Armenia, who should come to besiege this place, as afterwards he did) ouerran all the countrie. Against these went forth Count Salm, who commaunded Iauerin, and with as many men as he was able to bring into the field, he went directly to Pallota: and hauing put thereinto victuals, and refreshed the garrison, he marched with a good troupe of Caualarie towards Vesprimia, which Vesprimia taken by Count Salm from the Turkes. is a great towne, and not very strong, two miles from Pallota, making great spoyle all about, not staying any whit at all vpon any bootie, vntill his Infantrie  approached. The Turkes who were within, minding to prepare and defend themselues, and for this effect readily giuing order to many things, as they displaced two Cannons to place them elsewhere in a more commodious place, a pane of the wall fell to the ground. The Count being aduertised thereof, taking this for some good signe, and as if God should open the

passage to him, diligently prepared his people. These arriued about night, and the batterie was deferred vntill the day following. In the meane time  the Turkes laboured to repayre the happened ruine: and presently when day light appeared, the Count hotly assailed the towne on all parts, putting fire to the ports, and ladders against the walls, by meanes whereof (in repulsing the enemie) they threw fire vpon the couerings of houses, which for the most part are but of wood, according to the common manner of the countrie: and some entring by the breach, and others boldly leaping from off the ladders, forced the enemies, and they cut the greatest part of them in peeces; the principall amongst them retiring into the Castle: but for all that they were no more warranted then the others were. For minding to parley, they  were suddenly forced and slaine. At this surprise was taken aliue the Gouernour of Alberegalis, who was sent to the Castle of Poson. There was also taken about this towne fiue Turkish Spies. This being done, the Count knowing that within Pallota were entered for the garrison thereof certaine Germane companies, left in this to command therein George Tury, who had so well defended the other, giuing him a sufficient companie of men to keep it: and afterwards he retired to Iauerin, while the Basha of Buda departed from Alberegalis, and retired himselfe to Buda to aduise of his affayres. On the other side, the souldiours who were in garrison within Leuante (situated at the foote of the mountaines) going into the field to assaile the Turks, were  by them badly entreated, and there were many amongst them who remained prisoners there, and amongst others was Bartholmew Horuatte, a man of great valour.
Fiue miles from Iauerin, and two from Comar is the Fortresse of Tata. From thence the Emperiall souldiours, which were in the neighbouring places, daily receiued great losses, this place being wel munitioned and kept. Count Salm desiring to rase this Fort, departed with his people from Iauerin early in the morning the 21. of Iuly, and arriued about euening before Tata, with a resolution not to depart from this enterprise without conquest Tata taken by Count Salm from the Turkes. thereof. Being there arriued, he sent for to come before him (after faith  pledged) a Turke whom he knew. He (by the permission of his Captaine) came to him, and the Count desirous to perswade him that all his companions should doe well to yeeld themselues; promising safetie of life to all of them: this Turke answered, that they had rather a good desire valiantly to defend themselues, being otherwise assured that the Basha of Buda would not faile to come and succour them if neede were: that neuerthelesse he thanked him of this friendly offer which he made him, whereof he would aduertise his companions, and promised him to returne within one houre, if they were determined to yeeld, desiring him in the meane time not to vndertake any thing, assuring him that by those of the towne he should not receiue any damage. With this mutuall promise the Turke being returned into  the towne, and the houre being passed, the Count seeing not any person to come to him from those of the towne, caused his Artillerie to be planted to begin his batterie, against which the Turks hauing 14. peeces of Cannon, ceased not to shoote one against another vntill night: and during this, the

Count caused to be remoued sixe peeces into a commodious place to make  his breach, and betimes in the morning he caused them so furiously to play, that incontinently a gap was laid open in the wall. But the Turks with exceeding diligence in such sort repayred the damage, that they gaue no commoditie to our people to come to the assault. Neuerthelesse the Count appointed Colonell Villardun with his companies to goe to the breach, commaunding all the rest of the armie to raunge themselues in battaile. A 1000. souldiours should giue an assault with ladders in passing the water euen vnto the girdle, and 1000 others were appointed to goe to the breach, whilest that altogether they boldly assayling it, the Count with other 2000. assayled the Castle gate. The Turkes going to the defences, as well at the breach, as against  those who were in the ditch, valiantly for a time defended themselues against them. But the port was battered downe, and the Count entering in by it, the Turkes performing the dutie that hardie and bold souldiours could doe in such necessitie, were all by him cut in peeces, except 50. who being retired into a Tower, yeelded themselues vnder certaine conditions. Amongst these was the Captaine of Tata, and he who commaunded last at Vesprimia, and a kinsman of the Basha of Buda, all three greatly esteemed. These were sent to Vienna. This surprise and that of Vesprimia greatly reioyced the Emperour.
The Count continuing in so fortunate successe, caused his people (without  staying in any place) to march to the Castle of Ghestez, from whence Ghestez and Vithain taken from the Turkes. the Turkes perceiuing the Vauntgard, they presently fled, abandoning with the place all their munition and Artillerie. For the like feare, those who were within the Castles of Vithain, Ischolchin, and other villages, took their flight, and retired to Strigonium, after they had set fire on their munition, for feare the enemie should preuaile thereby. The taking of these Castles, for that they were situated vpon the way which goeth from Comar to Strigonia, brought great profit to Maximilians affayres, because they might easily aduance themselues euen to this towne, without leauing behinde any place which was in the enemies hands: and specially because that in these high situated places ordinarily retired a good number of Martelots, who are peasant  Martelots wicked peasants. theeues, and without faith, who by their robberies ruinated all that countrie: these people being of so strong force, that in respect of their courage they care not for any paine, trauaile, or daunger.
The Emperour (who yet was not gone into the field so soone as he determined) as well by reason of the preparations to which he daily gaue order, as for that the appointed troupes through all the Emperiall States were not yet arriued, and also for that he was afterward ascertained that the Turk was not passed Belgrade, and that there he should soiourne, attending the rest of his armie, considering that the goodliest ordinances that might bee are frustrate,  and that men trauaile in vaine to defend their townes, except God preserued them; for this consideration he ordained that they should pray to God without any intermission, commaunding vnder great penalties, that at certaine nominated houres at the sound of a bell, euery one in Vienna should kneele downe, and pray to God for the good and preseruation of

the publike weale, in such sort that all the Lords of what degree or qualitie they were of, should not faile to descend from their horses at the sound of  the said Bell if they were then in the towne. Besides he caused to be prohibited all manner of sports and pleasant pastimes; exhorting euery one to indeauour by good workes to appease the wrath of God.
In the meane time the Emperials desiering to execute the enterprise of Strigonia, and setting this matter before the Councell to be considered of, they sent to Maximilian to know of him his aduise. The answer and resolution was, that he should not prepare himselfe with so small an armie to a towne of so great importance, and which was no lesse strong and also well furnished then Buda. On the contrarie, the Emperour sent to Count Salm,  that because Tata was a place farre distant from Danubius, and not easily to be victualed, or to conduct victuals thither, he should directly retire himselfe from thence, right ouer against Comer along the riuer, and there to expect him, hoping within a while to come and ioyne with him.
The Turkes thinking on nothing else ranne ouer all the Countrie, and at Carpon (where was Captaine Bruschitty) they tooke and led away 40. peisants, who were reaping corne, and were taken by the Castle gate as they were drinking and taking their repast. The Captaine moued to see so bolde an act done before his eyes, presently sallied forth, and tooke three of those Turkes, and had stayed the rest if the souldiours would haue followed him.  But the losse which they receiued by the Counte of Serin without comparison was farre otherwise. He hauing had aduertisement by his spie, that Halla Sangiach, and the Gouernour of the 5. Churches were come neere vnto Sighet with their troupes, yet he not knowing their determination, and that there they were incamped, he presently went into the fielde to incounter them: and finding them drowsie he assailed them on the suddaine, and the Turkes not being able so instantly to range themselues in battaile, the greatest part of them were taken prisoners, and the other throwen into the water, and of those who were slaine, were caried to Sighet 94. heads, with 16000. Ducats, many faire harnesses, many Camels, Mules, siluer vessell, tents, and other spoyle. The Sangiach there valiantly defending himselfe  lost one of his hands, and was constrained to yeeld himselfe.
In the end the Emperour hauing receiued the succours which he expected, Ferdinand Lieutenant General in the armie of the Emperour Maximilian his brother. published Ferdinand (Arch Duke of Austria) his brother his Lieutenant generall in this Armie, to whom was Lieutenant Count of Schuartzemburge: and committed the charge of the Artillerie to Paul of Zara; and the 12. of August his Maiestie departed from Vienna with the Emperiall Ensigne, which was commaunded by the Lord of Arach, hauing vnder him for his Lieutenant the Marshall of Vnghemad, and the Guidon was caried by the Duke of Pomerania. His Maiestie marched towards Attemberg distant two miles from Iauerin while al the horse of Bohemia came  to Posson, which consisted of 7. Cornets, and besides there was 1000. horse Bohemians, Morauians, and Slesians in the Emperours ayde. marching at their owne charges vnder the commaund of Teufel, and 1200. other conducted by Count Gonther of Schuartzemburg. The Morauians, Slesians, and Lusatians made besides the rest a good shew of horse. Vratislauia

sent 300. horse. All these troupes with others who followed Maximilian,  made to the number of 10000. horse, besides those who alreadie were at Iauerin, and at Comar. All the Armie being assembled at Altemburg, the Emperour marched to Iauarin, there being at the same time arriued at Comar the Nauale Armie which came a long Danubius. Presently there passed many skirmishes, in which for the most part the Emperials had the better. The more to strengthen the Armie, his Maiestie caused the other troupes to come which were at Comar, hoping to enterprise vpon Strigonium, and by the taking of this towne, to diuert the siege (which was feared should be made by the enemie) before Sighet and Iula. For to giue battaile, (although necessitie seemed so to require) it was not requisit, least they might hazard  the whole estate of the Empire in one battaile, which is alwaies vncertaine and doubtfull: and on the other side, the Emperour had not such forces that he could assure himselfe of victorie. The enterprise neuerthelesse of Strigonium was yet then deferred for some good respects.
Vpon this, newes came that Solyman was passed the riuer of Tissa, and that Solyman arriued in Hunagrie. of Danubius, and that alreadie he was on this side Sighet, hauing with great diligence, caused to be made in this towne a bridge vpon Drauus for the passage of his Armie: for performing whereof, he sent before 25000. men. This bridge was erected in 16. daies, although it was in length 5500. fathum, and 14. broade: and for the building whereof, they vsed an infinit companie of boates, bound with Iron chaynes in place of piles, which they could not  vse by reason of the deepenes of the riuer. Certaine dayes before, Solyman Solymans siege before Sighet. had giuen the charge of the siege of Sighet to the Basha of Bossina, and to him of Armenia: but hauing vnderstood the losse of Tata, and of Vesprimia, he sent them to the succours of the Basha of Buda, and gaue the conduct of this siege to the Beglerbey of Armenia. He readily marched thither, and incamped himselfe within a mile of the Fortresse. Solyman within a while after came himselfe. This towne is situated in Hungarie vpon the confines of Croatia, in the middest of waters and marishes, which enuiron it on three sides for the space of more then a mile, and on the side of the firme land it  hath but one entrance, which is defended with two great Bulwarkes made of earth and wood, well combined and bound together. It is composed of two townes made in frame of a Fortresse, with a Castle closed in with foure Courtaines in a square forme. Betweene the one and other there are good deepe ditches full of running water. In this place commaunded for the Emperour Nicholas Esdrin Count of Serin, of whom we haue often before Nicholas Esdrin Count of Se-rin commaunded at Sighet. spoken. He was Nephew to the Lord Torguat by reason of his sister, and there was giuen vnto him the office of Banambt in the kingdomes of Croatia, Dalmatia, and Sclauonia, which is as much as Bailife or Seneshall: and besides he was Mundschencken of Hungarie, that is to say, great Butler:  and Captaine generall for the Emperour about Danubius. He was present at the siege of Vienna, which heretofore we haue described in the former bookes: and for his valour which in this siege was knowen and obserued by euery one, he was recompenced with a faire horse and a chaine of golde. He was also sufficiently made knowen at the siege of Pesthe and Buda. This

Captaine (a Hungar by birth) had in this place 1200. souldiours to defend it. The Turke (greatly to annoy Maximilian, besides the besieging of this  place) sent 35000. men, as well Tartars as Turkes, to besiege Iula. But the waters hindered them to doe it: and at their retraict those within sallied forth, and charged them behinde so hotly, that many of the enemies remained there.
Certaine daies after, the Turks being returned thither, they besieged this place very straightly, battering the towne with great peeces: but they cooling their fury, and seeming carelesse, those within seeing their countenance, in the night sallied forth: and thus surprising the enemie, killed many of them, and caused the other to retire, in such sort, that they remained masters  of their Artillerie, which they choked and rammed vp, the enemie not being able to carrie it away. The Tartars (who at that time might easily haue assailed Schuendy, who then had not many people with him, and who for that occasion daily importuned the Emperour to haue fresh succours) hauing taken some countrie men, and knowing of them by supposed speeches that Schuendy had with him 20000. men: vpon these words they were so daunted, that suddenly they raised the siege: and spoyling the countrie all about, they fiered fiue villages, vsing a marueilous crueltie euery where, without respecting any sexe or condition, but following their barbarous custome they put all to fire and sword. 
In the meane time the Turkes (after the batteries and breaches made at Sighet, by meanes of high Forts which Mahomet Basha (commaunding all the armie) had caused to be raised) had giuen eight furious assaults: and the 29. of August they gaue thereto a generall assault, which continued 24. houres. But the besieged defended themselues so couragiously, that after they had killed a great number of the enemies, and taken the Captaine of the Ianisaries, they alwaies valiantly repulsed them. The stinke of the dead bodies was so great, that Solyman was forced to recoyle foure miles off. Serin seeing he had lost in these assaults many of his people, caused the towne to bee fiered, and retired himselfe to two other Forts. This retraict gaue occasion  to the Turkes to giue yet another assault vpon the day of the beheading of S. Iohn, Solyman trusting in this day, which he esteemed very fortunate for him in all his battailes, hauing on yt day obtained this notable and memorable victorie which he had against Lewis King of Hungarie, and hauing on the same day wonne the townes of Rhodes and Buda, and defeated in battaile the armie of the King of Persia. This fortune neuerthelesse failed the Turkes at this time, and they were yet valiantly repulsed. The day following, which was the 30. of that moneth, they yet againe returned to the assault with greater furie, and with such courage, that their Ensignes were seene vpon the Rampiars: but neuerthelesse they were repulsed euen with great slaughter of them. Solyman considering the tediousnes of this siege,  and the valiantnes of Serin, caused to bee offered to this Captaine a very good offer, if he would yeeld to him. But these offers could nothing moue the faith which the Count had sworne to Maximilian. Notwithstanding, if the Emperour had had good Spies who would haue informed him of the

trueth, or if at least he had credited the reports which was made him, it is  without all doubt that with prosperous successe he should haue finished this warre: for that then was taken a Turke of good qualitie, who after he had requested libertie, swore and affirmed vpon his head that Solyman was dead: the which was confirmed by other demonstrations. The Emperour notwithstanding would not beleeue any thing hereof, iudging that if such a thing were happened, it could not be possible that the Turkish armie should bee in such quiet, nor so well gouerned. But the prudence and marueilous industrie of Mehemet Basha (a most wise Lord) knew so well to manage this matter, that not onely he concealed the death of his Lord: but yet further, assured the Empire vnto him to whom it belonged: and (which is of  no lesse consequence) contained so great an armie in militarie obedience, repressed the furie and sedition of the Ianisaries, preserued the treasure, and obtained a notable victorie.
Solyman was come into Hungarie with a puissant armie of 150000. men, which he diuided into many parts, whereof one was towards Iula in the confines of Hungarie adioynant to Transiluania, and another towards Sighet vpon the marches of Croatia. In this was his greatest force, and there was himselfe in person, to the end that his presence should the more encourage the souldiours to the taking of this towne. But being now of the age of 66. yeeres, and being crazed, in respect of the labours of so long a voyage, and perhaps hauing his courage abated to see his people in so many assaults The death of Solyman.  repulsed, with so great a butcherie of them: and it may bee this accustomed valour of minde being no longer in him, with which he before had happely brought to end so many goodly enterprises, the humours of his bodie being corrupted, a bloody flux troubled him, which within few daies took him out of this world. And thus the prognostication (which in the moneth of May before going, had been made touching the anuall reuolution of this Prince, by those that had been curious to know that which heauen did promise touching this warre) fell out to be true. This prognostication contained The prognostication of the death of Solyman. that the Emperour of Turkes should dye there, if peraduenture he was not ouerthrowne and defeated by the Christians, notwithstanding the great  leauie of people which he made against them.
Mehemet Basha seeing his Prince dead, and Sighet yet vntouched as it The marueilous prudencie of Mehemet Basha. were, and in possession of the Christians, presently thought that it was expedient to keepe this death secret, as well for the continuance of this siege and taking of the place, as for the preseruation of the armie and treasure; as also to inuest the new Sultan Selim in the possession of the Empire, to whom of right it belonged. Vpon this resolution he readily dispatched a messenger to the Basha of Constantinople, to aduertise him of the fortune which was happened, and he sent him word of that which was necessarie for him to  doe. Then with a singular subteltie, knowing that the souldious would bee offended if they saw not their Lord, he caused the bodie to be clothed with his accustomed habits, and setting him in a high place within his Pauilion, caused him a farre off to bee shewed to all, without that any of them could know that he was dead. This being thus well inuented, Mehemet went forth

of the Pauilion, and taking occasion thereupon began to encourage the Ianisaries, exhorting them to performe their last endeuour to the assault of Sighet.  But while he was speaking, and calling to minde that his Lord was dead, he could not for the griefe which he felt in his minde refraine from weeping. And as this passion was pricking, his wisedome to couer it was also very readie, in such sort, that presently remembring that his teares gaue to the souldiours some apprehension and assurance of the death of their prince, vpon some little bruite which alreadie was spread in the Camp, vsing a braue stratagem in wisely dissembling his inward griefe, added to his speeches, that he wept not for the death of his Lord, as it seemed they iudged, who (thanks be to God) was liuing and out of all daunger. But that he wept for the miserable and pitious condition of all the armie, for that their Prince had made  an inuiolable oth, laying hand on his breast and head, that if within few daies Sighet were not taken, he would put them all to death without remission, with a cruell and strange kinde of death. Mehemet by these speeches and many others, animating euery one, a singular desire of fight, and also presently to returne to the assault, possessed all the souldiours, and aboue all, the Ianisaries being all obstinate to performe therein their last endeuours, or else to end their liues there. Vpon this resolution, after he had giuen order to that which appertained to such an assault, all the souldiours running with great furie to the breach and skaladoe the 6. of September, they were neuerthelesse repulsed with great losse both of the one part and other. But the enemies  hauing meanes to refresh them, and continuing their blowes, came againe for the last time the day following to the breach, with a marueilous furie and a greater force then they had yet euer made, and the one and other fighting betweene hope to ouercome and feare to dye, there was seene a terrible conslict now on this side, then on the other. Count Serin performing then the dutie of an aduised and most valiant Captaine, encouraging his people, ranne here and there, not being wanting either to himselfe or to his souldiours, appeared greater then himselfe. He seeing that the Artillerie of the enemie had set fire in the Fortresse, and being astonished thereat, caused  the port to bee opened, and hauing planted a Cannon (charged with many little bullets) at the enterance of it, and giuing fire thereto, more then 100. Turkes were layd on the ground by that shot, and presently the Count aduanced himselfe vpon the bridge with his Courtlasse and Target, being followed of his people, who of 1200. were reduced onely to 500. and they all thronging in amongst the enemies fought valiantly. Serin would neuer yeeld himselfe, although the Turks desired him to doe it, willing to haue him aliue into their hands: but alwaies fighting couragiously in the middest of the enemies, increased in himselfe an incredible valour: and thus managing his hands with extreame courage, was thrust into the breast with a pike. But he fearing to abate the courage of his people, concealed this wound as  much as he could, vntill in the end he was greatly wounded in the head with The death of Count Serin. a blow which killed him. And although that the souldiours desisted not, yet could they not make such resistance as they did before: so auaileable in souldiours hearts is the Captaines presence: from whence it happened that Sighet

was presently taken, and all those who were taken, within a few daies after  Sighet taken by the Turks. were all cruelly massacred by the Turkes. The head being cut from the bodie of this valiant Count, it was sent by the Basha of Buda to Count Ecchia of Salm, wrapped in a peece of blacke veluet, with letters, by which he declared vnto him, that hauing vnderstood that this braue warrier who had so faithfully maintained the part of his Emperour, was his kinsman and friend, he was willing to send him his head, to the end it should bee a beginning of an obligation of mutuall friendship betweene them, sending him word that he had caused his bodie to be honourably buried. Some beleeued that the Basha did this more to possesse him with griefe and some astonishment, then for any office of humanitie or curtesie that was naturally in him. This head  was carried by a peasant to Comar, and from thence to Iauerin to the Emperours Campe: to whose Maiestie then came one of the sonnes of Serin, and prostrated himselfe at his feete, to desire him that with his good fauour he might hold his fathers place, and of all his familie. The Emperour raised him with his hands, and promised to be to him a good Tutor, and as a father to all his house. This sonne after he had taken leaue of ye Emperor, being followed with a good number of gentlemen, went to the Fortresse of Iskachaturn, and causing his fathers head to bee conducted thither, made it honourably to be buried with great pompe. The towne of Sighet came in this sort into the enemies hands, it being opened on all sides by the violence of the Artillerie.  The Emperour lost there to the number of 100. peeces of Cannon, which Serin seeing that he had no more hope, caused them to bee charged euen to the mouth, and put fire thereto, so that they were all cleft and broken. If this Count had had sufficient of souldiours, he had neuer seene it reduced to this point, hauing neither want of armes nor victuals. Of 1200. souldiours which he had at the beginning of the siege, there remained no more the 110. when he was wounded to death. By this losse the port was opened to the Turkes to molest the rest of Hungarie. For from this place they might runne without any impeachment vnto Sopron, called Odembourg, and euen to the walles of Poson. Amongst the most of marke who dyed in Sopron called Odemburg.  this siege of the Turkes part, was noted Alipartu Basha, who for Sea affayres was held to bee very expert, and for one of the valiantest of all the Turkish Captaines.
After the taking of this place, the Turkes dispersed themselues by incursions through all the countrie, and euen in sight of the Emperour, who was greatly discontented for this losse, and the death of Serin. By these excursions the countrie was greatly endamaged, Fortune being altogether so fauourable to the enemy, that she not being content to haue brought him such happie successe, added yet thereto the winning of the towne and Fortresse of Iula, which in the same weeke was reduced vnder the Turks commaund,  although this place was iudged inexpugnable. Captaine Ladislas Cheretsken commaunded there. He seeing himselfe besieged by a long and dangerous Ladislas Cheretsken Gouernour of Iula. siege, and moued by distrust from being able to sustaine it any longer, or rather (as it was said) for the great promises which Portau Basha made him, he rendered it to him vpon such composition, that he might retire himselfe

with his armes and baggage saued, with hostages for assurance of the capitulation,  who should accompanie him and his people vnto some place of securitie, Giusa taken by the Turks. and that the Turkish Artillerie should be displaced and turned into some place, where it could not endamage them. Vpon such conditions the Captaine being come forth, he was lead before the Basha, and in the meane time that the others marched, being not yet 1000. paces off, two great companies of Turkes assailed them. They seeing themselues thus deceiued, ranged themselues altogether within their waggons, and for a while valiantly defended themselues, and specially the Germanes who with their harquebuze shot killed many of the enemies. But in the end being surmounted with a great number, they were constrained to yeeld to the enemie who almost cut them all to peeces, except some who saued themselues, amongst  which was Bernard Rotenau a Germane Captaine, who afterward being presented before the Emperiall Maiestie, accused Cheretsken of treason, he hauing made an accorde without the knowledge of his companions. Neuerthelesse by the reporte of an Hungarian souldiour, who afterwards came to the Campe, they knew that the Captaine had conferred of this surrender with the Germanes, and that those for certaine would not yeeld at the first: but that afterwards ouercome by the promises and great perswasions of the Turkes, they consented thereto.
Neere to Alberegalis there was 20000. Turkes incamped and fortified with good trenches, who made many attempts towards the Emperiall  Campe. The Emperour willing to suppresse this insolencie, chose out certaine of his armie, and with a few of his souldiours sent them to discouer. Afterward hauing first sent to the Turkes certaine spies to know how the enemie behaued themselues there, they marching before, and meeting with those who were of the guard, and seeing them well armed returned to make recital of that which they had seene, and might discerne by the enemies countenance. The Emperials notwithstanding all other difficultie, being gone forth, marched towards them, and going with good speede they surprised them, and assayling them on the suddaine put them to flight, killing some of  them who were gone a forraging. This newes being carried to the Emperours Campe, the Hungars, Burgunnians, and Austrians, couragiously put themselues into the field, and pursuing the Turks who fled, they killed some and tooke others. George Tury hauing knowne amongst them the Sangiach of Alberegalis, a great Councellor of the Turkes, (whom he might verie well know, because that while he was at Pallota he had been his neighbour, and had persued him oftentimes to take him) he boldly thrust himselfe into the middest of them all, and followed him so neere, that although his horse was slaine vnder him, yet being readily remounted vpon another, he tooke him a liue and brought him prisoner to the Emperour, at whose hand for  so valerous an act he was knighted, and the Sangiach was conducted to Vienna, where he remained a long time prisoner.
At another time 1500. horse being, gone forth of the Campe to encounter certaine Turkes, they made forward as farre as Iscocaky belonging to the enemies, two miles from Alberegalis. But they did not any exployt,

there passing nothing betweene the two Camps but light skirmishes, in  which George Tury more then once gaue chase to the enemies, and brought from them good spoyle. At the same time, the Arch Duke Charles being at Bubolca, defeated a Basha with 4000. horse by the riuer of Sleuua, and without doubt he had taken him, if the armie that was at Sighet had not been so nigh, he retyring himselfe to the Castle of Carotua, a very strong place which is situated in an Iland which Drauus and Murus maketh.
All these excursions greatly increased from the time of the taking of Sighet, and the Turkes pilled, burned, and wasted all euen neere vnto Sabar, distant two miles from the Emperiall Campe. By these excursions many Captaines experienced in the manner of the Turkish warre, beleeued that  Solyman would retire to Constantinople, and that somuch the more, because they vnderstoode that in his armie was a great dearth of victuals, and that there was some taken from Buda and Alberegalis to send thither. Besides they heard that Solyman was dead, and that the Basha giuing this last ruine to the Countrie, would depart with his accomplished victorie. Neuerthelesse it seemed that is would be a strange thing, if there happened not some sedition in this armie, knowing that in like cases the Turkes are verie easily moued to mutine. But Mahomet entertained, and that with great care, these courses to stay his owne armie and that of the enemies, he daylie expecting the comming of Selim their new Emperour, and Solymans sonne, to whom he had sent, that in the greatest speede he could, he should depart from Constantinople.  When Selim receiued the newes of his fathers death, he was in Selim the sonne and successour of Solyman. the plaine of Saraissa, three dayes iourney from Constantinople, in a place called Chiefredy, which belonged to Sinan Basha. He hauing in this place receiued the letters of Mahomet, subscribed with the Captaines Aga and with the principall Phisitians hands, departed the 17. of September to goe to Constantinople with all the people which for that time he could haue with him, and being arriued at Scutari, Bostangy Basha chiefe Gardner, who had the keeping of the Kings Pallace, went before with a Brigandine ordained for the person of the Grand Seigniour, it being verie well and Ceremonies at the receiuing of the Grand Seigniour into Constantinople. richly trimmed, and accompained with many goodly young men sumptuously  apparelled. Selim had first sent many Ianisaries to Scander Basha, Gouernour and Lieutenant of Solyman in Constantinople, to aduertise him to prepare all things necessarie for his entrance. And being aborde this Brigandine, he arriued at Constantinople, and descending into the Serrail, Bostangy tooke him by the hand, and conducted him into the vsuall chamber aunciently deputed for all the Kings, and there he being seated in a chayre dedicated to the Ottoman Emperours, made proclamation through the towne, with the same words which they ordinarely vse in the election of new Emperours: sending within a while after in great diligence the same proclamation  through all his Empire, to the end that the death of his father should no sooner be discouered, then his establishment in the Empire. Afterward going out of his Pallace, he shewed himselfe in the towne to all the people, going to the sepulcher of Iob, which is a place adioyning to the wals, where the Kings and Grand Seigniours are accustomed to make their sacrifices,

offering sheepe and other beastes, which afterward are distributed to the  poore in remuneration of the graces receiued of God. And hauing offered there a great summe of monie, and said his prayers, he returneth in great pompe and pleasure to his Palace: from whence he departed the 26. of September to goe to his Campe, making great iournies, and without staying in any place at last he arriued at Belgarde hauing made this voyage in great speed, and so secretly that the people marueiling to see him, knew not the occasion of his comming but onely after his departure: which caused that not any tumult happened, whereof euery one greatly marueiled, knowing afterwards how all was passed. And being departed from Belgrade, and alreadie two dayes iourney on his way, by the letters of Mehement he retourned  backe, for that this Basha sent him word that he should come no further, for that the Armie was not any whit molested: and in auoyding the tediousnes of so long a iourney, Mehemet desyred him to attend at Belgrade.
Thus his Maiestie soiourned in that place, attending the Armie which was conducted by a deade bodie, carried in a close couered Coach, euery one beleeuing that he was liuing: because that he being in this his olde age for certaine yeares together subiect to the goute, he was accustomed to be carried into the fields in this sorte.
Vpon the daie that this bodie or corps should enter into Belgrade, Selim Ceremonie for the funerall mourning of the Turkish Emperours. put vpon his head a verie little Turbant, and being decently apparaled  with a blacke cloth cloake mounted on horsebacke, hee went before the bodie of his father euen to the Porte: this bodie being accompayned with displayed Ensignes, trumpets, and other such signes of a tryumphe. The couer of the Coach being lifted vp, Selim dismounted, and began to mourne ouer the bodie. All the Bashaes, the Cadilischiers (who Cadilischiers. are the principall persons for Iustice) with all the chiefe of the Campe, after lighting from their horses, tooke also little Turbants, and in token of sadnes all the Ensignes through the whole Campe were reuersed the point downeward: and there was a wounderfull silence made  for the space of a quarter of an hower. After this ceremonie, a white Turbant being brought, enriched with precious stones, it was put vpon Selims head, and hee being clothed with stately and magnificent habits, hee mounted vpon another horse, and all the others doing the like, the Coach of the dead was againe couered, and the Ensignes raysed, all the souldiours making great acclamations in the name of their new Emperour. In this manner they accompayned him to the Palace, and there the deputies of the Empire, according to their degrees, went and kissed his hands.
Presently Selim gaue order to the gouernment of Iustice, and performed  the accustomed larges to the Ianisaries, and giuing to euery one two Larges dew to the Ianisaries by the new Emperour. thousand Aspres. At the same time it was decreed, that the bodie of his deceased father should be conducted to Constantinople, to be buried in the Sepulcher which hee caused to bee built in his life time, named by The Sepulcher of Solyman. the Turkes, Marata, which is as it were an Hospitall for the poore. Some

say that this Tombe is the most sumptuous that is to bee found at this day, it  being in the great Mosquee. He gaue the charge of this conduct to Hamant Basha, who had married one of his Neeces, and to Ferrat Cap Aga, commaunding that this corps should besides be accompanied with all the Ianisaries, who were then in the Campe, with many other persons of note, carrying with them the Emperiall Ensigne.
Selim remained at Belgrade with the rest of the armie to march afterward more commodiously. The bodie of Solyman entered into Constantinople The entrance of Solymans bodie into Constantinople. the 22. of Nouember, there being first gone foorth to receiue him Muphty, otherwise called Muplety, who is the supreame of their Priests, and one who (they say) was dissended of the line of Mahomet, he being followed of all  the Doctors of their law, that then were in the towne. Scander Basha Gouernour, with all the Treasurers, and other Lords of qualitie who were remaining at Constantinople, with an infinit number of other sorts of people came also before him. They were all clad in blacke, with little Turbants of wooll on their heads in signe of sorrow. These hauing drawne the bodie out of the Coach, the principals of them tooke it and lifted it vp vpon the palmes of their hands, carying it thus raised on high through the towne, in changing it from hand to hand, and bearing it by turnes; the Doctors of the law marching before, and reading with a high voyce euen vnto the Sepulcher, wherein he was put, with all the ceremonies and accustomed solemnities  due to such Princes. Vpon the Sepulcher was put a cloath of very fine Chamblet with his Cimetrie, to notifie that he had ended his daies in the warre; and at the very top of it there was a Turban, like to that which he was wont to weare in his life time.
But now to returne to our discourse: the Emperour Maximilian knowing for certaine the death of Solyman, and coronation of Selim, (which was seuen weekes after) it being sent to him from Venice by Guy of Noremberg his Ambassadour, resident in the Seigniorie of Venice for his Maiestie. All the Captaines were greatly astonished thereat, considering how and with what prudence these barbarous people were able to keepe so secret such a  notable accident, in such sort that their owne armie neuer knew any thing thereof. Which thing (if it had been discouered) had without all doubt bin an occasion that the souldiours mutining to sacke the treasure, had opened a way to the Emperour to attaine to a most euident and singular victorie. But Basha Mehemet in his owne iudgement foreseeing all the disorder, and knowing that of his Lords life depended the good of all the armie, meant to prouide for it in time: and for this cause he concealed the death of Solyman, to the end that the armie should not perceiue it selfe depriued of their Lord, and that in diuiding it selfe it should not by that meanes open the way of a notable victorie to the enemie. 
After then that the Turkish armie was departed out of Hungarie, there happened a new disaster at Iauerin, (where was the force of the Emperiall Iauerin burned by cha^ce. Campe) there being the last of September fire set on the lodging of a Hungarian Lord, by negligence of his Cooke. This fire by little and little increased so farre, by meanes of a great winde which blew from the West, that all

the houses being made of wood (after the manner of that countrie) not any  house was exempted from burning, except the Palace and Church which were built of stone, and about some 17. little houses: and it was a great chance that this fire pearced not euen into the Church, wherein was all the munition: which if it had happened, it had brought a great misfortune, for that the towne (although it be litttle) was stored and filled with souldiours, and of all other sorts of people who had followed this armie: and for feare of this inconuenience, the Emperour mounted presently on horsebacke, and with great speede retired farre from the towne. That which was not consumed by the fire, serued as a pray to the souldiours, some of whom most wickedly put fire to certaine houses, that they might more freely get pillage,  as they did. The Emperour was so sad for this misfortune, that he neuer felt any such griefe in all these warres, hauing alwaies reserued this place for the suretie of his armies: and seeing that therein all the neighbours did vsually retire their goods and persons, and specially of all the countrie thereabouts, his Maiestie commaunded that this place should bee reestablished by the souldiours and peasants. And the winter being come, and the enemie retired, Maximilian dismisseth his armie. he dismissed his armie, and most affectionatly he thanked all the Lords, who so willingly were come to succour him: and this done, he retired to Vienna, leauing at Iauerin a good and strong garrison of the brauest and valiantest souldiours of the armie, as well foote as horse vnder the charge of  Count Salms. He presently caused the place to be repayred, by the money which the Emperour had sent him from Vienna. The troupes of Austria were sent to Odemburg to resist the ordinarie incursions of the Turkes. In Canisa (a Fortresse very nigh to Sighet) was sent to commaund there Captaine Thay, with 1000. horse, and as many footmen.
In the meane time the Emperour called the Estates of Austria into the towne of Vienna, to aduise of new preparations for the yeere following, as well in Hungarie as in Transiluania, where alwaies continued the warre betweene him and King Iohn, for whose ayde remained Portau Basha with many Tartars, who surpassing ours in multitude and crueltie, massacred all those that they encountred, not pardoning any sexe, and without any distinction  The barbarousnes of the Tartars. of age, cutting the infants in the middest, whom they afterward rosted and eate.
The Transiluanian hauing in the former yeere lost Tocchay, which Tocchay taken by Schuendy from the Transiluania^s, and besieged by King Iohn. Schuendy had taken from him with 30. peeces of Artillerie, and great store of munition which he found there, and willing to get it againe, came with his Tartars to besiege it, making a batterie with nine Cannons. The assieged valiantly behauing themselues, did not any thing faile in their defence. Schuendy (although then he was very ill) willing neuerthelesse not to be slacke in the office of a prudent and discreete Captaine, sent for succours to the Emperour,  not any thing doubting but he would be well able to chase away the enemie. The Emperour presently sent him 1000. horse, conducted by Henry Stampir, with sixe Ensignes of foote, and with them he sent his chiefest Phisition to cure Schuendy. He also sent 50. waggons laden with victuall, and coyne to pay the souldiours.
Iohn being with his armie before Tocchay, where alreadie he had been  eight daies, and hoping to come to the end of his enterprise, he was informed that 10000. Tartars, who warred with the Turkes in his fauour, being mutined and departed from the Campe, were dispersed in his Prouince, committing infinite outrages, and burning many townes. Iohn vpon this newes raised his siege: and hauing sent to these mutiners, that they should A mutinie betweene the Tartars and King Iohn. quietly retire themselues, he vsed all the meanes not to meddle with them by fight. In the end, seeing that intreaties and all perswasions serued him to no purpose, and that continuing their crueltie, they would by no meanes desist, moued by a iust choller he assailed them on the sudden, and cut in peeces more then 6000. of them. Those who remained, and the Turks ioyned  with them, desirous to be reuenged for their companions, came and besieged Iohn at Varadin, which is a place of small strength, and where they might haue taken him aliue, if they had had any peeces of Artillerie. Neuerthelesse Iohn fearing the worst, and not willing to haue the reproach to be besieged by such raskalitie, secretly auoyded the towne, and retired to an other place of more strength. There hauing gathered a greater armie he againe assailed them, and hauing made a great butcherie of them to the number of 20000. besides the wounded who were in great number, he saued Tartars defeated by King Iohn. from their hands many thousands of soules, who they led into miserable seruitude. Among these were many gentlewomen, which they had taken from the Castle of Beregras, to which they were retired for the greater suretie,  all that countrie remaining in the meane time (which is towards Cassouia) so desolate, for the great and horrible cruelties which these people had vsed, that it was not possible to endure any more.
During such mutinies, 400. Ianisaries passed very neere to Filech, a place neighbouring to Sepusa, committing where they passed infinit outrages, and vsing acts altogether barbarous and cruell: and hauing taken out of the mountaines more then 8000. soules, they gaue a great amazement to all the neighbour people of Danubius, of Vagne, and of Arabon. The Turkes a little before had taken two Forts (such as they were) named Comar and Calambach, Comar, Calambach, Ghestez, and Vitan taken by the Turks. as also those of the garrison of Alberegalis had done the like, seazing  themselues by forces of Ghestez, and Vitan: and thus daily increasing, there was at Palota, Vesprimia, and at Tata a great doubt of the enemie. The Tartars after the ouerthrow which they had receiued of the Transiluanian, ioyning themselues a new with other Turkes, among which there was a good companie of Ianisaries, and many Valachians, who robbed and spoiled through all Rossia and Podolia, which are countries belonging to the King of Polonia, vsing all acts of hostilitie, fiering all the villages and Castles, massacring the old and impotent persons, and making slaues of more then 100000. soules: finally, attempting to besiege the Palatin of Rossia in a Tartars defeated in Polonia. Castle, he making many sallies vpon them, with a good number of souldiours  he n a manner put them all to the sword, and taking from them 12. peeces of Artillerie, they were forced to retire.
The Emperour being at the assemblie of his Estates of Austria, whom he A Diet in Austria, in which was granted succours to Maximilian. caused to bee called thither (as wee aboue haue written) proposed to all the

Prelates and principall of the Nobilitie, what neede he had of succours to withstand the violence of the enemies. And for this effect he demaunded  of them the same succours as was graunted the yeere before, which amounted to little lesse then 300000. Florins for the entertainment of 900. horse, which they were bound to furnish. And besides he demaunded of them, that he who had 100. Florins of reuenew should pay for a horse, and he who should haue more, should also furnish one for euery hundred. And because that although his Maiestie would march in person to the warre, he would not that the Nobilitie of the countrie should goe thither with him, and in stead of such a personall seruice, he demaunded of them that they would furnish him with the pay of 1000. horse, and 5. companies of foote. And besides,  he would that vntill 6. yeeres were compleate, euery one should come to labour at Vienna sixe daies in the yeere.
To these demaunds, as very excessiue, the Austrians not willing to condiscend, were wilfull in their opinions, deferring for many daies to make an answere, giuing others openly to vnderstand, that first they should permit them the exercise of the Confession of Ausbourg. The Emperour not being able to containe himselfe from anger, caused to be declared vnto them that he had not proposed any article concerning the faith and religion, and that therefore they should answer to his demaunds, if they would not incurre his indignation. In the end they againe assembling together, yeelded  to these articles: to wit, that they were content yeerely to giue him 138000. Florins, and 300000. for the fortification of Iauerin: that he who had 100. Florins of yeerely reuenew, should entertaine at his owne charges for the seruice of the warre one horse for three moneths: that he who had a greater reuenew should also furnish more: that if his Maiestie would march to the confines of the Prouince for the affayres thereof, they should bee bound of fifteene persons to furnish him with one: if he departed out of the confines, they should giue him one of euery thirtie. This last offer was in stead of 1000. horse, which he demaunded to serue him in place of the Nobilitie. After these accords, the Austrians minding to renew againe the article of the  Confession of Ausbourg, being not content with the deniall which the Emperour had made them thereof, meant againe to replie. But he gaue them The exercise of the Confession of Ausbourg denied to the Austrians. to vnderstand, that those who would not liue nor beleeue as himselfe did, might sell their goods and depart the countrie: and by this conclusion he made them silent.
In the meane time, endeuouring himselfe to assure his countries against the incursions of the Turkes, who remained with the Transiluanian from the death of Solyman, he laboured nothing else but to make peace with the Turkes, knowing that Selim (after being come to the Empire) had confirmed peace with the Venecians, who among so great warres which his father had, would neuer take armes against him, although they were often required  thereunto.
The Princes of Italie endeuoring themselues to bee well liked of with The Pope, and Turkes of Florence, Ferrara and Mantua, sent succours to the Emp. Maximilian, sent him new succours, among others Cosine de Medicis establishing the more by this meanes his owne Estate. The Pope, the Duke of

Sauoy, and he of Ferrara did also succour him with good store of men. His  Maiestie had before time sent to the Grand Seigniour for Ambassadour George Hossute, thinking by him to negotiate some peace with Solyman, whom George Hossute. he thought to be yet liuing. But this Ambassadour vnderstanding for certaine vpon the way the decease of the Turke, returned towards the new Emperour Ambassadour of the Emperour saw Selim. Selim, at the same time that he went to Constantinople, after the bodie of his father, as wee haue said before. At this meeting it was permitted him to see his Maiestie, but not to entertaine any talke of peace with him: Mehemet Basha shewing to him that he had been sent towards the Maiestie of the deceased Solyman, and that seeing that he was dead, he was not to treate with his successour; and that therefore if his King would any thing  with Selim, he should send another, or else himselfe. This Basha did particularly counsel him to demaund peace of Selim, and that otherwise there could not but euill happen to Maximilian.
When that Hossute arriued at Belgrade, Cheretsken (in times past Captaine and Gouernour of Iula) was there with bolts on his heeles. This man made great promises to the Turke who conducted Hossute, to bee permitted to speake to him: but he could neuer obtaine it. And not being able to attaine Excuses by writing of Cheretsken for the yeelding and losse of Iula. this fauour, he writ a long letter, by which he sent him word of all that which he endured at Iula, and how he had been deceiued by a vaine hope of succours; alleadging among other things, that he had maintained the siege for 70. daies, that one day he had seene 14. Turkish Ensignes vpon the wall: and  besides there was happened to him during this siege a great and daungerous sicknes: that with all this, after he had a long time expected the succours which was promised him, which neuer appeared, he was constrained to accept of composition. In the end he desired all his friends to make suite for him to the Emperours Maiestie, signifying that he might bee set at libertie so soone as the Sangiach should be deliuered in exchange of him: and being at libertie, he offered to remaine in such a prison as it would please his Maiestie, there to attend the iudgement which should be giuen vpon his cause, not perceiuing himselfe culpable in any thing. Cheretsken writ to Hossute concerning all these things, to the end he should report them to the Emperour. 
In the meane time it was held for certaine in the Court, that the Lord of Arrach might set at libertie the Sangiach of Alberegalis, whom he held prisoner in one of his Fortresses named Zetipont, to redeeme Cheretsken, there hauing been made (before this bad fortune) a treatie of mariage betweene them, this Lord hauing promised to Cheretsken one of his daughters. But a while after fortune being no way fauourable to this poore prisoner, there was heard of him a miserable end. For many complaining to Selim, for hauing receiued by this Captaine many cruell iniuries, some hauing by his  commaund lost their nose, others hauing had their eares cut off, others their mouth, and all alleadging against him such like cruelties, Selim moued with such a report, gaue him vnto them that accused him, permitting them to take what reuenge of him they would. These taking a Tunne nayled within full of great nayles, whereof the points were inward, and carrying it to the top

of a high hill, inclosed Cheretsken within, and after they cast him headlong The cruell death of Cheretsken. from the top thereof to the foote, and by this cruell and horrible paine they  caused him to dye. The Lord of Arrach receiued great displeasure at this death, for that he could not relieue him, and within a while after he had 50000. crownes for a ransome of the Sangiach: and although that he should remaine debter of another great summe, the Emperour neuerthelesse would that he should be set at libertie. He being set on his way, accompanied with Iohn Suizen a Councellor of Hungarie: and being arriued on the frontier, Suizen at his returne reported marueilous things of ioy and mirth that the Turkes made for the returne of this Lord. Besides the money by him disbursed, they gaue libertie to Captaine Gorger, who was taken at Iula, and  who for his ransome was taxed at 40000. crownes.
Schuendy being now growne to good health from so long a sicknes, and receiuing good strong troupes, went into the field with his people, and besieged the Castle of Zatmar, well furnished with all things, except men. This belonged to Bec the Emperours capitall enemie, and the principall author Zarmar taken by Schuendy. of the enmitie and discord which was nourished betweene his Maiestie and King Iohn. He seeing they came to besiege him, he secretly departed from this Fortresse, which being out of hand straightly besieged, in the end the souldiours within yeelded, their liues and baggage saued. This taking was vpon the 14. of Ianuarie, and in that place was gotten great store of bootie:  and Schuendy freely setting at libertie the Becs wife, with all his moueables, retained onely for himselfe all the Artillerie.
Maximilian was in the meane time to continue the Diets of his Estates, and hauing been alreadie at Bruna, and after at Troppa, to goe from thence to Prage in Bohemia, in which places he made his demaunds: and at Bruna it was concluded, that in stead of the Nobilitie they should giue him 1200. horse, which his Maiestie should send whither it pleased him: and besides that, the Nobilitie should be bound to keep the limits of the countrie, when there should bee neede thereof. He being arriued at Prage, he made his entrie thereinto very solemnely, being receiued by the Citizens vnder a Canapie, with great pompe and magnificence. From thence he sent the Duke of  Bauier, and Doctor Inuch his Councellor, with certaine other, to the Diet of Ratisbon. The Bohemians at the Diet held at Prage, accorded that the succours before graunted for three yeeres should bee reduced into one onely The Bohemians, Slesians, and Morauians doe graunt succours to the Emperour. payment, seeing that the appointed money for this effect should be committed to custodie into a certaine place, and that these should not come into his Maiesties coffers, except they were imployed against the Turke. Besides, all the Estates graunted during the space of two yeeres the succours which followeth: to wit, that all the houses being vnder the precinct of fees belonging to Princes, Barons, and Gentlemen, as well Spirituals as fenditaries, should pay for one yeere halfe a Dollor, except the publike Bathes, the houses  of Pastors, and the shops of Artisans: that the towne of Prage, and the other subiects to the Emperour, and those who make the third estate of the kingdome, should pay three Dollors for euery house. All the cities, boroughs, and villages euery one, gaue 100. Duckets, the labourers 9. the seruants

and mercinaries a white groshe: those who put mony to interest aswell  spirituall as secular, payed so much to his Maiestie which the interest came vnto by their bargaines: but if the Emperour should goe in person to the warre against the Turke, they should be bound hauing 10000. dollors at interest, to entertaine in the warre a horseman well armed for foure moneths: and that the poorer sorte should contribute rate for rate of their goods: and the same should be practised if they had neede for the defence of the 15. Dukedomes of Bohemia; to wit, in entertayning one horseman 15. Dukedomes in Bohemia. well armed for euery reuenew of 6000. dollers, and 10. footemen for a 100. subiects which should be vnder his fee. By this meanes the Emperour was succoured from all parts with men and monie, to preuent any more a suddaine  surprisall by the enemie, when at any time he would againe make incursions into Hungarie.
On the other side Schuendy after one siege, had yeelded vnto him by composition Mourach taken by Schuendy. their liues and baggage saued, the Castle of Mourach situated in Transiluania. All these preparations, and this losse gaue the Transiluanian sufficient matter to thinke of: for that this Fortres was of great importance to him, being on the way betwixt Polonia and Russia, from whence by this occasion he could not draw any more succours, except with a long compasse by Moldauia, which was a very teadious and daungerous iourney. After this taking, Schuendy went to besige Hust a place of no lesse importance then the other. 
These enterprises and executions gaue vehement suspition, that betweene the Emperour and the Turke would neuer be any accord, although afterwards both the one part and other treated thereof: considering that in precedent yeares, by reason of the same place of Mourach, all the negotiation of peace was broken betweene Ferdinand and Iohn: it being verie likely that the Transiluanian for the losse of these two places, would declare to the Grand Seigniour the absolute losse of all Transiluania, and with all excite him to giue him ayde, as it appeared incontinent. For the Basha of Buda fayled not to send to the Emperour that he should cause Schuendy to retire from Hust, and in the meane time tooke councell with his people to aduise  for needfull ayde for King Iohn, giuing order to the affaires of the warre.
In this time Edward being in returne from Constantinople, who the Emperour had sent thither to treate of a peace, brought newes that the Turke had geuen charge to Portau Basha, and to the Belerbie of Greece to prepare themselues to march into Hungarie: but the same Turke hauing vnderstoode for certaine, that the Emperour would send his Ambassadours to negotiate with him, and to determine the peace, he had hope that these would not hasten their voyage. These Ambassadours were Antonie Verance Ambassadours of the Emperour to Selim for peace.  Bishop of Agria, who had remained fiue yeares in Solymans Court in the quallitie and condition of an ordinarie Ambassadour, and Tijffempach Councellour to the Emperour, both of them men endewed with good vnderstanding, and hauing the knowledge of diuers languages. These with a great companie departed from the Court to goe to Constantinople, the

Emperour not omitting for all that to continew his Diets, to the end that  he might alwaies hold himselfe more readie for defence against the enemie.
Then was celebrated that of Poson, in which after many complaints made by the Hungarian Barons against certaine Captaines of garrisons, in the end it was determined by common consent, that for this yeare they should pay the Emperour 150000. Crownes, which summe should not be Succours graunted by the Hungars to the Emperour. drawen from any others, but of the families of peasants, in paying for euery one two Dollors: and besides euery familie should be bound to labour 12. dayes in the frontier places: but in the yeare when any Diet should not be held, the taxe should at least be reduced to the halfe: that the Emperour  should send Comissaries, part whereof should be Hungars, and part Germanes, on this side, and beyond Danubius, to informe him of the goods and possessions held by the Captaines and officers of the Emperour, to the end to restore them to their first possessors: that they should chastice all those who had committed robberies, and that they should giue order that these robbers should not any more molest the labourers, that they should adnihilate the grieuous and extraordinarie impositions layd vpon them by Schuendy, aswell of wine as of beastes: that the Hungars not being receiued into the Countrie of Austria, nor into the other prouinces, might redeeme the Castles and townes engaged before by the King of Hungarie: that the  Emperour should graunt the Prelateship, and other ecclesiasticall dignities onely to Hungars, and other persons capable: that if his Maiestie would retaine to himselfe the recouered goods from the possession of the Transiluanian, which before appertayned to the Hungars, he should then giue in recompence thereof some others: that the gentleman who had 100. villages vnder him, should according to the ancient custome, furnish 10. horses and 8. footemen, when the Emperour should goe in person to the warre, and lesse by halfe when he should send thither his Lieutenant, all amounting vnto 10000. horse and 8000. footemen: but in time of peace they should be bound to furnish but three horses for defence of the frontiers.  All this was decreed in the Diet of Poson, whereof the Emperour was verie well content. And to appease euery one he maintayned Iustice in the Countrie, and caused to be chastised many Captaines of garrisons who purloyned the pay from the souldiours, and besides shewed to all great demonstrations of frendship: which greatly contented all the people, and specially for the affection which he caused to appeare by hauing a desire to see them liue in peace, which he instantly pursued, hauing the better to attaine thereunto, sent by the said Ambassadours many goodly presents to the principall of Solymans Court.
These Ambassadours arriued at Constantinople the 22. of August, and within few daies after visited the Bashaes of the Port (which we aboue said  call amongst vs Court) to wit, Mehemet, Portau, Pialy, Achmat, and Mahomet: and the fourth of september, (being againe gone to see Mahomet Basha superintendant of all the Empire) they went with him vnto Andrionopoly, where then was the new Emperour. In this place the conditions

of peace were propounded, and after sundrie disputations thereof, in the Peace betweene Maximilian and Selim.  ende it was concluded with the same conditions, with which before it had been decreed betweene Ferdinand and Solyman.
The Ambassadours being returned to Vienna, they released and quitted many things both of the one part and other, and new borders were limited betweene the countrie of both parts. And vpon this deede the Emperour sent Schuendy with many other deputed to see the differences which might be vpon those limits; besides giuing him charge to finde the meanes to hinder the incursions and insolencies which the Turkes made without any respect of the truce lately decreed. George Tury Captaine for the Emperour prouoked with such courses, after he had made complaint to the Basha of  Buda, in the end he twice put himselfe into the fielde, once by Canisa, and an other time by Iauarin, and in such sort assayled the Turkes, that hauing checked their foolish temeritie, they durst no more trouble the countrie.
In the meane time the Emperour for some suspitions conceiued against some of the principall of Hungarie, caused the Hungars to be required (to diuert the practises, which Iohn vsed in their behalfe to draw them to him) to this, that they would contribute to the pay of 5000. horse for the preseruation of the countrie: but they expressely denied this contribution, being moued at this, that the vacant goods were no more solde amongst them,  but were giuen to their enemies and to strangers, making instance that since he could not any more assist them in his owne person in all important affaires of the kingdome, hee would nominate Lieutenant generall for his Maiestie, the Palatin, and Archbishop of Strigonia Primate of the kingdome. The Arch Bishop of Strigonia Primate of Hungarie. The Emperour then for that time dissolued this Diet, and retired vntill another time. On the other side the Transiluanian sought to the Basha of Buda, thinking to demaund ayde of him, and to haue of him meanes to recouer that which was taken from him by his enemies, of whom he then thought to haue better commoditie, for that they were busied in the wars of Germanie, and deuided amongst themselues. The Basha aunswered him that he could not doe it without the expresse commaund of his Lord, exhorting  him in the meane time to remaine in peace. But Iohn continuing his determination recouered certaine Fortresses: and hauing drawen to him Guilassa a Hungarian Baron, who was malecontent with the Emperour, he had of him Hust, a verie strong Castle, situated amongst the mountaines of Salem, not being able to induce the Turke to breake truce with the Emperour.
His Maiestie (hauing vnderstood that Selim had sent an armie towards Muscouia, by Podolia, and Kiania (Prouinces of the kingdome of Polonia) against the Duke of Muscouia, who hindered the cutting which the Turke  would haue made in (the riuer of Hust yeelded to King Iohn. This cutting was of this riuer Volga, within it of Don, called Tanais, the better to bring the commodities which come by that riuer by the said riuer of Don, euen vnto Constantinople by the great Sea. Volga) fearing that vnder false intelligence it might turne against himselfe, sent an Ambassadour of his to Constantinople, by him to giue Selim to vnderstand, how the Transiluanian, against the articles of truce, was in armes, and caused it to be bruited abroad that he would assayle Hungarie: and vpon this he desired his greatnes not

to censure hardly of him, if he defended himselfe, assuring him that though he had not giuen any consentment to such new enterprises, yet he had giuen  sufficient order and as much as was needfull, for opposing himselfe against Iohn: but if this enterprise was done with his consent, he not knowing of his Maximilian complaineth to Selim of King Iohn. part any occasion thereof, he desired him that he would at one word tel him, to the end he might iustifie his cause, or else freely to accept of warre. Selim answered him, that he had neither aduised nor consented thereto, neither for the one nor other; and promised him if the Transiluanian or Moldauian were in armes to offend or disturbe him, that both the one and other should be by him punished.
The Emperour satisfied by this answere, afterwards laboured to doe so  much to effect this, that certaine of the principall of the Hungars (who were discontent with him, for that they were not in such esteeme with his Maiestie, as they thought they had well deserued) should not proceede any further in rebellion, which alreadie began to be on foote towards Cassouia and Tocchay, these Lords being prouoked thereto by the Transiluanian (as afterward was knowne) who did solicite them with fayre promises, making on his part great preparations, the better to seaze himselfe of certaine other important places. But the Turke writ to him that he should desist, and threatned Selim threatneth K. Iohn. to depriue him of his estate, if in that time he enterprised any thing against the Emperour. The Hungars being thus remoderated and pacified  with their King, gaue order to repayre their Fortresses.
In this time the Emperour would neuer condiscend to the perswasions of Maximilian solicited by the Pope and Venecians to make warre vpon ye Turke. the Venecians or Pope to make warre vpon the Turke, saying, he well knew that in time matters would bee pacified, and he alone should remaine charged with the burthen of the warre. The cause which moued the Venecians to stirre vp as well the Emperour as other Christian Monarches, was, that they might preuaile against the Turke, who had sent to them a Chiauss to demaund the kingdome of Cypresse, as depending on the East Empire: and well knowing that they had not forces sufficient to withstand so great a Lord, they did solicite the Pope that he would giue them ayde, and in like  sort to employ his Holines to all the Princes for the same effect: for which, they had dispatched to his Emperiall Maiestie Iacques Soranze a Venecian, a man greatly esteemed, with charge to goe further to the King of Polonia. But the goodly and apparant reasons of this man could effect nothing with Maximilian, for the onely consideration which we haue said: and faining himselfe ill at ease, dismissed Soranze, breaking all hope to ioyne Germanie in this league. Selim on the other part hauing some doubt that the Transiluanian would accord with the Emperour, (although he was well assured of Maximilian, by reason of the truce and many other businesses dispatched together) caused the towne of Buda to bee fortified, and other his places of Hungarie. The Pope not minding to be directed with the first word, by the  declarations that Maximilian had made, to the discourses and perswasions which his Nonce had vsed to his Maiestie: the Emperour to please his Holines, caused a Diet to be called at Spire, where hauing caused very largely to bee layd out the demaunds of the Pope and Venecians, with many offers

made to his Maiestie by the Leaguers: after many aduices, it was resolued  that they would doe no other thing therein, although they had certaine knowledge of more then one person, that there were there many of the principals of the assembled, who freely and liberally would accord to the Popes demaunds, they being aduised that it was an excellent occasion to preserue Christendome, and specially Germanie and Hungarie from so many imminent perils as enuironed them.
With this resolution the Diet was dissolued, in which no other thing was Maximilian resigneth the kingdomes of Hungarie and Bohemia to his sonne Rodolph. done, but the voluntarie yeelding that the Emperour made to his sonne Rodolph of the kingdomes of Hungarie and Bohemia, with the consent of the Lords of both the kingdomes: in regard of which, they made at Vienna and  Ispurch great feasts and triumphs.
Within a while after Sigismond King of Polonia sent his Ambassadours to the said Rodolph, to congratulate with him for the honours which he had receiued of his father: and within a very little while after this King (who was of the ancient house of Iagellons) departed this world. This man was the The death of Sigismond King of Polonia. sonne of Sigismond the first of that name, and of Bonna the daughter of the Duke of Millan, and had no other brothers, but onely foure sisters. He maried one of the daughters of the Emperour Ferdinand, who being dead, he maried for his second wife one of his subiects, a gentlewoman endued with exquisit beautie and incomparable grace, by whom he had not any children.  He caused not his warlike deedes so to appeare against the Turkes, Muscouits, and Tartars as his father did: but neuerthelesse he knew well to maintaine his kingdome in peace. For default of issue begotten by him, the Princes, and Lords of the kingdome (who haue authoritie for the election of a new King) assembled themselues to chuse another, there being remaining of the Iagellons but one sister of the last deceased, not yet maried. The succession of this kingdome doth not ordinarily fall to the kindred of the dead, but commeth sometimes by election, for which is made a great assemblie, tearmed amongst them and the Germanes a Diet. In this there are present The manner of the election of a King of Polonia. fifteene Prelates of the kingdome: to wit, the Archbishop of Gnesna chiefe of all, and Legat natus for the Pope in Poland, the Archbishop of Leopolde,  the Bishop of Carcouia, he of Vratislauia, the Bishops of Chelmen, Polocen, Varnia, Clunem, Presmilia, and of Cameneren, which ten Bishops are of the kingdome. There are foure other of Lituania who also haue their voyce at such Diets: to wit, the Bishop of Samogithie, of Vilne, of Chronien, and of Lutturiensa. After these Prelates there are present the gouernours of Castles, amongst which the most noted is he of Cracouia, who is the most fauoured of the King, for that he hath in his custodie the life of his Maiestie. This man goeth before the Palatins of Poland, which are those of Cracouia, Posnania, Colosense, Siradiense, Bresten, Lanticiense, Russia, Innonbleuia, Iublinense, Belcense, Plocen, Rauense, and he of Massouia.  With these came the seuen Palatins of Lituania: to wit, he of Vilne, Kioky, Samogithia, Trocense, Vitiliense, Polocense, and he of Nouograde. The Palatins haue many Prouinces vnder them, and euery Prouince sendeth thither two messengers. The Chauncellor, Vicechauncellor, Treasurer of the

kingdome, and he of the Court haue in this assemblie places in the first rank.  All that which is resolued vpon in this Diet by the greatest part of those that are there, is held firme and stable. And if therein be treated any matter which belongeth not to the election of a new King, it may be resolued in this assemblie, although it bee against the Kings will. And from thence it commeth that the Kings are lesse warlike in action, then in courage, because that they cannot vndertake any warre, if it bee not graunted to them by such assemblies.
This Diet whereof we now write, for the election of a new King, was appointed at Varsouia. To it were come many Ambassadours from the greatest Princes of Europe, some requesting and suing for their Masters, and others soliciting in the behalfe of those whom they would recommend. From  Charles the King of France there was first come thither the Lord of Lansac, Ambassadours from the King of France pursuing in Polonia the election of Henry D. of Aniou. well vnderstanding the Slauonian tongue, and greatly experienced in these Northerly countries; and after there came thither the Bishop of Valence, of the house of Monluc, a good Oratour, as also the Lord of Rambouillet. These men by reason of their goodly speech and fayre promises, setting out also the great reputation that the Duke of Aniou (brother to Charles) had alreadie gotten through all the world, by the great armies which alreadie he had conducted in those yong yeeres wherein he was, did so well, that he for whom they spake was chosen King of Poland: and the election published, presently there was dispatched a Lord of Poland to the said Duke of Aniou,  who then (as Lieutenant generall for King Charles) held the towne of Rochell besieged. This Prince hauing receiued this gracious newes, (which The siege of Rochell. tended nothing else but to the encrease of his glorie, because he saw that it was extended to the vttermost parts of the world, as well by the proper nature thereof, which is to flie with renowne from one Region to another by passing the seas, as also by reason of so many Northerly Princes, against whom contrarie to all mens opinions he carried away the credit and honor, to be reputed the most valiant and warlike Prince of all) considering that this siege, by reason of the strength of the towne, and valiantnes of the souldiours who were within, was to continue so long a time, that it might bring some  preiudice to his new estate, and also being pricked forward by this Polish Lord who was come to him, who had been thereto solicited by them that fauoured the assieged: his Highnes praied the King his brother that he would giue him leaue and dismisse his armie, after he had made some accord with the Rochellers, to the end to aduise vpon his particular affayres, and to hasten his voyage into Poland. He being come to Paris, and by the perswasion of the King hauing accepted this election, and sworne betweene the hands of the Ambassadours, who were alreadie arriued in this towne, (appointed by the generall assemblie of the kingdome of Poland) to keepe and  Henry trauaileth into Poland. obserue the conditions with which he had been chosen, and the lawes of the kingdome, without preiudicing neuerthelesse his successiue right to the Crowne of France, if it should so fall out; after he had amassed great store of money, to the summe of two millions, as well to content those who had chosen him, as to make his voyage, he departed from the Court, accompanied

with the Queene his mother, and with many other Princes and Lords  of France, whereof some and the greatest part accompanied him vnto Polonia. Passing through the countrie of the Count Palatin, he there receiued The indiscretion of Count Palatin of Rhein. some discourtesie by this Lord, in shewing him the picture of the deceased Admirall of France, called Coligny, otherwise Chastillon, slaine with many other Lords of the pretended reformed religion in the towne of Paris the 24. of August the last precedent yeere, the which Admirall was alwaies assisted by men of warre and counsell, sent by the said Lord to the warres, which for the space of tenne or twelue yeeres were maintained in France for Religion.
As this man thought to braue this Prince, on the other side the Duke of  Saxonie was astonished at the comming of this new King passing through his countrie, seeing neere him the Polonians in armes. In the end, Henry at Henry receiued King of Polonia. the beginning of the yeere entered into his kingdome, he being receiued thereinto with great applause: and after hauing againe sworne the obseruance of the countrie lawes, he receiued the tokens and royall Ensignes, according to the ancient custome.
Almost about the same time, yet a little before Stephen, otherwise called Iohn, sonne of Iohn the Vayuode, and King of Transiluania, departed this world, without any lawfull issue. By reason of this decease there began to The death of Iohn King of Transiluania. breake forth new troubles in Transiluania, because that the Turke procured that this Prouince (which was commodious to him for the passage into  Hungarie) should maintaine it selfe in league with him, and vnder the same confederacie which was betweene him and Iohn. On the other side, Maximilian aspired to this kingdome, as well by the right and inheritance of his Pretences of Maximilian to the kingdome of Transiluania. deceased mother, who had succeeded King Lewis her brother, as also by reason of Stephens will and testament, who at his death had named him his heire, and ordained that this kingdome should bee yeelded to him, pricked thereto perhaps by remorse of conscience, or else fearing that it should fall into the Turkes hands, who made to him great suite therefore: which could not happen but to the great damage of all Christendome. But the Barons of the countrie did not so presently resolue vpon that which they should haue  done, because that on the one side they seared the Turkes forces (who would not faile to endamage them) if they should giue themselues to the Emperour. On the other side they feared worse, if they should elect a King at his deuotion. Vpon such feares many moneths passed without any resolution. Certaine men of note fearing the iust anger of the Emperour against them, because (during the life of King Iohn) they banded against his Emperiall Maiestie in manner of hostilitie, firmely resisted those who fauoured Maximilians part, and who demaunded that the testament of the dead should bee put in execution. These feares engendred amongst them great diuersitie, which was an occasion long to delay their last resolution. But  within a few moneths after it was finally concluded amongst them, that they should particularly chuse a King of their nation, minding thereby to preserue their kingdome, and that they might remaine in peace with the Turke they would pay him the accustomed tribute, and that he who should be

chosen King should maintaine himselfe in peace with the Emperour, they  all iudging thereby that the Turke would haue occasion to content himselfe with them, and that the Emperour should not be so much offended against them. For this consideration they chose for their King Stephen Battor, the Stephen Battor chosen King of Transiluania. principall Baron amongst them.
About this time the Emperour published the resignation which he made of the kingdome of Hungarie to the profit of his eldest sonne Rodolph, who the yeere before he caused to come out of Spaine, where he had soiourned a certaine time with the Catholike King his vncle. The crowning of him with many magnificent and sumptuous ceremonies was made in the towne of Poson. And for that such things are notable and worthie to bee knowne  for those who desire to please themselues in the knowledge of that which is The crowning of a King of Hungarie. strange to them, I purpose to recite and write them in this historie.
The place of Poson (which anciently was called Pisonium, because it was built by Piso a Romane) being appointed for this pompe, all the States of Poson called Pisonium. the countrie were called thither. These being assembled, the day before their enterie into the towne, the Emperour and Empresse entered by night into the towne in their Coaches with many lights and torches, accompanied with the Prince Mathias and Maximilian their yonger sonnes the 20. of September, not minding no more then did the other Lords of their Court, to enter therein publikely in the day time. The day following departed from Ambourg (otherwise called Sopron) Rodolph, accompanied with his  brother Ernestus, and many other Princes and Lords. Before him departed Ambourg called Sopron. out of the towne (a league off) his two other brothers Mathias and Maximilian, in whose companie was the Archbishop of Strigonium Primate of the kingdome, who had with him sixe Bishops followed of other Lords, of the Nobilitie and Caualarie of Hungarie. At the meeting, the Archbishop (to whom belonged this charge) with a briefe and elegant oration in Latin, after he had prayed to God that it would please him to make this his entrance and comming prosperous and fortunate for the peace, and comfort of his subiects, he promised to him in the name of all the kingdome obedience and fidelitie. The Prince answered him with a modestie mixt with a sweet kind  of grauitie, that he thanked the kingdome for so good an affection in his behalfe, and that he prayed God that he would giue him that grace in such sort to beare this charge, that his diuine Maiestie might be well serued therein, that it would please him to make him such an one that all the Prouinces and people of the kingdome might neuer haue occasion to repent themselues to haue obeyed him: but rather that they would bee very well content with his election, promising to employ all his forces to the good, preseruation, and augmentation of all the kingdome as well in generall as particular. This said, they began to proceede on towards Poson with this pompe;  the Hungarish Caualarie marching before to the number of 3000. horse, diuided vnder 42. Ensignes, with so goodly an order and so well guarded, that it was a marueilous thing to see, because that these souldiours did weare vpon their heads most goodly and glistering head-peeces inriched with gold, and fayre workes ingrauen vpon them, and vpon the front they had great

plumes made of white Peacocks feathers, that couered all the bodie which  they had armed with bright Curasses, or Shirts of maile. Vpon the left arme they carried Targets after their manner, certaine whereof had about them three hemmes or borders of the same feathers, and in their hands and at the saddle bow they held Launces, Sables, Clubbes, and Maces of iron. They were all mounted vpon very good horses, which made them the more worthie to bee regarded, for so much as their harnesses was inriched with gold, and their head-peeces furnished with great plumes, with many precious stones and pearles of great value, in such sort that it seemed that this people carried with them all their worth, which is a meanes to incourage and defend themselues more couragiously against the enemie. That which made  this Caualarie seeme yet more proud and gallant, were the skinnes of Beares and Tygers which the horsemen did weare vpon their shoulders, and mane of their horses. After this ordinance marched all the gentlemen of the traine of the Princes, of Bauier, of the Archduke of Austria, of the two yonger sons of the Emperour, and many other of his Maiesties house, so nobly apparelled, and their horses so trimly decked, that they made this pompe very magnificent, they all hauing chaines of gold about their neckes. The Prince Maximilian marched after these, hauing on his left hand the Prince of Cleueland. After him marched Prince Ernestus, who had his brother Mathias on his left hand, and Prince Ferdinand of Bauier on his right. Behinde came  Prince Rodolph in the middest of the Archduke of Austria his vncle, and of Prince William of Bauier. After these Princes was to be seene the aforesayd Archbishop with his Prelates in the middest of the Emperours guard. This new King with this pompe was receiued without the bridge by the Germane Infantrie, which was ranged in battaile to the number of 5000. and of others 500. souldiours who were for the guard of the Port, and in like sort of all the people, who of all sorts of age and condition were gathered together to see and receiue this new King with great applause, and to conduct him to the Archiepiscopall palace which was prepared for him. He went about euening to kisse the hands of the Emperour and Empresse, who imbraced  him very louingly. The 25. of September the necessarie things for his coronation being prepared, the Emperour went to the Cathedrall Church in great pompe with his Emperiall habit, accompanied with his Heraulds, being carried in a chaire, by reason that then he was troubled with the gowte which did daily molest him. Before him marched the great Marshall of the Empire, hauing in his hand the naked sword. After followed the Ambassadours of Princes, and the gentlemen of his Court. His Maiestie being placed on the top of the quire, where his siege was prepared vnder a Canapie and that of the Empresse: on his right hand sat the Archduke Charles, Prince William of Bauier, Prince Ernestus, Ferdinand of Bauier, Maximilian, Mathias, and the Prince of Cleue. On the left hand was placed Iohn Dolfin the Popes  Nuncio, the Ambassadour of the Catholike King, and he of Venice. After arriued the new King, accompanied with the Princes which wee haue named, and of all the Nobilitie of Bohemia and Hungarie. These Princes being entered into the Church, and hauing made reuerence to the Emperour,

tooke their places appointed for them. But Rodolph entered into the Vestarie,  from whence he presently after came out bare headed, being apparelled with a white robe, which they said sometime was belonging to S. Stephen the first King of Hungarie, and before him went tenne Hungarian Barons sumptuously apparelled, each one carrying a Standard in his hand, wherein were represented the tenne Prouinces subiect to this kingdome, although the most part of them are possessed at this day by the Turke. These are they, Hungarie, Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclauonia, Seruia, Galisia, Rascia, Bulgaria, Bosnia, and Lodomiria. After these tenne followed fiue other Barons, the one of which carried a Relique in token of peace, set in a round forme of gold. The second carried a Sword vndrawne in a crimosin veluet scabbard  trimmed with siluer. The third had the Scepter in his hand. The fourth held a little Globe of gold. And the last carried the Crowne. All these Iewels (as it is said) belonged to the said S. Stephen, and are among the Hungars held in such regard, that they esteeme him not for lawfull King who enioyeth them not. These fiue Barons were followed by the new King, who had vpon his right hand the Marshall of the kingdome, who held in his hand the naked Sword. With this traine and companie the King comming to the quire, two Bishops came before him into the middest of the Church, to wit, he of Agria, and Zagrabia, who after a few words conducted him (being in the middest of these two) before the Archbishop, who was solemnely apparelled. At the feete of him Rodolph kneeling, the Archbishop gaue him his blessing,  and annoynted him with the accustomed ceremonies. There the Epistle being ended, the Archbishop girded his Sword about him, causing him to draw it out of the scabbard, and to lift it vp on high three times, demonstrating thereby that he should be bound by armes to defend the faith of Iesus Christ against Infidels and Heretikes. Then the Archbishop demaunded with a lowd voyce of the people (who are present at the ceremonies) if they would accept this Prince for their King. Then euery one with infinit acclamations cried, that they desired and would haue him for their King. Vpon this the Archbishop taketh his oth, and putteth the Crowne vpon his head, and the Scepter in his hand. The King raising himselfe, they  take the Sword from his side, which they giue to the Marshall of the kingdome, to carrie it alwaies before his Maiestie. Then the Archbishop leadeth the King (wearing his Crowne on his head, and holding the Scepter in his hand) into his Throne. At all these ceremonies the Archbishop vseth certaine prayers and admonitions appointed for that purpose. After that the Archbishop sitteth downe by the King while they sing Te Deum: which ended, the Archbishop returneth to the Aulter to end the Masse. That done, the King in the same habit goeth out of the Church, causing peeces of gold and siluer to be throwne to the people, and newly coyned vnder his name:  and from this Church with the same companie he went to the Cordiliers, in which he made many Knights as well Hungars as strangers: and from thence he went mounted on horsebacke richly decked (although he did earnestly lament) two miles from the towne, to accomplish certain ceremonies depending vpon the oth which the Kings ought to make in such sacred

things. In the meane time the Emperour after he had most affectionatly  thanked the Ambassadours for their assistance, and had permitted them to depart, he was brought backe to the Castle. The Saterday following they made many feasts; and vpon the Sunday 100. braue gentlemen performed an excellent Tourney. Amongst these (according to the iudgement of the assistance) the two princes Maximilian and Mathias behaued themselues valiantly; the one of them fought against a Spaniard the sonne of the Spanish Ambassadour, and the other against a Duke of Poland. At night the Emperour made a most rich and sumptuous supper for all the Princes, who all for reuerence of the Emperour were bare headed, except the King and Archduke Charles, who went before the King being placed by the Emperesse.  Two dayes after they presented an assault giuen against a towne made of wood, for defence of which were certaine Knights greatly esteemed.
This same yeare ended the truce betweene Selim and Maximilian. The The truce betweene Selim and Maximilian expired. Emperour perceiuing no more strength to bee in him, such as before it was, and knowing his small forces, or else for some other consideration, Selim sought to obtayne of him a prolonging of the truce. But Selim not so readily condiscending as Maximilian desired, the truce in that time expired: and presently the Turkes of the next garrisons fayled not to put themselues into the field, and to harrie and assaile the frontiers, carying away with  them great store of bootie. Rodolph, with Maximilian his Father, determined to erect a Fort betweene Poson and Alberegalis, to restraine such incursions. The Turkes well foreseeing that which might happen by such a building, resolued not to suffer to bee finished before their eyes, a place which should be to them of too great importance, and by the same meanes to hinder the deseignes of Rodolph. For this end hauing amassed together their forces, which might amount vnto 20000. men, they suddenly assayled this Fort in a maner finished: and entering in by force, they killed the garrison and all the labourers who worked there: and after they had reuersed all that edifice, they lead with them from thence store of artillerie and other munition of warre. Rodolph sent to Constantinople to complaine to Selim for  such an enterprise made by his people daring the time of the treaty of peace, and without there being of either partie any other former declaration of warre, redemaunding that which was taken from him at this Fort. But the aunswere was a deniall of all that which his Maiestie demaunded, and to which they added threats if he persisted in such demaunds. The Emperour (notwithstanding his voluntarie yeelding which he had made to his sonne Rodolph of the Crowne of Hungarie) hauing no lesse care of this kingdome then he had before, and considering how greatly the losses which the people receiued by these incursions were damageable, and that by this occasion,  necessitie constrayned him to take armes to defend it from the violence of his enemies, and to recouer that which they tooke from him, caused to be published a Diet at Ispurch, calling thither all the Princes of Germanie; and there proposing to them the perill imminent to all their nation, and how little they ought to trust the promises of Infidels, exhorted them to take

armes with him for the defence of the whole nation. The Princes moued by his perswasions, concluded to vndertake this warre with him, they all  Succours granted to the Emperour by the Germanes. iudging that it was more expedient to make open warre, then to remaine alwaies in suspence and doubt. And vpon this conclusion they gaue order for necessaries thereto.
In the meane time Charles King of France a long time vexed with such continuall troubles in his kingdome, or else because he had vsed too much The death of Charles King of France. excesse in his ordinarie exercises, in which too violently he passed the time, or else by reason of some poyson, as some said, dyed within a few daies, euen then when his life was most necesarie for France, not leauing after him but one legitimate daughter of him and his wife, named Elizabeth, daughter of  the Emperour Maximilian. Henry his brother King of Polonia being aduertised Henry King of Polonia stealeth away, and commeth into France. of his death, made present instance to the Lords of Poland to permit him to goe into France to take possession of so great a kingdome, and to set things in order there, promising them to returne againe within few moneths. The Pollacques would not willingly graunt to him that which he demaunded: neuerthelesse they aunswered him that they would consent thereunto, if so be that for that effect a Diet should be assembled, without which they could graunt him nothing. In the meane time his Maiestie gaue order to locke vp his best implements and Iewels, and to depart secretly with all speed: and after he had sent away before the Ambassadour of  France, vnder coulour that his authoritie was expired by the decease of his Master, and seeing that to attend any longer the resolution of this Diet (which the Pollacques delayed from day to day of purpose to detaine him) and being resolued to depart, he caused to be written in his name by the Lord of Pibrac a letter in Latin to the Senat of Poland, by which his Maiestie aduertised them, that the occasion more then apparant, and the neede of France forced him to depart from their kingdome sooner then hee thought for, without further expecting the issue of the Diet, he being solicited by messengers vpon messengers to doe it by the Princes and Lords of France, and especially by the Queene his Mother, without further expecting  the issue of the Diet. Hauing left these letters vpon his table, and as the said Lord of Pibrac had ended them, his Maiestie departed in the night from Cracouia out at a secret posterne, of which he vsually had the keyes to goe on hunting: and being mounted on horsebacke, he made so good speed, that within a short time he was out of the limits of the kingdome of Poland: and being come to the confines of the Emperours territories, he was receiued by his Emperiall Maiestie, and by his children with all demonstration of great amitie, and by them conducted to Vienna, where he was honored and vsed with all manner of honorable respects. From thence hee went to Venice, where the Seigniorie prouided for him a magnificent enterie. After that he passed by Ferrara, Mantua, and Turin, being  greatly entertayned by the Princes of Italie. An Ambassadour of Poland met him at Ferrara, who greatly complayned himselfe of his Maiestie, and protested that if hee returned not within a short time, the Polonians were resolued to make choise of a new King, for that this kingdome could not

remaine without the presence of a King. His Maiestie desired him to stay  this resolution, promising him to returne within a short time. From Turin within few daies he arriued in France, at the same time that the Hungars giuing order to their affayres, and fortifying their frontier places against the Turkes, prepared for the warre: and this they did so much the more willingly, for that they already saw amongst them many disorders, and that in Transiluania there was declared King (by the commaund of the Turke) Stephen Battor, a man of great experience, of whom they had some feare, and not without cause. Vpon such distrusts and with such preparations they began both of the one part and other greatly to be indamaged. But during such feares as the Hungars had, by reason of the Turke, he alreadie preparing to destroy  all Christians, and feeling himselfe marueilously puffed vp with glorie, by reason of the happie successes which betided him in Africa: and thinking to take away from the Venecians the Ile of Candie, as he had done that of Cypresse, he dyed within few daies after. He was a Prince aboue all other The death of Selim. of his time greatly periurious, barbarous, and wholly fraughted with treacherie, he being not come to this Empire but by deceits and falsehoods, hauing induced his father to cause all his brethren to be massacred, as it was afterwards auerred: and hauing thus filled his house with homicides and murthers, he obserued not any law or religion, but was drowned in all filthie and vilanous vices whatsoeuer. This death happened then when the Polonians  (seeing that their King Henry was peaceably possessed of the Crowne of France, and that the time by him prefixed, was expired many moneths alreadie past) began to treate of the election of another King. Henry being aduertised of their intention, desired the Electors and Barons of the kingdome that they would attend vntill a certaine time, in which space he promised to returne to them, or else that hee would send them full commission to chuse another, such as they would think to be more commodious for them. To this request (being ioyned the threats of Amurath the Turke) the Polonians contented themselues to stay vntill the prefixed time. This passed, and at the last expired, the Diet was appointed at Cracouia. 
The Emperour Maximilian after that he was aduertised that the intention of the Polonians was not to remaine without the presence of a King, began to negotiate with them to cause himselfe to bee chosen King amongst them. On the other side, Amurath (who succeeded Selim) hauing vnderstood Amurath the sonne of Selim soliciteth the Polonians to chuse Battor for their King. the suites which the Emperour made, sent to the Pollacques, and aduised them to doe nothing in that affayre which was disliking to him, and that he would they should chuse for their King one amongst them, or else Stephen Battor King of Transiluania. And the more to astonish this negotiation of Maximilian, he writ vnto him by a Chiauss, that he and his brothers the Archdukes should pay him tribute of all whatsoeuer they possessed, otherwise  that he would march into Hungarie and Austria with a puissant armie to put all to fire and sword; threatning him in the end, that if for him or any of his he shuld practise the getting of the kingdom of Polonia, he would make him repent it. Notwithstanding these threats, the Emperour (by meanes of those who were of his partie) was chosen K. of Poland, against the King of Maximilian chosen King of Polonia.

Transiluania and Duke of Muscouia, which two perceiuing themselues  greatly disdained, determined to endamage with all their forces that kingdome. Maximilian being aduertised thereof, and foreseeing that he should draw vpon himselfe so many and so puissant enemies, and considering that he had not sufficient forces to oppose himselfe against them, and especially against the Turk (who prepared to thrust himselfe into Poland, being offended with this, that the Polonians had so slightly regarded his aduertisements and messengers) fearing to trouble himselfe in a warre too daungerous for him and his, from whence very hardly he could vntangle himselfe, made no great shew of reioycing at this election: but laying aside the care which he ought to haue had of it, fained as though he knew nothing thereof, prolonging  by that meanes the taking possession of that kingdom, vnder a hope that after the first assaults of these Princes there would not thereby happen to him in the end any other thing. Neuerthelesse the Polonians fearing the puissance of the Turke, who prepared himselfe to armes, would not persist in this election, vsing for their excuse the long delay which Maximilian made. Thus the Bishop of Cracouia, many Polish and Lituanian Lords fearing the Turke, and other Princes their neighbours, made choise of Stephen Battor for their King, hoping by this election to appease the Turke, the Muscouite, and other Princes, who hated the greatnes of the Austrian house: Battor chosen King of Polonia. and on the other side this Battor was a Prince of great valour. To this new  election Albert Lasky Palatin would neuer consent, nor performe the homage which he ought to this new King, and chusing rather to abandon his countrie and goods, he retired out of the kingdome, with all those who fauoured the Emperiall partie.
Now Battor knowing that he was chosen, went from thence presently into Battor receiued into Poland. to Polonia, and after he was crowned, he sent into diuers Prouinces to notifie his election, and namely to the Emperour Maximilian, sending him word that if in former time he had been to him a friend, and fauoured his actions, that for the time to come he would yet honour him more, and that he would respect him both as a friend and Emperour, and that he should not take displeasure  that this Crowne was fallen into his hands, who had beene alwaies fauourable vnto him, desiring that since through the dissentions of the Barons and Electors of Poland, and by some wicked solicitations of some Princes (who enuied the greatnes of the house of Austria, and who by diuers meanes had hindered his election) he would bee contented that this kingdome was come to such a person as reuerenced his Maiestie, and greatly loued him, and specially considering that this last election would bee the cause to quench many troubles, which might be an occasion to ouerthrow the Estate of that kingdome.
Maximilian (for all these goodly reasons and kinde offers) would not be appeased: but entering into choller, made sufficient apparance that this election  greatly displeased him: adding, that he would make the Polonians repent it. Vpon this displeasure, the Muscouit and Denmarke being ioyned The King of Denmark and the Mulcouit make warre in Polonia. together, with certaine of the Emperours forces, greatly endamaged by sea the riuers of Liuonia, and hauing set foote on land at Plescouia, ranne very

farre into the countrie. Battor notwithstanding being receiued and crowned  King of Poland, caused to be published a Decree, by which he permitted all those who were retired forth of the kingdome for fauouring the Emperours part, to returne home to the same Estates, dignities, and prerogatiues which before they had: and if in case they would not returne and sweare such oth of fealtie to him as they ought, they should be proclaimed rebels to his Maiestie, and enemies to the Crowne.
In this time of the election of Battor, the Emperour appointed a Diet at Ratisbone, to aduise of meanes by which they might hinder that his people should not be thus daily exposed to the mercie of the common enemie, who continually molested Hungarie. Afterwards his Maiestie demonstrated to Maximilian demaundeth aide of the Germanes to make warre vpon the Polonians.  the Princes who were present therein, and to the Ambassadours of them who were absent, that he was chosen King of Polonia, and that by that meanes Liuonia and Russia were fallen vnder the Empire, and that the Polonians for feare of the Turke had varied in their election, and afterwards chosen another, whereof he was exceeding heauie: further declaring to them that his intention was not to bee silent therein: and for this cause desired them to assist him, to the end that by meanes thereof he might preserue these two great countries to the Empire. And that he might the better obtaine their forces, he exhorted them all to maintaine themselues in peace one with another, commaunding them that for the time to come they should not any  more suffer their subiects to goe and serue straungers in their wars. This Diet Succours granted to Maximilian. was transferred to Ausbourg, in which he did so much, that the ordinarie succours for warre was continued to him. The Bohemians offered him besides the ordinarie, 1500. horse; and the Hungars 300. Pistoliers, and 400. Harquebuziers on horsebacke: and the Slesians 600. horse, 100. Pistoliers, and 800. Harquebuziers on horsebacke. To these succours, offered themselues the King of Denmarke, the Duke of Saxonie, Pomerania, and of Brandeburg. And in the end there was concluded a league betweene the Emperour, the Kings of Denmarke and Swethland, the Duke of Saxonie, A league against the Polonians. the Duke of Muscouia, and the Dukes of Brandebourg and Pomerania, for defence of the Empire, and inuading of Polonia, all these complaining for  the election of Battor, who, that he might aspire to the Crowne of Poland against them all, had presumed so much vnder the protection of the Turke. Besides, they feared that he in regarde of the bond which he had to Amurath, would take armes against the Emperour: who not content with this Maximilian sent to solicit the Sophy against Amurath. league, sent as well in his name, as in the name of the King of Spaine, his Ambassadours into Persia, to excite the Sophy King of Persia, to make war vpon the Turke. This word King is called in the Persian language Scach, and the Turkes surname it Sophy, which we commonly thinke to proceede of this Greeke word Sophia, which signifieth wisdome, which in the  Turkish language signifieth wooll. And the Turkes vsed this scoffe against Ismael heretofore King of Persia, for that he following his opinion or heresie, would teach that he must couer his head with wooll, because it was more vile and base then linnen, whereof the Turkes make their Turbans. Battor hauing discouered the voyage of these Ambassadours, caused them to be

surprised in their iourney, and to be massacred: and sent to Amurath their  letters of credence and instructions, by which there were discouered vnto him the diseignes of his enemies: which being reported to the Emperour, he was greatly displeased thereat, and caused the Ambassadours of Battor to be arested, and many other Pollacques who then were in Germanie and at Vienna: and sent to all the christian Princes to require ayde of them, seeing the Protestants of Germanie denied him such ayde as the imminent perill required, for that his Maiestie would not condiscend to the demaunds which they made to him for the affayres of Religion.
In this Diet notwithstanding the reclamation and hinderance of some Electors of the Empire, his Maiestie caused to be declared his sonne Rodolph  Rodolph the sonne of Maximilian declared King of the Romans. Emperour after him, and caused to be imposed vpon him the title of King of the Romans. This was then when the Muscouite Ambassadours arriued at the Court to confirme the league made with his Emperiall Maiestie, their master being greatly incensed against the Polonians, for that he was by them thus disdained. These hauing presented to the Emperour many goodly presents, offered in their masters name to his Maiestie, all his abilitie to subdue Polonia. Maximilian accepting these offers, thanked the Ambassadours for the good affection of their Prince, reseruing power to vse his ayde vntill time should require it.
Whilest he was in prouiding for all that which concerned the estate of the next warre, (his Maiestie being suddainly taken with a vehement trembling  The death of Maximilian. of his members, and with a great panting of his heart) he ended his dayes. He was a Prince who well knew to preserue his Emperiall dignitie and the greatnes of his house. Hauing receiued the administration of the Empire, his father liuing, the care which he alwaies had in his minde, was to keepe Germanie in peace, and in such sort to effect it, that it should not any more feele the former calamities whereinto it was fallen. For this cause some seeing Germanie in so great repose, had a sinister opinion of him, as though he had too much fauored the Protestants. But these men did not consider that amongst so many diuisions and hazards as were alreadie in France, Flaunders, and other countries, it was not profitable for the Catholike partie to adde Germanie thereto, for feare least the rest of the Catholikes might not be in  like perill. This Prince in his young yeares was very hot of the warre. He greatly loued the professours of the liberall arts, and especially handicrafts men. Hee had a delight to please euery one. Hee spoke most familiarly many and diuers sorts of languages, so that it seemed he was borne with them: and although he had a subtile and fine wit, oftentimes hauing an intention contrarie to his actions, yet neuerthelesse he was indued with many other vertuous qualities.
To this man succeeded in the Emperiall dignitie, Rodolph second of that name his sonne, King of Bohemia and Hungarie, a most Catholike and religious  Prince. He in the same Diet of Ausburg in which he was chosen King of the Romans was receiued for Emperour whilest that the Diet continued. Rodolph receiued Emperour. Presently his Maiestie commaunded (the better to take away all hopes of change from all his subiects in his hereditarie estates) that they should liue

Catholikely: and caused to be made seuere executions against those who  would vndertake to preach any other doctrine but Catholike, and by his example and speeches perswaded all the Princes, Catholikes and Protestants, carefully to obserue Gods commaundements. So soone as he was proclaimed Emperour, he caused the Polish Ambassadours to be released, and sent to Amurath to demaund truce, which without any great difficultie was accorded Truce betweene Amurath and Rodolph. to him; because that the Turke hauing had aduertisement of the war which the King of Persia prepared against him, and of the resolution of the Germanes, who had made a great leauie of souldiers and money vpon euery estate of the Empire, to maintaine warre against him, could not any whit assure himselfe to be able to make resistance in so many places, his Empire elsewhere  being sorely weakened by the iust punishment of God, with plague, war, and famine: in regard of which, he very easily granted the demaunds of Rodolph. At the same time all the Christian Princes sent to his Maiestie to congratulate with him his new promotion in the Emperiall dignitie: and amongst others, Battor not long before chosen King of Poland also sent his Ambassadours thither for the same effect, knowing the release that Rodolph had made of his Ambassadours while he besieged the rich town of Danzit, situated at the mouth of Vistula vpon the sea of Prusia, being of the demains Danzit besieged by Battor. of Polonia, which then held of Maximilians part, the inhabitants then knowing nothing of his death: but as soone as they were assured thereof, they capitulated with their new King and yeelded to him vnder condition, that the  towne should not be spoyled, and that the penaltie should be conuerted into monie. They besides gaue him 12. peeces of great Artillerie with other lesser, and certaine amongst themselues for hostages, to the end the more to assure his Maiestie of their fidellitie towards him. This done Battor presently caused his Armie to make head against the Muscouit, to recouer the places that the Duke had taken towards Liuonia.
During this busines he omitted not to send to the Pope to acknowledge him as soueraigne Prelat of the catholike Church: and by the same meanes Battor sent to acknowledge the Pope, and to seeke for learned men in Italie. sought through Italie for many Captaines of valour, and other men of knowledge, offering them great pensions and rich recompences, as he manifested  to many, who both of one and other vocation went to him: this Prince being as much giuen to armes as hee was indued with the knowledg of learning and sciences, and especially in diuinitie and histories, hauing passed his youth in the exercise of armes and learning in Germanie and Italie. Within a short time hee recouered all that which the Muscouits and Tartars had vsurped vpon him; and tooke many places from them, hauing Battor bringeth the Muscouits and Tartars to require peace. so many times beaten them, that he constrayned them in the end to seeke peace of him, euen as Demetrius Duke of Muscouia for this effect solicited thereto Pope Gregorie the 13. of that name, vsing him as a meane to this Prince, to the end that he might obtaine it. 
The Hungars for all this were neuer a whit the more at rest. For notwithstanding the truce, Amurath (as these Princes are barberous, proud, and couetous) caused to be stayed at Constantinople the Emperours Ambassadour, who at his new arriuall brought not to him the accustomed Present. Rodolph

willing to reuenge himself of this iniurie, commanded his people who were  in Hungarie, to make incursions vpon the Turkes, and to enterprise some thing vpon some of their places in stead of two Forts that these had taken in Croatia. The Hungars desirous to attempt somewhat vpon certaine Castles by Alberegalis, were in the way intrapped by the Turkes, and most of them cut in peeces. The Emperour considering that these skirmishes might in the end ingender a greater war, caused a Diet to be called in Bohemia, soliciting therein the Bohemians that they would succour him against the Turkes, who, without regard of the truce, ran and spoyled continually the frontiers of his countries. These accorded to him a good summe of monie. For the same effect he also called the Hungars to Poson, and not being able to be therein, for his indisposition, he shewed to them by the Prince Ernestus his brother,  the necessitie which constrayned him to solicite them to haue regard to the common defence against the Turkes, by whom daylie they receiued so many oppressions. But his Maiestie could then draw nothing from them at that time, minding that he himselfe should be in person at the Diet and warre. In the end notwithstanding they daylie perceiuing the effects of the violence of their enemies (who notwithstanding the warre of Persia, in which Amurath was greatly combered, ceased not neuerthelesse greatly to molest them, and procured them much trouble) graunted to the Emperour the greatest part of his demaunds, and they all taking courage opposed themselues so valiantly against the Turkes, that many times they constrayned them to retire from them, and euen to forsake a great part of the Countrie which they  vsurped. Rodolph notwithstanding so happie successe of his people, ceased not to send to Amurath to complaine of the great timeritie of the Turkes, who had not any respect to the truce concluded betweene them two. Amurath seeing himselfe to be greatly combered with the Persian, accorded with Rodolph, that of the one and other partie Truce confirmed betweene the Emperour and Amurath. should be deputed sundrie persons to take counsell how they might pacifie those differences which might arise betweene them vpon their frontiers, touching the extention of their bounds.
FINIS.

