


THE GLORIE OF ENGLAND.

The First BOOKE: TOPOGRAFICALLY describing the Countries of the World, with some historicall amplification.

CHAP. I. The Empire of TARTARIA.
ACcording to the vaine, popular, and indeed ridiculous error of opinion, The fir^ Monar^ of the (...) as it is now made ^rious. the world hath inuested nine seuerall Monarchs with his glory, and from strange disproportions giuen them prerogatiues to command all the Nations of the earth, interdicting any petty Prince to come neere them by way of competition or comparison. First then the Empire of Tartaria laid

prostrate vnder the throne of the great Cham called Dominus dominantium, and Rex regum, spreadeth it selfe with so large embracings, that it extendeth from the northren Obba, or if you will Tanais, which falleth into the great Euxinum, euen to the easterne sea; sometimes surnamed the Atlanticke, whose vast lappe is almost filled with a fry of Ilands, all Idolaters, and most of them enemies to strangers, but especially Christians.
It begirteth those Countries formerly called, and many times still collaterally named, Scithia, Sarmatia, Albania, Ieccomangall, Sumongoll, Mercat, Metrit, the vast deserts of Lop, Tangut, Cathaia, and Mangia, so that shouldring all the Northren shore of the Caspian, it runneth along without controll by the high looking walles of China, and is TAVRVS hath many names. ouershaded by those formidable mountaines Riphei, Hyperborei, Imaus, and Caucasus, all incorporated into the glorious Character of Taurus, of whom Pliny lib, 5. 27. writeth almost a whole booke, shewing that the varietie of Nations vnder this great Empire, gaue sundry names vnto the vast body of this high-looking, and high-spreading heape of earth and stones: as in the first footing you haue heard before: afterward in his larger body he is called Egidis, Paropamisus, Circius, Chambudes, Pharphariades, Cho^as, Oreges, Orates Niphates, Taurus, in his glorious ^ozen head, and snowy crowne Caucasus, in his stretching armes Sarpedon, Coracesius, Cragus, and Taurus againe, with diuers others, and some more significantly. But if you would know how it shouldreth all other titles vnder (...), and looketh vp to heauen with the swelling eyes of Tartaria, raised vp by the supportation of three principall Commaunders: you must be contented to beleeue some thing which is written to this purpose; or at least be reposed

to aske no further questions, but know, that from Russia to the North-east sea, all the Countries and people are now called Tartars: But we will enlarge it a litle.

The Story of BARKA and ALLAV.
IF you suppose Herodatus an Author meriting the fame, and good opinion disposed toward him: in his fourth booke you shall finde him ouermantling Scithia from the denomination of Scythe the sonne of Hercules, with his brethren Gelo, and Agathirsis, and by a woman with much adoe beleeued to be halfe a snake: but it may be the allusion from the cruell condition of the people extracted Amazones. from this linage, gaue way to the fiction. For after Agathirsis had taught the Inhabitants the vse of bow and arrowes, they became so expert in shooting, that from hunting and killing of beasts, they set vpon men and strangers, yea at last grew barbarous toward one another: so that the admirable report of the Amasons a principall Nation amongst them, is now esteemed a matter of probabilitie, who remembring their vowes to Diana, and customes of their Herculian Progenitors, accustomed to cut off their right pappes for the better dexterity of this military exercise, and so their famous exploits made all the Countrey reuerence the Goddesse for their sakes, in whose memory they performed actions beyond credit, and for whose reuerence Thoas beganne an Holocaust of strangers, as by the story of Iphigenia Agamemnons daughter may appeare: so that they continued in glorious estimation, till Tomyr is conquered Cyrus, and taught all mighty Monarchs and Tyrants this lesson, that the punishment of sinnes is a iudgement from heauen, and when they are in

the greatest burning heat of ambitious tumors; some ^lender cloude of reuenge shall ouer-shade their glories, and poure downe showers of deuastation on their heads, as you may read in the Scriptures, and other probable Authors of diuers great Princes brought to ruine; yea slaine by the priuate hands of women, which also happened to these insulting Dames themselues, who grew so proude by reason they supposed the Goddesse Diana to protect them, or that some supernaturall influence made their prosperitie immoueable, that they not onely conspired against their Husbands, but had the name of man in a kinde of hate, and vilipending, except for necessitie of procreation: wherein yet as diuers Authors haue endeuoured to strengthen our credulitie, they tied them to certaine conditions of commorance amongst them, vntill they were conceiued, and then compulsing them to returne: so that at the time of their deliuery the ^aemales were reserued, and the males killed; or if you will beleeue so much for ciuilities sake, sent to their fathers; wherupon when time was weary of such degenerating inconueniences, and that some secret whisperers had incited the people to remember the glory of the first Creator, or the Goddesse, Nature, in mans resemblance, the better sort conspired against the women, and by degrees ware them out of the Countrey with many slaughters, teaching the obstinate the vicissitude of things, and admitting the submissiue vnder the warmth of louing embraces, by which occasion the men at last preuailed; and in time this vast Countrey was proud to be the life infuser into many valiant sonnes: such as Scitha with his mother Araxa, who conquered Armenia, and Scithes who married his mother in law Opaea, and performed actions beyond credit: such

as Othoman, Barka, Allau, Tamberlaine and others, whose noble exploits made Fame flie about the world to divulge how glorious valour and vertue was in some worthy spirits ouer others. But amongst many hundreds, none obtained so much at the hands of history and report, as Barka and Allau both named Emperors at one time. For when many battailes had filled the fieldes with the carkasses of as many thousands, the people weary of such slaughters, and they themselues amazed at the crueltie, it was concluded betweene them to diuide the Empire, hauing indeed a world of ground to satisfie ten Emperors: but some Authors are willing to maintaine, that they scorned such partition, and so in a noble combat decided the controuersie themselues, till the Controuler of men and kingdomes made Barka triumphant, who in the next lustrum of his gouernment had by the beautifull Tartara a sonne for his mothers sake named the Author of Peace, and proclaimed besides Barka Tartarus: so that when he leauing three sonnes behinde him, gaue them also leaue to diuide the Empire. The people were proude of their new name of Tartarians, and their Princes distinguished Tartarians a new name. with Tartar Chrim, Tartar Mercat, and Tartar Cham: who many times standeth for all the rest, and drowneth the murmuring sound of inferiours with the full name of the great Emperor, and Lord of Lords. For although the Tartar Chrim would faine challenge affinitie with the Turke, expecting if the line of Othoman should faile the greatest share of the worlds magnificence: yet without question it is but a couert presumption, and the fanaticall hopes of some imposturing prediction: Otherwise hee dare not but acknowledge the Emperor Cham for his supreame; and is affrighted, when he heares of any complaints

to his preiudice: As for his further enlarging his credit, because Tamberlaine was extracted from him, who conquered Persia, Asia minor, and Baiazet, it will stand him in litle stead to startle from his first obedience, as I said before, and helpe him as litle to intrude into Turkie. for all he diuulgeth, that the sonnes of Tamberlaine brought with them the daughters of the Persian Sophy, and Othoman familie into Tartary, from whence he is now lineally descended. But some will haue it thus, that Barka in remembrance of the horrible confusion of the warres, named his sonne Tartarus, as a very deciphering of Hell, and that the people should be euer after affrighted at dissensions by recording the mischiefe formerly acted. But to proceede:
From Scithia to the prouince of Tangut they liue in troopes called Hordas, and remoue from place to place according to the temperature of the season, plenty of feeding, and conueniencie of accommodating one another: nor before the yeere of Redemption 1212 (as I said) did we in Europe heare of the name of a Tartar: but Scithians, Sarmatians, Albanians, and such like, who were all idolaters, worshipping their gods in trees, hanging vp their dead on nether boughes, and by way of auguring diuining their happines or damnation, which custome is still reteined amongst the barbarous sort in the remotest places. They are generally men of square stature, broad faces, hollow eyes, thin beards, owgly countenances, and tye vp their haire to the crowne of their heads in rolles, like a Snailes shell; to which you may adde swarthnes of complexion, not that the Sunne kisseth them with that feruencie, but the aire and their sluttish customes corrupts both their blood and bodies: yet hath nature preuailed ouer

these outward inconueniences in the distribution of valour, swiftness of footmanship, vigilancie, and patience to endure the many encombrances of trauell, hunger, and want of sleepe. They loue Horses, and from that loue accustome themselues to a sauage drinking of their blood, practising a cunning theft herein, which being vnpunishable, occasioneth many prety changes, both in keeping their owne, and purloyning from others, as if some ciuill Artist had instructed them with the Lacedemonian toleration Theft lawfull, and vnlawfull. in this kinde, for the better animating one another in the spoyling their enemies: yet for all this, by reason they liue in tents, and haue small defences for their furniture and goods, theft of petty things is seuerely punished amongst them, as also adulterie, or if you will lying with another mans wife, which is most odious vnto them, because they are tyed to the trusting of one another, as I said within dores, and no man is debarred any entercourse: it were therefore a double treachery to deceiue the trust reposed, and either purloyne the goods which lye open, or abuse the women which admit you so friendly. They are gouerned in their trauels and remouings by the starres, and obseruing the North pole settle according to her influence: They liue free from couetousnes, and are thus farre happy, that the strange corruptions of wealth, especially gold and siluer breed no disorders amongst them: yet haue they a kinde of trafficke, and by way of exchange continue mutuall commerces, louing presents, and can be contented to be flattered euen in their barbarisme: and herein I thinke all the Easterne people are delighted, from a receiued tradition of our Patriarkes. But howsoeuer, I can assure you Tartar Chrim himselfe, who is the most likeliest to be spoken with of all

others, as being the neerest, will not admit of any Christian without a gratuitie, and present worthy of his fauour.
You must now step a litle forward toward the East, and with the Sunnes rising see their glory arise: For Tangut is a wealthy Prouince, affording many things befitting Europes magnificence, especially Rheubarb, a simple of R^barb. that prerogatiue, as if the whole world were beholding for this distribution, and had a sauing health by vertue of the same. In Cathaia amongst many others, the great Citie of Cambala will excite admiration, if you measure a quadrant of 30 mile about, and ouer-looke at euery corner a Tower 40 furlongs in circuit, erected for a Seralia or Arsenall, wherein the Emperors munition, armour, and prouision for war are secured: but he himself is sequestred to the priuacie of another stately Pallace, and is a strange Meteor amongst them seldome seene, but for some portentous accident. In Mangia as Queene of the rest, is the Citie of Quinzai, hauing a circumference of a 100 mile, by reason a great Lake of 30 mile diuideth the streets into channels, ouer which are numbred 1260 bridges, some opening the arches so high and wide, that a good ship vnder saile hath a passage of ease, but things a farre off are quickly reported; yet hardly beleeued, and sometimes ouer-beleeued vpon easie report, as you may perceiue by the trauels of Sr Iohn Mandeuile, the writings of Munster, and the constant asseueration of moderne Pilgrims, who all tell of so many monstrous shapes of men in these parts, that our ciuill people are affrighted at the hearing, and many times come flocking to see such Trauellers, as haue escaped the dangerous passages, and sauage immanitie. For my owne part I would perswade

you, that the world is a stage of variety and wonders, whereon are placed more strange things of truth, then the wit and policie of man can invent to seeme fabulous: but as at a stage the spectators onely are a few in number to the infinite multitudes for the time excluded; so in the exploration of Countries not one amongst ten thousand either take the paines, or haue the iudgement to looke into the wonders of the world, and therefore I would be loth to exclude all enlargements of histories from the closet of truth: yet concerning those fabulous reports of Pigmies and Cranes, of men with long eares, one eye, one foote, and such like, the Iudicious take vp the bookes to read, as if they would excite laughter; and I dare be bold to maintaine, there are no such men or people in the world: but all Gods images are miraculous in this distinction of voice, reason, and an erected countenance, with a proportion of shape, and what is not thus established, is meerely a monster, or a beast. But because I am sure, whether true or false, there is nothing amongst them worthy respect, or challenging any prerogatiue of happinesse, or imitation, I will leaue them to their vast territories, and desist from amasing you with the almost incredible particulars of those places, especially Cathaia, and Mangia.




CHAP. II. The Monarchy of CHINA.
ON the second step of the earths Throne is the Country of CHINA mounted, and ^ diuided into eight seuerall Kingdomes, ouer whom one principall Monarch controuleth by those high and illustrious titles of MVNDI DOMINUS, and COELI FILIVS, as if indeed their challenge to all natures immunities were a matter of consequence, and their boasting of many things before Adam true and canonicall. The principall Citie is now called Faquin neighbouring Tartary, out of which the Emperor neuer issueth, but in time of warre, which is as it were an exercise amongst them, and challengeth the attendance of euery nation, as if an hereditarie duty challenged the sonne to the fathers obedience, and one succession receiued of another, what belonged to the setling their estates by attending their principall Commanders. For as you haue read in England, that from the Twede betweene (...), Westmerland, and Scotland, euen to the Irish Seas, there was a wall of a 100 mile long, called Picts (...) are at certaine spaces fortified with watch-towers, (...) hollow trunckes placed within the curtaines, receiued aduertisements one of another; so that (...) a moment upon any alarum, excursion, or attempt, w^ (...) Picts, and turbulent Scots did (...) ^ountry was vp in armes, and the ordi^e (...) of their militarie discipline put in pract^ (...) ^as in (...) Country from the Atlanticke sea to

mount Taurus betweene the Tartarians, and there (...) 8000 furlongs in length is a wall raised ^ke a strong (...) fication, and at euery miles end a ^mpart or (...) wherein is continuall garrison. But when the (...) disposeth himselfe to any field encounter of setled ^attaile, he seldome marcheth vnder an Armie (...) foote, and 200000 horse, and as seldome mee^ (...) uersarie without effusion of much bloud, and (...) many thousands, ouer whom their friends seeme (...) ioyce, whether they haue their dead carkasses, (...) a statua, as if some glorious blessing were imparte^ (...) happy a thing they suppose it to die for their Count^ and obey their Emperor: of which I am not (...) considering that sacred truth hath inlarged the ^error (...) that battaile vnto vs, which was fought betweene (...) and Ierusalem, wherein 500000 felt the smart of (...) and tyranous dissention: And of another, wherein Zeres Emperor of Mores and Aethiopians brought (...) paire of hands to pull downe the walls of (...) and not the God of Iacob remembred his promise to (...) and pushed them downe to the pit of destruction.
The great Citie of Manquin was once Capitall of ^e Kingdome, in which now onely shineth a g^ ^een more, insculped with the present Emperors name, and neuer vnveiled, but at Festiuals: at which ^me the reuerence appropriate to his owne person exciteth the ^ike ^tion. The Gouernors of Countries, and (...) of Iustice are called ^utant, whose (...) looketh the punishment of theeues, who (...) chiefly abound, so are they most seuerely (...) commonly beaten to death with a (...) of (...) ^gers broad, and one thicke: it is made of ^ewes (...)

wet in water to supple the same the sooner: so that the executioner daring not moderate his strength, at euery blow draweth bloud, vntill all their ioynts and sinewes are broken to peeces: and in this sort doth tyrannie boast of the slaughter of 3 or 4000 euery yeere, besides such as the prisons deuoure, being sent thither halfe maimed, and formerly tormented.
Amongst them there are few Christians admitted, for feare of discouering the secrets and wealth of their countrey: so cautelous and subtill they are in vnderstanding themselues and strangers, as for their commerces and vttering the commodities of the countryes, it is done in the Ilands, or with certaine Brokers Indians, who traffique reciprocally betweene Christians and them, receiuing ready golde and siluer for all, as scorning any thing which other nations can conferre, or transport vnto them: nor is this done without a kinde of iealousie both toward the Indians and Christians; yea, sometimes a trecherous policy to cut all their throats whom they can ouermaster, as Sr. Ed. Michelborn could haue testified, and many other English, surprized by disloyalty of such as haue thronged them on ship-boord, or wearied comming on shore amongst the Ilands of Moluccae and Philippinae either for water, or to view the countrey: yet haue some Portugals intruded themselues, and certaine Iesuites by way of insinuation got liberty of entercourse, from whom it should seem they haue learned to blesse themselues with the signe of the crosse, against the assaults and temptations of the Dinell, whom they much adore in these parts, and for feare of mischeefe, pacifie with sacrifice and presents, which makes mee remember a reasonable honest man of my acquaintance, who hauing two suspicious friends of contrary demeanours,

and demanded why hee obserued one before another; answered thus politikely: that the one was honest of inclination, and would doe him good for vertues sake, or at least no hurt: but the other was more pestilent and dangerous, and therefore must be diuerted by flattery and insinuation from the ill he might prosecute, or intend against him.
The better sort (notwithstanding these affrightings of the Diuell) apprehend, that all things, both supernall and infernall, depend vpon the protection of a greater Influence, whom by the name of Sunne, Moone, and Stars they adore, allowing a duplicity of Priests, the one in a white habit, as sequestred with shauen crownes, like our cloistred Friers: the other in blacke with shag-haire and formidable aspect, going at randome, and frequenting more often their temples, which are very sumptuous and rich, both in cities and countries: these Priests are confederate with certaine women called witches, who doe make trauellers beleeue, they can sell them winde to saile from Iland to Iland, and bring them to certaine wagons for their land iourneyes ouer barren and sandy places, which shall haue sailes, and be driuen to and fro with great swiftnesse: wherein as I will not betray my vnderstanding to any vaine and idle credulity, considering that God is the onely commander of his creatures: so must I yeeld to this probability, that by reason of the infinite number of Ilands, and the countrey lying open to the sea, the winde is euery way more forcible then in other places, and by reason of mountanous blustrings, and pressing the aire into straights, seemeth to fight one with another, and at one time to blow with sundry diuisions.
Concerning other particulars of their wiues and concubines,

of their wealth and iewels, of their odours and perfumes, of their wines and syrups, there is no offending chaste eares with their incredible customes: so vilde and filthy is their idolatry, so obscene and shamelesse their liues, so ridiculous their incantations, so exorbitant their presenting of virgins to be deflowred of Idols, so abominable their exorcismes, and so odious their sencelesse profanation, with lamentable obstinacy not to be diuerted: I will therefore leaue them to the supreame Iudge, and returne to England with this caution, that the foole hath sayd in his heart there is no God, and I hope wee attend these discoueries with feare or contempt.


CHAP. III. The Monarchy of INDIA.
THE third part of the worlds glory is enclosed within the store-houses of rich and The third Empire of the world. opulent India, a countrey not onely inuested with magnificence, but arrogating a preheminence ouer other nations, both for spaciousnesse of ground, and all such blessings, wherewith the diuine prouidence hath made the ^oyes of men exceed. For the two great riuers of Indus and Ganges water the same, and diuided into many thousand brookes, like the children of a blessed mother, and plentifull house-keeper, bring glad tidings to the family (...) extraordinary allowances: and thus it insulteth for two summers, temperature of aire, duplicity of encrease, and that we are aduenturers for such things as she vilipendeth:

not yet admitted to vnderstand the one halfe of her secrets, The men and women doe now imitate a noble pomp as not encountred abroad, nisi ma^na comitante ^terua, vsing many odours in their bathes and washing; nor are they without oyles and perfumes, iewels, pearles, and other ornaments, not onely befitting the bu^nesse in hand, but to please one another in matters of incontinency: yet haue they many wiues, who striue with all ^cting demeanour to bee best beloued of their (...) But you haue diuers bookes of this subiect, both an^ and moderne, as Herodotus, Pliny, and other Cosmographers, who thus relate the matter: that since the conquest of Bacchus, whom by another name they call ^oer Pa^r they haue settled in their countrey with magnificent eq^ page 5000. principall cities, aduancing a fashion ^le gouernment to equall the best Common-wealths, onely they adored Bacchus for a God, and Hercules for a giant: they neuer intruded into any other princes territories, but haue defended their owne from all innouation of strangers, as Q. Curtius relateth, adding withall a delicate commentary of their famous exploits and noble greatnesse, euen against the Conquerour of the world, in the time of the He^e Porus, who with great maiesty, valour, and armies of Elephants would haue maintained their freedome and glory: but that Fortune and Successe had condescended to the conditions of ratifying Alexanders prosperity. And although the many Princes haue sometimes repined one against another, and for superiorities sake, shewed the ^ety of their owne glories and mightinesse: yet (...) still combined in the prop^ing of for^ (...), (...) appeasing priuate encombrances, not reaching (...) ciuill deciding, and hating iniustice and co^ (...)

much as may bee. They loue and reuerence their Kings, (amongst whom the great Mogull, hauing vs in some estimation before other Princes of Europe, and with whom we haue a kinde of correspondency, as by reciprocall letters may appeare, is principall and of greatest reputation) making holy-day when hee shaueth his head, and attending his chariot with pompous brauery, spredding the way where he must passe, with costly ornaments and delicate perfumes. For hee is carried in great pomp on the shoulders of men, adorned with purple, golde, and precious stones, the chaire hanging with orient pearle, and all thing so ordered, as if the best of our ceremonies should adde an honor to Maiesty. His Guards for his person are many and the best of his souldiers, who suffer no neerer approaches to his stately throne, then hee himselfe shall command, which is publikely knowen by the disrobing of his head of common ornaments, and inuesting himselfe with a magnificent Diadem, then are Embassadors admitted, and diuers lawes enacted for the good of the people.
Another booke will discouer, that when hee disposeth himselfe to pleasure, his concubines are sent for to be partakers of the hunting, and then in open view the beasts are killed, being chased before hand into certaine straight enclosures for the purpose: but if he determine a longer progresse, their chariots are drawne with Elephants, and their Diuers authours write of India, and would include China as one Countrey honourable Queenes left at home: but the wantons are enstructed to make proud incontinency swell with variety, not accustoming their wiues to be partaker of such lasciuious changes, but reseruing them for necessity of children, or moderation of contentment: when he determineth to sleepe, or peraduenture is ouerloded with wine, that he must resettle his spirits and senses with rest and

ease, the loueliest dames bring him to bed, singing a song of inuocation to the God of silence, and the night.
Another will relate, how worthily their honest matrons liue after they haue had children, how euer they yeelde their chastities at the first to their louers for the price of an Elephant, which yet neuer exciteth any exprobation against them. In some places, when a virgin desireth marriage, her parents bring her to publike view amongst a number of young men, where shee electeth whom shee fancieth. In their mutuall commerces they hate vsury, disclaime iniustice, denie indentures of couenant, contracts of writing, and haue many seeming excellencies of loue, confidence, and trusting one another: onely they are impatient of wrong, and thinke it a glory to take reuenge, but will not offer the occasion.
Another will tell you, that they once esteemed two sorts of wisemen, by the names of Samaraei and Brachamanes, both which were charactered for Gymnosophists: but the Samaraei for their precisenesse were better esteemed of the Kings; for liuing more moderate then the rest, as eating neither fish nor flesh, it added to their reputation, that the peace of their Kingdomes was established by their orizons, and the prosperity of the countrey confirmed through their holinesse.
Another will demonstrate, how St. Thomas conuerted them to Christianity, how euer with the Syrians in Samaria, they haue since intermingled horrible idolatry, and vntill the Portugals came amongst them, would scarse reforme the most grossest abuses.
Another will enlarge the conquest of their countrey by the Portugals and Spanyard, with a full description of all things, which may shew you the perfect portraiture of

their kingdomes, courts, common-wealth, riches, pleasures, ciuill administration, and mightinesse: yet (as I take it) so farre from a conquest, as wee were ouer France, when we had only Callis in Picardy, or Turwin and Tornay, which cost more the re-edifying, then all the country about it was worth. Heere you shall also finde how they haue striued with the Aegyptians for antiquity and cunning, how many Ilands are subiected vnto them, amongst whom Summatra, in times past called Taprobana, mustreth the power of eight Kings. Iapan affoordeth our English a harbour; and at Bantam they receiue the commodities of China from the Indian Marchants, who are only admitted to commerce amongst them: and diuers others, as are therein variated with many particulars.
To conclude no one Countrey comes neere it for greatnesse, India now intermingled with Christians. which without other addition lifteth vp her title alone, as challenging all the territories betweene China and Persia; yea in times past China it selfe, almost 1200. English mile, and amongst many Kings, hee is principall, that obtaineth by force or popularity. But of late they haue ouer-exalted the high Priest called Voo, who in spirituall matters (as I may say) hath absolute power and authority, and vpon whose blessing or cursing dependeth the expectation of future happinesse. Yet hath this idolatrous superstition acknowledgement of a God, whom they inuest with a triple crowne, not yeelding any reason for the same, but that he commandeth Heauen, Earth, and Hell. The Iesuites haue taught them to baptize infants in some places, and to fast, wherein they are now tedious obseruants (as barbarous people are best maintainers of customes and ceremonies) and they vse the signe of the crosse, but it is where they are enforced by the Spanish garisons,

otherwise, what I spake before of China: for all their silkes, clothes of gold, delicate beds, houses of canes, Serpents, Elephants, precious stones, minerals, pearles, perfumes, drugs, spice, sweet wood, barkes of trees, shels, nuts, and other things of estimation, I may with a Christinn-like sorrow amplifie, concerning their turpitude and morosity. As for their cities, euery one would affoord a story, and I am vnwilling to runne into the errour of fiction or miracle, considering your best Cosmographers haue onely extended the relations of others, and besides the variety of contradicting one another, would now be amazed to see so bewtifull a face of many countries, which they left most glorious, so deformed: and so vnpleasant a countenance, as they imagined, so illustrious and exalted.
And thus much for that part of Asia, who are all Idolaters, barbarous, inhumane, treacherous, haters of strangers, and so remote from the happinesse I would relie vpon, as my ioy exceedeth for not being a natiue amongst them.


CHAP. IV. The Empire of PERSIA.
ON the fourth principall palace of the worlds maiesty, attendeth the expectation of the Persian, 4. The fourth part of the worlds honour. who though he cannot boast of 128. regions, as in the time of Hahashuerosh: of intruding into Greece, and subiecting the Ilands of the Hellespont, as in those confused Anarchies of Corinth, Athens, and Lacedemon: of re-edifying of Babylon, and swelling with prosperity and glorious armies, as when Darius and

Alexander the great made slaughter proud to haue the fields furnished with gold, pearle, and treasure: of a since regathered and compacted mightinesse, when the Roman Crassus was subiected to the calamity of an vnfortunate ouerthrow: and of a strained originall from Perseus, who aduanced that magnificent structure of Persepolis amongst them, and made the people proud of their denomination, because he was the sonne of Iupiter, and they the off-spring of the supreame God: yet doth hee still command many regions of Asia, with reputation of a principall Monarch. For the Kingdomes of Saca, with the magnificent exployts of Tolmilanda, that glorious Queene, the Virago of her time, and mirrour of her Sex: the regions of Bactriana, Sogdiana, and many other nations compassing the East and South of the Caspian, lie still prostrate vnder the feet of this Empire: but because I finde the best authours diffused in the^ discouery, and neuer conferred but with certaine Armenians, who had trauelled into those parts, by whom I only vnderstood of much tyranny amongst them, and that their greatest exercise was rapine and murthering of passengers, with other mischeeuous practises, both on the confines of Media and India, without forme of gouernment, or controll of superiours, as flying into the mountaines, and securing themselues in the dangerous passages, in despight of any forces to be raised against them: so that they still remaine vnsubiected and vnpunished, more then a generall acknowledgemet of title and willingnesse, to make the Persian the arbiter of such controuersies as are raised amongst them. I desist from further dismantling their sauagenesse, as a liuing misery, without either forme, or order of discipline.
I might also be affrighted from poorer relations, in regard

the locuplent history of Turkie, especially Chron^ Turcarum in Latine, the Tartarian Tamberlaine, and valiant Scanderbegg of EVROPE, or if you will George Castriot of Epirus with some others, haue spread abroad, an open carpet of pandecticall ampliation, concerning the conquest of these places and people, by another name Parthians, including Media, sollemnizing the ostentation of Samerchanda, and making Tauris with other Cities of Persia the seates of his reziance, wherein this Tamberlaine proceeded so farre, that after the victory ouer Baiazet, he put a Tyara The (...) Tyara. on his head in imitation of the auncient Cydaris, and Persian former renoune. I will therefore be the more sparing either in exprobating them that esteemed him at the first a theeuish robber, a base shepheard, or at the best a barbarous Scithian: or exasperating the displeasure of credible Authors, who haue confounded one another with disparitie of opinions, concerning the alteration of these people euen in our moderne times; especially since the Emperors of Constantinople neuer looked backe on the terrors of their vengeance, nor forward on the preuentions of their dissolution: yet because I must now keepe a proportion in my discourses, I will gently lead you a neerer way to the knowledge of such occurrences, as my poore endeauours haue obtained.
About the yeere of our redemption 1360. after many ^. mischeeuous practises, and intestine broiles amongst the Mahumetans, or Saracens, now Persians, Turkes, and Moores a worthy Conqueror amongst them, and especially Prince named Sophy, aduanced his head ouer the rest, and obteining the Towne of Abdenelis attempted likewise the principalitie ouer all those factions, that stroue to aduance the honour of Mahomet, and gaue way to the strong receipt of

his imposturing Alcaron. This Sophy from the bloud and consanguinity of Alis Muamedes in the right of his wife Musa, Cusinus challenged the Empire, and lifted vp the armes of a mightie power to ouer-awe the turbulent spirits almost left breathlesse by a long and tedious dissention, (for at that time the Calipha of Babylon was extirped, and new authority with new names, obscured the first originall of the Persian greatnesse, and quickly altered both the Princes and people, teaching them other customes euen in ciuill and mutuall conuersation, with the well entertained religion.) But Hosenus the sonne of Alis stomaching his Vnkle Sophies proceedings, as hauing twelue sonnes of sufficient hope, like a Hieroglyphicall resemblance of a sheaue of arrowes bound together in one quiuer, proclaimed his right to the Persian Cidaris, and well conceiued opinion of his interpretation of the Alcaron, at such time as the Turke, assisted by the Tartars, aduanced a standard of opposition, publishing, that whosoeuer affected their enlarging of these religious secrets should weare a Tiara on his head of purple with a Tulliuant: wherupon both Turkes, and Persians in infinite numbers bandied seuerall parties, vntill at last great armies tooke vpon them the deciding of these controuersies, and by many auxiliary forces both of the Northren regions, and all the Arabians, filled the fields of Asia with tormenting The Persians a^e. quarrels: where by the way you must consider, that both Persians, Turkes, and Medes, with Arabians aunciently called Saracens, doe in a manner adorne their bodies and heads all alike, and may be thus worthy distinguishment and obseruation, First in the Tyara, which is a round ornament of the head, in the Turkes, more formally called a Turban: in the others not so curious, but either interwinded

like a rowll; or in some places plighted, at in Munster in Ireland. Secondly a Cidaris, which some will haue a hat, or cappe of veluet, or cloth of gold, on which they wreathed their Tiara, or linnen scarffes. Thirdly, a little swelling crowne some foure or fiue inches higher, then the wreath, or Turban called by them a Tulliuant, and cannot be resembled better, then to your younger You (...) Merchants wiues of LONDON in their hat-cappes. Fourthly, long coates or gownes with halfe-wide sleeues: yet vnderneath they haue a shorter, girt to them more closely. Fiftly, a large girdle either of net-worke silke, or other curions needleworke, hanging downe as low, as the skirt of the inward coate. Sixtly, a Stola, or robe of Honour particoulored of dellicate stuffe, or veluet. Seuenthly, a Semiter, of a reasonable bredth and bending like a bow, or as much as the sheath will giue ease for entertainement. And last of all fine coulored shooes plated with iron, and turning vp at the toe with a peake.
After many conflicts Hosenus the immediate Heire of Alis preuailed against his Vnkle Sophy, and set the crowne on his owne head with remembrance yet of the others glory so farre, that he was proclaimed Hosenus Sophy (...) in the next generation the sanctity of Guines the sonne of Hosenus continued with such applause, that the (...) were reputed Heretikes, and suffered that contume^s diuision, as now the Papist and Puritane in EV^ but so the fortune of Guines Sophy preuailed, that (...) laine himselfe tooke armes in his defence, and as a principall Sectarie of Mahomet made the colourable suppreding of Heretikes (for so doe Turkes, and Persians reciprocally vpbraid one another) the stimulatory cause (...) all Asia minor, vntill the Emperor Baiazet with (...)

Turkes fell vnder the stroakes of his warlike hand: Next vnto him succeeded Secaider, as obstinate as his father, and as successefull in enlarging their Mahomets blasphemies, of whom I will say no more, seeing they acknowledge one God, one Prophet, and circumcision, differing onely as I said in the antiquity of their Rabby, and idle nicety, for which they haue set in combustion the Countries of the East, and with violent entercourses diuided the spoiles of Asia. For this Secaider attempted the conquest of Georgia and Mengrelia on the West of the Caspian, who being Christians according to the superstition of the Greeke Church, submitted to certaine conditions, as tolleration of religion, paying tribute, and disclaiming to assist the Turke against them: whereby they obtained a kinde of peace and protraction, vntill againe the Persians declined in their fortunes, and could not preuent the forwardnesse of the O^oman glory: yet euer since there hath beene an intermixture and admittance on all sides, especially in the interims of their truce; and when counterchangeable Embasies haue passed betweene them. Besides, from an absolute tradition of the East, which that lasciuious Mahomet inserted, as a tolleration and princely prerogatiue from Ahasuerosh instance, or if you please Salomons Concubines, all the beautifullest Virgins are taken vp between Persian and Turke, euen perforce out of the laps of Christian mothers, and sequestred with purifying oyle, and ^e fare for the Emperors pleasure: witnesse SIR (...) SH^S LADY, who was a Christian ^ Georgian either liuing with some kinred in the freedome of religion, or taken out of the Seralio (wherein he was exceedingly fauoured) before shee was graced with the (...) (...) presence; otherwise, it is death to

marry a Christian, or a Persian to bee married to a Christian.
Thus you see how the name of Sophy began, and was added ^ to the Emperours titles, as the Abimelech^ to P^e Pharaoh and P^olomeus to Aegypt: yea, within our memorie, the Soldan called Cairo new Babylon, and Caesar was, and is an attribute to all Emperours, since Iulius and Augustus. But no sooner had the distinction of these people, Persians, Turkes and Moores, from an interpretation of their law, limited the seuerall subiects within certaine bounds of strict allegeance: but time and curiosity corrupted all their manners, and neither Herodatus* (...) nor Pliny, liuing now amongst them, would suppose them the same nations, for whom they tooke such paines in their descriptions: so that who viewes them now, must not looke vpon their riches and glory, otherwise the^ ^pon mighty conquerours, and magnificent people ^yet because there are some differences amongst them, according to a breuiary obseruation, wherein my time was employed, and that as the Iewes repined at the Samaritans, the ^ritans at the Galilaeans: so heer is the same discrepancy ^ut extending to particulars of better consequence (...) ^e thought good to publish these vses. The Persian is (...) minded, liberall, sociable, and farre from affect^on. The Turke is dogged, proud, sparing, and contemp^, ^s not knowing either consanguinity, neighbor-hood, or any thing but the name of a ^aue. The Persian (...) noble-men, loueth such as we call hawke-^ee, from (...) commendation of Cyrus, weareth his vpper ^p w^ ^g and turning mustachoes, boasteth of his (...) in propagato sanguine, is glorious in app^ (...) ^ous, enclining to peace, and de^rous of ple^ (...)

they giue life vnto by solemnizing of feasts, whereat their noble wiues may meet, except when they are heated to lasciuiousnesse, then are they sent away, and concubines inuited to make wantonnesse the fuller, to which they come by degrees, beginning with a modest shamefastnesse, but more bold, at last set open all the doores of petulant and luxurious variety: nor are they ashamed to produce instances of Darius banquetting in Susa 180. dayes, with all his Princes: of Baltashars solemnities, when the cups of of gold were filled, and the beds of iuory spred: of Alexanders the Conqueror, imitating the Persian brauery, and reiecting the barren and shuffling customes of the Grecians, and diuers others, whose inuentions and customes are remembred to set on flame the already burning fire of their voluptuousnesse. The Turke contemneth such formality in condition: yet is more curious in apparrell; for his Turban is delicately plighted, and when it raines, hath a hood to couer it, his vpper gowne is cleane brusht, his mustacho carefully preserued, his beard the grace of his countenance, and many other delicacies maintained, while hee is resident in corrupted cities, seeming more solid, tyrannous, warlike, and knoweth nothing but obedience, as coniured to raise vp all the trophees of his endeauours to the glory of Othoman: yea, in his matters of incontinency, he runneth also a strange race, with a more impudent violence then the Persian, as if the Satyre were exemplined: Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt: and both from that horrible corruption of the Grecians, haue admitted the defiling of males, and the better sort do both geld and keepe Eunuchs, and other to the same purpose. The Persian loueth learning, painting, exercises, and many generous qualities. The Turke scorneth any language

but his owne, supposing him a right Politician, who speaketh or learneth his, careth for no quality, but riding, shooting, and playing at chesse, contemneth many superfluous customes of Europe, and hath in derision, yea in malicious contempt all the ceremonies of the Westerne Churches, by reason of their images, and foolish prophaning of God through idolatry. Thus then from India to Arabia East and West, and from the Caspian to the Persian Gulph (where the great Euphrates emptieth his streams, and vnder whose shores is that famous Ormus scited, where they fish for pearle, and trauell six weekes together, from Damascus and Cairo to the same, with 6. or 700, cammels and asses in a company, to carry their prouision, for feare of the theeues of Arabia) preuaileth this Emperour, possessing withall diuers cities on this side Ganges, as intermingled with the Portugals: so that in India at this instant you haue many ports and harbours of fortification lying intricately diuiuided betweene Turkes, Persians, Spanyards, and the Indians themselues.


CHAP. V. The Empire of TVRKS.
THE fift and absolutely the greatest share The fift par^ of the (...) glory. of the worlds honour for goodnes of ground, as indeed throwing into his lap the spoiles of Asia, Europe, and Africke, hath bedecked the Emperor of Turks with such ornaments, that we now call him the Gran Signeur, and he vnderstandeth himselfe

thus farre, that for wealth, territories, and command of souldiers, all other Princes come short of him, and are terrified, when he is at peace with the Persian, and vniteth his Armie against the ill-agreeing Princes of Christendome: But if you please, you shall thus expose the contention to your owne arbitrament.
For countries: He possesseth Asia minor, now Natolia Countries. or Anatolia, of the Greeke word signifying East, with all the Regions within the Propontis, and Hellespont, and such places as in times past made the Crownes of Kings to shine with gold and pearle, aduancing their chaires to the establishment of the highest Maiestie, as Phrigia, Galatia, Bithinia, Pontus, Lidia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Licia, Magnesia, Capadocia, and Comagena: then neere the Caspian now Hircanian Sea, Georgia, Mengrelia, Armenia, all Christians of the Greeke Church: To which if you adde the Empire of Trebisond, you shall then finde him the great controller of the blacke Sea: For although Russia, Bogdonia, Muldauia, and some Polanders keepe the north and west shores; yet is it as a man, which hath notice of a theeues comming to rob him, and dareth not slacke his guards, lest hee be surprized vnawares. Next doth the pride of his greatnes send you into Assiria, Siria, Palestina, Mesopotamia, Iudea, some torne away peeces of Persia, especially the oppulent Townes of Tauris and Babylon, the three Arabia's, and the red Sea. Thirdly, if you will walke into Affricke, he can inuite you to the pleasures and plenty of Aegipt, the fertilitie of Nilus, and all the shores of the middle land Sea, as farre as the confederation of Morocco, Barbary, and Fess: Nor desisteth he so, but in the fourth place from the top of Alexandria hee biddeth you looke as farre Northward as you can, and all the Ilands in the arches,

except Candy, and some few circumspecting the couchent lyon of Venice, acknowledge him for soueraigne Lord, and King. Fiftly, the fields of Greece lye walle, and are ashamed to lift vp their deformed countenances, and worne-out necks with the yron coller of seruitude and bondage, considering that in times past Thracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Epyrus, and Pelopenesus set both Philosophers and Poets on worke to sing out encomions of their delightsome magnificence, and pleasures of loue; all which is now forgotten, as if the swet of a brow were wiped away with a cloth. Last of all, his Bashawes will bring you to Buda and Belgrade, and affright you with a relation of Hungaries troubles, assuring you, that it knoweth not her first parents, but calleth the Turke a conqueror in many things. Yea the Princes of Poland, Transiluania, Sclauonia, and others, with whom he hath contracted a pacification, are yet vncertaine of his dammings in, and haue a fearefull care, lest he should breake downe his enclosures, and like an invndation indeed burst vpon them vnawares.
His principall Cities are Trebisond, Amasia, Babylon: or if you will but the ruines of confusion: Tauris gotten Cities. from Persia: Mecha famous for the historie and buriall of Mahomet: Gran Cairo in times past Memphis, of late new Babylon, exposing the ostentous workes of the Pyramides: but now you can wonder at nothing, but heat, dust, sluttishnes, and the mortalitie of a 100000 in a yeare, when the pestilence rageth amongst them: Alexandria boasting of her Founder, and that shee is the porter to let you enter the dores of Nilus: Algier lifting vp the head of a strong Castle, and daring to publish, how the Emperor Charles the fift lost his Nauie before her: and Tunis the Port of old Carthage, and now refuge of all the English

Pirates: Shall I come backe againe and tell you of Ierusalem, Tyrus, and Sidon? alas, they are but names, and all the plagues denounced by the Prophets haue broken their bones in sunder, and bruised them like a rod of iron: Aleppo, which would faine be old Antioch, yea dare from the mouth of some Authors publish, the antiquities of Niniuie: The seuen Churches of Asia renowned for former election, and former desolation according to the prophesie of the Euangelist for the remouing of the candlesticke: Rhodes mourning for the pulling in peeces the Colossus of brasse, which named the whole Iland Collocenses, and loaded 700 Cammels after he departed from the siege: Nicosia, Paphos, and Famagosta, all Cities of Ciprus, and almost fretted a peeces to thinke, that the Venetians lost them so carelesly, and vnfortunately: The few Cities left of Europe: the poore harbours of Asia minor: the port townes of the Ilands: the two castles of the Hellespont, reducing to your memorie the misfortunes of Hero and Leander, whom the townes of Cestos and Abidos bewailed, and the principall place of all his reziance Constantinople, called Stanbole, or the Beautifull; and extraordinarily graced with the denomination and conueniencie of the sacra porta.
His riches consist in commanding the lands, bodies, Riches. and liues of all his subiects: For first his owne nation called the Musselman laboureth in all businesse to increase his treasurie, and pay him an yeerely entrado: the countryman is a drudge, and tilleth the ground to maintaine his officers, who distribute to the people, as he appointeth: the Christians maintaine his Sansacks, and Timatriots; and all his Ianisaries and souldiers being the sonnes of Christians are payed, and haue their salary from

his Exchequer and treasurie: the Merchant bringeth him gold from all the world, and filleth his Harbours with such commodities, as the earth affordeth, and the Iew supplieth his wants in such a manner, that he neither lacketh pearles, diamonds, and pretious stones, nor any thing which the earth affords to fringe the skirts of Maiestie with extraordinary pompe and brauery. But if you will aske me in what manner Fortune attended thus to apparell, and set him on the stage of such magnificence, as neuer Emperor, or Monarch could dreame on before; with all their tyrannous inventions besides? I will thus redact some occurrences of former times to helpe your memory.

The storie of the OTHOMANS.
ABout the yeere of Grace 1300. to our greater disgrace, His Conquests. did Othomanus the sonne of Lichis step before other families, as if he were adopted the darling of successe, and in his fathers behalfe obteined iurisdiction ouer Bithinia, Cappadocia, and most part of Pontus. His successor Orchanes conquered the great Citie of Prusia, and made it the Citie of his Kingdome, and seat of his inheritance: but in the 22 yeare of his progresse he was killed by the Tartars, and left his sonne Amurah to succeed both in his honor and familie; who perceiuing the dissention of the Greekes, and diuision of the Empire against the remainder of the Romans, spent not the aduantage which he tooke at the same, without a great satisfaction. For with the water that draue the mill he drowned it, and inuited as a guest to this banquet of combats became master of the feast; or rather resembled the viper, which

destroyed the mother that brought it forth: so he admitted as auxiliary for another, at last made a conquest for himselfe, of Gallipolis, Chersonesus, Peloponesus, Philipopolis, Hadrinopolis, Seruia, Bulgaria, and Misia: But after 23. yeares convulsion of the Graecian glory, and his owne shouldring into the throng of magnificent renowne, he was stabd with a dagger, and so gaue way to his sonne Baiazet to fill the chaire of his imperiousnes: He began well, attaining Phocis, Macedonia, and most part of Thracia, had not fortune kept him a litle from insulting, and tript vp his heeles euen in the race of his triumph: For with the losse of 200000 Turkes against that valiant Tamberlaine, he also lost his freedome, and how he died, our stages haue instructed Mechanicall men: Yet did Calepinus his sonne in the meane while take vp the colours of defiance, and forbearing the reuenges of Asia, wrecked his anger on Sigismond of Europe, and determined to ouerrunne the other territories of Hungary, and the Empire; but prosperitie was not so attendant. For ere six yeeres had enlarged the branches of this strange spreading tree, the axe was put to the roote, and as in Daniels vision, Nabuchadnezar fell to the earth: but his stump sprung againe, and Mahomet his sonne in imitation of his fathers progresse, set forward his owne iourney, winning Walachia, Sclauonia, all the borders of the Ionian sea, and made Andrianopolis the store-house of his honour, wherein for 14 yeere he heaped vp such ornaments of Mars and Bellona, that he terrified the Emperor of Germanie, and all the confederate Princes of Italy. Presently followed Amurath the second, and filled vp his inventory with Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Boeotia, Attica, and Thessalonica: then subject to the Venetians, now Salenica, and the gulph

of Napoli, running vp by a corner of Nigropont, in times past Eubaea. Next him Mahomet the second ouerthrew the schooles of Athens, and on a fatall day, a day of punishment and terror, a day of iudgement and vnanswerable accounts, the 29 of May 1452. brought such a reckning before Constantinople, that shee forfeited her libertie, and was compelled to pay the amercement, nor had shee time with the politicke steward to alter the bills of the debters, whereby he prouided against future wants: But when Corinth, Lemnos, Meteline, Capha a towne belonging to the iurisdiction of Genoa, and many other Ilands vnderstood of her araignement, and perceiuing there was no contesting with this seuere iudge of assise, they tooke a course of prostitution, and yeelded both homage and fealtie; to which they were the rather induced, because Trebisond first led the way of expectation for mercy, and gaue him leaue to continue in pompe, and glorious estimation 32 yeeres. After him Baiazet the second obtained Naupact, Methon, and Diriachum from the Venetians; then went he to make a contract with fortune for the most part of Dalmatia, and thought to haue bargained for Austria: but it should seeme the conditions were very intricate, and something interposed it selfe. For an enuious hand poisned his body, as ambition had done his minde, which was imputed to his sonne Zelimus, who most vnnaturally made him away with excuse of Alexanders emulation against his father Philip, when he told him his enterprises were so great, that he would leaue him litle to doe: yet it fell out to them both otherwise. For Alexander set forward the conquest of Asia: and Zelimus of Affricke, vniting Cairo, Aegipt, Alexandria, and Damascus to the Empire. But now you must looke vpon the wanton

of fortune, euen Solyman the magnificent, who stepped backe againe into Europe, and reached at Belgrade, Buda, and Strigonium, with so forcible a strength, that he pulld them from the sides of a louing mother, and left the rest of Hungarie mourning at the cruelty: yet desisted he not so. For he vanquished Rhodes, pulling the Colossus and wonder of the world in peeces; to which he added the deuastation of the fiue Churches, and Iula: but comming to Zigethis was there arrested with an imperious ^one firma from the commander of Kings, and so died. But his sonne Zelimus the second, liued, and raigned, vntill Ciprus fell from the Venetians 1570. like a stone pull'd from a ruinous wall: yet being loose before, it did not much endanger the foundation. For presently followed the battell of Lepanto, wherein these Italian confederates played the worke-men indeed, and a little restored both their reputation and losses. Thus was Amurah the third left the great Lord of Lords, ouerlooking the most part of Europe, the West of Asia, and the North of Africke, but more proud of the old Sinan, Bashaw, and the Cigalas: the one his Admirall at sea, the other Viceer of his army: then the conquest of any one Kingdome, because through their industry the honour of the Empire flourished, and yet he might follow his pleasures. But being a corpalent man, he presumed so farre, that luxury and incontinency ouergorg'd him in the feeding. For, Nihil violen^um ^erpetuum, and so his lamp was extinguished, leauing (...) sonne ^tanus Achmat the first of his name, and fouretee^ (...) from Othoman, not aboue sixteene yeeres olde, to ^ge the horses of this Phaetonticall charriot.
This Emperor is seldome seene abroad, vnlesse hee be (...) ^ted to some Bashawes Seralio, or appoint to

hawke according to the time of the yeere: but I impu^ this sequestration to his sicknesse, of the small pox, w^ ^ which he was greeuously the yeere before perplexed (...) when hee taketh his pleasure in this kinde, to ans^ (...) proportion of attendance, you shall haue 300. (...) and 4000. horse in the field together, with whose (...) they spring the game. For wanting Spaniels, the ground besides being hot and stony, they sildome come to (...), but quickely kill whatsoeuer is put vp, by reason (...) multitude, both of haukes and and officers: to this they adde the musike of certaine halfe drums on horse-backe, and so for all our ridiculous prouerb of hunting hares with tabers, they pastime themselues in all their sports, which I was an eye witnes of, about the first of September 160^ and beheld the great Turke in the fields of Greece, a gallant young-man of nineteene yeeres olde, somewhat fat and and well fauoured: yet did the pock-holes a little ecclipse the sweetnesse of his aspect: his countenance was sterne and maiesticall, and his apparrell a plaine crimsen satten gowne. He wore no gloues, nor suffered any to doe so in his presence, which likewise all their women obserue, especially the Sultanesses, whom when the Lady G^ouer was admitted to visit, they caused her to put her gloues aside: On his thumb he had a horne ring, as all other Turks haue, keeping one order for their shooting, as an artificiall deuice to draw their strong sinewed bowes, without which a treble enforcement cannot preuaile. His Semiter was rich, and boasted of a Christian worke-man in Dama^s, and in a delicate Turban, he had a hanging feather of diamonds, valued at 40000. pound sterling, his company was not aboue 2000. horse, most of them Capogies and Chiauses, in veluet gownes and rich saddles^ should (...)

he went not farre, because 200. Gimoglans carried his repast on foot, in certaine delicate baskets couered ouer with rich handkerchifs: after he was past, I was admitted into his gally, in which he came from his Caska, a delicate banquetting-house without his Seralio, close by the sea side to Porta del Fiume, where hee tooke horse: it was a roome of great riches, yet small capacity, set all ouer with inlayed worke of mother of pearle, rubies, opals, emeralds, and had the mettall beaten into thin plates layd countercompony, which with the borders answered one another in gracefull proportion; within this Cabinet, as I may say, no man comes but himselfe, nor on horse-backe were any neere him by 60. foot, except such as ran by him in their proper places, or durst aduenture to deliuer petition vnto him, which certaine Russians did, complaining on the borderers of Bogdonia, and daily excursions of the Rouers and Pirates of the blacke sea.
Amongst other entertainements, the Ambassadour Sr. Thomas Glouer had seuerall times inuited the Bashaw of Tunis, the Polish and Persian Ambassadours, from whom I receiued an extraordinary description of all the well-deseruing vertues of our noble Queene Elizabeth, as if that Maiesty alone had made all the East to wonder, who before were neuer mooued with any businesses of Europe, and with whom I went to Scideret a towne in Asia, iust ouer the sea, against the City, in whose fields about Iuly before, the great army of 200000. Turkes and Tartars were mustered: by the way in the midst of the sea standeth a watch-tower, as the guard of the passage into the blacke sea, which in truth is a riuer of great pleasure for twenty miles to the blacke tower, and Pompey's piller, adorned on each side of the banke with delicate

houses, wherein both Turkes and Greekes pastime themselues in their haruest and vintages, and sometimes retire in the raging of a plague, yet was I in the great City, when there died 80000. in fiue months: but of all other things suppose themselues graced, when the Gran Signieur will vouchsafe to visit them, and extend his pleasure amongst them: this tower is well guarded and erected, in such a fashion, that wee may dispute therof, if an Iland? how so small? and not washed in peeces with the violence of some tempest; if none? how was twenty fathom deepe raised to a foundation: within two mile more particularly called the vines of Pera, the Greekes for seuen or eight daies resort in famelies to their gardens, and solemnize their vintages with musike and dancing, and although the countrey seemeth stony and hot: yet vnder the skirt of the hils are mantling meddowes running in stripes, yeelding hay and pasture for their greater cattle. Beyond Constantinople Northward, are the Iewes licensed to bury their dead, and according to the greatnesse of the family and person, set vp tents of watchet and crimsen satten, and obserue a commendable order of mourning and lamentation in their exequies. The riuer runneth into the sea by the vines of Pera: so that Galata neither standeth in Asia, nor is an Iland, but resembleth a spurre of fortification, and is ioyned to the Continent of Thrace with an Istmus: some fiueteene miles from the City, those stately aquae ductus, of which there be sixteene in seuerall places, which feede the cesternes of Constantinople, giue notice what men and money can doe. For being the workes of pleasure and ostentation, they are raised to a leuell from hill to hill, and the water comming from open springs, is as it were sent to be better secured within passages of stone, mounted vpon

arches 200. foot high, and a thousand in length, from whence it posteth with gladnesse to a delicate aboad of cesternes and fountaines, which by diuers pipes vnder ground pay a continual tribute to the conduits of the great Citie.
The townes and villages of the countrey are disordered, and the people line ^luttishly on roots, fruit, garlicke, onions, gourds, and such like. For they sildome eat any flesh, and if any good thing fall to their share, as melions, pomegranets, almonds, grapes, figs, and other delicates, they raise what profit they can: yea, as beastly as it is, they send their butter and cheese to Stanbole, which with a loathsome shew openeth the Cow-hides it is put in, and next the filthy haire glutteth a strangers stomach without tasting at all. They cart and plow with Buffoloes: yet haue oxen, whom they feede to supply the markets and court, as being proportioned out of their Sansacks end Timatriots to a weekely number. About the end of Nouember was a comet seene in the West, neere the Constellation of Andromeda, and the plague continued without feare or repining, to which was added a lasting fire of seuen dayes, consuming almost 4000. houses, and shaking the wals of diuers Bashawes houses: the losse lighting vpon the already broken backes of the Iewes, and some Grecians, and the repining dispersed amongst the Turkes themselues, who casting vp an vntoward catalogue of many accidents, and summoning altogether with diuers reuolts, but especially the rebels of Armenia, and the distasting humours of the S^uano of Asia, or if you will, the Bashaw of Aleppo, dared to whisper many things against the dignity of the Empire. So that at this very instant, the expectation of a change may embolden vs all, if Christendome will acknowledge

that there is one in heauen, who disposeth of earthly kingdomes, and the Princes could admit of some principall Iosua to conduct his brethren. For without controuersie, this swelling Monarch is now at the highest marke, and must haue a cadence according to the reuolution of time and gouernments.



CHAP. VI. The Empire of AETHIOPIA.
THe sixt part of the worlds Honour spreadeth The (...) W^ (...) ^me abroad the roiall mantel of Aethiopia, or if you will Abisse vnder the command of Prester Iehan, to whom at this houre are so many Nations and Cities obedient, that for my owne part I want names to decipher them; and concerning the Nauill of Africke, few Europians I am sure haue seene the secret, or searched how the compacted sinues are vnited yet was Meroe once the principall Citie, and many famous things are recited by the Scriptures, Pliny and Ptolemy in the description thereof: as that in Hebrew it was called Chus for the blacknesse of the people, dwelling betweene the two tropickes, or else of Chus the sonne of Cham the sonne of Noe; or Aetheria, afterward Atlantia; and last of all Aethiopia of Aethiope the sonne of Vulcane* that they are now diuided into Arothertae, Atha^uii, Daraticae, Hesperij, and Perorsi; that Diodorus and Volacoran^ haue maintained, how the originall of all Creatures first beganne in this Countrey, and would extend Paradice to

this place, when GOD caused Adam to name them: but these Philosophers not vnderstanding the truth, inuented what they listed to please themselues, as you may perceiue by Homers fictions: that they were the best obseruers of religious secrets, and ceremonies; and boasted of true deuotion to their gods for the example of all Nations: That they were very warlike, and obedient to their EMPEROR in all things, and so populous, that the Emperor seldome went without a 1000000. into the field: That they were sold to all the Nations of the world for slaues, and seemed contented with such seruitude, as being glad to go out of their owne Countries: That they were wont to plight their haire in knots, and winde it with intricate diuisions: That the great and high mountaines of the Moone ouerlooketh their territories, and vnburtheneth Nilus from her wombe, sending it abroad, as farre, as the middle-land sea 1500. mile, like a timely birth to the comfort of his mother, and with ioy to all good kinsfolk, and neighbours: That the nature of the Riuer Niger fluuius is so strange, that as ashamed of his imperfections, and abrupt breakings out vnder sandy hills, it hideth his head 60. mile together, and then bursteth out with horrible and impetuous violence: That whole Countries haue beene ouerwhelmed with sand, when the hills make a noyse, and the Sun hath enflamed his heate, and anger against them, departing in that fury, that in breaking the sides of Mountaines the aire and winde maketh a rupture, and so the drie ground first parched presently crumbleth to pouder, and is quickly tossed with forcible blasts: That the Kingdomes of Damutego and Manuongo as farre as Caput bonaespei, with all the shore, Cities, and harbours, are numbred parcell of this Empire, and expose many stories and plentifull relations:

That infinite Ilands full of drugges, mineralls, gold, pretious stones, pearle, spice, etc. are the handmaides of this Mistris, especially the great Iland of Saint Laurence in times past called Madagascar, which now compareth with Britaine for magnitude, as containing 600. mile in length, but say what deuises can, ours is the greatest Iland of the world. Many other particulars are inserted by Authors with addition of their manners, and customes: but because all absolute things are worne out of date, and that it would vex a Traueller to read one thing, and finde another, I will trouble antiquitie no longer, but content my selfe with some probabilities, and the best receiued opinions of this Monarchy.
You must then vnderstand, that those limited Garisons of Aegipt vnder the Turke, are here very strong to keepe backe the excursions of the Aethiopians, who from Nilus The conuersion of the Aethiopians. to the South-sea make one Countrey, and are all reputed Christians, boasting of their conuersion from Candauce the Queene in the Actes of the Apostles, whom by another name they call Iudith, and so afterward submitted to the obedience of one principall, to whom they afforded the significant title of Preste Iehan, not that he is a Byshop or Priest, as some superstitiously conceiue, but that those Prester Iehan no Priest. words signifie in the Aethiopian tongue Great PRINCE, or EMPEROR. Amongst them are many Monasteries both of men and women, but strictly prohibiting any entercourse betweene them, or wanton show of prophanation: their fasts are 50. daies with bread and water, and some slender fruit, as for fish they haue litle store, or lesse skill to take them, or make vse of them by way of sustenance: they are so carefull in the obseruation of their customes concerning this religious fasting and prayers, that

they will sleepe no longer, then they hold their heads ouer water, that the nodding downe may giue them warning to be more vigilant: their bells are of stone for the most part; their Priests marry, and celebrate the masse, allowing in their procession, crosses, censors, tapers, and lampes: the retired monkes maintaine their haire; the common Priests shaue, and both are b^refoote, especially in the Church, wherein no man enters with prophanation; but putteth off his sandalls and laieth them apart, as the Turkes doe, who are very carefull in such deuout obseruations, adding withall a ceremonious washing, taken from the Iewish purifying, as in his proper place shall appeare. The Sabbaoths and Eues are festiuals and celebrated accordingly; circumcision is added to their baptisme both in men and women, vnto which they are not admitted, vntill 40. daies, and then the three persons of the Trinity haue a reuerent exaltation, and the Eucharist is administred by custome at the same time according to the credit of the Greeke Church, which they resolutely confirme to haue priority before the Latine: their names are all significant, and the religion ariseth from a certaine booke, which they confidently maintaine was approued by the Synode of the Apostles, congregated at Ierusalem. The very common people haue plurality of wiues, according to their sufficient ability to support their estates, and content their desires, suffering diuorses either for naturall imperfections, or iust causes of incontinencie: but such men and women thus scandalized are debarred intermedling with spirituall matters; some say not admitted into the Church at all. Their Nobility are in great estimation, and according to actions correspondent to their professed vertue preserue the wealth, and credit of their Auncestors.

Their greatest Cities are few in number, but such as stand by the sea shore are of good strength and eminence with stupendous Castels and workes of antiquity. The common heape of houses are poore, sluttish, all on the ground open, without chimnies, and sutable to the dispersed manner of their villages. In all the Empire is no money, but pure gold: salt and pepper are excellent marchandize through Africke: but here so richly valued, that slaues are redeemed with them: but the commodities of the Countrey soone and easily exchanged, it affordeth many thing* as you haue heard, especially Eliphants, Tyger Linkes, Taxos, Apes, Lions, and Harts against an absolute opinion, that there was no Venison in Africke; but Beares, Cunnies, Corduels, and Cuckowes are not seene amongst them. The custome of their huntings, raising their armies, order of diet, with ciuet and muske, washing and no^ting with precious balmes and perfumes, feasting, burials, and superstitions, would fill seuerall relations, either to pacifie ignorance, or strengthen their knowledge who are entred a little into the Schoole of experience: but because there is nothing amongst them fit for our example, I will make my iourney as cursory as I can, and study for no commorance, but where there is possibility of thriuing. Their Cabalisticall Arts, and secrets from certaine wise men named Gymnosophists with the Indians, called also or some the Easterne Aethiopia, would make as tedious disputation, especially when I must name the Trogiodite, Garamaulis, Atlantides, Libera interior, Synega, the further plaines of Monte nigro, and some others, and cannot tell you, whether they be Idolaters, or no; onely I can assure you they allow of the immortality of the soule, on which they are besotted so diabolically, that they will murther

themselues vpon small enforcement, either to honor their lords, dye with their husbands, preuent the discommodities of old age, helpe their friends, or pleasure their best beloued after their barberous credulity: But because I would faine bring you into Europe, where my hope and purpose is to finde the happinesse of a kingdome, according to the reciprocall duties betweene Prince and Subiect, I will leaue these people to be reiected with Esau. For sure there is a Iacob, whom old Isaacke hath better blessed


CHAP. VII. The Empire of RVSSIA.
TIll now the world hath opened her The seuenth share of the worlds (...). largest embraces, seeming to giue Honour and Maiesty a breathing time for feare of smoothering with heate, and fulsomnesse of aire: but here shee will hugge it close with a contrary kindnes, and keepe it warme, for doubt of catching of cold; otherwise this great Dukedome of Muscouia, or if you please Empire of Russia will shut vp renowne in the dangerous passages of the frozen sea, or pinch her bloud with congealed Isicles, and snowy frosts. For all the Countrey is byting, sharpe, and in some places dangerous to the passengers, especially in winter, which here lasteth long: besides, it is full of woods, and desert places Northward, and they as full of wild beasts, noysome and vnsauory in their liues; but profitable and full of contentment after they be kild. For Beares, Martins,

Sables, blacke-foxes, Ermines, and some others fill the magnificent Courts of Europe with furres. Notwithstanding toward Poland there is great difference both of ground and aire, and in obseruing certaine customes against the intemperatenesse of the weather, there is reasonable suppliment of Natures allowance either concerning food or rayment. It boasteth of foure great Riuers, Olba, Volga, Duina, and Tanaies, sometimes taken one for another, and many times confounded, as if Olba and Tanaies were all one, sending foorth many brookes, like so many seruants of a thriuing Husbandman, and Housekeeper, who are orderly imployed about their busines for the credit and prosperity of the family. The Emperors progenie hath giuen way to diuers Histories, and is now so increased in wealth, mightinesse, estimation, command ouer his Subiects, and such other tumors of Maiestie; that many stratagems, and politicall deuices haue taught one another trickes to bring the proudest Monarch on his knees: whereby sometimes his will and imperiousnesse vpon the least iealosie of competition, or incroaching on the Diadem, hath beene mixed with a kinde of tyrannie, and the Subiects obedience resembled to slauish prostitution: so that in his chiefest and best ordered Townes of Nouagrade and Mosko, many strange and fearefull executions haue beene practised, and the Subiect enforced to wilfull murthering one another to satisfie the Emperors pleasure: as for his warres either forraine or domestique, how euer his many Countries, ostentous numbers of people, and seeming resolutions of the Souldiers, would giue an affrighting shadow from some portentous body* yet is he glad of auxiliary forces, and according to politike obseruations of such confused multitudes, must haue

many men and few souldiers, as peraduenture wee our selues haue made some proofe of late amongst them, when a few resolute and well ordred English, euen in the fields of Nouagrade contracted their owne conditions, in despight of that threatning Armie, which both Poles and Muscouites rallied against them.
But let vs returne to the best flourishes of his peace: whether it be a natiue pride, or ouer-growne custome with corrupted time, he is questionles a proud and stately Prince, and once nailed an Embassadors hat to his head, because he either abated him of that reuerence appropriate to so great a maiestie; or contested with him ouer peremptorily in behalfe of his master: but St Thomas Smith was entertained with a contrary satisfaction and welcom, how euer our merchants were terrified, when the Abbey of St Nicholay should haue beene surprised by certaine English, who I am perswaded would haue done it indeede, if the proiect had not beene discouered, and peraduenture interdicted by supreame authoritie. If you would aske me any questions of Mosko the Metropolitane of the Empire; I will spend my topography from vnseemely flattering, and assure you, it is compared to Gran Ca^o for spatiousnes of ground, multitude of houses, and vncomelinesse of streets: so that as the one is patible of sun^e, corruption, and infectious aire; the other is not free from bea^linesse, smoake, and vnwholesome smells: but because there be many vnacceptable relations, sauou^ng indeed of Trauellers ouer-reachings, and impossibilities, or at least absurdities, I will desist from bringing you into any such by-waies of misdoubt, and lead you thus into the plainer fields of knowledge and demonstration.

They follow for the most part the rites and ceremonie^ of the Greeke Church, and superstitiously maintaine many idle traditions and ridiculous ceremonies: The Priests haue wiues, teach the adoration of images, fast, and compell to confession, which the common people suppose most necessary, especially for the Nobles and Gentry, in regard of their sensuall libertie in sinne, and voluptuous prostitution to all manner of filthinesse, like those which were reprehended by the Prophet for sitting downe to eat and drinke, and rising vp to play. Their chiefest prayers consist on the faith of this breefe; Iesu thou sonne of God haue mercy vpon me: as for the Lords prayer they haue in small vse or forme, because the Scriptures are prohibited them, and not suffred to be published; yea the Priests themselues scarse haue the New Testament amongst them. At seuen yeere olde they are terrified with actuall sinnes, and so minister yong children the sacrament, mingling bread and wine together. The Festiuals they doe rather abuse, then celebrate, gurmondizing with that excesse, that it ouer-passeth the limits of neighbourhood, or friendly conuersation. The common people attend their labour, and are indeed the tired seruants of wearisomnes, rather comming neere the tediousnes of slauery, then the honest necessitie of husbandry. They are all incredulous of Purgatorie; yet as the Greekes commit many absurdities for their dead, they howle about their graues, and repaire with seuerall songs to the places of buriall; and this is customarie in (...) euen amongst our selues, especially in Gallowa^, where all the ^ summer long the yonger women bedecke the g^ues w^ flowers, euery familie in their seuerall Chappels, an (...) satterday at night solemnize a kinde of mourning and ^efunctory

prayers: No man giueth himselfe holy water, but attendeth the Priest; they haue many wiues, allow of diuorcement, and yet runne into the deceitfull by-waies of filthinesse and incontinency: so that as they count it no adultery, except Dauid lye with Bathsheba, when Vrias is liuing: so it is a dangerous matter to transgresse the law of wedlocke, and the woman is terribly ouer-watcht, and suspitiously restrained from walking abroad, wherein the condition of their reputed honest women is more miserable than in Italy, and a wife or a maide looseth all reputation, if shee goe at random, or sit by the high way, as Thamar did to deceiue Iuda.
The people are naturally cunning and dangerous: yet as I said subiect to seruitude, and very slaues to the Emperor: their apparell is a long coat without plighting, almost after the manner of Hungarie, but indeed all the East generally yeeld no other: they weare coloured bootes comming no higher then their knees, the soles plated with yron; the better sort haue them gilded, painted, and embrodered: the women weare such too, and like the Turkes are not seene abroad bare-faced: all sorts loue iustice, or at least the shew of it. For they punish petty thefts, how euer great robberies and manslaughters, yea after due examination, passe without capitall execution, which makes me remember the answer of Cleonidas the Pirate to Alexander Alexander and Cleonidas. the Great, when he sharply reprehended him for the basenes of his life, and intimated besides the common scandall of a rouer, the mischiefes depending, as hindring the Merchant from filling the harbours, and resorting to the Cities, whereby the Kings customes were inlarged, and the Common-wealth enriched: Tis true O King saith he, because I rob with one or two ships, I am condemned

for a rouer: but thou that runnest ouer the Hellespont, and fillest great seas with thy Nauies art saluted a mighty Monarch, and reuerenced more for the feare of thy reuenge, then beloued by the extention of thy bounty or liberalitie.
Their coine is both gold and siluer without forme, as stamped long and vnfashionable: their furres fill all the world with merchandize, making vs not onely warme, but proud in Europe: yea such is the estimation of Ermines, Sables, and blacke Fox from a receiued opinion of Priamus King of Troy, whose mantle to the greatest shew of ostentation and magnificence, was lined with Ermines, that in the secrets of Armory (except the Prince) all persons are limited, what and how to weare them: and amongst themselues, though the Emperor and Nobles haue gownes of cloth of gold and siluer, tread vpon Persian and Turky carpets, and are indeed adorned with great wealth both in iewels and marks of maiestie; yet hath their head attires of blacke fox the preeminence, wherein he thinketh himselfe more honored, than in an imperiall crowne after the manner of auntient Kings: Their great Cities are very thin, and villages lye scattered with low houses, spatious on the ground, with stones; and the territories which now he challengeth, extendeth almost 1200 English mile: their woods foster plenty of beasts, which in an extreame winter will come downe to their houses, and endanger both cattle and people: their horse are reasonable good and many, by whom they maintaine the strength of their Armies, and practising them in hunting haue them the more seruiceable in the warres: But I purpose no further discoueries, and therefore attend the businesse proposed, which is onely to giue you a superficiall view

of these countries, that when we come to compare England vnto them, we may finde them the sooner, and be able to iudge the better.
Thus liueth and raigneth this North-east Monarch, with reputation of one of the greatest sharers in the aduenture of the worlds happines: As for the other Kingdomes of Norway, Sweden, Goteland, and Denmarke, with the prouinces of Bothnia, Finmarck, Lapland, Finland, and such Northren regions. like, they are onely called Reges simplices, because they liue and take care of their particular Scepters, without ambitious intrusion into anothers possession to make it their owne hereditary. For though sometime Sweden, and Norway is vnited: sometimes Denmarke triumphing, and sometimes as it were disioynted: yet hapneth it by seuerall factions amongst themselues and to reuenge iniuries for the present, and may resemble a throng and presse of people in a yard, who one while driue to that corner, another while shoue to this, and suddenly stand at a stay, as wearied with the shouldring. For as Princes are exasperated to displeasure by their owne conceiued opinions of a wrong and indignity: so doe they prosecute reuenges from a wrathfull indignation, and many times draw whole Armies into the field to stop further outrages, and shew the aduersarie, there is no end, but blood and death, yea the countries deuastation without an honorable agreement, or satisfaction: and thus haue these people vpon no other colour but wilfulnes weakned one another with counterchangeable preuailings: But yet I doe not see, that the Russian Emperor taketh aduantage of their disagreements, onely at this instant by reason of former troubles about the succession, and well-grounded suspition of the King of Polands warlike humors, he standeth on his

guard, and for some priuate respects hath bin auxiliary to the King of Swedea, to which belong so many particulars, that a whole history might fill your eares with pleasure and instances of worthy prosecution, which I desist from, for swelling the booke too bigg with so poore a breath of common and knowne relations, and will onely goe forward with some slender descriptions, as the country now lieth vnder fortunes controule.
Norway is famous vpon the etymologie of the word, Norway. as it were the North-way, and yeeldeth plenty of fish, called stockfish, which is taken in the greatest frost for lasting, and is a reasonable good country for feeding cattle, the increase of a dairy, and many other excellent blessings for the nourishment of life.
Swedia inviteth you to a Towne in imitation of Swedia. Venice called Stokeholme, as if shee boasted onely of this place, considering the rest of her villages resemble the scattered troopes of a retired Armie: yet must you not ouer-passe the famous Castle of Calmar, which is proprietory to Goteland, and so depending on Sweden, as the principall Port, Citie, and fortification of these parts, and aduanceth her reputation of strength in such a manner, that excellent enginers, and iudicious Trauellers haue ranked it next the Castle of Millaine.
Denmarke, and his tributes are knowne to euery body, Denmarke. with the shipping and customes of the Sont, where at one time you shall haue 5000 saile brought to the barre of payment, and defraying the Kings charges: Their feasts and drinking customes, wherein you must not challenge their liberall promises, nor take

hold of cursory speeches vpon an hereafter remembrance, least his displeasure suppose you ouer-politicke for his plainenes, yet dangerous humors in his rages: Their maintayning of Gentry, though fearefull for affording titles of honour by opening the enclosures of desires to affect greatnes and popularitie, so that you haue no ambitious titles amongst them: Their feminine scorne of mechanicall men, trades, or professors of Arte: insomuch though a man bee neuer so excellent a scholler, or Musician, yet will not the Ladies of their countrey admit of their society, nor entertaine their wiues with befitting complement, but with a primordiall contempt of ill musico, scholastico, pedante, or such like, countermand their intrusion: Their ouer-looking of passengers into the East Countries, and many other things, are matters of some notice: But amongst other points of Heraldry, the blason of the coates of these countries displaieth the profitable distribution of masts, firre, deale, pitch, tarre, rosen, cables, ropes, hempe, flax, and such like: To which I must needes adde, how from this Continent former times detruded those Nations of Vandalls, Gothes, Lombards, Getes, and other famous people, who not onely blotted out the scandall of their banishment with more memorable actions, but made a plenary satisfaction to their endeuours with the glorious diadems of Italy and Spaine.


The storie of the GOTHS and LOMBARDS comming into Italy and Spaine.
IN the time of Sennio King of Goteland about the yeere How the Goths came into Italy. 400. (For Norway and Denmarke were but then characters of a new print) there hapned a confusion of blessednesse amongst these Nations. For considering, how hee was a Prince not onely of great setlednes and gouernment, but of peace and prosperity, his subiects likewise participated with the felicitie, and liued so long, and in such increase, that I must resemble them to certaine fish in the sea, amongst whom the great ones deuoure the small; yet not so fast, as they could preuent the sodaine approch of a strange famine, whereby the King and principall Counsellors of the State were as it were brought to behold the comming forward of their misery, in regard that many thousands must perish for lacke of foode, and such as had wherewithall to supply their wants, in danger of spoyling, by the indigent multitude tyed to tyrannous necessitie: wherevpon to preuent the worst, as they supposed, and from the law of nature of two euills to chuse the least, and of nations to rectifie the crooked lines of threatning destruction on them: it was concluded to disburden the Realme of all old, impotent, poore, and vnnecessary people, and when the manner was likewise demanded, the inventors were not ashamed to publish, that they must be tied backe to backe and throwne into the sea: with the iollity of which deuise euery man departed home, and the King himselfe, as glad, that his subiects were generally appeased, seemed

proud to be the reporter of the iudgement: But when the Queene vnderstood the cruelty of that doome, and from the tendernes of her sex began to compassionate the guiltles soules, she was not onely amazed to see such an error seduce the wisdome of Gouernors; but stepped a litle more forward, and in debating the matter, brought them to a hansommer path of preuention, which was by exile to expose them to the fortune of the world, and keep the conscience cleare from shedding innocent bloud, which no doubt in time would once lye heauy vpon the most obdurate heart.
Here reason and honest pitie wanne the field of former wilfulnes and resolution, and the Queene was not onely proclaimed the mother of charity, but applauded for her wisdome, and high exalted vertue: so they allowed her directions, and without further disputing the matter, shipped forth 300000 soules, who dispersed themselues ouer the North-east of Europe, filling those countries, which now are called Muldauia, Bogdonia, the borderers of the blacke sea, and Russia with new names and nations, such as were afterward distinguished by Samatae, Gothae, Longabardi, Hunni, Vandali, Getae, Swedi, and diuers others, who raised their fortunes out of industry, and made their able bodies the ministers of a great prosperitie: For when the Emperors of Constantinople groned vnder the burthen of diuision and dissention with the Princes of the West, and had no other way to pacifie the indignation, but by drawing maine Armies into the field; they were also compelled to entertaine these strong and barbarous people, as presidiary, and depending on their military salary: But they quickly instructed in the discipline of Armes, and as quickly furnished for any imployment, did as

quickly perceiue the weakned estate of both parties, and so vnderstanding their owne strength with tumultuous innouation kept the best countries of Italy to their owne vse, making the Graecian Emperors beleeue, it was in their behalfe, and for the renowne of the Empire; but when it came to the casting vp the account, they denied the debt, and by force of armes sent the Graecian auditors home vnsatisfied, and so fell againe and againe on the weakned forces of Europe, and at last possessed the diadems both of Lombardy and Spaine.
I could heere adde the Ilands of Freesland, and Iseland, famous for fishing, and the wonders of mount Heda, sutable to Gibello or Aetna in Sicilia, of both which some haue submitted to a fabulous credulity concerning a locall place of Hell, about the center of the earth, and that the Diuels goe in and out at these monstrous Crateres some 4000. miles vnder sea and land: but because it soundeth both ridiculous euen to superstitious eares, and blasphemous to religious hearts, I ouerpasse it with slightnesse: besides, in regard that I am not emulous of any glory, wealth, or eminent magnificence appertaining to these northerne kingdomes, I desist from further enlarging them, or telling them any stranger newes, onely I must needes say, their shipping is commendable, and the remembrance of our conquest in those times glorious: so that as we serued France, and are contented with titles: they haue serued vs, and still quarter the arms of our countrey with their Danish triumphs.




CHAP. VIII. The Empire of GERMANY.
THE eighth prize out of this great lottery of The eighth part of the worlds brauery. the world, is proclaimed for the Emperor of Germany and king of the Romans, to which the house of Austria is (as it should seeme, or at least would bee) enfeoffed. For at this houre, the sonnes of the olde Arch-Duke haue thus raised the throne of imperiousnesse: Rodulphus Emperour, yet famous for nothing but peaceable desires, and a priuate sequestration scarce affecting the defence of his owne territories, much lesse the expatiating of any military proiect against the enemy of Christendome. Matthias after much repining and a great expectation, King of Hungary, out of which hee hopeth (if occasion serue) to step into his brothers chaire, and command Europe, or at lest so much as the Pope and King of Spaine can support him in. Maximilian, Arch-Duke of Austria, and powerfull enough in being commander of Vienna, from whence the Turks with 200000. souldiers was valiantly repulsed. Albertus, first Arch-Bishop of Toledo, then Cardinall, next dispensed with, and married to the Infanta of Spaine his cozen german, and last of all Arch-Duke of Burgundy, and Commander of the Low-Countries, or at least so many as are brought so low, that hee standeth like a Colossus ouer them: and Ernestus called the Cardinall of Austria, but whether filius naturalis, or no, I dispute not on; so that if the father were now aliue, to see this bundle

of arrowes so well, so strong, and so gloriously bound together, he would flatter himselfe with an opinion, that the Emperials either would not, or durst not startle from their resolutions of corroborating the Diadem in his familie. But although the Germanes haue thus raised vp the principall tree, wherein the double neckt Eagle doth build her airy: yet is it farre from any royall florishing, or Monarchall supremacy. For neither is it hereditary, nor after inauguration can he commaund, as other Kings, or like the briefe of Samuels Oratory to the rebellious Israelites, shew the reciprocall duties betweene Prince and Subiect: but by no meanes is he powerfull enough to ouerthrow the priuiledges of the Empire, because the Princes be so many, so mighty, so beloued, that they attend in Court at pleasute, raise their forces at pleasure, contest with the Emperor in many cases at pleasure, and supply his wants and demands for impositions at pleasure. The Townes againe are so strong, so priuiledged, so populous, that out of obstinate finding fault with taxes and imperious restraints, they many times oppose against their principall lords, and in hostile manner exclude them from the benefit of commaunding, like royall Princes indeed, witnesse the many contentions of Colleine with the Noble men and Byshops, and at last with the Byshop and the people, the power of the DVKE of Saxony in maintaining of LVTHER against both Pope and Emperor: the repining of diuers Cities, and Princes, when the Lantsgraue of Hesse was imprisoned vnder Charles the 5. The last contention betweene the Duke of Brunswicke and the Citie, and the generall cause of the Protestants protected in euery place inuita fortuna, yea against Ecclesiasticall curses and temporall menaces.

Of all Europe it is the greatest Countrey with the best and richest store of Cities, Townes, Castels, and religious Germany the greatest Countrey of Europe. places, in that decorum, and order (for in a manner view one Towne and view all) as if there were a vniuersall consent to raise our admiration from their vniformity: To which is added a secret of Nature, that the people generally for honesty of conuersation, probity of manners, assurance of loyaltie, and confidence of disposition (setting apart their imperfect customes of drinking) exceede our beliefe, as being vnoffensiue, conuersable, maintainers of their honours, and families, wherein they step so farre, as if true Gentry were incorporate with them, and had his principall mansion in Germany. And although they repine at any strangers intrusion, and will not suffer new Nations to bring in new customes, no not artificers; and seeme withall fantastique in apparrell, and gaudy with deuises: yet doe they hate formalitie of Courtiers, and of all other things beware of that horrible deceit of vaparous Germanes haters of deceit. promises, common protestations, open embraces, palpable flattery, and hypocriticall bindings of obseruation from inferiours: when the heart is corrupted, yea ready to leape into his Masters mouth, and tell him, that he lies, when it heares him sweare, what he neuer meant: thus can they with Lucan exclaime:
Exeat aulaQui vult esse pius, virtus and summa potestas non coeunt.
and thus doe they endeauour themselues in all honest courses to liue of themselues, which questionlesse proceedes from some worthy caution concerning their miserie, who eate meate vnder the repining eyes of another, and herein no doubt they lay a great imputation on many

English, whose profession of libertie by base and seruile attendancy is ouerthrowne: or if they seeme glorious in casting off the yoake of obedience; yet are they besmeered Errors of Courtiers. with the frothy corruptions of verball and vaineglorious Courtiers, who haue with the viciousnesse of time so abused this profession of moralitie, that an honest and vnsubiected heart is afraid to come neere them. For although Liberalitie and Charity haue equall properties to the opening, if it were possible, the gates of heauen: although the fauour of Kings must be purchased by duty and obsequiousnesse, and although the maiestie of a Court must not be depressed by admitting euery man at pleasure: yet hath the errors of life so traduced worthy men for swelling too bigge with wealth and aduancement, that their power and authoritie growes tedious, and the depending on another is a very excruciation of minde, which made the Poet exclaime against the protraction of good deedes with Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest: which made the Italians murmure with Dono molto aspettato e venduto e non donato: which made Berzelay say vnto the King, I am old I will go a litle way ouer Iordan, but returne to my owne house, liue with my people, and be buried in the sepulchre of my fathers. In these things are the Germans worthy of all commendation: yet me thinkes wanting an hereditarie succession of Princes, and hauing an Emperor sometimes by partiality of election, sometimes by factious strength, and sometimes by the absolute commaund of the Pope, they should a little abate their ostentation concerning his MAIESTIE, or their owne glory. As for their formall custome of denominating all the sons of Arch-Dukes Dukes, Earles, and Barons, according to their fathers titles, and paternall honours, it keepes corespondencie with the name of Caesar amongst them, and

the Italians hold it so ridiculous, that in their facetiae, as we terme it, they ieast it thus: The Earles of Germany; the Dons of Spaine; the Monsiers of France; the Byshoppes of Italy; the Knights of Naples; the Lardes of Scotland; the Hidalgos of Portugall; the Noblemen of Hungary; and the younger brethren of England make a very poore company.
But if you are curious indeed, and would search in natures storehouse for the furniture, that Germany holds, or know in what manner she distributeth her blessings, you shall finde corne, vines, riuers of fish, fruite, hot waters, bathes, minerals, mines of all sorts, and very good cattle. If ambition transport you to view the palace of Honour, they can bring you into well fortified Cities, wherein you shall haue munition, armor, and the very Burgers trained with martiall discipline: they can cary you into the fields of Bellona, and delight you with a beautifull sight of 20000. horse diuided into seuerall batalions and squadrons with cornets, penons, and sufficient equipage: they can conduct you into the very walkes of Princelines, and show stately palaces, pleasant hunting and hawking, turniaments, iusts, riding horses, and other exercises befitting a Gentleman. If you descend to more moderate expectations, you shall then haue notice, how most men eate vnder their owne vines, how the Citizen liueth in quiet, how the women are blessed in their children, how faults are pardoned, scandals remooued, and euery man appeares like a faire shining Planet in his owne Orbe without disturbance.
On the north from Callis to Dantske in Prussia lieth part of the seuenteene Prouinces, and Pomerania: On the East Brandenburg and Silesia, I might haue named Hungarie,

and Transiluania: to the South as farre as the Alpes, Austria, Bauaria, Sweuia, and Heluetia: on the West ^ranconia, Hessia, and Munsterland: as a core in the midst Westphalia, Saxonia, Brunswicke, Thuringia, Misina, the well compacted kingdome of Bohemia, circumcepted with ^gra, Silua, and Morauia, with many other diuisions of Principats, Dukedomes, Lordships, and Clergie men, that to number them would be more tedious, then satisfactorie; consider Munster their owne Countrey-man h^th ^. described them at full, and taken so much paines there^n, as if he studied nothing more, then to set out the honour and dignitie of the Nation, wherein hee was borne. Amongst these are seuen Princes sequestred to a speciall lifting vp the Emperor into his throne: the three Byshops of Colleine, Ments, or as some will haue it ^agunse, and Treuers: the three Seculars, Duke of Saxony, Marqu^, of Brandenburge, and Count Pallatine of the Rhene; the binding voice is allowed the King of Bohemia, who was once so absolute, that he triumphed in the three^old City of Prage with repining, when the Emperor challenged either submission or prostitution: but now the Pope and Austria haue subuerted such immunities, and vnder the danger of fulmination, and Church discipline terrifie them all from contradicting their wilfulnes.
The Cities of this spacious Countrey are many, and haue as many descriptions from seuerall Authors, whom if you finde contrary to one another, you must mod^ your anger, and remember how diuers (...) with sicke bodies, that although they li^ with (...) of learned men, yet shall not any, two agree, (...) in (...) causes, nor the remedie of the disease, le^ (...) vnderstand the same neuer so well: So fareth it (...)

quarians and Chronographers, they shew you such faces, as they themselues beheld, or wrote as priuate affection and information induced, and so the next age enlarged her talent; and the last opposeth against the former. But if you will be contented with my manner of Cosmography, and vnderstand, that my meaning in this cursory iourney is to runne onely away with Titles, you shall then finde vpon the Rhene a riuer comming out of Heluetia, and 800. mile together, gathering many confederates of springs and brookes to shew himselfe well accompanied at the Court of the maine Ocean: Constance, Basill famous in her originall vpon the Serpent found in her foundation; Strasborough beautifull in her name, and for her high steeple, Spires, Ments, Hidelburge the Court of the Palatine, Franckfurt glorious in her Marts, Coblents and Coleine; these be principall Cities, either supporting the chaires of Byshops, or maintaining their owne freedomes with royall iurisdiction, or submitting to the controule of some worthy Prince; as for other Townes, which are both walled, and fortified they are infinite, and would fill vp too much roome to ioyne them here together. Vpon Danubius the greatest riuer of Europe, as running 1500. mile betweene the bankes of many Countries, and changeth his name into ^er, when he commeth into the pride of Greece, and poureth himselfe, with troupes of attendance into the lap of the black-sea: you haue Vlmms, Auspurg, or if you will Augu^ta proud of her title and fortification; Ingelstade boasting of the birth of Emperors; Regenspurg, Paslaw, Vienna, Presburg, and Keimar; vpon Weserslood, that run^eth through Brunswicke and Westphalia, Brennen, and Ca^; vpon the riuer Alba, which posteth out of Bohemia, as it were with glad tidings through the midst of many

flourishing Countries into the German sea; Prag^, Dresda, East Wittenberg, Brandenberg, Hanborough and Stode; vpon Odera, whose head almost meeteth with the Wexell of Poland; Neisa, Breslaw, Crossen, East Fran^furt, and Stetin; this riuer running toward Brandenburg through Silesia watreth a great part of Pomerania, within the heart of this Continent, whose veines are yet filled, and life as it were refreshed with the moderate flowing and swelling goodnesse of diuers armes, hanging as it were by the maine bodies of these riuers, and may resemble kinde messages, or entercourses strengthning the amity of vnsetled families, are scituated Norremberg the greatest of the Countrey, Wirteberg, Erfurt, Brunswick, Iger, Gorlitz, and so many other, that France and Italy both must a litle yeeld. For if a difference may tend to make a place the better, questionlesse Germany hath the preeminence; yet because it resembleth a Capitoll of so many Princes, rather then a Parliament house, where the Subiect how great soeuer, acknowledgeth his Monarch; we will allow him Emperor, as I haue said, for good manners sake; but questionlesse standing at the deuotion of his imperials, and Cities; it diminisheth his glory, and obscureth the shining of his three Crownes; witnes the busines of Colleine it selfe, which amongst many others of the same kind, is so subiected to the authority of the Byshop, that the name of Emperor hath sounded harshly to their obedience, and both people and Clergie haue still opposed against all secular Princes: the story is briefly thus.


The History of COLLEINE.
COlleine is a famous Towne, and one principall of the Vbij before CHRIST, which questionlesse the ^ Romanes made great account of as a receptacle for their garrisons, when they had warre against the Swedians, who ^nged then all ouer Germany, especially in Saxonia. In the time of Iulius Caesar there was a wodden bridge made ouer the R^ene for the better transporting his armie, which was after transhap't into stone, but the miracle proceeded from the power of money, and industry of man; but because many murthers, rapes, and robberies were committed on the same, Bruno the Byshoppe by the Emperor O^os commaundement ruined, and quite subuerted it: so it should seeme it was then called Vbiopolis, vntill a commutation into Colonia Agrippina of Marcus Agrippa sonne in law to Augustus Caesar, who reedified and beautified the same; yet Tacitus extracteth the title from a daughter of Augustus borne here, and leaueth it as a place of great consequence vnder the iurisdiction of many worthy Commaunders; but it should seeme, they entertained Christianity betimes, and quickly cast away the authoritie of the Romanes: For thus they record it. About the yeere 70. Maternus the Disciple of Saint Peter conuerted the Vbij, who admitted their spirituall saluation with such gladnesse, that they likewise determined the preseruation of their liberty and bodies, and so proiected to be free of themselues, had not afterward diuers Emperors, setled the Duke of Saxony, and Earles of the Em^ (...) established greatness both ouer Citie and Coun^, vntill againe the Pope wrested the supremacie ouer

the European Princes, and confirmed the Archbishops in the ostentation of a Count Palatine, and absolute power of the gouernment of all, which yet the secular Noble men not onely repined at, but sought by noble courses to preuent; and at last, when no deuise could make gentill the hard wound pullies of the Clergies ambition, they were resolute to effectuate it by force of armes, so that many contentions arose betweene the Byshoppe, Nobles, and Citizens, which ended not without effusion of blood, and ouerthrow of whole armies drawne into the field by particeans, whereby the Citie it selfe felt the smart of warlike scourges, and saw her walles and houses puld on heapes of rubbish, according to the nature of rage and fury the end of tumultuous vprors. But at last Colleine is reedified, and in despight of all frets and fumes, either of Saxony, the Palatine of the Empire, or confederates of the Princes, acknowledgeth the Archbishop for supreame Gouernour, and he still ouermantleth it with a superstitious protection, so that the people are kept vnder with his blessing and cursing accordingly.
It now bendeth like a bow, as you see our great Citie from Surreies side: the key before the wall is a place of great pleasure; the ports and ramparts worth the obseruing, the Palace stately and magnificent, the houses beautifull and comely, the streets sweet, spatious, and well ordered, the Inhabitants ciuill, sociable, and superstitious. For amongst the Churches they are of opinion, that the three Kings haue a memorable monument, concerning the birth of our Sauiour, when they were commaunded to returne another way home, but comming hether it was the fortune and glory of this place, not onely to be their refuge from the fury of Herod in their life; but a receptacle

for their bodies after death; but how the truth would proue all this ridiculous, it were pity to dispute. Howsoeuer, as I haue said, the Citie and territories now swell with the pride of exemption from the Emperors iurisdiction, and in the same race runne many other famous Townes, whereby you may see the disioynted gouernment of Germany, and the poore authority the Emperors haue ouer the Electors, and imperiall Cities.
For although Charles the 5. had the fortune to imprison the Lantsgraue of Hesse, and by the seruice of the Duke of Burbone to possesse the Castle of Saint Angelo, and punish the Pope with a terror of vsurpation, euen ouer his spirituall authoritie; yet was it a sudden greatnesse, and like the blaze of a bauin, lasted but a while. For the German Princes quickly repined, and the next Pope as quickly ratified his owne conditions, so that the Emperors since haue no more to doe in Italy, then a Pilgrimme, who is admitted to see the wonders of our Lady at Loretto. But if How Germany is neighbored. you would know, how Germany is neighboured, and beloued of strangers, I answer as if my friend should aske me my opinion concerning anothers loue: the heart is vnsearchable, we onely can discouer the outward countenance, and formall protestations: thus is it with Topographicall descriptions, wee can say these and these be the Countries and people, but whether enuious, ambitious, reuengefull, traiterous, cowardly, or such like, it must be referred to actions and time. Toward the North lies Pomerania, Prussia, Lithuania, Silesia, Podolia, and Poland; but Poland now stands for all, within these 300. yeeres a factious Dukedome, limited within her owne territories, now a well compacted kingdome of many Countries; yet wilfully resolute to haue no hereditary Prince amongst

them, whereby the supreame authority is subiect to the suffrages of men, and a manner of Oligarchy of Nobles limiteth the King in his royaltie, and maketh his establishment but a slauish brauery. The Countrey from her plaines, as spreading it selfe abroad without mountaines, or hills, addeth to the Etymologie of the word, and hath only the great Citie of Cracow vpon the Vistula meriting discourse, but litle commendation, or wonder. Toward the East lieth the noble Kingdome of Hungary; I call it noble, because whole volumes might be writ in relating her troubles; externall with her enemy of Christendome; internall with a confused dissention: For sometimes the glory of the Kingdome elateth them; sometimes priuate reuenges diuideth them; sometimes the Clergie doth tyrannize ouer them; and sometimes the generall cause exciteth compassion: then adioyneth what in times past you called Illiria now Transiluania and Sclauonia. Toward the South, but you must first see, what snow lieth vpon the Alpes all along the bankes of the Adriaticke sea, now Gulpho Venetiano, are spred abroad the Prouinces of Friaull in times past forum Iulij, Histria, Croatia, Dacia, Dalmatia, as farre as Ragusa once Epidaurus, all full of prety Townes, the shores beautified with Ilands, and the sea beating on diuers rockes seruing yet for many vses, as the Venetians can tell, who are the Commaunders of these people, and places for the most part. Toward the West, what wee now nicke-name the Wallons, Loraine with the memorable Towne of Mets, and in a prety corner Heluetia, containing the 13. Cantons of Switzerland euen amongst the Alpes, which remaine with freedome of both religions in despight of Pope and other turbulent Princes, and can shew Bazill, Bern, and Zuricke as fine and delicate Townes, as

any in the pride of Italy; but withall you must vnderstand, that both the Emperour, France, and Spaine haue diuers times attempted the subiection of these people, especially Geneua, which belongeth to Sauoy: yet failed, as the Romans did with the Parthians concluding a corroboration of friendshippe rather then a publication of their shame to be propulsed, which appeared in the time of Charles the fift, who was mightily incensed Fooles may giue good counsell. against them, had not the blunt reprehension of a foole diuerted him. For when diuers fiery spirits had brought fuell to set on flame these guiltlesse people, and that hee determined to ouerrunne them as it were with one speedinesse. I, I, saith the foole, you all conclude well for going into the Countrey, but vnacquainted with the terrible passages of the Alpes, you litle consider the difficultie of comming out againe. Vpon which pithy and compendious obiurgation, a new debatement of matters set vp another loome of retraction.




CHAP. IX. The glory of the SPANIARD.
THE ninth proportion of the earths happinesse The ninth part of the earths glory. hath so confirmed the King of Spaine in a large inheritance, that hee now lifteth vp a head of maiestie with an imperiall countenance and extraordinary titles: But if I must conduct you into the enclosures of vnderstanding, how this comes about, I am affraid I shall torment former times with vaine repetitions, and confused originals; yea indeede abuse your patience with tedious and friuolous discourses, considering so many excellent histories haue explained the difficulties of these people, and the moderne commentary is a true and delicate glasse to behold her forme and beauty in: Otherwise I could fill your lap with these abstracts, and make vp a kinde of reckning with pleasure and contentment from a modest ampliation. That Hercules with his large and warlike embracements clasped this country about, infusing such vertue, as his father Ioue innated in him, whereby his actions tended to reformation of abuses, and purging the Kingdom of such monsters, as had both terrified them with their huge bodies, and made them miserable with the confusion of rapes, murthers, and cruell oppression: so that Hesperus, Gerion, and Cacus mighty giants were subdued, and the country calmed of all stormy blasts of rudenes, and confused barbarisme: That after such heroicke proceedings

he stood like a Colossus ouer the streights, naming the great mountaines of Abila and Calpe his pillers with this inscription of Non plus vltra, howeuer afterward it was Non (...) vl^. P^s (...). the fortunate brauery of Charles the Emperor vpon the discouery of the West Indies to write Plus vltra, quite obliterating Non; as if his new glory had better consequence: That hee erected a Temple in the Iland of Gades now Cales, and as it were enfeoffed the seas and streights with his surname: That from the burnt ashes of Tyrus after Dido was forewarned to abandon Phoenicia by the ghost of her husband Sichaeus, like the Phaenix sprung vp a many Phoenixes, who possessed the shores of Africke, and built an airy in Gades: that is, the banished and discomfited people of Tyrus erected Carthage, Gades, and many other townes in Africke, and Spaine: That presently followed the dissention betweene the Gaditanes, and Turditanes; betweene the Celtibrians and Iberians, setled nations in Spaine, to the deciding of whose controuersies Marrhable and Haldruball were called out of Carthage, which both made a conquest of Spaine, and proiected to clip the feathers of the Roman Aegle, who now began to spread her wings ouer the best inhabited fields of the world: That from this emulation, Rome stood on a better guard, and accounted these Africans a barbarous people in respect of themselues, as foretold from the prophesie of Daniel, and the Sibills of her strange establishment, as Queene of the world, and at last shared the plenty of Spaine: for impatient of any aduenturers in that voyage, the Carthaginians were expelled, and the royall standard of Italy aduanced: That time ouerwearied with the insulting of perpetuitie, at last incited the strange nations of Gothes, Vandalls, and Lombards to

labour in the worke of the god of alteration, who pull'd this country from all Emperors and Kings, and made a fearefull diuision of the same, keeping themselues warme in Spaine, when all other countries failed: That long after Count Iulian began a new worke, as if he could haue powred downe vengeance on the author of his discontents. For after Rodrigo had rauished his daughter, hee called in the Mores a race of Mahumetans into Spaine to be reuenged on the King, by whose assistance he not onely banished the Gothes, and other people into Castile, but kill'd the King, vsurped the country, altred the gouernment, and so plaied their parts in Granado, Valentia, and Andolozia, as if they were created of purpose to shew some wonder of heauen, when dissolution of Kingdomes, and punishment of offences is determined: so that they quickly made their owne conditions, and bound the countrey euer since to the ratifying of them, infecting the best families of Spaine with paganisme, whereby our moderne Kings weeding them out by litle and litle, haue also attempted to purge their Churches of such filthines, and when they could not preuaile by precept, and authority of reason, they erected the office of Inquisition, to discouer who were addicted to the adoration of Mahomet, Inquis^. and durst contest against the blessednes of saluation in IESVS CHRIST, whereupon the Mores haue raised many innouations in the countrey, and euen the last yeere to 1609. the number of a million fraighted their hearts with treason, and a burning desire to set on flame the wondrous compacted peace of Spaine.
Here is yet no great cause of amazement: For thus were the children of Israel persecuted by the Aegiptians, affrighted with the Philistims, maligned by the Edomites

subiected and made slaues to Babylon, tormented and threatned by Syrians and Graecians, and at last not onely subdued, but subuerted by the Romans, who of all other, put the axe to the tree, and at one stroke laid the same on the ground, leauing the holy Citie desolate as a widow, cast out as an orphan, despised as a vagabond, and punished worse than a traiterous rebell, vntill the Mahumetans by way of curtesie ridd her of her paine at once, and vtterly trampled her to peeces: so that now to see the people dispersed without a law, common-wealth, or King: to view the countrey like a barren wildernes: to behold nothing but rapes and robberies, where so many promises had bin made from heauen, where such riches and maiestie flourished, where such mightines and state increased, and where all prosperity triumphed, would leniat an adamantine heart, and raise a crying voice from commiseration, with Heu cadit in quenquam tantum scelus? tanta iniquitas? And thus much for example concerning the seuerall alterations of Spaines gouernment, now to the rest of his ostentation.
The whole countrey retaineth still the antient diuision of Baeticam, Lusitaniam and Tarraconensem, and the memory of eight seuerall Kingdomes, 1. Gallicia, to which Asturia and Cantabria are connected: 2. Nauarra, the proper Eight kingdomes in Spaine. inheritance of the house of Burbon in France. 3. Castiles, a coople boasting both of antiquitie and excellency. 4. Lusitania, tother day Portugall, but now incorporated with the rest into the house of Austria. 5. Leon extinguished long since by the greater light of Arrogon. 6. Arrogon, laying claime to Naples and Ierusalem, and so enlarging the King of Spaines titles. 7. Valencia, mourning for her corruption in religion: and 8. Granado, to which Andolozia

or the countrey of Vandalls, with the former Iland of Gades are vnited. Amongst these Portugall did once boast of the conquest of India, Aethiopia, Persia, and many other places, especially Taprabona, or the Iland of Saint Lawrence, betweene whom and Great Britaine (as I haue said before) at this instant of all the Ilands in the world is comparison for circuit, and spatiousnes of ground. But shall we let them goe on with these vaine-glorious titles of conquest and victory, when they are yet but poore possessors of some harbours and townes by the sea shore, and stand on their guard with more terror to lose, than euer they entertained comfort in getting them. I, I, let them alone a gods name: For quarrels arise from contradiction; and there is no disputing with men resolued in the vaine promises of worldly deceit; nor must you be incredulous, when a Portugall shall report, that these exploits were carried in the current of successe without the helpe of Spaine at all, as though there was euer a distinction, or rather separation betweene themselues, and a Castilian; yea they proceeded further, as if there were an Antipathy in nature: For they vsed to spit at the naming a Spaniard, like simple people in England after the Deuill was pronounced. But to the rest: if you would truely vnderstand the cause of his pride and former elation of countenance, you must then take notice, that he detaineth all these Kingdoms within his owne Continent, as a commanding Monarch, and after many convulsions begged at fortunes hands the ratification of the Royalty, stiling himselfe withall King of Naples, Sicilia, and Hierusalem: the two former gouerning by Viceroies, the latter claiming by inheritance, as vnwilling to lose himsele, or forget the glory of his auncestors, wherein he pleadeth imitation:

For the Emperor writeth King of the Romans, not once visiting of Italy: the Denmarke King of England, England of France, and France of Nauarre: then are the Ilands of Sardinia, Corsica, Maiorca, and Minorca entred his booke of accounts; to which if you adde the noble Duchie of Millane, into whose demeanor Count Fuentes looketh with prying eies for his behalfe, and that the state of Genoa dependeth on his protection, you will say ambition set him well on worke, and as well rewarded him for his daies labour. As for the Low Countries, he would faine shew them as feathers belonging to his broken wings, and taketh the house of Burgundie for his owne, hoping that the Pope, which can canonize a Saint, will make the daughter of Spaine a Queene, especially of her owne inheritance.
Thus liueth and ruleth he in Europe: but all this were rather burthensome vnto him, considering the barren hills and sandy plaines of his countrey, if you looke not one way into the shores of Affricke, and another way ouer the bottomles Ocean, and so examine the cause of his boasting indeede, which is his store-houses of golden mines, his conquest of many nations, his reducing them America conquered. to Christianity, and his triumph in the fruition of possessed tranquillitie: For America is almost his owne, resembling a Peninsule, and ioyned in the midst with an Istmus. If you begin at the streights of Magellane, they will tell you, that Magellanus a Spaniard first explored the passage: If you aske, what was done a litle before, an answer is ready, that Americus Vesputius gaue name to this new world, and Christophorus Columbus of Genoa about a 130 yeeres since, searched her entrailes, discouered her maladies, and applied a Cataplasme to her most dangerous

wounds, which was irreligion and barbarous idolatry: For although he found vnlookt-for glorious Cities, and well compacted gouernments, yet was he faine by strong hand to ouerthrow their idols, and punish their obstinacy with cruelty. The south shore, or if you please the Continent on the left hand 10000 miles long called Psitacorum regio, is questionles inhabited, though vndiscouered, and not fully descried. The other Continent beyond the line inuites you to the view of strange nations, whom we confound with the generall horror of Cannibals, as men or rather monsters feeding on humane flesh, Giants: the land of Patagons, and Amazons, as supposed to flie hither, when the Kings of Europe repined to see women the equall sharers of honour amongst them: But for my owne part, I rather suppose it the error of ignorant Cosmographers, who when they cannot, or dare not certainly deliniate a countrey, then will they fill vp a place with monsters and formidable creatures both men and women: Thus haue they done with the interior parts of Africke, and the remote countries of Mangia, and the inhabitants of Taunis, when God knowes all these places with the rest are possessed by men, and of orderly proportion, yea such men, that though they be idolaters, beleeue the immortality of the soule, and care not to dye in hope of a better life: therefore let the iudicious be perswaded, that what hath not voice and reason, is a beast or monster. From hence neerer the line or more northward looking from the streights of Magellane, you come into the golden kingdomes of Peru, Brazill, and Caribana, and may be pleased with the streames of two mighty riuers De la Plata, and Maragnon, which by computation maketh a winding of 5000 mile, and haue their shores stored with

Cities and inhabitants, of whom and which so many idle things are reported, that though I am not incredulous, as knowing, what barbarous nations can afford; yet doe I disclaime vnnecessary discourses, because I haue further busines in hand, and of better consequence. A litle more remote toward the West, beginneth the Istmus circumspected with the territories of Mexico, Cusco, and Themistian, with many other Cities of such wealth and mightines, that the people were slaine by thousands, or rather millions, ere they could sauour other obedience, than idolatrous and sauage liberty: On the other side toward the North looketh vp to heauen the new fashioned Ilands of Cuba, Hispaniola, S. Iohns, and many others: the further side of the land is as it were fringed with the countries of Virginia, Terra Florida, Noua Francia, Norrembega, and the fishing land; I call it fringed, because as yet we haue onely entred vpon the skirts of the same, not daring further exploration, and indeed not knowing what to doe with the rest, much desiring the discouery of the north-west passage into India, and resolued there is a way, if successe would lead vs by the hand to preuent the tediousnes and the charge of going about by the south Cape.
Here you see is great cause of triumph: For of all these he either challengeth the principality and confederation, or ouer-looketh with such ielous eyes, that they dare not start from his obedience; and would not so many kingdomes, so many nations, and such power elate any Prince to assume extraordinary titles? But (as I said) all this were vaporous smoake, and the frothy breath of opinion, if his treasuries at home were not yeerely supplied from the tribute of the Esterne and Westerne mines abroad,

whereby he presumeth to yeeld more reason of his ostentation, than Salomon himselfe. For though Salomon did fetch gold from Ophir, and that the pride of Ierusalem swelled with plenty, when gold filled euery mans purse, and siluer was as common as stones: yet he made it a iourney of three yeeres, and had no other cunning, no The true Philosophers stone. other wisdome, no other Philosophers stone, than the industry of Merchants, and confederation of the Kings of Tyrus and Sidon: But the King of Spaine can make a yeerely returne, or at least once in 16 moneths, as vnderstanding himselfe thus farre, that his Cities of Toledo, Madrid, Valiodolid, Leon, Barcelona, Saragossa, Valentia, Cartagena, Malaga, Corduba, Seuilla, Lisbone, Baione, and the rest, cannot maintaine their glories without them: That the monastery and stately Palace of the Scurial could neither invite you to her magnificent structures, nor supply necessities of life with prouision: That the Garisons of Millane, Naples, Sicilia, the townes of Africke, the inheritance of Burgundy, his owne Castles and frontiers townes, with diuers other remote in many Prouinces, would quickly decay, and haue oftentimes mutined for want of money, and their ordinary entertainment: That the Ports and Harbours would be empty of shipping, yea the ships themselues vnbuilt and vnfurnished: that the countrey commodities might be vnuttered: his souldiers disappointed: his kingdomes many times famished, and his glory vtterly eclipsed, if there wanted but one returne of his treasure, or that any disastrous encounter defeated or disappointed his Nauy. And thus much for the seuerall principall Monarchs of the world, as at this howre they looke vp to heauen with ouer-liberall titles, and haue blowed opinion bigg with some seeming

reasons, and yet in comparison of true roialtie and happinesse, absolute partiality.


CHAP. X. The description of ITALY, as in times past.
WHereas you partly heard, that the house of Austria obtaining the Empire euen Italy diuided. with the Popes grudging, did also intrude it selfe into the pleasant fields of Italy, whereby the King of Spaine would haue his head empaled indeed with one of the Imperiall Diademmes of the world: we will steppe thether, and see with what fashion her countenance is made cheerefull, and how her curtesie is prepared to entertaine vs. I will therefore desist from any former ampliation of absolute beginnings, least I should wrong the labours of ther men, and speake indeede their owne words more imperfectly, onely I must somewhat abstrusely and abstractly to helpe your memory with some things, that sauour of antiquity, and shall assist your comparatiue bringing them face to face in these moderne times. Vnderstand then, that it was the first Countrey inhabited of Europe by Ianus, or Iaphet the sonne of Noe, whose history giueth life to many strange and fabulous relations: How presently followed the possession of many Nations, whose loue to the Countrey changed her name into Oenotria, Ausonia, Hesperia, Saturnia, Italia; and some others of lesse consequence, some significantly according to the goodnes of the place,

some metonimically either pars pro toto, or totum pro parte; some ironically for idle actions, or Poeticall fictions, and some iudicially according to the vertue of the Inhabitants, excellency of the soile, or honour of the first explorator, or Redacter to gouernment, and thus it was suddenly diuided into Prouinces, as Liguria, Hetruria, Vmbria, Countries. Latium, Campania foelix, Lucania, Brutia or Magna graecia, Salentitij or Salentini, Appuleia Peucetia, Appuleia Daunia, Samnites, Pisenum, Aemilia or Galsia transalpina, now Lombardy; and forum Iulij or Friaul, now Venetorum regio; Some say 15. Blondus 18. and Leander 19. parts. Cities.
How Rome became the metropolitane Citie of Italy, Rome. and Queene of the world, so that the Emperors amplified the same with magnificent structures and monuments, and in diuiding, or rather translating their seates to Constantinople left all to the Exarchat of Rauenna, and vsurpation of Byshoppes; who by a higher stile at last made themselues Popes, and with the cuppe of abomination, like the whore in the Apocalips, poisoned the westerne Kingdomes.
How the Venetians beganne their Citie and State, and Venice. about anno 700. constituted a DVKE, boasting indeede that they were the poore remainder of the Roman Nobility, as it were sequestred into certaine remote Ilands, which the Goths respected not, nor Lombards regarded: yet hath Time you see raised a glorious flame from the poore dispersed imbers, almost extinguished, either from heate, or light.
How Millane was incorporated to a principalitie: First built by the Frence, after subuerted by the Vandalls, then Millane. reedified, next made a Duchy; fiftly, strengthned with the band of Sforza; sixtly, possessed by the French againe,

and now by the Spaniard.
How Genoa boasteth of her antiquitie from Ianus, and Genoa. about 1237. constituted a DVKE like vnto Venice, but daring not to trust her owne foundation entertained the noble assistance of the Spanish castells.
How Turine or Taurinum was an Academy, the chiefe Turine. Citie of Piemont, and now giueth so much aire to Sauoy, that he breatheth with one of the noblest Dukedomes of the world.
How Papia or Pauy in times past Ticinum by reason of Pauy. the riuer, that runnes round about it, was vnited to the Duchy of Millane by Iohannes Galeazius the first Duke.
How Padoa boasteth of her neighbourhood to the riuer Padus, her Vniuersitie, Antenors foundation, fertillity Padoa. of ground, strong ramparts, and repineth at her subiection to Venice.
How Cremona is very auncient, and flourished with orderly strength and prosperity, vntill it was burnt in the Cremona. warres betweene Vitellius and Otho.
How Verona is pleased with the common enterpretation Verona. of her name quasi vera vna, with the orderly accesse of Italians nobles, with the ruines of her Amphitheater so goodly a structure, that I dare be bold to say, it would containe 80000. people to behold the spectacles, presented to the Inhabitants for triumphs of Emperors, and famous Consuls, and being once free was subiected to the Venetians about anno. 1405.
How Mantua was first a Marquisate, but by the marriage of the onely daughter of Montisferate raised to a Duchy Mantua. by the Emperor, and thrust warme vnder the mantell of Gonzaga by the Pope.
How Mirandula was fortified, besieged by the Emperor Mirandula.

and Pope, assisted onely by the French, and at last vnited to the principate of Parma.
How Ferrara was first subiect to the Byshoppe of Rauenna, then vnder the family of Est, made a Marquisate; Ferrara. lastly, a Dukedome, and now vsurped by the Pope, as part of Saint Peters patrimonie.
How Parma boasteth of antiquitie, suffered many concussions, Parma. fell into the blessing of the Clergy, and with the Coronet of a Duke was presented to Alexander Fernesius.
How Bononia was once ruled by an Exarchate, as a place Bononia. of greatnesse, and important conueniency for the gouernment of the Countrey: after giuen to the Church by King Pepin, and Carolus magnus, and hath now a famous Vniuersitie.
How Rauenna boasteth of antiquitie, was the principall Rauenna. seate of the Vicegerents, for the Emperors of Constantinople, and after surrendred into the Popes hands by the name of Romandiolas territories.
How Vrbine was famous for courtshippe, and made a Urbine. Dukedome 1476. by Pope Sixtus in the family of Fredericus Vbaldinensis, who were once citizens of Florence, but for their vertue raised to this honour, so that the family extinguished, it is returned to the possession of the Pope againe.
How Ancona is an old walled Towne and port in the Ancona. Adriaticke sea, now Gulpho Venetiano, is knowne by her white cliffe, inuiteth you to come on land, and see the wonders of our Lady at Loretto; and obeyeth the Pope in his temporall iurisdiction.
How Florence suffered many alterations, increased in wealth, buildings, state, populousnesse, was honored in Florence. the house of Medices, and aduanced her fame with the best

through the valour and well-deseruing of that valiant Cosimo, by the stile of Magnus Dux Hetruriae, and hath since boasted of two Queenes of France from her daughters, who haue filled the Courts of all the Princes in Europe with strange reports. How Pisa was once Mistresse of Maiorca, Pisa. had an Acedemy, was sold to the Florentines, by the Vicount Iohannes Galeasius, and bought of the Emperour Charles, 1369. by Petrus Gambacurta, for 12000. peeces of gold. How Leuca was made a Seignory, and had L^uca. many Gouernours, but at last obtained their freedome by donation of a Cardinall, who distributed for the same 25000. Checkinos. How Sienna boasteth of the birth of S^a. Aeneas Siluius, called Pope Pius, of the Vniuersity of Physicians, is delicately scited, was tossed, or rather tormented in the factions of the Guelphs and Gibellines, submitted to the Spanyard, then to the French, next to the Cardinall M^ndoza, and at last 1558. yeelded to the Duke of Florence. How Naples encreased in glory, and raised her Naples. dignity next to Lombardy, of all the Principats of Italy, to a Kingdome, suffred many alterations, had Princes of seuerall families, filled the world with the occurrences of her troubles; and at last, by example of Sicilia, prostituted it selfe to Spaines insulting. Of all which to discourse at large were another Gordion: and with the Preacher a man may cry out, all things are so hard to be knowen, that no creature can expresse them, the eye is not satisfied with sight, the eare not filled with hearing, the thing that hath beene, commeth to passe againe, and there is no new thing vnder the Sunne: and therefore I will desist from further tormenting my selfe or you, because many worthy authors are opposite to one another, in vnfolding the secrets of antiquity, and hee which striueth to please all readers

with satisfaction, must transforme himselfe into all shapes, especially with Ianus looke two contrary waies, and study the arts both of detracting and flattery: yet there is but one truth, if a man did liue in such a blessed age, that he might maintaine the same with worthy boldnesse, speaking what he thinkes, thinking what he knowes, and knowing nothing, but honest certainties: wherein not to be corrupted, is a glory exceeding report, and a worke of wonder indeed: therefore as neere as I can, I will reiect all impossible reports and authorities, and tie my selfe to probabilities and truth, or at least so much, as is either receiued for currant in iustifiable relations: or my poore experience dare warrant from mine owne endeauours: and so I will shew you with what face Italy lookes vp to heauen at this houre, and may with Heraclitus weepe for the vanities and miseries of the earth: yet is cheerefull, and thus like a strumpet is knowne by the pride of her eyes.


CHAP. XI. ITALY described at this time.
FIrst, towards the East lies the Kingdome of Naples, within whose enclosures are The estate of Italy in t^is modern age. Naples. detained the countries of Calabria, Brutia, and Apulia, now Abruzzo Puglia, and separated by the cha^mpaine of Romandiola, and the large Appenini, which bee mountaines rising by Ancona, and running forward to the great gulph, that thrusteth it selfe between Rocca Imper^all

and Gallipolis. It hath many townes, but few cities: onely Brindisi, Ottonto, Barletto and Naples are of some account: the Countrey is rich in vines, oyle, and silke-wormes, the people are dangerous, superstitious, and the Villano liues beastly: the Gentle men are maintainers of liberty and pleasure, scoffers at their owne religion, and as great blasphemers as the Greekes of Cyprus, insomuch that I haue heard them in their rages cry out, Iddio Beco: Puttana del Di: and sweare by the absurd oath of potta del Cielo, as in their commedy called Ruffiana, and published in print, may appeare: yet is their adoration of her so superstitious, that the Sauiour of the world is accounted her inferiour, her attributes make heauen amazed, and her altars smoke with incense and prophanation. And what is this: but to cause the Prophets to exclaime against the sacrifices of the Queene of Heauen? and what is this, but with Ahaz to make images for Baalim, and burne children in the valley of Hinnon, after the abhomination of the heathen? and what is this? but to build high altars with Manasses, and like a Sorcerer, to regard the crying of birds, to vse enchauntments, and giue way to the imposturing art of witchcraft. As for true religion, oh God! thou laughest them to scorne, as they haue the truth in derision, which makes me remember, what is reported in these parts of that worthy Sr. Philip Sidney, who conuersing with a Neapolitane Count, and brought to one of their Churches, wherein he was loth to enter at that time, was yet vnwilling altogether to distaste him, but interiected some excuses: but the Count vnderstanding him well enough, bad him tarrie a while, and so went into his formall deuotion, but quickly returning, embraced him with an oath, by his Santa Donna, that he would renounce all the religion of the world; yea,

his part of Paradice, before hee would trouble againe the conscience of so well deseruing a Gentle-man and companion. They liue in great pomp for outward shew, and make the City, both rich and stately, because they are not permitted to be resident in the Countrey, but keepe heere continuall entercourse, howeuer they groane vnder the Vice-Royes controll, and the ouerwatchings of two strong castles, which keepe both towne and harbour in awe: and although the Spanish pride, and sometimes cruelty, is exercised amongst them, as abating their natiue glory: yet doth it little abridge them of moderne pleasures and customary wantonnesse: so that if the Prophets in times past exclaimed against Tyrus and Sidon, threatned Damascus and Syria, prophesied the desolation of Aegypt and Aethiopia, lamented Iuda and Samaria, and mourned for Babylon and Assyria, they might now cry out against Italy and Naples, which as in times past was called Parthenope, of the Syrens haunting these shores, of the dangers of Scilla and Caribdis, and for the notorious transhaping men into monsters by Circes, allegorically alluding to the voluptuous sinnes, and abusiue pleasures of this City and Countrey: so still may it retaine the comparison, and men bee terrified with the same dangers. For if any place in the world keepes wickednesse warme, with glorious flames and stretcht-out sensuallity to the length and bredth: heere men are not only drunke with iniquity; but commit fornication with Idols; yea, are mad with the rage of impiety.
The next is Romagnia, or Romandiola, called S. Peters Rome. patrimony; a great countrey vnder the Pope, in which are reckned the two Dukedomes of Ferrara and Vrbine, of late daies fallen into the power of the Conclaue of

Cardinals, for want of lawfull succession; or else by reason of their weaknes, who peraduenture haue right, but are not able to contest with so irregular an aduersary, which makes them step a litle aside for feare of being trampled to peeces indeed. The chiefe Cities are Rome, Loretto, Rimano, Bologna, Ferrara, Vrbine, Perugia, Viterbium, Spoletto, Ancona, and Rauenna, all places of account, well fortified, adorned with palaces, replenished with inhabitants, and resort of Gentills both natiues and trauellers, and supplied with all manner of prouision both for necessitie and wantonnes. But Rome is the seat of the Pope, and keepeth the Priests to the duties of the Sanctuary: For the Colledge of Cardinals suffer no man to depresse the glory of the Church, and proclaimes him an heretike, that intermedleth with the ordinances of the great Bishop; so that according to their seuerall degrees religious persons liue in great st^te, keepe Curtezans, trauell in Carosses with six moiles sumptuously trapped, though but a quarter of a mile to the Conclaue, solemnize feasts and banquets, make onely show of some ridiculous ceremonies, and are in truth of slender deuotion in spirituall secrets, but foolish superstition in absurd apparitions: so that if I were an Atheist, and a man vnconscionable to suppose, that there were not a day of account to be made with the commander of all actions, I had rather liue a religious man in Rome, than be a Nobleman of Naples, who (as I said a litle before) of all men liuing wash their hands in carelesnes, and like Pollicrates the tyrant haue nothing to trouble them, but that nothing hath troubled them concerning worldly encombrances; so that with the Prophet I may well cry out, the Priests are gone astray by the meanes of strong drinke, and are ouercome

with wine, they faile in prophesying, and stumble in iudgement, their tables are full of vomit and filthines, and no place is cleane: yea the vision of the Prophet is come vnto them, as the words of a booke which is sealed vp, which men deliuer to one that is learned, saying, read thou, and he replies, I cannot, for it is sealed; then it is deliuered to an ignorant with read thou, but his answer is, I am not learned: so that with the Apostle I may say, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of the Lord; and in the latter daies shall be the doctrine of deuils, forbidding to marry, and eat meat, which God hath sanctified: so that with the Euangelist I may lawfully tell you of the Vision of the beast, which rose out of the sea, hauing 7 heads and 10 hornes, and that he opened his mouth vnto blasphemy, resembled to the woman araied in purple and rose colour, decked with gold, pretious stones, and pearle, and holding a cup of gold in her hand full of abomination and filthines. The Citie yet is swelling bigger and bigger, though nothing comparable to the ostentation of former times: For Historiographers haue confirmed it for greatnes, riches, magnificence, Nobilitie, and famous illustrations the admiration of the world, as contayning 20 English mile in circuit, and shewing a countenance of brauery, and princely structures: But now it onely boasteth of some few ancient buildings, the ruines of the Amphitheater, certaine Obelisci, the swiftnes of Tiber, new erected Palaces of Cardinals, the Castle of St Angelo olim moles Adriani, the Popes owne Palace, and the Church of S. Peter, threatning to exceed with his high erected Cuba and wondrous crosse Iles, our London Cathedrall, which is the vastest heape of stones vnder the sunne: the aire is most pestilent, and vnwholesome, so that S^

haue died in a yeere by infection, and the vninhabited places afford such damps and mists, that many times they effectuate suffocations, but are alwaies dangerous and patible of no remedy, but extraordinary fires.
The third part of Italy affordeth an honorable title to the Duke of Florence, who is stiled Magnus Dux Hetruriae, Florence. and registreth in his booke of renowne for principall Cities Florence, Pisa, Sienna, and Legorne a strong new hauen towne on the sea shore almost ouer against Corsica. The Citie it selfe is one of the stateliest and richest in Italy, the riuer Arnus runneth in the midst, playing the wanton vnder the arches of three delicate stone bridges: the Dona is a delicate and curious Church: the state-house, Dukes palace, and treasurie, with other Arsenals, and store-houses are to be made account of, as glorious spectacles, and worthy structures; but whereas you shall finde a booke of the wonders of the Citie, when you come to the substance from the shadow, it will proue either ridiculous, or not answering expectation. The Duke himselfe studieth nothing but wealth, for which he liueth both sparingly and basely, not caring by what meanes his yeerely entrado is augmented, taking the indirect profit of common Innes: He is of the family of Medices, and his subiects (if I may so terme them, which doe what they list) are fine speakers, but buggerers, and blasphemers.
The fourth roome of Italies palace is opened for the delicate state of Leuca, a Signiory and Citie of that riches, Leuca. and estimation, that in comparing it to so much ground againe, you shall easily finde the difference: For being not 20 mile square, yet can they muster 3000 horse, and 15000 foote: they make much silke, and are well conditioned Merchants: their chiefest Podesta or officer is called

Confaloniero, changed euery two moneths: his councell are of the chiefest Citizens, altred euery six moneths; they liue altogether for the time in one Palace: they haue had many Gouernors, but at the last the Cardinall (as you heard) purchased their manumition, and they as apprehensiue are resolued to maintaine their priuiledges.
The fift share is taken out of Italies lap by the Venetians, who boast of great antiquity, haue a Duke during life, Venice. chosen by the balls of the full Councell, who is at this instant a Donatus, and are proud of their great possessions, but might haue gloried, if they had not lost their first footing. Within the land they keepe close Forum Iulij or Friaull, with the territories of a large countrey round about Venice it selfe, which is called the impossible within the impossible, scited in the sea, and diuided into such channels, that you goe both by water and land to their houses, which indeed are hansomely contriued, and belonging to the Noblemen worthy the reputation of Palaces; yet are the streets so narrow, that they endure neither horse nor cart, neither doth their Gentlemen weare sword or cloake; nor is any fresh water, or good aire belonging to the same, more then what is brought them, or they reserue in pargetted cesternes, as in Zeland and Holland when it raineth. Padoa is their Vniuersitie, and a large towne, famous for Titus Liuius and Peter Auenons birth, who made the bathes vnder the mountaines some fiue mile beyond, where the vipers are taken; it retaineth a goodly monument of a Hall, keeps Antenors toombe in the streets, and dare tell you, that S. Lukes sepulchre is in the Church called the Santo: Palma is a fine towne, and strong in fortification: Verona a famous Citie, whither the Noblemen resort, who much stomach the Venetian

gouernment: Vizenza is a delicate Academie, and hath a stately and yet hansome theater: Crema a frontier towne, and well guarded: Vdine comely and conuenient enough after the Italian manner, and superstitious alike. Treuiso hath a faire Piazzo, and sheweth some wanton Curtezans: and Brescia, where the language is corrupt; for belike they haue beat out the finenes with hammering their armours. On the other side of the Adriaticke sea, they command the pleasant shores of Histria, Dacia, and Dalmatia almost as farre as Ragusa: a litle further in their owne Gulph, and amongst the musters of the Greeke Ilands, they protect Cephalonia, once Ithaca, or the countrey of Vlisses. Corfu, where the strong Castle is accounted a principall peece of workmanship: Xante, an Iland famous for the vallies yeelding 4000 tunne of Corans euery yeere: Zerigo, and many other Ilands, in euery one of which they haue for Gouernour one Prouisor, and two Conciliarij as assistant: they had also many other fortunes, but tempus edax rerum, and the Turkes greatnes hath almost broken the chaine of their prosperitie abroad in peeces: For they haue lost Rhodes, Ciprus, and some other commands; yet doe they keepe Candy in the Mediterranean sea, whose Gouernour is priuiledged with the title of DVKE, and hath potestatem vitae and necis.
Modena is the sixt step of Italies glory, and an hereditary Dukedome, full of riches and fashionable Gentry, Modena. newly allied to Mantua, and reasonable well fortified against his dangerous neighbour in Millane: The country is very pleasant, and conducteth you to those plentifull water-pooles, called Lago de Garda, and Lago de Como; the first vnder the Venetian, the next belonging to the Cardinall

of Trento, and both very neere 50 Italian mile in length, and 30 in bredth.
On the seuenth degree of honors chaire, as he is mounted Mantua. in Italy, is Mantua placed, a new Dukedome of an old Marquisate, in the name of Gonzaga: He liueth in better fashion of Courtship than the other Princes, with a guard of Switzers; the Citie is large, boasteth of Virgils birth, the delicate streames of Po, ouer which for all the swiftnes and bredth, a gallery bridge transporteth both coach, cart, and horse, and vnder which are preserued many courtly barges both for magnificent showes, pleasure of the water in summer time, and necessitie of the inhabitants at all times.
The eight prize of Italies lottery is proclaimed for the Parma. Dukedome of Parma, connited to the house of Farnesius a Spaniard, and signorising ouer Macentia and Mirandula, not onely holdeth vp a stately countenance of three magnificent Cities, famous for many alterations, proud of well contriued ramparts, boasting of hansome women, and exposing an extraordinary profit from the vent of seuerall country merchandice; but openeth the plentifull fields of increase, and giueth cause of wonder for many temporary blessings.
The ninth proportion of this countries happinesse is distributed to the Duchie of Millan^, a principality in times Millano. past of such eminence, that like a faire shining planet in a conspicuous orbe, it once had a prerogatiue of title and goodnes ouer other Dukedomes: and how euer the King of Spaine hath charged Count Fuentes to ouer-looke the Citie and countrey, and Don Diego de Piemontel to superuise the Castle and Garison; yet is the brauery of the place very litle abated, nor doth the Nobleman shrinke

vnder the burthen, but carrieth his load lightly, how euer his inward grones are breathed, and lifteth vp a face of cheerefulnes, as if he dranke wine, and fed on oyle indeed according to the properties of either.
On the tenth rondell of Italies ladder is Genoa mounted, a rich, proud, and sumptuous state; yet much perplexed Genoa. for their perfidious dealing with the French, and now depending on Spanish protection; hath a Duke by their constitution, and placed or displaced according to the mightinesse of factions, or fauour of the Clergy: The Citie hath many buildings of eminent sumptuousnes, and is not so filed in the rankes of reputation, but that they iest it thus with the aire birdlesse, the sea fishles, the mountaines woodles, the men respectles, and the women graceles.
On the eleuenth seate of this Countries Councellchamber hath residence the Prouince of Trent, famous Trent. for a Generall Councell, and lieth warme vnder the Alpes neighbouring Germany: you may passe to it through the famous lakes of Lombardy, De guarda, and De Como, from whence arise those swelling springs, that fill the streaming riuer of Padus, and strengthen the Citie like an Iland, except it be toward the West, where yet you shall behold a reasonable fortification, and a well murited wall with ramparts and rauelings: It is subiect to a Cardinall, who like a Count Palatine taketh all iurisdiction vpon him, and with the two mastring coorbes of the world praemium, and poena, gouerneth the sterne of this principalitie.
The twelfth place to make the iury the fuller, is assigned to Piemont, the flourishingst part of Sauoy, as opening the Piemont. gates of his chiefest palace, and Citie Turine, where a Citadell of Spanish Garisons taketh account of all passengers,

which come ouer the Alps; it sendeth the riuer of Po through the countrey as farre as Ferrara into the Venetian Gulph; and hauing many Knights of Malta within her walles is ready for their succour, which way soeuer it chance, and they againe for hers, as reciprocally depending vpon one another, and howeuer they are all ielous of the Spaniard, they yet dare not breath it aloud; but sure I am when I passed through Italy, and that the Cardinals Aldabrandino and Caesario came with a treaty to haue the Prince of Piemont and his brother vnder the King of Spaines protection, the Secretary was imprisoned by the Councell of State for vrging the matter in the King of Spaines behalfe: so that there is probable suspition, that the Sauoijen and Spaniard will not continue long friends for all their alliance: it receiueth the customes of Merchants trauelling ouer the Alpes, and maintaineth the office of Dacij, and could be contented to haue either Millane or Naples annexed to his Coronet. But if you will haue Sauoy flie with her owne wings, you must hearken a litle after some antiquitie.


CHAP. XII. The storie of SAVOY.
THE countrey of Sauoy is all mountanous euen from the fields and champaine of Sa^y descr^d. Lions to Mount Sinese, the onely passage of the Alpes into Italy: It is called Sinese, quasi nunquam sine niue, neuer without snow, and is indeed a dangerous, tedious, and cold trauell euen in the midst of summer: but

Sauoy hath many other hills, as Aguabelle, and Agabellette, and is euery way full of strange and vneuen iournies, so that it shall not be amisse to deriue our discourse from the etymologie of the word, which may serue to confront ignorance, and enrich vs with the knowledge of things, which is no great burthen, but rather a happines, according to the Poet, Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas: You must then vnderstand, that this strange and vnsauoury nation, by reason of the streight and narrow waies to trauell in, was euer subiect to theeues, and being slenderly inhabited had not sufficiency to protect either themselues or passengers from the confused rages of men addicted to spoiles and murthers: wherevpon it continued in the name and scandall of Maluoy, the ill or mischeeuous way, vntill a worthy aduenturer of the countrey attempted a reformation, and shew'd these disordred people the strength of a more powerfull arme, preuailing so farre, that by his industry and fortune, these enormities were not onely purged, but the first causers remoued, I meane the robbers and theeues were either slaughtred outright, or publikely executed for a terrifying example, and as a reward to his vertues, the end of his labours had a quadruplicitie of blessings: First, the Emperor made him a DVKE, gaue him part of Italy called now Piemont, as if it would speake for it selfe, that it is a countrey at the foote of the mountaine, and inuested him with iura regalia, not to be accountable to any Prince for his actions within his owne territories. Secondly, the countrey it selfe changed her title from Maluoy into Sauoy, quasi salua via. Thirdly, these incredible mountaines erected houses, entertained husbandmen, and cattle, and builded Chappels, where a man would imagine an impossibilitie

of footing. Last of all, it was stored with forts and castles, in such a defensiue manner, that some of them at this day rancke themselues in the highest forme of bulwarkes and and ramparts. But I must not thus passe ouer their accounts, nor vilipend their glory. For they boast of antiquity of Kings, as that Hanibal found Brunco disseised of his inheritance by his yonger brother, and so rectified that discord. That Bitultus or Bituitus, another King, was taken prisoner by Q. Fabius Maximus, some 50. yeeres after Hanibals passage into Italy. And that Cotius raigned in the time of Augustus the Emperour, so that till the Goths and Vandals dissolued all gouernments of the West, these countries remained firme in their former renowne, as part of Gallia Cisalpina: but afterward mischeefe was added to mischeefe, till it was concluded otherwise by time and worthy endeauours, as you haue heard: whereupon Chambery was the cheefest towne on this side the Alps, scituated in a delicate rich valley, full of Gentle-mens houses, on the other side of the mountaine Agabella, ouer which the traueller spendeth commonly fiue or six hours: it hath a handsome castle now manned with Spanyards, in the behalfe of the Duke, the City is orderly ditcht and fortified, and by the fauor of a pretty riuer, hath commodity of a reasonable water, otherwise it is snowy through the countrey, and the people are Strumosae, as in Switzerland. The suburbs are not fully recouered of her ruines, which they were subiect vnto in the yeere 1600. when the King of France, as stomaching the cunning violence of the Duke of Sauoy's detention, of the Marquisat of Salust, came to Grenoble by the marches, and after good surueigh besieged Chambery, lodging in the suburbs, and commanded Villeroy to parley with Iacob and the President Rochet, about the

surrendring the towne and castle, whom at last the people compelled to a composition, as finding it impossible to resist the French forces: thus within three dayes was the towne, and within six the castle surrendred, and Le Buise a Gentle-man of Daulphine left for Gouernour: but the successe of these actions was not comparable to the fortune of attaining mount Melian, and St. Katherines fort, two of the strongest holds that euer I saw. For mount Melian is Mount Melian. seated on the top of an high and rocky mountaine, the ditch bankes very steepe, and the defences consist of fiue great bastions flanked in most warlike manner, to which is but one passage, and that from the towne. The King (according to the condition of men) transported onely with outward shewes, sayd it was impregnable, but vnderstanding himselfe afterward a little better, commanded to besiege it: so the Marquis Rosny, great master of the artillery, drew vp seuen canons by the force of armes, and strength of men, and two batteries were made by De Bourdes, Lieutenant Generall of the artillery, against the bastions of Maiuosin and Bouillars, besides an old Tower, which had beene shaken by Francis the first.
The Fort was commanded by the Earle of Brindis, who had all prouision for his defence, and like one of Dauids Worthies, prooued an honourable Seruitor, had not the Duke failed, and brake his word, leauing him to such a fortune, as extremities accustome. For hee held it out foure months, after many thousand shot of fortie canons, whose voyces sounded out nothing, but terrour; and effects made way vnto feare and mistrust: and accordingly, seeing the French had too good footing to bee remooued, a composition was condescended vnto, and the castle surrendred.

The towne of Aguabelle is scituated at the foot of a great rocke, as if it lay asleepe in the lap of security. By it Aguabelle. runnes the riuer of Arck, it was surprized by the good endeauours of the Signeurs of Crequy and Morges, not giuing them of the castle any leasure to burne it. At the same time was Conflans commanding the passage of Tarentaies and Carboniers, with all the straights of Morien in the Kings hands: but if you would know what pleased him indeed, it was the braue surprizall of St. Katherines Fort, a gift as if fortune should open her lap, and bid him with cheerefulnesse be his owne caruer. For it is scited on a high hill within six mile of Geneua, and not onely ouerlookes the Countrey, but raiseth her rocky sides in such a manner, as if it cared neither for battery, nor bullet, but would return them backe againe, as you see a man spit against the winde to his owne defiling.
Concerning Geneua, by the water it seems impregnable, Geneua. as washed with the pleasant billowes of the lake Lemanus, and yet made vnaccessable, by reason of certaine marishes, ouer which neither horse nor cart can trauell: by the land it hath all the helps of art and nature, yet not without danger of treason and stratagems: but that I am perswaded God hath reserued it, as little Zoar was a city of refuge, when all the cities of Sodome and Gomorrha were on a blaze round about it. So Sauoy, the King of Spaine, the Pope, and her owne treasons were all disappoynted, and it still remaines in the freedome of ablessed protection, boasting of nothing more, then her 300. yeeres continuance in an vniformity of religion, and that it retaineth the true method of the Primatiue Church. But to St. Katherines Fort againe. It consisteth of fiue bastions, which are not walled but ditcht. well furnished with artillery, and had 600. men

to defend it, who yet were in seuerall distractions, when they perceiued the confidence of the Kings army, not to take all that paines without further satisfaction; so they submitted to the clemency of Count Soysons, after the King was departed, to goe meet the Queene at Lyons, and thus were these impregnable places made the tennis-ball of fortune, and left vs this obseruation, that men, money, and endeauours, will ouercome all disasters, and make the very mountaines yeeld to heroike resolutions. This is that Fort, which was excepted in the composition between Sauoy and France. This is that Fort, that was to keepe the Countrey in obedience. This is that Fort, whose gouernment being denied to Duke Byron, startled his resolutions, and plunged him in the irrecouerable gulph of discontented treasons. The towne of Moriana is beautified with a Colledge, Monastery, and Churches, and tooke the first name, either because the people are swartish and blacke; or the earth (like some places of Aethiopia) resembleth clots of pitch, and so indeede their swine are of the same colour. A little further lies Bramont, a city of that antiquity, that Caesar filleth some part of his Commentaries with her relations. The passages to all these places are somewhat fearefull to strangers. For to ride vnder, and behold such mighty mountaines and rockes, to see the snow dissolue and runne downe with that impetuous force, making such anfractus and ruptures, that diuers hundred mils are turned with the same, to heare the terrible noyse of the channell, whose foundation is huge stones disseuered from the hils: to see the pine trees stand vnder like a carpet, ready to receiue the falling of the snow, is a thing both of admiration and pleasure. But for mine owne part, it startled me not at all, in regard I had marched ouer some mountaines

and places in Ireland; especially Pen men mawre in Pen men mawre in Wales. Wales, which for the length of the passage, is the fearefullest that euer I saw, because the stony rocke hangeth ouer so many hundred fathome high, and the sea lieth vnder as great a depth: so that a quarter of a mile together, the way is not eight foot broad, and (as it were) patch vp in the broken places, with furrs and bauin, to keepe both horse and man from slipping. Besides, after a great frost you shall haue an hundred load of stones fall at once from the rocke into the sea, and almost batter the fence in peeces, which in the fearefull report, and sudden viewing by a new commer, must needs be troublesome, and indeed surmounteth any place of Sauoy, or the Alps.
Thus much for Sauoy, whose eldest sonne is now called Prince of Piemont, hauing his court a part from the Dukes palace, with a small guard of Switzers, and liueth in reasonable eminence, knowing his father to bee an absolute Prince, himselfe a nephew to Spaine, and neerly allied to the house of Austria. As for the Dukes iealousie of the power of the Clergy, and the Spanish encroachments, I am resolued (like a smoothering fire) it will one day burst foorth into flames of despight, and did he not rather feare France, as a neere neighbour, and more dangerous aduersary, he would peraduenture attempt further into Italy, in despight of Spaines ouer-watching. But because it is a thanklesse labour to gleane the fields of other folkes haruest, and that you haue whole volumes of the Spanish, French, Low-Countries, Hungary, Venice, Portugall, and Turkish affaires, I will entermeddle no further: onely I must speake a little concerning Millane, and so leaue Italy betweene the straights of her owne pleasures at home, and suspicion of forraine intrusion abroad.



CHAP. XIII. The Story of MILLANE.
ABout the yeere 1492. the Realme of Naples reuolting, Rhene Duke of Loraine The occurrences of Millane. was sent for by the Pope to be inuested King, which was the first motiue for the French to be admitted into the attractiue delights of Italy. For when many hands had (as it were) torn a peeces the peace of this Countrey, it seemed a charitable and meritorious worke to contriue an establishment, and redacting it to vniformity, which the Controller of Kingdomes at that time, I meane the Pope, determined by this course, had not the very next yeere his minde receiued a further perturbation. For this Pope was a Spanyard, by the name of Roderick Borgia, or Alexander the sixt, whom the Venetians, and Duke of Millane beeing an vsurper at that time, established in the Papacy, because they might bee assisted from him in all their demands. Whereupon the Duke, by the name of Lodwick Sforza, and an vnkle, surprizeth the Cittadle of Millane, insinuated into the loue of the principall nobility, and confederated with many Princes of Italy, to corroborate his new gotten greatnesse. All this yet hindred not the next iourney of Charles the eighth, King of France, who now pretending a very right to Naples and Sicilia, with much adoe was incited to passe the Alps, and take his pleasure in these plenteous fields, in which, that his walkes might be the more smooth, hee condescended to certaine articles with this Vsurper

Lodwick, much about the time that Iohn the true Duke of Millane died, leauing behinde him one son and daughter, in whose minority Lodwick, as hee had before wrested the gouernment, now assumeth the title, had not his forwardnesse beene somewhat intercepted by this French visitation, whereupon he perswaded the Venetians, who of themselues were suspicious enough, when they saw the French Kings glorious entrance into Florence, to some interposition, and so both Millane and Venice grew iealous of King Charles his proceedings, which yet could not bee so cunningly trauersed, but hee was made acquainted with their vnconstancy, and held his peace till a fitter opportunity. For now he was to make his pompous entrance into Rome, where the wals both of the City, and the Castle St. Angelo fell downe miraculously before him. By which occasion, as if the sword of Iehu should kill the Priests of Baal, is prognosticated, that by the hand of France, the enormities of the Church, and the monstrous abuses of the Clergy, should be winnowed and throughly fanned: but it should seeme there was a tricke of preuention put vpon him, and the name of an Emperour taught him another way to acknowledge the Popes fauour. For 1495. about the 12. of May he enters Naples in an Imperiall habit, as Emperor of Constantinople, by the Popes grant and confirmation: but he had not possessed it fiue months, before there was a generall reuolt concluded against him, as at the same instant Millane had done with Lodwick: whereupon the King somewhat fearefull of an Italian receipt, or other strange surprizals, returnes the next yeere home againe, with purpose to renew the warre, and reintegrate his former losses: but the Cardinall of St. Malo hindred it at that instant, had not the Princes of Italy, perceiuing how the

Venctian and Millenois triumphed for the departure of the French, incensed the King againe to punish them both 1497. which was also interceded against by his brother the Duke of Orleance, who disclaimed in his owne name or person to disturb the peace of Millane: yet had not sufficient authority to diuert the Kings designes, and so the warres of Italy were renewed.
Now is Lodwick perplexed indeede, and compelled to prostrate himselfe before the Couchant Lyon of Venice, and lower then the same vseth so his submission, that the noble beast enclineth to succour him: yet in such a manner, as Israel assisted Iuda against Assyria, being fearefull of extirpation her selfe; but as soon as the publike enemy was departed, the emulation at one anothers greatnesse drew whole armies into the field: so playd Simeon, Eleazer and Ichoconon with the Romans, when their ciuill mutinies barracadoed the streets with heaps of slaughtered carkasses, and filled the channels with the spilt-out bloud of murthered men. For Millane is now iealous of Florence, Florence of Millane, both of Venice, Venice of both, and all three of the French: yet Charles goes on, and leauing garrison almost ouer all Italy, returnes home againe: but at his castle of Amboyse dies of an Apoplexy, 1498. after hee had vnfortunately strucke his head against a low doore, going to see a set at tennis. Lewis the 12. then succeeded, and not onely claimed the Dutchy of Millane, iure millitari, but takes vpon him the stile by right of succession, and a property of inheritance, as resolued to maintaine, what his father had gotten, and so gloriously purchased, to which he is adiuted by all the supportation, wherein Pope Alexander could animate him, who to raise vp his bastard sonne Caesar Borgia to a Princely throne in Italie,

ioyneth with King Lewis in his enterprizes, and so contriueth the matter, that Millane mutinies against Lodwick Sforza, and submits vnto the French with Cremona and Genes.
All this while is Lewis at Lyons: but who will not run to The (...) in poss^ssion of Millane. carry so great a King glad tydings; so that he is quickly aduertized of the fortunate proceedings of his army, and as quickly trauels ouer the Alps, beating the way of Mount Sinese, entring Millane in triumph, and left for Gouernour, Philip Lord of Rauestine, and Baptista Fregose his Lieutenant. The castle was yet protected with the guard of 3000. men, and committed to the loyalty of Bernardine of Corte borne in Pauia, who by his good beginning gaue life to their opinion, which supposed it impregnable, and not to be taken by force. But what men cannot in the Lyons, they compasse with the Foxes skin, and thus farre deride both the strength of souldiers, and pride of fortifications, that where the minde may be corrupted vpon any tearmes of disloyalty, neither wals, ramparts, nor manhood, can preuent the power and deceit of bribery. This appeared in the disposition or Bernardine, and Philip of Fresques; whom the cunning of Triuulce, and the disbursing 20000. crownes, quickly diuerted from their first resolutions, and made a breach in the Citadle without mine or battery.
Thus was the French possessed of this Duchy without competition, or diffidence, and Lewis the 12 made his royall entry accordingly. But marke the vicissitude of all things, Millane reuolts againe, and Sforza recouers all as easily, as he lost it, in which busines the Swisses proued very disloyall to the French, and the lookers on were amazed to behold fortune proud of inconstancy, so that

this vse may be raised thereby: How euer men satisfie ambition for the time, yet are they certaine of nothing vnder the sunne. Againe, when by indirect courses designes are concluded, they must stand the better on their guard, and prepare their patience when any alteration startleth resolution: thus fared it with Millane againe. For as you see a glooing heat in Aprill changed on the sodaine to bitter blasts and cloudy tempests, so was Sforzas iollity reuersed, himselfe surprized, taken and caried prisoner to Lions, where denied the benefit of a princely execution, and resolued nothing can be so acceptable to a man in misery, as a noble death, worthy the name of a Romane, hee dies at once, whether for griefe, or great heart, it matters not: yet doth the King of France pardon Millane, and at last keeps all in quiet. But the warres of Naples are renewed 1501. and the kingdome is diuided betweene France and Aragon, so that great alteration happens in Italy, and within two yeeres there is a generall ouerthrow of the French with the taking of the Castle at Naples by the Spaniard: yet is not Beniamin discomfited, but calleth his brethren together, and with more setled courages reintegrate their estates, and so the French make head againe, attending the good hower of a better prosperity.
About this time in August died Pope Alexander the sixt of poyson, which he had prepared for the Cardinals: but his taster by mistaking the flagons tooke away both his life, and the pride of his expectation concerning Caesar Borgias glory, or his further desires to set the fuell of Italy on a blaze: After him to stint the strife of many Nations expecting the Papacie, old Francis Piccolamini Cardinall of Sienna was chosen Pope, by the name of Pius the

third, in memory of Pius the second his Vnkle, who made him Cardinall: but a yong man must prepare himselfe to dye, and an old man cannot liue long: so he continues scarce a moneth, leauing his roome, and the glory of all Rome to the Cardinall of S. Pierre, who was made Pope by the name of Iulius the second 1504. in which yeere Naples wrested her head out of the French coller, and seemed more glad to be supported by Arragon: nor was this sufficient, but vpon a supposition to extinguish the light of the lamps of France in Italy, a new league 1511. was corroborated by the vnstedfast Italians against the French, which when the King perceiued, and that he coniectured, how his barke must bee driuen to dangerous streits by the vncertaine windes of alteration, he transported his Court and Councell from Florence to Millane, and from Millane to Lions, determining to weary them with tedious iournies and attendance, so is Italy perplexed, and the Nobles repine without remedy; till at last the Emperor Maximilian spreadeth the wings of the Aegle, and clocketh the Princes of Italy vnder her sides: whereupon with the help of the Spaniard called the holy league, warre is made against Lewis, and the Duchy of Millane recouered againe to the vse of Maximilian Sforza grandchilde to Lodwick, who was inuested Duke by the Cardinall of Sion about the end of December, yet by the Swizzes assistance, and loyalty, the Castles of Millane and Cremona hold still for the French; and the imbers are not so extinguished, but fire appeares, and yeeldeth this comfort, that if they moderately proceed, a greater heat and more quickning light may be made.
In the midst of which convulsions of Italy, Pope Iulius dies, and Iohn Cardinall of Medices succeeded him by the

title of Leo the 10. whereby a second truce was ratified betweene Lewis of France, and the King of Arragon: so that Lewis made great benefit of this interim and cessation, confederating with the Venetians, by whose assistance he brought a royall Armie into the Duchy of Millane: but the Pope hauing sent 40000 ducats amongst the Switzers, quickly weighed downe their former stedfastnes, and so when Millane and Cremona was stored with them, they were corrupted to be traitors to their first masters, and accordingly against all expectation, with an odious reuolt encountred the French in as cheerefull a manner, as euer before they had entertained the crownes of the sunne against the Italians: so that ere the yeere went about, the Castles of Millane and Cremona returne to the obedience of the Duke, and King Lewis held nothing in Italy but the lanterne of Genes, which afterward the Genouais razed to the ground, both to preuent the occasion of future tyranizing ouer them, and to manifest their inveterate malice against the flower-de-luce, though it glistered neuer so gloriously in an azure field. Now dyes Lewis 1514. but corruptio vnius generatio alterius: For Francis the first suruiues, and renewes the warres of Italy, passing the Alpes the yeere following, and surpassing considering his Royall Armie into the Duchy of Millane against the Emperor, Arrogonians, Sforza: and the Switzers contract a league, and aduance a strength to shoulder the new French King from any firmenes, nay if it may be footing in Italy; but like a Cedar of Libanus he standeth vpright, enduring the shaking of these tempestuous stormes, and so proceedeth to a warlike tryall, whereby the 13 of September in a gallant encounter at Marignan, he preuaileth 1515. against the Switzers, besiegeth the new Duke Maximilian

Sforza in Millane, and coadiuted by the Duke of Burbon wrested this composition, that Maximilian shall bee the Kings pentioner in France, and the Switzers to depart with bagg and baggage.
Thus are the French once againe welcommed into the pleasures of Lombardy, and Francis the first is Lord of this vnquiet Duchy, which now is detained with a seeming securitie, because the Pope applauded the successe, and according to the superstition of those times, and policie of temporizing, blessed the royall standard of Valoies. But about the 20 of Iune 1519. the Emperor Maximilian paies his tribute of life to the first enlarger of breath, and Charles of Austria, competitor with the King of France, is preferred by the name of Carolus Quintus, inheritor of Spaine, with so many titles besides, that the Harolds were troubled in the proclaiming them, and the stile was tedious to be divulged. Betweene these two great Princes so many grudges increased, and stimulatory causes of enmitie appeared, that at last open defiances proclaimed an vnappeased warre, and the trumpets of Bellona ecchoed nothing but disturbance in the fields of Europe, especially after the Pope declares himselfe against France, and by way of prophesie fore-telleth the ruine of the French gouernment in Italy, adding withall some ominous signes of calamitie to ensue, and casting vp an vntoward reckning in this manner: That on S. Peters day at sunne-set, a lightning fell on the great tower of the Castle of Millane, and ouerthrew 6 fathomes of the curtaine on either side, consumed 250000 weight of powder, 1200 fire-pots, salt for 5 yeeres, and buried in the rubbish Richbowrg Captaine of the Castle, with 300 Gentlemen of account: vpon which aduantage the 23 of Nouember the

Marquis of Pescarra with his Spanish bands, the Marquis The Spaniard taketh part with Millane against the French. of Mantua, the Cardinall of Medices, and all the Emperors and Popes confederates come to Millane, and once againe recouer it, sacking the Towne which continued 15 daies, in which time the Pope dying, a new Pope called Adrian the sixt, who was Cardinall of S. Sixtus, was elected, and admitted Sforza into Millane, had not the French the yeere following attempted to recouer their losses, besieged Millane againe, tooke Nouarra, and presumed to establish themselues more strongly, which questionles they had done, but that the Venetians forsaking them, made the matter somewhat difficult, and left the Army staggering, like a tree almost tormented with the cruelty of many strokes, and waueth in the winde ready to fall with the next violence. At last the fatall stroke is giuen indeede, mischeeues throng on one another so hastily, that the French 1522 are expelled Italy, so farre from hoping to augment their glories, that they are in despaire to recouer their owne, formerly possessed. For presently the Castle of Millane yeelded to the conqueror, the garrison was quickly dispersed, or rather consumed with sicknesse, the Spaniard insulted, the Italians trembled, and in a word all the French particeans were eaten out with hunger, diseases, and mutinies.
Thus was Francis Sforza invested in the Duchy of Millane, and a generall league betweene the Millanoies, Emperor, and Venetians concluded: but for all this successe of the confederates (with the addition of the Duke of Burbons reuolt to the Emperor) the French Armie continues in Italy, and the Admirall with new forces breatheth out new malice against Millane, besieging the towne, battering the Citadle, and trampling their best fields to durt: in

which times Pope Adrian dyes, and Iulius Cardinall of Medices is chosen by the name of Clement the 7. who to insinuate with the Emperor beginneth a strange worke, and by the way of conniuencie permitteth him to vsurpe Millane for himselfe, whereupon all the Princes of Italy The Spaniard by the Popes flattery looketh after Millane for himself^. are terrified indeed, and not only repine against the Popes proceeding, but goe the plaine way to worke seeking by force of armes to propulse the Spaniard, wherein the better to preuaile 1524, the French are recalled againe, and by the glorious titles of Protectors of Millane, the Marquis of Salust and Tremouile admitted for the French: But at the last the 25 of February, the fatall battaile of Pauy determined all controuersies, and the Emperor triumphed in the captiuitie of the King of France, which occasioned a very dissolution of the French gouernment in Italy, as inforced to disclaime their interest both in the kingdome of Naples, and Duchy of Millane.
Notwithstanding Francis Sforza is in no securitie of his estate, as suspecting the Emperors demand of 1200000 ducats for his expences, and that he intended a plaine vsurpation of the whole Duchie, whereupon disabled by force to suppresse him, he flies to the succour of his wits, and tampers with the Marquis of Pescara for the inuesture of the royall mantle of Naples, vpon condition to endeuour the spanish expulsion out of Millane; which designe and proiect the Pope and other Princes not onely allow, but as principall agents are imployed in the negotiation: but the Emperor Charles is incensed, and taking notice of these treasons, as he now entitleth them, raised vp the dust, that made Sforza blinde, and thus punisheth him, as chiefe delinquent. On the 24 of Iuly 1526. he brings his Armie to the siege of Millane, and with Caesars speedinesse

of Veni, vidi, vici, circumspecteth the Citie, obtaineth the conquest, and settles the Duke of Burbon in the Duchy: nor is his anger so moderated, but seeing the father of charitie durst transgresse his owne principles, he marcheth to Rome, and sacketh it, expulsing the Pope, not in admonitory manner, or after the discipline of the Church to excommunicate him ad coertionem; but with violence and terror to torment him ad ruinam, teaching him a new lesson of obseruing Emperors and Kings, and as farre as time had discouered to his conscience, shewing apparant signes of disanulling his authoritie in temporall affaires: nor desisteth he so, but vnderstanding of new releefe from the French and Lansguents, he hurrieth about with a full resolution to make due end of all. Thus endured this Duchy all the plagues depending on a miserable warre, till at last 1530. the children of France are released, and a peace ratified betweene the Emperor and the French King, who in the articles of agreement surrendred his claime to all these territories in Italy, and the Emperor is proud, hee hath so easie a passage into the countrey, which although seemed much distasting to the Princes, and was as thornes in the sides of the Clergy, as appeared The Spaniard absolute ly possesseth Millane. amongst the Cardinals, when they were enforced to ratifie the same: yet was the Emperor carelesse of their displeasure, and proceeded in what iourney he listed in despight of the Papacie; onely with a colourable show of commiseration, he restored Sforza to the Duchy of Millane, but kept the Castles of Cremona, and it in his hands: so that presently after his death, it was incorporated to the crowne of Spaine, and hath euer since looked with the eyes of ielousie and repining vpon all their Gouernors.



CHAP. XIV. The description of FRANCE.
THE flourishing kingdom of France euer The Topography of France. since that Charles the great did as it were spread the wings of the Cherubins ouer sanctum sanctorum, and ratified the glory of the Pope of Rome by expelling the Gothes and Vandalls out of Italy, was knowne by the characters of the Christian King, and eldest sonne of the mother Church. But long before it suffred a diuision into Cisalpinam and Transalpinam: Transalpinam againe into Celticam, Belgicam, and Acquitanicam: whereby the best parts of Lombardy, the low Countries, and all on this side the Rhene westward marched vnder the standard of France, and was proud to be registred in the booke of her accounts: so that whatsoeuer hath bin since disioynted from this French frame, may be resembled vnto children pull'd out of the armes of a louing mother. But I will quietly bring you into her own roomes, whereby you shall partly behold the beauty and workmanship of her building: onely by the way I must a litle touch the Etymologie of the word, and tell you, that (...) in Greeke signifieth milke, and so the people Galli of (...). from their complexion, and resemblance to whitenes, were called Galli or Galati. For other particulars, you haue Caesars commentaries, and well compacted histories, which haue tossed and tumbled the lodgings, yea the very beds of her chambers, and our owne acquaintance hath

ouer-lookt her choicest closets. It was once the nurse of valour, and afforded her vberant paps in those daies to such men, as trampled ouer the fields of Greece, robbed Apollos Temple at Delphos, fetcht away the spoiles of Asia, and by the assistance of Brennus an Englishman performed actions of wonderment, and applause. It was afterward the pride of Roman Consuls, and the greatest ambition thought it selfe sufficiently recompenced with her gouernment, when Rome had yet lessned her roome to make it prouinciall.
Presently followed the diuision of the Empire, and all the gouernment almost of Europe was rent asunder with the furie of very strange and sauage Nations, whose confused Chaos of barbarisme the brauery and goodnes of this countrey redacted to vniformity. A litle while after diuers families by being maiores palatij became masters of the Kingdome, wherein some by suppression, some by merit, some iure militari, and some by right of inheritance lifted vp the crowne and maiesticall head of this country: Straight-way the Eagle of Rome was sicke, and from France recouered health, how euer afterward it sought for further cure from the Germanes. Then followed the Law Salick amongst them, with absolute interdicting the Crowne of this glorious Monarchy to fall to the distass: whereupon the three famous houses of Valois, Burbon, and Loraine entailed the same, and made as it were a feofment of perpetuity, wherein this Diadem still keepeth her residence, and is dunged, watred, and liketh her manuring: so that whatsoeuer hath bin long since diuided amongst, many Princes, looking vpon one another with the eyes of emulation, and ambitious desires to become greatest in the same, is now at length vnited vnder one Monarchy,

and title of France: so that howsoeuer some will haue Loraine absolute of it selfe, and no subiect: some stomach, that Burgoine is revolted: some repine, that Daulphine was vnited by donation: some confound Gascoigne and Guienne, abolishing quite the name of Acquitane: some remember, that Normandy was English: some presume of Britany, as a Principate of her owne: some make Sauoy afraid, when Geneua calls the King of France patron and protector; and some by diuision and subdiuision would extenuate her greatnes: yet is now all France, and the worthy Princes are resolued to keep correspondency with strangers, but suffer no new intrusion, nor any forreine claimes to preuaile at their marble table: I will therefore desist from any further vnwinding the yarne of strange bottomes, but spread a moderne cloth, and giue you some slender taste of her present dainties, whereby you shall not depart away altogether vnsatisfied.
To begin euen vnder the mountaines Pirenei, which Gascoine and Guienne. diuide Spaine from France: the first part is called Gasconia, including Guienne and Acquitane, Dukedomes once appropriate to the heire of England, before the inuesture of the Principat of Wales. The chiefest Cities are Burdeaux and Tholouse, washed with the plenteous waters of the Garonn, a riuer not onely spreading her many armes abroad to send plenty all ouer the fields; but powring out her greater streames into the sea, welcommeth store of ships into her ports and harbours, sending them backe againe into many countries of Europe with glad tidings of an abundant vintage. Burdeaux is watrishly scited, by reason the riuer, and springs raiseth many marshes here about; yet is it wholesome, and the heat of the climate can endure the moistnes of the aire; the Citie is ancient,

and boasteth of an Vniuersitie, but more properly of the great concourse of Merchants: It is beautified with many monuments, especially the Pallace, wherein King Richard the second, the sonne of the blacke Prince was borne; and another without the Towne, a worke euer since the Emperor Galienus, and then supposed a glorious Amphitheater. The towne of Tholouse is more proud of antiquitie, and telleth of time before Troies devastation: yea remembreth since Deborah Iudge of Israel was famous for her wisdome and gouernment. It hath now a well disciplined schoole, a court of Parliament, populous streets, and reasonable buildings, but indeed they seeme very ancient, and for some speciall structures may carry the credit of magnificence. The other townes are many and very good, except countrey villages, which are as rude as in other places, and the Pesant liueth like a drudge, not daring scarse drinke of the wine of his owne garden, lest he should not raise such profit, as would answer the proportion of his rent. But herein our English Merchant hath somewhat ouer-reached them: For they hire the gardens themselues, and make the best vse of them, not trusting their labourers and husbandmen to handle the presses, but as they be hired by the day, or great.
The second part is called Poictoy, a countrey so great, and plentifull, that there are numbred 1200 parishes, and Poictoy. three Bishopricks, and faine would haue you reckon these principall walled townes within her diuision of inferior and superior: The bishopricks are Poictiers, Leucone, and Mailezay: The superior townes Roch sur yon, or if you will Rochell, one of the strongest townes in Europe, and the rather because it hath not trusted her walls and ramparts, which are yet stupendous, and magnificent, but the Lord

of hostes, and his true religion, which hath alwaies raised their spirits to an extraordinary confidence of mercy, and preuailing against any Antichristian attempt: Talmont, Meroil, Vouuant, Meruant, Bresfure, Lodun, Fountenay le Conte: The inferior, or townes of the lower diuision, Noiart, Partenay, Touars, Moncontoul, Herenault, Meribeau, Chastelleraut, and others of like eminence, amongst whom Poictiers is reckned the most populous of all France next to Paris, it is watred with the ouer-flowings of Clanius, a riuer filling the Loire, and sending it the faster into the sea: it boasteth of some antiquities, a Theater called the Sandes; a palace of the Emperor Galienus; an Aquaeduct, to which belong certaine fountaines, vulgarly called arceux de parigne, and other memories from famous Romans, who were here euer resident: To talke of their Churches, prisons, walls, ports, ramparts, arsenals, towers, riuers, bridges, and such like, it were superfluous considering they are not subiects either of admiration, or delicacie, but euen common or ordinary buildings.
The third part is Aniou, though a litle Prouince, yet very Aniou. fruitfull, and affordeth such excellent vines, that the common prouerbe crieth out, the wine of Aniou. For the stately riuer of Loire comming from Orleance posteth a pace with the glad tidings of a plentifull country, and excellent husbandry in their gardens: The mountaines yeeld a red stone and parget called ardoises; the vallies plenty of grasse, the riuers fish, and the barrennest place pasture for cattle: The chiefe Citie is Angiers on the banke of the Meduan, not far from the Loire; yet is it ioyned by a bridge of stone to another on the other side, and so you may conclude, that two townes make one Citie: Here you haue also ruines of Theaters, vulgarly Brohan,

and an Academy enlarged, or rather founded by Lodwick the second 1389: the other townes are Samurs, Belforce, Bange, and such like, of whose particulars my purpose is not to make relation.
The fourth part is Britania, in times past Armorica: It boasteth for sending ouer such inhabitants into our countrey, Br^taigne. as not onely taught them a language, but peopled and possessed the same: Wee againe are resolued, that though France was first inhabited, yet from the greater Britaine the lesse receiued denomination, and by entercourse of people, affinitie, mariage, and politike confederation, both countries learned one anothers language. For being called Armorica, it at last condiscended to be entitled litle Britaine, retaining a long time an absolute Duke of her owne, and diuiding her territories into low and high Britaine: in both which are numbred nine Bishopricks, Carnouaile, S. Paul, Treguires, Doll, Rheines, S. Malo, Nants, Vannes, and Brein, amongst whom Doll hath the precedency, though Renes and Nants be the chiefest and greatest Cities: It is three parts exposed to the sea, and hath many strong ports, especially Brest, famous for sundry warlike exploits, and the last intrusion of the Spanish leaguers.
The fift part is Normandy, diuided into the countries of Constantine, Bessin, Maine, and Auge, in which as principall Normandy. Cities are recorded Roan, Pontoise, Alenson, Argenni, Caen, Baieux, and some few others: The people boast of their endeuors in spinning linnen cloth, excellent wits, and able bodies for the warres: But of all other things, they would exceede (especially the Gentlemen) for mansuetude, courtship, and affabilitie in attending the affaires of peace, and quietnes.

The sixt part challengeth the title of the Ile of France, a countrey so named, because it is in a manner environed Ile of France with excellent riuers, which make the ground so fertile, that for number of Townes, Gentlemens houses, places of pleasure, conueniencie of prouision, and other particulars tending to brauery and profit, it excelleth all the countrey: But her chiefest pride ariseth from the possession of Paris on the riuer Sequana, or the Sein, the mistris of all Cities; and Orleans on the Loire famous for many remarkable actions, betweene whom almost 40 English mile is one cawsey of stone, or otherwise there were no trauelling, especially in winter: For all the ground is so fat and clammy, that Paris it selfe is called Lutetia of luto, or the durtinesse of the soile.
The seuenth part belongeth to Bourges, or Berry, a countrey Berry. boasting of many delicate things; but the Citie is quite out of patience, if you either forget her monuments, or contradict her first founder to be Ogiges, the grandchilde of Noe: It is enclosed with the countries of Touraine, Burbon, and Niuernois, and on the riuer of Loire washing cleane the fields with his strange ouer-flowings are erected Cosme, Le Charity, the Citie of Neuers with her long bridge, Molins, and many other townes, some of hansome eminence, and some of lesse consequence.
The eight part is attributed to Limosin or Lemania, Limosin. contayning the County of Auernge, and yeeldeth such plenty of fenns and marishes, that the fatnes of the soile is both bettered and augmented thereby, howeuer the aire seemeth not so wholesome, and the Cities and Townes are fuller of inhabitants, by reason of natures suppliment in all things, and the easines wherewith good husbandry dispatcheth her busines: yet are they neither great, nor

extraordinarily beautified: no not Limoges, Clermont, Beurgard, Monferau, and Goudade, which are the principall.
The ninth lot of France her renowne, is taken out of fortunes lap for Languedock, reaching to the sea as farre as Languedock Montpelier and Arles; on the other side Westward, Car^ossen and Narbon: yet doe some ioyne Languedock to Prouence, and call all these sea-coasts, with the territories adiacent, by the title of Gallia Narbonensis.
The tenth principall roome of this French palace, is Prouence. beautified with the Parliament roabes of the seuerall countries of Prouence, Daulphine and Orange. For they account Arles, a towne compassed with the streames of Rhodanus, rather in Prouence then Languedock, because it standeth (as it were) at the mouth of the riuer, to watch how the sea and the fresh water meets: as for Narbon, they esteeme it the pride of the riuer Araxis, and boast of the great lake for her denomination accordingly. Heere abouts were those excellent bathes contriued, spoken of so much in the Roman Commentaries: and Marius celebrated his triumphs for conquering the Cimbrians, who came thus farre in those dayes, from that countrey which we now call Denmarck, to re^st the Romans. To Daulphine they added a gracious allowance of the famous and ancient city of Lyons, whom the (...) diuideth, and whose wals are so ambitious, that they ^mb vp to the top of very rockes: the riuer playes the wanton about the towne, and runs a pace to Valence and Vienna, neuer leauing vntill he thrust himselfe into the Mediterranean sea, hard by Marselles, a city and port of great consequence: but is so separated from the riuer, as if it were affrayd of his swiftnesse. But Lyons hath yet more cause of insulting, in regard that all this part of France was

called Gallia Lugdunensis, from her owne name Lugdunum and diuers monuments of water-workes, bridges, towers, and temples, were magnificent in Caesars time. The prouince of Daulphine was giuen to the eldest sonne of France, with no other intent, but to name himselfe accordingly, by which occasion all Europe knowes what the Daulphine means. To Orange is a town so named appropriate, and Grenoble with Auignion, are coniured within this circle. For although euer since the Pope made it his seat, and established heere a Conclaue for the Cardinals, it hath since rema^ed firme to the Roman Clergy: yet is it sited in this prouince, and called France her naturall mother: some reckon heerein the three Bishoprickes of Carpentoract, Lissa and Vaurias, with many other townes, allowing vs to call it the Principate of Orange, and will haue vs take notice, that the house of Nassau, which challengeth the glory of the Low-Countries, as by the worthy life of the last Prince of Orange (whose younger sonnes are still so famous for the Belgick warres) may appeare: was extracted from hence, and glorieth in her denomination accordingly. For mine owne part, I haue thus bound them together within the girdle of Prouence, and could finde in my heart to make Geneua with her great lake and plaines vnder the mountaines, a daughter of France, although she hath vrgently denied her first mother. Besides, howeuer the Rhosne or Rhodanus commeth a pace out of Burgundy; it was once knowen by the name of Araris, and telleth a true tale of an hundred seuerall townes dispersed on his streames, and supported by his bankes.
The eleuenth booke of this noble countrey, openeth (...). the leaues of knowledge for Burgundy, which was once a Kingdome, as absolute as the King of France himselfe; and

is still a Dukedome and County graced with such royalties, that by their owne prerogatiues they haue brought armies into the field, and proclaimed the absolute freedomes of their gouernment: yea, in the latter times of contestation with France, they held the dignity of a Parliament: kept a full palace sequestred: and instituted the noble order of knighthood called the golden Fleece: some would annex the Dutchy of Barr vnto it, which I thinke more properly belongs to Loraine, and many Earledomes of estimation. The petty riuers receiue augmentation from the springs of her fields, and the swift Araris is sent into the sea from her mountaines. Her cheefest cities are Digion and Austune, maintaining regall tribunals, exposing ostentous edifices, boasting of great antiquity, setting out the brauery of diuers monuments and palaces, and supporting the necessities of many people. The townes of the Dukedome would bee called Latornelle, Rochpot, Chalons, Verdune, Seure, Argilly, Sausieu, and such like. The townes of the County please the inhabitants with the titles of Iussy, Gray, Dole, Besanson, Quingay, Salins, Arboies, Paligny, Bouteuant, Noseroy, Vennes, Chastillion, and diuers others: none of which, but either boasteth of one excellency or other; some for making salt, some for fulling cloth, some for spinning linnen, some for mines and minerals, some for excellent pastures, some for vines, some for cattle, and all for good building, plenty of Gentle-men, and concourse of people.
The twelfth doore of this Countries enclosure, is vnlocked Loraine. for Loraine, howeuer the Duke repineth that he is not a King with his ancestors, and still protesteth he wil be as absolute within his own territories as an Emperor: nay, sometimes addeth the French King himselfe. For louing

both alike, he will bee auxiliary to either, and sometimes enemie to both, as being such a Prince, who aduanceth and diminisheth at his pleasure the Marquisate of Ponce, the Earledoms of Vademont, Verdune, Blamont, Demanche, Marchen, and diuers other coronets, with the immunities of sundry Baronies; all depending vpon his praemium and poena. The townes of this countrey are Metts, famous for the Emperours siege, and many warlike fortifications, Nancy, Voige, Chaligy, Vaudmont, Dompair, Rosiers, Rumbelluillier, and such like worthy description: but as I sayd in the beginning, I intend not to extenuate the endeauours of other men, either in their trauels or commentaries, nor tell any abrupt tales, when such and so many famous Authors and Cosmographers speake so orderly and plainely. Therefore I referre you thither for more ample discourses, especially concerning such cities as I haue ouerpassed, and yet flourish at this hower in seuerall countries; it shall only suffice me to name the countries and principall places, that I may prepare you the better to attend my comparison, when I shall set out England to the sale with her ornaments of commendation indeed.
The thirteenth roome of the palace of France her Honour, is appropriate to Callis and Boloigne, maintaining the Boloigne. sea-shores ouer against Kent, and the sweet breathing mouth of the Thames in England: but in such emulation being so neere, that either they complaine to be thus long disioynted from her gouernment, or seeme offended that we euer possessed them, and could keepe them no longer: much of this countrey once belonged to Artoys, and was diuided betweene the Emperour and France, by way of composition. But if you would know, wherin and wherof it boasteth indeed, it is for two famous Dukes of the same,

or if you will, but Earles; who by their valours and heroik endeauours, obtained the noble Diadems of the world: the one was Godfrey, inuested King of Ierusalem, and made like another Agamemnon, Captaine Generall of the Christian army against the Saracens. The other was Stephen, sonne of Duke Williams daughter of Normandy, raised to the dignity of England, and maintaining the possession against Maud the Empresse and her sonne, during his life.
The last part of this glorious Kingdome may include Vermond and Picardy, whose principall townes are Guise, Picardy. La Fere, Han, St. Quintine, Tornay, Chatel, Abeuile, Amiens, Auxi, Peron, and such like, washed with the streames of the Some and Scaldis, whose rivulets make the fields plentifull in corne and grasse, although the inhabitants are not industrious in planting of vine-yards, which I rather impute to the indisposition of the soile, then their negligence.
Thus you see with what a glistring crowne the head of France is impaled in the chaire of Maiesty, and may visit the palace of honour with more and better attendance of Princes, Dukes, Earles, and Gentle-men, then any absolute Monarch of the world: yet because it hath some defects in meere matters of state, according to the true prosperity of a countrey: and that diuers deficiencies chance somewhat disgraciously vnto her, like staines and spots to pure linnen, I cannot yeeld her the pride of happinesse: because you shall see in my next book of comparison, wherin her fulnesse of glory is ecclipsed, and how wee our selues enioy many prerogatiues before her.



CHAP. XV. The Description of the Low-Countries.
BEyond all, euen to the sea, which made a sea of their fields and townes, lie the seuenteene The glory of the s^uenteene Prouinces, as moderne times esteem them. Prouinces, called the Low-Countries, or Germania inferior. For alas, the name and title of Gallia Belgica is long since extinguished, although (as I sayd) all the Countries on this side the Rhene toward France, were reputed as France. Of these I must vse a little ampliation, because I cannot chuse but wonder, how any Prince would neglect such a benefit, as the peaceable possession of these places, which for goodnesse, greatnesse and wealth vnited with the loue of the inhabitants, might haue exceeded Spaine it selfe, as by their reuenewes, multitude of people, cities, shipping, traffique with all nations, and home-bred commodities, may appeare. They are called Ditiones inferior is Germaniae, diuided into Dukedomes, Counties, and Lordships, and knowen by these Characters: The Dukedomes, Brabant, Limburck, Luzenburg, and Gelderland. The Counties, Flanders, Artoys, Henault, Holland, Zeland, Namurs, and Zutphen, which is but one principall towne, and some small territories adiacent. The Marquisate of the Empire. The Lordships, Freesland: for you must take notice, that East Freesland belongeth to a Prince of her owne, and euer disclaimed to bee subiect either to Emperour or King, and so holdeth vp a head of liberty accordingly, Mechlin, Vtrech, Trans-Ysell, and Groining.

In these are numbred 228. great townes, murited with wals, ramparts, ditches, warlike ports, bridges, and fortifications. Besides, their guards are continuall, either of their owne Burgers, or Souldiers lying in garison, according to the proximity of the enemy, importance of the place, necessity of affaires, or inconueniences of the time. The villages or dorps are 6300. beautified with embattelled Churches of many seuerall fashions, frequented with entercourses of people, adorned with handsome markets, and priuiledged by ancient immunities, faires, solemne festiuals, and neighbourly meetings; besides granges, castles, religious houses, towres, and Yonkers mannor-places. The aire seemeth moyst, especially of Holland and Zeland, with the sea-coasts of Brabant and Flanders; yet not preiudiciall to the health of the inhabitants: for in the champaine of Brabant men liue an hundred yeeres. The Countrey is euery where visited with nauigable riuers, nor come they empty handed, but affoord delicate water and excellent fish: but what talke I of fish? when the large Ocean is so nigh, out of whose store-house a man may take, without being called in question, or repining. It is beautified with many woods, affoording timber to build withall, and the pleasure of hunting. It is smally, or not at all mountainous, except about Namurs, Luzenburg or Henault, It is fruitfull of corne, grasse and herbs, fit for pasture for cattle, and medicine for health: yet in some places of Brabant and Gelderland full of heath, which notwithstanding is not so barren, but cattle are fatted with the same, and their flesh hath an extraordinary sweet taste: It is free from those creatures, which are either noysome, or dangerous to man, and wanteth none of those blessings, wherewith the God of all blessing marketh a Countrey:

but a noble Prince, vnity of religion, and a quiet gouernment.
The Countrey of Limburck hath many names, and is a Limburck. prouince full of villages, it containeth part of the Dukedome of Boloigne, the Marquisate of Franckmount, the Earledome of Haspengo and Lootes, with many other Baronies. There are brought into the lists 24. great townes, amongst whom we begin inprimis with Leege, situated on the Mase, as hauing a Bishops See, a delicate castle, and many well-ordred edifices: the dorps are reckned 1700. besides Abbayes and religious houses: toward the North adioyning to Brabant, it flourisheth in corne and hath some vines. Toward the South, neighbouring France and Lutzenburg: it is more barren, as intermingled with hils and woods, the remainder of that great forrest of Ardenia, of which so many fabulous accidents are recorded. It containeth diuers mines of marble and cole, and in such goodnesse of euerything, that a prouerb raiseth it selfe, to haue bread better then bread, fire hotter then fire, and iron harder then iron.
The Dukedome of Lutzenburg is for the most part mountainous and full of wood, in the rest well tilled, and Lutzenburg where they haue stocked vp the trees, excellent ground: what neighboureth France conserueth both their language and customes, the rest speake Dutch. The names of the Prouince and principall City haue one sound, but it is ill diuided, part on a hollow by the riuer Essa, part on a rocky mountaine: so that it proposeth no great vniformity: but yet yeeldeth a gracefull obiect, and in retaining the authority of a Parliament, hath a preheminence of many greater and prouder townes. The next is Arlunum, quasi ara Lunae, as supposed, that they heere worshipped the Moone.

The rest are sutable, some for strength, as Thion on the Mosell; some for commodity, as Baston, the mart of the Countrey, and adiacent to the forrest; and some for contentment and orderly conueniency, as 26. others.
The countrey of Henault is sutable to the rest, and marcheth with the same equipage of plenty and pleasure: the Henault. cheefe cities are Mons and Valenciens. To Mons is attributed the precedency, for antiquity, strength and riches: yet is it almost neere the center of the Land, and on a little riuer called Trulla, whose visitation makes the common people wealthy and industrious, especially in weauing of a stuffe called Sayes, which heere exceede all the townes of the Low-Countries. Valenciens is better sited on the riuer Scaldis, and is very spacious, well walled, and full of ancient buildings, the Citizens are great trades-men, and gaine much by the making of fustians, the rest are brought into the account with the number of 22. Amongst whom Binchium might haue showne you a goodly palace, erected by Mary, sister to Charles the fift, and beautified with gardens of pleasure to these vses. To beguile idle houres, to countenance a solitary retiring from the great encombrances of the world, to quicken meditation with a corresponcency of time and place, and to inuite the body to a better aire, then commonly populous cities affoord, it was yet destroyed, some would faine say defaced, by Henry the second, King of France, in those times of desolation, when intestine mutinies could not be appeased without effusion of bloud, and the rage of Princes exasperated one another to sore reuenges. Heere is also the ancient towne of Ba^aies, which flourished in the time of Constantine the Emperour. The rest are Charlimont, Manburg, and Philips towne, wherein the first founders, or rather re-edifiers,

made strong defences against the eruptions of the French, and were resolued to diuide the house of Burgundie for euer from the Flower-de-luce. Many other townes with the villages might be spoken of; but because there are few memorable things in them, I passe all ouer with such a slightnes, as is required in a man, that maketh haste out of an idle iourney, till he come to his place of rest, and better consequence.
The countrey of Artois did once absolutely belong to the Flower-de-luce, as by the antiquitie and scituation Artois. may appeare: But afterward in the contract 1529, it was patible of diuision, when the Emperor and the French King were weighed in the ballance of successe to set forward the renowne of eithers preuailing; so that when France was found too light, in regard that the false hand of fortune turned the scale on tother side, twelue pretty townes fell from the King, as stones pull'd from a ruinous wall, leauing the whole Prouince in hazard of falling too, had not the other part of the countrey succor'd it selfe vnder the supportation of Picardy, and now telleth vs of good corne, many riuers, much wood, and reporteth of the raining wooll by the testimonie of Saint Hierome, and others, who set it in the account of wonders.
The Prouince of Namurs is plentifull of all things, that Namurs. belongeth to the vse of man, as if the horne of Achelous were not onely reserued here for a monument, but distributed abundance by reason of the vertue following the possession: it hath many iron and cole mines, of whose nature and condition this is obserued, that whereas other coales are extinguished with water, and enflamed with oyle; these are set on fire with water, and rebated in their

heat with oyle. It hath onely fowre walled Townes, who dare thus lift vp their heads aboue water to keepe the bodies from sinking. 1. Namurs, scituated on the two riuers Mosa and Scambra vnited by a well compacted bridge of stone, retayning a Bishops sea, and keeping the solemnitie of a Parliament. 2. Bouinum on the banke of Mosa, much defaced by the warres, being of late a rich, stately, and populous Citie. 3. The third is Charlemont, one of the strongest Castles in Europe, mounted on a high looking rocke, whose foundation is washed by the riuer Gillet, and from the Emperor retaineth both glory and denomination. 4. The last is Vallencuria, whose etimology doth almost expresse it selfe: For here are all ciuill causes determined, and the villages of the Prouince bring their controuersies to be decided.
The Dukedome of Brabant challengeth a more plentifull description: For it hath 26 walled townes, and at Brabant. least 700 villages well inhabited, industrious people, and proud of their glory in retaining the presence of the Enfanta, and the Court of State in Brussels, where, by reason of the pleasure and conveniencie of many delicate fountaines, diuers well ordred pallaces invite you to behold euen obiects of magnificence, and the Noblemen boast, how they are better accommodated here, than in other parts of the countrey. Antwerp is scited on the riuer Scaldis, and so glorious for goodly buildings, famous marts, a beautifull Statehouse, delicate Churches, an Exchange for Merchants, an house for Englishmen, a wonderfull Cittadle, an admirable harbour, and such like illustrations, that not long since it stroue for the Coronet of Europe, and to be the Queene of Townes. Louaine is very populous, and graced with an Vniuersitie, which the

Duke of Brabant, Iohn the 4. erected. Mechline hath her estimation from the assembly of States, and deciding of controuersies. Busumduce, a towne of note for a publike schoole, and the peoples meeting to solemnize triumphs. Tiena, neighbouring the riuer Geta, from whence the cheese hath a particular estimation. Leuua, famous for drinke brewed there. Niuella, proud of a monasterie only of noble women. Arscot by the riuer Demera, in times past a Marquisate, but by the Emperor Charles aduanced to a Duchy. Berghen-op-zoome, named so for the kisses of the riuer that saluteth it, and famous for the auncient Marte, and frequentation of Merchants; yet since Antwerp flourished vtterly decaied. Megen, a place of contentment, glorying in the passages of the riuer, playing the wanton with her shores, and running vp and downe, as if it brought glad tidings of prosperitie. Breda, a towne of delicacie; yet may you in respect of her building adde the Epithet of magnificent. Steneberg vpon the sea, which once had wealth enough to invite Merchants to a banquet of commercing. Lira, a place so sufficiently pleasant, that diuers Noblemen haue retired thither, as repining against the troubles, which debarred them from more oftner entercourses. Vileuord raiseth her fame from the strength of a well scituated Castle, and the feare of a soule-terrifying prison. Gembloures can shew you a Lord Abbot, as free and imperious, as a Count Palatine in his iurisdiction. Iudoigna boasteth of her nursery of Princes, and that the wholesomnes of her aire inuiteth them to an abode of wantonnes and contentment. Hannutum maintaineth the credit and estimation of an Earledome, and addeth withall the blessing of a most fertile countrey. Landen lifteth vp the head of age

in such a manner, that shee warranteth her selfe the first, though not the best of Townes. Halen is notorious for the warres and many deuastations by battery of the Canon, and breaches made in her walls and bulwarks. D^ist, a towne washed on both sides by the fluent riuer of Demeta, it is of great receit, and famous for wollen cloth, and the profit arising from thence, as if it were powred by the hand of plenty into the laps of the inhabitants. Sichnum proud of the kisses of the same streame. Herentalls full of clothiers, and of such inhabitants, who boast of of their labour and handyworke. Endoue vpon the riuer ^ommela, which watreth the fields of the champaine, and maketh very seeming barren ground exuberant: and Hellmount raising her walls vpon a hill, and is both ouerlooked, and defended by the fortification of a well munited Cittadle.
The country of Flanders is nobly diuided into three parts, Teutonicam, Gallicam, Imperatoriam, and plentifully (...). watred with three principall riuers, Scaldis, Lisa, and Tenera; affording this reason for Imperatoria, that it neuer acknowledged any superior, but their owne Earles, and therefore had also the attribute of proprietory: For as the Dukedome of Millane boasted with a superiority before other Dukes; so the Earledome of Flanders had the prerogatiue of other Counties, in regard that with Kings the Earles stile had this emphasis, Comes Flandriae Dei gratia; yet were they afterward subiect to France, and numbred amongst the 12 Peeres. It retaineth the estimation, and aduanceth the walls of 28 Cities, plowing the fields of 1200 villages, whose enclosures yeeld plenty of grasse toward the West, and bringeth forth strong oxen for tillage, and horses for seruice, as you may see by

their beautifull mares, of whom we make such good triall, and vse in our Carosses. The blessings of milke and hony fill their cups euen to ouer-flowing, and the abundance of wheat might once haue told them, that it was no miracle, when Isaac sowed in the land of Abimelech, and receiued a 100 for one, because they haue reaped, and found after haruest 60 for one. The people are gentle, and the women streight and comely: their husbandry is graced with the sale of linnen cloth, and their Semsters boast of bone-lace, and delicate needle-workes: but concerning the Townes the principall are thus the subiect of relation. Gaunt hath a wall of 9 mile circumference, but possessing much waste ground is not very populous, nor filled with houses, although three riuers are at strife for her partition, and making 20 Ilands of her territories, challenge one another for lifting vp most land aboue water: but in truth the inhabitants in her behalfe complaine of the misery of many sieges, and that her fortunes haue bin as it were tossed to and fro with extremities: For shee hath tried the seuerall dispositions of French, English, Dutch, and Spanish, boasting of nothing so much, as the famous birth of Iohn Duke of Lancaster, sonne of Edward the third, and in the right of his wife King of Castile; and that memorable retreat, wherein Generall Norris with a few resolute English confronted the whole Armie of the Prince of Parma. Bruges for delicacie of buildings, sweetnes of streets, frequentation of merchants, and strength of walles did once surpasse all the townes of the Low Countries, and still boasteth, that howeuer her reputation is somewhat diminished, she was yet the occasion of the credit and glory of Flanders. Ypers raised her wealth from the endeuours

and industry of Clothiers, vntill the English with the help of those of Gaunt destroying their great suburbs, ouerthrew likewise their trafficke, and brought more ruder hands to pull their loomes and mills a peeces, then laboured in their first building, and raised them vp: the rest with the villages, castles, houses, Churches, bridges, and such like structures of admiration, are worthy of further enlargement: but the booke fills already too fast, and I purpose another thing, then to patch vp thus an ill fauoured cloth out of the shreds of other mens Cosmography, who tell you of Turwin and Tornay, and those noble endeuours of Hen. 8. when the King of France claimed Artois and Flanders, as well as Picardy.
The Prouince of Gelderland is altogether champaine, yet intermingled with woods, and stored with euery Gelderland. thing to satiate our desire, especially if wee looke after plenty of corne, and pasture, which both stuffeth full their garners, and fatteth their cattle, insomuch that they bring them leane in great heards from the furthest part of Denmarke, to receiue here, as it were a more seemely forme. It is visited with the three riuers of Rhene, Mase, and Whale: it hath 22 walled townes, attended on by the care and diligent seruice of 300 villages, amongst whom Numegam is metropolis, and indeed boasteth not onely of antiquitie, but the royaltie of a King, had not time worne out the shining brightnes of his Crowne, or some boistrous hand pull'd the scepter out of his arme, and shouldred him quite aside from his Throne; or else it was as the Kings of Cities in Mesopotamia, Reges a regendo, when nine of them made battaile together, and the preuailers spoiled Lot, and tooke him prisoner.
Herein is also contained the country and Earledome of Zutphen.

Zutphen, and the delicate Iland of the Betto, how euer Holland would challenge her of disobedience, if shee should call another mother. For Goricum, Worchum, and many other townes are reputed hers, onely Arnham on the other banke of the Rhene, with the sweet fields of the Vellwe, will still belong vnto Gelderland, and could tell you of a sconce builded ouer against it: of another on the banke of Icell: of another before Numegen, where that valiant German Sir Martin Skinck lost his life, and was tossed from graue to graue, vntill a military ceremonie laid him in an honorable place of rest: and of another at the point of the Iland, diuiding the riuer into the Rhene and Whale, which saies you can scarce shew such another, and is proud of nothing more, than her founder, and title: For it is called still Skinck sconce, and could affright you with the relation of many strange designes, and changes of military seruice, as if the Armies chose these parts of the country to play at base in, and as it were dance a mattachene in armour. For I my selfe knew the leaguer one yeere in Gelderward, within two mile of Eltam; another yeere at Bommel; a third at Berck; a fourth in Cleueland, etc. It flourished vnder Otho the third Earle of Gelderland, who walled in Ruremond, Arnham, Harderwick, Bomell, Gooch, and Waggenhen, and so held the title of a Countie vntill Rheinaldus the second, whom for his valour, iustice, piety, and other vertues the Emperor Lodwick lifted vp to the dignitie of a Duke in the presence of the Kings of England, France, and the Princes Electors 1339.
Zeland is a new name, and not read of in ancient histories, as if a man should say, a countrey compounded both Zeland. of land and sea: For it is euery where distinguished with

Ilands, which are environed with water, and knowne by 15 seuerall names, against whom the sea hath much preuailed, and not long since with violent invndations swallowed 300 of their inhabited townes; so that now you may saile by the steeples of Churches, and not knowing the reason, wonder to what purpose the Towres were so erected. There remaine now three principall, which are preserued against the rage of the Ocean with exceeding cost, and powerfull industry, namely Walcheren, Schouen, and South-Beueland: and foure inferior, Diuelant, Tolen, North-Beuelant, and Woolfersdike; which are graced with the prerogatiues of eight walled townes, whereof six continue their Estates Deputies for the whole County. Midelborough, Flushing, Camphere, and Armenden, which hath no voice, although it cry out neuer so loud, that it standeth with the rest in Walcheren. In Schouen, Sirexee, and Bucers hauen, which hath likewise no voice. In South-Beueland which is the greatest and fertilest Iland, the towne of Tergowse; and in the land of Tolen, the towne of Tertolen, and Martins dike, which hath also no voice. These Ilands are preserued by the downes, which be certaine bankes of sand cast vp with the tides, and where there are no sands, as toward the south, the dikes are raised by the industry of man, and proportioned with equall height to the rest; all so rammed with mats and casses of fagots 6 or 7 foote long, that it not only performeth the effect of their securitie, but seemeth an artificiall gracefulnes, and being so neere England is worthy the ouer-viewing. In times past the Marquis of La Vere, and Flushing were onely at the Generall Councels of the countrey, now the places are supplied with Deputies, and new times haue giuen way vnto new orders: For these

inheritances and titles are incorporated in Prince MAVRICE of NASSAV, and the Abbot of St Martins in the towne of Midlebourgh, which at this instant is the Court of Zeland: As for the Prince, he is the seruitor of the States, and can doe nothing absolute of himselfe without their direction: And for the Abbot, his name is extinguished with his superstition, and the reformation of religion hath also reformed his very title and authoritie: so that the Estates make the Democratia a princely gouernment, and assume to themselues the power of life, death, controuling, punishing, rewarding, and resolute ordering all their affaires, except in cases of necessitie, wherein there is no disputing, nor interiecting any cause of imputation either of negligence, or improuidence: For so great Princes either diminish or augment their illustrious royaltie, and Monarks whose pride at the first swelled ouer the banks of preuailing, haue in one age bin left bare on the sands of an ebbing fortune. The cheefest trade of the inhabitants is nauigation, fishing, and making salt: yet within the land they imploy themselues to tillage, and feeding of cattle. The people doe so multiply and increase, that they are compelled to inlarge their Townes, as well for their owne inhabitants, as frequentation of strangers, who since the troubles of Antwerpe resort hither extraordinarily; but if I should adde the brauery of fortifications, I should do them no wrong, nay I might augment their glory: For Flushing is one of the strongest Townes of Europe; and Midleborough so ramparted and guarded, that a very militarie renowne is attributed vnto them, and the Burgers themselues deserue well of all good reports.
The prouince of Holland is (as it were) a Peninsule, circumuironed Holland,

with water. For the sea, the Rhene, and the meeting riuers, open their doores in such a manner, that you may goe (as it were) round about the house, except in one corner toward Gelderland. and although it containeth not in circuit aboue two hundred English mile: yet lifteth vp the wals, ramparts, and warlike ports of thirty townes of such receipt, wealth and shipping, that the pride of Tyrus and Sidon, exclaimed vpon by so many Prophets, had not greater occasion of raging and oftentation, howeuer they are yet blessed with moderation, and restraint of distempered actions. The villages or dorps are foure hundred, amongst whom the stately county of the Hague aduanceth her counteuance equall to a great city: for their court retaineth some shew of princilnesse, and the old palace maketh demonstration of those noble customes and hospitality, which the ancient Earles in their former power maintained; yet because it is vnwalled, neighbouring a pretty parke of fallow Deere, and inuiteth you to better retired places, then the townes of hurliburly and continuall commerces accustome, it is reputed a Dorp, and seemeth much contented with her situation so remote from the forraine enemy of the State. Harlem with her spaciousnesse is founded most delicately; for as soone as you are entred, the pleasure of a pretty wood inuiteth your abode, where the Citizen in the dayes of pastime make their honest conuersation, the strengthning of one anothers friendship. Besides, for bulwarkes, harbours, shipping, capacity, entercourse, and noble meetings, it challenged the precedency of all the towns of Holland, and howeuer Amsterdam hath got the start for riches, marchants, and nauigation; yet hath Harlem a greater wall, and better compacted buildings. Dort or Dordrech some 150. yeeres since was made

an Iland by the inundation of the sea, which with vngentle violence (at that time) washed away whole fields of firme ground, and like a barren vnsatiate wombe, filled her paunch with aboue 200. villages: It is a beautifull long towne, and graced with the staple of Rhenish wine, corne and timber, brought in great, strange and long boats called Punts, which neuer goe backe againe, but serue in these riuers as a receptacle of diuers families, and many people who haue no other dwelling then on shipboord, and if you demand how they liue the voyage ended, and maintain their estates when the first businesse is determined. They spin, fish, follow the league with prouision, carry corne and turffe from towne to towne, and are employed for the vse of bridges, to transferre whole armies ouer riuers; but to tell you that some of them are 160. foot long, and haue three or foure diuisions or houses in one boat, would raise a suspicion, and peraduenture make you smile at the fiction, but admire the truth. Delft is so named of a ditch, cut out betweene it and the Hague, and is a sweet and pleasant towne, although the inhabitants are emploied for the most part about brewing, and spinning of wooll. Leyden boasteth of her antiquity, as deriuing her originall from the Legions of the Roman souldiers heere resident, when the custome of warre, and the coldnesse of winter did enforce them to garison, and orderly sequestration: it is now an Vniuersity, beautified with walkes of pleasure and magnificence: yet cannot wash away the imputation of many trayterous reuolts and vnconstant resolutions against the gouernment of the States. Gouda is a populous towne vpon the riuer Isell; yet could tell you of another of her owne name, that runneth into the Ocean, as if it made haste to tell you, from whence it came. Amsterdam, besides

the sea is visited by the gentle riuer Tia: yet seemeth sory that she cannot be affoorded the sweetnesse of her waters, and is so contriued as the channels of Venice, which direct you by boat from house to house: for shipping, it is one of the most famous harbours in the world, and hath such entercourse of Marchants and Saylors, that I haue numbred 1000. ships of all sorts to goe out at one tide: for buildings it equals the best, and for orderly watches and fortifications the Burgers haue a blessed vniformity and glorious reputation. Enchusen vpon the banke of the sea called the Zuidersea, is famous for the building of ships, which are heere yeerely built and orderly rigged. Horne hath the same foundation, and in May bringeth together such a faire of butter and cheese, and in such incredible manner, that almost all countries haue suppliment from thence. Alcmar likewise maintaineth the dairy, and encloseth such fields, that a very few acres of ground raise a good farme. Purmerndum boasteth of her first estimation, by reason of the palace and delicate castle, which belonged to Count Egmond, was within her wals. Edam hath great store of shipping, and such kine, that few oxen are larger: besides, heere is sowed so much hemp, that most of the netting, which either Holland or Zeland vse is heere made. Sconhouen is a delicate towne and place of pleasure: for indeed it is an attribute, or significant name from the attracting delight of their gardens, and hath a staple for Salmons. Rotterdam a great city full of shipping, yet rather boasteth of the birth of Erasmus. Brill is a towne of defence, and was once causionary to England, in regard of great summes disbursed for the States, but now of late, by the Kings Maiesty, resigned into the hands of the States. Thus for strength, fertility, wealth, and plenty of shipping,

Holland exceedeth any countrey in the world, challenging no more circuit of ground, as may be ghessed by the yeere 1587. when there was 600. ships arrested in the Sont by the King of Denmark, and in 1588. it is well knowen, that in very short warning they supplyed vs with an hundred men of warre, as for Cales voyage, the third part of that Nauie was theirs: but if you looke further, in the West and East-Indies, in the hauens of Barbary and Affrick, in the Arches, and Constantinople, in the Gulph of Venice, and almost all the frequented places of the world, the Hollander aduentures, and is now a glorious Marchant and Mariner. To conclude, Holland, Zeland, and Freesland, smile in the possession of 2500. good ships, from 150. tun to 700. and although they haue no timber, or at least very little growing for this purpose, yet doe they yeerely set vpright 5. or 600. of one sort or other.
Of all in the States diuision, the City and Lordship of Vtrech. Vtrech is principall, as retaining an ancient Bishops See, and shewing the ruines of a castle, erected to suppresse the insolency of the inhabitants, who in a pride of their owne greatnesse, made a continuall sport of rebellion, it is now vtterly defaced, and the loyalties of their harts seeme more firme, then the workes of mens hands, assuring vs that so noble a citie and populous territories would yeeld a very ambitious Prince reasonable satisfaction, if it might bee commanded by the authority of a Monarch, and had the vnity of a well-ordered Common-wealth and Kingdome.
The Countrey of Freesland would require an ample discouery Freesland. to extract her originall, and relate her stories: so would Cleeueland, the land of Luke Munsterland, and some others reputed Neuters, that is, neither maintaining the Spanyard in his military inuasion, nor supporting the States

in their iustifiable defences. But I refer you to their own and manyother co^mentaries, and content myself with a cursory trauell, and what I can catch hold of by running touches. It is diuided into two parts by the riuer Amisia, which commeth downe by Embden: East Freesland challenging a particular preheminence and iurisdiction, as I sayd, by it selfe: and West Freesland suffering this partition, Ostergo, Groining. Westergo, Transilana, Drenta, Tuenta, the seuen woods and Lordship of Groining, a beautifull towne and famous for that siege, wherein were 80000. in the field on both sides 1594. when Prince Maurice obtained it for the States, being before ouer-awed 1580. by the Duke of Parma. As it hath more cattle and pasture then other prouinces: so more villages, and the inhabitants are more warlike, insomuch, that commonly there is a Regiment or two of Frizons in the army, when amongst the foot-companies there is scarse two hundred Dutch-men besides: yet haue they many troops of horse, and are distinguished by diuers characters, although they speake all one language, either high or Low-Dutch, as Resties, Lansguents, Frizons, Switzers, High-Germans, Dutch, and Free-booters, or Boot-halers.
I haue insisted the longer on the discourse of these Prouinces, The Low-Countries is lost by the Spanyard. because you may see the errours of selfe will and ill counsell, euen in the gouernment of mighty Monarchs, as I sayd before. For the conquest of the West Indies, the onely greatnesse of Spaine, was not, nor is so glorious to his ostentation, as the losse of the Low-Countries (when hee might with peace and mansuetude haue opened the arms of a louing father ouer them) greeuous to his remembrance, and a very wound to his policy. Because if these countries were vnited, and altred from their Aristocratia or Democratia, chuse you whether, to the vniformity of a Monarchie,

affoording to Caesar what belongeth to Caesar, raising their nobility, aduancing the well-deseruers, encreasing their estates, disciplining their able men to the seruice of the warres, and from the imitation of other countries endeauouring to raise their owne glories, it would surmount all the reuenues of Spaine, which for extent of ground measureth six times as much; nay, if I added the West Indies, computatis computandis, I might be beleeued after some reasonable disceptation. For say a stirring spirit desired glory and pompous attendancy. From hence might bee obtained infinite treasure, settled content, high magnificence, multitude of subiects, commerces of marchants, store of shipping, stately horses, louing people, and the glory of A generall commendation. nature, beauty it selfe: so that if the Arch-Dukes fortune could raise him to such a height, if at first he honoured the Enfanta, with vshering her bare-headed into Bruxels, hee might then prostrate himselfe before her throne indeed, as one of the greatest Princes of the world. For although his hopes did depend vpon other supportation, and in her owne language he cries Kala, as peraduenture determining a composition with his brother Mathias, if the peacefull Rodolphus were once discharged of his debt to nature, whereby she might be Empresse of Germany: yet cannot a meere titular dignity come neere so great a contentment, as to haue the fruition of such a kingdome, and natiue felicity. But if delicate life and quiet establishment of temporall happinesse were propounded, amongst these is honesty of contracts, probity of manners, truth of word, preuention of wants, fulnesse of wealth, delicacy of apparrell, neatnesse of furniture, vniformity of building, magnificence of structures, plenty of viands, sumptuousnesse of feasts, liberty of conuersation, and what else enflameth our

desires to helpe our deficiencie: yea the very behauiour of the women enforceth admiration. For being tall, beautifull, actiue, and familiar, they are yet free from those peenish humors of ielousie, lightnes, and pride, which make vs weary one of another: Besides all their words, and actions tend to simplicitie, and modest plainenes, retaining with all this suppliment of wants, making of cloth, and knitting of lace and dainty works: But when I consider their mutuall entercourses, their skill in buying and selling, their frequenting of the shops, their going from place to place without so much as suspition of incontinencie, and their loue to their husbands and children euen in the ouerflowings of naturall imperfections, or if you will diseases of the Nation; I stand amased, and sweare, that vertue cannot be poore, and an honest minde will not be seduced for any worldly respects to the slauish corruption of las^iuiousnes, or dishonestie.


CHAP. XVI. The Monarchy of Great Britaine.
THE last of all Countries, and as many England. thinke the least, but such a least, as if a pretty sparke of a pure Diamond should triumph ouer a border of soft topasses, is the kingdome of ENGLAND; now proclaimed vnder the royall standard of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, stile enough,

if the desire of man know what is enough. But alas, ^nisi ab orbe Britanni: wherein I thinke nature and glory plaied the silken Artist or Artificer, chuse you whether, who in sorting out his commodities laies the principall aside for a friend, or his owne vse: so did our first mother deale with this ILAND, allowing it a double portion of blessings before the other countries of the world for her owne honour. But at this time you shall not heare mee stammer out my words, considering Mr Cambden hath spoken so well and distinctly, as if a Lawyers cunning had not onely inlarged some excellent matter, but doubly graced the same with good deliuerie, and pleasing elocution: Besides, I must in the second booke vntie her bound-vp fardell, and come to more neerer particulars, and therefore there shall be now no further disputing of the same: yet Ireland hath made me amased to see such an impossibilitie to reduce her, which mee thinks cannot proceed from any innated hatred against vs particularly (though it be an vnsauoury truth) because in affecting Spaine and France shee disclaimeth their formalitie, and would faine besprinkle the beautifull faces of ciuilitie, gouernment, formes of Cities, courtlines, maiestie, and state, with the vntoward termes and abuses of policie, restraint of libertie, couetousnes, flattery, pride, and licentiousnes: therefore I will bee the bolder to speake a word or two of her vnkindnes.



CHAP. XVII. The description of IRELAND.
THE country and kingdome of IRELAND is generally for naturall aire, and commoditie Ireland. of blessings, sufficient to satisfie a couetous, or curious appetite: but withall diuided into such fastnes of mountaine, bogg, and wood, that it hath emboldned the inhabitants to presume on hereditary securirie, as if disobedience had a protection. For the mountaines denie any cariages, but by great industry and strength of men (so haue we drawne the Cannon ouer the deepest boggs, and stoniest hils) and the passages are euery way dangerous, both for vnfirmenes of ground, and the lurking rebell, who will plash downe whole trees ouer the paces, and so intricately winde them, or lay them, that they shall be a strong barracado, and then lurke in ambush amongst the standing wood, playing vpon all commers, as they intend to goe along. On the bogg they likewise presume with a naked celeritie to come as neere our foote and horse, as is possible, and then flie off againe, knowing we cannot, or indeed dare not follow them: and thus they serue vs in the narrow entrances into their glins, and stony paths, or if you will dangerous quagmires of their mountaines, where a 100 shot shall rebate the hasty approch of 500; and a few muskets (if they durst carry any) well placed, will stagger a pretty Armie, not acquainted with the terror, or vnpreuenting the mischeefe.

The Prouince of LEMSTER is more orderly than Lemster. the rest, as being reasonable well inhabited, and hauing some forme of a Common-wealth; so that I finde no mislike either for delight, or profit, but that the want of wood abridgeth their computation of happinesse; yet questionles was the principall cause of our reducing them to ciuilitie, and the place wherein we first setled many English families. Some vnite, and some diuide the kingdome of Meth from Lemster, and make it a Prouince of it selfe, containing East-Meth, West-Meth, and Longford, wherein O Roorck is resident, supposing himselfe the greatest Gentleman in the world; yea contesting many times with Oneal, how euer with much adoe he afforded him precedencie: The countrey is very fruitfull and pleasant, not so mountanous, but ill inhabited: For the warres, and their owne bestialitie, haue not onely made a separation of all good order, but euen terrified both beast and fowle from commorance amongst them in many places.
The Prouince of MVNSTER hath some Townes well Munster. aduanced by the sea coasts, and many excellent harbours, wherein Ireland may boast ouer all the countries of Europe: The grounds adiacent are very fertile, and in many places afford cause of ostentation; but more inward they are very barren and mountanous, full of boggs, wood, and other remote places, whose fastnes hath incited the people to ouer-great presumption: yet because of the spatiousnes with men desiring good order, it might be reduced and reformed, as enioying plentifull and sweet riuers, full of fish, and some of sufficient depth to transport reasonable boates into the land.
The Prouince of CONACH is diuided from the rest by a Conach.

goodly riuer called the Shanon, being as I take it the greatest of any Iland in the world: For it fetcheth a course of 200 mile, and filleth his channell along the shores of Longford, Meths, Ormond, Limrick, and Kerry, yet serueth them in no great stead: For their shipping commeth no further, than Limrick, where it is fiue mile broad fresh water, and 60 mile from the maine sea, from thence small cotts, as they tearme their boates, carry their wood, turff, fish, and other commodities: but for fish, as Salmon, Breame, Pike, and diuers other sorts, I shall not be beleeued to relate the numbers, and hugenes, by such as are enemies to obseruation, or the beleefe of the blessings of other countries. Within 20 mile of Limrick, as I take it, a litle beyond, the praecinct of Caher-Castle a strange rock hath taken her lodging euen crosse the riuer, and filleth the roome in such a manner, that almost the nauigation is hindred thereby: but what cannot men and money doe? and why should not these idle people be industriously imployed to remoue the same, and so free the passage to Athlone: As for an obiection of impossiblitie; the iudgement of men hath yeelded to suruey, and many examples haue confirmed the effects of more laborious attempts. The south part, namely Tomond, (for by reason of the riuers interposing it selfe I see no reason why it should be disiointed from Conach) with Galloway and Clenricard is very stonie, full of marble, alablaster, and iett, and hath better order both for number and good building in their Castles, than other parts of Ireland: The north from Athlone to the Abbey of Aboile, and so beyond the Curlewes as farre as Slego, is of excellent temperature and goodnesse: These Curlewes are mountaines full of dangerous passages, especially when the Kern take a stomach and a pride

to enter into action, as they terme their rebellion and tumultuary insurrections. On the other side the County of Maio consorteth with the pleasingest place in the Kingdome, by whose beaten banks lye those famous Ilands of life, of whom a ridiculous tale is fathered, that nothing dies in them, so that when the inhabitants grow old, they are caried else where, which custome they haue of late superstitiously obserued both in these Ilands of Aran, and some other adioyning of the same condition, as they suppose.
The Prouince of VLSTER, and called the North is Ulster. very large, and withall mountanous, full of great Loughs of fresh water, except Lough Cone, which ebbeth and floweth, as the Sea shouldreth aside the streites at Strangford, and with that violence at the ebb, that a ship vnder saile with a reasonable gale of winde cannot enter against the tide. These lakes nature hath appointed in steed of riuers, and stored with fish, especially Trowt, and Pike, of such strange proportion, that if I should tell you of a Trowt taken vp in Tyrone 46 inches long, and presented to the L: Montioy, then Deputie: you would demand, whether I was oculatus testis, and I answer, I eat my part of it, and as I take it both my L: Dauers, and Sir William Goodolphin were at the table, and worthy Sir Iosias Bodley hath the portraiture depicted in plano. Here are no Townes, or at least very few, but diuers Castles dispersed, and the inhabitants remoue their cabbins, as their cattle change pasture, somewhat like the Tartarians, except in times of warre, and troubles, then doe they retire vnder the couett of Castles, and order their houses wonde with rods, and couered with turffs, as well as they can, bringing their cattle euen within their houses, lying altogether in one roome

both to preuent robberies of Kern, and spoile by Wolues. Amongst these euery country is subiect to the Law Tanist, which is, he which is best able to maintaine the reputation of their familie, is the great O, and commander.
Through the Kingdome generally the winter is neither so cold, nor the summer so hot as in England, by reason whereof Haruest is very late, and in the North wheat will not quickly ripen, nor haue they acornes once in a dozen yeere: their principall corne is oates, which are commonly burnt out of the straw, and then trod from the husks with mens feete; of this they make their bread in cakes, being first grownd by calliots and drudges very naked, and beastly sitting on the ground, with the mill like our mustard quernes betweene their legs, and then vpon broad yron presses they bake the meale when it is kneaded; which custome the best obserue in Munster with their cheefest corne. The continuall showers and mists make the countrey more dangerous to our Nation, debarring the absolute assurance of wholesome aire, and the consequent health: seldome any frost continues, or snow lieth long, but on the mountaines, in which are great store of Deere both red and fallow. The abundance of Wolues compels them to house their cattle in the bawnes of their Castles, where all the winter nights they stand vp to the bellies in durt: another reason is, to preuent theeues, and false-harted brethren, who haue spies abroad, and will come 30 mile out of one Prouince into another to practise a cunning robbery. The people are generally haters of bondage, and beyond measure proud: so that the yonger brothers, and bastards, who are as deare as the other, scorne all endeuours, but liberty and warre. The Gentlewomen stomach, and in truth vilipend others, who get

their liuing by trade, merchandice, or mechanically: yet are diuers Grauers in gold and siluer, called plaine tinkers, who make their challices, harpes, buttons for their sleeues, crucifixes, and such like, in estimation amongst them. Their Noblemen, or Lords called Dynastas, are knowne by O and Mac, and euery familie hath such as minister iustice to the people, famoused by the title of Breahans, and yet the exactions ouer their tenants by way of cuttings, and other terrible impositions, haue caused diuers rebellions and insurrections amongst themselues, which when the State hath attempted to reforme, then haue they stood on their guard, and taken indirect occasions to condemne our vsurpation, whereby their odious and hatefull repinings, like a menstruous cloth, haue made their disobedience loathsome, and brought vpon them such miseries, as a calamitous warre and angry Prince inflicteth turbulent people withall. These families haue also such, as by way of historie elate them to exorbitant actions, ioyning withall the abuse of Poetry, and deceit of Physicke, knowne by the name of Bardes, on whom depend certaine harpers, rymers, and Priests, which liue in a kinred, the father instructing the sonne, or brother, and he his cosin, or friend. The name of Galliglas is in a manner extinct, but of Kern in great reputation, as seruing them in their reuolts, and prouing sufficient souldiers, but excellent for skirmish. They haue strong and able bodies, proud hearts, pestilent wits, liberall of life, subiect to incontinency, amorous, wherein their women are extraordinarily pleased, patient to endure, louers of musicke, and hospitalitie, constant to their maintainers, whether men or women, implacable in their hatred, light of beleefe, couetous of glory, impatient of reproch, or contumelie;

not thinking it yet any disgrace to receiue a nickname at their christning, as Con Oneale banco, because hee was lame. Besides, they are all extreamely superstitious, as indeed barbarous people are best obseruers of ceremonies, and when any of them enters into religion, it is admirable with what austeritie they reforme themselues: Their children are nursed abroad, and their foster-fathers and foster-mothers are as deare to them, as their owne kinred: They vse incantations and spells, wearing girdles of womens haire, and locks of their louers; they suppose idlenes a glory of nature, and by their sluttish, or rather sauage customes striue to scorne (as they say) our superfluitie: They are ready vpon any inforcement by the imposturing Art of their Bardes to innovation, as enuying our first conquest, and stomaching they were neuer able to expell vs: They are desperate in reuenge, and their Kerne thinke no man dead, vntill his head be off: They suppose theft no great offence, as imitating the Lacedemonians; for they pray to prosper in their attempts: but these be commonly the bastards of Priests, who proue notorious villaines, and the daughters either begg or become strumpets, or if you will, beggerly strumpets. They commonly intermix othes with their speeches, as by the Trinitie, God, his Saints, St Patrick, St Briget, faith, and troth, the Temple, your hand, O Neales hand, and such like. Their mariages are strange; for they are made sometimes I haue knowne of them deliuered in the morning and march along with vs the same d^. so conditionally, that vpon a slight occasion the man taketh another wife, the wife another husband: They are easily deliuered of their children, and if they haue any by diuers men, at their deaths they resigne them to the right father; the new maried and conceiued with childe giueth the Barde her best clothes: They haue soft and excellent

skins and hands: but the small of their leggs hangeth in a manner ouer their brogs: Their apparrell is a mantle to sleepe in, and that on the ground on some rushes or flags: a thicke gathered smocke with wide sleeues graced with bracelets and crucifixes about their necks: They weare linnen rowles about their heads of diuers fashions: in Vlster carelesly wonde about: in Conach like Bishops miters, a very stately attire, and once prohibited by Statute: in Munster resembling a thicke Chesshire cheese. Their smocks are saffrond against vermine; for they weare them three moneths together; but to be lowsie is hereditarie with the best of them, and no disgrace. Both men and women not long since accustomed a sauage manner of dyet, which was raw flesh, drinking the blood, now they seeth it, and quaff vp the liquor, and then take Vsquebath: not hauing flesh they feede on Watercresses, Shamrocks, and Bonniclaboch, which is milke strangely put into a tub a sowring, till it be clodded, and curded together: when the Cow wiil not let her milke downe they blow her behinde very strangely, and sometimes thrust vp their armes to their elbowes, speaking words of gentlenes and intreaty by way of bemoning. The men weare trowses, mantle, and a cap of steele; they are curious about their horses tending to witchcraft; they haue no saddles, but strange fashioned pads, their horses are for the most part vnshod behinde: they vse axes, staues, broad swords, and darts: In Terconnell the haire of their head growes so long and curled, that they goe bare-headed, and are called Glibs, the women Glibbins. These and many other doe the meere Irish obserue with resolution and our wonderment not to be diuerted, as if the Poet should finde fault with

Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odoremTesta diu.
And thus much for Topography, or superficiall view of the Kingdomes of the world.


LIBRI PRIMI FINIS.

