


An excellent Treatise of ANTONIE
GALVANO Portugall, containing the
most ancient and moderne discoueries of the
world especially by nauigation, according to
the course of times from the flood
vntill the yeere of grace
1555.
WHile I had a desire to gather together
some olde and some new
discoueries, which haue beene
made by sea and by land, with
their iust times and situations;
they seemed to be two things of
so great difficultie, that being
co^fused in the authors of them,
I determined once to desist fro^
any such purpose. For touching
the course of time the Herbre^es
declare, that from the beginning of the world to the flood were
1656. yeeres. The Seuentie Interpreters make mention of
2242.Augustine de C^^^t. Dei, lib. 15. cap. ^0. And S. Augustine reckoneth 2262. In the situations
likewise there be many differences. For there neuer sailed
together in one fleete at sea from ten pilots to the number of
100. but that some of them found themselues by reckoning
in one longitude and other some in another. But considering
better with my selfe, that the difficulties are open^o, and the
differences amended by others of more exact iudgement and
vnderstanding therein, I purposed notwithstanding to proceede
in this worke of Discoueries.
Some there be that say, that the world hath fully beene
discouered: and they alleage this reason, that as it hath b^ene

peopled and inhabited, so it might be frequented, and nauigable,
and the rather for that the men in that age were of a
longer life, and of lawes and languages almost one.
There be others of a contrarie opinion to this,Contrarie opinions touching the discouerie of the world. holding
that all the earth could not be knowne, nor the people conuersant
one with another. For though it had beene so once,
yet the same would haue beene lost againe by the malice of
men, and the want of iustice among the inhabitants of the
earth. But bicause the best and most famous discoueries were
made by sea,Who were the first discouerers since the flood. and that principally in our times, I desire to
knowe, who were the first Discouerers since the time of the
flood.
Some affirme that they were the Greekes, others say, the
Phoenicians, others also the Egyptians. The people of India
agree not hereunto; affirming that they were the first that
sailed by sea: namely theThe people of China say they were the first sailers by sea. Tabencos, which now we call the
Chinois. And they alleage for the proofe of this, that they be
ye Lords of the Indiaes euen vnto the Cape of Bona Speranca,
and the island of S. Laurence, which is inhabited by them* and al
along the sea; as also the Iauaes, Timores, Celebes, Maca^ares,
Malucos, Borneos, Mindanaos, Lucones, Lequeos, Iapones,
and other Islands being many in number, and the firme
lands of Cauchin-China, Laos, Bramas, Pegu, Arracones, till
you come vnto Bengala:The inhabitants of the West Indies descended from China. And besides this, New Spaine, Peru,
Brasill, the Antiles, with the rest adioining vnto them, as appeereth
by the fashions and maners of the men and women,
and by their proportions, hauing small eies, flat noses, with
other proportions to be seene. And to this day many of these
Ilands and countreies are called by the names of B^tochina,
Bocho-China, which is as much to say, as the countreies of
China. Further it appeereth by histories, that the arke of Noe
rested vpon the north parts of the mountaines of Armenia,
which stands in 40. degrees and vpwards: and that immediately
thereupon Scythia was first peopled, for that it is an
high land, and appeered first after the flood. And seeing the prouince
and countrey of the Taben^os is one of the chiefest of
all Tartarie, as they report, it is to be thought that they were
of the most ancient inhabitants,The seas betweene the Tropicks very calm. and men of the most ancient
nauigations, the seas being as calme as the riuers be in those
parts lying betweene the Tropicks, where the daies and

nights do not much differ, as well in the howers, as in ye temperature:
where there blow no outragious windes, to cause
the waters to rise or to be troubled. And by late experience it
is sound,An high bough in steed of mast and saile. that the small barks wherein they saile haue onely
a great high bough in the middest of the barke, standing in
steed both of mast and saile, and the master holdeth onely an
^are in his hand to stirre withall: and so they saile swiftly
along the coast; and the rest of the passengers sit onely vpon
certaine poles, which are fastened in the barke, which they
call Catamarones, and so they passe without rowing.
It is further said, that the people of China were somtimes
Lords of the most part of Scythia, and sailed ordinarily along
that coast, which seemeth to reach vnto 70. degrees toward
the north.Pomponius Mela lib. 3. Cornelius Nepos is the author of this; who particularly
affirmeth,Plinius lib. 2. cap 67. that in the time that Metellus the fellowe
Consul of Afranius, was Proconsul in France, the king of
Sue^ia sent vnto him certaine Indians, which came thither
in a ship from this countrey, comming by the north and by
the flats of Germanie. And it is probable that they were people
of China, for that they from 20. 30. and 40. degrees vpwards
haue strong ships and clynchers, that can well brooke
the seas, and indure the cold and intemperature of such northerly
regions. As for Cambaia there is shipping also in it,
and the people by report haue vsed the seas many yeeres:
but it seemeth not that they were any of them which came
into France: for that they trafficke onely to Cairo, and are
men in deed of little trafficke and lesse clothing.
As for those which escaped the destruction of the flood,Ioseph. Antiouit. Iudai^ lib. 1. ca. 5. they
were therewith so amazed, that they durst not descend into
the plaines and lowe countreies, but kept the hils. And we
reade of Nimrode, who 130. yeeres after the flood built the
Tower of Babell, intending thereby to saue himselfe, if there
should come any more such floods.
Therefore it seemeth, that they which first came to be sailers
were those which dwell in the east in the prouince of
China: although others contrariwise hold them which dwell
in the west as in Syria, to haue vsed the trade of the sea soonest
after the flood. But this contention about the antiquitie of
nauigation I leaue to the Scythians and Egyptians,Iustinus lib. 1. who
were at great variance and difference in this matter; for each

of them chalenged vnto themselues the honour of the first sea
trauaile. But omitting all iars and differences thereabouts,
I will apply my selfe to my purposed discourse, and speake of
that which histories haue left in record.
THere be some wel seene in Antiquities,Bero^us. which say that
in the 143. yeere after the flood,The first nauigation after the flood 143. Tubal came by sea into
Spaine, whereby it seemeth that in those times nauigations
were vsed into our parts out of Ethiopia.
And they also say farther, that not long after this, the
Queene Semyramis went against the Indians in that riuer
wherof they tooke their name,Diodorus Siculus lib. 2. cap. 5. and therein gaue battaile vnto
the king Stabrobates, wherin he lost a thousand ships. Which
being credible by the ancient historie, prooueth manifestly
that in those parts, in those times were many ships, and the
seas frequented in good numbers.
In the 650. yeere after the flood there was a king in Spaine
named Hesperus,Berosus. who in his time as it is reported went and
discouered as far as Cape Verde, and the Island of S. Thomas,
whereof he was prince:Gonsaluo Fernandes de Ouiedo lib. 2. cap 3. Generalis H^st. And Gonsaluo Fernandes of Ouiedo
the Chronicler of Antiquities affirmeth, that in his time the
Islands of the West Indies were discouered, and called somewhat
after his name He^perides: and he alleageth many
reasons to prooue it,Plinius lib. 6. cap. 3^. reporting particularly that in 40. daies
they sailed from Cape Verde vnto those Islands.
There are others that say that the like was done from this
Cape vnto the Islands of S. Thomas, and the Isle De Principe,
and that they be the Hesperides, and not the An^iles:
And they doe not differ far from reason:The ancient nauigation was along the coast, and not far into the maine Ocean. seeing in those times
and many yeeres after they did vse to saile onely along the
coast, not passing through the maine Ocean sea: for they had
neither altitude nor compasse then in vse, nor any mariners
so expert.
It cannot be denied, but that there were many countries,
Islands, Capes Is^hmos and points which now are grown
out of knowledge;Length of time (...) of waters have much altered the situation of (...) places. because the names of them are found in
histories. But the age of the world and force of waters haue
w^sted and consumed them, and separated one countrey from
another, both in Europe, Asia, Af^ica, New Spaine, Peru, and
other places.
Plato saith in his dialogue of Timaeus,Plato in Timaeo. that there were in
ancient times in the Ocean sea Atlanticke certaine great
Islands and countries named Atlantides greater then Afrike
and Europe: and that the kings of those parts were Lords of
a great part of this our countrey: but with certaine great
tempests the sea did ouerflow it, and it remained as mud and
shingle; so that in a long time after no ships could passe that
way.
It is also recorded in histories,Plinius lib. 4. cap. 22. that fast by the Island of
Cadiz towards the Straights of Gibraltar there was a certaine
Island which was called Aphrodisias, well inhabited
and planted with many gardens and orchards, and yet at
this day we haue no knowledge of this Aphrodisias, but only
a bare mention of it in ancient authors. The said Island of
Cadiz is further said to haue been so large and big, that it did
ioine with the firme land of Spaine.
The Islands of the Acores were sometimes a point of the
mountaines of Estrella,The Islands of the Acores somtimes ioined to the firme land. which ioine vnto the sea ouer the
towne of Syntra: And also from Sierra Verde or the greene
mountaine, which adioineth vnto the water, hard by the citie
of Sasin in the land of Cucu (which is the selfe same Island of
Mouchin, where Algarbe is) come the Islands of Porto Santo
and Madera.
For it is held as a true and vndoubted veritie,All Islands haue their rootes running from the maine land. that all
Islands haue their roots running from the firme land, though
they be neuer so farre from the continent: for otherwise they
could not stand firme.
There are other histories which say,Eratosthenes apud Strabonem lib. 1. pag. 26. that from Spaine vnto
Ceuta in Barbarie men sometimes trauailed on foote vpon
drie land, and that the Islands of Sardinia and Corsica did
ioine the one with the other, as also did Sicilia with Italie,
and Negroponto with Graecia.
We reade also that there were found hulles of ships,Huls of ships and ankers ^ound on mountaines f^rre within land. ankers
of iron, and other memorials of shipping vpon the
mountaines of Sussa farre within the land: where as it
seemeth now no salt water or sea euer came.
In India also, and in the land of Malabar, although now
there be great store of people, yet many writers affirme that
it was once a maine sea vnto the foote of the mountaines; and
that the Cape of Comarim, and the Island of Zeilan were all

one thing: As also that the Island of Samatra did ioine with
the land of Malacca by the flats of Caypasia; and not farre
fro^ thence there stands now a little Island, which few yeeres
past was part of the firme land that is ouer against it.
Furthermore it is to be seene, how Ptolemey in his tables
dot^ set the land of Malacca to the south of the line in three or
fower degrees of latitude, whereas now it is at the point
thereof, being called ^entana, in one degree on the north side,
as appeereth in the Straight of Cincapura, where daily they
doe passe through vnto the coast of Sian and China, where the
Island of Aynan standeth, which also they say did ioine hard
to the land of China: and Ptolemey placeth it on the north
side far from the line, standing now aboue 20. degrees from it
towards the north, as Asia and Europe now stand.
Well it may be that in time past the land of Malacca and
China did end beyond the line on the south side, as Ptolemey
doth set them foorth: because it might ioine with the point of
the land called ^entana, with the Islands of Bi^tan, Banca, and
Salitres being many that waies, and the land might be all slime
and oaze; And so ye point of China, might ioine with the Islands
of the Lucones, Borneos, Lequeos, Mindanaos, and others which
stand in this parallele: they also as yet hauing in opinion that
the Island of Samatra did ioine with Iaua by the chanell of
Sunda,At this Isle of Bali the Holla^ders were 1596. and haue largely described it. and the Islands of Bali, Aujaue, cambaua, Solor, Hogaleao,
Maulua, Vintara, Rosalaguin, and others that be in
this parallele and altitude did all ioine with Iaua; and so they
seeme outwardly to those that descrie them. For at this day
the Islands stand so neere the one to the other, that they seeme
all but one firme land; and whosoeuer passeth betweene some
of them, may touch with their hand the boughs of the trees on
the one and on the other side also. And to come neerer to the
matter, it is not long since, that in the east the Islands of Banda
were diuers of them ouerflowen and drowned by the sea:
And so likewise in China about nine score miles of firme
ground is now become a lake,Nine score miles of firme ground lately drowned in China. as it is reported. Which is not
to be thought maruellous; considering that which Ptolemey*
and others haue written in such cases; which here I omit, to
returne to my purpose.
After the flood 800. yeeres we reade that the citie of Troy
was builded by the Dardans; and that before that time they

brought out of the Indies into Europe by the Red sea,800. yeeres after the flood was trade of spices by the Red sea. spices,
drugs, and many other kindes of marchandises, which were
there more abundant, then now they be. Whereunto if credit
may be giuen, we may conceaue that the sea was of old haunted
and frequented, seeing that then they of the East had so
much and so great trafficke with them of the West, that they
brought their marchandise vnto an hauen which was named
Arsinoe,Arsinoe, now called Suez. being that which at this day is called Suez, standing
in 30. degrees on the north part of the Arabian Gulfe. It
is also by authors farther written, that from this hauen of
Arsinoe or Suez,Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29. these marchandises were carried by Carauans
or great companies of carriers vpon camels, asses, and
mules, vnto the Leuant sea vnto a city called Cassou, standing
on the coast in 32. degrees of latitude, yeelding vnto euery
degree 17. leagues and an halfe, as the maner is. And there
are by account from the one sea to the other 35. leagues, or
105. miles.Strabo lib. 17. pag. 560. These carriers, by reason of the heate of the countrey,
trauailed in the night onely, directing themselues by
stars and by marks of postes and canes, which they vsed to
sticke in the ground as they went. But after that, because this
course and iourney had many inconueniences, they changed
and altered the same twise, to finde out the most commodious
way.
900. yeeres or there about after the flood,900. yeeres after the flood. and before the
destruction of Troy,Strabo lib. 17. there was a king in Egypt called Sesostris,
who perceiuing that the former courses and passages for
the carrying of marchandises by men and beasts, were chargeable
to the one and most painfull to the other, prouided to haue a
way or streame cut out of the land from the Red sea vnto an
arme of the riuer Nilus which ru^neth vnto the Citie Heroum;
that by the meanes thereof ships might passe and repasse
with their marchandises from India into Europe,Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29. and not
be discharged till they came into Italie. So that this Sesostris
was the first king, which built great caracks to trauaile this
way. But this enterprise for all that tooke little effect. For if
it had, Africa had then been made as an Island all compassed
with water, being no more ground betweene sea and sea, then
the space of 20. leagues or 60. miles.
About this time the Graecians gathered together an army
or fleete,Diodorus Siculus lib. 4. cap. 4. which now is called Argonautica, whereof Iason and

Alceus were captains general. Some say they went from the
Isle of Creta, others from Graecia. But whence soeuer they
departed, they sailed through the Proponticke sea, and Saint
Georges Sleeue vnto the Euxine sea, where some perished,
and Iason thereupon returned backe into Greece. Alceus reported
that he was driuen with a tempest to the lake Maeotis,
The lake Maeotis. where he was forsaken of al his company, and they which
escaped with great trauaile, passed through by land vnto the
Ocean sea of Almaine,Shipping of great antiquitie in the Germaine sea. where they tooke shipping, passing the
coasts of Saxonie, Frisland, Holland, Flanders, France, Spaine,
Italie, and so returned vnto Peloponesus and Greece, discouering
the most part of the coast of Europe.
Strabo,Strabo lib. 1. pag 26. alleaging Aristonicus the Grammarian, sheweth
that after the destruction of Troy Menelaus the king came out
of the straights of the Leuant seas into the sea Atlanticke and
coasted Africa and Guinea, and doubled the Cape of Bona
Speranca, and so in time arriued in India. Of which voyage
of his there may be many more particulars gathered out of
the histories. This Mediterrane sea was also sometimes called
The Adriaticke, The Aegaean, and the Herculean sea, with
other names, according to the lands, coasts and Islands which
it passeth by, running into the great sea Atlanticke, along the
coast of Africa.
In the yeere 1300. after the flood Solomon caused a nauie
to be prepared on the Red sea,1. of Kings. 9. at an hauen called Ezeon Geber,
2. Chron. 8. to saile to the East India, where by opinion stande the
Islands called Tharsis and Ophir. This nauie was three
yeeres on this voyage, and then returned, and brought with
them gold, siluer, cypres, etc. Whereby it seemeth that those
places, and Islands were those, which now be called the Lucones,
Lequeos, and Chinaes. For we know few other parts
from whence some of those things are brought, or wherein
nauigation was so long since vsed.
It is left vs also in histories,Herodotus lib. 4. that a king of Egypt called
Neco, desiring greatly to ioyne the Red sea with the riuer
Nilus, commanded the Phoenicians to saile from the straight
of Mecca to the farther end of the Mediterrane sea, to see if it
did make any turne backe againe vnto Egypt. Which commandement
they obeied, sailing towards the south all along
the coast and countrey of Melinde, Quiloa, Sofala, till they

came to the Cape of Bona Esperanca, finding the sea continually
on the left hand: But when they had doubled the Cape,
and found the coast continually on the right hand, they maruailed
much at it. Notwithstanding they continued their
course forward toward the north al along the coast of Guiney
and the Mediterrane sea, till they came backe againe into
Egypt, whence they first went out. In which discouerie they
remained two yeeres. And these are thought to be the first,
that compassed by sea all the coast of Afrike, and sailed round
about it.
In the yeere 590. before the incarnation of Christ there
went out of Spaine a fleete of Carthaginian marchants vpon
their owne proper costs and charges,Aristoteles lib. de mirandis in natura auditis. which sailed toward
the west through the high seas to see if they could finde any
land: and they sailed so farre, that they found at last the
Islands,Gonzalo Fernandes de Quiedo lib. 2 cap. 3. of his generall historie. which we now call the Antiles and Noua Spagna:
which Gonzalo Fernandes de Quiedo saith were then discouered,
although Christopher Columbus afterwards by his
trauaile got more exact knowledge of them, and hath left vs
an euident notice where they be. But all these historians,
which wrote of these Antiles before, as of doubtfull and vncertaine
things, and of places vndiscouered, doe now plainly
confesse the same to be the countrey of Noua Spagna.
In the yeere 520. before the incarnation,Diodorus Siculus lib. 1. cap. 3. and after the setting
out of the aforesaid army, Cambyses king of Persia tooke
Egypt, after whom succeeded Darius the sonne of Histaspis,
and he determined to make an end of the enterprise which
king Sesostris had begun, if they had not told him that the Red
sea was higher then the land of Egypt, and that by meanes
of the salt sea comming into the riuer Nilus, all the prouince
would haue been lost and vndone for hunger and thirst. For
the fresh water of the riuer Nilus doth ouerflowe the whole
countrey, and the inhabitants haue no other water then that
for their drinke: whereupon he left his first purpose of prosecuting
that enterprise.
Now by the way I shall not swarue much from my matter,
A digression. if I speake a word or two of some things incident to this
discourse.Plinius lib. 9. cap. 58. de mu^ibus Nili. The Egyptians say that they had in their countrey
certaine vermine like vnto rats, whereof many be halfe like
earth and the other halfe like a vermine. One kinde of them

keepe the water, and another kinde the land. For my part I
thinke that these be they, which breake the serpents egges,
whereof there are many in the riuer Nilus, which also be called
Crocodiles: which in times past by report were so inchanted,
that thereby they could not hurt any person. But
when they were deliuered from their inchantment made by
the Egyptians arte,Ioannes Leo Africanus lib. 9. cap. de Nilo. and letters, then they endeuoured to kill
people, wilde beasts and cattell, doing very much harme, specially
those which liue in the water, which oftentimes come
to the land, and liuing altogether on land become very strong
poison. The people beyond the citie of Cairo vse to fish for
them and eate them, and they take their heads, and set them
vpon the walles of their citie.
Of these Crocodiles it is written,Plinius lib. 8. cap. 25. that they lay themselues
along by the riuer with their mouthes open, and that there
come vnto them certaine white birds,Ioannes Leo Africanus lib. 9. litle bigger then thrusshes,
which flie into the mouth of the Crocodile, and picke out
the filthines which is betweene his teeth, and in his iawes,
wherewith he is greatly pleased; but for all that the Crocodile
would close his mouth and deuoure the bird, if nature
had not prouided the bird a sharpe pricke as it were, growing
out of his head, wherewith he pricketh the Crocodile in
the mouth; which causeth him to gape wide, and so the bird
flieth away without harme; yet there come by and by other
of those birds, which make an end of cleansing his mouth.
In the same riuer there are also many beastes like vnto
horses;Hippopotami. and vpon the land certaine fowles like vnto cranes,
which warre continually with serpents,Ibis. that come thither
from Arabia, and kill many of them. Which birds as also the
vermine, which eate the egges of the Crocodiles, are greatly
esteemed of the Egyptians.
But now to returne to my matter, and to proceede in the
discoueries; In the yeere 485. before the incarnation of Christ
Xerxes the king of Persia commanded Sataspis his nephew to
goe and search, and discouer India: who according to the precept
vndertooke the voyage, and went through the straight of
Gibraltar, and passed the promontorie of Africa, which now
we call the Cape of Bona Speranca, standing southward betwixt
34. and 35. degrees in latitude, and being weary of so
great a nauigation turned from thence backe againe, as Bartholomew

Diaz did in our daies.
Before the comming of Christ 443. yeeres Himilco and
Hanno his brother Carthaginian captaines gouerning that
part of Spaine,Plinius lib. 2. cap. 67. which is now called Andaluzia, departed from
thence each one with his nauie. Himilco sailing towards the
north discouered the coasts of Spaine, France, England, Flanders
and Germanie. And some write farther, that he sailed
vnto Gotland, and came to the Island of Thule, or Island, standing
vnder the circle Arcticke in 24. degrees from the north
pole, and continued in his nauigation two yeeres, til he came
vnto this Island, where the day hath in Iune 22. houres, and
in December the night also hath 22. houres, whereby it is
there woonderfully cold.
Now the other brother Hanno tooke his course towarde
Africa and Guiney, and he discouered the Fortunate Islands,
which we call the Canaries, and besides these he discouered
others,Plinius lib. 6. cap. 31. as the Dorcades, Hesperides, and the Gorgades, which
now be called the Isles of Cape Verde. There he with his
company went along the coast till they doubled the Cape of
Bona Speranca, and taking their course towards the land,
they went along by it vnto another Cape named Aromaticum,
which is now called Guardafu, standing southeast from
Cape Verde in 14. degrees toward the north; and he came
to the coast of Arabia standing in 16. and 17. degrees; and
was fiue yeeres in this voiage, before he returned backe into
Spaine.The nauigation of Hanno in Greeke herevnto agreeth. There be others that say, that he passed not beyond
Sierra Leona, but peopled it, and afterwards discouered as far
as the line. But it seemeth he made a full nauigation, because
he spent so much time in his trauaile. It is reported that
the inhabitants of the Cape of Bona Speranca are great witches,
and inchanters of certaine snakes, which they bring to
such seruice,Enchanted snakes. and commandement, that they keepe their Churches
and Churchyards, gardens, orchards, barnes, and cattel
as well from wilde beasts, as from theeues. For if they see any
to doe or to intend hurt, the snake windes her selfe to him or
them, holding them as prisoners, and commanding her yoong
ones to call their masters vntill they be taken. If the theeues
be many, or the wilde beastes of so much strength, that they
dare not meddle with them, then they goe vnto the house of
him with whom they doe liue: and if it be in the night time,

they giue so many strokes, that at the last they doe awake
them, to cause them to prouide for their defence.
A certaine Italian called Aloisius Cadamusta writeth, that
he being in the discouerie of Guiney in the kingdome of Budimol
lay in the house of Bisborol his sonnes sonne; and lying
in his bed he heard a great noise and many blowes giuen
about the house; whereupon Bisborol rose, and went out: and
when he came againe, Cadamusta demanded of him, where
he had been; and he answered that he had been with his Cobras
or snakes which called him. In the Indias there be many
of these kinde of snakes, and some full of poison, which notwithstanding
the Indian people vse to carrie about their
necks, and put them into their bosomes and vnder their
armes: which at some soundes that the people make will
daunce, and doe diuers things at commandement.
There was a Portugall that somtime told me, that beyond
the Cape of Bona Speranca towards Sofala, Quiloa, and
Melinde, where he had been, there were certaine birds, which
would come to the Black Moores at their call,Odericus writeth the like of one that brought multitudes of patridges to Trapezunda. and according
as the Moores did remooue, so the birds would doe, from one
tree to another: and they vsed to follow them till they did
light vpon some tree, from whence they could not remooue.
And as the Negros went vp the tree they should finde waxe
and honie thereupon, not knowing whether it grewe there
naturally or not. In the same countrey also vnder ground in
Ant-holes they did finde much honie and waxe, which the
Antes did make, being somewhat bitter. Vpon the sea coast
also they found certaine fishes, which commonly went vpright
in the water,Mermaides. hauing the faces and natures of women,
which the fishermen of those places were acquainted with.
In the yeere 355. before Christ it is said that the Spanyards
sailed through the maine sea till they came vnto the flats of
India,Aristotel. de mirand^^ in natura auditis. Arabia,Strabo lib. 2. pag. 68. de Gad^tanorum longi^^^a nauiga^^^^ ingentibus na^^bus. and those coasts adioyning, whereunto they
caried diuers marchandises, which trade they vsed in great
ships. And sailing to the northwest they came vnto certaine
flats, which with the flowing of the sea were couered, and
with the ebbe were discouered, finding there many Tunnies
of great bignes, where they commonly vsed to fish them to
their great profit, because they were the first vntill that time
that they had seene, and were greatly esteemed.

The time of Alexander Magnus, as appiereth by the ages
of the world, was before the comming of Christ 324. yeeres:
we all know that he was borne in Europe: but he trauailed
into Asia and Africa, and passed through Armenia, Assyria, Persia,
and Bactria, standing northerly in 44. degrees of latitude,
which is the farthest countrey in longitude wherein he was
in all his iourneyes. From thence he descended into India by
the mountaines of Imaus, and the valleyes of Paropanisus,
and prepared a nauie in the riuer Indus, and therewith passed
into the Ocean sea, where he turned by the lands of Gedrosia,
Caramania, and Persia, vnto the great citie of Babylon, leauing
Onesicritus and Nearcus captaines of his fleete, which afterwards
came vnto him by the straight of the Persian sea, and
vp the riuer of Euphrates, leauing that countrey and coast
discouered.
After this, Ptolemey raigned king of Egypt, who by some
is reputed to haue been bastard sonne vnto Philip father of
the foresaid Alexander the great.Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29. This Ptolemey imitating
the forenamed kings Sesostris aud Darius, made a trench or
ditch of an hundred foote broad and of thirty foote deepe, and
ten or twelue leagues in length till he came to The bitter
Welles, pretending to haue his worke run into the sea from
a mouth of the riuer Nilus, called Pelusium, passing now by
the citie Damiata. But this thing tooke none effect: for that
the Red sea was thought to be higher by three cubits then the
land of Egypt, which would haue ouerflowed all the countrey,
to the ruine and losse thereof.
In the yeere 277.Strabo lib 17. pag. 560 and 561. before the incarnation succeeded in the
gouernment of the kingdome one Philadelphus, who brought
to passe that the marchandises should come out of Europe to
the citie of Alexandria vpwards by the riuer Nilus vnto a city
named Coptus,Coptus. Myos-Hormos now (...) on the Red sea. and from thence to be conueyed by land to a
hauen standing vpon the Red sea called Myos-Hormos;
which way was trauailed in the night, the pilots directing
themselues by the stars, which were expert in that practise.
And because water was scant that way, they vsed to carrie it
with them for all the companie, till at the last to auoide that
trouble they digged very deepe wels, and made large cisterns
for the receipt of raine water, by which the way furnished
with that commoditie, which at the first it wanted grewe in

continuance of time to be the more frequented.
But whereas the straight way was dangerons by reason
of flats and islands, the aforesaid king Philadelphus with his
armies went on the side of Troglodytica, and in an hauen
called Berenice caused the ships to arriue which came out of
India, being a place of more suretie and lesse perill; from
whence they might easily carrie the wares to the citie of
Coptus,The cause of the greatnes of Alexandria. and so to Alexandria. And by this meane Alexandria
grew so famous and rich, that in those daies there was no
citie of the world comparable to it. And to speake briefly and
particularly of the abundance of trafficke there vsed, it is left
written for an assured truth,Strabo lib. 17. pag. 549. that in the time of king Ptolemey
Auletes father vnto Cleopatra, it yeelded in customes
vnto him yeerly seuen millions and an halfe of gold, although
the trafficke was not then scant twenty yeeres old, by way of
that citie.
But after that this prouince and countrey became subiect
to the Emperours of Rome,Strabo lib. 17. pag. 549. as they were greater in power,
and neerer in couetousnes, so they enhansed the customes: so
that within a little time the citie yeelded double the foresaide
summe. For the traffike grew so exceeding great, that they
sent euery yeere into India 120. ships laden with wares,
which began to set saile from Myos-Hormos about the middle
of Iuly,Plinius lib 6. cap. 23. and returned backe againe within one yeere.
The marchandise which they did carrie amounted vnto
one million two hundred thousand crownes, and there was
made in returne of euery crowne an hundred. In so much
that by reason of this increase of wealth the matrones or noble
women of that time and place,Plinius lib. 12. cap. 18. spent infinitely in decking
themselues with precious stones, purple, pearles muske, amber,
and the like: whereof the writers and historians of that
age speake very greatly.
Cornelius Nepos,Plinius lib. 2. cap. 67. alleaged by Plinie, maketh report of a
king of Egypt, that raigned in his time called Ptolemaeus Lathyrus,
from whom one Eudoxus fled vpon occasion, and the
better to auoid and escape his hands he passed through the
Arabicke gulfe, and the sea, all along the coast of Africa and
the Cape of Bona Speranca till he came vnto the Island of
Cadiz: and this nauigation by that course was in those daies
as often vsed as now it is, if we may giue credit to the histories.

Which appiereth the more manifest by this, that Caius
Caesar the sonne of Augustus going into Arabia did finde in
the Red sea certaine peeces of those ships, which came thither
out of Spaine. It was a vse also long after those daies to
passe to India by land. For so did the kings of the Soldans,
and the princes of Bactria, and other famous captaines, who
trauailing thither and into Scythia by land, had the view of
those prouinces and countreyes, so farre till they came that
way vnto the * West, and to the seas thereof on the north
part, whereunto many marchants then did trauaile. Marcus
Paulus Venetus writeth much hereof.Paulus Venetus commended. And although at the
first his booke was taken for a fabulous thing, yet now there
is better credit giuen vnto it, for that by the late experiences
of the trauailers and marchants of these daies into those
parts, the names of the countreyes, cities and townes, with
their situations, latitudes and commodities are now found
true, as he and other historiographers of that time haue reported.
In the 200. yeere before the incarnation it is written, that
the Romanes sent an armie by sea into India against the great
Can of Cathaia, which passing through the straight of Gibraltar,
and running to the northwest, found right ouer against
the Cape Finisterre ten Islands, wherein was much tinne:
And they may be those which were called the Cassiterides,Cassiterides. and
being come to 50. degrees of latitude they found aThe northwest passage, though the latitude be somewhat mistaken. Straight;
and passing through it towards the west, they arriued in the
Empire of India, and fought with the king of Cathay, and so
came backe againe vnto the citie of Rome. Which thing howsoeuer
it may seeme either possible or not possible, true or not
true,What histories may these be? yet so I finde it left to vs recorded in the * histories of
that time.
In the 100. yeere after the incarnation of Christ the Emperour
Traiane prepared an armie by sea vpon the riuers
Euphrates and Tigris,Xiphil^nus in vita Traiani. and departed from them, and sailed to
the Islands of Zyzara, and passing the straight of Persia entred
into the Ocean sea and sailed towards India all along
the coast till he came to that place where Alexander had been,
and there he tooke certaine ships which came from Bengala,
of whom he learned the state of that countrey. But because he
was then in yeeres and wearie with his trauaile, but especially

because he found there small reliefe for his armie, he returned
backe.
After that the Romanes had gotten the most part of the
world, there were in that age made many, and notable discoueries.
But then came the Gothes, Moores, and other barbarous
nations, and destroied all. For in the yeere 412. after
the incarnation of Christ,Rome taken by the Gothes 412. they tooke the citie of Rome: And
the Vandales came out of Spaine and conquered Africa.
And in the yeere 450. the king called Atila destroied many
cities in Italie:The originall of Venice 450. at which time the citie of Venice began. And
in this age the Frankes and Vandals entred into France.
In the yeere 474. the Empire of Rome was lost, and fell
from the Romanes to the Gothes.
And after this came the Lombards into Italie, namely in
the yeere 560.
Also about this time the sect of the Arrians preuailed greatly:
and at this time one Merline of England was famous
for his prophecies.
To be short,The sect of Mahumet began anno 611. in the yeere 611. sproong vp the Mahumetane
sect and Morisco regiment, which by force inuaded both
Africa and Spaine.
By all this it may appeere, that in that age all the world
was in an hurly burly, and all places very tumultuous. In so
much that trafficke and marchandise ceased:Trafficke and nauigation cease. for no nation
durst trade one with another neither by sea nor land: nothing
as then remained stedfast neither in monarchies nor kingdomes,
Ramusius 1. vol. fol 372. pag. 2. signiories, religions, lawes, artes, sciences, nor nauigations.
Nor so much as the records and writings of such
things did remaine, but were all burnt and consumed by the
barbarous crueltie and vnbrideled power of the Gothes:
who became so couetous and ambitious, that they purposed
of themselues to begin a new world, and to roote out the memorie,
and blot out the knowledge of all other nations besides.
But they that succeeded after these times in the gouernment
of things, perceiuing the great and huge losse, that the
Christian world had by the want of trafficke and ceasing of
nauigation, whereby those commodities and marchandises
could not be spent, which before went ordinarily from one
nation to another by the vse of trade: to the end that this

decay and losse might be repaired, and the treasures of the
East might be imparted with the West, as it was woont in
the times of quietnes and peaceable liuing, they began to
deuise a way to passe to India, which was not as the former
way was by the Red sea and the riuer Nilus, but a way of farther
sailing and farther length and cost also. For they brought
their ware vp the riuer Indus,Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 373. and there vnladed it, carrying
it by land through the countrey of Paropanisus by Carauans
vnto the prouince of Bactria, and then shipped it in barks on
the riuer Oxus,A way by the riuer Oxus, the Caspian sea, Volga, and ouer land to Caffa. which falleth into the Caspian sea, and so sailed
ouer that sea vnto an hauen of the riuer Rha named Citracan
or Astracan, and so vpwards in the said riuer which now
is called Volga; and as it appeereth they carried it to the citie
of Nouogrode in the prouince of Resan, which now belongeth
to the great Duke of Moscouia, standing toward the north in
54. degrees of latitude: and therehence they trauailed ouer land
vnto the prouince of Sarmatia vnto the riuer Tanais, which is
the diuision of Europe from Asia; where they againe laded it
in barks, and caried it downe the riuer, into the lake Maeotis,
and to the citie of Caffa, which in ancient time was called
Theodosia, which then belonged to the Genowais, who came
thither for those wares in their galliasses or great ships.
It is also left written, that the trade this way endured
vntill the raigne of Commodita Emperour of Armenia, who
prouided for a better course, and commanded this trafficke
of the spices to be conueied by the Caspian sea,Strabo lib. 11. and so through
the kingdome of Hiberia, which now is called Georgiana, and
from thence they entred by the riuer Phasis, now Phasso, into
Pontus Euxinus,The marte of spices at Trapezunda. Ramusius ibidem. and so vnto the city of Trapezunda standing
in 40. and odde degrees of northerly latitude. And to that
place came shipping for the marchandises out of Europe and
Africa.
It is further left recorded concerning this way of trafficke,
Strabo lib. 11. Plinius lib. 6. cap. 11. that Nicanor determined or had already begun to open
aboue 120. miles of land, which lieth betweene the Caspian
sea and Pontus Euxinus, that they might come and goe by
water with their spices, drugs, and other commodities, there
vsed. But in the meane time this mischiefe happened, that
Ptolemey Ceraunos killed him, and by his death this woorthy
and famous enterprise ceased without effect.

But the other way being also at last lost by reason of the
wars of the Turks,Another way to Boghar, and so by carauans into Persia by the riuer Ganges. it pleased God to open another way to
these marchandises from the Isle of Samatra, the citie of
Malacca, and the Island of Iaua vnto Bengala, and so carrying
them vp the riuer Ganges vnto the citie of Agra; from
whence they trauailed ouer land vnto another citie standing
neere the riuer Indus named Boghar, where they discharged,
bicause the citie ofOr Laor. Cabor standeth too farre within the land,
being the principall citie of the Mogores. From thence they
went forward to the great citie of Samarcand standing in the
countrey of Bactria:Samarcande. and there the marchants of India, Persia,
and Turkie met, bringing thither their seuerall commodities,
Woollen cloth good marchandise for Cathay. as cloth of gold, veluets, chamolets, scarlet, and woollen
clothes, which were carried to Cathay and the great kingdome
of China: wherehence they brought againe gold, siluer,
precious stones, pearles, silke, muske, and many other things
of great value, and much rubarbe. After this these marchandise,
The way by Ormus and Balsara and so to Aleppo and Barutti. drugs, and spiceries were carried in ships vpon the Indian
sea vnto the streight of Ormus, and to the riuers Euphrates
and Tigris; and were vnladen in the citie of Balsara
standing in 31. degrees towards the north, and from thence
they were caried ouer land vnto the cities of Aleppo, Damascus,
and Barutti standing on the same side in 35. degrees: And
there the Venetian gallies or galliasses, which transported
pilgrims into the holy land, came and receiued of those goods.
In the yeere 1153. in the time of Fredericke Barbarossa it
is written that there came to Lubec a citie of Germanie one
Canoa with certaine Indians, like vnto a long barge: which
seemed to haue come from the coast of Baccalaos, which standeth
in the same latitude that Germanie doth: The Germaines
greatly woondered to see such a barge, and such people,
not knowing from whence they came, nor vnderstanding
their speech, especially because there was then no knowledge
of that countrey, as now there is: it may be credible that
though the boate was small in respect of those huge seas, yet
the winde and water might bring them thither: as we see in
these our daies, that the Almadie which is but a small boate
commeth notwithstanding from Quiloa, Mosambique, and
Sofala to the Island of S. Helena, being a small spot of land
standing in the maine Ocean off the coast of Bona Speranca

so farre separated.
In the yeere 1300. after the comming of Christ the great
Soldan of Cayro commanded that the spiceries and drugs,Ioannes Leo Africanus.
and marchandises of India should be carried through the
Red sea,Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 373. as it was vsed before: at which time they vnladed
on the Arabian side, at the hauen of Iuda, and carried them
vnto the house at Mecca, and the carriers of it were the pilgrims.
So that each Prince vsed a custome to augment the
honour, and increase the profite of his countrey. And these
Soldans had speciall regarde to Cayro, from whence the
wares were carried vnto the countreyes of Egypt, Lybia,
Africa, the kingdomes of Tunez, Tremessen, Fez, Marocco,
Suz: and some of it was carried beyond the mountaines of
Atlas vnto the citie of Tombuto,Tombuto. and the kingdome of the Ialophos;
vntill afterwards that the Portugals did bring it about
the Cape of Bona Speranca vnto the citie of Lisbone, as in
place conuenient we purpose to shew more at large.
In the yeere 1344. king Peter the fourth of that name
reigning in Arragon, the Chronicles of his time report, that
one Don Luis of Cerda, sonne vnto the sonne of Don Iohn of
Cerda, craued aide of him to goe and to conquers the Isles of
the Canaries,The Canarie Islands. standing in 28. degrees of latitude to the north,
because they were giuen vnto him by Pope Clement the sixt,
which was a French man. Whereby in those daies there
grew a knowledge of those Islands in all Europe, and specially
in Spaine: for such great Princes would not begin nor
enterprise things of such moment without great certaintie.
About this time also the Island of Madera was discouered
by an English man called Macham:The Island of Madera discouered by Macham an English man. who sailing out of England
into Spaine, with a woman of his, was driuen out of his
direct course by a tempest, and arriued in that Island, and cast
his anker in that hauen, which now is called Machico after
the name of Macham. And bicause his louer was then sea-sicke,
he there went on land with some of his companie, and
in the meane time his ship weyed and put to sea, leauing him
there: whereupon his louer for thought died. Macham, which
greatly loued her, built in the Island a chappell or hermitage
to burie her in, calling it by the name of Iesus Chappell: and
wrote or graued vpon the stone of her tombe his name and
hers, and the occasion whereupon they arriued there. After

this he made himselfe a boate all of a tree, the trees being there
of a great compasse about, and went to sea in it with those
men of his companie that were left with him, and fell with
the coast of Africke without saile or oare, and the Moores
among whom he came tooke it for a miracle, and presented
him vnto the king of that countrey: and that king also admiring
the accident, sent him and his companie vnto the king
of Castile.
In the yeere 1395. king Henrie the third of that name reigning
in Castile, the information which Macham gaue of this
Island, and also the ship wherein he went thither, mooued
many of France and of Castile to goe and discouer it, and the
great Canarie: And they which went were principally the
Andaluzes, the Biscaines, and the Guepus^oes, carrying with
them many people and horses. But I know not whether the
charge of that voiage was theirs or the kings. But by whom
soeuer it was set out,The first discouerie of the Canaries by the Christians 1405. they seeme to be the first that discouered
the Canaries and landed in them: where also they tooke
150 of the Islanders prisoners. Concerning the time of this
discouerie, there is some difference among the writers: for
some affirme this to be done in the yeere 1405.

The first beginning of the Portugall
Discoueries.
THe Chronicles of Portugall haue this record, That after
the incarnation of Christ 1415. king Iohn the first
of that name king of Portugall, departed from the citie
of Lisbon with the Prince Don Duarte or Edward,The first conquest of the Portugals in Barbarie 1415. and Don
Peter, and Don Henry his sonnes, with other Lords, and nobles
of his realme, and sailed into Africa, where he tooke the
great citie of Ceuta,This victorie was gotten by the helpe of the English as Walsingham writeth. standing on the north side thereof betweene
35. and 36. degrees in latitude: which was one of the
principall causes of the enlarging of the dominions of Portugall.
When they were come from thence, Henry the kings third
sonne, desirous to enlarge the kingdome and to discouer strange
and vnknowne countreyes, being then in Algarbe, gaue direction
for the discouery of the coast of Mauritania.Iohn de Barros Asiae decad. 1. lib 1. cap. 2. For in those
daies none of the Portugals had euer passed the Cape de

Non, standing in 29. degrees of latitude.Cape de Non. And for the better accomplishing
of this discouerie, the aforesaid Don Henry prepared
a fleete, and gaue commandement to the chiefe captaines
to proceede in discouerie from the aforesaide Cape forward:
Which they did. But when they came to another Cape named
Bojador,Cape Bojador. there was not one of them, that durst goe farther
or beyond it: at which fearefull and cowardly faintnes
of theirs the Prince was exceedingly displeased.
In the yeere 1417. king Iohn the second reigning in Castile,
and his mother Ladie Katharine then vsing the gouernment,
one Monsieur Ruben of Bracamonte which was then
Admirall of France craued the conquest of the Islands of the
Canaries, with the title to be king of them, for a kinsman of
his called Monsieur Iohn Betancourt: which being granted
him by the Queene, and farther also partly furnished out,
he departed from Siuill with a good armie: But the chiefe or
principall cause that mooued him to enter into this action,
was to discouer and perfectly to take a view of the Island of
Madera, whereof Macham before had giuen so much information.
But for all that he went vnto the Canaries, and carried
with him a Friar called Mendo to be as Bishop thereof,
admitted by Pope Martine the fift. When they were landed
they wonne Lancerota,The Canarie Islands conquered. Forteuentura, Gomera, and Ferro:
from whence they sent into Spaine many slaues, honie, waxe,
Camfora, or Camfire, hides, Orchall, figs, Sanguis Draconis,
and other marchandises, whereof they made good profit: And
this armie also as they report,Porto Santo. discouered Porto Santo. The
Island that they inhabited was Lancerota, where they built
in it a castle of stone for their better defence and securitie.
In the yeere 1418. one Iohn Gonzales Zarco,Iohn de Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 2. and Tristam
Vaz Teixera, housholde gentlemen vnto Don Henry the
kings third sonne, perceiuing the desire that their master had
to discouer new countreyes, and willing in that course to doe
him some seruice, craued of him a barke, and licence to vndertake
the action: which they obtained, and sailed to the coast
of Africa: where they were ouertaken with a terrible tempest;
but they were succoured by falling with the land, and
entring into an hauen called Santo, where they landed, and
remained two yeeres.
In the yeere 1420. they discouered the Island of Madera,

where they founde the chappell and the stone and tombe,Ba^^os decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 3.
whereupon the foresaide Macham had grauen his name.The chappell built by Macham found in Madera.
There are others that write that a certaine Castillian perceiuing
the desire and fauour to nauigation which Don Henry
had, told him that they had found the Island of Porto Santo;
which being but a small thing they made no reckoning of it.
Don Henry sent Bartholomew Perestrello, Iohn Conzales
Zarco, Tristam Vaz Teixera, and by the signes and likelyhoods
that they had receiued,Porto Santo. they went to Porto Santo, and
there remained two yeeres: and after that, namely in the
yeere 1420. they sailed also to the Island of Madera, where
they found the memoriall and monument of the aforesaide
Macham the English man.
As for Monsieur Betancourt, who entred into the conquest
of the Canaries as is aboue mentioned, he was slaine
in the middest of the action, and left behind him for his heire a
kinseman of his called Monsieur Menante,The Canarie Islands sold ouer to a Spanyard. who after that
sold the said Islands of the Canaries vnto one Peter Barba of
Siuill. There are other which speake otherwise, and say that
Monsieur Iohn Betancourt went into France to prepare a
new armie about this conquest, and left there a nephew of
his; who because he heard no more of his vncle, and sawe
that he could not maintaine the warres any longer, he solde
the Canaries to Don Henry the king of Portugals third sonne,
for a certaine thing that he gaue him in the Island of Madera.
In the yeere 1424. they write that the saide Don Henry
prepared a nauie and armie to conquer these Islands,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 12. wherein
there went as captaine generall, one Don Fernando de
Castro; and by reason of the valiantnes and warlike behauiour
of the people they had the repulse: whereupon Don Ferdinando,
considering the great charge, and little or no good
successe, he gaue ouer the action, and returned backe againe.
After this Don Henry resigned ouer these Islandes to the
crowne of Castile, in consideration of the aides which Betancou^t
had receiued. But the Castillians agree not vnto this
report. For they say, that neither the kings of Portugall, nor
Don Henry would render the Islands, till they came in question
before Pope Eugenius the fourth;The Canaries came to the crowne of Spaine in the yeere 1431 who fully vnderstanding
the matter, gaue the conquest of the Islands by order of
iudgement vnto the king of Castile in the yeere 1431. whereupon

this contention ceased touching the title of the Canaries
between^ the kings of Portugall and of Castile.
These Islands being in number seuen, were called by the
name of Fortunatae, standing in 28. degrees to the north:
where the longest day is but 13. howers, and the longest
night as much, lying distant from Spaine 200. leagues, and
from the coast of Africa 18. leagues.The ancient maners of the Canarians. The people were idolaters,
and did eate their flesh raw for want of fire: they had no
iron, and sowed without any toole: they tilled and raised the
ground with oxe hornes, and goats hornes. Euery Island did
speake a seuerall language. They tooke many wiues, and
knew them not carnally vntill they had deliuered them to the
superiours. They had diuers other Paganish customes: but
now the Christian faith is planted among them.
The commodities of these Islands are wheate,The commodities of the Canaries. barley, sugar,
wine, and certaine birdes, called Canarie birdes, much
esteemed in Spaine and other places.
In the Island of Ferro they haue none other water, but
that which proceedeth in the night from a tree,A tree yeelding abundance of water in Ferro. compassed
with a cloud, whence water issueth, seruing the whole Island
both men and cattell, a thing notorious and knowne to very
many.
In the yeere 1428. it is written that Don Peter the king
of Portugals eldest sonne was a great traueller. He went into
England, France, Almaine, and from thence into the Holy
land, and to other places; and came home by Italie, taking
Rome and Venice in his way: from whence he brought a map
of the world,A most rare and excellent map of the world. which had all the parts of the world and earth
described. The streight of Magelan was called in it The Dragons
taile: The Cape of Bona Speranca, The forefront of
Afrike,A great helpe to Don Henry in his discoueries. and so foorth of other places: by which map Don Henry
the kings third sonne was much helped and furthered in
his discoueries.
It was tolde me by Francis de Sosa Tauares, that in the
yeere 1528. Don Fernando the kings sonne and heire did
shew him a map, which was found in the studie of Alcobaza,
which had beene made 120. yeeres before, which map did set
foorth all the nauigation of the East Indies,As much discouered in ancient time as now is. with the Cape of
Bona Speranca, according as our later maps haue described
it. Whereby it appeereth, that in ancient time there was as

much or more discouered,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4. then now there is. Notwithstanding
all the trauaile, paines and expences in this action of
Don Henry, yet he was neuer wearie of his purposed discoueries.
At length there was a seruant of his called Gilianes
that first passed the Cape Bojador,Cape Bojador first passed. Anno 1132. a place before terrible to
all men: and he brought word that it was not so dangerous,
as it was reported: for on the other side of it he went on land,
and in maner of taking possession, set in the ground a crosse of
wood, to be as a marke and token afterwards of his discouery
so farre.
In the yeere 1433. in the moneth of August Don Iohn
died,The death of Don Iohn the first of Portugall. and his sonne Don Duarte or Edward succeeded him in
the kingdome.
In the yeere 1434. Don Henry set out one Alfonso Gonsales
Baldaia,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 5. and Gilianes aforesaid, and they went to another
Cape, which was beyond the former, and going on land perceiued
the countrey to be inhabited: and because they were
desirous to satisfie Don Henry with as much relation and
knowledge as they could get, they continued their voiage,
and went forward, till they came to a certaine point of land,
from whence they turned backe againe.
In the yeere 1438. king Edward,The death of Don Duarte king of Portugall. whom the Portugals call
Don Duarte died, and Don Alphonso the prince being yoong,
Don Peter his vncle gouerned the kingdome.
In the yeere 1441. Don Henry sent out two ships,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 6. and the
captaines were in the one Tristan, and Antonie Gonsales
in the other Being put to sea they tooke a prise vpon the coast,
and sailed on to Cape Blanco,Cape Blanco. that is the White Cape, standing
in 20. degrees, and informed Don Henry of the state of
that cou^trey by the Moores which they brought from thence.
Whereupon he sent one Fernan Lopez de Sauado to giue
knowledge thereof to Pope Martine, trusting to make these
things commodious to Holy Church. Vpon which knowledge
the Pope granted indulgences and euerlasting pardon,I^dulgences ^^anted to encourage to this enterprise.
and all other things demanded of him, vnto those which
should die in this enterprise.
After this,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 7. in the yeere 1443. Don Henry commanded
Antonie Gonsales to carrie backe the slaues which he had
brought, and to ransome them in their countrey: Which he
did, and the Moores gaue them in trucke for them againe

blacke Moores with curled haire, and some gold; so that now
that place is called Rio de Oro,Rio de Oro, why so called. that is, the Golden Riuer;
whereby the desire of the discouerie might be the more increased.
Not long after he sent out another named Nunnez Tristan,
who came vnto the Islands of Arguin,The Islands of Arguin. where he tooke more
slaues, and brought them to Portugall in the yeere 1444.
Hereupon also one Lansarote, a groome of Don Gilians
chamber, with others associated with him, armed out certaine
ships,The Islands of Garze. which went coasting til they came to the Islands
of Garze, where they tooke two hundred slaues: which were
the first that were brought from thence to Portugall.
In the yeere 1445. there went as captaine of a barke one
Gonsalo de Syntra,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 9. an esquire belonging to Don Henry into
those parts; and he went on land, where he was taken with
sixe or seuen more of his company, which place was therefore
called after his name,Angra de Gonsaluo de Syntra. Angra de Gonsaluo de Syntra. This
was the first losse, which the Portugals receiued in their discoueries.
In the yeere following Don Henry sent out three carauels,
wherein went as captaines Antonie Gonsales, Diego Aloizio,
and Gomes Perez, who had their direction, not to enter
into Rio de Oro, nor to beare themselues disorderly, but to
trauaile in peace, and to conuert as many infidels as they
could to Christianitie. But none of these things were performed
by them; for they returned without doing any memorable
act.
In the same yeere 1446. another esquire belonging to the
king of Portugall called Denis Fernandes of the citie of Lisbon,
Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 9. and cap. 13. entred into these discoueries, more to winne fame then
to reape commoditie by them. And he being in his voiage
came to the riuer of Sanaga,The riuer of Sanaga. standing betweene 15. and 16.
degrees of latitude towards the north, where he tooke certaine
Negroes; and not contented therewith, he went forward
and discouered Cape Verde,Cape Verde. standing in 14. degrees on
the same side; and there he set vp vpon the land a crosse of
wood, and then returned with great contentation.
In the yeere 1447. one Nunnez Tristan went foorth to discouer
in a carauell,Barros decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 14. and he passed the aforesaid Cape Verde,
and Rio Grande,Rio Grande. and went past it vnto another standing beyond

it in 12. degrees, where he was also taken with 18. Portugals
more: but the ship came home againe in safetie, conducted
by fower or fiue which escaped the hands of the Negroes.
In this yeere also 1447. it happened that there came a Portugall
ship through the streight of Gibraltar; and being taken
with a great tempest, was forced to runne westwards more
then willingly the men would, and at last they fell vpon an
Island which had seuen cities,The Island of seuen cities. and the people spake the Portugall
toong, and they demanded if the Moores did yet trouble
Spaine, whence they had fled for the losse which they receiued
by the death of the king of Spaine, Don Roderigo.
The boateswaine of the ship brought home a little of the
sand, and sold it vnto a goldsmith of Lisbon, out of the which
he had a good quantitie of gold.
Don Pedro vnderstanding this, being then gouernour of
the realme, caused all the things thus brought home, and
made knowne, to be recorded in the house of Iustice.
There be some that thinke, that those Islands whereunto
the Portugals were thus driuen, were the Antiles, or Newe
Spaine, alleaging good reasons for their opinion, which here I
omit, because they serue not to my purpose. But all their reasons
seeme to agree, that they should be that countrey, which
is called Noua Spagna.
In the yeere 1449. the king Don Alfonso gaue licence vnto
his vncle Don Henry to inhabit the Islands of the Acores,Don Alfonso king of Portugall come to age.
which were long before discouered.Barros decad. 1. lib. 2. cap 1.
And in the yeere 1458. this king went into Africa,The Acores first inhabited. and
there he tooke the towne called Alcacer.
And in the yeere 1461. he commanded Signior Mendez a
gentleman of his house to build the castle of Arguin,Alcacer taken. whereof
he gaue vnto him the gouernment,The castle of Arguin builded. as to his lieutenant.Ibidem.
In the yeere 1462. there came into the realme of Portugall
three Genowais of good parentage,Barros decad. 1. lib. 2. cap. 1. the chiefe of whom was
called Antonie de Noli, and of the other two, the one was his
brother, the other was his nep^ew, and each of these had his
seuerall ship, crauing libertie of Don Henry to discouer the
Islands of Cape Verde, which was granted them. Others
say,The Isles of Cape Verde disc^uered by three Genowais. that the places which they discouered, were those which
Antiquitie called the Gorgades, Hesperides, and Dorcades:
but they named them Mayo, Sainct Iago, and Sainct Philip,

because they discouered them on those Saints daies: but
they are also called by some the Islands of Antonio.
In the yeere following 1463. this good noble man Don
Henry died,The death of Don Henry 1463. leaning from Cape De Non discouered vnto the
mountaine called Sierra Leona,Sierra Leona. standing on this side the line
in 8. degrees of latitude, where no man had beene before that
time.
In the yeere 1469. the king of Portugall did let out for
yeerely rent the trade of Guiney vnto one called Fernan Gomez,
Barros decad. 1. lib. 2 cap. 2. which countrey afterwards was called The Mine.The countrey of Guiney let out to farme. He
let it out for fiue yeeres, for two hundred thousand Reyes by
the yeere (which is of our English money 138. l. 17. ^. 9. d. ob.)
and added vnto his lease this condition, that euery yeere he
should discouer an hundred leagues.
In the yeere following,Ibidem. which was 1470. this king went
into Africa with his sonne Prince Iohn, where they tooke the
towne of Arzila,Arzila taken. and the people of the citie of Tanger fled out
for feare,Tanger taken. and that he tooke also. It seemeth that good fortune
followeth a couragious attempt.
In the yeere 1471. Fernan Gomes gaue commandement
that the coast should be discouered as it lay.Ibidem. Which was vndertaken
by Iohn de S. Aren, and Iohn de Scouar;La Mina. and they
went and found the Mine in 5. degrees of latitude.
And the next yeere,Ibidem. which was 1472. one Fernando da Poo
discouered the Island now called after his name.The Isle de Fernan de Poo. Also about
this time the Islands of Sainct Thomas,Sainct Thome. Rha del Principe. and Del Principe
were discouered, standing vnder the line, with the firme land
also,Benin. wherein is the kingdome of Benin,Cape de Santa Catarina. reaching to the Cape
de Santa Catarina, standing on the south side of the line in 3.
degrees. The man that made this discouerie was a seruant
of the kings, and his name was Sequeira.
Many suppose, that than also there were those places,
countreyes and Islands discouered, which before were neuer
knowne to vs since the flood.
In the yeere 1480. the valiant king Don Alphonso died,Don Iohn the second.
and left many things woorthy of memorie behinde him;Barros decad. 1. lib. 3 cap. 2. and
his sonne Don Iohn the second succeeded him.Castell de Mina. built. Who in the
yeere 1481. gaue direction for the building of the castle De
Mina to one Diego d'Azambuxa; who did so, and was made
captaine of it.

In the yeere 1484. the foresaid king Iohn sent out one Diego
Caon a knight of his Court to discouer:Barros decad. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3. and he went to
the Riuer of Congo,Rio de Congo. standing on the south side in 7. or 8. degrees
of latitude; where he erected a pillar of stone with the
royall armes and letters of Portugall, wherein he wrote the
commandement that he had receiued from the king, with the
time and day of his being there. From thence he went vnto
a riuer neere the Tropicke of Capricorne,Discouerie neere vnto the Tropick of Capricorne. setting still vp pillars
of stone where he thought it conuenient, and so came
backe againe vnto Congo,An ambassadour from the king of Congo. and to the king of that countrey:
who thereupon sent an ambassadour and men of credite into
Portugall.
In the next yeere or the second following, one Iohn Alonso
d'Aueiro came from the kingdome of Benin, and brought
home pepper with a taile:Pepper of Benin. which was the first of that kinde
seene in Portugall.
In the yeere 1487. king Iohn sent to discouer India ouer
land.Barros decad. 1. lib. 3. cap. 5. Pedro de Couillan and Alfonso de Pavua sent to discouer India. In which iourney went one Pedro de Couillan a seruant
of the kings, and Alfonso de Payua, because they could
speake the Arabian toong. They went out in the moneth of
May, and the same yeere they tooke shipping at Naples, and
arriued in the Isle of Rhodes, and lodged in the house that
was prouided for the Portugall knights of that order: from
thence they went to Alexandria,Alexandria. and so to Cayro, and thence
to the hauen of Toro in the companie of the Carauans or
carriers which were Moores.Cairo. There they tooke shipping,Toro. and
being on the Red sea they arriued at the citie of Aden,Aden. and
there they separated themselues: for Alfonso de Payua went
towards Aethiopia, and Pedro de Couillan into India. Who
came vnto the cities of Cananor and Calicut,Cananor. and came backe
vnto Goa:Calicut. where he tooke shipping vnto Sofala,Goa. being on the
coast of Africa in the southerne latitude of 20. degrees,Sofala. to see
the mines that were of so great name.Mosambique. From Sofala he turned
backe to Mosambique,Quiloa. and vnto the cities of Quiloa, Mombaza,
Mombaza. and Melinde,Melinde. till he came backe againe vnto the citie of
Aden: where he and Alfonso de Payua deuided themselues:
and thence he sailed againe through the Red sea vnto the citie
of Cayro, where he thought to haue met with his companion:
but there he heard that he was dead by the letters that he
receiued from king Iohn his master; in which letters he was

farther commanded to trauaile into the countrey and dominions
of Presbyter Iohn.
Vpon this commandement he prouided for his farther
iourney,The voiage of Pedro de Couillan vnto the countrey of Prete Ianni. and from Cairo went backe againe to the hauen of
Toro, and from thence to Aden, where he had been twise before:
and there hearing of the fame of the citie of Ormuz, he
determined to goe thither; and therefore went along the
coast of Arabia vnto the Cape Razalgate standing vnder the
Tropicke of Cancer,Cape Razalgate. and from thence he went to Ormuz,Ormuz.
standing in 27. degrees on that side. There he learned and vnderstood
of the streigth of Persia, and of that countrey: and
entred there into the Red sea, and passed ouer to the realme of
the Abassini,Abassini. which commonly is called Presbyter Iohns
countrey or Aethiopia:Pedro de Couillan the first Portugall that came into the East India and Aethiopia by the Red sea. and there he was detained till the
yeere 1520. when there came thither the ambassadour Don
Roderigo de Lima: This Pedro de Couillan was the first
Portugall that euer knew and saw the Indias and those seas,
and other places adioyning thereunto.
In the yeere 1490. the king sent vnto Congo one Gonzalo
de Sosa a gentleman with three ships,Barros decad. 1. lib. 3. cap 9. and in them sent
home the ambassadour of Congo, which was sent into Portugall,
whom Diego Caon had brought from thence: who at his
being in Portugall was baptised both himselfe and others of
his companie.
The aforesaid Gonzalo de Sosa died in that iourney by
the way, and in his roome they chose his nephew Ruy de Sosa
for their captaine; and so being come vnto Congo, the king
was very glad of their comming, and yeelded himselfe, and
the greater part of his realme to be baptized:A great part of the kingdome of Congo baptized. whereof the
Portugals had good cause to reioice, seeing by them so many
Infidels were conuerted from gentilitie and paganisme to
Christianitie.


The first beginning of the Discoueries of the Spanyards,
with the continuation of the Discoueries
of the Portugals.
IN the yeere 1492. in the time of Don Ferdinando king of
Castile, he being at the siege of Granada, dispatched one
Christopher Columbus a Genoway with three ships to goe

and discouer Noua Spagna: who first had offered his seruice
for a westerne discouerie vnto king Iohn of Portugall; but he
would not entertaine him.
He being sufficiently furnished for this enterprise departed
from the towne of Palos the third day of August, hauing with
him as captaines and pilots Martin Alfonso Pinzon, Francis
Martinez Pinzon, Vincent Yannes Pinzon, and Bartholomew
Columbus his brother, with 120. persons more in his companie:
The first that in sailing are thought to haue obserued latitud^s. and some affirme that they were the first that sailed by
latitudes. They tooke the Canaries in their way, and there
refreshed themselues; taking their course thence towards Cipango:
but finding the sea by the way full of weeds they were
amazed, and with great feare arriued at the Antiles the tenth
day of October, and the first Island that they descried was
called Guanahany:The Isle of Guanahany first discouered. where they went on land, and tooke possession
of it, and named it San Saluador. This Island standeth
in 25. degrees of northerly latitude. And after that they
found many Islands, which they called the Princes because
they were the first that they had discouered.
The Sauages of those parts call these Islands by the name
of Lucaios,Lucaios Islands. hauing in deede seuerall names for them. And they
doe stand on the north side almost vnder the Tropicke of Cancer.
As for the Island of S. Iames or Iamaica, it standeth betweene
16. and 17. degrees.
Thence they went to the Island which the naturals of the
countrey call Cuba,Cuba. and the Spanyards call it Ferdinandina,
bicause their kings name was Ferdinando, standing in 22.
degrees: from whence the Indians conducted them vnto another
Island, which they call Hayti, and the Spanyards called
it Isabella, in the memorie of the Queene of Castile, which
was so called,Hispaniola. and they named it also Hispaniola. In that
Island the Admirall ship of Columbus was cast away: of the
timber and planks whereof they made a forte, wherein they
left 38 men, and a captaine called Roderigo de Arana, to
learne the language and customes of the countrey. They
brought from thence musters and shewes of gold, pearles, and
other things, which that countrey yeelded; and ten Indians
also, whereof sixe died, the rest were brought home and baptized.
Hereupon there grewe such a common desire of trauaile

among the Spanyards, that they were ready to leape into the
sea to swim, if it had been possible, into those new found parts.
The aforesaid company of Columbus at their comming home
tooke in their way the Isles of the Acores, and the 4. day of
March in the yeere 1493. they entred into the bar of Lisbon:Contention betweene the kings of Spaine and Portugall.
which discouerie pleased not the king of Portugall. Whereupon
rose a contention betweene those two kings.
Christopher Columbus being arriued went presently into
Castile with the newes of all things, and acquainted the king
Fernando, with the discontentednes of the king of Portugall:
whereupon he and the Queene Isabella his wife sent streight
word thereof vnto Pope Alexander the 6. whereat he and
the Italians were in great admiration,The bull of donation. maruailing that there
was any more land besides that which was vnder the Romanes.
But the end of this matter was this: Alexander the
Pope gaue these countreies by his iudgement vnto the kingdomes
of Leon and Castile; with this condition, That they
should labour to extirpate idolatrie, and plant the Holy faith
in those countreyes.
Fernando the king hauing receiued this answere, was
glad of it, and sent Christopher Columbus againe on the former
voiage,Gomara historiae general. lib. 1. cap. 17. hauing made him Admirall, and giuen him other
honors, with particular armes, and a posie written about his
armes to this effect.

For Castile and for Leon
A new world found out Colon.

In the yeere 1493. the 25. of the moneth of October Christopher
Columbus went backe vnto the Antiles,Columbus second voiage. and fro^ Cadiz
he tooke his course, hauing in his companie 17. ships, and
1500. men in them, with his brethren Bartholomew Columbus,
and Diego Columbus, with other knights, gentlemen,
men of law, and religious men, with chalices, crosses, rich
ornaments, and with great power and dignitie from Pope
Alexander; and the 10. day after their setting foorth, they arriued
at the Canaries; and from thence in 25. or 30. daies they sailed
vnto the Antiles; and the first Island that they saw standeth in
14. degrees towards the north, due west from Cape Verde on
the coast of Africa. They say that the distance from thence to
the Canaries is 800. leagues.Deseada discouered. The name they gaue it was
Deseada, that is the Desired or wished Island, for the great

desire which the companie had to come to sight of land. After
that they discouered many more which they named the Virgines,
Caribas. which the naturals of the countrey call the Caribas, for
that the men of that countrey are good warriers, and shoote
well in bowes. They poison their arrowes with an herbe,
whereof he that is hurt dieth, biting himselfe like as a mad
dog doth.
From these Islands and others they went vnto the principall
Island there, which they of the countrey doe call Boriquen,
Boriquen of S. Iohn de porto riceo. and the Spanyards call it S. Iohn, and thence to Hispaniola
or Isabella, where they found all the men dead which
there they had left. Here the Admirall left the most part of the
people to plant it, and appointed his brethren to be gouernours
there: and so tooke two ships, and went to discouer the
other side of the Island of Cuba,Iamaica. and from thence to Iamaica.
All these Islands stand from 16. vnto 20. degrees of northerly
latitude. In the meane time that the Admiral^ sailed about,
his brethren and they that were left with them were much
troubled, because the Sauages did rise against them. So that
Christopher Colon went backe againe into Spaine, to tell the
king and Queene of his aduentures.
In the yeere 1494. and in the moneth of Ianuarie there
was an agreement made of the differences which were betweene
the two kings of Spaine and Portugall. For the which
agreement there were sent out of Portugall Ruy de So^a, and
Don Iohn his sonne, and the Doctor Ayres de Almada: and
for the king of Spaine there were Don Henry Henriques,
Don Iohn de Cardenas, and the Doctor Maldonado. All these
met in the towne of Tordesillas, and they deuided the world
fro^ the north to the south by a meridian which standeth west
from the Islands of Cape Verde 300. leagues:The first line of partition. so that the one
halfe which lay vnto the east should belong vnto Portugall,
and that which lay to the west to the king of Spaine, whereby
notwithstanding libertie to trauell was left equall vnto
both.
In the yeere following 1495. Iohn king of Portugall died,The death of Don Iohn the second.
and Emmanuel his cosen began to reigne.
In the yeere 1496. there was a Venetian in England called
Iohn Cabota,The great discouerie of Iohn Cabota and the English. who hauing knowledge of such a new discouerie
as this was, and perceiuing by the globe, that the

Islands before spoken of stood almost in the same latitude
with his countrey, and much neerer to England then to Portugall,
or to Castile, he acquainted king Henrie the seuenth
then king of England with the same, wherewith the saide
king was greatly pleased, and furnished him out with two
ships and three hundred men: which departed and set saile in
the spring of the yeere, and they sailed westward til they came
in sight of land in 45. degrees of latitude towards the north,
and then went straight northwards till they came into 60.
degrees of latitude, where the day is 18. howers long, and the
night is very cleere and bright. There they found the aire
cold, and great Islands of ice, but no ground in an hundred
fathoms sounding: and so from thence finding the land to
turne eastwards they trended along by it discouering all the
Bay and riuer named Deseado, to see if it passed on the other
side: Then they sailed backe againe till they came to 38. degrees
towards the Equinoctiall line,This is to the south of the Chese^ian Bay. and from thence returned
into England. There he others which say, that he went as far
as the Cape of Florida, which standeth in 25. degrees.
In the yeere 1497. The king of Spaine Don Fernando sent
out Christopher Columbus with sixe ships,Columbus third voiage. and he himselfe
prouided two ships at his owne cost,Gomara historiae general. lib. 2. cap. 21. and sending his brother
before, he made saile from the Bay of Cadiz, carrying with
him his sonne Don Diego Colon* It was then reported that
he went to take the Island of Madera, because he mistrusted
the French men, and therefore sent thither three ships: others
say it was to the Canaries. But howsoeuer it was, this is
true, that he and three more went vnto the Islands of Cape
Verde, and ran along by the line finding great calmes and
raine, and the first land which they came vnto of the Antiles
was an Island standing in 9. degrees of latitude towards the
north ioining fast vnto the maine land, which they called La
Trinidada;Trinidada. and so he entred into the Gulfe of Paria, and came
out of the mouth which they name Bocca de Dragone, or the
Dragons mouth: and they tooke their course hard by the coast,
where they found three small Islands, which they named Los
Testigos,Testigos. that is to say,Cubagua. The Witnesses, beyond which standeth
the Island of Cubagua, where is great fishing of muscle
pearles: where also, as they say, there springeth a Well of
aile: and beyond that Island they came to the Isles of Frailes,

Roques,Frailes, Roques, Aruba, Caracao, etc. Aruba, and Curacao, with other small ones all along
the Bay: and they came to the point of Cabo de Vela, and
discouered along the coast almost 200. leagues,Cabo de Vela. from whence
they crossed ouer to Hispaniola, hauing had also sight of the
Island called Beata.Beata.
In this same yeere 1497. on the 20. day of the moneth of
Iune one Vasques de Gama sailed from Lisbon by the king
Emmanuels commandement to India with 3. ships,Barros decad. 1. lib 4 cap. 2. and to the end of the 11. chapter. wherein
there went for captaines Vasques de Gama, Paulus de Gama
his brother, and Nicolas Coello with 120. men; with whom
also there went one ship laden only with vittailes, and in 14.
daies they came vnto Cape Verde, vnto the Island of Saint
Iago, where they refreshed themselues, and from thence they
went along the coast beyond the Cape of Bona Speranca,The Cape of Bona Speranca.
whereupon they erected certaine pillers of stone, and so came
vnto Mosambique standing in 15. degrees to the south of the
line,Mosambique. where they staied not long, but went from thence to
Mombaza,Mombaza. Melinde. and vnto Melinde: where the king of that place
gaue them pilots, which conducted them into India, in which
discouerie they found out Los Baxos do Padua,Los Baxos de Padua. that is to say,
the flats of Padua.
In the yeere 1498. in the moneth of May they came to an
anker before the citie of Calicut,Calicut. and Panana, where they remained
all the winter: and the first day of September they
set saile towards the north discouering the coast all along till
they came to the Island of Angediua, which standeth on that
side in 15. degrees of latitude, where they came to an anker
in the beginning of October, and so they departed from Angediua
in Februarie in the yeere 1499. and came in sight of the
coast of Africa about Melinde towards the north 3. or 4. degrees,
and from thence they sailed vnto the said citie, and so vnto
Mosambique againe, and to the Cape of Bona Speranca, sailing
along by the coast, and then they came to the Islands of
Cape Verde, and last of al to the citie of Lisbon in the moneth
of September,Gomara historiae general lib. hauing beene in the voiage 26. monethes.
In the yeere 1499 on the 13. day of the moneth of Nouember
there departed fro^ Palos one Vincent Yannez Pinson and
his nephew Aries Pinson with fower ships well appointed at
their owne coast and charges, to discouer the new world vnder
the licence of the king of Castile, and with commandement

not to touch there, where the Admirall Columbus had beene.
And so they went to the Islands of Cape Verde, and passed
the line to the southward,The Cape of S. Augustine. and discouered the Cape of Saint
Augustine standing on that side in 8. degrees of latitude, and
there they wrote on the rindes of pine trees the names of the
king and of the Queene, also the yeere and day when they arriued
there. They fought with the people of Brasil, but got
nothing,Rio de Maria Tambal. they tooke their course all along the coast towards
the west vnto the riuer Maria Tambal, and at that time they
had taken thirty and odde prisoners.Angla de San Lucas. The chiefe places where
they touched were the Cape of S. Augustine, and the angle or
point of S. Luke,The riuers of Marannon, Amazones and Rio Dolce. and Tierra de los Humos, the Riuers of Marannon,
and of the Amazones, and Rio dolce, or the Sweete
riuer, and other places along the coast: and they came to ten
degrees of latitude on the north side, where they lost two ships
and their companie, and remained in that voiage of discouery
ten moneths, and 15. daies.
In the yeere 1500. and in the moneth of March one Pedro
Aluarez Cabral sailed out of Lisbon with 13. ships,Barros decad. 1. lib. 5 cap. 2. with commandement
not to come neere the coast of Africa to shorten
his way; and he losing the sight of one of his ships, went to
seeke her, and in seeking of her lost his course, and sailed till he
came within sight of the land. The Generall was so long in
seeking his ship, that the companie were wearie of it, and entreated
him to leaue his enterprise. The next day they fell in
sight of the coast of Brasil: whereupon the Generall commanded
a barke to goe to land and seeke an hauen: which they
did,Puerto Seguro in Brasil. and found a good and safe hauen, and they named it Puerto
Seguro, that is to say, The Safe hauen, standing on the
south side in 17. degrees of latitude. From thence they sailed
towardes the Cape of Bona Speranca, and Melinde, and
crossed ouer to the riuer of Cochin, which before was not
knowne, where they laded themselues with pepper, and at
their returne Sancho de Thouar discouered the citie of Sofala
vpon the coast of Africa.Sofala.
In this same yeere 1500. it is reported that Gaspar Cortereal
craued a generall licence of the king Emmanuel to discouer
the New found land. He went from the Island Tercera
with two ships well appointed at his owne cost, and he sailed
vnto that climate which standeth vnder the north in 50.

degrees of latitude, which is a land nowe called after his
name;Terra Corterealis. and he came home in safetie vnto the citie of Lisbon:
And making another time this voiage, the ship was lost
wherein he went, and the other came backe into Portugall.
Wherefore his brother Michael Cortereal went to seeke him
with three ships well appointed at his owne cost; and when
they came vnto that coast, and found so many entrances of
riuers,Many entrances of riuers in the northwest. and hauens, euery ship went into her seuerall riuer,
with this rule and order, that they all three should meete
againe the 20. day of August. The two other ships did so, and
they seeing that Michael Cortereal was not come at the day
appointed, nor yet afterwards in a certaine time, returned
backe into the realme of Portugall, and neuer heard any more
newes of him, nor yet any other memorie. But that countrey
is called The land of Cortereall vnto this day.
In the yeere 1501. in the moneth of March Iohn de Noua
departed from the citie of Lisbon with fower ships,Barros decad. 1. lib. 5. cap. 10. and passed
the line on the south side into 8. degrees of latitude, and he discouered
an Island,I^^ha de Ascension. which he called the Isle de Ascension: And
he went vnto Mosambique, and to Melinde, and from thence
he crossed ouer vnto the other side, where they tooke lading,
and so came back and doubled the Cape, and found an Island
called Santa Helena,The Isle of Santa Helena. being but a small thing, but yet of great
importance in respect of the situation thereof.
In this same yeere 1501. and in the moneth of May there
departed out of Lisbon three ships vpon the commandement
of Emmanuel the king to discouer the coast of Brasil: and they
sailed in the sight of the Canaries, and from thence to Cape
Verde,Bezequiche. where they refreshed themselues in the towne of Bezequiche,
and passed from thence beyond the line southward
and fell with the land of Brasill in fiue degrees of latitude,Brasil discouered to 32. degrees.
and so went forward till they came in 32. degrees little more
or lesse, according as they accounted it, and from thence they
came backe in the moneth of Aprill, because it was there at
that time cold and tempestuous. They were in that voiage
fifteene monethes, and came to Lisbon againe in the beginning
of September 1502.
In the y^ere 1502. one Alfonso Hoieda went to discouer
Terra firma,Gomara historiae general. lib. 2. and followed his course till he came to his prouince
of Vraba.Vraba.

The next yeere following also one Roderigo Bastidas of
Siuill went out with two carauels at his owne cost, and the
first land of the Antiles that he saw was an Island which he
named Isla Verde, that is, the Greene Island, standing fast by
the Island of Guadalupe, towards the land: and from thence
they tooke their course towards the west to Santa Martha, and
Cape De la Vela, and to Rio Grande, or the Great riuer, and
they discouered the hauen of Zamba, the Coradas, Carthagena,
and the Islands of S. Barnard, of Baru, and Islas de Arenas,
and went forward vnto Isla fuerte, and to the point of Caribana
standing at the end of the Gulfe of Vraba, where they
had sight of the Farrallones standing on the other side hard by
the riuer of Darien, and from Cape De la Vela vnto this place
are two hundred leagues: and it standeth in 9. degrees and
two parts of latitude. From thence they crossed ouer vnto
the Island of Iamaica, where they refreshed themselues. In
Hispaniola they graued their ships because of the holes which
certaine wormes of the water had eaten in the planks. In
that countrey they got fower hundred markes of golde, although
the people there be more warlike then in Noua Spania:
for they poison their arrowes which they shoote.
In this same yeere 1502. Christopher Columbus entred the
fourth time into his discouerie with fower ships at the commandement
of Don Fernando to seeke the Streight,The fourth voiage of Columbus. which
as they said did diuide the land from the other side,Gomara historiae general. l^b. 1. cap. 24. and he
carried with him Ferdinando his sonne. They went first to
the Island of Hispaniola, to Iamaica, to the riuer Azua, to the
Cape of Higueras,Cabo de Higueras. and vnto the Islands Gamares, and to the
Cape of Hunduras,Cabo de Hunduras. that is to say, the Cape of the Depthes:
from thence they sailed towards the east vnto the Cape Gracias
a Dios,Cabo Gracias a Dios. and discouered the prouince and riuer of Veragua,
and Rio Grande,Veragua. and others, which the Indians call Hienra.
And from thence he went to the riuer of Crocodiles, which
now is called Rio de Chagres,Rio de Chagres. which hath his springs neere
the South Sea, within fower leagues of Panama, and runneth
into the North Sea: and so he went vnto the Island
which he called Isla de Bastimentos,Isla de Bastimentos. that is the Isle of Victuailes,
Puerto Bello. and then to Puerto Bello, that is the Faire hauen, and
so vnto Nombre de Dios,Nombre de Dios. and to Rio Francisco, and so to the
hauen of Retrete, and then to the Gulfe of Cabesa Cattiua,

and to the Islands of Caperosa,The Cape of marble. and lastly to the Cape of Marble,
which is two hundred leagues vpon the coast: from
whence they began to turne againe vnto the Island of Cuba,
and from thence to Iamaica, where he grounded his ships being
much spoiled and eaten with wormes.
In this yeere also 1502 Don Vasques de Gama being now
Admirall went againe into India with 19. or 20. Carauels.Barros decad. 1. lib. 6. cap. 2.
He departed from Lisbon the tenth day of Februarie, and by
the last day of that moneth he came to an anker at Cape Verde,
The Island of Mosambique. and from thence he went vnto Mosambique, and was the
first that crost from that Island into India: and he discouered
another in 4. degrees of latitude, which he called the Island of
the Admirall, and there he tooke his lading of pepper and
drugs, and left there one Vincent Sodre to keepe the coast of
India with fiue ships.
These were the first Portugals, that with an armie did run
along the coast of Arabia Foelix. It is there so barren, that
their cattell and camels are onely maintained with drie fish
brought from the sea;Cattell and camels led with dried fish. whereof there is such plenty and abundance,
that the cats of the countrey doe vse to take them.
In the yeere following, as it is reported, one Antonie de
Saldanta discouered the Island which in old time was called
Coradis,Socotora. and now Socotora, and the Cape of Guardafu, which
adioineth vnto that countrey.Cape de Guardafu.
In the yeere 1504. Roderigo de Bastidas obtained licence
of king Ferdinando, and by the meanes of Iohn de Lodesma
and others of Siuill armed and furnished out two ships, hauing
for his pilot one Iohn de Cosa of Saint Marie Port, and
he went to discouer that part of Tierra firma where now standeth
Carthagena,Carthagena. being in ten degrees and a halfe of northerly
latitude. And it is said that they found the captaine Luis de
la Guerra;Codego. and they together tooke land in the Isle of Codego,
where they tooke sixe hundred persons of the Sauages: And
going farther along the coast they entred into the Gulfe of
Vraba, where they found sand mingled with gold, being
the first that was brought to the king Don Ferdinando: from
thence they returned to the citie of Santo Domingo laden
with slaues without victuailes, because they of the countrey
would not bargaine with them, which grew to their great
trouble and griefe.

In the later end of this yeere died Ladie Isabella Queene of
Castile:The death of Queene Isabella 150^. Which Queene while she liued would not suffer any
man of Arragon, Catalunia, Valencia, nor any borne in the
countrey of Don Fernando her husband to enter into these
discoueries, saue those which were their seruants, or by speciall
commandement, but only the Castillians, Biscaines, and those
which were of her owne Signiories, by whom all the lands
aforesaid were discouered.
In the yeere 1505. vpon our Lady day in March Francisco
de Almeida Viceroy of India tooke his course with 22. sailes
towards India as now is accustomed.Barros decad. 1. lib. 8. cap. 3. He came vnto the citie
of Quiloa,A fort built in Quiloa. where he built a fort, appointing one Peter Fereira
to be captaine thereof: and beyond Melinde he trauersed to
the Island of Angediua,Angediua possessed. where he placed as captaine one Emmanuell
Passauia.Forts builded in Cananor and in Cochin. In Cananor also he built another fort, giuing
the captainship of it to Laurence de Brito. In Cochin he
did the like, where Don Alfonso de Noronia was made captaine.
A fort builded in Sofala. This yeere one Peter de Anhaya did build the fortresse
of Sofala, whereof also himselfe was made captaine.
In the later end of this yeere the Viceroy commanded his
sonne, whose name was Don Laurenco to make some entrie
vpon the Islands of Maldiua, and with contrarie weather he
arriued at the Islands, which of ancient time were called
Traganae, but the Moores called them Ytterubenero, and we
call them Ceilan:Ceilan. where he went on land, and made peace
with the people there, and afterward came backe vnto Cochin,
sailing along the coast and fully discouering it. In the
middest of this Island there stands a rocke of stone very high
hauing the signe of the foote of a man vpon the top of it, which
they say to be the footestep of Adam, when he went vp into
the heauens, and the Indians haue it in great reuerence.
In the yeere 1506. after the death of the Queene of Spaine,
king Philip and Queene Ioan his wife came into Spaine to
take possession thereof, and king Don Fernando went into
Arragon being his owne patrimonie.The death of Philip the first king of Spaine 1506. In this same yeere the
said king Philip died, and then Fernando came againe to gouerne
Spaine, and he gaue licence vnto all Spanyards to goe
vnto the New land, and to the A^tiles, but not to the Portugals.
The death of Christopher Columbus. In this yeere and in the moneth of May Christopher
Columbus died, and his sonne Don Diego Columbus succeeded

in his roome.
In the yeere 1506. and entring into the moneth of March
Tristan de Acunna and Alfonso de Albuquerque went into
India with 14. ships in their companie,Barros decad. 2. lib. 1. cap. 1. and sailed till they
came to an anker at the towne of Bezequiche,Bezequiche is by Cape Verde. where they
refreshed themselues: and before they came to the Cape of
Bona Speranca in 37. degrees they found certaine Islands,
which now are named the Isles of Tristan de Acunna,The Isles of Tristan de Acunna in 37. degrees. where
they had such a tempest that therewithall the fleete was dispersed.
Tristan de Acun^a and Alfonso de Albuquerque went
vnto Mosambique, and Aluaro Telez ran so far that he came
to the Island of Samatra,Samatra discouered. and so backe againe vnto the Cape
of Guardatu; hauing discouered many Islands, sea, and land
neuer seene before that time of any Portugall. Emmanuel Telez
de Meneses was also driuen without the great Island of
S. Laurence, and he ran along the coast thereof, and arriued
at last at Mosambique, and there met with Tristan de Acun^a,
who was the first captaine that wintred there; and by them
it was told, that in this Island was much Ginger, Cloues,
and siluer:The Inland of S. Laurence discouered. whereupon he went and discouered much of it
within the land; but finding nothing he came backe againe
vnto Mosambique; from whence he sailed vnto Melinde, and
ran along that coast and entred into Braua,Braua. and from thence
they crost ouer to the Island of Socotora,A fortresse builded in Soc^tora. where they built a
fortresse,Barros decad. 2. lib. 2. cap. 1. and made one Don Antonio de Noronia captaine
thereof.
In the yeere 1507. in the moneth of August Tristan de Acun^a
tooke shipping for India, and Alfonso de Albuquerque
remained there with fiue or sixe ships to keepe the coast and
entrie of the Streight; but being not therewith satisfied he
tooke his course ouer vnto Arabia, and running along that
coast he doubled the Cape of Rosalgate standing vnder the
Tropicke of Cancer.The Cape of Rosalgate.
In the yeere 1509. one Diego Lopez de Sequeira went
out of Lisbon with fower sailes vnto the Island of Saint Laurence,
Barros decad. 2. lib. 1. cap. 3. and continued in his voiage almost a yeere,The Isle of S. Laurence. and in the
moneth of May the same yeere he arriued in Cochin, where
the Viceroy gaue him one ship more: and in the beginning of
the moneth of September he tooke his course vnto Malacca
passing betweene the Islands of Nicubar,The Islands of Nicubar. and many others:

He went also to the land of Samatra to the cities of Pedir and
Pacem,Samatra. and all along by all that coast vnto the Island of A
Poluoreira,The Isle of A Poluoreira. and the flats of Capacia: and from thence he
went ouer vnto Malacca standing in 2. degrees of latitude
towards the north:The flats of Capacia. but in that citie the people killed and tooke
as prisoners some of his men:Malacca. and thereupon he turned backe
againe into India, hauing discouered in this voiage fiue hundred
leagues.Rarities in Samatra. This Island of Samatra is the first land wherein
we knew mans flesh to be eaten by certaine people which
liue in the mountaines called Bacas, who vse to gilde their
teeth. They hold opinion that the flesh of the blacke people
is sweeter then the flesh of the white.In Samatra buffes, kine, and hennes haue flesh as blacke as inke. The buffes, kine, and
hennes which are in that countrey are in their flesh as blacke
as any inke. They say that there are certaine people there
called Daraqui Dara,People hauing tailes like sheepe. which haue tailes like vnto sheepe; and
some of their welles yeeld oile.
The king of Pedir is reported to haue a riuer in his land
running with oile: which is a thing not to be maruelled at,
seeing it is found written, that in Bactria there is also a well
of oile: it is farther said that there groweth here a tree, the
iuice whereof is strong poison, and if it touch the blood of a
man, he dieth immediately: but if a man doe drinke of it,
it is a soueraigne remedie against poison, so seruing both for
life and death.Gold coined in Samatra. Here also they doe coine peeces of gold, which
they call Drachmas, brought into the land as they say by the
Romanes: which seemeth to haue some resemblance of truth:
because that from that place forward there is no coined gold:
but that which is thus coined doth run currant in the buying
of marchandise and other things.
In the yeere 1508. one Alfonso de Hoieda with the fauour
of Don Fernando purposed to goe vnto Tierra firma to conquer
the prouince of Darien.Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 7. He went foorth at his owne charges,
and discouered The Firme land, where it is called Vraba,
which he named Castilia del Oro,Castilia del oro. that is Golden Castilia,
bicause of the gold which they found among the sand along
the coast: And they were the first Spanyards that did this.
Alfonso de Hoieda went first from the Island of Hispaniola
and the citie of San Domingo with fower ships and three
hundred soldiers,The booke of the Bachiler Anciso of these discoueries. leauing behinde him the bachiler Anciso,
who afterwards compiled a booke of these discoueries. And

after him there went also one ship with victuals, munition,
and 150. Spanyards. He went on land at Carthagena: but
there the people of the countrey tooke, slew and eate 70. of his
soldiers, whereupon he grew very weake.
In this yeere 1508. one Drego de Niquesa prepared seuen
ships in the port of Beata to goe vnto Veragua,Beata is a prouince in the west part of H^^paniola. and carried in
them almost 800. men. When he came to Carthagena he
found there Alfonso de Hoieda sore spoiled with his former
losse: but then they both ioined together, and went on land
and auenged themselues of the people. And in this voiage
Diego de Niquesa went and discouered the coast called Nombre
de Dios, and went vnto the sound of Darien, and called it
Puerto de Misas,Gomara gen. hist. lib. 3. cap. 6. which is vpon the riuer of Pito. When they
were come vnto Veragua, he went on shore with his armie,
his soldiers being out of hope to returne to Hispaniola. Alfonso
de Hoieda began a fortresse in Caribana against the Caribes;
which was the first towne that the Spanyards builded
in the Firme land:Nuestra Sennora de la antigua builded. and in Nombre de Dios they built another,
and called it Nuestra Sennora de la Antigua. They builded
also the towne of Vraba. And there they left for their captaine
and lieutenant one Francis Pisarro, who was there
much troubled. They builded other towns also, whose names
I here omit. But these captaines had not that good successe
which they hoped for.
In the yeere 1509. the second Admirall Don Diego Columbus
went into the Island of Hispaniola with his wife and
houshold:Many gentlewomen went to dwell in Hispaniola. And she being a gentlewoman carried with her
many other women of good families, which were there married,
and so the Spanyards and Castillians began to people the
countrey: for Don Fernando the king had giuen them licence
to discouer and people the townes of Hispaniola; so that the
same place grew to be famous and much frequented. The
foresaid. Admirall also gaue order to people the Island of
Cuba,Cuba peopled. which is very great and large, and placed there as his
lieutenant one Diego Velasques, who went with his father
in the second voiage.
In the yeere 1511. in the moneth of Aprill Alfonso de Albuquerque
went from the citie of Cochin vnto Malaeca.Barros decad. 2. lib. 5 cap 10. and lib. 6. cap. 2. In
which yeere and moneth the Chineans went from Malaeca
into their owne countrey,Barros decad. 2. lib. 6. cap. 5. and Alfonso sent with them for

master a Portugall called Duarte Fernandes, with letters also
and order vnto the king of the Mantias, which now is called
Sian standing in the South.The Streight of Cincapura. They passed through the streight
of Cincapura, and sailed towards the north, went along the
coast of Patane vnto the citie of Cuy,Odia the chiefe citie of Sian. and from thence to Odia
which is the chiefe citie of the kingdome, standing in 14. degrees
of northerly latitude. The king greatly honoured and
welcomed Duarte Fernandes, being the first Portugall that
he had seene, and with him he sent backe ambassadours to Albuquerque.
They passed ouer land towards the west vnto the
citie of Tanacerim standing vpon the sea on the other side in
12. degrees,Tanacerim. where they imbarked themselues in two ships,
and sailed along the coast vnto the citie of Malacca, leauing it
all discouered.
The people of this countrey of Sian are people that eate of
all kinde of beastes,M. Ralph Fitch which had beene in this countrey brought diuers of these bels into England. or vermine. They haue a delight to carrie
round bels within the skin of their priuie members: which
is forbidden to the king and the religious people. It is said
that of all other people of those parts they be most vertuous
and honest. They commend themselues much for their chastitie
and pouertie. They bring no heunes nor doues vp in
their houses. This kingdome hath in length 250. leagues,
and in bredth 80. Of this only kingdome the king may bring
foorth into the field thirtie thousand elephants, when he goeth
to warre, besides those which remaine in the cities for the
garde of them. The king much esteemeth a white elephant,
and a red one also, that hath eies like vnto flaming fire.
There is in this countrey a certaine small vermine, which
vseth to cleaue fast to the trunke of the elephant, and draweth
the blood of the elephant, and so he dieth thereof. The skull of
this vermine is so hard, that the shot of an handgun cannot
enter it: they haue in their liuers the figures of men and women,
which they call Toke^a, and are much like vnto a mandrake.
The liuer of a little beast good against any wo^d of iron. And they affirme that he which hath one of them
about him cannot die with the stroke of any iron. They haue
also wilde kine in this countrey, in the heads of whome they
finde stones, which are of vertue to bring good hap and fortune
to marchants.
After that Duarte Fernandes had been with the Mantales or
people of Sian, Alfonso de Albuquerque sent thither a knight

called Ruy Nunnez de Acunna with letters and ambassage
vnto the king of the Seguies,Pegu. which we call Pegu. He went in
a Iunco of the countrey in sight of the Cape Rachado, and
from thence went vnto the citie of Pera which standeth fast
by the riuer Salano,Pera. and many other villages standing all
along this riuer, where Duarte Fernandes had beene before,
vnto the cities of Tanacerim and of Martauan, standing in
15. degrees toward the north, and the citie of Pegu standeth
in 17. This was the first Portugall, which trauailed in that
kingdome:Master Ralph Fitch saw this in Pegu also. and he gaue good information of that countrey,
and of the people, which vse to were bels in their priuities
euen as the Mantales doe.
In the end of this yeere 1511.Barros decad 2. lib 6. cap. 7. Alfonso de Albuquerque
sent three ships to the Islands of Banda,The Isles of Banda and Maluco. and Maluco. And
there went as Generall of them one Antonio de Breu, and
with him also went one Francis Serrano: and in these ships
there were 120. persons. They passed through the Streight
of Saban, and along the Island of Samatra, and others, leauing
them on the left hand, towards the east: and they called
them the Salites.The Salites. They went also to the Islands of Palinibam
and La Suparam; from whence they sailed by the noble Island
of Iaua,Iaua. and they ran their course east, sailing betweene it and
the Island of Madura.Madura. The people of this Island are very
warlike and strong, and doe little regard their liues. The women
also are there hired for the warres: and they fall out often
together, and kill one another, as the Mocos doe, delighting
onely in shedding of blood.
Beyond the Island of Iaua they sailed along by another
called Bali:Bali. and then came also vnto others called Aujaue,
cambaba, Solor,Or Guliam. Galao, Mallua, Vitara, Rosalangum, andOr Aru. Arus,
from whence are brought delicate birds, which are of great
estimation because of their feathers: they came also to other
Islands lying in the same parallele on the south side in 7. or
8. degrees of latitude. And they be so nere the one to the other,
that they seeme at the first to be one entire and maine land.
The course by these Islands is aboue fiue hundred leagues.
The ancient Cosmographers call all these Islands by the
name Iauos: but late experience hath found their names to
be very diuers, as you see. Beyonde these there are other
Islands toward the north, which are inhabited with whiter

people going arraied in shirts,The people of the Isles of Maluco weare such apparell. doublets and slops like vnto
the Portugals, hauing also money of siluer. The gouernours
among them doe carrie in their hands red staues,Gouernours carrying red staues like those of China. whereby
they seeme to haue some affinitie with the people of China.
There are other Islands and people about this place, which
are redde; and it is reported that they are of the people of
China.
Antonie de Breu and those that went with him tooke their
course toward the north, where is a smal Island called Gumnape
or Ternate,Ternate. from the highest place whereof there fall
continually into the sea flakes or streames like vnto fire;
which is a woonderfull thing to behold.Burro. From thence they
went to the Islands of Burro and Amboino,Amboino. and came to an
anker in an hauen of it called Guliguli,Guliguli. where they went on
land and tooke a village standing by the riuer, where they
found dead men hanging in the houses; for the people there
are eaters of mans flesh. Here the Portugals burnt the ship
wherein Francis Serrano was, for she was old and rotten.
They went to a place on the other side standing in 8. degrees
toward the south,Cloues, nutmegs, and mace in 8. degrees toward the south. where they laded cloues, nutmegs, and
mace in a Iunco or barke which Francis Serrano bought
here.
They say that not farre from the Islands of Banda there is
an Island, where there breedeth nothing else but snakes, and
the most are in one caue in the middest of the land. This is a
thing not much to be woondred at; for as much as in the Leuant
sea hard by the Isles of Maiorca and Minorca there is
another Island of old named Ophi^sa, and now Formentera,
wherein there is great abundance of these vermine: and in
the rest of the Islands lying by it there are none.
In the yeere 1512. they departed from Banda toward Malacea,
and on the baxos or flats of Lucapinho Francis Serrano
perished in his Iunke or barke, from whence escaped
vnto the Isle of Mindanao nine or ten Portugals which were
with him,Mindanao. and the kings of Maluco sent for them.Maluco. These were
the first Portugals that came to the Islands of Cloues, which
stand from the Equinoctiall line towardes the north in one
degree, where they liued seuen or eight yeeres.
The Island of Gumnape now called Ternate is much to
be admired, for that it casteth out fire. There were some

princes of the Moores and couragious Portugals which determined
to goe neere to the firie place to see what it was; but
they could neuer come neere it. But Antonie Galuano hearing
of it, vndertooke to goe vp to it, and did so, and found a riuer
so extreme cold, that he could not suffer his hand in it, nor
yet put any of the water in his mouth: And yet this place
standeth vnder the line, where the sunne continually burneth.
In these Islands of Maluco there is a kinde of men that haue
spurres on their ankles like vnto cocks.Monstrous men. And it was told me
by the king of Tydore,Batochina. that in the Islands of Batochina there
were people that had tailes, and had a thing like vnto a dug
between their cods, out of the which there came milke. There
are smal hennes also which lay their egges vnder the ground
aboue a fathome and an halfe, and the egges are bigger then
ducks egges, and many of these hennes are blacke in their
flesh. There are hogs also with hornes, and parats which
prattle much, which they call Noris. There is also a riuer of
water so hot, that whatsoeuer liuing creature co^meth into it,
their skins will come off, and yet fish breede in it. There are
crabs which be very sweete, and so strong in their clawes,
that they will breake the iron of a pik^axe. There be others
also in the sea little and hairie, but whosoeuer eateth of them
dieth immediately. There be likewise certaine oisters, which
they doe call Bras, the shels whereof haue so large a compasse,
that they doe Christen in them. In the sea also there are liuely
stones, which doe grow and increase like vnto fish, whereof
very good lime is made: and if they let it lie when it is taken
out of the water, it looseth the strength, and it neuer burneth
after.The flowers of Xistus and Arbor (...) are such. There is also a certaine tree, which beareth flowers at
the sunne set, which fall downe as soone as they be growne.
There is a fruit also, as they say, whereof if a woman that is
conceaued of childe eateth, the childe by and by mooueth. There
is further a kinde of herbe there growing, which followeth
the sunne, and remooueth after it, which is a very strange and
maruailous thing.
In the yeere 1512. in the moneth of Ianuarie Alfonsus de
Albuquerque went backe from Malaca vnto Goa,Barros decad 2. lib. 7. cap. 1. and the
ship wherein he went was lost, and the rest went from his
companie.The Isles of Maldiua. Simon de Andrada, and a few Portugals were driuen
vnto the Islands of Maldiua being many and full of palme

trees: and they stand lowe by the water: which staied there
till they knew what was become of their gouernour. These
were the first Portugals that had seene those Islands, wherein
there growe Cocos, which are very good against all kinde of
poison.
In this yeere 1512. there went out of Castile one Iohn de
Solis borne in Lisbon,Iohn de Solis. and chiefe pilot vnto Don Fernando.
And he hauing licence went to discouer the coast of Brasill.
He tooke the like course that the Pinsons had done: he went
also to the Cape of S. Augustine, and went forwards to the
south, coasting the shore and land, and he came vnto The
Port De Lagoa: and in 35. degrees of southerly latitude he
found a riuer which they of Brasill call Parana-guacu, that is,
The great Water. He sawe there signes of siluer, and therefore
called it Rio de Plata,Rio de Plata. that is, The Riuer of siluer. And it
is said that at that time he went farther because he liked the
countrey well: but he returned backe againe into Spaine,
and made account of all things to Don Fernando, demaunding
of the king the gouernment thereof, which the king
granted him.Pet. Martyr. decad. 3 cap. 10. Whereupon he prouided three ships and with
them in the yeere 1515. he went againe into that kingdome;
but he was there slaine. These Solisses were great discouerers
in those partes, and spent therein their liues and
goods.
In the same yeere 1512. Iohn Ponce of Leon, which had
beene goueruour of the Isle of S. Iohn armed two ships and
went to seeke the Isle of Boyuca, where the naturals of the
countrey reported to be a Wel,Pet. Martyr. decad. 2 cap 10. which maketh old men yoong.
Whereupon he laboured to finde it out,Gomara historiae general. lib. 2. cap. 10. and was in searching
of it the space of sixe monethes, but could finde no such thing.
He entred into the Isle of Bimini;Bimini Islands. and discouered a point of
the firme land standing in 25. degrees towards the north vpon
Easter day,Florida. and therefore he named it Florida. And because
the land seemed to yeeld gold and siluer and great riches,Martyr. decad. 3. cap. 10. he
begged it of the king Don Fernando, but he died in the discouerie
of it, as many more haue done.
In the yeere 1513. Vasco Nunnes de Valboa hearing
speech and newes of The south sea,Pet Mart^r. de^ad. 3. cap. 1. determined to goe thither,
although his companie dissuaded him from that action. But
being a man of good valure with those soldiers that he had,

being 290. he resolued to put himselfe into that ieoperdie. He
went therefore from Dariene the first day of September, carrying
some Indians of the countrey with him to be his guides,
and he marched ouerthwart the land sometimes quietly,
sometimes in war: and in a certaine place called Careca he
found Negroes captiues with curled haire.The South sea dis^o^ered. This Valboa
came to the sight of the South Sea on the 25. day of the said
moneth, and on Saint Michaels day came vnto it: where he
imbarked himselfe against the will of Chiapes, who was the
Lord of that coast, who wished him not to doe so, because it
was very dangerous for him. But he desirous to haue it
knowne, that he had beene vpon those seas, went forwards,
and came backe againe to land in safetie, and with great contentment,
bringing with him good store of gold, siluer, and
pearles, which there they tooke. For which good seruice of his
Don Ferdinando the king greatly fauoured and honoured
him.
This yeere 1513. in the moneth of Februarie Alfonsus de
Albuquerque went fro^ the citie of Goa towards the streight
of Mecha with twenty ships.Barro^ decad. 2. lib. 7 cap. 7. They arriued at the citie of
Aden and battered it,The streight of Mecha or of the Red sea discouered. and passed forward and entred into the
Streight. They say that they saw a crosse in the element and
worshipped it.The Isle of Camaran. They wintered in the Island of Camaran*
This was the first Portugall captaine that gaue information
of those seas, and of that of Persia, being things in the world
of great account.
In the yeere 1514. and in the moneth of May there went
out of Saint Lu^ar one Pedro Arias de Auila at the commandement
of Don Ferdinando.Pet. Martyr. decad. 3. cap. 5. He was the fourth gouernour
of Castillia del Oro or Golden Castile: for so they named the
countreyes of Dariene, Carthagena, and Vraba, and that
countrey which was newly conquered. He carried with him
his wife the Lady Elizabeth and 1500. men in seuen ships;
and the king appointed Vasco Nunnez de Valboa gouernour
of the South Sea and of that coast.
In the beginning of the yeere 1515. the gouernour Pedro
Arias de Auila sent one Gaspar Morales with 150. men vnto
the Gulfe of S. Michael to discouer the Islands of Tararequi,
Chiapes, and Tumaccus. There was a Casique Valboas friend
which gaue him many Canoas or boates made of one tree to

rowe in,The Island of Tararequi or of pearles in the South sea. wherein they passed vnto The Island of pearles: the
Lord whereof resisted them at their comming on land. But
Chiapes and Tumaccus did pacifie him in such order, that the
captaine of the Isle had them home vnto his house,Martyr. decad. 3. cap. 10. and made
much of them,Gomara historia^ general. lib. ^. cap. 2. and receiued baptisme at their hands, naming
him Pedro Arias after the gouernours name, and he gaue vnto
them for this a basket full of pearles waying 110. pounds,
whereof some were as big as hasell nuts of 20. 25. 26. or 31.
carats: and euery carat is fower graines. There was giuen for
one of them 1200. ducats. This Island of Tararequi standeth
in 5. degrees of latitude towards the north.
In this yeere 1515. in the moneth of March the gouernour
sent one Gonsaluo de Badaios with 80. soldiers to discouer
new lands, and they went from Dariene to Nombre de Dios,
where came vnto them one Lewis de Mercado with fiftie
men more, which the gouernour sent to aide him. They determined
to discouer toward the South,Pet. Martyr. decad. 3. cap. 1^. saying that that countrey
was the richest. They tooke with them Indians to be their
guides, and going along the coast they found slaues marked
with irons as the Portugals doe vse; and hauing marched a
good way through the countreyes with great trauaile they
gathered together much golde and fortie slaues to doe them
seruice: but one Casique named Pariza did set vpon them and
slue and tooke the most part of them.
The gouernour hearing of these newes, the same yeere
1515. sent foorth his sonne Iohn Arias de Auila to be reuenged
and to discouer also by sea and by land: They went westward
to Cape De Guerra standing in little more then sixe
degrees towards the north,Cape de Guerra. and from thence vnto Punta de
Borica,Punta de Borica. and to Cape Blanco or the White Cape standing in
8. degrees and an halfe:Cape Blanco. they discouered 250. leagues as they
affirme,Panama peopled. and peopled the citie of Panama.
In this very yeere 1515. in the moneth of May Alfonsus
de Albuquerque gouernour of India sent from the citie of Ormuz
one Fernando Gomes de Lemos as ambassadour vnto
Xec or Shaugh Ismael king of Persia:Barros decad. 2. lib. 10. cap. 5. and it is declared that
they trauailed in it 300. leagues,Osorius lib. 10. pag 277. and that it is a pleasant
countrey like vnto France.An ambassage to^ Ismael king of Persia. This Xe^ or Shaugh Ismael went
on hunting and fishing for troutes, whereof there are many.
And there be the fairest women in all the world. And so

Alexander the great affirmed, when he called them The women
with golden eies. And this yeere this woorthy Viceroy
Alfonsus de Albuquerque died.
In the yeere 1416. and one hundred yeeres after the taking
of Ceuta in Barba^ie, Lopez Suares being gouernour of India,
there was a dispatch made by the commandement of the
kings highnes vnto one Fernando Perez de Andrada to passe
to the great countrey and kingdome of China. He went from
the citie of Cochin in the moneth of Aprill. They receiued
pepper,Pepper a principall ma^chandise in China. being the principal marchandise to be sold in all China
of any value: And he was farther commanded by the king
Don Emmanuel to goe also to Bengala with his letter and
dispatch to a knight called Iohn Coelo. This was the first
Portugall as farre as I know, which drunke of the water of
the riuer Ganges.
This yeere 1516. died Don Fernando king of Spaine.The death of Fernando king of Spaine.
In the yeere 1517. this Fernando Perez went vnto the
citie of Malacha,Osorius lib. 11. fol. 312. and in the moneth of Iune he departed from
thence towards China with eight sailes fower Portugals and
the others Malayans.China discouered. He arriued in China: And because he
could not come on land without an ambassage, there was one
Thomas Perez which had order for it: and he went from the
citie of Canton,Canton. where they came to an anker: They went by
land fower hundred leagues, and came vnto the citie ofOr Pakin. Pekin,
where the king was for this prouince and countrey is the
biggest that is in the worlde. It beginneth at Sailana in
twentie degrees of latitude towards the north, and it endeth
almost in 50. degrees. Which must be 500. leagues in
length: and they say that it containeth 300. leagues in bredth.
Fernando Perez was 14. moneths in the Isle Da Veniaga,(...) da Veniaga or Tama according to Osorius.
learning as much as he could of the countrey, according as
the king his master had commanded him. And although one
Raphael Perestrello had beene there in a Iunke or barke of
certaine marchants of Malaca, yet vnto Fernando Perez
there ought to be giuen the praise of this discouerie: as well
for that he had commandement from the king, as in discouering
so much with Thomas Perez by land, and George Mascarenhas
by sea,Foquiem. and for coasting vnto the citie of Foquiem
standing in 24. degrees of latitude.
In this same yeere 1517. Charles, which afterward was

Emperour,The comming of Charles the fift into Spaine. came into Spaine, and tooke possession thereof.
And in the same yeere Francis Fernandes de Cordoua, Christopher
Morantes,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 3. cap. 2. and Lopez Ochoa armed three ships at
their owne proper charges from the Island of Cuba. They
had also with them a barke of Diego Velasques, who then
was gouernour:Iucatan. They came on land in Iucatan standing in
20. degrees of latitude at a point which they called Punta de
las Duennas, that is to say, The point of Ladies, which was
the first place wherein they had seen Temples and buildings
of lime and stone. The people here goe better apparelled then
in any other place. They haue crosses which they worship,
setting them vpon their tombes when they be buried. Wherby
it seemeth that in times past they had in that place the
faith of Christ among them. And some say that thereabouts
were The seuen Cities.The Seuen cities. They went round about it towards
the north which is on the right hand: from whence they turned
backe vnto the Island of Cuba with some examples of
gold, and men which they had taken. And this was the first
beginning of the discouerie of New Spaine.
In the yeere 1518. Lopez Suares commanded Don Iohn
de Silueira to goe to the Islands of Maldiua:Castagneda lib. 4. cap. 36. and 37. and he made
peace with them:Osorius lib. 11. fol. 315. pag. 2. and from thence he went to the citie of
Chatigam situated on the mouth of the riuer Ganges vnder
the Tropicke of Cancer.Chatigam in Bengala. For this riuer, and the riuer Indus,
which standeth an hundred leagues beyond the citie of Diu,
and that of Canton in China doe all fall int the sea vnder one
parallele or latitude. And although before that time Fernan
Perez had been commanded to goe to Bengala, yet notwithstanding
Iohn de Silueira ought to beare away the commendation
of this discouerie: because he went as captaine generall,
and remained there longest, learning the commodities of
the countrey, and maners of the people.
In the said yeere 1518. the first day of May Diego Velasques
gouernour of the Island of Cuba sent his nephew Iohn
de Grisalua with fower ships and two hundred soldiers to discouer
the land of Iucatan.Pet. Martyr. decad. 4. cap. 3.Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2* cap. 14. and cap. 17. And they founde in their way the
Island ofOr Acuzamil. Cosumel standing towards the north in 19. degrees, and named it Santa Cruz, because they came to it the
third of May.The Isle of Ascension. They coasted the land lying vpon the left hand
of the Gulfe, and came to an Island called Ascension, because

they came vnto it vpon Ascension day*The Bay of Hunduras. They went vnto the
end of it standing in 16. degrees of latitude: from whence they
came backe because they could finde no place to goe out at:
and from hence they went round about it to another riuer,
which they called The riuer of Grisalua standing in 17. degrees
of latitude:^io de Grisalua. the people thereabout troubled them sore,
yet notwithstanding they brought from thence some gold,
siluer, and feathers, being there in great estimation, and so
they turned backe againe to the Island of Cuba.
In the same yeere 1518. one Francis Garay armed three
ships in the Isle of Iamaica at his owne charges,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 12. and 61 and went
towards the point of Florida standing in 25. degrees towards
the north, seeming to them to be an Island most pleasant,
thinking it better to people Islands then the firme land, because
they could best conquere them and keepe them. They
went there on land, but the people of Florida killed many of
them, so that they durst not inhabite it. So they sailed along
the coast,Panuco. and came vnto the riuer of Panuco, standing 500.
leagues from the point of Florida in sailing along the coast;
but the people resisted them in euery place. Many of them
also were killed in Chila, whom the Sauages flaied and eate,
hanging vp their skinnes in their Temples in memoriall of
their valiantnes. Notwithstanding all thi^ Francis de Garay
went thither the next yeere and begged the gouernment of
that countrey of the Emperour, because he sawe in it some
shew of gold and siluer.
In the yeere 1519. in the moneth of Februarie Fernando
Cortes went from the Island of Cuba to the land which is
called Noua Spania with 11. ships and 550. Spanyards in
them.Pet. Martyr. decad. 4. cap. 6. The first place where he went on land was the Island
of Cosumel; where they immediately destroied all the Idols,
and set crosses on the altars and the images of the virgine
Marie.Gomar. hist. gen lib. 2. cap. 18. etc. From this Island they went and arriued on the firme
land of Iucatan, at the point De las Duen^as, or the point of
Ladies,Tauasco. and went thence to the riuer of Tauasco, and set vpon
a citie fast by called Potoncian inuironed with wood,Potoncian now called Victoria. and
the houses were built with lime and stone, and couered with
tile: they fought there egarly; and there appeered vnto
them S. Iames on horsebacke, which increased their courage.
They called that citie Victoria: and they were the first people

which were subdued to the Spanyards obedience in all Newe
Spaine. From hence they went discouering the coast till they
came vnto a place named S. Iohn de Vllhua,S. Iohn de Vllhua distant as they
said from Mexico where the king Mutecuma was, 60. or 70.
leagues: and there was a seruant of his that gouerned that
prouince, named Tendilli, which gaue them good entertainment,
although they vnderstood not one another. But Cortes
had 20. women, whereof one was called Marine borne in
tha^ countrey: They were the first that were baptized in New
Spaine. And from that time forward Marine and Aguilar
serued as interpreters. Tendilli presently gaue knowledge
of this vnto Mutecuma, that a kinde of bearded people were
arriued in his countrey: for so they called the Castillians. But
he was troubled vpon that newes: for his Gods, (which are
to be thought to be diuels) had told him, that such people as
the Spanyards were should destroy his law and countrey, and
be Lords thereof. And therefore he sent gifts vnto Cortes, in
value 20. thousand ducats, but would not come to him.
Because S. Iohn de Vllhua was then no place for a nauie
to ride in, Cortes sent Francis de Mont^io, and the pilot Antonie
Alaminos in two brigandines to discouer that coast; who
came to a place where they might ride without danger.
They came to Panuco standing in 23. degrees northward:Gomara historiae general. lib. 2. cap. 21. 22. 23* 24.
from whence they came backe vpon an agreement to goe vnto
Culuacan being an hauen of more safetie. They set saile,
but Cortes went by land westward with the most part of his
men on horsebacke,Zempoallan. and they came vnto a citie called Zempoallan;
where they were well receiued. And from thence he
went to another towne called Chiauitztlan:Chiauitztlan. with the Lord
of which towne as with all the countrey besides he made
league to be against Mutecuma. And when he knew that
his ships were come, he went vnto them, and there builded
a towne,Villa rica de la vera Cruz. and called it Villa rica de la vera cruz. From whence
he sent vnto Charles the Emperour a present, and made report
of all that he had done, and how he determined to goe to
Mexico, and to visite Mutecuma: and besought the Emperour
to giue him the gouernment of that countrey. And because
his people should not rise in mutinie, as they began, he
destroied all his ships.
Cortes presently went from Villa rica de la vera Cruz, leauing

there 150. Spanish horsemen, and many Indians to serue
them; and the villages round about became his friends. He
went vnto the citie of Zempoallan:Gomara historiae general. lib. 2. cap. 61. there he heard newes
that Francis Garay was on the coast with fower ships to
come on land: And by subtiltie he got nine of his men; of
whom he vnderstood, that Garay had beene in Florida, and
came vnto the riuer Panuco, where he got some golde, determining
to stay there in a towne which is now called Almeria.
Cortos ouerthrew the idols in Zempoallan,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 25. and the tombes
of their kings, whome they worshipped as Gods, and tolde
them that they were to worship the true God. From thence
he went toward Mexico the 16. day of August 1519. and trauailed
three daies iourney,Zalapan. and came to the citie of Zalapan,
and to another beyond it named Sicuchimatl,Sicuchimatl. where they
were well receiued, and offered to be conducted to Mexico,
because Mutecuma had giuen such commandement. Beyond
this place he passed with his companie a certaine hill of
three leagues high, wherein there were vines. In another
place they found aboue a thousand loades of wood ready cut;
and beyond they met with a plaine countrey, and in going
through the same, he named it Nombre de Dios. At the bottome
of the mountaine he rested in a towne called Te^hixuacan,
and from thence they went through a desolate countrey,
and so came to another mountaine that was very colde and
full of snow,Zaclotan. and they lay in a towne named Zaclotan: And
so from towne to towne they were well receiued and feasted
till they came into another realme named Tlaxcallan,Tlaxcallan. which
waged warre against Mutecuma, and being valiant they
skirmished with Cortes; but in the end they agreed and entred
into league with him against the Mexicans; and so they
went from countrey to countrey till they came within fight
of Mexico. The king Mutecuma fearing them, gaue them
good entertainment with lodging and all things necessarie:
and they were with this for a time contented: but mistrusting
that he and his should be slaine,Mutecuma prisoner. he tooke Mutecuma prisoner
and brought him to his lodging with good garde. Cortes demanded
how farre his realme did extend, and sought to know
the mines of gold and siluer that were in it, and how many
kings neighbours to Mutecuma dwelled therein, requiring
certaine Indians to be informed thereof, whereof he had eight

prouided: and he ioined to them eight Spanyards, and sent
them two and two into fower countreyes,Zucolla. namely into Zucolla,
Malinaltepec. Malinaltepec,Zenich. Tenich,Tututepec. and Tututepec. They which went
vnto Zucolla went 80. leagues: for so much it was from
Mexico thither: They which went to Mahnaltepec, went
70. leagues, seeing goodly countries, and brought examples of
gold, which the naturals of the countrey tooke out of great riuers:
and all this prouince belonged vnto Mutecuma.
The countrey of Tenich and vp the riuer were not subiect
to Mutecuma, but had warre with him, and would not suffe^
the Mexicans to enter into their territorie. They sent ambassadors
vnto Cortes with presents, offering him their
estate, and amitie; whereof Mutecuma was nothing glad.
They which went to Tututepec standing neere the South
sea did also bring with them examples of gold, and praised the
pleasantnes of the countrey, and the multitude of good harbours
vpon that coast, shewing to Cortes a cloth of cotton
wooll all wouen with goodly workes, wherein all the coast
with the hauens and creekes were set foorth.Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 48. But this thing
then could not be prosecuted by reason of the comming of
Pamphilus de Naruaez into the countrey,Pamphilus de Narua^z. who set all the kingdome
of Mexico in an vprore.
In this yeere 1519. the tenth day of August one Fernande
de Magallanes departed from Siuill with fiue ships toward
the Islands of Maluco:Gomara hist. gen. lib. ^* cap. 2. he went along the coast of Brasill till
he came vnto the riuer of Plate, which the Castillians had before
discouered.The discouerie of Magallanes from the riuer of Plate forward. From thence therefore he began his discouerie,
and came vnto an hauen which he called The Porte of
Saint Iulian standing in 49. degrees, and there he entred and
wintred: they endured much cold by reason of snow and ice:
the people of that countrey they found to be of great stature,
and of great strength, taking men by the legs and renting
them in the middest as easily as one of vs will rent an hen:
they liue by fruits and hunting.Patagones. They called them Patagones,
but the Brasilians doe call them Morcas.
In the yeere 1520. in the beginning of the moneth of September
growing then somewhat temperate they went out of
the port and riuer of Saint Iulian, hauing lost in it one of their
ships, and with the other f^wer he came vnto the Streights
named after the name of Mag^llanes standing in 52. degrees

and a halfe. From thence one of the ships returned backe vnto
Castile, whereof was captaine and pilot one Stephen de
Porto a Portugall, and the other three went forward, entring
into a mightie sea called Pacificum, without seeing any inhabited
land till they came in 13. degrees towards the north of
the Equinoctiall: in which latitude they came vnto Islands
which they called Los Iardines;Los Iardines. and from thence they sailed to
the Archipelagus of S. Lazarus, and in one of the Islands called
Matan Magallanes was slaine,Gomara hist gen. lib. 4 cap. 3. and his ship was burnt,
and the other two went vnto Borneo, and so from place to
place they went backe vntill they came to the Islands of
Mal^cos,Pet. Martyr. decad 5. cap. 7. leauing many others discouered, which I rehearse
not, because I finde not this voiage exactly written.
About this time Pope Leo the tenth sent one Paulus Centurio
as ambassadour to the greot Duke of Moscouie to wish
him to send into India an armie along the coast of Tartarie.Gomar. lib. 4. cap. 17.
And by the reasons of this ambassadour the said Duke was
almost persuaded vnto that action,Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 374. if other inconueniences
had not letted him.
In this same yeere 1520. in Februarie Diego Lopes de
Sequeira gouernour of India went towards the Streight of
Mecha and carried with him the ambassadour of Presbyter
Iohn, and Roderigo de Lima who also went as ambassadour
to him.Macua. They came vnto the Island of Macua standing in
the Red sea on the side of Africa in 17. degrees towards the
north: where he set the ambassadours on land, with the Portugals
that should goe with them. Peter de Couillan had beene
there before,Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 190. being sent thither by king Iohn the second of
Portugall: but yet Francis Aluarez gaue principall light and
knowledge of that countrey.
In the yeere 1520. the licenciate Lucas Vasques de Aillon
and other inhabitants of S. Domingo furnished two ships,Gomara hist gen. lib 2. cap. 7.
and sent them to the Isles of Lucayos to get slaues, and finding
none they passed along by the firme land beyond Florida
vnto certaine countreyes called Chicora and Gualdape,Chicora. vnto
the riuer Iordan and the Cape of Saint Helena standing in 32.
degrees toward the north.Gualdape. They of the countrey came downe
to the sea side to see the ships, as hauing neuer before seene the
like: The Spanyards went on land where they receiued good
entertainment, and had giuen vnto them such things as they

lacked. But they brought many of them into their ships and
then set saile and brought them away for slaues: but in the
way one of their ships sunke, and the other was also in great
hazard. By this newes the Licentiate Aillon knowing the
wealth of the countrey, begged the gouernment thereof of
the Emperour, and it was giuen him: whither he went to
get money to pay his debt.
About this time Diego Velasques gouernour of Cuba
hearing the good successe of Cortes,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 48. and that he had begged
the gouernment of New Spaine, which he held to be his, he
furnished out thither against Cortes 18. ships with 1000.
men and 80. horses, whereof he sent as Generall one Pamphilus
de Naruaez. He came vnto the towne called Villa rica
de la vera Cruz, where he tooke land, and commanded those of
the countrey to receiue him as gouernour thereof: But they
tooke his messenger prisoner, and sent him to Mexico where
Cortes was. Which thing being knowne of Cortes, he wrote
letters vnto Naruaez not to raise any vprore in the countrey
which he had discouered, offering him obedience if he had any
commission from the Emperour; but he corrupted the people
of the countrey with money: Whereupon Cortes went from
Mexico and tooke Naruaez prisoner in the towne of Zampoallan,
and put out one of his eies.
Naruaez being thus taken prisoner, his armie submitted
themselues to Cortes, and obeied him. Whereupon presently
he dispatched 200. soldiers vnto the riuer of Garay, and he
sent Iohn Vasquez de Leon with other two hundred vnto
Cosaalco, and withall sent a Spanyard with the newes of his
victorie vnto Mexico.The reuolt of the Mexicans in absence of Cortes. But the Indians being in the meane
time risen, hurt the messenger. Which being knowne to Cortes,
he mustered his men, and found a thousand footemen and
two hundred horsemen, with the which he went towards
Mexico, where he found Peter de Aluarado, and the rest
which he had left there aliue and in safetie, wherewith he was
greatly pleased, and Mutecuma made much of him. But yet
the Mexicans ceased not but made warre against him: and
the warre grew so hot that they killed their king Mutecuma
with a stone,Mutecuma slaine. and then there rose vp another king such an one
as pleased them, till such time as they might put the Spanyards
out of the citie, being no more then 504. footemen, and

fortie horsemen.Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 50. The Spanyards with great losse being driuen
out of Mexico, retired themselues with much adoe to
Tlaxcallan, where they were well receiued: and so they gathered
together 900. Spanyards, 80. horsemen, and two hundred
thousand Indians, their friends* and allies: and so they
went backe againe to take Mexico in the moneth of August
in the yeere 1521.
Cortes obtaining still more and more victories defermined
to see further within the countrey:Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap 60. and for this purpose in the
yeere 1521. and in October he sent out one Gonsalo de Sandoual
with 200. footemen and 35* horsemen, and cortaine Indians
his friends vnto Tochtepec and Coazacoalco,Tochtepec. which
had rebelled,Coazacoalco. but at length yeelded. And they discouered the
countrey, and built a towne 120. leagues from Mexico, and
named it Medelin, and another towne they made naming it
Santo Spirito fewer leagues from the sea vpon a riuer; and
these two townes kept the whole countrey in obedience.
This yeere 1521. in December Emmanuell king of Portugall
died,Emmanuels death. and after him his sonne king Iohn the 3. reigned.Osorius lib. 12. fol. 366.
In the yeere 1521. there went from Maluco one of Magellans
ships laden with cl^ues:Gomara historiae general. lib. 4. cap. 8. they victualed themselues in
the Island of Burro, and from thence went to Timor which
standeth in 11. degrees of southerly latitude.Burro. Beyond this
Island one hundred leagues they discouered certaine Islands
and one named Eude,Timor. finding the places from thence forward
peopled.Eude. Afterward passing without Samatra they met with
no land till they fell with the Cape of Bona Speranca, where
they tooke in fresh water and wood: So they came by the
Islands of Cape Verde, and from thence to Siuill, where
they were notably receiued, as well for the cloues that they
brought, as that they had compassed about the world.
In the yeere 1522. in Ianuarie one Gilgonzales armed
fower ships in the Island of Tararequi standing in the South
sea with intent to discouer the coast of Nicarag^a,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 4. and especially
a streight or passage from the South sea into the North
sea. And sailing along the coast he came vnto an hauen called
S. Vincent, and there landed with 100. Spanyards and certaine
horsemen, and went within the land 200. leagues* and
he brought with him 200. pesoes of gold, and so came backe
againe to S. Vincent: where he found his pilot Andrew Nigno,

who was as far as Tecoantepec in 16. degrees to the north,Tecoantepec.
and had sailed three hundred leagues:Gomara histori^ general. lib. 6. cap. 12. from whence they returned
to Panama, and so ouer land to Hispaniola.
In the same yeere 1522. in the moneth of Aprill the other
ship of Magallanes called The Trinitie went from the Island
of Tidore,Castagneda Historia delle Indie Orientali lib. 6. cap. 41. wherein was captaine Gonzalo Gomez de Espinosa,
Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. 8. and 12. shaping their course toward Noua Spania: and because
winde was scant they stirred toward the northeast into 16.
degrees,Two Islands in 16. degrees of northerly latitude. where they found two Islands, and named them the
Isles of Saint Iohn, and in that course they came to another
Island in 20. degrees, which they named La Griega, where
the simple people came into their ships, of whom they kept
some to shew them in Noua Spania: They were in this course
fower monethes,42. degrees of northerly latitude. vntill they came into 42. degrees of northerly
latitude, where they did see sea fishes called Seales and
Tunies. And the climate seemed vnto them comming newly
out of the heat, to be so cold and vntemperate, that they could
not well abide it, and therefore they turned backe againe to
Tidore, being thereunto enforced also by contrarie windes.
These were the first Spanyards which had beene in so high a
latitude toward the north. And there they found one Antonie
de Bri^to building a fortresse, which tooke from them their
goods, and sent 48. of them prisoners to Malaca.
In this yeere 1522.Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 12. Cortes desirous to haue some hauens
on the South sea, and to discouer the coast of ^oua Spania on
that side, whereof he had knowledge in Mutecuma his time,
(bicause he thought by that way to bring the drugs from Maluco
and Banda, and the spiceris from Iaua, with lesse trauaile
and danger) he sent fewer Spaniards with their guides to
Tecoantepec, Qua^utemallan, and other hauens: where they
were wel receiued, and brought some of the people with them
to Mexico:The South sea first searched by Cortes ^is pilots. And Cortes made much of them; and afterwards
sent ten pilots thither to search the seas there about. They
went 70. leagues in the sea but found no hauen. One Casique
or Lord called Cuchataquir vsed them well, and sent with them
to Cortes 200. of his men with a present of gold and siluer,
and other things of the countrey:Tecoentepec. and they of Tecoantepec
did the like: and not long after, this Casique sent for aide to
Cortes against his neighbours which did warre against him.
In the yeere 1523. Cortes sent vnto him for his aide Peter

de Aluarado,Gomara hist gen. lib. 6. cap. 12. with two hundred soldiers footemen, and fortie
horsemen, and the Caciques of Tecoantepec* and Quahutemallan
asked them for the monsters of the sea which came
thither the yeere past, meaning the ships of Gil Gonsales de
Auila, being greatly amazed at the sight of them, and woondring
much more when they heard, that Cortes had bigger
then those:A wittie stratageme. and they painted vnto them a mightie Carake
with sixe masts, and sailes and shroudes, and men armed on
horsebacke. This Aluarado went through the countrey and
builded there the city of Sant Iago or Saint Iames,Sant Iago built. and a towne
which he called Segura leauing certaine of his people in it.Castagneda hist. delle Indie Orientali lib. 6. c 42.
In the same yeere 1523. in the moneth of May Antonie
de Britto being captaine of the Isles of Maluco sent his cosen
Simon de Breu to learne the way by the Isle of Borneo to
Malaca:Manada. They came in sight of the Islands of Manada and
Panguensara:Panguensara. They went through the straight of Treminao
and Taguy:The Islands of S. Michael. and to the Islands of Saint Michael standing in
7. degrees,Borneo. and from thence discouered the Islands of Borneo,
and had sight of Pedra branca or the White stone,Pedra branca. and passed
through the straight of Cincapura, and so to the citie of Malaca.
In this same yeere 1523. Cortes went with 300. footemen
and 150. horsemen and 40000. Mexicans to Panuco both to
discouer it better,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 61. and also to inhabite it, and withall to be reuenged
vpon them which had killed and eaten the soldiers of
Francis Garay. They of Panuco resisted him, but Cortes in the
end ouerthrew them, and conquered the countrey: And hard
by Chila vpon the riuer he built a towne and named it Santo
Stephano del puerto,Santo Stephano del puerto. leauing in it 100. footemen, and thirtie
horsemen and one Peter de Vall^io for lieutenant. This iourney
cost him 76. thousand Castillians, besides the Spanyards,
horses, and Maxicans which died there.
In this yeere 1523. Francis de Garay made nine ships and
two brigandines to goe to Panuco and to Rio de las Palmas to
be there as gouernour:Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 61. and en la Conquista de Mexico. for that the Emperour had granted
vnto him from the coast of Florida vnto Panuco, in regard of
the charges, which he had beene at in that discouerie. He carried
with him 850. soldiers, and 140. horses, and some men
out of the Island of Iamaica, where he furnished his fleet with
munition for the warre: and he went vnto Xagua an hauen
in the Island of Cuba, where he vnderstood that Cortes had

peopled the coast of Panuco: and that it might not happen
vnto him as it did to Pamphilus de Naruaez, he determined to
take another companion with him, and desired the Doctor
Zuazo to goe to Mexico and procure some agreement betweene
Cortes and him. And they departed from Xagua each
one about his busines. Zuazo came in great ieoperdie, and
Garay went not cleere without.Rio de las Palmas. Garay arriued in Rio de las
Palmas on S. Iames his day, and then he sent vp the riuer one
Gonsaluo de Ocampo, who at his returne declared that it
was an euill and desert countrey: but notwithstanding Garay
went there on land with 400. footemen and some horsemen;
and he commanded one Iohn de Grijalua to search the
coast, and he himselfe marched by land towards Panuco, and
passed a riuer which he named Rio montalco;Rio Montalco. he entred into
a great towne where they found many hennes, wherewith
they refreshed themselues, and he tooke some of the people of
Chila which he vsed for messengers to certaine places:Chila. And
after great trauaile comming to Panuco they found no victuailes
there by reason of the warres of Cortes and the spoile
of the soldiers. Garay then sent one Goncalo de Ocampo to
Sant Isteuan del puerto to know whether they would receiue
him or no. They had a good answere. But Cortes his men priuily
by an ambushment tooke 40. of Garayes horsemen, alleaging
that they came to vsurpe the gouernment of another:
and besides this misfortune he lost fower of his ships: whereupon
he left off to proceede any farther.
While Cortes was preparing to set forward to Panuco*
Francis de las Casas, and Roderigo de la Paz arriued at Mexico
with letters patents,Gomar. en la Conquesta de Mexico fol. 226. wherein the Emperour gaue the gouernment
of Nueua Spagna and all the countrey which Cortes
had conquered to Cortes, and namely Panuco. Whereupon
he staied his iourney. But he sent Diego de Ocampo with
the said letters patents, and Pedro de Aluarado with store of
footemen and horsemen. Garay knowing this thought it best
to yeeld himselfe vnto Cortes his hands, and to go to Mexico;
which thing he did hauing discouered a great tract of land.
In this yeere 1523. Gil Goncales de Auila made a discouerie,
Gomara en la Conquista de Mex^co fol 242. and peopled a towne called San Gil de buena vista standing
in 14. degrees toward the north,San Gil de buena Vista in the Bay of Honduras. and almost in the bottome
of the Bay called the Ascension or the Honduras. He

began to conquere it because he best knew the secrets thereof,
and that it was a very rich countrey.
In this yeere 1523. the sixt day of December Peter de Aluarado
went from the citie of Mexico by Cortes his commandement
to discouer and conquere Quahutemallan,Gomara en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 229. and in sequentibus. Vtlatlan,
Chiapa, Xochnuxco, and other townes toward the South sea.
He had with him three hundred soldiers, 170. horsemen, foure
field peeces, and some noble men of Mexico, with people of
the countrey to aide him as well in the warre, as by the way
being long. He went by Tecoantepec to Xochnuxco, and
other places aboue said with great trauaile and losse of his
men: but he discouered and subdued all the countrey. There
are in those parts certaine hils that haue Alume in them,Oile distilling out of hils. and
out of which distilleth a certaine liquor like vnto oile, and sulphur
or brimstone, whereof the Spanyards made excellent
gunpowder.Ibidem fol. 230. He trauailed 400. leagues in this voiage, and
passed certaine riuers which were so hot, that they could not
well endure to wade through them. He builded a citie calling
it Sant Iago de Quahutemallan.Sant Iago de Quahutemallan. Peter de Aluarado begged
the gouernment of this countrey, and the report is that it
was giuen him.
In the yeere 1523. the 8. day of December Cortes sent
Diego de Godoy with 100. footemen and 30. horsemen,Gomara en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 233. two
field peeces, and many of his friends Indians vnto the towne
Del Espiritu santo:Villa del Espiritu santo. He ioined himselfe with the captaine of
that towne,Chamolla. and they went to Chamolla the head citie of that
prouince, and that being taken all the countrey grew quiet.
In the yeere 1524. in Februarie Cortes sent one Roderigo
Rangel with 150. Spaniards and many of the Tlaxcallans and
Mexicans against the Zapoteeas and Nixticas and vnto other
prouinces and countreyes not so well discouered:Gomara en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 234. they were
resisted at the first, but quickly put the people to the woorst,
and kept them for euer after in subiection.
In this same yeere 1524. one Roderigo de Bastidas was
sent to discouer,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 3. cap. 21. people, and gouerne the countrey of Santa
Martha: where he lost his life because he would not suffer the
soldiers to take the spoile of a certaine towne. They ioined
with Peter Villa-forte, and he being sometimes his entire
friend did helpe to kill him with daggers lying in his bed.
Afterward Don Pedro de Lugo, and Don Alfonso his sonne

were gouernours of that place, which vsed themselues like
couetous tyrants; whereof grew much trouble.
In this same yeere also 1524. after that the Licenciate Lucas
Vasques de Aillon had obtained of the Emperour the gouernment
of Chicora,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 7. he armed for that purpose certaine
ships from the citie of Santo Domingo and went to discouer
the countrey, and to inhabite it: but he was lost with all his
companie, leauing nothing done woorthy of memorie. And I
cannot tell how it commeth to passe, except it be by the iust
iudgement of God, that of so much gold and precious stones
as haue beene gotten in the Antiles by so many Spaniards, little
or none remaineth, but the most part is spent and consumed,
and no good thing done.
In this yeere 1524. Cortes sent one Christopher de Olid
with a fleete to the Island of Cuba to receiue the vitailes and
munition which Alonso de Contreras had prepared and to
discouer and people the countrey about Cape De Higueras
and the Honduras;Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 65. and en la Conquista de Mexico fol. 243. and to send Diego Hurtado de Mendoca
by sea, to search the coast from thence euen to Darien to finde
out the Streight which was thought to run into the South
sea, as the Emperour had commanded. He sent also two ships
from Panuco to search along the coast vnto Florida. He commanded
also certaine brigandines to search the coast from
Zacatullan vnto Panama. This Christopher de Olid came to
the Island of Cuba, and made a league with Diego Velasquez
against Cortes, and so set saile and went on land hard by
Puerto de Cauallos standing in 10. degrees to the north, and
built a towne which he called Triumpho de la Cruz. He tooke
Gil Gonzales de Auila prisoner, and killed his nephew and
the Spaniards that were with him all sauing one childe, and
shewed himselfe an enimie to Cortes, who had spent in that
expedition thirty thousand Castellans of gold to doe him pleasure
withall.
Cortes vnderstanding hereof the same yeere 1524. and in
the moneth of October he went out of the citie of Mexico to
seeke Christopher de Olid to be reuenged of him,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 66. and en la Conqu^sta de Mexico fol. 246. and 251. and also to
discouer, carrying with him three hundred Spanish footemen
and horsemen, and Quahutimoc king of Mexico, and other
great Lords of the same citie. And comming to the towne called
La villa del Espiritu santo, he required guides of the Lords

of Tauasco and Xicalanco: and they sent him ten of their principall
men for guides: who gaue him also a map of cotton
wooll,An excellent large map of cotton wooll. wherein was painted the situation of the whole countrey
from Xicalanco vnto Naco, and Nito, and euen as farre
as Nicaragua, with their mountaines, hils, fields, meadowes,
vallies, riuers, cities and townes. And Cortes in the meane
time sent for three ships which were at the hauen of Medellin
to follow him along the coast.
In this yeere 1524. they came to the citie of Izancanac,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 67. and 68 and en la Conquista^ie Mexico fol. 257.
where he vnderstood that the king Quahutimoc and the Mexicans
that were in his companie were conspired against
him and the Spanyards: for the which he hanged the king
and two others of the chiefe:Mazatlan. and so came to the citie of Mazaclan,
Tiaca. and after that to Tiaca the head citie of a prouince so
called standing in the middest of a lake: and here about they
began to finde the traine of the Spanyards, which they went
to seeke,Zuzullin. and so they went to Zuzullin, and at length came to
the towne of Nito: from Nito Cortes with his owne companie
and all the Spanyards that he found there departed to
the shore or strand called La Ba^a de Sant Andres,Gomar. in the Conquest of Mexico fol. 268. and finding
there a good hauen he builded a towne in that place and called
it Natividad de nuestra Sen^ora.Natiuidad de Nuestra Sennora.
From hence Cortes went to the towne of Truxillo standing
in the hauen of the Honduras,Truxillo. where the Spanyards
dwelling there did entertaine him well:Honduras. and while he was
there, there arriued a ship which brought newes of the stirre
in Mexico in Cortes his absence: whereupon he sent word to
Gonsalo de Sandoual to march with his companie from Naco
to Mexico by land toward the South sea vnto Quahutemallan,
Gomara in the Conquest of Mexico fol. 170. and 273. because that is the vsuall plaine and safest way, and he
left as captaine in Truxillo Fernando de Saavedra his cosen:
and he himselfe went by sea along the coast of Iucatan to
Chalchicoeca now called Sant Iuan de Vllhua, and so to Medellin,
and from thence to Mexico, where he was well receiued,
hauing beene from thence 18. monethes, and had gone
fiue hundred leagues trauailing often out of his way, and enduring
much hardnes.
In the yeere 1525. Francis Pizarro and Diego de Almagro
went from Panama to discouer Peru standing beyond the
line towarde the South,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 1. and 2. which they called Nueua Castillia.Peru.

The gouernour Pedro Arias would not entermeddle with
this expedition, because of the euill newes which his captaine
Francis Vezerra had brought.
Francis Pizarro went first in a ship hauing with him 124.
soldiers, and Almagro went after him in another ship with
70. men. He came to Rio de San Iuan standing in three degrees
where he got two thousand pesoes of gold; and not finding
Pizarro, he went to seeke him, repenting his doings by reason
of a mishap that he had. But he went first to an Island called
Isla del Gorgona,Isla del Gorgona. and afterward to another called Isla del
Gallo,Isla del Gallo. and to the riuer called Rio del Peru standing in two
degrees northward,Rio del Peru. whereof so many famous countreyes
take their name. From thence they went to Rio de San Francisco,
Cabo de Passaos. and to Cabo de Passaos, where they passed the Equinoctiall
line,Puerto vejo. and came to Puerto Vejo standing in one degree to
the south of the line: from whence they sailed to the riuers
of Chinapanpa,Tumbez. Tumbez,Payta. and Payta standing in 4. or. 5. degrees,
where they had knowledge of king Atabalipa and of
the exceeding wealth and riches of his palace. Which newes
mooued Pizarro speedily to returne home againe to Panama,
and so into Spaine, and to request the gouernment of that
countrey of the Emperour: which he also obtained. He had
spent aboue three yeeres before in this discouerie not without
enduring great trauaile and perils.
In the same yeere 1525. there was sent out of Spaine a
fleete of seuen ships,Pet. Martyr. decad. 8. cap. 9. whereof was captaine generall Don
Garsia de Loaisa to the Islands of Maluco.Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. ^2. They went from
the citie of the Groine and passed by the Islands of the Canaries,
and went to Brasill, where they found an Island in two
degrees,The Isle of S. Mathew. and named it. S. Matthew: and it seemed to be inhabited,
because they found in it orenge trees, hogs, and hennes
in caues, and vpon the rindes of most of the trees there were
grauen Portugall letters, shewing that the Portugals had
beene there 17. yeeres before that time.Gomara in the Conquest of Mexico pag. 28^. A patache or pinnesse
of theirs passed the streight of Magellane hauing in her one
Iohn de Resaga, and ran all along the coast of Peru and Noua
Spagna: They declared all their successe vnto Cortes, and
told him, that frier Garsia de Loaisa was passed to the islands
of cloues. But of this fleete the Admirall onely came thither,
wherein was captaine one Martine Mingues de Car^houa:

for Loaisa and the other captaines died by the way. All the
Moores of Maluco were found well affectioned to the Spaniards.
In the same yeere 1525. the pilot Stephen Gomes went
from the port of the Groine toward the north to discouer the
streight vnto the Malucos by the north,Pet. Martyr. decad 8 pag 601. to whom they would
giue no charge in the fleete of frier Garsia de Loaisa.Gomara historiae general. lib. 1. cap. 5. But yet
the Earle Don Fernando de Andrada, and the Doctor Beltram,
and the marchant Christopher de Sarro furnished a gallion
for him, and he went from the Groine in Galicia to the
Island of Cuba, and to the point of Florida, sailing by day because
he knew not the land. He passed the bay Angra, and the
riuer Enseada, and so went ouer to the other side. It is also
reported that he came to Cape Razo in 46. degrees to the
north: from whence he came backe againe to the Groine laden
with slaues. The newes hereof ran by and by through
Spaine, that he was come home laden with cloues as mistaking
the word: and it was carried to the Court of Spaine:
but when the truth was knowne it turned to a pleasant iest.
In this voiage Gomes was ten monethes.
In this yeere 1525. Don George de Meneses captaine of
Maluco, and with him Don Garcia Henriques sent a foyst to
discouer land towards the north, wherein went as captaine
one Diego de Rocha, and Gomes de Sequeira for pilot. In 9.
or 10. degrees they found certaine Islands standing close together,
The Isle of Batochina by Gilolo. and they called them the Islands of Gomes de Sequeira,
he being the first pilot that discouered them. And they
came backe againe by the Island of Batochina.
In the yeere 1526. there went out of Siuill one Sebastian
Cabota a Venetian by his father,Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 39. but borne at Bristol in England,
being chiefe pilote to the Emperour, with fower ships
toward Maluco. They came to Pernambuco, and staied there
three monethes for a winde to double the Cape of Saint Augustine.
In the Bay of Patos or of ducks the Admirall ship
perished; and being without hope to get to the Isles of Maluco
they there made a pinnesse to enter vp the riuer of Plate,
and to search it. They ran 60. leagues vp before they came to
the barre: where they left their great ships, and with their
small pinnesses passed vp the riuer Parana,(...) Parana. which the inhabitants
count to be the principall riuer. Hauing rowed vp

120. leagues, they made a fortresse and staied there aboue a
yeere: and then rowed further till they came to the mouth of
another riuer called Paragioa,Rio Paragioa. and perceiuing that the countrey
yeelded gold and siluer they kept on their course, and sent
a brigandine before; but those of the countrey tooke it: and
Cabote vnderstanding of it thought it best to turne backe vnto
their forte, and there tooke in his men which he had left
there, and so went downe the riuer where his ships did ride,
and from thence he sailed home to Siuill in the yeere 1530.
leauing discouered about two hundred leagues within this
riuer,The fountaine of the Riuer of Plata. reporting it to be very nauigable, and that it springeth
out of a lake named Bombo. It standeth in the firme land of
the kingdome of Peru, running through the vallies of Xauxa,
and meeteth with the riuers Parso, Bulcasban, Cay, Parima,
Hiucax, with others which make it very broad and great. It
is said also, that out of this lake runneth the riuer called Rio
de San Francesco; and by this meane the riuers come to be so
great.The biggest riuers proceede from lakes. For the riuers that come out of lakes are bigger then
those which proceede from a spring.
In the yeere 1517. one Pamphilus de Naruaez went out
of S. Lucar de Barameda to be generall of the coast and land of
Florida as farre as Rio de las Palmas,Ramusius 3. vol. fol. 310. and had with him fiue
ships, 600. soldiers, 100. horses, besides a great summe and
quantitie of victuailes, armour, clothing and other things.
He could not goe on land where his desire was, but went on
land somewhat neere to Florida with three hundred of his
companie, some horses, and some victuailes, commanding the
ships to goe to Rio de las Palmas; in which voiage they were
almost all lost:The Isle of Xamo or Malhada. and those which escaped passed great dangers,
hunger and thirst in an Island called Xamo and by the Spaniards
Malhada being very drie and barren, where the Spaniards
killed one another, and the people also of the countrey
did the like. Naruaez and those which went with him sawe
some golde with certaine Indians, and he demanded of them
where they gathered it: and they answered that they had it
at Apalachen.Apalachen. They therefore searched this gold, and in searching
came to the said towne, where they found no gold nor
siluer: they saw many Bay trees, and almost all other kinde
of trees with beasts, birds, and such like. The men and women
of this place are high and strong, very light and so swift

runners, that they will take deere at their pleasure, and will
not grow wearie though they run a whole day. From Apalachen
they went to a towne called Aute;Aute. and from thence to
Xamo a poore countrey with small sustinance.Xamo. These people
bring vp their children very tenderly, and make great lamentation
when any of them dieth; they neither weepe nor lament
at the death of any olde bodie. Here the people desired
the Spanyards to cure their sicke folks, for they had many diseased:
and certaine of the Spanyards being in extreme pouertie
assaied it, and vsed praier, and it pleased God that they did
indeede recouer as well those that were hurt, as those which
were otherwise diseased; in so much, that one which was
thought verily to be dead, was by them restored to life, as
they themselues reporte. They affirme that they passed
through many countreies and many strange people differing
in language, apparell, and customes. And because they plaied
the physitions, they were as they passed greatly esteemed and
held for Gods, and the people did no hurt vnto them, but
would giue them part of such things as they had. Therefore
they passed quietly, and trauailed so farre till they came to a
people, that vse continually to liue in heards with their cattel
as the Arabians doe. They be poore, and eate snakes, lisards,
spiders, ants, and al kinde of vermine, and herewith they liue
so well contented that commonly they sing and dance. They
buie the women of their enimies, and kill their daughters,
because they would not haue them marrie with them, whereby
they might increase. They trauailed through certaine places,
where the women gaue sucke vnto their children til they
were ten or twelue yeeres of age; and where certaine men
being Hermaphrodites doe marrie one another. These Spaniards
trauailed aboue 800. leagues; and there escaped aliue
in this iourney not aboue seuen or eight of them. They came
vpon the coast of the South sea vnto a citie called Saint Michael
of Culuacan standing in 23. degrees and vpward toward
the north.
This yeere 1527. when Cortes vnderstood by the pinnesse
aforesaide that Don Garcia de Loaisa was passed by the
Streight of Magelan toward the Islands of cloues,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 72. and in the Conquest of Mexico fol. 28^. he prouided
three ships to goe seeke him, and to discouer by that way
of New Spaine as farre as the Isles of Maluco. There went

as gouernour in those ships one Aluaro de Saavedra Ceron,
cosen vnto Cortes, a man fit for that purpose. He made saile
from Ciuatlanejo, now named S. Christopher standing in 20.
degrees toward the north on All Saints day. They arriued at
the Islands which Magelan named The Pleasures; and from
thence sailed to the Islands, which Gomes de Sequeira had
discouered,Islas de los Reyes. and not knowing thereof, they named the^ Islas de los
Reyes, that is to say, The Isles of the kings, because they came
vnto them on Twelfe day. In the way Saavedra lost two
ships of his company, of which they neuer after heard newes.
But from Island to Island he still sailed and came to the
Island of Candiga,Candiga. where he bought two Spanyards for 70.
ducats, which had beene of the companie of Frier Loaisa, who
was lost thereabout.
In the yeere 1528. in March Saavedra arriued at the Islands
of Maluco, and came to an anker before the Isle of
Gilolo: he found the sea calme and winde at will, without
any tempests: and he tooke the distance from thence to Noua
Spagna to be 2050. leagues. At this time Martin Yn^iguez de
Carquicano died, and Fernando de la Torre was chosen their
Generall, who then was in the citie of Tidore, who had there
erected a gallows and had fierce warre with Don George de
Meneses captaine of the Portugals: and in a fight which they
had the fourth day of May Saavedra tooke from him a galiotte
and slew the captaine thereof called Fernando de Baldaya,
and in Iune he returned towards New Spaine, hauing
with him one Simon de Brito Patalin and other Portugals,
and hauing beene certaine monethes at sea, he was forced
backe vnto Tidore, where Patalin was beheaded and quartered,
and his companions hanged.
In this yeere 1528. Cortes sent two hundred footemen and
60. horsemen,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 73. and many Mexicans to discouer and plant the
countrey of the Chichimecas, for that it was reported to be
rich of gold. This being done he shipped himselfe, and came
into Castile with great pompe, and brought with him 250000.
marks of gold and siluer: and being come to Toledo where
the Emperour then lay, he was entertained according to his
deserts, and the Emperour made him Marques Del Valle,
and married him to the Lady Iane de Zuniga daughter vnto
the Earle de Aguilar, and then the Emperour sent him backe

againe to be Generall of New Spaine.
In the yeere 1529. in May Saavedra returned back againe
towards New Spaine,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 72. and he had sight of a land toward the
South in two degrees, and he ran East along by it aboue fiue
hundred leagues till the end of August. The coast was cleane
and of good ankerage,Noua Guinea. but the people blacke and of curled
haire; from the girdle downward they did weare a certaine
thing plaited to couer their lower parts. The people of Maluco
call them Papuas,Os Papuas are blacke people with frisled haire. because they be blacke and friseled in
their haire: and so also doe the Portugals call them.
Saavedra hauing sailed 4. or 5. degrees to the South of the
line, returned vnto it, and passed the Equinoctiall towards
the north, and discouered an Island which he called Isla de los
Pintados,Isla de los Pintados. that is to say, The Isle of painted people: for the
people thereof be white, and all of them marked with an iron:
and by the signes which they gaue he conceaued that they
were of China. There came vnto them from the shore a kinde
of boate full of these men, making tokens of threatnings to
the Spanyards; who seeing that the Spanyards would not
obey them, they began to skirmish with slinging of stones,
but Saavedra would suffer no shot to be shot at them, because
their stones were of no strength, and did no harme.
A little beyond this Island in 10. or 12. degrees they found
many small low Islands full of palme trees and grasse, which
they called Los Iardines,Los Iardines. and they came to an anker in the
middest of them, where they taried certaine daies. The people
seemed to descend from them of China, but by reason of
their long continuance there they are become so brutish, that
they haue neither law, nor yet giue themselues to any honest
labour. They were white clothing which they make of
grasse. They stand in maruailous feare of fire, because they
neuer saw any. They eate Cocos in steede of bread, breaking
them before they be ripe, and putting them vnder the sand,
and then after certaine daies they take them out and lay them
in the sunne, and then they will open. They eate fish which
they take in a kinde of boate called a Parao, which they make
of pine wood,(...) wood. which is driuen thither at certaine times of the
yeere, they know not how, nor from whence, and the tooles
wherewith they make their boates are of shels.
Saavedra perceiuing that the time and weather was then

somewhat better for his purpose, made saile towards the
firme land and citie of Panama, where he might vnlade the
cloues and marchandise which he had, that so in cartes it
might be carried fower leagues to the riuer of Chagre, which
they say is nauigable running out into the North sea not far
from Nombre de Dios, where the ships ride, which come out
of Spaine: by which way all kinde of goods might be brought
vnto them in shorter time, and with lesse danger, then to saile
about the Cape of Bona Speranca. For from Maluco vnto
Panama they saile continually betweene the Tropickes and
the line: but they neuer found winde to serue that course, and
therefore they came backe againe to Maluco very sad, because
Saavedra died by the way: who if he had liued meant
to haue opened the land of Gastillia del Oro and New Spaine
from sea to sea.Fower narrow passages from sea to sea in the West Indies. Which might haue beene done in fower places:
namely from the Gulfe of S. Michael to Vraba, which is
25. leagues,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. 14. or from Panama to Nombre de Dios being 17.
leagues distance: or through Xaquator a riuer of Nicaragua,
which springeth out of a lake three or fower leagues from the
South sea, and falleth into the North sea; whereupon doe
saile great barks and crayers. The other place is from Tecoantepee
through a riuer to Verdadera Cruz in the Bay of the
Honduras, which also might be opened in a streight. Which if
it were done, then they might saile from the Canaries vnto
the Malucos vnder the climate of the Zodiake in lesse time
and with much lesse danger, then to saile about the Cape de
Bona Speranca, or by the streight of Magelan, or by the
Northwest.The northwest passage very beneficiall. And yet if there might be found a streight there
to saile into the sea of China, as it hath beene sought, it would
doe much good.
In this yeere 1529, one Damian de Goes a Portugal being
in Flanders, after that he had trauailed ouer all Spaine, was
yet desirous to see more countreyes, and fashions, and diuersities
of people; and therefore went ouer into England and
Scotland, and was in the courts of the kings of those parts:
and after that came againe into Flanders, and then trauailed
through Zealand, Holland, Brabant, Luxenburge, Suitzerland,
and so through the cities of Colen, Spyres, Argentine,
Basill, and other parts of Alemaine, and then came backe againe
into Flanders: and from thence he went into France through

Picardie, Normandie, Champaine, Burgundie, the dukedome
of Borbon, Gascoigne, Languedoc, Daulphinie, the dukedome
of Sauoy, and passed into Italy into the dukedome of Millaine,
Ferrara, Lombardie, and so to Venice, and turned backe
againe to the territorie of Genoa, and the dukedome of Florence
through all Tuscane: and he was in the citie of Rome,
and in the kingdome of Naples from the one side to the other.
From thence he went into Germanie to Vlmes, and other
places of the Empire, to the dukedome of Sueuia and of Bauier,
and the Archdukedome of Austrich, the kingdome of
Boeme, the dukedome of Morania, and the kingdome of Hungarie,
and so to the confines of Graecia. From thence he went
to the kingdome of Poland, Prussia, and the dukedome of
Liuonia, and so came into the great dukedome of Moscouia.
From whence he came backe into High Alemayne, and
through the countreyes of the Lantzgraue, the dukedome of
Saxonie, the countreyes of Denmarke, Gotland, and Norway,
trauailing so farre, that he found himselfe in 70. degrees of
latitude towards the North. He did see, speake and was conuersant
with all the kings, princes, nobles and chiefe cities of
all Christendome in the space of 22. yeeres: So that by reason
of the greatnes of his trauell, I thought him a man woorthie
to be here remembred.
In the yeere 1529. or 1530. one Melchior de Sofa Tauarez
went from the citie of Ormuz vnto Balfera and the Islands
of Gissara with certaine ships of warre, and passed vp as farre
as the place, where the riuers Tygris and Euphrates meete
one with the other. And although other Portugals had discouered
and sailed through that streight, yet neuer any of them
sailed so farre vpon the fresh water till that time, when he discouered
that riuer from the one side to the other, wherein he
saw many things which the Portugals knew not.
Not long after this one Ferdinando Coutinho a Portugall
came vnto Ormuz, and being desirous to see the world, he
determined to goe into Portugall from thence ouer land to see
Asia and Europe; And to doe this the better he went into
Arabia, Persia, and vpwards the riuer Euphrates the space of
a moneth; and saw many kingdomes and countreies, which
in our time had not beene seene by the Portugals: He was
taken prisoner in Damasco, and afterward crost ouer the prouince

of Syria, and came vnto the citie of Alepo. He had beene
at the holy Sepulchre in Ierusalem, and in the citie of Cayro,
and at Constantinople with the Great Turke; and hauing
seene his court he passed ouer vnto Venice, and from thence
into Italie, France, Spaine, and so came againe to Lisbon. So
that he and Damian de Goes were in our time the most noble
Portugals, that had discouered and seene most countreyes and
realmes of their owne affections.
In the same yeere 1530. little more or lesse,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 3. one Francis
Pisarro, which had beene in Spaine to obtaine the gouernment
of Peru, turned backe againe to the citie of Panama with all
things that he desired: he brought with him fower brethren,
Ferdinand, Iohn, Gonzaluo, and Francis Martines de Alcantara:
They were not well receiued by Diego de Almagro,
and his friends; for that Pisarro had not so much commended
him to the Emperour as he looked for, but omitted the discouerie,
wherein he had lost one of his eies, and spent much:
yet in the end they agreed, and Diegro de Almagro gaue vnto
Pisarro 700. pezoes of golde, victuailes and munition, wherewith
he prepared himselfe the better for his iourney.
Not long after this agreement Francis Pisarro and his brethren
went in two ships with the most of their soldiers and
horses; but he could not arriue at Tumbez as he was minded,
and so they went on land in the riuer of Peru; and went
along the coast with great paines, because there were many
b^gs and riuers in their way, wherein some of his men were
drowned: They came to the towne of Coache, where they
rested,Much gold and emeraulds. where they found much gold and emeraulds, of which
they brake some to see if they were perfect. From thence Pisarro
sent to Diego de Almagro twentie thousand pezoes of
gold to send him men, horses, munition, and victuailes; and
so he went on his iourney to the hauen named Porto Viejo:
and thither came vnto him one Sebastian de Benalcazar, with
all such things as had sent for, which pleased and pleasured
him very much.
In the yeere 1531. he hauing this aide,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 4. passed ouer into a
rich Island called Puna,The Isle of Puna. where he was well receiued of the
gouernour: yet at last he conspired to kill him and all his men:
but Pisarro preuented him, and tooke many of the Indians, and
bound them with chaines of gold and siluer. The gouernour

caused those that kept his wines to haue their noses, armes,
and priuie members to be cut off, so iealous was he. Here Pisarro
found aboue sixe hundred men prisoners belonging to
the king Attabalipa,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 5. who waged warre against his eldest
brother Guascar to winne reputation. These he set at libertie
and sent them to the citie of Tombez, who promised to be a
meane that he should be well receiued in those partes. But
when they saw themselues out of bondage, they forgat their
promise, and incited the people against the Spaniards. Then
Pisarro sent three Spaniards to Tombez to treate for peace,
whome they tooke and slew and sacrificed, and their priestes
wept not for pitie but of custome. Pisarro hearing of this
cruell fact, passed ouer to the maine, and set vpon the citie one
night suddenly and killed many of them, so that they presented
him with gifts of gold and siluer and other riches, and so
became friends. This done, he builded a towne vpon the riuer
of Cira,S. Michael of Tangarara. and called it Saint Michael of Tangarara, which
was the first towne inhabited by Christians in those partes;
whereof Sebastian de Benalcazar was appointed captaine.Payta an excellent harbour in 5. degrees to the South of the line.
Then he searched out a good and sure hauen for his ships, and
found that of Payta to be an excellent harbour.
In this same yeere 1531. there went one Diego de Ordas
to be gouernour in the riuer of Maragnon,Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 17. with three ships,
sixe hundred soldiers, and 35. horses. He died by the way, so
that the intention came to none effect. After that in the yeere
1534. there was sent thither one Hierome Artal with 130.
soldiers,The famous riuer Maragnon. yet he came not to the riuer, but peopled Saint Michael
de Neueri, and other places in Paria. Also there went
vnto this riuer Maragnon a Portugall gentleman named Aries
Dacugna, and he had with him ten ships, nine hundred
Portugals, and 130. horses. He spent much, but he that lost
most was one Iohn de Barros.Iohn de Barros factor of the house of India. This riuer standeth in three
degrees toward the South, hauing at the entrance of it 15.
leagues of breadth and many Islands inhabited, wherein
grow trees that beare incence of a greater bignes then in
Arabia, gold, rich stones, and one emeraud was found there
as big as the palme of a mans hand. The people of the countrey
make their drinke of a kinde of dates, which are as big
as quinces.
In the yeere 1531. one Nunnez de Gusman went from the

citie of Mexico towards the northwest to discouer and conquer
the countreies of Xalisco,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 16. Ceintiliquipac, Ciametlan, Toualla,
Cnixco, Ciamolla, Culhuacan, and other places. And to
doe this he caried with him 250. horses, and fiue hundred soldiers.
He went through the countrey of Mechuacan, where he
had much gold, ten thousand marks of siluer, and 6000. Indians
to carrie burdens.Nueua Galicia. He conquered many countreyes, called
that of Xalisco Nueua Galicia, because it is a ragged countrey,
and the people strong. He builded a citie which he called
Compostella,Compostella. and another named Guadalajara, because he
was borne in the citie of Guadalajara in Spaine.Guadalaira. He likewise
builded the townes de Santo Espirito,Santo Espirito. de la Conception,De la conception. and
de San Miguel standing in 24. degrees of northerly latitude.San Miguel.
In the yeere 1532. Ferdinando Cortes sent one Diego
Hurtado de Mendoca vnto Acapulco 70. leagues from Mexico,
Gomara hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 74. where he had prepared a small fleete to discouer the coast
of the South sea as he had promised the Emperour. And finding
two ships readie, he went into them, and sailed to the
hauen of Xalisco, where he would haue taken in water and
wood: but Nunnez de Gusman caused him to be resisted, and
so he went forward: but some of his men mutined against
him, and he put them all into one of the ships, and sent them
backe into New Spaine. They wanted water, and going to
take some in the bay of the Vanderas, the Indians killed them.
But Diego Hurtado sailed 200. leagues along the coast, yet
did nothing woorth the writing.
In the yeere 1533. Francis Pisarro went from the citie of
Tumbes to Caxamalca,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 6. 7. 8. 9. where he tooke the king Attabalipa,
who promised for his ransome much gold and siluer: and to
accomplish it there went to the citie of Cusco standing in 17.
degrees on the South side Peter de Varco, and Ferdinando de
Sotto, who discouered that iourney being 200. leagues all
causies of stone, and bridges was made of it, and from one
iourney to another, lodgings made for the Yngas: for so they
call their kings. Their armies are very great and monstrous.
For they bring aboue an hundred thousand fighting men to
the field. They lodge vpon these causies; and haue there prouision
sufficient and necessarie, after the vse and custome of
Chi^^^, as it is said. Ferdinando Pisarro with some horsemen
went vnto Paciacama 100. leagues from Caxamalca, and

discouered that prouince: And comming backe he vnderstood
how Guascar brother to Attabalipa was by his commandement
killed,Guascar slaine. and how that his captaine Ruminaguy rose vp
in armes with the citie of Quito.Gomar. hist. gen. lib 5 cap. 11. After this Attabalipa was
by the commandement of Pisarro strangled.Attabalipa strangied.
In the yeere 1534. Francis Pisarro seeing that the two kings
were goue, began to enlarge himselfe in his signiories, and to
build cities, forts, and townes to haue them more in subiection.
Gomara historiae general. lib. 5. cap. ^8. Likewise he sent Sebastian de Banalcazar the captaine of
S. Michael of Tangarara against Ruminaguy vnto Quito. He
had with him two hundred footemen and 80. horsemen: He
went discouering and conquering 120. leagues from the one
citie to the other east not farre from the Equinoctiall line:Cruell snowe vnder the line.
where Peter Aluarado found mountaines full of snow,Gomara historiae general. lib. 5. cap. 19. and so
cold, that 70. of his men were frosen to death. When he came
vnto Quito, he began to inhabite it, and named it S. Francis.
In this countrey there is plentie of wheate, barlie, cattell and
plants of Spaine,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 16. which is very strange. Pisarro went straight
to the citie of Cusco, and found by the way the captaine Quisquiz
risen in armes, whome shortly he defeated. About this
time there came vnto him a brother of Attabalipa named
Mango, whom he made Ynga or king of the countrey. Thus
marching forward on his iourney after certaine skirmishes
he tooke that exceeding rich and wealthie citie of Culco.Casco taken.
In this same yeere 1534. a Briton called Iaques Cartier
with three ships went to the land of Corterealis, and the Bay
of Sain^ Laurence,The Bay of S. Laurence discouered. otherwise called Golfo Quadrato, and fell
in 48. degrees and an halfe towards the north; and so he sailed
till he came vnto 51. degrees hoping to haue passed that
way to China, and to bring thence drugs and other marchandise
into France. The next yeere after he made another voiage
into those partes, and found the countrey abounding with
victuailes, houses and good habitations, with many and great
riuers. He sailed in one riuer toward the southwest 300.
leagues, and named the countrey thereabout Noua Francia:
at length finding the water fresh he perceiued he could not
passe through to the South sea, and hauing wintered in those
parts, the next yeere following he returned into France.
In the yeere 1535. or in the beginning of the yeere 1536.
Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 2. cap. 74. and lib. 2. cap. 98.
Don Antonie de Mendoca came vnto the citie of Mexico as

Viceroy of New Spaine. In the meane while Cortes was
gone for more men to continue his discouerie, which immediately
he set in hand sending foorth two ships from Tecoantepec
which he had made readie. There went as captaines
in them Fernando de Grijalua, and Diego Bezerra de Mendoca,
and for pilots there went a Portugal named Acosta, and
the other Fortunio Ximenez a Biscaine. The first night they
deuided themselues. Fortunio Ximenez killed his captaine
Bezerra and hurt many of his confederacie: and then he
went on land to take water and wood in the Bay of Santa
Cruz,Plaia de Santa Cruz. but the Indians there slue him, and aboue 20. of his
companie. Two mariners which were in the boate escaped,
and went vnto Xalisco, and told Nunnes de Gusman that they
had found tokens of pearles: he went into the ship, and so
went to seeke the pearles, he discouered along the coast aboue
150. leagues. They said that Ferdinando de Grijalua sailed
three hundred leagues from Tecoantepec without seeing any
land,The Isle of S. Thomas. but onely one Island which he named The Isle of Saint
Thomas, because he came vnto it on that Saints day: it standeth
in 20. degrees of latitude.
In this yeere 1535. Pisarro builded the citie de los Reyes
vpon the riuer of Lima.Lima builded. The inhabitants of Xauxa went to
dwell there,Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. 23. because it was a better countrey, standing in 12.
degrees of southerly latitude. In this same yeere of 1535. he
caused the citie of Truxillo to be builded on a riuers side vpon
a fruitfull soile,Lib. 5. cap. 22. Truxillo. standing in 8. degrees on that side. He built
also the citie of Saint Iago in Porto Viejo:S. Iago de Porto v^ejo. besides many
others along the sea coast and within the land: where there
breede many horses, asses, mules, kine, hogs, goates, sheepe,
and other beasts; also trees and plants, but principally rosemary,
oranges, limons, citrons, and other sower fruits, vines,
wheate, barlie, and other graines, radishes and other kinde of
herbage and fruits brought out of Spaine thither to be sowne
and planted.
In the same yeere 1535. one Diego de Almagro went from
the citie of Culco to the prouinces of Arequipa and Chili,Go^ara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 24. Chili. reaching
beyond Cusco towards the South vnto 30. degrees.
This voiage was long, and he discouered much land, suffering
great hunger, cold, and other extremities, by reason of
the abundance of ice, which stoppeth the running of the riuers;

so that men and horses die in those parts of the colde.
About this time Ferdinando Pilarro came out of Spaine to the
citie de los Reyes, and brought with him the title of Marquisate
of Atanillos for his brother Francis Pisarro, and vnto Diego
de Almagro he brought the gouernment of 100. leagues ouer
and besides that which was discouered,Lib. 5. cap. 25. and named it The
New kingdome of Toledo. Ferdinando Pilarro went straight
to the citie of Cusco: and one Iohn de Rada went to Almagro
into Chili with the Emperours patents.
Diego de Almagro hauing receiued the letters patents
which the Emperour had sent him,Lib. 5. cap. 27. went straight from Chili
vnto Cusco, to haue it, seeing it did appertaine vnto him.
Which was the cause of a ciuill warre. They were mightily
oppressed with want of victuailes and other things in this
their returne, and were enforced to eate the horses, which
had died fower moneths and a halfe before, when they passed
that way.
In this same yeere 1535. Nunnez Dacun^a being gouernour
of India,The fortresse of Diu. while he was making a fortresse at the citie of
Diu, he sent a fleete to the riuer of Indus, being fro^ thence 90.
or 100. leagues towards ye north vnder the Tropicke of Cancer.
The captaines name was Vasques Perez de San Paio:
also he sent another armie against Badu the king of Cambaia,Badu king of Cambaia.
the captaine whereof was Cosesofar a renegado. They came
to the barre of that mighty riuer in the moneth of December,
of the water whereof they found such trial as Quintus Curtius
writeth of it, when Alexander came thither.
In this yeere 1535. one Simon de Alcazaua went from Siuill
with two ships and 240.Gomara hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. 13. Spaniards in them. Some say
they went to New Spaine, others that they went to Maluco,
but others also say to China; where they had beene with Ferdinando
Perez de Andrada. Howsoeuer it was, they went
first vnto the Canaries, and from thence to the streight of Magelan,
without touching at the land of Brasill or any part at
all of that coast. They entred into the streight in the moneth
of December with contrarie windes and cold weather. The
soldiers would ha^^ had him turne backe againe, but he
would not. He went into an hauen on the South side in 53.
degrees: There the captaine Simon of Alcazaua commanded
Roderigo de Isla with 60. Spanyards to goe and discouer land:

but they rose vp against him and killed him, and appointed
such captaines and officers as pleased them, and returned.
Comming thwart of Brasil they lost one of their ships vpon
the coast, and the Spanyards that escaped drowning were
eaten by the Sauages. The other ship went to Saint Iago in
Hispaniola, and from thence to Siuill in Spaine.
In this same yeere 1535.Gomara historiae general. lib. 3. cap. 39. Don Pedro de Mendoca went
from Cadiz towards the riuer of Plate with twelue ships, and
had with him two thousand men: which was the greatest
number of ships and men, that euer any captaine carried into
the Indies. He died by the way returning homewards. The
most part of his men remained in that riuer, and builded a
great towne containing now two thousand houses, wherein
great store of Indians dwell with the Spanyards. They discouered
and conquered the countrey till they came to the mines
of Potossi and to the towne La Plata,The riuer of Plata runneth vp to Potossi. which is 500. leagues
distant from them.
In the yeere 1536. Cortes vnderstanding that his ship
wherein Fortunio Ximenez was pilote was seased on by
Nunnez de Guzman,Gomara hist gen. lib. 2. cap 74 and 98 he sent foorth three ships to the place
where Guzman was, and he himselfe went by land well accompanied,
and found the ship which he sought all spoiled and
rifled. When his three other ships were come about, he went
aboord himselfe with the most part of his men and horses,
leauing for captaine of those which remained on land one
Andrew de Tapia.Saint Iago Isle. So he set saile, and comming to a point
the first day of May he called it Saint Philip, and an Island
that lieth fast by it he called Sant Iago. Within three daies
after he came into the bay where the pilot Fortunio Ximenez
was killed,La plaia de Santa Cruz. which he called La plaia de Santa Cruz, where he
went on land, and commanded Andrew de Tapia to discouer,
Cortes tooke shipping againe and came to the riuer now called
Rio de San Pedro y San Paulo,Rio de S. Pedro y San Paulo. where by a tempest the
ships were separated, one was driuen to the bay de Santa
Cruz,Guajaual Rio. another to the riuer of Guajaual, and the third was driuen
on shore hard by Xalisco, and the men thereof went by
land to Mexico.
Cortes long expected his two ships that he wanted: but
they not comming he hoised saile and entred into the Gulfe now
called Mar de Cortes,Mar Vermejo or the Gulfe of California. Mar Vermejo, or the Gulfe of California,

and shot himselfe 50. leagues within it: where he
espied a ship at anker and sailing towards her he had beene lost,
if that ship had not succored him.Gomara in the conquest of Mexico folio 290. 291. 292. But hauing graued his ship,
he departed with both the ships from thence. Hee bought
victuals at a deere rate at Saint Michael of Culhuacan; and
from thence he went to the hauen of Santa Cruz, where hee
heard that Don Antonio de Mendoca was come out of
Spaine to be Viceroy. He therefore left to be captaine of his
men one Francis de Vlloa, to send him certaine ships to discouer
that coast. While he was at Acapulco messengers came
vnto him from Don Antonio de Mendoca the Viceroy, to
certifie him of his arriuall: and also he sent him the coppie of
a letter, wherein Francis Pisarro wrote, that Mango Ynga
was risen against him, and was come to the citie of Cusco
with an hundred thousand fighting men, and that they had
killed his brother Iohn Pisarro, and aboue 400. Spaniards
and 200. horses, and he himselfe was in danger, so that he demanded
succour and aide. Cortes being informed of the state
of Pisarro, and of the arriuall of Don Antonio de Mendoca,
because he would not as yet be at obedie^ce; First he determined
to sende to Maluco to discouer that way a long vnder the
Equinoctial line, because The Islands of Cloues stand vnder
that paralele: And for that purpose he prepared 2. ships with
prouision, victuals and men, besides all other things necessarie.
He gaue the charge of one of these ships to Ferdinando de
Grijalua, and of the other vnto one Aluarado a Gentleman.
They went first to Saint Michael de Tangarara in Peru to
succour Francis Pisarro, and from thence to Maluco all along
neere the line as they were commanded. And it is declared
that they sailed aboue a thousand leagues without fight of
land, on she one side nor yet on the other of the Equinoctiall.
And in two degrees toward the north they discouered one
Island named Asea,Asea Island. which seemeth to be one of the Islands of
Cloues: 500. leagues little more or lesse as they sailed,Isla de los Pescadores. they
came to the sight of another which they named Isla de los
Pescadores. Going still in this course they sawe another
Island called Hayme towards the south,Hayme Island. and another named
Apia:Apia Island. and then they came to the fight of Seri:Seri. turning towards
the north one degree, they came to anker at another
Island named Coroa,Coroa. and from thence they came to another

vnder the liue (...) and from thence vnto Bufu
standing in the same course.(...) Bufu.
The people of all these Islands are blacke, and haue their
haire frisled,Os papuas. whom the people of Maluco do call Papuas. The
most of them eate mans flesh, and are witches, so giuen to
diuilishnes, that the diuels walk among them as co^panions.
If these wicked spirits do finde one alone, they kill him with
cruell blowes or smoother him. Therefore they vse not to goe,
but when two or three may be in a companie.These seeme to be like Ostriches. There is heere
a bird as bigge as a Crane: he flieth not, nor hath any wings
wherewith to flee, he runneth on the ground like a Deere: of
their small feathers they do make haire for their idols. There
is also an herbe, which being washed in warme water, if the
leafe thereof be laide on any member and licked with the
toong, it will draw out all the blood of a mans body: and with
this leafe they vse to let themselues blood.
From these Islands they came vnto others named the
Guelles standing one degree towards the north,Guelles Islands. east, and west
from the Isle Terenate,Terenate. wherein the Portugals haue a fortresse:
these men are haired like the people of the Malucoes.
These Islands stande 124. leagues from the Island named
Moro;Moro. and from Terenate betweene 40. and 50. From
whence they went to the Isle of Moro,Moluccae. and the Isla^ds of Cloues,
going from the one vnto the other. But the people of the countrey
would not suffer them to come on lande, saying vnto
them:Antonie Galuano, the author of this booke. Go vnto the fortresse where the captain Antonie Galuano
is, and we will receiue you with a good will: for they
would not suffer them to come on land without his licence:
for he was factor of the countrey, as they named him. A thing
woorthie to be noted, that those of the countrey were so affectioned
to the Portugals,The case now is much altered. that they would venter for them
their liues, wiues, children and goods.
In the yeere 1537. the licenciate Iohn de Vadillo gouernour
of Cartagena,Pedro de Cieca parte primera de la Cl^^onica del Peru cap 9. and cap. 107. went out with a good armie from a porte
of Vraba called Saint Sebastian de buena Vista, being in the
gulfe of Vraba, and from thence to Rio verde, and from thence
by land without knowing any way, nor yet hauing any carriages,
they went to the end of the countrey of Peru, and to
the towne La plata,La Pla^a. by the space of 1200. leagues: a thing
woorthie of memorie. For from this riuer to the mountaines

of Abibe the countrey is full of hils,The mountaines of Abibe thicke forests of trees,
and many riuers: and for lacke of a beaten way, they had
pierced sides. The mountaines of Abibe as it is recorded
haue 20. leagues in bredth. They must be passed ouer in Ianuarie,
Februarie, March, and Aprill. And from that time
forward it raineth much, and the riuers will be so greatly encreased,
that you cannot passe for them. There are in those
mountaines many heards of swine, many dantes, lyons, tygers,
beares, ounses, and great cats, and monkeis, and mightie
snakes and other such vermine. Also there be in these
mountaines abundance of partridges, quailes, turtle doues,
pigeons, and other birdes and foules of sundrie sorts. Likewise
in the riuers is such plentie of fish, that they did kill of
them with their staues: and carrying canes and nets they
affirme that a great army might be sustained that way without
being distressed for want of victuals. Moreouer they declared
the diuersities of the people, toongs, and apparell that
they obserued in the countries, kingdomes, and prouinces
which they went through, and the great trauels and dangers
that they were in till they came to the towne called Villa de
la Plata,Villa de la Plata. and vnto the sea there unto adioyning. This was the
greatest discouerie that hath beene heard of by land, and in so
short a time. And if it had not beene done in our daies, the
credite thereof would haue beene doubtfull.
In the yeere 1538. there went out of Mexico certaine friers
of the order of Saint Francis towards the north to preach
to the Indians the Catholicke faith.Ramusius 3. vol. fol. 356. He that went farthest
was one frier Marke de Nizza,Frier Marke de Nizza. who passed through Cul^acan,
Sibola. and came to the prouince of Sibola, where he found seuen
cities: and the farther he went, the richer he found the countrie
of gold, siluer, precious stones, and sheepe bearing very
fine wool. Vpon the fame of this welth the viceroy don Antonio
de Mendoca, and Cortes, determined to send a power thither.
But when they could not agree thereupon Cortes went
ouer into Spaine in the yeere 1540. where afterward he died.
In this yeere 1538. began the ciuil warre betweene Pisarro
and Alonagro, wherein at the last Alinagro was taken and
beheaded.
In the same yeere 1538. Antonie Galuano being chiefe
captaine in the isles of Maluco sent a ship towards the north,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 34.

whereof one Francis de Castro was captaine,Antonie Galuano chiefe captaine of Maluco author of this worke. hauing commandement
to conuert as many as he could to the faith. He
himselfe christened many, as the lords of the Celebes, Macasares,
Amboynos, Moros, Moratax, and diuers other places,
When Francis de Gastro arriued at the Island of Mindanao,
sixe kings receiued the water of Baptisme, with their wiues,
children and subiects: and the most of them Antonie Galuano
gaue commandement to be called by the name of Iohn, in remembrance
that king Iohn the third raigned then in Portugall.
The Portugals and Spaniards which haue beene in these
Islands affirme, that there be certaine hogs in them, which
besides the teeth which they haue in their mouthes, haue
other two growing out of their snouts, and as many behinde
their eares of a large span and an halfe in length. Likewise
they say there is a tree, the one halfe whereof, which standeth
towards the east is a good medicine against all poyson, and the
other side of the tree which standeth toward the west is very
poison; and the fruite on that side is like a bigge pease; and
there is made of it the strongest poyson that is in all the
world. Also they report that there is there another tree, the
fruite whereof whosoeuer doth eate, shall be twelue houres
besides himselfe, and when he commeth againe vnto himselfe
he shall not remember what he did in the time of his madnes.
Moreouer there are certaine crabs of the land, whereof
whosoeuer doth eate shall be a certaine space out of his wits.
Likewise the countrey people declare that there is a stone in
these Islands whereon whosoeuer sitteth shall be broken in
his bodie. It is farther to be noted, that the people of these
Islands do gild their teeth.
In the yeere 1539. Cortes sent three ships with Francis
Vlloa to discouer the coast of Coludean northward.Gomara hist gen. lib. 2. cap. 74. and. Ramusius 3. vol. fol. 339. They
vient from Acapulco,The bottome of the gulfe of California discouered. and touched at S. Iago de buqna speranca,
and entred into the gulfe that Cortes had discouered,
and sailed till they came in 32. degrees, which is almost the
farthest end of that gulfe, which place they named Ancon de
Sane Andres, because they came thither on that saints daie:
Then they came out a long the coast on the other side,California doubled. and
doubled the point of California and entred in betweene certaine
Islands and the point, and so sailed along by it, till they

came to 32. degrees,Cabo del Enganno. from whence they returned to newe
Spaine, enforced thereunto by contrarie windes and want
of victuals; hauing beene out about a yeere. Cortes according
to his account, spent 200000. ducates in these discoueries.
From Cabo del Enganno to another cape called Cabo de
Liampo in China there are 1000. or 1200. leagues sayling.The distance betweene America and China in 32. degrees is 1000 leagues Gomar. hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 17.
Cortes and his captaines discouered new Spaine, from 12.
degrees to 32. from south to the north, being 700. leagues,
finding it more warme then cold, although snow do lie vpon
certaine mountaines most part of the yeere. In new Spaine
there be many trees, flowers and fruits of diuers sorts and
profitable for many things. The principall tree is named
Metl.Metl an excellent tree. It groweth not very high nor thicke. They plant and
dresse it as we do our vines. They say it hath fortie kinde of
leaues like wouen clothes, which serue for many vses. When
they be tender they make conserues of them, paper, and a
thing like vnto flaxe: they make of it mantles, mats, shooes,
girdles, and cordage. These trees haue certaine prickles so
strong and sharpe, that they sewe with them. The roots make
fire and ashes, which ashes make excellent good lie. They
open the earth from the roote and scrape it, and the iuice
which commeth out is like a sirrupe. If you do feeth it, it will
become honie; if you purifie it it will be sugar. Also you may
make wine and vineger thereof. It beareth the Coco. The
rinde rosted and crushed vpon sores and hurts healeth and
cureth. The iuice of the tops and roots mingled with incense
are good against poyson, and the biting of a viper. For these
manifold benefits it is the most profitable tree knowne to
growe in those parts.
Also there be there certaine small birds named Vicmalim.
Their bill is small and long. They liue of the dewe, and the
iuice of flowers and roses. Their feathers be verie small and
of diuers colours. They be greatly esteemed to worke golde
with. They die or sleepe euerie yeere in the moneth of October
fitting vpon a little bough in a warme and close place:
they reuiue or wake againe in the moneth of Aprill after that
the flowers be sprung,The reuiued birds. and therefore they call them the reuiued
birds.
Likewise there be snakes in these parts, which sound as
though they had bels when they creepe. There be other which

engender at the mouth, euen as they report of the viper.
There be hogges which haue a nauell on the ridge of their
backs, which assoone as they be killed and cut out, will by
and by corrupt and stinke.
Besides these there be certaine fishes which make a noyse
like vnto hogs,Snorting fishes. and will snort, for which cause they be named
snorters.
In the yeere 1538. and 1539. after that Diego de Almagro
was beheaded,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. 35. the Marques Francis Pisarro was not idle.
For he sent straight one Peter de Baldiuia with a good companie
of men to discouer and conquere the countrey of Chili.Chili.
He was wel receiued of those of the countrey, but afterwards
they rose against him and would haue killed him by treason.
Yet for all the warre that he had with them, he discouered
much land, and the coast of the sea toward the southeast, till
he came into 40. degrees and more in latitude. While he was
in these discoueries he heard newes of a king called Leucengolma,
This might be the temple in the lake of Titicaca. which commonly brought to the field two hundred
thousand fighting men against another king his neighbour,
and that this Leucengolma had an Island, and a temple
therein with two thousand priestes:Cieca cap. 103. and that beyond them
were the Amazones, whose Queene was called Guanomilla,
that is to say, The goldeu heauen. But as yet there are none
of these things discouered. About this time Gomez de Aluarado
went to conquer the prouince of Guanuco: and Francis
de Chauez went to subdue the Conchincos, which troubled
the towne of Truxillo, and the countreyes adioyning. Peter
de Vergara went to the Bracamores, a people dwelling toward
the north from Quito. Iohn Perez de Vergara went
against the Ciaciapoians: Alfonsus de Mercadiglio went vnto
Mulubamba. Ferdinando and Gonzaluo Pisarros went to
subdue Collao, a countrey very rich in gold. Peter de Candia
went to the lower part of Collao. Peranzures also went to
conquer the said countrey. And thus the Spanyards dispersed
themselues, and conquered aboue seuen hundred leagues
of countrey in a very short space, though not without great
trauailes and losse of men.
The countreyes of Brasill and Peru stand east and west
almost 800. leagues distant. The neerest is from the Cape of
Saint Augustine vnto the hauen of Truxillo: for they stand

both almost in one parallele and latitude. And the farthest is
950. leagues, reckoning from the riuer of Peru to the streits
of Magellan, which places lie directly north and south, through
which countrey passe certaine mountaines named the Andes,
The mountaines of Andes. which diuide Brasill from the empire of the Ingas. After
this maner the mountaines of Taurus and Imaus diuide Asia
into two parts: which mountaines begin in 36. and 37. degrees
of northerly latitude at the end of the Mediterran sea
ouer against the Isles of Rhodes and Cyprus, running still
towards the East vnto the sea of China. And so likewise the
mountaines of Atlas in Africa diuide the tawnie Moores
from the blacke Moores which haue frisled haire, beginning
at mount Me^es about the desert of Barca, and running along
vnder the Tropicke of Cancer vnto the Atlanticke Ocean.
The mountains of the Andes be high, ragged, and in some
places barren without trees or grasse, whereon it raineth and
snoweth most commonly. Vpon them are windes and sudden
blastes; there is likewise such scarcitie of wood, that they
make fire of turffes,Earth of diuers colours good to dy withall. as they do in Flanders. In some places
of these mountaines and countries the earth is of diuers
colours, as blacke, white, red, greene, blew, yellow, and violet,
wherewith they die colours without any other mixture.
From the bottomes of these mountaines spring many small
and great riuers, principally from the east side, as appeereth
by the riuers of the Amazones, of S. Francis, of Plata, and many
others which runne through the countrey of Brasil, being
larger then those of Peru, or those of Castilia del oro. There
grow on these mountaines many turneps, rapes, and other
such like rootes and herbes. One there is like vnto Aipo or
Rue which beareth a yellow flower, and healeth all kinde of
rotten sores, and if you apply it vnto whole and cleane flesh it
will eate it vnto the bone: so that it is good for the vnsound
and naught for the whole.
They say there be in these mountains tigers, lions, beares,
woolues, wilde cats, foxes, Dantes, Ounces, hogs and deere:
birdes as well rauenous as others, and the most part of them
are blacke, as vnder the North both beasts and birdes be white.
Also there be great and terrible snakes which destroied a whole
armie of the Ingas passing that way, yet they say that an olde
woman did inchant them in such sort that they became so

gentle, that a man might sit vpon one of them. The countrey
of Peru adioining vnto the mountaines of Andes westward
toward the sea, and containing 15. or 20. leagues in bredth is
all of very hot sand, yet fresh, bringing foorth many good trees
and fruites because it is well watered: where there growe
abundance of flags, rushes, herbes, and trees so slender and
loose, that laying your hands vpon them the leaues will fall
off. And among these herbes and fresh flowers the men and
women liue and abide without any houses or bedding, euen
as the cattell doe in the fields: and some of them haue tailes.
They be grosse, and weare long haire. They haue no beards,
yet haue they diuers languages.
Those which liue on the tops of these mountains of Andes
betweene the cold and the heate for the most part be blinde of
one eie, and some altogether blinde, and scarce you shall finde
two men of them together, but one of them is halfe blinde.
Also there groweth in these fields, notwithstanding the great
heate of the sand good Maiz, and Potatos, and an herbe which
they name Coca, which they carrie continually in their
mouthes (as in the East India they vse another herbe named
Betele) which also (they say) satisfieth both hunger and thirst.An herbe named Coca which satisfieth hunger and thirst.
Also there are other kindes of graines and rootes whereon
they feede. Moreouer there is plentie of wheate, barly, millet,
vines, and fruitful trees, which are brought out of Spaine and
planted there. For all these things prooue well in this countrey,
because it is so commodiously watered.
Also they sow much cotton wooll, which of nature is white,
red, blacke, greene, yellow, orange tawnie, and of diuers other
colours.
Likewise they affirme, that from Tumbez southward it
doth neither raine, thunder, nor lighten, for the space of fiue
hundred leagues of land: but at some times there falleth some
little shower. Also it is reported, that from Tumbez to Chili
there breede no peacocks, hennes, cocks, nor eagles, falcons,
haukes, kites, nor any other kinde of rauening fowles, and
yet there are of them in all other regions and countreies: but
there are many duckes; geese, herous, pigeons, partriges,
quailes, and many other kindes of birdes. There are also a
certaine kinde of fowle like vnto a ducke which hath no
wings to flie withall, but it hath fine thinne feathers which

all the body. Likewise there are bitters that make war
with the seale or sea wolfe: for finding them out of the water
they will labour to picke out their eies, that they may not see
to get to the water againe, and then they doe kill them. They
say it is a pleasant sight to behold the fight betweene the said
bitters and seales. With the beards of these seales men make
cleane their teeth, because they be wholesome for the toothach.
There are certaine beastes which those of the countrey call
Xacos,Xacos a kinde of great sheepe that men ride vpon. and the Spanyards sheepe because they beare wooll like
vnto a sheepe, but are made much like vnto a deere, hauing a
a saddle backe like vnto a camell. They will carrie the burteen
of 100. weight. The Spanyards ride vpon them, and
when they be wearie they will turne their heads backward,
and void out of their mouthes a woonderful stinking water.
From the riuer of Plata and Lima southward there breede
no crocodiles nor lizards, no snakes, nor any kinde of vene
mous vermine, but great store of good fishes breede in those
riuers. On the coast of Saint Michael in The South sea there
are many rocks of salt couered with egges. On the point of
Saint Helena are certaine Well springs which cast foorth a
liquor, that serueth in stead of pitch and tarre. They say that
in Chili there is a fountaine, the water whereof will conuert
wood into stone. In the hauen of Truxillo there is a lake of
fresh water, and the bottome thereof is of good hard salt. In
the Andes beyond Xauxa there is a riuer of fresh water, in the
bottome whereof there lieth white salt. Also they affirme by
the report of those of the countrey, that there haue dwelt giants
in Peru, of whose statures they found in Porto viejo, and
in the hauen of Truxillo, bones and iawes with teeth, which
were three and fower fingers long.
In the yeere 1540. the captaine Ferdinando Alorchon
went by the commandement of the Viceroy Don Antonio de
Mendoca with two ships to discouer the bottome of the gulfe
of California,Ramusius 3 vol. fol. 303. and diuers other countries.
In this yeere 1540. Gonsaluo Pisarro went out of the citie
of Quito to discouer the countrey of Canell or Cinamome, a
thing of great fame in that countrey. He had with him two
hundred Spanyards horsemen and footemen, and three hundred
Indians to carrie burthens.Gomara hist. gen. lib. 5. cap. (...). He went forward til he came
to Guixos, which is the farthest place gouerned by the Ingas:

where there happened a great earthquake with raine and
lightning, which sunke 70. houses. They passed ouer cold and
snowie hils, where they found many Indians frozen to death,
maruelling much of the great snowe that they found vnder
the Equinoctiall line. From hence they went to a prouince
called Cumaco,Cumaco. where they tarried two monethes because it
rained continually. And beyond they sawe the Cinamome-trees,
Cinamom trees which be very great, the leaues thereof resembling bay
leeues, both leaues, branches, rootes, and all tasting of Cinamome.
The rootes haue the whole taste of Cinamome. But
the best are certaine knops like vnto Alcornoques or acornes,
which are good marchandise.Wild. Cinamom in the Islands of Iaua. It appeereth to be wilde Cinamome,
and there is much of it in the East Indies, and in the
Islands of Iaoa or Iaua.
From hence they went to the prouince and citie of Coca,Coca.
where they rested fifty daies. From that place forwards they
trauailed along by a riuers side being 60. leagues long, without
finding of any bridge, nor yet any foorde to passe ouer to
the other side. They found one place of this riuer, where it
had a fall of 200. fathoms deepe,El pongo. a mighty fall of a riuer. where the water made
such a noise, that it would make a man almost deafe to stand
by it. And not far beneath this fall, they say they found a chanell
of stone very smooth, of two hundred foote broad, and the
riuer runneth by: and there they made a bridge to passe ouer
on the other side,Guema. where they went to a countrey called Guema,
which was so poore, that they could get nothing to eate
but onely fruits and herbes. From that place forward they
found a people of some reason, wearing certaine clothing
made of cotton wooll, where they made a brigandine, and there
they found also certaine Canoas, wherein they put their sicke
men, and their treasure and best apparell, giuing the charge
of them to one Francis de Orellana: and Gonsaluo Pizarro
went by land with the rest of the companie along by the riuers
side, and at night went into the boates, and they trauailed
in this order two hundred leagues as it appeereth. When
Pizarro came to the place where he thought to finde the brigandine
and Canoas, and could haue no sight of them nor yet
heare of them, he thought himselfe out of all hope, because he
was in a strange countrey without victuales, clothing, or any
thing else: wherefore they were faine to eate their horses,

yea and dogs also, because the countrey was poore and barren,
and the iourney long, to goe to Quito. Yet notwithstanding
taking a good hart to themselues they went on forwards
in their iourney, trauailing continually 18. monethes
and it is reported, that they went almost 5. hundred leagues,
wherein they did neither see sunne nor any thing else whereby
they might be comforted, wherefore of two hundred men
which went foorth at the first, there returned not backe past
ten vnto Quito, and these so weake, ragged, and disfigured
that they knew them not. Orellana went fiue hundred or sixe
hundred leagues downe the riuer, seeing diuers countreyes
and people on both sides thereof, among whom he affirmed
some to be Amazones. He came into Castile, excusing himselfe,
that the water and streames draue him downe perforce.
This riuer is named The riuer of Orellana,Rio de Orellana. and other name it
the riuer of the Amazones, because there be women there
which liue like vnto them.
In the yeere 1540. Cortes went with his wife into Spaine
where he died of a disease seuen yeeres after.
In the yeere 1541. it is recorded that Don Stephan de Gama
gouernour of India sailed toward the streit of Mecca. He
came with al his fleete vnto an anker in the Island of Macua,Macua.
and from thence vpwards in small shipping he went along
the coast of the Abassins and Ethiopia, till he came to the
Island of Suachen,Suachen. standing in 20. degrees towardes the
north,Cossir. and from thence to the hauen of Cos^ir, standing in 27.
degrees,Toro. and so he crossed ouer to the citie of Toro standing on
the shore of Arabia,Suez. and along by it he went vnto Suez, which
is the farthest ende of the streit, and so he turned backe the
same way, leauing that countrey and coast discouered so far
as neuer any other Portugall captaine had done, although
Lopez Suarez gouernour of India went to the hauen of Iuda,
and the hauen of Mecca standing on the coast of Arabia in 23.
degrees of latitude, and 150. leagues from the mouth of the
streit. Don Stephan de Gama crossing ouer from Cos^ir to
the citie of Toro,An Island of brimstone in the Red sea. as it is reported found an Island of Brimstone,
which was dispeopled by the hand of Mahumet, wherein
many crabs doe breede, which increase nature: wherefore
they be greatly esteemed of such as are vnchaste. Also
they say that there are in this streit many roses which open

when women are in their labour.
Iohn Leo writeth in the very end of his Geographie which
he made of Africa, that there is in the mountaines of Atlas a
roote called Surnag, ouer which if a maid chance to make water
shee shall leese her virginitie.
In the same yeere 1541. Don Diego de Almagro killed the
Marques Francis Pizarro, and his brother Francis Martinez
of Alcantara in the citie de los Reyes, otherwise called Lima,
and made himselfe gouernour of that countrey.
In the yeere 1540. the Viceroy Don Antony de Mendoza
sent one Francis Vasquez de Coronado by land vnto the prouince
of Sibola with an armie of Spaniards and Indians.Gomara hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 17.
They went out of Mexico,Sibola. and came to Culuacan, and from
thence to Sibola, which standeth in 30. degrees of latitude.
They required peace with the people and some victuals,
being thereof destitute. But they answered that they vsed
not to giue any thing to those that came vnto them in warlike
manner. So the Spaniards assalted the towne and tooke
it, and called it Nueua Granada, because the generall himselfe
was borne in Granada. The soldiers found themselues deceiued
by the words of the Friers, which had beene in those
parts before; and because they woulde not returne backe to
Mexico againe with emptie hands, they went to the towne
of Acuco,Acuco. where they had knowledge of Axa and Quiuira,
where there was a king very rich, that did worship a crosse
of golde, and the picture of the queene of Heauen. They indured
many extremities in this iourney, and the Indians fled
away from them, and in one morning they found thirtie of
their horses dead.Circuie. From Cicuie they went to Quiuira, which
was two hundred leagues off,Quiuira. according to their account,
passing all through a plaine countrey, and making by the
way certaine hillocks of cowe dung, because thereby they
might not loose their way in their returne. They had there
haile-stones as bigge as Oranges. Now when they were
come to Quiuira, they found the king called Tatarrax, which
they sought for, with a iewell of copper hanging about his
necke, which was all his riches. They saw neither any crosse,
nor any image of the queene of Heauen, nor any other token
of Christian religion.Gomara hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 18. and 19. It is written of this countrey that it is
but smally inhabited, principally in the plaine and champion

places, because the men and women goe in herds with their
cattell, whereof they haue great plentie, euen as the Arabians
do in Barbarie, and they remooue from place to place, euen as
the season serueth,Sheepe as big as horses. and the pastures to feede their cattle. In
these parts are certaine beasts almost as bigge as horses,
they haue very great hornes, and they beare wooll like vnto
sheepe, and so the Spaniards call them. They haue abundance
of oxen verie monstrous, being camel-backed, and hauing
long beards, and on their necke long manes like vnto horses.
They liue with eating of these oxen and drinking of their
blood, and apparell themselues with the skins of the same.
The most part of the flesh that they do eate is rawe, or euill
rosted, for they lacke pots to seeth it in. They cut their meat
with certaine kniues made of flint stone. Their fruite are
damsons, hasel-nuts, walnuts, melons, grapes, pines, and
mulberies.Dogs carying 50. pound waight on their backs. There be dogges so bigge, that one of them alone
will hold a bull, though he be neuer so wilde. When they remooue,
these dogs do carrie their children, wiues, and stuffe
vpon their backes, and they are able to carrie fiftie pound
waight. I passe ouer many things, because the order which
I follow will not permit me to be long.
In the yeere of our Lord 1542. one Diego de Freitas being
in the realme of Siam, and in citie of Dodra as captaine of a
ship, there fled from him three Portugals in a Iunco (which is
a kind of ship) towards China. Their names were Antony
de Mota, Francis Zeimoro, and Antony Pexoto, directing
their course to the citie of Liampo, standing in 30. and odde
degrees of latitude. There fell vpon their sterne such a storme,
that it set them off the land, and in fewe daies they sawe an
Island towards the east standing in 32. degrees, which they
do name Iapan,Iapan discouered by chance. which seemeth to be the Isle of Zipangri,
whereof Paulus Venetus maketh mention, and of the riches
thereof. And this Island of Iapan hath gold, siluer, and other
riches.
In this yeere 1542. Don Antonio de Mendoca Viceroy of
Nueua Spagna, sent his captaines and pilots to discouer the
coast of Cape del Enganno, where a fleete of Cortez had been
before. They sailed till they came to a place called Sierras Neuadas,
or The snowie mountaines, standing in 40. degrees
toward the north, where they saw ships with merchandises,

which carried on (...) the images of certaine birdes
called Alcatra^zi, and had the yards of their sailes gilded, and
their prowesse laid ouer with siluer.Gomara hist. gen. lib. 6. cap. 18. They seemed to be of the
Isles of Iapan, or of China; for they said that it was not aboue
thirtie daies sailing vnto their countrey.
In the same yeere 1542. Don Antony de Mendoca sent vnto
the Islands of Mindanao a fleete of sixe ships with fower
hundred soldiers,Gomara hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. 13. and as many Indians of the countrey, the
generall whereof was one Rui Lopez de villa Lobos,Ramusius 1. vol. fol. 375. pag. 1. being
his brother in law and a man in great estimation. They set
saile from the hauen of Natiuidad standing in 20. degrees towards
the north, vpon All Saints eeue, and shaped their course
towards the west.Saint Thomas. They had sight of the Island of S. Thomas,
which Hernando de Grijalua had discouered, and beyond in
17. degrees they had sight of another Island which they named
La Nublada,La Nublada. that is, The cloudie Island. From thence
they went to another Island named Roca partida,Roca Partida. that is,
The clouen Rocke. The 3. of December they found certaine
Baxos or states of sixe or seuen fathoms deepe.Baxo^. The 15. of the
same moneth they had sight of the Islands, which Diego de
Roca, and Gomez de Sequeira, and Aluaro de Saauedra had
discouered,Los Reyes. and named them Los Reyes, because they came
vnto them on Twelfe day. And beyond them they found other
Islands in 10. degrees all standing round, and in the midst
of them they came to an anker, where they tooke fresh water
and wood.
In the same yeere 1542. Don Diego de Almagro was
slaine in Peru by the hands of one Don Vaca de Castro.
In the yeere 1543. in Ianuarie they departed from the
foresaid Islands with all the fleete, and had sight of certaine
Islands, out of which there came vnto them men in a certaine
kinde of boats, and they brought in their hands crosses,
and saluted the Spaniards in the Spanish toong saying, Buenas
dias, Matelotes, that is to say, Good morrow, companions;
whereat the Spaniards much marueiled, being then so
farre out of Spaine, to see the men of that countrey with crosses,
and to be saluted by them in the Spanish toong, and they
seemed in their behauiour to incline somewhat to our Catholique
faith. The Spaniards not knowing, that many thereabout
had beene Christened by Francis de Castro, at the commandement

of Antony Galuano, some of them named these
Islands,^he Isles of Matelates. Islas de las cruzes, and others named them Islas de
los Matelotes.
In the same yeere 1543. the first of February Rui Lopez
had sight of that noble Island Mindanao standing in 9. degrees:
Mindanao. they could not double it nor yet come to an ancre as
they would, because the christened kings and people resisted
them, hauing giuen their obedience to Antonie Galuano,
whom they had in great estimation, and there were fiue or
sixe kings that had receiued baptisme, who by no meanes
would incurre his displeasure. Rui Lopez perceiuing this, and
hauing a contrary winde, sailed along the coast to finde some
aide;Sarangam. and in 4. or 5. degrees he found a small Island which
they of the countrey call Sarangam, which they tooke perforce,
and in memory of the vizeroy who had sent them thither
they named it Antonia, where they remained a whole
yeere, in which time there fell out things worthie to be written;
but because there are more histories that intreat of the
same I leaue them, meaning to medle with the discoueries
onely.
In the same yeere 1543. and in the moneth of August the
generall Rui Lopez sent ane Bartholmew de la torre in a smal
ship into new Spaine, to acquaint the vizeroy don Antonio de
Mendoca with all things.The relation of Iohn Ga^etan in the first vol. of Ramusu^^ fol. 376. They went to the Islands of Siria,
Gaonata, Bisaia, and many others, standing in 11. and 12. degrees
towards the north, where Magellan had beene, and
Francis de Castro also, who there baptized many, and the
spaniards called the^ the Philippinas in memory of the prince
of Spaine.The Philippinas. Here they tooke victuals and wood, and hoised
sailes, they sailed for certaine daies with a fore-winde, till it
came upon the skanting, and came right vnder the tropique
of Cancer. The 25. of september they had sight of certaine Islands,
Malabrigos. which they named Malabrigos, that is to say, The euil
roads.Las dos Hermanas. Beyond them they discouered Las dos Hermanas, that
is The two sisters. And beyond them also they saw 4. islands
more,Los Volcanes. which they called los Volcanes. The second of October
they had sight of Farsana,La Farsana. beyond which there standeth an
high pointed rock, which casteth out fire at 5. places. So sayling
in 16. degrees of northerly latitude, from whence they
had come, as it seemeth wanting winde, they arriued againe

at the Islands of the Philippinas.Sixe or (...) Islands more. They had sight of 6. or 7.
Islands more, but they ankered not at them.An Archipelagus of Islands. They found also
an Archipelagus of Islands well inhabited with people, lying
in 15. or 16. degrees: the people be white, and the weomen
well proportioned, and more beautifull and better arraied
then in any other place of those parts, hauing many iewels
of gold, which was a token, that there was some of that metal
in the same countrie. Here were also barkes of 43. cubits
in length, and 2. fathomes and a halfe in bredth, and the
plankes 5. inches thicke, which barkes were rowed with
^ares. They told the Spaniards, that they vsed to saile in them
to China,Pilots for China. and that if they would go thither they should haue
pilots to conduct them, the countrie not being aboue 5. or 6.
daies sayling from thence. There came vnto them also certaine
barkes or boates handsomely decked, wherein the Master
and principall men sate on high, and vnderneath were
very blacke moores with frizled haire: and being demanded
where they had these black moores, they answered, that they
had them from certaine Islands standing fast by Sebut,
where there were many of them, a thing that the Spaniards
much maruailed at, because from thence it was aboue 300.
leagues to the places where the black people were. Therefore
it seemed, that they were not naturally borne in that climate,
but that they be in certaine places scattered ouer the
whole circuite of the world. For euen so they be in the Islands
of Nicobar and Andeman, which stand in the gulfe of Bengala,
and from thence by the space of 500. leagues we doe not
know of any blacke people. Also Vasco Nunez de Valboa
declareth that as he went to discouer The South sea, in a certaine
land named Quareca he found black people with frizled
haire, whereas there were neuer any other found either in
Noua Spagna, or in Castilia del Oro, or in Peru.
In the yeere 1544. Don Gutierre de Vargas bishop of Placenza
sent a fleet from the city of Siuil vnto the streits of Magellan:
Gomara hist. gen. lib. 4. cap. 14. which is reported to haue beene done by the counsel
of the vizeroy Don Antonie de Mendoca his cousin. Some
suspe^ed that they went to Maluco, others to China, others,
that they went onely to discouer the land betwixt the streite
and the land of Peru on the other side of Chili, because it was
reported to be very rich in gold and siluer. But this fleete by

reason of contrary windes could not passeth^ streit, yet one
small barke passed the same, and sailed along the coast, and
discouered all the land, till he came vnto Chirimai, and Arequipa,
which was aboue 500. leagues, for the rest was alreadie
discouered by Diego de Almagro, and Francis Pizarro, and
their captaines and people at diuers times. By this it appeereth,
that from The streit to the Equinoctial line on both sides
is wholy discouered.
In the yeere 1545. and in the moneth of Ianuarie Rui Lopez
de villa Lobos, and Giraldo with the Castilians came to the
Island of Moro,The Isle of Moro. and the citie of Camafo, where they were
well receiued of the kings of Gilolo and Tidore, and of the
people of the countrey (because Antony Galuano was gone)
and put the captaine Don George de Castro to great trouble,Antonie Galua^o gon out of ^he Malucas.
as appeered by those things which passed betweene him and
the Portugals, and the great expences whereunto he put the
fortresse.
In the same yeere 1545. Rui Lopez de villa Lobos sent
from the Island of Tidore another ship towards New Spaine
by the south side of the line, wherein was captaine one Inigo
Ortez de Rotha, and for pilot one Iaspar Rico. They sailed to
the coast of Os Papuas,Os Papuas. and ranged all along the same, and
because they knew not that Saauedra had beene there before,
they chalenged the honor and same of that discouerie. And because
the people there were blacke and had frisled haire,Nueua Guinea. they
named it Nueua Guinea. For the memorie of Saauedra as
then was almost lost, as all things else do fall into obliuion,
which are not recorded, and illustrated by writing.
In this yeere 1545. and in the moneth of Iune, there
went a Iunk from the citie of Borneo, wherein went a Portugall
called Peter Fidalgo, and by contrary windes he was
driuen towards the north; where he founde an Island standing
in 9. or 10. degrees, that stretched it selfe to 22. degrees of
latitude,The Isle of Lu^ones. which is called The Isle of the Lucones, because the
inhabitants thereof were so named. It may haue some other
name and harborowes, which as yet we know not: it runneth
from the north vnto the southwest, and standeth betweene
Mindanao and China. They say they sailed along by
it 250. leagues, where the land was fruitfull and well couered,
and they affirme, that there they will giue two Pezos of

gold for one of siluer:(...) gold. and yet it standeth not farre from the
countrey of China.
In the yeere 1553. there went out of England certaine
shipping, and as it appeered they sailed northward along the
coast of Norway and Finmark,Moscouie discouered by sea, by the English. and from thence east, till they
came betweene 70. and 80. degrees vnto Moscouie, for so far
one of the ships went: but I know not what became of the
rest: and this was the last discouery made vntil this time. From
this lande of Moscouie eastward you faile vnto Tartary,
and at the farther end of it standeth the countrey and prouince
of China. It is said that betweene China and Tartary
there is a wall aboue 200. leagues in length, standing neere
vnto 50. degrees of latitude.
Now I gather by all the precedent discoueries, that the
whole earth is in circuite 360. degrees according to the Geometrie
thereof: and to euery degree the ancient writers allow
17. leagues and a halfe, which amount vnto 6300. leagues
yet I take it that euerie degree is iust 17. leagues. Howsoeuer
it be, all is discouered and sailed from the east vnto the
west almost euen as the sunne compasseth it: but from the
south to the north there is great difference; for towardes the
north pole there is found discouered no more then 77. or 78.
degrees, which come to 1326. leagues: and towards the
south pole there is discouered from the Equinoctiall to 52.
or 53. degrees, that is, to the streit which Magellan passed
through, which amounteth to about 900. leagues; and putting
both these saide maine sums togither, they amount to
2226. leagues. Now take so many out of 6300. leagues,
there remaineth as yet vndiscouered north and south aboue
the space of 4000. leagues.
FINIS.


