




All that can sing or say,
Come and heare a Iesuits play.

IN the Conclusion or appendant to my former Booke, I made
bold to acquaint my Reader with Mary Wiltshire, somtime ensnared
and cooped by a packe of Iesuites or Priests, with the
engine of personated Apparitions; as also I gaue a touch in generall of
Mris Bouchers daughter, which here according to my notice
followeth in particular.
About some three yeares since Mary Boucher alias
Butcher, daughter of Anne Boucher of the Cittie of
London widdow (and Gentlewoman of good sort) was entertained in the
service of the Lady A. a Papist. But before she went to
serue the said Lady, Mris Boucher her mother told the Lady
A. that by no meanes shee would permit her daughter to liue with
her, if shee thought shee would be diverted from her Religion, shee being
then a good Protestant. The Lady promised that neither her selfe
nor any other should haue to dowith her in that particular.
Yet there repairing often to this Ladies house Mr Fisher, Mr
Wainman, and Mr Ireland, Iesuites, they were still
busie and labouring with this Mary Boucher to become a Romish
Catholicke, telling her that shee must be damn'd if shee did not
imbrace their Religion, and as for the Protestant Religion they told
her that it was the deuils doctrine, brought in by Martin Luther, who
had conference with the devill and learnd of him every point of that beliefe
which the Protestants now retaine. For proofe hereof they shewed
her a Printed Booke wherein Luthers conference with the devill was at
large expressed. Vpon reading whereof the yong woman did seeme to
stagger, and was much perplexed. And after a while these
Iesuites came to her Mistris house againe and then began to
tamper and deale with her as before, and Mr Fisher told her that
he knew better then her selfe what would become of her. Wee are Gods
Prophets (quoth he) wee can doe Miracles, and wee are inspired with
divine Illuminations. It is revealed vnto me that you must goe beyond the
Seas, and become a Nunne, which is to liue an Angelicall life, yea it is the
most excellent of all other kindes of liuing;
A loud lewd Hyperbole.For it
obtaineth the same grace which is had in Baptisme, and the entring into
that order doth take away all sinne, both the fault and punishment, and
restoreth to the first state of Innocency as Baptisme doth. For proofe
whereof he alledged vnto her diverse sentences pretended to be taken out
of the Fathers. This young woman much amazed at him, told
him, that her Mother would never yeeld shee should become a
Papist, much lesse to be a Nunne and to leaue her Countrey. Mr
Fisher and Mr Wainman both replyed, You must not
respect your mother in these matters. Shee is an Hereticke, and you shall
be Gods childe, and we would advise you never to see her any more. These
things troubling and distempering the yong womans minde, she found her
selfe scarce well, and then went and layd her downe vpon her bed, where
after shee had rested her selfe a while, there comes into the chamber one
Mris Vause, a great Recusant, and asked her how shee did, and
then came to her and did with somewhat stroke or rub her forehead. After
which time Mary Boucher felt her selfe very ill at ease and
distempered in her head. And about an half-houre after Mris
Vause was departed from her, shee heard her chamber dore open, and
with that a great light flashed into the roome two or three times, which
shee thought some bodie did by way of iest or merriment, to make her
afraid. Wherevpon shee called on them not to affright her, for that shee
was not well. But forthwith came into the roome an apparitio^ or shape as of
a woman all in white, with countenance pale and wanne, with long tresses of
haire hanging downe to her middle who still made toward her; whereat this
sicke woman was much afraid. But this visible approaching nearer
to her, bad her not to feare; for that she came to her for her eternall good
and happinesse. And with that the appearing woman began
by degrees to remoue with her hand the haire from her face, and asked this
Mary whither shee knew who shee was; with that this
distressed Mary looked earnestly on her, and then cryed out,
Oh my God-mother, and would haue gotten off from her bed to haue
asked her blessing. But the other bad her lye still and not stirre.
And then touching her with a hand cold as earth or iron, asked her where is
your mother, where is my husband, where are my children? And then told her
shee was come from Purgatory, where she had long endured torture
and torment. And shee came to tell her how shee her God-daughter should
escape the same. And then began to question with her, what Religion
shee was of: Mary Boucher told her, I am a Protestant. Oh
then quoth this Preaching goodly ghost, thou hast no hope at all euer to
see heaven. Then it asked her againe, how many Sacraments there were. Shee
answered, two.
A Cathechizing Ghost.Nay quoth the
Ghost, thou art deceived there are seaven. Then it asked her the third
time, whether shee did beleeue the point of Transubstantiation.
Shee answered, No. God-daughter quoth the Ghost, thou must beleeue that
especially; For, for not beleeving that point, there is daily many hundreds
that are damned. And in this manner did this familiar informing, conferring
Ghost continue for the space of an houre or two questioning with Mary
Boucher, who lay in great heate and agony, sweating and quaking vpon her
bed, no body all this while commingneare and disturbing
them, which shee saith makes her since the rather beleeue it was a plot
devised and practised by the Priests, with the consent of her
Mistris: For in this Chamber where shee lay, there did vse every
quarter-houre of the day to be some one or other comming in and out, being
the chamber where the children and Maid-servants lay, and had often
occasion thither. When this Ghost had so long conferred with her, and was
taking her leaue, it willed her in this maner. By all meanes see that you
tell my children what you haue seene, and how their Mother appeared vnto you,
and what counsell she hath given you. And then it vanished away.Exit Ghost.
Shortly after the vanishing of this vision, there comes into
Mary Bouchers chamber Mris Vause, and asked her how
shee fared. Shee answered her not well, but told her what had happened. Oh
then quoth Mris Vause, It is time for thee to become a good
Catholike; For assure thy selfe it was a speciall favour and
mercy of God that thou shouldest haue such a warning. And so giving her
more instructions to this purpose, went away.Exit
Vause. Intrat Godmother. Nimble Actors know their Q.
And then appeared againe the Ghost and spake to her in this manner.
God-daughter thou maist thinke I loue thee well to come thus to thee and tell
thee what thou must doe to be saved, and not rather to haue spoken to one
of my owne children. But I consider that thou art ordained for an
extraordinary end, to be a Nunne, which is the happiest life of all other.
For they that so liue are Saints vpon earth. The vow that is made by
 those who enter into that order deserveth the plenary
remission of all sinnes, and Iustification before God.
Iustification. Will the
Iesuites iustifie this for ghostly doctrine? A bold Ghost
alluding to S. Pauls instruction by Ananias. Act.
22. And therefore God-daughter if any holy man perswade thee to that
course of life, accept of it, and I would haue thee to repaire vnto one Mr
Ireland a Priest, and he will direct thee in this course.
Whatsoever he biddeth thee to doe, refuse it not. And so the Ghost
vanished the second time. And in the whole appeared vnto her aboue a dozen
times, which so amazed her, that shee was not her selfe a long time
after.
Though this vision was privately Acted, yet the noise of it
was bruted abroad and came to the eare of Mris Boucher the Mother,
who therevpon came to the house of her Mistris to speake with her
daughter, but being forsooth an Hereticke might not be admitted after long
waiting to question with her owne child about this strange newes. Nay the
daughter her selfe vpon fresh apprehension hereof was perswaded by
those in the house to estrange her selfe toward her owne mother, who
notwithstanding pressing on, did at length speake with her Mistris
the Lady of the house, and in her daughters presence vpbrayded them with
these Collusions, and telling the Lady that shee thought her to be of
better vnderstanding then to put any beliefe in such devices, adding
moreover, that it was great wrong to the dead Lady to be thus acted as being in
Purgatory; when as she was a woman so vertuous and religious,
that it is not to be doubted but that shee is in heaven. And though vsing
great importunitieto haue her daughter home, shee could
not obtaine it, wherevpon shee vsed further meanes by complaining vnto
some in high place and authoritie, for the rescuing of her child out of
the possession of those who had thus deluded her: But vsing all the
helpes shee could, it was more than halfe a yeare ere shee could get her
daughter home to her. And within a weeke after her daughters being with her,
some of these ghostly Fathers that sent this ghost to her, did by the
conveiance of a private Letter call her off againe, so that she made an
escape from her Mother and flew the second time to their lure. And to
prevent her Mothers recovering of her againe, they determined to set her
packing beyond the Seas, there to be Nunnified. To which end they scratcht vp
by their Catholicke-hookes the sum of threescore pounds to line
this new Nunne. This comming to her Mothers notice, whetted her endeavours to
regaine her childe, and accordingly shee spake to some who shee knew
had interest in those that robd her of her daughter, threatning that shee
would complaine to the Highest, and declare their deceitfull lewd
courses. This sharpe ingredient wrought so well, that the voyage was
stayed and her daughter restored. Who since being in her Mothers tuition
and receiving due instruction, hath by Gods blessing pulled her Foote
out of the Snare, well seeing and leaving the vanitie of
Popery. Shee is now married and dwelleth neare
Bainards-Castle in London, where of late I visited her to
informemy selfe the better of the truth of these
particulars. And within these very few dayes shee being demanded in my
hearing, what meanes shee thinketh to haue beene vsed to make those
apparitions to her, and disquiets in her, shee saith; Shee thinketh in
her conscience some of those things could not be done without Witchcraft,
or some strange helpe by the devill.
The particulars of this apparition are
incntioned in my former Booke.In which opinion I must needs say
shee doth concurre with Mary Wiltshire, who not long since in my
hearing repeated such apparitio^s made to her to the same end, did with
great asseverance expresse that shee verily thinketh that they who
made the apparition of the Virgin Mary, dealt by Sorcery or such
indirect devilish meanes.
I doubt I shall now sure vndergoe the Ferula of our
grand pedanticke Masters the Iesuites, for telling so many tales
out of the schoole: which their Anger will be the more implacable, because
they know my informations to be good, my relations to be warrantable, and the
very circumstances of them to trench vpon the reputation of those who
would be thought so wise and vncontrouleable, that they deserue to hold
the whole Christian world in pupillage and pillage. But for my part I must
spare them never a whit the more. The necessitie of any dutie
ouercommeth the weight of their menaces. As he that hath beene incited to hold
out a Castle mutinously against the lawfull owners and gouernors
thereof, when he seeth his fault and hath slipped away from his fellow
Mutiners, is in duty boundnot to favour those his
quondam-Mates, but rather for the better demonstration of his
alleagiance, is to discover what he can the practises of their
combination, and to lead others on to the battery of that hold in such places
where he by experience knowes it to lye weake and best assaileable: So I
am so farre from repenting of the former declarations made by me, out of
conscience and truth against those that possesse many a secret
hold in the Territories of his Maiesties Dominions, seasing vpon the
hearts and houses of many, and captivating them within a combination, in
opposition against our Religion established, and discontent
against the course of our civill estate and Lawes; that I cannot but goe
on in vsing my best memory to recollect what I knew, and meanes to inquire
what formerly I knew not, that might conduce to the further display of their
practises. I confesse I speake stones, and lay inke and gall on their
tettars. But, Dicatur veritas, rumpatur invidia; Let the Truth be
spread, and their Envy burst it Gall.



@ The second Comodie of a Female Apparition,
acted by the thrice honourable Company of Iesuites, Players to the
Popes Holines.
Iesuites are in at all
games.ABout August last 1623. Mr Fisher and
Mr Wainman, Iesuits, came to a Romish Recusants
house in Surrey, where soiourned a young Gentlewoman, one Mris
Francis Peard, whose parents being dead, shee had her portion of
goods in her own hands, which portion (as I am credibly informed) was aboue a
thousand pounds. Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman laboured
to perswade this Gentlewoman to become a Romish Catholicke, and at
length prevailed and perverted her; which done Mr Fisher and Mr
Wainman began to consider how they might worke her out of her
moneys, which being so round a summe, they laboured to get this fat Fish
into their Nett.
A Mountebankes
Oration.Master Wainman begins here to Act his part, and
first comes to her by himselfe and saith; Oh Mistris Francis, what
a glorious sight did I behold the last night. At midnight being in my bed I
lay awake and began to say over my Breviary,The
Breviary is attractiue of Virgins in the night as well as in
the day. which I had no sooner done, but there appeared vnto me a
beautifull Virgin like your selfe, all in white, glittering like
an Angell, and said vnto me, Behold I am such a one,
whom you being my ghostly Father perswaded to become a Nunne, and now I
appeare to giue you thanks. For since my departure out of this world, I
raigne in glory with the Virgin Mary. All the tongues in the world
cannot expresse that which I now possesse. There is a Gentlewoman
you lately perswaded to become a Catholicke, Mris Francis Peard:
Oh perswade her to the same life that I led in the heavenly
Monasterie at Bruxells: Shee will without doubt be a good
Saint.
Oh thrice blessed
Iesuite.This visible having thus spoken vnto Mr
Wainman, It gaue him (as he said) three Benedictions and
vanished away.
Mr Wainman the Precursor
vnto Fisher to beat game into his Nett.After the narration of
this vision made to Mris Peard, Mr Wainman
began to exhort her to Nunship, and vsed diverse Arguments for
the alluring her to such course of liuing. And so left the Gentlewoman
for that time, who as yet was vnresolved what to doe. The weeke following
Mr Fisher perswaded this Gentlewoman to come to London,
and appointed her to lodge in a Popish house in Drury
lane, and told her shee should there heare a very excellent
Sermon. According to his direction shee came to the appointed
house in London, and the day following heard a Sermon preached by a
Iesuite, whose name shee could not learne; but his Text was
taken out of 1 Cor. 7. And for Virgins a Commandement of our Lord
I haue not, but Counsell I giue* as having obteined mercy of our Lord to
be faithfull etc.
In which Sermon he tooke occasion to handle the point of
Vowes, and said, that to vow Chastitieand to liue vnmarried, was an Angelicall life vpon earth, resembling
the state of the blessed in heaven, where they
Math. 22.neither marry nor be
married, but are as the Angels of God in heaven. And spake particularly
of Nunnes, that as they sing in Gods quire here vpon earth, so
they shall sing a song of ioy in heaven which none can sing but they;
and shall be crowned with a speciall Crowne of glory, which none can weare
but they.
This Sermon much inflamed the Gentlewoman with zeale to become
a Nunne: which Mr Fisher well perceived. And the night
following after this Gentlewoman had beene in her bed some houre or two,
there seemed to be a great light in her Chamber, which at the first
beholding thereof astonished her, and then presently after appeared vnto
her, a shape like vnto a woman all in white: from her face seemed to come
little streames of fire, or glittering light. This Woman-shape
first bad her not be afraid, for shee came to her with a message from
heaven, and said her name was St Lucy, who being borne of honorable
Parents, and of a great Familie, had great riches left vnto her by her friends;

The fruitfull vsefull part of a ghostly
Sermon is in the Application.which riches fearing least they should
be an hinderance to her in the processe of godlinesse, she bestowed
all vpon the poore and liued a Monasticall life, by meanes whereof shee is
now one of the most glorious Saints in heaven. And then said this crafty
vision to the Gentlewoman, Doe you also dispose of those
worldly things that you haue to the poore, and toward religious Vses, and goe
your wayes and liue a religious life amongst the good
company of Virgins at Bruxells, and so shall you be
sure to be saved, and freed from the fire of Purgatory, which
otherwise you cannot escape. And so this vision left her.
Cogging were la^e, if dubbing did not follow.The next morning
came to visit her Mr Fisher and Mr Wainman, to whom
shee presently began to relate what shee had seene that night, and that
St Lucy had appeared to her and talked with her.
The poore Protestant Heretickes haue no
such sweet visions.Oh what a happy woman are you quoth
Mr Fisher. You may see what it is to be a Catholicke
and to be of our Church. Thus doth God worke his Miracles amongst vs daily,
and by such visions doth God commonly reveale himselfe vnto vs.
What will you now doe then, said Mr Wainman? Will you not become a
Nunne? Yes forsooth, said the Gentlewoman, I will be advised by
you. So then they wished her to get her moneys ready, and one of them would
be her Conductor to Bruxells. But, quoth Mr Wainman, you had
best giue an hundred pounds presently to poore Catholickes in
thankfulnes for St Lucyes good will towards you.The fine wch St Lucyes Tenants pay at entrance, an hundred pounds. Yea, said Mr Fisher, that indeed will be a worke
meritorious. Then said Mr Wainman, You had best put it into our
hands, and wee will distribute it where we find most fit.Quisque sibi proximus. He is an ill
Cooke that licks not his ovvne fingers.  To all this the
innocent Gentlewoman with little repine yeelded, and within few dayes after
delivered them an hundred pounds. Shortly after they came to her and told her,
that they must haue an hundred pounds more to send over to the Nunnery
before her,Hard Landlords that exact a second fine. Why
should they not be sued in Court of equitie to restore it? to
make provision of some necesseriesagainst her
comming. The which hundred pounds they likewise tugged out of her hands; and
for the space of a quarter of a yeare, these two
Master-Iesuites, like two cunning old Gray-hounds that could well
serue one anothers turne for the catching the poore hare, with some other
Iourney-men of their trade, made great labour to and fro this Gentlewoman, and
every one of them began to plucke a feather from the plume of her estate.
Shee seeing and plainly perceiving that they made Religion a
stalking horse to intend their owne profit, began to take consideration
thereof, and to meditate on their practising, assuring her selfe that
they aymed at nothing more than to cheate her of her moneys and goods.
Experience deare bought. And
seriously weighing the particulars of the apparition presented to her
in Drury lane, shee concluded it must needs be some iugling
tricke devised by those Masters, and assisted by some in the
house. In briefe, shee resolved to shake off her gracious grand-Fathers
the Priests and Iesuites, and so to bid her new Guest
the Roman Religion farewell.
By the like Pageant or tricke of legerdemaine was Elizabeth
Powell of Holborne within this tweluemoneth befopped with
Visions and Revelations, and perswaded to become a Nunne, whom of
late the Priests haue packed over to some Monastery,
giving her belike not so long a time of deliberation to bethinke her selfe;
or rather her ghostly Father Mr Musket is a man somwhat
nimbler than his Copes-mates. He was the Master-gamster
(as I haue heard) who fetcht over this said Elizabeth Powell, but
in what manner he played his part vpon the Stage, I cannot yet learne.
As concerning their other Imposture and Cosenage of Mris
Peard, I see no reason but that these Iesuites
should be sued; First vpon an Action of Account, how they haue
disposed these summes, being committed to them in trust, and limited
to others vses. Nor would I be the Advocate for them if they were sued in
the Starre-chamber for Subornation, lewd practise and
Cosenage, having entred into such a combination, and executed the
same by such cheating, shuffling, and Comicall an Engine. I haue heard
that in that high Court within these three yeares some combining cheating
Companions, haue beene questioned for stripping a simple credulous man
out of his revennues, by setting vp one of their company in a Taverne to Act
a Commanding part over the rest of that good fellowship, who by their
device should haue such authoritie, that none of the rest might disobey
whatsoever he imposed on them.
Mr K^a: befooled.This Commander they stiled by
the mightie name of Captaine Gogge, who vpon pretence of this power,
made one of his silly Companions to set his hand to a writing there
brought, which proued a Release of right in certaine Lands, which for ought I
heare could neuer be recouered againe. But the Iesuites devices are
more refined* this onely by the spirit of liquor and bond
of roaring good fellowshippe, but theirs by pretended
divine inspirations, visible messengers, and audible messages from
heaven. And what perswasiue power is there betweene the blustring
Commands of any Gog or Magog in comparison of the sweet
insinuations of a Virgin-Saint, imitating in some sort the
Angell Gabriell in speaking to a Virgin and comforming her selfe
to her own name in the manner of her apparition, flashing out rayes or beames
of light. O Luciam lucidissimam, or rather O luculentam
fraudem, O lutulentum scelus! A bold, palpable, dirtie Imposture. And
if wee consider this kinde of knauery in the highest pitch of it, me
thinkes these lewd pagenteeres should be questioned also in some
Ecclesiasticall Court for Prophanation of heaven and
holy things, making them by such devices little better than Theatricall and
fabulous tricks to get money and inescate poore deceived soules. I know not
whither any of our Bishops Courts, or high Commission doe
take cognisance of such kind of abuses, but if they doe, those holy,
heauenly, Virginall, Monasticall, fantasticall, sophisticall Contrivers
and Actors will cut out worke for them to spend some time in censure.
But now I bethinke my selfe how deeply I am mistaken, I had
forgotten that the superexcellent, transcendent, exorbitant order of the
Iesuites, is not subiect to any but their owne seraphicall
Superiours. What talke you of our Courts of Iustice in England? They
haue no more power over these exempts, than the King of Kallecut
hath over the Virginian Toma-Coma. All
Romish Priests forsooth are exempt from secular hands, and
Iesuites Exemptissimi from the secular Priests. The
Consistories of our Bishops can doe no Acts but nullities against any
of these; For every thing they doe is voyd ipso facto, quia per non
Iudicem. Ours are not Ecclesiasticall Iudges, nor haue any
Iurisdiction, because not derived from the Well-head at Rome, nor
imparted by him who hath the keyes of all Church-lockes at his girdle, and
setting his hands by his side brauely sayes, Data est mihi omnis
potestas in Coelo and in terra. All power is given to me in heaven and in
earth.
But now for manner of cleanly conveyance of this
businesse, nay, in these manifold Pageants of heavenly
visibles, I haue thought with my selfe diverse times to what
kind of operation I should referre it. Somewhat I thinke may be done this way
by Paper Lanthornes or transparent Glasses to eradiate and redouble
light, and cast out painted shapes by multiplication of the species
visibiles, and artificiall directing of refractions. And for the
Actor that puts life into this mimicall Artillery by motion and voice,
that may be done by some nimble handed and footed Nouice Iesuitable
Boy, that can as easily put on the person of St Lucy, or
The virgin Mary, as a Play-boy can act winged Mercury, or
Eagle mounted Ganimedes.
But the Iesuites being or having Actors of
such dexteritie, I see no reason but that they should set vp a
company for themselues, which surely will put down The Fortune,
Red-Bull, Cock-pit, and Globe.Onely three exceptions
some make against them which perhaps may make their Customers after a
while some what coole and thinly to frequent them.
1 Tautologie.It
seemes by want of varietie the Poet is drawne dry.One is,
that the plots of their Comedies twang all vpon one string, apparitions of
the same kind, their Actors having little or no varietie of disguise. In
all these three or foure Playes, none comes in Acting but A Woman, A
Woman, A Woman, arrayed in white, white, white.
I am so charitable to plead for them
without a Fee.But I answer for them; That perhaps may be excused,
because the spectators are women, and so shee likely to consort
best with her owne sexe. Neither haue they much varietie of apparell. One
white robe and no other habit in three severall Playes. White from
Heaven, and white from Purgatory. I will be so kinde as to
answer for them in case of Tautologie, or want of varietie, with
that advice which was once giuen to an Orator, who being to make an
Oration before a curious Auditory, and belabouring his memory with often
co^ning it by heart, at length loathed his owne worke by often hearing it, and
therefore distrusted the Auditories acceptation; Whereto his Friend made
answer; Though you by often repeating it are weary, yet to them it will
be fresh enough, because they shall heare it but once. So though
themselues are guiltie of the dulnes of the same tricke which they act
often, yet their comfort is, that it is represented but to one, and so the
lesse spread, and every time of repetition tis presented to a new
spectator that never saw it before, to whom it may well be fresh and
welcome.
2.
Incongruitie.The second Obiection is Incongruitie, the
Poet seeming worthy to be quarrelled with all for devising to
send one in a white robe from the smoakie burning Kitchen of
Purgatory. The Tel-tale from that place should rather haue come in a
scorched sheete all torned to tinder. But hereto I answer for our good
Poets the Iesuites. If the sheet had beene burnt to
tinder, it would not haue hung together, and so all the device had falne in
pieces.
But stay Sir Poet, one word more concerning
the title of Incongruitie. What Decorum is it to bring from
Purgatory her that Acted God-mother, who was knowne to the
Spectatrix to haue beene a Protestant: whereas all those
that build Purgatory, doe intend it for a hot Inne for the
Roman Catholickes onely. But no Hereticke may haue the honor
to smell of those flames, but are beat downe with a Club to hell in
post-hast with out baiting by the way. Hereto I answer, that these
Actors would giue out that shee dyed a Romanist, and hope
they may pretend so, because she liued and dyed a very vertuous life:
Godlines being a proper Priviledge entailed to the
Romanists, who seeing any Ship of great burthen, (any great
learned man) passing to his Haven, giue ayme presently and say, it is
ours;
Vid. The Iesuits Cathech.
lib. 1. cap. 17. thus dealt Puteanus the
Provinciall of the Iesuits with him, who was vere
Iesuit^-mastix, religious
and renowned Mr Beza; and as cunningly or knavishly dealt
foule-mouth'd Mr Musket, and doting Doctor
Kellison, both Seculars, with the late reverend and learned
Bishop of London. But Fallitur cum
sua tota cater ua Diabolus. The deuill and all his rout were much
deceived. They dyed in a constant beliefe, perswasion, and profession
of that holy Truth of God, in defence whereof they stood both by writing
and speaking against the Church of Rome.
Now to make vp your mouth against all distast of
Incongruitie, I say the Poet kept within his Circle. For
he well knew that deepe passions, especially affright and
astonishing admiration, doe for the time bereaue and suspend exact
inquiring discourse. Well might he presume that the spectator being a
Woman would not be too full of true Syllogisme, and being
possessed with admiration of her revi^'d God-mother, would not be too busie in Theologicall
Queres, how shee was capable of that place from whence shee came to
visit her God-daughter.
3. Deare price.The third abatement of
the honor and continuance of this Scenicall company is, that they make
their spectators pay to deare for their Income. Representations and
Apparitions from the dead might be s^ene farre cheaper at other Play-houses. As for example, the
Ghost in Hamblet, Don Andreas Ghost in Hieronimo. As for flashes
of light, we might see very cheape in the Comedie of Piramus and
Thisbe, where one comes in with a Lanthorne and Acts
Mooneshine. But here for a Comedie consisting of one
Scene, and one Actor, tis very deare market to pay an hundred
pounds for entrance, and besides that another hundred pounds for sitting in
a boxe neere the Stage.But here I answer for them (though
I thinke I shall haue little thanke for my paines of them) that they having
but one Spectator, must haue as much of that one as if they had an whole
Theater full. The Lawyer that pleads at Barre for his Client, will
not therefore abate any thing of his Fee because the Auditory is small or
the Iudges few, his study and preparation being the same.
Moreover, though there be but one Actor appearing here vpon the
Stage, yet you must consider that here are diverse others within the
tyring-house, that take a great deale of paines to proiect the plot, to
instruct the Actor, and to furnish him with habit and ornament. And who
can tell how many sharers there are that must take part of that which is
paid? Wherein I hope that these two Iesuites, F.
Fisher, and F. Wainman, men of extraordinary action, haue a
treble or quatriple share each of them, as being the principall over-ruling
Masters. Would any man thinke that Burbege should be co^tent with
a single share, who was the flower and life of his company, the
Loadstone of the Auditory, and the Roseius of the
Stage?
Another matter more troubled my curiositie, where and of what
Master they learned these trickes of legerdemaine. I alwayes
thought they had their rudiments from some iugling Hocas Pocas in a
quart pot.
A man of great name and fame.At length
I learnd that one of them, namely, Mr Wainman, alias Mr
Wrightman, alias Mr Wood, alias Mr Peacock, alias
Mr Baker, alias Mr Read, alias Mr Frye, alias
Mr French (I thinke he taketh eight names to
answer to the eight Beatitudines) had beene heretofore the Auditor
and Disciple of a grand Master, notorious in the peoples reputation for
strange feates. And besides I learned that this said Wainman had
long since some trickes of cleanly conveyance, whereof he brought a whole
waine-load from Bristow, where he made himselfe very famous by
professing that he could make the Philosophers stone, and
turne any mettall into gold; But he so turned over the money of a Knight
thereabouts by Evaporation, Calcination, Proiection, and
Cohobbation, that the Knight might well haue wished this
Mountebank had studied lesse the Chimicall Trade,
vnlesse he had left more fruit of his labours by proiection
behinde him.An Alchymist vsually answers his
deluded scholler with expectation of Proiection, and tells him
the more his Materials be multiplied, the stronger will the
Proiection be; especially if it come to the mountenance of an
hundred pounds. Vid. The Play of the Alchymist. And
yet haue I heard he was not vtterly vnfruitfull there. For how soever his
Inventions proued abortiue concerning the Philosophers stone, yet
he lest some evidence of bringing forth some worke of perfection, or
rather imperfection by other kinde of stones; concerning which imployment
of Multiplication, I could make a Quere how it agrees with
his Priesthood, or with the sublimated quintessence of his
Iesuiticall order. Whose holy function would be blasted and crackt in
sunder by any Matrimoniall Coniunction? If himselfe were to answer, he
could easily put it off with some equivocating tricke,Vid. Dr Sheldon of the Miracles of
Antichrist. like his brother Ignatian, who being
examined vpon oath whether he were a Priest, answered, No; and
after said, he meant he was not a Priest of Baal. And so aske
this man whether itaccord with his Father-hood to be as
fruitfull in the flesh as in the spirit, he will haue some sodering
shift that will make all sound, without vrging the Text Crescite
and multiplicamini and replete terram. Gen. 1. 28.
That which I would now haue you obserue out of Mr
Fisher and Mr Wainmans pretty iugling practises is, with
what creeping sly stealth the Master-Gamesters the
Iesuites doe driue the female Partridges into their Nett
by the helpe of the setting Dogge of sneaking Visions and
Phantasmes. Or to come nearer the habit of this Scene;
When I consider their carriage and wily beguiling conveyance, me thinkes I
behold the cunning Fowler, such as I haue knowne in the
Fenne-Countries, and els-where, that doe shoot at Woodcockes, Snipes, and
wilde Fowle, by sneaking behind a painted cloth which they carry before them,
having pictured in it the shape of a Horse, which while the silly Fowle
gazeth on, shee is knockt downe with Hale-shot, and so put in
the Fowlers-budget. Oh the Artificiall incomparable engine of Iesuiticall
Fowlers, the painted Hobby-horse of Saint-like Apparitions from
Heaven or Purgatory! Whilst the silly Bird gazeth with rapting
admiration; Bounce sayes the Iesuites Gunne, Thou art mine, and
takes them by the Coxcombe, and packes them by dozens to send by the
Poulterers to be put in Coopes at Bruxells, and else-where.

Quo pulchrius E^ charius.Wherein I commend
their skill in their Trade, that they chuse as neare as
they can those fowle that are fatte and faire of feather. If a leane one come
in the way, the fatter shall beare it out. In the one they haue a pretence of
Wisedome, in the other of Charitie.
But oh, the profound Policie which our Ignatians vse
for the confirmation and establishment of their Religion, consisting
in these superlatiue proiects and practises, wherein they goe as farre
beyond their fellow Priests, as Master Stevens galloping
Crosse beyond a penny Palme Crosse;Vid. The
Foot out of the Snare. pag. 70. or F. Garnets little
straw beyond all the Wheat-sheaues in England. What infallible
arguments are these strange Apparitions to vphold Faith? The
Sorbonites in truth vpbraid the Iesuites with a Doctrine,
that they hold it lawfull to forge a Miracle for the furtherance of their
Religion: Why should not I thinke, that they hold it as lawfull
sometimes to forge a vision, for the better maintenance of their
Catholicke cause? I remember how the Sorbon concluded by a
Decree of the yeare 1554. and 1564.The Sorbons
censure of the Iesuites. Hac societas periculosa in
negotio fidei, vana, nugax, mendax, pacis Ecclesiae perturbatiua, Monastica
Religionis euersura, and magis in destructionem quam in edificationem
ordinata, etc. Surely if brethren of the same seame censure thus
hardly of them for their lowd lying, let none wonder if I begin to sentence
them for the onely Cogging Impostors of these times, scandalizing the
name of Christian with most impious inventions, vnbefitting
any though desperate Hereticke, and arguing little
lesse than Atheisticall prophanes. As for their visions, and
such like ayery Mountebanke Hobgoblin-stuffe, I say
(...), Fooles may be frighted with
Hagges, and Fairies; men of vnderstanding know it is but knavery.





THE COPPIES OF DIVERS LETTERS OF Late Intercourse concerning
Romish Affayres.

The Coppie of a Letter (the Originall whereof is in my hands)
sent from Rome to F. COLLETON, Arch-Priest, alias
Arch-deacon of LONDON.

FAther Colleton we receiued your Letters dated the
xxixth of March, wherein you write of Prince CHARLES his going for
Spaine.The newes was here before your Letters,
and there is no doubt but we shall now worke all things to our owne content.
Father Pitts is sent from his Holines with Letters to the
King of Spaine, vpon his return we shall heare more. His
Holines hath created 3 new Bishops: Dr Bishop
is Bishop of Calcedon, and comes shortly into
England: Dr Bath and F. Iohn Roch are made
Bishops, the one of Gortyna, the other of
Cydonea, and are to be sent into Ireland. If matters
succeed well, there will be other new Bishops and an
Archbishop sent over for the propagating of true discipline in
your Kingdome: and for those who haue now indured the heat of the day will be
the freer passage to Ecclesiasticall dignitie. His Holines
would haue you advise those who are subordinate to you, that they walke
warily, to be as secret as formerly, the easier (as he sayth) may they
worke their owne ends. He would haue none puffed vp, or swell with
sensuall delights, but remaine yet mortified, that humilitie, charitie,
obedience, contemplation,zeale of soules may be most
observed. As water doth more inflame the Smiths forge, as repugnance doth
animate the Lyons courage, as tartnes eggeth the languishing appetite: so
will it imbolden and strengthen the Heretickes, if they know they
are to finde opposition to their naturall inclinations, and
sensualitie. Religion (saith the Divinest of all Divines
S. Thomas of Aquin)I had thought St
Augustine, St Bernard and some other of the Fathers had
beene as divine as He. must haue neighbourhood of Policie, Tunc
enim piae suae observantiae ex maiori discretione ordinatae sunt ad
finem religionis. For then her pious observantio^s through more
discretion are directed to the end of Religion.
Our Colledge-money from the Catholicks of
England comes in slowly: There is three hundred pounds of what we
accustomed to receiue behinde. Wee must intreat you to call vpon them, and
if T. M. be in England, acquaint him with it. I haue written
hereof to Mr Wright, and haue desired him to send vs an hundred
pounds from his stocke: he knowes where to receiue it againe. Father
Spencer I heare hath laine sicke this greatwhile at Burdeaux, I pray God send him lustie againe good
man. We heare that Mr Daniell (whom Father Sweet knowes
well) hath an ancient Manuscript called the History of S.
Gertrude; desire F. Sweet if it be possible to get it for
vs, and send it to Rome, or else to Lovaine or
Tournay. There are the Histories of St Columban,
St Rumuld, and St Fursius, which his Holines
hath given order shall be translated into English for the good
and benefit of the lay-Catholicks. I beleeue the Hereticks
droope and begin to hold downe their heads of late* tis not possible
they should hold vp long, either in England, France, or
Germany, they haue lost their plumes. Let me know what the old
Blocke saith; you know my meaning. Send vs over if you can six or
ten young Schollers to Rome, Let not Dr Kellison admit any
more at Doway, till there be supplie made here. There was one Mr
Harelcot an English Gentleman here of late, and is
travailed hence to the Holy-Land, he had Letters of commendation from
F. Fisher. Write to vs as oft as you can hereafter, that wee
may heare how things succeed. Haue among you Cor vnum
and animam vnam. And so praying to our Lady and All
Saints for the extirpatio^ of Heresie among you, with
commendations to my kindred, you know whom I loue best, not forgetting
G. Smith, who will wonder he had no Letter from me. I Rest.

Your brother in @ H.
Floud.

Rome.
March 27. 1623.





@ A short Comment vpon Master Flouds long
Letter.
INdorsed, To Father Colleton Archdeacon of London]
To another Letter following, Father Colleton hath subscribed
himselfe, Vicarius generalis orientalis Angliae, Vicar generall of the
East of England Promotion comes very fast on him. For I heare moreover
that of late, he is made Deane of Chalcedon; which I doe not
see by what dispensation he can hold, being so farre remote as
London is from Constantinople; yet I will try whether I can
likewise get him a facultie to be Deane of
Dunstable.
His Holines hath made three new Bishops.] It is
questioned whether his Holines be a Bishop himselfe,
for that since Gregory the thirteenth, there hath beene no true
Pope: but all that haue succeeded him haue beene meere Intruders
into the Papacy. vide. A Booke Intituled, The New man,
translated into English by William Crashaw, Batchelor
in Divinitie, according to the Latine Copie sent from Rome into
England, Printed 1622.
Dr Bishop is Bishop of
Chalcedon and comes shortly into England.] I will beleeue him another
time. For according to his promise true it is, that the Bishop of
Chalcedon is come into England, and hath laid about him
in Pontificalibus, having confirmed many, and
ordained some. When I was their childe, they would haue had mee
receiue Confirmation from him. Tis strange I refusd it, when so many
gaping, gazing gulls flockt after him (as after a Lord at
Whitson) with desire to kisse but the very ground where he had
stood.
Asperges me Domine saith the
Holy mightie man, Mundati estis saith his Chaplaine Mr
Ouerton.Oh blessed they that were asperged but with the
least drop of his thrice hallowed Holy water. Mundati sunt, they
were purged from all sinne. But what shall I say of those who had the
liuery and hansell of his sacred Crozier-staffe, when his
Lordship lorded it with his taper-bearers of each side, and one with a
Censor burning Incense before him? Oh surely those that had this
Benediction (as Fr. Leech said vpon another occasion) Peccare
non possint si maxime velint, twas almost impossible for
them to commit any more sinne.
Dr Bath and F. Iohn Roch are made Bishops, the
one of Gortyna, the other of Cydonea, and are to be sent into Ireland.]
Were I in Ireland and there wanted a Bishops
Benediction or Confirmation, I might I thinke run over a great deale of ground,
and leaue many a merry old Towne behinde me, before I should finde the
severall Seas of these two new-stampt Bishops; but casting
mine eyes vpo^ the Globe of the whole earth, I find that Gortyna and
Cydonea are two renowned Cities of the Ile ofCreete or Candy, which Iland (as Strabo
writeth) is compassed with the Aegean, Affrican, Egilan, and
Cytheran Seas. So that by the next packet that comes from
Rome to the Popes Councell in Ireland, I desire to
be resolved whether per mortem or else per lapsum
these two new Bishops came to their Seas. Secondly, I would be
satisfied concerning the largenes of those two Diocesses
Gortyna and Cydonea; and how long the Kingdome of
Ireland (divided from the Continent of Creete by a great many
lakes and gulfes) hath beene within their precints. Thirdly I desire to know
what revennewes are annexed or appendant to those said
Bishoprickes, that the Bishops chuse rather to be
commorant at their manner houses in Ireland, than at their ancient
Palaces at home.
If matters succeed well, there will be other new
Bishops and an Arch-bishop sent over.] They must waite for
another winde before they crosse the Seas. Tis a dangerous storme; many
of their Mates are like to suffer ship-wracke. But I perceiue they make
account that their Hierarchy shall blow away ours.
Our Colledge-money from the Catholickes of England comes
in slowly.] I perceiue according to the old Proverb, The English
Catholickes are still the Popes Asses. But he is beholding to his
Ianizaries the Iesuites, who will whip them soundly if
they beare not their accustomed loads. Yet I heare that in the Northerne
parts, their Mules backes are almost bursten with over-riding.
There is three hundred pounds to
receiue behinde] It were a fit Quere what they haue received,
so many of their Customers being observed of late to be turned
Bankrupts.
Let Mr Wright send an hundred pounds from his
stocke.] It were good grafting vpon this stocke that beares so
fruitfull branches.
There are the Histories of St Columban, St
Rumuld, St Fursius, which his Holines hath given order to be
translated etc.] I warrant you there be good huskes in this trough to
feed Roman Catholicke Piggs of devouring beliefe.
The Catholicks droop, they cannot hold vp long,
etc.] See how they haue cast the dye to make vs loosers and
Bankrupts.
Let me know what the old Blocke saith.] Wee are
such Block-heads that we doe not yet vnderstand who this Blocke is. The
Iesuites Cabala must helpe vs.
Praying for the extirpation of heresie.]
Extirpation? The zeale of this Prayer may kindle an Invasion of Gun-powder,
if need be.


The Letter subscribed by H. Floud.
I Haue heard there are three Flouds, notorious
proiecting proditorious Iesuites beyond the Seas, all of them well
studied in Machiauell. One of them caused the Iesuites
at Lisbon to spend a great deale of money vpon Powder on a
Festivall day a little before the
Powder-Treason in England should haue beene effected,
thereby to make experience of the force thereof. And also perswaded one
Iohn How (a Merchant whom he had perverted) and divers other
Catholickes to goe over into England, and to expect their
Redemption there (as he called it) a while. He is much honoured by the
State-Papists of this Kingdome. Some I haue heard giue a large
testimony of his Wisedome and Worth. I beleeue it is he that was the Father
of this pestilent LETTER.




 A Letter sent from one Mr VVorthington a
Priest, to a kinsman of his living in Lancashire.

The Coppie of this Letter I haue from
Worthingtons friend, who will iustifie the truth of
it.WOrthy and well-beloued Cosen, you fhall please to vnderstand,
that at my late being at Tholouse I receiued your Letter, and
returned an answer therevnto againe, though (as I heare) it never came to
your hands. Since haue I beene at Roan, where I met with another
Letter of yours, which I had not time to answer from thence, neither would
the answering of it there haue beene convenient. Since am I come to
Hage in Holland, where I can scarse endure to heare the
lavish and vile speeches which a sort of base
vnbridled people daily disgorge against the Maiestie of the King of
Spaine. For singularity among the people I haue noted, that they are
generally so bred vp to the Bible, that almost every Cobler is a
Dutch Doctour of Divinitie, and by inward illumination of spirit,
vnderstandeth the Scripture as well as he that wrote it. Those of
Holland and the adiacent parts terme themselues of the Vnited
Provinces; but never people in this world liued in a more disvnited
vnitie; so great a confusion hath this freedome brought among them of every
Idiots babling out of the Bible. There are not more different
languages at the Tower of Babel, then there are different beliefes in
Holland. But I leaue them to their differences and inward
illuminations, borrowed from Martin Luther the
New-Religion-maker of Germany, and desire you let me heare
so soone as may be what newes in England, whether the
Proclamation be yet come forth for Toleration, that we may
make vs merry at home in our Kingdome without controule. I
was told by one Mr Hinslow some two or three dayes since, that
there is three or foure Churches building in London for
Catholickes, and that the King hath appointed the Bishop
of Chalcedon to Preach at Pauls-Crosse, and that Mr
Fisher hath Preached before his Maiestie twise alreadie. If
this be true I will be with you within this moneth. I heare the Prince
was married vpon Easter day last, a Gentleman told me who was
then at Madrid. I could acquaint you with all the solemnitie, but
that I know you heare the newes in England as soone as it is with
vs. F. Mason is lately dead, and much lamented at Bruxells.
I was in good hope my sister Ioan would haue come over to mee
before this time. I spake to the Lady Abbesse for her, who hath
promised shee shall be presently admitted, and will accept of
eightscore pounds. I pray you to pay ten pounds for me to my Cosen
Maxfield in London, which I sent vnto him for, and I haue
received it. I wish his brother Henry andwe
could agree as well in minde and iudgement, as we doe in ancient amity. I could
write some other newes hence, but for reasons I spare, till I be departed
hence, and then I shall make you laugh. For this time in hast I leaue you
to God, and in all kinde affection I take of you my leaue, desiring you to
remember me to all those to whom in dutie and loue I am bounden, I need not
name them all, but rest

Your loving kinsman I.
Worthington.

Hage,
this 4th of May.
1623.





The Comment.
AS for the former part of his Letter which concerneth the
Hollanders, they are of age to answer for themselues.
What newes in England, whether the Proclamation be yet
come forth for Toleration.] The hope of a Toleration is the Wine
that seasons all their merry Feasts; but I hope their Wine is turnd to
Vineger by another Proclamation, though some (I heare) make but a
iest of it.
Three or foure Churches building in London for
Catholickes.] Risum teneatis amici? Belike they are like
those Churches builded vpon the sand, a floud came and washd
them away. I wonder to which of their new Canonizd rubricall Saints those new
Churches must be dedicated: Oh I remember, to St Nicholas Nemo,
and the Parish where they stand is Nullibi in the
Metropolis of Eutopia. Goe aske Sr Thomas Moore on
which end of those Churches the Weather-cocke shall stand.
The King hath appointed the Bishop of Chalcedon to
Preach at Pauls-Crosse.] Yes very true, and his Text must be
Act. 1.20. Episcopatum eius alter accipiat. His Bishopricke
let another take.
Mr Fisher hath Preached before his Maiestie twice
alreadie.] As true as steele. And there to the comfort of his Auditory
he told his owne heroicallActs in producing Actors from
Heaven and Purgatery, for the Nunnizing of Mary
Wiltshire, Mary Boucher, Mris Francis Peard, and others his
ghostly children.
I heare the Prince was married vpon Easter day.]
True and trusty newes. The Capons are not yet fed that should be eaten at
that Feast, and yet the Epithilamium or Marriage-Song is
made by Master Pateson in the dedication to the Booke called,
The image of both Churches.
The Lady Abbesse will accept of eight score
pounds.] I verily beleeue it and more money if shee could get it. A good
Broker for Dowries; but those Dowries suck a great deale of money out of
England.
I shall make you laugh.] Good sport belike. In
the meane time we laugh at you (good Master Worthington) for your
newes of non ens; and that you build Churches and Castles in the
ayre.




 A Letter sent from the said J.
VVorthington to his Vnckle in London, a Seminary
Priest.


Most loving Vnkle,

I Know you take it very vnkindly that I wrote not vnto you by
the last packet; but the reason was because I intended to haue come over
within a weeke following, had not Dr Kellison hindred me. Let mee
intreat you to provide some good house where I may be entertained in
London at. Mid-summer, when I intend to see
England. Wee vnderstand there is libertie enough now, every man
withyou may vse his Conscience. My Cosen
Melling wrote vnto me that they hoped to purchase all the Churches
in Lancashire, if this world last long. The heaven hath beene long
full with our cryes, the world with our afflictions, Sed tandem miserendi
tempus, exultandi dies. Pursuivants, men infamous, who at their
pleasures inriched themselues with the spoyle of our goods, I heare that
now they sneake vp and downe, and the onely preferment any of them can
attaine vnto, is to keepe a Tobacco-shop. Wee shall no more I hope
be made a Spectacle to the World, and to Angels, and to men.
But Nisi praecedit pugna, non succedit victoria, sayth St
Cyprian. It is a comfort that the case is so altered. Interim
Germanicus. I was lately at the Hage in Holland, where
I found but seaven Religions in one Familie; the man of the house being of
one Religion, the wife of another, the children and servants of others. The
high powerfull Lords the States keepe a great toyle there,
thoughthe best of them were but the sonne of a
Beere-Brewer or Basket-Maker. I saw there King
Iames his daughter and her Worshipfull Husband, whose high
aspiring thoughts are now low enough, even as low as that muddie Countrey is
beneath any sound earth. Their dwellings are fitter to be a habitation for
fishes than for men. I got an Ague there which I was afraid I should not
so soone haue shaken off. I would entreat you Vnckle to send me over to
Doway fiue pounds, to fit mee with some necessaries against my
Iourney: And I haue written to my Cosen Maxfield to send mee
fiue more. I haue Printed a Booke which I will bring over with mee, I am sure
that will helpe mee with money enough in England. I was at
Anwerpe where I bought a Box of hallowed Rings, which I value
at a great rate, so that I will begin to pay my debts to your selfe and
others my good friends when I haue beene a while in England. Wish my
Cosen Maxfield to shew you his Letter. I
remember my dutie vnto you, and so rest

Your loving Nephew I.
Worthington.

Duac.
May 20. 1623.





@ The Comment.
LEt mee intreat you to provide some good house where
I may be intertained.] His harbinger hath provided him a house in
Holborne, one of those that stand in the next way to
Tyburne.
My cosen Melling wrote, that they hoped (if
this world last long) to purchase all the Churches in Lancashire.]
Wee thanke your cosen Melling for telling of a long lasting
world; But as for Lancashire, I can giue by my abode in it, some
little account of it, and of their acquaintances swelling into thousands,
yet I hope they shall never purchase Church there, though they haue
purchased and invaded too many houses and families.
Pursuivants etc.] Doe they now scorne the
Officers of Iustice and Religion amongst vs? If hereafter those Pipes
that haue for a time bin put vp in a bag shall be plaid on againe, let not
those take it in snuffe who haue now made no more of our Lawes made
against them then of a vanishing euaporated whiffe of Tobacco. And
as for the Pursuivants, they would haue this libelling knaue to
know, that the worst of them hath meanes to maintaine himselfe without
being beholding to any Popish Pedlarly Priest whatsoever.
Interim Germanicus.] Cunningly
spoken. I thinke he alludes to the Interim in the time of
Charles the fift, and would imply that they haue in England a
midling provisionall sect of Statizing, Temporizing Romanists,
who can conforme to the times, in hope they shall be otherwise fairer bent
for their ends. Many here are that tread vpon Roman earth, though
English ground.
A Beere-brewer or Basket-maker.] Hee had this iest
out of Robert Parsons, the brazen-fac'd libelling
Iesuite his bookes. But yet those Brewers he speakes of
haue made drinke so strong that it hath oft beene huffecap to their
enemies. And their Baskets haue beene so stuft with earth vpon their
rampiers, that the greatest Ordnance of the enemy could not demolish them
at Bergen vp-Zone.
Whose high aspiring hopes, etc.] God may
please to giue them a time to repaire their decayes, which they patiently
expect. But it may be some triall of their patience, to haue their losses
redoubled by stormes from that faction whose supporters haue procured
and continued those damages.
I got an Ague there.] By feeling your purse I find
you haue febrem pestilentem, at least a malignant fever; your
bloud and spirits being possessed with a callenture gotten or
increased by the bad ayre vpon the bankes of Tyber.
I haue printed a little Bocke.] No doubt it is a
goodly worke made by this fiue pound man. Some bungling botcherly bundle of
miraculatingSaints piping new. Let Mr Henry
Barber of Holborne haue the vttering and dispersing of it,
who met me within these few daies and challenged mee for putting him into my
Catalogue of Popish Booke-sellers, and said he had
little reason to haue gone in among them, for that he had beene in prison
for it heretofore. Or if Henry Barber be by this meanes too infamous,
I commend you Mr Worthington to another Trader, one Mr
Vdall of Gunpowder-Alley, who was very angry that in my
Catalogue I put him downe plaine Vdall without an M. at his
girdle.
Money inough.] Pray marke how these cheating Mates
make a prey of their credulous Laick Disciples. They count it no small part
of their reuennew the summes which they squeise by dropping idle pocket
Pamphlets which they sell at an high Market and vnreasonable rates, as
before I haue shewed in divers particulars. I doubt whether they haue wit
inough that vpon these occasions furnish them with moneys inough.
A boxe of hollowed rings, which I value at a great
rate.] Doth he make them Hogs whom he thus ringeth, or rather wringeth by
extracting good silver from men and women past Non-age, though not Dotage
for such rattle-baby toyes? Oh Trumpery! Is this zeale and Christian
Devotion? Why doe we laugh at the barbarous Indians for imparting to
vs their richest commodities in exchange for glasse, beads, peny
whittles, copper rings, etc? But the Popes Benediction, or any the
least touch of Sainting Miracle-monging fictionis able to
infuse the highest worth into the basest baggagely New-nothing to hang
vpo^ the sleeue of admiring adoring ghostly Children of the
Iesuites. How doth his Holines exorcise and coniure
Beads of wood, of stone, of Corall, and of all other stuffe,
making besotted Ignaro's beleeue they haue great power against sinne, the
Devill, and Hell; whereas alas all is but cheating, and to gull them of their
money. (*)




The Coppie of a Letter Indorsed as followeth.

Au Tresreverend Pere le Pere Berville, Generall
des Peres de la Congregation de L'oratoire en France a
Paris.

REverendissime Pater,

DEest nobis hoc tempore homo prudens, diligens, and
constans, qui negotia Episcopi nostri, and Cleri in Curia
Romana tractet: Habetis in vestra Congregatione R. P. Thomam
Rant Anglum, qui Italice loquitur, and Romae aliquando versatus
cum laude est, and in Anglia antequam Congregationem vestram
ingrediebatur causis agendis diu, multumque studuit. Hunc idoneu^
reputamus, cui negotia nostra co^mittamus. Rogamus itaque
Reuerendissimam Paternitatem vestram vt hunc virum nobis concedat, vel ad
tempus saltem commo let, ne Rmi Episcopi et nostrae causae oportuno
praesidio in ea altissima Curia distitutae sint Vestrae
Co^gregationis proprium esse inaudiuimus viros pios et prudentes
Episcopis concedere: quapropter summis precibus
obsecramus, ne hanc gratiam denegetis Ordinario nostro vestri
amantissimo, qui hoc etiam a Paternitate vestra Reverendissima antea
petiit. Quo quidem beneficio nos omnes sibi and Congregationi suae
summopere devinciet. Deus Reuerendissimam Paternitatem vestram
diutissime seruet incolumen.

Reverendissimae Paternitatis vestrae
observantissimi,
Ioannes Colletonus Vicarius generalis
orientalis Angliae.Richardus Smitheus Vicarius generalis in
partibus Australibus Angliae.Richardus Broughtonus Vicarius generalis
Septentrionalis partis Angliae.Edwardus Bennettus Vicarius generalis in
partibus Occidentalibus Angliae.

Londini
24. Septembris Anno Domini
1623.





The former Letter in English. Indorsed

To the most reverend Father the Father
Beruille, Generall of the Fathers of the Congregation of the Oratory
in France, deliver this in Paris.

Most reverend Father,

He meanes the late new cast Bishop of
Chalcedon.WEE want at this present a wise, diligent, and
constant man, who may dispatch the businesses of our
Bishop and Clergie in the Roman Court. You haue in your Congregation
a reverend Father, one Thomas Rant an English man, who
speakes Italian and hath beene to his commendation sometime
imployed at Rome; as also he was much and long imployed in
England in soliciting of businesses, before his admission
to your Congregation. This man wee thinke fit to trust with our
affayres.Their affayres are Faires to purchase
money. And therefore, we beseechyour most
reverend Father-hood that you would grant vs this man, or at least lend him
vs for a time, least the most reverend Bishops affaires and
ours should be destitute of Protection, as occasion may serue in that
most high Court. We haue heard that it is proper to your Congregation to
affoord pious and prudent men vnto Bishops. Wherefore wee
earnestly intreat you, that you would not deny our Ordinary this
favour, who doth fervently loue you, and hath heretofore requested thus much
from your most reverend Father-hood. By which benefit your Father-hood
shall much oblige vs all to your selfe and your Congregation. God long
preserue your most reverend Father-hood in prosperitie.

Your most reverend Father-hoods much bounden,

Iohn Colleton Vicar generall of the East
parts of England.Richard Smith Vicar generall of the South
parts of England.Richard Broughton Vicar generall of the
North parts of England.Edward Bennet Vicar generall of the West
parts of England.

London
24 of September.
1623.






The Comment.
POore England you finde quartered without
iudgement, by this domineeting Quaternion of Popish
popular Quarter-masters. An admirable newerected intruded
Hierarchy. Our Lord Bishops had need looke to their
Rochets. For I heare of a strange imaginary scambling after the revennewes
of their Church-livings. Great hopes there is of purchasing Churches, and
great newes of sending over more new Bishops. The nimblefooted
Messengers deligated from the Popes Holines, may intrude where
they list and obtrude what they please (it should seeme) without
restraint or reproofe. Alas great Roman Idoll-Gull, there is none
of our Bishops that feare your leaden Bull. As for your
Bishops of Chalcedon, Gortyna, and Cydonea, who
haue their authoritie so brauely signed sub annulo
Piscatoris, I desire them to tarry where their land lyes that may
maintaine them in Pontificalibus. The truth is, in England we
haue as yet no emptie Palace worthy to entertaine them except it be the
Gate-house at Westminster, or the Stone
house at New-gate, where they shall be pompously
attended.
Is it not inough that the little Foxes of
Rome eate vp our Grapes, but other wild Boares must
must enter into our Vineyard? The Lord hath yet
a hooke for their nostrils and a bridle for their lips. Let
Abaddon the King of the Locusts, that
Romish vsurper raue and braue, seeking to inlarge his
Territories from East to West, or as far as he lift, claiming
Hyperbolicall power to beare through Diabolicall drifts; It
makes no matter; our Iosiah (whose name shall ever remaine vpon
record in the Kalender of the iust) hath taken away all
abhominations of iniquitie, all intruding Iurisdiction that might streame
hither from the Well of Rome; having in himselfe
(...) and
(...), an inbred power, limited onely
with iustice and equitie; (...)
absolute dominion and vniversall command; and yet
(...) also, subiection to none but
God onely. And who (but the Pope and his adherents) doubteth, but that
the limmes and branches of his authoritie are extended over all persons and
in all causes as well Ecclesiasticall as Civilli His
power profession and facultie is immediate and next vnto God, held from him
in Capite, not derived from beneath: he is not one of those Princes
of whom Blondus speaketh, that should honor and worship the Pope
as God; he kisseth not the hands and feet of his Holines, but is
architectonicall, supreame and commander of all other functions and
vocations.Blond. Iust. Roma. lib. 3.
Bertrandus.




 The Coppy of a Letter sent from P. Rowe a
Romish Priest, to his brother William Rowe in
ENGLAND.


Loving Brother,

ALbeit according to S. Bernards saying,
Efficacior lingua quam litera: The tongue is of greater efficacy then
the Penne, And so I could wish rather to inlarge my selfe vnto you by
word then by writing, (my occasion of writing vnto you at this time being
very serious) yet sith according to the old Proverb, Gainst
necessitie there is no law, I will plead my cause by this mute Advocate
of my minde.
Those that are of religious Orders vow
obedience to their Superiours, who may co^mand them to run to any Angle of
the world, to the Indies.So it is that I haue received command
from our Superior to travell to the Citie of Seleucia within the
Province of Isauria,a place I know not where,
and so I know not whether euer I shall see England againe. I
will delay my Iourney eight weekes longer, and would intreat you (as you
respect me) to send me over before my going the thirtie pounds you owe me.
Though I told you I would forbeare it a yeare longer, yet now I cannot doe it,
neither would you I hope desire it, considering my case. I had come this
Sommer into England, but that the Superior of our Order is
thus pleased to put a tricke vpon me, the burthen whereof I must patiently
vnder-goe. I haue deserved better I am sure, then to be so foysted off
and driven God knows where. I wrote vnto you a fortnight since by Mr
Herbart, desiring you to send me a dozen yards of good
broad-cloth, of a fine new mixt colour for a friend of mine. Wee every day
expect to heare from you and to receiue it. The money that is in my brother
Iames hands I freely forgiue him, for I know he needs it.
The Popes pardons you find are hardly
purchased.I procured Mr Shepheard an Indulgence,
but there is yet twelue pounds of the chargesvnsent, I
harken still when I shall receiue it. If he haue not yet taken order (as I
appointed him) for the payment of it in Anwerpe; I pray speake to
him that he send it over with your money. I pray let there be no iarring
betwixt my brother Robert and you: I haue written to him and charged
him deeply to behaue himselfe soberly and lovingly toward you. Had I come
over as was intended, wee might haue had great comfort one of another. I envy
not the braue life which my fellow Priests in England now lead.
Remember me dearely to Master Browne, Mr Midleton, Mr
Iones, Mr Curley, Mr Bond, and whom else of my
acquaintance you meet withall, and let them know what is become of me. Tell
Master Midleton that he looke well to my Bookes, and if I never
see him againe they are his. I desire him to write to me so soone as he
can. Let me heare how the Catholicke Cause doth thriue of late. I
heare all is as we would haue it. Not so Sir, for you
would haue all turnd topsie turuye. Againe your new Hierarchy is not
yet established. I cannot write what I would at this time,
but deferre it till I heare of another Messenger. And
so desiring you to pray for me I rest

Your loving Brother, P. Rowe.

Lisle
Aprill 8. 1623.


The Hollanders haue had a late overthrow; and for
other Newes we haue none.





The Comment.
THose newes now which the Romanists, the
Authors of the aforesaid Letters intended should be Occulte
dimissa privately conveyed to their true-hearted friends in
England, are by a wrong Messenger, Oculis and auribus
subiecta infidelibus, miscarried farre contrary to their hopes and
expectation. It is easily collected from their said Letters of what
spirit and temper they are, what marke they shoot at. I desire the Reader
to make construction of some things himselfe. I haue by the meanes of
good friends come to the sight of other Letters of theirs, all which savour
of nothing but rancour and malice against vs Protestants. But
alas what are all their stout Invectiues, but so many gusts of wind to
drowne in disgrace the ship of Christ? What are all their threats but
raging waues that batter her? What are their peevish and malicious
slanders, the fond absurdities they foist vpon vs, but horrible
monsters? What all their brags and boasts, but Syrens songs?
Such waues against Gods Church haue never wanted in any age, who by battering
her haue broken themselues; yet will not the latter learne of the former, nor
feare their ends whose courses theyfollow, but with a
new rage of fury run to their ruine.






A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Sale of Jndulgences
at the next Staple Faire at Rome now neere at hand Anno
Domini 1625. Called the great yeare of Iubilee.
IT is not vnknowne to the learneder sort especially of
those who liue within the Circle of the Christian Papalizing world, that
this present yeare of Grace 1624. is the Eeue or Vigill of the b^th iolly yeare of Iubilee,
beginning In die Natalis Domini prox. when the grand Mart of
Pardons and Indulgences is to be set vp, and open shop thereof
to be kept in the Pope-holy merry old Citie of Rome.
In the Eeue of this great Staple Faire, it behooveth
we who haue devoted my selfe in all service to his Holines, to
exhort and advise all tenderhearted Romanists, to provide
themselues with two things especially, Sinnes inough, and Gold
inough. Sinnes inough, else there will be nowounds
to cure. Gold inough, else there will be no cure for the wounds. The weakenes
and corruptio^ of our nature will be get the first, we need no spurre to
gallop downe that Hill. And the corruptions of the Court of Rome will
attract the other.

Deposcuntur opes tanquam medicina malorum,
Exportantur opes irritamenta malorum.

In this great Faire I must tell you wee haue nothing
but honest and faire dealing, our trading being by way of compensation in
equall ballance. Sinne you know is so heavie a thing that it
presseth a man downe into Hell. Nothing therefore is able to lift
a man vp from the downefall, but that which it selfe is most heavie.
Philosophy and Experience tell vs, that Auro nihil grauius, no
created matter in the world weighes heavier then gold. Nothing therefore hath
our hallowing holy Father the Pope thought fitter to put into his scales to
lift men out of Purgatory and mount them on high than massie
silver and gold. Whereof if thou come to our Stations at Rome, see
thou bring thy burthen and weight. Auro enim nihil r arius, nil charius,
nil suauius, nil gratius. Nothing at his Holines Market may be
sold without gold. But bring that; and then as for Dispensations,
Absolutions, Appellations, Faculties, Inuestitures, and such
Interests as the Church of Rome doth affoord, thou shalt
want none; So say the Negotiators of that Apostolicall
Sea. Ohbraue and beautifull Rome?
Apoc. 18.The Merchants are waxen
rich with the aboundance of thy pleasures. Vnde haberi possit
Indulgentiarum communicatio nisi ab hac sede, saith
Bellarmine the great Bailif and Clerke of this Market? Who can forgiue
sinnes but the Pope onely? His Pardons are that traffique
whereby the Church of Rome (whereof his Holines is the Head)
keepeth her intimate correspondency and participation with all her members,
tying thereby their consciences by a secret and strong obligation vnto
the Pontificall Seate.
Doth any one thinke that they are ordinary trinkets and trifles
which are set to sale in the Popes Market?In
for^ Papali. Commodities
vendible at Sturbridge, or Bartholmew Faire? Fye younster,
you are much deceived. Famous Babylon, the seauen hild Citie, Papall
Rome, Shee shall haue many that shall be Merchants vnto her of the
soules of men. Apoc. 18. 13. Her Indulgences are a relaxation
of temporall paines inflicted vpon soules in Purgatory. And is it a
small matter I pray you to escape the hot, fiery, flagrant, torrid,
sulphurous smoake and flames of Purgatory? Oh no; It is written in
the Decrees,Capit. quid in aliud distinct.
^5. There is no earthly
paine or Martyrdome, to be compared to the paines of Purgatory. And the
holy man that Angelicall Doctor Thomas of Aquine saith,
That the paine of the fire of hell, and the fire of Purgatory is all one,
and that they differ nothing at all, but that the one is but temporall and the
other eternall. Virgill set a partition of Iron and other
mettall betwixt those two fires.Aeneiad. lib. 6.
Yet somemen be of opinion that the partition was but a
pale made of Wainscot, which (because it was of wood) was long agone burnt
away;
Hell and Purgatory both but one
Kitchen.so that now Hell and Purgatory enter both
in at one hole and are both but one fire. There was a soule which had lyen
thirtie yeares in Purgatory (saith the Booke called Sermones
discipuli de Tempore)Sermones discipuli de
tempore and de sanctis. serm. 160. and at last there came
an Angell, who did bid the soule chuse, whether it would tarry yet one
short Winters day in Purgatory, or that it would returne into the
world againe, and there doe a marveilous hard penance, to wit, for one long
hundred yeares space should goe barefoot, and tread still vpon sharpe
iron nailes, eate nothing else but browne bread, and drinke bitter gall
mingled with vinegar, and weare a cloth of Camels haire next the skinne, and a
stone vnder the head in place of a pillow. This soule did chuse much
rather to doe all that same hard penance in earth, than to tarry one day
longer in Purgatory. Consider now what a sharpe, bitter, biting
sauce Purgatory is, all the plagues and pains whereof thou maist
escape if thou wilt but goe to the Faire at Rome, and carry
some store of money with thee.
A prettie tale to tole Greist to the Popes
Mill.In the territory of Apamea a towne of Syria,
there liued one German Mossocus a man very rich and covetous. He
was advised by his friends in one of the yeares of Grace or
Iubilee to travell to Rome, there to be made a brother of the
Gild, and to partake of all the Indulgences, Remissions,
Priviledges, Liberties, Dispensations, Sacrifices, Benedictions,
etc. which his Holines is vsed to giue at
that time publickely: the said German was so loth to part with his
money, and to be at any expence in trauelling to Rome, that he
chose rather to loose that great blessing offred him, then to vnloose
any of his worme-eaten rotten bags of siluer. Wherefore marke what followed.
His house was burnt downe to the ground, and his money perished therewith,
and him selfe narrowly at that time escaped the fire. And now his riches
being all vanished, he trauailed to Rome for Indulgence and
Pardon for his sinnes, where being arriued he entred into the Temple of
S. Constanza, where there met him the Ghost of one
Isoac a neighbour of his, who dyed some two yeares before, and
told him he had all that while beene in Purgatory; but now (quoth he)
by the helpe of the holy Masses, Mattenses, Suffrages, Almesdeeds,
Pilgrimages, and other good workes of pietie and charitie had at
this time, I am delivered. Those bitter paines that I haue indured (quoth the
Ghost) thou mightest haue escaped, but that thou didst regard a little
dirt and dust, that is thy money more then thy soule; thou hast
escaped of late one fire, the burning of thy body; but there is a worse
fire the flames of Purgatory, which thou canst not escape.
German Mossocus herevpon much amazed, pined away and about a
weeke after dyed. And at the very instant as he was departing out of the
world, he was heard pronounce these words; I see the Flame.In the Booke called The proofe of Purgatory, Printed
An. 1621. pag. 84. 85.
Againe, one Hernandes Garcia, Earle
of Castile in Spaine, who warred much with
Almancor of Corduba King of the Moores, being to
fight a great battaile against his said Adversary, was desirous afore
his going into the field to get our holy Father the Popes
Benediction, not doubting but by meanes thereof he should haue the more
prosperous successe. And so with hast to Rome he went,
where being arrived he visited his Holines, who did
Blesse him and thereby assured him of victory. At the same
time he obtained from his Holines a speciall pardon and plenary
Indulgence for all his sinnes; and then salied vpon the
Moores. In the conflict the Moores were chased, and
admirably discomfited. Great cause here was for Hernandes to
praise God for the grace he received from his Holines, finding that
good issue in his aforesaid affaires. But he became most ingratefull,
and did at a certaine time scoffe at the Popes Indulgences, no whit
regarding the inestimable weight thereof. But marke his reward: he was
presently stricken lame and blinde. And after that there
appeared vnto him many thousand soules, who said they came out of
Purgatory, and did striue amongst themselues who should gaine
of his Holines that Pardon which had beene given to this
said Hernand Garcia, and by him wretch not esteemed.
Belike it was Holiday with them that day: For
learned Mr Stevens writeth that vpon any Saints day The soules in
Purgatory are at rest. This said vision brought
him to a remembrance of his impietie, and a serious consideration of the
infinite mystery of the Popes Indulgence, which is perfectly
auaileable to purge a man from his sinnes, and to free him from the
scorching paines of Purgatory. So that after, he
repented him of his former evill, and still sued vnto the Pope to
be againe mercifull vnto him. And after the performance of great
penance he was againe pardoned by his Holines. Which pardon
was no sooner granted, but he had his sight restored him, and the perfect
vse of his limmes as he had before. Witnesse the Author of the Booke
before Cited, called The Proofe of Purgatory. pag. 71. 72. Et
sequ.
Here are too tales able to stop the mouth of the most
obstinate Hereticke in the world, who shall be bold to say the Popes
Indulgences are but pickpurse trash and trumpery: Oh yes note the
punishments of the contemners of them: marke their extraordinary operation,
farre beyond any quack-salving Empericks pill or potion. A man blinde and
lame you haue heard restored to his limmes and sight by the holy
Fathers onely Pardon and Indulgence. And but that
one of his Holines Canonicall Authors told mee of it, I should haue
sworne it had beene a lye in a budget. For my owne part I now know what to
thinke, beleeue it else who will.
Yet it may be; as Aesop devised all his
Fables for the Morals sake: So the Popish Legendarians
inuent their tales to make a good morall vse of them onely, for the wealth
and reputation of the Pope and his Clergie. Purgatory,
Pardons, and Indulgences, indeed they are the Channels that
bring water to the Bishop of Rome and his Chaplaines Mill; the
stalking walking Horses thatbring home all the
Provander and provision to his Holines Kitchen: the Posts or
Pillers that vphold the whole fabrick of their Masses, Miracles,
Processions, Pilgrimages, Dirges, and the like.
Pope Iohn the eight, through the great pittie that he
had vpon the silly soules burnt and broiled in Purgatory (like
dryed Herring, or Westphalian Hammes or Gamons of Bacon which hang
seaven yeares long in the smoake) by the good and ripe advise and
councell of Odilion a holy Father and Monke of an Abby called
Clunie did command and ordaine that alwayes the next day after
All-hallowes day,All-soules day.
a solemne day of devotion should be kept for all Christen soules: which
order is very precisely followed and observed by our deere mother the holy
Church of Rome, and many yeares of Pardon given or granted to all
those, which vpon that day doe devoutly visit the Chantry Priests and
Masses of Scali Coeli, vsing their purse liberally for that
purpose, and to haue a trentall of Masses, a sacke full of seven
Psalmes, and three or foure pokes packt with Pater nosters and
Aue Maries, all well measured and filled, whereof to make a
present to the silly soules in Purgatory, for that is fit meate
for their mouths, and they are as well refreshed with those dainties, as
though they were wrapped about the head with a wet clout in a cold morning.
But yet I will not omit a pretty take for my purpose.
Wee read (quoth the Author of the booke called Sermones
discipuli de tempore)Serm. 41. that
in old timegood people would on All-hallowen day
take bread and deale for all Christen soules. And one good Woman a widdow,
who had in store but three pecks of flower, did make it all into loaues and
deale it, saying to them that receiued it, Remember to pray for the soule
of my Mother. And one of them praying very earnestly for the soule of this
good Womans Mother, her Mother appeared vnto her and told her, my daughter by
her charitie and thou by thy good prayers hast now helped me out of
Purgatory; Tell my daughter that shee sell her Cow and goe
presently to Rome to the Popes Holines for a Pardon for
her sinnes, and then shee may be eased of such paines as I haue
indured: which being told to her daughter, shee reioyced much and did as
shee was bidden, and went to Rome, and had Indulgence. And
the Pope by divine revelation knew before shee came of all that had
happened to her.This Tale is alledged by Father
Steuens in his Booke called The Vnity of Gods Church. pag.
271.
Let me then intreat all honest English Italianated
Romanists, who are willing to chaffer for this singular, exquisite
commoditie of Indulgence at the best hand in this next ensuing
yeare of Iubilee, that they provide them of good store of cash;
though I heare Pardons will be then very plenty, and therefore the
lesse dainty.
The prices they shall find high or low according to
the coursenesse or finenesse of their Remission, the
lightnesse or weightinesse of the crime, the abilitie or weaknesse
of the purchaser. I haue within these few daies seene in the hands
of one (who esteemeth it as a great raritie) an
authenticall Booke of the particular Prices and Taxations of all Pardons,
Faculties, and Indulgences grantable by the Popes liberall
Holines, which Booke was Printed aboue an hundred yeares agoe in
Paris, bearing the name of Taxa Came^e Apostolicae, which as I guesse is like to
be published in English ere long against the opening of the
great Market, for the benefit of the Christian world. And sure a great
benefit it is and speciall conveniency to our Romanists who are
willing to trade, to know before hand the prices of the Market by the Booke of
the generall Bailiffe, or Clearke of the Market. It is defended by some
WritersDeseusio Parisien. Curi^ pro libertate Eccl. Gall.
Ludouic. 11. Oblato arus. 77. that the common
Indulgences onely, with the Letters of pardon, and the
Reseruationes pectorales, mentales, regressus generales and
speciales accessus, with other such trifles more, are worth to the
Pope in one onely Kingdome aboue two hundred thousand Crownes a
yeare: which through all Christendome would amount to aboue tenne millions
of Crownes, which is a prettie moderate reckoning or summe. I haue beene
informed by some of the Priests in London that some
great persons of our Kingdome haue sent the Pope two or three hundred
pounds a piece for Pardons. The vse of some of which Indulgences in the
manner of their proceedings is very remarkable. For they are the Mother or
Midwife of many wicked practises, for the advantage of their Church, as
being the very bellowes which blow the fire of Treason against the
personsand states of Princes. This ware bewitcheth not
onely private men, but great Kings; For her Merchants are the
great men of the earth. Apoc. 18. 3. Therefore infinite store of this
Babylonian trumpery was transported vnto the poore
Indians, for the pretended benefit of their soules, but for the
intended benefit of a Princes worldly estate.
The Ministration of the Popes pardons is with the
ingredients of Parchment, Waxe, and encaunted Words, all
which by purging the entrailes of their purses haue a wonderfull operation in
them.
The Treasury of Indulgences is shut vp in a Chest
(his Holines having the Keyes) wherein is heaped vp all the
superfluous meritorious good workes of St Francis, S^ Benedict, St
Dominick, S^ Thomas a
Becket, St Boniface, St Alphonse, and other holy
Fathers,
Petrus Asores in Catholica
assertione de lege. whose merits being so overflowing
plentifull, over and beside what hath answered for their owne sinnes,
Vid. Extrauag. Clement. 6. the
Pope dispenseth and distributeth the remainder to every person
according to his Holines discretion, which is much guided by weight
and measure of that which is brought to purchase a good Market.
Thesaurum Ecclesiae vocant Christi
and sanctorum Apostolorum, Martyrumque merita. Caluin. Instit.
lib. 3 cap. 5. The bottome of this Chest is so
vnplummetable, that it can never be sounded, emptied nor diminished. If it
were possible that all the people of the world did goe to Rome in
one yeare of Iubilee that every one might receiue full Indulgence and
Pardon, yet should the same Chest be no more emptied thereby, then the
Ocean Sea should be with taking out of it one spoonfull of
water; or St Goddards mountaines be diminished
by taking from them one handfull of sand.
Tho. Becon. de Reliqu. Eccl. Rom.
sol. 186.Lastly, as for the extent of these
Indulgences. Some of them are for an hundred thousand yeares, so
liberall is the holy Father. Pope Innocent the 8. granted some for
fifty thousand yeares as but an ordinary kindnesse; Pope Clement
the 7. for fortie thousand; Pope Clement the 5. for thirti^ thousand yeares.
Plenariae Indulgentiae a Papa
Centoru^ annorum: a Cardinalibus centum dieru^: ab Episcopis
quadraginta. Some are granted to the liuing, some to the
dead. Some purchase pardons as they doe Lands, not onely for
themselues, but their heires. Some haue their whole
sinnes remitted, some but part. Some haue power granted for the
freeing of one soule out of Purgatory by the Popes
Indulgence, others haue libertie to free many. Some of their
dispensations are the dissipations of divine and
humane right; some are the disvniting of naturall and morall bands. Some
are to tye Princes in vnlawfull marriage; some to vntie many Subiects from
lawfull obedience: All of them are of great presumption against the Lawes
of God and Nature.
Caluin. Institut. lib. 3.
cap. 5.Sunt sanguinis Christi prophanatio, Satanaeque
ludibrium, quo Christianum populum a Dei gratia, a vita quae est in
Christo abducant, and a vera salutis via avertant.



SPECIALL INDVLGENCES PVRCHASED AT Rome, granted to
diverse English Gentle beleeving Roman Catholickes, for their
money.
MY chiefe intent in propounding a recitall of particular
Indulgences given to diverse particular men of our Nation, is not
(God is my witnes) to cast imputation of folly vpon Gentlemen of worthy and
respected Families in our Nation; but to imply and signifie in regard of
the publicke by this tast and essay, what great summes of money are
exhausted and gotten out of this Kingdome to inrich Rome vpon
pretence of these and other such like Trumperies. They make a Mart of
the Nations. Esa. 23. 3. The Papall pardons indeed which like
Summer-swallowes so busily fly abroad, what are they els then
very Nets for money, Impostures, Sophistications,
Circunductions, Collusions, and Deceivings of the people, defacings of
Christs death, obscurings of Gods free grace, very spurres vnto all
lewdnesse of life? For what offence, knavery, sinne, or abhomination can
be so great, which may not be healed and made cleane with the mollifying oyle
of the Popes candid Indulgence?

--Venalia Romae
Thura, Sacerdotes, caelum est venale, Deusque.




Jndulgences granted to Reliques, Crosses,
Beades and Pictures, at the instance of Sr Robert
Sherley, Ambassadour from the King of Persia, to all
Christian Princes.
THose who having any of
the aforesaid things, shall confesse and communicate, or say
Masse, and moreover shall say the Psalme De profundis,
with one Pater Noster and one Aue; and those that cannot
read, three Pater nosters and three Aue's, gaine a plenary
and deliuer a soule out of Purgatory.
 Those who shall say
The Divine Office, or Offium B. Mariae, or 7
Psalmes, or Coron. of our Lady, or a third part of the
Rosary, or the Letanies of Saints with the Prayers, or that
of our Lady approued, praying our Saviour for the exaltation of holy
Church, and extirpation of heresie, gaine all the Indulgences which
in that day are got in all the Churches within and without the walles of
Rome, and a Plenary for those that shall be confessed and
communicated.
 Those who shall say
three Pater nosters and three Aue maries, praying our
Saviour for the Advancement and Honor of Sr Robert
Sherley, a grand Promotor of the Catholicke cause, desiring
also the increase of all Religious Orders, they are made partakers of all
the Intercessions of the aforesaid renowned Knight; as also of all the
sacrifices, prayers, fastings, mortifications, and pious workes of any of
the members of the Catholicke Church.
 Every time that any one
shall examine his conscience, and after the same shall say one
Pater noster and one Aue Marie; praying for the
exaltation of holy Church, and extirpation of heresie, he doth gaine the
Remission of the third part of his sinnes, and being confessed and
communicacated, saying seaven Pater nosters and seaven
Aue Maries, deliver three soules out of Purgatory.



Jndulgences granted to Crosses, Beads,
and Pictures, at the instance of the Procurators of the
Canonization of St Carolo Boromeo.
HIS Holines doth
grant to any that shall haue about him any of those forenamed things
blessed, and praying before any of the said Pictures, shall say
the office of our Ladie, of our Sauiour, or of the
dead, or the seaven Penitentiall Psalmes, or
graduall, or the Coronarie of our Ladie, or of our
Sauiour, or the third part of the Rosarie, or shall
heare Masse, or a Preaching, or shall visite
the most holy Sacrament, or shall accompany it, or shall giue an
Almes, or doe any other like workes (although they should be bound to doe
the same) praying for the extirpation of heresie, gaine for every time the
remissio^ of the third part of their sinnes, and being confessed, and
communicated, a plenarie Indulgence, a poena et culpa, etc.
 His Holines doth
also grant to every one that shall make reverence to any
Crosse or Picture, or shall recommend himselfe to
God, to our Ladie, to his good Angell, or to that
Saint which he is most devoted to, or shall giue thankes
to God for his benefits received, or in the beginning any action, or in time of
any tribulation shall signehimselfe
three times with the signe of the holy Crosse, or shal say once
Deus in adiutorium meum intende, or shall doe other pious or
charitable workes, gaine for every time twentie yeares of
Indulgence.
 For every one that are
penitent for their sinnes, with purpose to Confesse them, and
communicate, shall gaine ten yeares of Indulgence, and when
moreover they shall examine their consciences, they gaine
remission of the third part of their sins, and being
effectually confessed, praying to God for the happie estate of holy
Church, gaine dubble.
 And every time that any
Priest shall confesse and communicate or say
Masse (as well being bound as for devotion) and pray to God for
the extirpation of heresie, or the exaltation of holy
Church, he shall gaine a plenarie, and praying for the
soules in Purgatory, deliver every time a soule thence, according
to their owne intention.
Whosoever shall cause to be sayd three
Masses of the dead in one or more dayes twelue times in the yeare; for
every time deliuereth a soule out of Purgatory, according to his
owne intention.
 Whosoever vpon holy
Thursday, and vpon the day of the Ascension of our Sauiour
shall be confessed and communicate, and shall pray for his
Holines, and for the exaltation of holy Church, gaineth the
Indulgences of the blessing of his Holines, which he is
vsed to giue publickly in that day as if he were present.
 In the dayes of the
Stations of Rome, in what time of the yeare soever, who
so hath any of theaforesaid holy things, may gaine the
same Indulgence as well for the liuing as the
dead, saying in the Church, or at home before some of the sayd
Pictures fiue Pater nosters, and fiue Aue's in honor of
the most holy blood of our Saviour, sprinckled in his most holy
Passion.
 Whosoever shall say
one Miserere, or one Credo, etc. or Te Deum,
etc. in honor of the most holy blood as aboue, and kisse
the ground three times, may be partaker of the Indulgence which
they doe gaine, which make the going of the holy stayres that
day.
 Those which are present
at the most holy sacrifice of the Masse, and shall pray
for his Holines, for the Christian Princes, and
tranquilitie of their state, doe gaine every time all the
Indulgences and Graces which in that day are got by
visiting all the Churches within and without Rome.
 Whosoever shall pray for
the conseruation and increase of religious Orders, is made
partaker of all their sacrifices, fastings, disciplines, prayers, and
other their good workes, as if he were a member of any of them.
 Whosoever having
confessed and communicated in the feast of St Charles, shall
say fiue Pater nosters and fiue Aue's in honor of the
Passion of our Saviour, getteth a plenarie, and the
remission of all their sinnes.
 Likewise his
Holines doth grant to those that say one Pater noster
and Aue, or the Psalme Laudate Dominum omnes gentes, or
the Psalme De profundis, or shall kisse any of the aboue
named holy things, saying three times Iesus
and one Salve, Pardon for all those deserts which they haue
vnadvisedly committed in saying the divine office (either being
bound thereto or for devotion) or any errour in saying the office of our
Ladie, or our Saviour, or by saying or hearing
Masse, or saying or doing any other kinde of spirituall
worke.
 Whosoever shall be
hindred by any lawfull cause so that he cannot be present at
Masse, or that being a Priest cannot say Masse,
or cannot say his office, or other things to which he was bound; By
saying fiue Pater nosters and fiue Aue's in honor of the
most sacred blood of our Saviour sprinkled in his most holy
Passion, obtaineth the same Indulgence which he should haue
had in fulfilling the aforesayd things. Those which at the point of death
devoutly say once Iesu with heart, not being able to pronounce it
with their mouths, being therewith contrite, not being able to be
confessed and communicated, obtaine all Indulgences in forme of a
Iubilee.
 Lastly, his
Holines doth grant over and beside the aboue-named
Indulgences and graces (of what sort soever they be) that
it shall be sufficient for any one to haue of the aforesayd holy things
either proper or borrowed, and if that it happen any do
breake or be lost, one other may be put in the place of the same, and
shall haue the same graces and Indulgences, and that they
doe serue for all places of the world, neither are they to be recalled,
except there be expresse mention made of the aforesaid Chapters.



Jndulgences granted to a Countesse of this
Kingdome by the Intercession of her Sonne. Anno Domini
1607.
HIS Holines is
pleased to grant that for thirtie yeares following, vpon the sixt of
February, every yeare, in the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore,
(which is seated vpon one of the seaven Hills, called Mons
Esquilinus) there shall be said that day at the high Altar
a Masse for the said Countesse, and thereby shall shee
obtaine a plenary remission for all her sinnes past. And by
repeating fiue Pater Nosters, fiue Aue's, and one
Credo, etc. Shee shall be able her selfe to free a soule that
day out of Purgatory.
 It is granted vnto the said honourable Lady,
that within a private Chappell of the aforesayd Church, called the
Splendid Chappell of Pope Paolo the V. (where he lyeth buried) there
shall be said vpon the seventh of February during the space of
thirtie yeares following, Masses for the children and kinred of
the said Countesse; and by vertue thereof the third part of their
sinnes shall be remitted; And if they be Confessed and Communicate the
same day, they shall obtaine a plenary Indulgence.
 It
shall be lawfull for the said Lady and her Children in time of Lent, and
other times of the yeare in the which white meats be prohibite and forbidden,
to eate egges, cheese, milke, butter, and other such like, freely and
without scrupulositie; and if they be sicke they may also eate
flesh.
 Lastly, to the aforesaid Lady
for diverse her pious workes, especially for her sustentation and
maintenance of a Holy man to say Masse daily for the
soules in Purgatory, shee shall at the houre of her death haue
full remission of all her sinnes, excesses, and trespasses
whatsoever. A poena and culpa etc. The like Indulgence
hath shee gained for her children, and as many of her kinred as shee
shall pray for, or wish well vnto.



@ Jndulgences granted to the
Catholickes of England, at the instance of Cardinall
Allen.
HIS Holines doth
grant to all the kinred and friends of the said Cardinall (imbracing the
Romish Catholick Religion, and saying every day three Pater
nosters and three Aue Maries) freedome from the paines of
Purgatory, and every one of them who shall say one Pater
noster and one Aue more for the honor of the said Holy
Cardinall, shall get a plenary Indulgence for his friend.
 Whosoever shall cause
to be said three Masses of the dead in one or more dayes twelue
times in the yeare; For every time delivereth a soule out of
Purgatory, according to his owne intention.
 Whosoever
Catholicke of England vpon holy Thursday before
Easter, and Ascension of our Saviour shall
be Confessed and Communicate, and shall pray for his Holines,
for the Cardinalls, and for the Exaltation of holy Church, gaineth the
Indulgences of the blessing of his Holines, (which he is
vsed to giue publickly in that day) as if he were present.
 Whosoever honoureth our
Lady with three Ave Maria's in a day more then is inioyned by
his Confessor, and once in a weeke shall say over this Prayer.
O domina mea sancta Maria, mater Dei,
pietate plenissima, summi Regis filia, mater gloriosissima, mater
orphanorum, consolatio desolatorum, via errantium, salus omnium in te
sperantium, virgo ante partum, virgo in partu, and virgo post partum;
fons misericordiae, fons salutis and gratiae, fons consolationis and
indulgentiae, fons pietatis and laetitiae, fons vitae and veniae; hodie
and quotidie, and in hora exitus mei, and animam meam and corpus meum
tibi commendo: omnem spem meam and consolationem meam, omnes angustias
and miserias meas, vitam and finem vitae meae tibicommitto. Amen.

Virgo virginum praeclara
Mihi iam non sis amara.

Whosoever performeth the premisses shall receiue many
blessings from our Lady in this life, and at his death our
Lady shall appeare vnto him and comfort him.
His Holines doth command all those that honor our
Lady to carry about with them, the booke called Officium B. Mariae
Virginis, or our Ladyes Psalter; and to keepe our Ladyes
Beads and Pictures.



Jndulgences and Pardons granted to Sir
Iohn Markam, Knight. Anno Domini. 1608.
HIS Holines doth
grant vnto the said Knight for diverse his pious and laudable
acts, plenary Pardon and Absolution for all his sinnes formerly
committed; as also Impossibility for the paines of Purgatory,
promising him a good Angell alwaies to attend him: He doth further yeeld
that whosoever shall say for the soule of Sr Iohn Markam
(being dead) thrice Pater Noster and Aue, shall gaine fortie
dayes of Indulgence whatsoever sinne he commit.
 His Holines doth
further grant to Katherine and Mary, sisters of the
said Sr Iohn Markam comming to Confession and Communicating,
and having any of the Meddalls of this Pardon, saying three Pater
nosters and three Aue's, a plenary Indulgence for the
time past; And if to the former they adde a De profundis, they
obtainePardon for fiftie dayes after, and may deliver a
soule out of Purgatory.
 The said Sr Iohn
Markam, and his Sisters, saying with Devotion at the houre of their
death (the word) Iesus; or if either of them cannot for the
extreamitie of their traunce pronounce it with the mouth, yet if eyther of the
parties but thinke of that blessed name, they obtaine a plenary
Indulgence in forme of a Iubilee.



@ A Pardon granted vnto Master
Rawson of England. Anno Domini 1608.
THe said Mr Rawson having devoted himselfe vnto
the service of the blessed Father and Law-maker St Benedict,
hath obtained by the Intercession of the said St Benedict, (who
did call himselfe from all worldly tumults to serue God alone) a plenary
Pardon for himselfe, and such Indulgence as followeth for all his
brethren the Catholickes of England.
 Whosoever shall say
Sancte Benedicte or a pro me, with Pater noster and Aue,
shall forthwith haue a third part of his sinnes remitted him.
 Whosoever shall say
three Pater nosters and three Aue Maries for the
advancement and happy increase of all the Religious Professors of the
Order of St Benedict, shall participate a particular benefit by all
their sacrifices, prayers, fastings, mortification and good workes, as if
he were a particular member of that Religious Order.
 Whosoever shall
celebrate either by Devotion or Obligation for any part of
that Order, shall forthwith deliver a soule out of Purgatory.
 Whosoever shall
sacrifice vnto the Disciples of St Benedict, that is, to St
Placidus, St Maurus, the Virgin St Scholastica
his Sister, and to all holy Monkes and Nunnes, shall be
able to make warre against the Flesh, the World, and the
Devill, and instantly deliver two soules out of
Purgatory.



@ Jndulgences granted by his Holines
to the Family of the MANPHILDS in England. Anno Dominini
1608.
IN the dayes of the
Stations of Rome, in what time of the yeare soever, any of the
aforesaid Family shall pray before any of the sacred Reliques
and Pictures sent from his Holines, they shall gaine the
same Indulgence as well for the liuing as the dead, as is giuen that
day publickely at Rome, saying in the Church or at home before
some of the said Pictures or Reliques fiue Pater nosters and
fiue Aue Maries, in honor of the most holy blood of our
Saviour sprinckled in his most holy Passion.Of little worth is that skull or dead mans bone which vvill not
(by beco^ming a holy Relique) adde something to the Popes
Exchequer.
 For saying one
Miserere, or one Credo, or Te Deum, etc. in
honor of the most holy blood as aboue, and kissing the ground three
times, any of the aforesaid Family may be partaker of the
Indulgences which they doe gaine who make the going of the holy
Stayres that day.
 Whosoever of the
aforesaid Family having Confessed and Communicated, shall say this
Antiphon in honor of our Lady, gaineth a
plenary, and shall free a soule out of Purgatory.





Aue Regina coelorum,
Aue Domina Angelorum:
Salue radix, salue porta,
Ex qua mundo lux est orta.
Gaude virgo gloriosa,
Super omnes speciosa;
Vale o valde decora,
Et pro nobis Christum exora.








Indulgences granted to the Family of the Lord
M. in England, at the Intercession of Tob.
Mathew. Anno Domini. 1608.
HIS Holines hath granted vnto the said Lord
M. for the reliefe he hath affoorded vnto distressed
Catholickes, as also for his bountie to the houses of
Bruxells and Lisbon,I wish rather that
this English money had bin spent in England vpon some publicke
service there. and for yeelding his helping hand to the repaire of
the Churches of St Peters, Santa Maria Maggiore, St Pauls,
St Sebastian and Fabian, St Lawrance, Santa
Croce, St Iohn de Lateran neare Rome, that he shall
be partaker of all the Masses, Prayers, Fastings, Watchings,
Pilgrimages, etc. had at the Stations of Rome; together with a
plenary Remission of all sinnes, A poena and culpa,
etc. for a thousand Lents and sixtie-fiue yeares. And besides
saying any day of the yeare three Pater Nosters and three
Aue's more then is commanded him by his ghostly Father, he shall
be able to free one of his Friends out of Purgatory.



Indulgences very large granted to the Family of the
Lord W. at the Intercession of the said T. M.


Indulgences granted to the Family of the Lord
Va. at the Intercession of T. M.



A PARDON GRANTED TO THO: GER. OF England Knight,
and his Lady.

PAulus quintus Episcopus, servus servorum Dei: Dilecto
filio nobili viro Tho. Ger. Militi; and dilectae in Christo filiae
nobili mulieri ejus uxori, salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem,
etc.


 The same at large in English thus:
PAul the fift, Bishop, seruant of the seruants
of God: To his beloued sonne the noble Gentleman T. G. the younger,
Knight; and to his beloued daughter in Christ the noble Lady his wife,
greeting and Apostolicall benediction. Hauing heard of late of some
desires of yours which concerne the saluation of yoursoules, and receiuing your Petitions from the hands of the Religious
man Henry Stanley, we haue granted to your said Petitions a
fauourable hearing, and by the tenour of these presents doe grant this
Indulgence to your deuotion. That such a ghostly Father as either of you
shal chuse, shall haue power by Apostolicall authoritie, to grant to
you full remission of all your sinnes whereof you shall be
confessed, as also freedome from the paines of Purgatory. And euery
Wednesday, Friday, or Saturday that any of you shall say ouer the
Office of our Lady, you shall merit for whom you loue best. And
if vpon Easter day you shal be confessed and communicate, and
say nine Pater-nosters, and nine Aues, with a de
profundis, for the soules in Purgatory, you shall euerie time be able
to free one soule thence. Also at the houre of your death the Deuill
shall haue no power ouer you, nor at al trouble or torment you. What lawfull
petitio^ you shall ask at any time of God, he shal grant it you. Your
enemies shall not preuaile against you. Yetwe declare
that if vpon confidence of this Remission, you shall commit any
notorious sinnes wilfully, that then this present Pardon shall not helpe
you as concerning them. You must also persist in the vnitie and faith
of the holy Church of Rome, and pray for the extirpation of heresie,
and liue in obedience and deuotion towards vs and our successors Popes
of Rome, canonically entring into that Sea, and further doe your
dutie to all religious men. Lastly, you shall giue twentie shillings
yearlie towards the maintenance of the Cope of S. Thomas Becket, and
euery Friday a penie to the first poore bodie you meet. Let it now be lawful
for no man to infringe this Pardon and Grant of ours, or with any boldnesse
to contradict it. And if anie shal presume to attempt any such thing, let
him know and assured lie vnderstand, that hee shall incurre the
indignation of Almightie God, and of his blessed Apostles Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, and all other Martyrs and Saints.
Giuen at S. Peters in Rome, vnder the Fishers Ring, the 9 of Aprill, in the
first yeare of our Papacy.





The forme of the Absolution wherewith they are absolued
with whom his Holinesse so graciously dispenseth.

AVthoritate Dei Patris Omnipotentis, and beatorum
Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus, ac authoritate Apostolica
mihi in hac parte commissa: Ego absolvote abomnibus peccatis tuis mihi
per te vere confessis and contritis, and de quibus confiteri v^lles; si tuae occurrerent memoriae.
Plenariam absolutionem omnium peccatorum tuorum, in quantum claves
Ecclesiae se extendunt in hac parte, authoritate istarum literarum
Apostolicarum tibi do and concedo, ita ut sis absolutus ante Tribunal
Domini nostri Jesu Christi, habeasque vitam aeternam, and vivas in
secula seculoru^. Amen.



In English thus:
BY the authoritie of God the Father Almightie, and of his
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and by the
Apostolique authoritie committed vnto mee in this behalfe: I absolue thee
from all thy sinnes, by thee to mee trulie confessed and contrite, and of
which thou wouldst haue been confessed, if they had come vnto thy
remembrance. Moreouer I giue and grant vnto thee full absolution and
remission of all thy sinnes, so farre as the keies of the Church doe
extend in this behalfe by the authoritie of these Apostolique Letters, so
that thou be absolued before the iudging seat of our Lord Iesus Christ,
and haue euerlasting life, worlds without end. Amen.




Another forme of Absolution.

AVthoritate Dei Patris Omnipotentis, Apostolorum Petri
and Pauli, and totius matris Ecclesiae: ac virtute hujus Bullae and
Papalis Jndulgentiae, Ego absolvo te ab omnibus peccatis tuis, etc.


BY the authoritie of God the Father Almightie, of the
Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all the mother Church, and
by vertue of this Bull, the Popes Pardon, I absolue thee from all thy
sinnes, etc.




A third forme of Absolution.

AVthoritate Dei Omnipotentis, and beatorum Petri and
Pauli Apostolorum ejus, ac authoritate Apostolica mihi in hac parte
commissa: Ego absolvo te ab omnibus peccatis tuis and poenistibi in
Purgatorio debitis propter culpas and offensas quas contra Deum and
animam tuam commisisti. Et in quantum mihi committitur, restituo te
illi Jnnocentiae, in qua eras quando baptizatus fuisti, exceptis punctis hiis
reservatis Domino Papae, ut anima tua vivat cum Christo in secula
seculorum. Amen.


BY the authority of God Almighty, and of his blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, and by the Aposto like
authoritie committed vnto me in this behalfe, I absolue thee
from all thy sins and paines due vnto thee in Purgatorie for the faults and
offences which thou hast committed against God and thine owne soule. And
as much as lieth in my power, I restore thee vnto that Innocencie wherein
thou wert when thou wast baptised, those points onely excepted, which are
reserued to the Lord Pope, that thy soule may liue with Christ worlds
without end. Amen.





Generall Pardons granted by diuers Popes for diuers
considerations, etc.
Pope Innocent the 8, hath granted to euery man and
woman that beareth the length vpon him of Christs nayles wherewith hee was
fastned to the Crosse (the iust length of euery one of them was nine
inches) and worshippeth them daily with fiue Pater nosters, and
fiue Aues, and a Creed, that hee shall haue granted him
these seuen great gifts that follow.
The first is, Hee shall neuer die sudden nor euill
death. The second is, He shall neuer bee slaine with sword nor
weapon. The third is, His enemies shall neuer ouercome him. The
fourth is, Poison nor false witnesse shall neuer grieue him.
The fist is, He shall haue sufficient goods and honest liuing.
The sixt is, He shall not die without the Sacraments of the
Church. The seuenth is, He shall be delivcred and defended from
all wicked spirits, pestilence, feuers, and other maladies.
Pope Jnnocent the 8,
etc.
TO all good Christian people disposed to say our Ladies
Psalter within this Church or churchyard, on any of these beads, the which
haue beene pardoned at the holie place of Shene, shall haue ten
thousand yeares of pardon. Also for euerie word in the Pater noster,
Aue, and Credo, 23 daies of pardon, totiens,
quotiens.
Also they are pardoned at Sion, and by that ye shall haue
for euery Pater noster, Aue, and Credo said on them,
three hundred dayes of pardon. Also vnto all those that the beads do
string, or cause to be stringed in time of necessity, there is
granted by two Bishops fourescore dayes of pardon, and Gods blessing
and theirs.
Also you must say first on the fiue beads fiue Pater
nosters, fiue Aue Maries, and a Creed, in the
worship of the 5 wounds of our Sauiour Christ, and then after euery
Creed, say on the first white bead of the fiue Iesu for thy
holy name, and then on the red bead And for thy bitter passion,
then on the first black bead Saue vs from sin and shame: then
on the second black bead And endlesse damnation:
and then on the last white bead Bring vs to the
blisse, That neuer shall misse Sweet Iesu, Amen.
The Pardon wherof, remembring the wounds great and small of
our Sauiour Christ, is 5 thousand, 4 hundred, 75 yeares, of these 5
beads. The whole summe of pardon granted of both Monasteries for euery
Psalter saying on these beads, is 26 thousand, 6 hundred yeares, and 50
dayes, totiens, quotiens.
Therefore let no man nor woman presume to carrie away or to
conuey the aforesaid beads, but hang them againe where yee find them. For if
they doe, they are accursed foure times in the yeare in the generall
sentence. And at euery Psalters end, pray for all christen soules.
Pope Clement the 7, with diuers other holy Fathers
Popes of Rome his predecessors, of their paternall holinesse and
abundant graces, haue granted to all the brethren and sisterne of the
said gyld that now be, and to all other that will bee, full power and
authority to chuse them any able Priest to their Confessor, secular
or religious, which may heare their confessions, and giue vnto them once
in their life and in the Article of death, plenary and full remission of
all their sins, excesses, offences, and trespasses, how grieuous
and enorme soeuer they be, a poena and culpa, etc.
Againe the brethren and sisterne of the aforesayd
gyld, may say or cause to be said, Masses and
all other diuine Seruices before day light incontinent after three of the
clock after midnight not onely in hallowed places, but also in vnhallowed
places, though they bee suspended or interdicted by ordinary
authority.
Also euery brother and sister that will say any
Wednesday, Friday, or Saturday, one Pater noster, one Aue
Maria, and a Credo, in any Church or Chappell where they doe
dwell, prouided alway that they giue somewhat to the aforesaid gyld, and
put-to their helping hand to the sustentation and maintenance of the
charges of the said gyld, as oft as they shall so doe, shall haue
cleane remission a poena and culpa, and the same
remission as if they had visited the Chappell of Scala coeli of
Rome, and the Church of S. Iohn Lateranense, when the Stations there
be celebrated for the quicke and dead.The picture of Saint
Iohn Baptist, and a stone, will driue away an angry
dog.
The aforesaid brethren and sisterne also causing
Masse to be said either on the Wednesday, Friday, or Saturday, in
Church or Chappell for the dead, shall deliuer what soules they will, and
as oft as they will out of Purgatory.
They may also lawfully in time of Lent and other times of the
yeare, in the which white meats be prohibited and forbidden, eat egges,
cheese, milke, butter, and all other white meats, freely and without
scrupulosity or grudge of conscience: and if they be sicke, they
also may eate flesh with counsell of their Ghostly father and
Physitian.
And whosoeuer shall procure any man or
woman to bee brother or sister of the aforesaid gyld, shall haue for
his godly trauell fiue hundred yeares of pardon. Also euery brother and
sister, with their fathers and mothers departed, shall be made partakers
of all Masses, Mattenses, Prayers, Suffrages, Almes deeds, holy liuings,
Pilgrimages, and all other good deeds and works of piety and charitie, the
which be done and shal be done throughout the whole vniuersal Church
militant, and all the members of the same for euer. And furthermore, our
said holy Father hath granted to all Christian people, being truly
penitent and confessed, or hauing purposed to bee confessed, at
such times as the Law hath determined, and there deuoutly doe visit the
Chappell of our Lady in Goston, and also doe visit three times seuen
Altars there assigned in the Parish Church at the Feasts of the
glorious Assumption, Natiuity, and all other feasts of the same our
blessed Lady, or within eight dayes following after euery of the same
Feasts, or any day of the said Vtas, putting-to their helping hands to the
maintenance of the charges of the same gyld, shall haue and enioy all and
singular Indulgences and Remissions of their sinnes, as if they had
personally visited the Church of the holy Apostles Peter and
Paul at Rome, and other the 7 principal Churches the^ in the year of Iubile and Grace, and
also shal haue al the same Indulgences and Remissions of their
sinnes as they should haue if they had personally visited the
Church of S. Iames in Compostell in
Spains, and had done or caused to bee done there any other thing for
the obtaining of the Indulgences of the said yeere of Iubile at Rome
and Compostell.
Also our holy Father hath declared and decreed, that these
said Remissions, Faculties, Indulgences, and Dispensations, shall
neuer be reuoked, suspended, nor denulled, but euer to stand in full
strength and vertue, from henceforth, notwithstanding the yeare of Iubile
at Rome, or any other manner of cause whatsoeuer shall happen in
time to come.
And euery man or woman may bee made a brother and sister of
Goston gyld, and enioy all Remissions, Priuiledges, Liberties,
etc. if they will pay euery one of them at their entring sixe shillings
eight pence, and euery yeare after, during his or her life, eight pence, or
else thirteene shillings foure pence for the whole, for euery singular
person, towards the maintaining and sustentation of Priests,
Clerkes, and poore bead-men, which daily be found with the charges of the
said gyld.
Pope Clement the 5 granted to so many as giue ought
to the sustentation of the order of S. Trinitie of Houndslow,
his blessing for euer, and twelue yeares, a hundred and threescore dayes
of pardon, with relaxations of the third part of their penance, and of the
paines due for their sinnes.
Pope Alexander the 4, to all the
brethren and sisterne of the aforesaid order, that giueth some good
portion of their goods yeerly to the brethren or Messengers of the said
order, or in their Will and Testament do giue and bequeath some honest
portion of substance for the reliefe of the said brethren, hath
licensed and granted, to choose vnto them any apt and meet Priest to
bee their Confessor or ghostly Father,I aduise them
to take M. Medcalfe for the men, M. Leake for
Gentlewomen. and to absolue them from all their sinnes,
toties, quoties, and also to be buried in Christian buriall, of
whatsoeuer death he deceased, if he were not excommunicated by name.
Pope Innocent the third dispenseth with the
brethren and sisterne of the aforesaid Order concerning all vowes of
abstinence, and of pilgrimage going, except onely the vow of pilgrimage vnto
Peter and Paul at Rome, and Saint Iames at
Compostell, so that it shall be lawfull for them to change those vowes
of abstinence and pilgrimage, vnto other workes of mercy and charity; and
this hath hee done of his speciall grace and meere motion to al them that
giue somewhat to the said Order of Saint Trinitie.
Pope Gregory the ninth hath
granted to all brethren and sisterne of the aforesaid order, and to all
their parents and friends, whether they be, aliue or dead, all those
Indulgences and Pardons
Pardons innumerable, and good
cheape.(which are innumerable, and may iustly be compared with the
Starres of the sky, and the sands of the Sea) that they haue, which goe on
pilgrimage either vnto Rome, or vnto the holy Land.
Pope Pius the 2 hath granted and giuen to the
aforesaid brethren and sisterne, once in their life plenary remission,
and full forgiuenesse of all their sinnes, yea, and that in all such
cases as are reserued to the Apostolique Sea.
Very graciously and innocently
considered.Pope Innocent the eight hath confirmed all the
aforesaid priuiledges, indulgences, pardons, etc. and of his speciall
grace hath doubled them all for the saluation of the brethren and
sisterne of the Order of S. Trinity.
Pardon of the Augustine Fryers.Pope
Iohn the 23 granted to so many as bee brothers and sisters, and
benefactors of the Friers Hermites of Saint Augustine, that they
shall bee partakers of all the prayers, sacrifices, preachings,
contemplations, fastings, watchings, pilgrimages, vowes, obedience,
chastity, pouerty, patience, mercy, almes, and of all other spirituall
labours, trauels, paines, exercises, etc. that bee done either of the
Friers of the aforesaid order, or of any other deuout and religious people
througout the world, with Remission and forgiuenesseof all their sinnes, a poena and culpa, toties,
quoties.
The like pardon was granted of diuers Popes to the Fraternity of
Burton Lazare, with dispensation of vowes, and relaxation of fome part of
penance, with plenary remission of all their sins.
The clemency of Pope Clement to
such as are bountifull to S. Mary of Runciuall.To them that
gaue any thing to the Hospitall of Saint Mary of Runciuall nigh vnto
Charingcrosse without the wals of London, Pope Clement the 4
granted that they should be partakers of all the Masses, Prayers,
Fastings, Watchings, Pilgrimage-goings vnto the holy Land consecrate with
the blood of Christ, or vnto the City of Rome, priuiledged with the authority
of the blessed Martyrs and Apostles Peter and Paul. And
if they be Priests or Religious persons, either men or women, and haue
failed to say their diuine Seruice, either through negligence or default of
bookes, or sicknesse of body; the aforesaid holy Father doth
mercifully absolue them from al such offences, and release them from the
paine and punishment due vnto such offendors.
Money is the Merchant in all the Popes
affaires.Pope Clement the 6, of his speciall grace hath
giuen and granted to all them that giue some part of their substance,
being confessed and contrite, release of the third part enioyned them by
their ghostly father, and three yeares of pardon, with an hundred daies more
of pardon, with free buriall in places although interdict, and of whatsoeuer
kind of death they chance to die, with 2000 Lents, and 85 dayes of pardon,
etc.
Pope Alexander the third hath
granted to all them that giue ought to the maintenance of the Collegiate Church
of Saint Iohn of Beuerley an hundred dayes of pardon, and relaxation
from the seuenth part of their penance.
Pope Innocent the fourth hath granted to all the
brethren of the same fraternity, pardon of all sinnes forgotten, and of all
vowes broken, except the vow vnto the Holy land, and at their latter end
remission from all their sinnes, a poena and culpa:
so that to euery brother and sister of that fraternity, being
confessed and absolued, their Confessor may say on this manner:
Iohn or Ioan, as free I make thee,As heart may thinke, or eye may see. Of this
pardon it is also thus written:
Omnibus in annis qui turbant jura Ioannis:Ter execrantur, damnati jure probantur.
The pardon granted to the Fraternitie of S. Cornelis at
Westminster for such as giue any thing vnto it, commeth in the year to
two thousand, seuen hundred and threescore dayes for euer to endure.
To the Fraternity of the Sepulchre of our L. Iesus Christ,
haue been granted by diuers Popes of Rome, especially Pope Vrban the
4, as large Indulgences as any of the former: pardons for 20, 30, and 40
thousand yeares, with odde daies.





A DISCOVRSE OF ENGLISH NVNNES of late transported within
these two or three yeares.
IT is obserued, that cunning Fowlers when they haue
caught one bird in their net, will make vse of that for a stale to tole-on
others. And so it is with our Priests and Iesuits who entice
the daughters of diuers of our Gentry here in England to the Nunneries
beyond the Seas: They not onely transport them thither, as it were with a
Writ called Corpus cum causa, (them with and for their
money) but also make vse of those that are in the Cage already, that
they may seeme to sing out the praises of the place where they are. And
to this end the Mother Abbesseby the
direction of an inspecting spirituall father maketh them write ouer
letters, or rather inditeth letters in their name to the exceeding magnifying
of the state wherein they liue, that other young Birds of that brood,
remaining in Engla^d, may be drawn to flie to the same forain
nests.
I haue seene of late diuers letters written from diuers
Nunnified Gentlewomen to some of their kindred here in this
Kingdome: The subiect of which Letters, though from diuers hands, wholly
concerned, first the extolling of those places wherein they were setled;
secondly, the earnest requiring and demanding of great summes of money to
be sent ouer at appointed times.
For the former, I enuy them not that mopish, mo^kish,
foolish paradice into which their ghostly fathers haue brought them, but
am content they shall solace themselues with the ioy and delight of
their Angelicall life.
The summes of money which passe out of
our Kingdome to the Nunneries.But as concerning the other, I wish it
were duly considered of, what infinit summes of money passe out of our
kingdome yearly, to vnderline those said Nunneries. I haue beene credibly
informed, and some of the Priests (namely, Father Floud Iesuit,
their prime Procurator, and others) haue boasted in my hearing,
that the annuall pensions giuen by our popish Voluntaries to such
vses, amount to the full value of foure thousand pou^ds, besides the rich
portions which many of our English women carry ouer with them, and must
sacrifice and lay downe to the Lady Abbesse her shrine, before
they be acceptedof or admitted into their religious Cell,
unde (ut ab Inferno) nulla est redemptio.
The places to which our English women are
sent. The chiefe places of receipt for our English women, are
Bruxels, Griueling, and Lisbon.
The seuerall Orders of Nunnes.The
seuerall Couents of Nunnes there are of S. Clares
order, S. Bridgets or S. Brides order, S. Katherines
order of Sene, Iustinians order, Mary Magdalens order, and
Augustines order.
Those that haue but a little or no portion, are packt by their
Masters to Griueling to the poore bare-footed Clares. Mary
Wiltshire, the daughter of a poore Taylor, whom I spake of in my other
Booke, being but a seruant and a poore wench, she should haue beene
seated in this lower form, being of the courser thred.
Those of a moderate portion trudge away to Lisbon,
where the whole Nunnery is allowed daily 5 crownes and their bread, with some
other almes vpon occasion bestowed vpon them, as when they shew the head
of S. Vrsula, the bones of S. Bridget and her daughter,
sundry reliques of S. Augustine, the milke of our Lady, the blood
of Hales, with diuers such trinkets and conceits.
But those that haue a good round summe for their dowry (as
1000 or 2000 pounds, which some good customers cary hence) such are
stamped for Bruxels, where the hungry Iesuits (who sometimes meet with
as good booties as the Merchants of Argier) dispossesse the^ of all
worldly cares and vanities, and like subtile Alchimists refine them out of
their siluer and golden drosse into a more sublime estate and
condition.
I haue seene within these few dayes
Letters that came from M.C. E.C. and A I. Nunnes at
Bruxels to some of their kindred in England. One of them
writes for fiue hundred pounds: That the Abbesse had done a great fauour in
taking so little: That the Nunnery is poore, and that the Abbesse cannot
forbeare the money any longer.
Pope Innocent the fourth appointed a company of
inlarged, vncloistred, vbiquitary Votists of seuerall sodalities: A
great many of which we haue latent in our kingdome; and of whom the Priests
and Iesuits make great vse. For these are the scraping Mendicants, who
bring good store of prouender to the Ignatian cratch. Their labor is
to beg what they can get for their holy fathers or masters, and to doe them
all kinds of seruice, as to starch their linnen, sweepe their chambers,
make their beds, wast their Church stuffe, etc of which ranke are
Mistris Baily in Grayes Inne Lane, Clarentia the Maid,
Mistris Halsal in Bloomesbury, Mistris Venetia,
Mistris Philpot, Mistris Fowler, Mistris Floud
in Holborne, Black Besse, and others.
As for the beginning of Nunnes. When Pope Iohn
the first was made Bishop of Rome, Monke Bennet, alias
Benedict, after that hee had placed himselfe and his Monkish brethren
in a certaine noble and famous Cloyster, built vpon the Mount
Cassinus, raised vp also an Order of Nunnes, and made his
sister Scholastica Abbesse ouer them.
Their Apparell is commonly a blacke, sometimes
a gray coat, cloake, coule, and vaile. They may not reade
the holy Scripture without consent or permission of their superior.
Their orders are all wrapped full of superstition and hypocrisie,
seeking their saluation, not in Christ through faith, but in
mens inuentions by foolish and popish workes.




@ A Catalogue of the Names of such young Women as to
this Authors knowledge haue beene within two or three yeares last past
transported to the Nunneries beyond the seas.

Mrs. Anne M^nfeild.
Mistris Anderton.
Mrs Parker.
Mrs Anne Gray.
Mrs. Talbot.
Mrs. Linsel.
Mrs. Sydnam.
Mrs. Percy^.
Mrs. Gerard.
Mrs. Floud.
Mrs. Ashton.
Mrs. Greffin.
Mrs. Halsal.
Mrs Blimstone.

Iane Roe.

Mrs. Eueleigh.
Mrs Worthington.

Elizabeth Lusher.

Bridget Lee, a kitching maid, sometime
dwelling at the vpper end of Holborne.
Mrs. Molineux.
Mrs. Ingam
Mrs. Webbe.

Dorothy Stamp.

Mrs. Ireland.
Mrs. Blackstones.
Elizabeth Powell of Holborne.
Mrs. Ruckwood.
Mrs. Lathom.
Mrs. Fortescue.
Mrs. Winchcombe.
Mrs. Townely.
Mrs. Townely.

Mary Turner.


Mary Smith.

Mrs. Iones.
Mrs. Bishop.
Mrs. Owen.
Mrs Clifton.

Sara Brewer.


Grace Wire.

Mrs. Atkins.
Mrs. Drury.
Mrs. Stanley.
Mrs. Sanders.
Mrs. Conniers.
Mrs. Abbington.




Factors employed for the conueying ouer of the said Women
to the Nunneries.

MAster Hughes of London, a man very actiue in
performing the said businesse.
Master Palmer.
Spanish Iohn, co^monly called The Deuils
factor: or Forty pound Iohn, which name was giuen him for
cosening two gentlewome^ of 40 pounds, whom he vndertook to
transport.

Iohn Smith.

A kinsman of Master Fisher the
Iesuit.
Vdal of Gun-powder Alley.

Iohn Barbar.


Iames Hart.


Vincent.

Captaine Dak.

Sherborne.

Langton, a Lancashire man.
Master Peeters.

Stubbes.

Louet, a brother to the popish
Goldsmiths.


FINIS.



