


THE FOOT OVT OF THE SNARE.
SAint Augustine reports,Aug.
Ciuit. de Dei. l. 1. that euen in the Primitiue
Church, and in those better times, the Diuell was become both Leo
aperte saeuiens, and Draco occulte insidians: by open
and outrageous cruelty, hee shewed himselfe a Lion; and, by his
secret poisoning of Religion, a Dragon. Yet his malicious power
was curbed, and himself bound in chains for a thousand yeers: so that,
notwithstanding all his subtilty, Truth, like a Palme-tree,
flourished; and Christ's Crosse, like Aarons Rod, did
blossom, and bring forth much fruit. But now the old Serpent is
let loose, and of late yeers hath acted both theLion and the Dragon without restraint; both by
policy and puisance, studying to extinguish the light of the
Truth. Neither haue his attempts been effectlesse: for, what by
Magogs sword in the East, and Gogs vsurped
Keyes in the West, hee hath driuen Truth, like a
Doue, into the holes of the rocks, and banished Faith in many
places from among men.
In Reformed Churches (especially in our Church of
England) Gods Mercy hath supported his Truth, euen
amidst the slacknes and carelesnes of the Professors themselues:
whil'st yet some, like Dinah the daughter of Iacob,Gen. 34.2 haue lost their Virginity, I mean,
primam et puram fidem, their first faith, by going abroad, and
haue returned home impure. Some, like Salomons outlandish
women,1 Kings 11.4 haue brought-in
outlandish Religion. Many at home, in stead of the voice of
the Faithfull, Come, let vs go vp into the House of the Lord,Psal.
122.1 say among themselues, Let vs go vp to Bethel, and
trangresse to Gilgal, and multiply transgressions. So that our
Countrey, which ought to bee euen and vniforme, is now made like a piece of
Arras, full of strange formes and colours. But what is the reason?
Besides the drowzinesse of many Luke-warm Gospellers, there is
a vigilant Tribe (I mean, the Emissaries of Rome, and Factors
for the Papacy), who are like vnto Dan, and are as an Adder
in the path, which bites the horse, and makes the Rider to fall
backward.Gen. 49 They make them, whom they can
get to work vpon by their perswasions, to become retrograde, with the 
Church of Ephesus, to leaue their first
loue,Apoc. 2 and become Apostates in matters
of orthodox Christianity. Easily can they steale away the hearts of
the weaker sort:2 Sam. 15.6 and secretly do
they creep into houses, leading captiue simple women loaden with
sinnes, and led away with diuerse lusts.2 Tim
3.6
Strange indeed it is to consider, how That Wolf-bred
and Wolf-breeding Romulus doth daily send-ouer his rauening brood of
Iesuites and Priests, to make hauock and spoil, and to
conclude a bloudy Catastrophe to a direfull Tragedy. Astant and
instant, vt Hannibal ad portas: nay, like Brennus and
his Gaules,Plut. vid. de Bren. they
haue not onely surprized our Suburbs, but almost taken our Capitol.

Virgil.Galli per dumos aderant,
arcemque tenebant,
Defensi tenebris and dono noct is opacae:

The Gaules came stealing-in by night through the
Thickets: so these Bats, in the twi-light of our security, creep vpon vs,
defensi tenebris. They finde, perhaps, among vs a still
night of negligence and drowzinesse: but they bring-on a greater
night, by the thick cloud and fogge of superstitions and forgeries;
wherein they enwrap themselues, and would ensnare vs; who if they should
go on to the height of their hopes, what may wee expect, but vt notent
and designent oculis ad caedem vnumquemque nostrum,
etc?Cic. orat. 2. con.
Catelin. Did they not long since, like the sonnes of
Belial, not onely cast off the yoke of obedience, with a Nolumus
hunc regnare, Luke 19.14. but euen clothe themselues in the robes of
rebellion, with a Venite and occidamus,
Luke 20.14? 
Gun-powder Treason.Witnesse one
intention of theirs, which must neuer be forgotten. And therefore, not
without iust cause, haue they been of late put in minde of a second
reflecting Tragedy; which met so right with them, that well were it, if they
could apply it to themselues, according to the sense of our Sauiour's
words (which haue been by diuerse of my friends rung in mine ears, and I
trust I shall still ponder of and remember them), Vade, and
ne pecca amplius, ne deterius contingat tibi: Sinne no
more, lest a worse thing happen vnto thee. And sure, for my owne
particular, I make such application, and will euer consider, that I had a
faire warningIctus Piscator sapit.
to come out from among them; non tam pede, quam pectore; non tam
gradibus, quam affectibus; not so much in motion, as in
affection; leauing them to their superstitious deuotions, and neuer more
partaking with them in any their abominations.
But, omne beneficium petit officium: as in morality
euery benefit is obligatory, and bindes to some thankfull duty; so more
especially in Diuinity, the wonderfull works of God, extended to all in
general, or to any one man in particular, in regard of speciall protection,
doo binde to a duty of Thanksgiuing.
Though I haue long runne vpon the score, and hitherto yeelded to
Ingratitude, that crafty Sinon, to keep the doore of my lips,
so that I haue neither discharged my conscience toward God or
man, yet will I at last, with the alone Lepe^, return to giue praise. And surely, of those that escaped the danger
of the Black-friers (an Accident for which I haue been much noted, and
often pointed at), none hath greater cause to offer the calues of his
lips, a gratefull Sacrifice vnto the Almighty, then my self.
For, as my escape was not the easiest; so my
offense, the greatest: whereof, one mooueth me to
compunction; the other, to gratulation. Being in the midst
of the Roume that fell, and though that omnes circumstantes, all (in
a maner) that stood about me, perished in that calamity, and I inuolued in
the down-fall, and falling, being couered with the heaps of rubbish and dead
carcases; yet it pleased God to hasten my Escape, beyond my owne
expectation and humane vnderstanding. Surely, when I record this common
down-fall, which wounded others vnto death, and mee but vnto affright, I cannot
but strike my brest, and look vp into heauen, or rather with the
Publican, down to the earth, and say, What was there, or is there in
me, miserable man, that the hand of God should strike so many
on my right hand and left, and yet ouerpasse me? Surely I was no
Lot, to escape out of burning Sodom; no Noah, to
bee preserued in a generall Deluge. If the load of sinne pressed them
down that fell (alas! farre be it from me to haue vncharitable conceit of their
persons), that waight should haue sunk mee then deeper than any
of them, not onely to the ground, but vnder ground, to hell it self. But our
good God is Master of his owne work, andfree Lord of his
owne mercies. Hee bestoweth them where there can bee no plea of merit. He
spared to crop mee in the strength of my yout h, in the midst of my
wandring vanities, in the act of my bold curiosity. Hee hath prolonged my
daies, that my heart may be inlarged in thankfulnesse to his glorious
Name; that my feet might bee inlarged, to walk the way of his
Commandements;Psal. 119. that my eyes and
vnderstanding might be opened, to take a full view of humane frauds,
adulterating his truth, and so to abhor them. Doth not he that hath plucked
my feet out of the snare, and deliuered me from this sudden death
(against which our Church hath taught me to pray), deserue now to be
praised, toto voto, tota vita, toto pectore, toto homine; in
al my life, with all my soule, and with all my selfe? Yes sure, I will
euer take the Cup of saluation, and call vpon his Name. I will not
cease to pay my vowes vnto him, in despight of our spirituall
Aduersarie, or any his Aduocates.I penned and published
this writing as a monument of my th^nkfnlnesse. It becommeth well the iust to bee
thankfull. For others that escaped, I wish they would not so
presumptuously tempt God, as some of them, whom I haue heard repine,
because they had not a share in this slaughter. And what is the reason
forsooth? Because euer since that accident befell, at all the places
about the City of London, where Priests are harbored, which are not
few (there beeing at this present, to my knowledge, more then two hundred of
them, within the City and Suburbes), af^er euery Masse of theirs, the Priest or Clarke 
starteth vp presently vpon the Benediction, and
calleth aloud vnto the people, to say three Paternosters, and
three Aue-maries for the soules of those that died at
Black-Friers. So that they think it cannot otherwise chuse, but that
their soules must be by this time in heauen. And sure so think I, or
else they will neuer come thither. For
(...), a modo, forthwith,
blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord: they rest from their labors,
etc.Reuel. Bona mors iusti, propter
requiem; melior, propter nouitatem; optima, propter securitatem, saith
Saint Bernard.Bern. Epist. 103.
Death is to bee desired, in regard of the rest, repose, and tranquillity,
wherewith it is immediatly accompanied: but in the Priests erected
Purgatory, durante commoratione,Suarez to.
3. in 3. p. disp.
^4. there is nothing but
torture and torment to be expected.
I cannot, but, by the way, tell you of one that very narrowly
escaped the danger of Black-Friers, and accompanied me that night
to my Lodging: his name was Parker, one that had beene long a
Trader and Factor for the Papacie beyond the
seas. Hee told mee by the way, that nothing grieued him more, then that hee
had not beene one of those that dyed by the afore-said mischance. W^at should make him so prodigall of
his life, I know not: but sure, not long after, the Powers diuine cut the
thred of his daies: for, the weeke following, hee beeing the man that must
carry the newes ouer the seas to Doway, and going then to take
Priestly Orders there beeing need of a supply, F. Drury, F.
Redyate, and one F. Moore,  beeing so
vnexpectedly, as they tearme it, martyred;The
Prouerb is, Hee that was borne to be drowned, etc. at
London-bridge, at his very first setting forward, M.
Parker was drowned, with a kinswoman of his, bound for
Brissels, there to take on her the habit of a Nunne. I
will not comment vpon these disasters, knowing, that God reserues to
himselfe three things; The reuenge of Iniuries, The glory of deeds, The
Iudgement of secrets. Quae Deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt
scrutanda: quae autem manifesta fecit, non sunt negligenda; ne etenim in
illis illicite curiosi, et in his damnabiliter inueniamur
ingrati.Prosp. de prouid.
I will iudge of my owne cause, and conclude, that the Mercy
of God was of larger extent to mee, then any other. None had prouoked him,
or tempted him more: and therefore, where sinne abounded, there the mercy
of God hath abounded much more. He is, multus ad ignoscendum,
according to the Vulgar Latine, and Because of sinners, he shall be
called mercifull. But why should I haue entred into the house of
Rimmon, or haue partaken with the abomination of the children of
Ammon? Why should I, that knew my owne Fathers Courts, haue
gone into the house of a stranger? Curiosity, in these kindes,
cannot excuse.Caluin. instit.
Bee not deceiued, God will not bee mocked.Euseb. It is dangerous with Ecebolius to bee
troden vnder foot as vnsauory salt. How great was his glory! how
infinite his beauty aboue his fellowes, who could say vnto his
Father; Those that thou gauest me, haue I kept, and none of them is
lost, but the childe of perdition.Iohn 17.12.
Holy Father, keepe them in thy name euen them whom thou hast giuen mee,
that they may be one, as I am!
And let mee here admonish all such as are
facile to yeeld vnto Popish perswasion, and are ready to take
vp the old saying of the Chaldees,Mel. can.
in loc. com. Homo quidam ex Iudaeis venit, Sacerdos, neutiquam
decipiet nos: Such a Priest will not deceiue vs. Sure, none
sooner, though they winde as close as Iuy about a tree, and so
insinuate, as they suck no small aduantage. They perswade,
that their houses are the houses of Cloe; their housholds,
the housholds of Onesiphorus.2. Tim.
4.19. But trust you no such vndermining Iesuites:
beleeue you not any of those oyly-mouthed Absolons, though they
speake plausible things, to steale away your hearts from Gods
Truth, and the Kings Obedience; crying as lowd, The Church of
Rome, as euer the Iewes did, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, The
Temple of the Lord.Ier. 7.14. Let them not, with
their golden Calues reared at Dan and Bethel, keepe you
from going to serue God at Ierusalem.1. King.
12.28. Let them not bring you out of loue with your Dauid, your
Gouernour, and true Father, or with our Orthodox and
Reuerend Church of England, your Mother. Let them not
intrench you with their false and lying Fables; the most of which you
cannot be so absurd and dull, but to conceiue and confesse, that they
are forgeries, and meere fopperies. Weigh but some of them in the balance of
your vnderstanding, which in this poore work of mine, out of their moderne
Authors, I haue truly collected, q^oted, and recited; and you will finde, that, according to the old
plain verse, 
Qui leuiter credit, deceptus saeperecedit.
All that they study, is but Imposture and
Legerdemaine. They will perchance tell you of their strict
Orders; that they are religious men, of the society of
Iesus, Benedictans, Franciscans, Augustines, Bernardines, Antonians,
Ioannites, Carthusians, Praemonstratentians, Cistertians, and the
like; that they haue distinct habits and customes, differing one from
another; that they professe perpetuall chastity, obedience, and wilfull
pouerty, and liue for the most part a solitary life, and thence called
Monks. Oh beleeue them not: they haue Esaus hands, though
Iacobs voice:Gen. 25.22. notwithstanding
all their faire pretexts and shewes, they are but as tinkling cymbals,
and greene bay-trees, whereunto Dauid compares the wicked.Psal. 37. The Pope dispenseth with any thing
heere, while they be in our Kingdom. Their penury is turn'd into
plenty: their Chastity becomes charity, for the relieuing
collapsed Ladies wants: their Friers coat is a Gold-laced Suit, to
hide their iuggling knauery, and keepe them vnknowne, when they are drunke in
good company; which is not seldome with them, as my selfe haue seene in
sufficient ouerflowing measure, hauing beene their companion ad
hilaritatem; but I protest, neuer ad ebrietatem. But
thinking, a faire outside at the Altar shall mend all, to tempt
you to their Idolatry, they will shew you their Bishops
and Priests offering vp the Sacrifice of the Masse,
attired in holy Vestures, commanded (as they say) by a sacred
Synod, which for their perfection are borrowed out of the Law of
Moses.
I am not so singularly conceited and
fantastick, as to think, that it is not expedient for a Minister of the
Christian Church, by his decent habit to bee distinguished from the
people, and adorned with some sacred significant Robe, in the function
and action of presenting publick prayers vnto God, or executing the sacred
Mysteries instituted by our Sauiour, to indure ad consummationem
mundi. But to inuent and multiply vndecent and theatricall habits,
burthensome in number, superfluous in signification, and
superstitious in opinion of sanctity, this may bee the proper dower of
Mother Rome, rather then the beauty of the Kings Daughter, who is
all glo^ious within. What a
Wardrope of habiliments and idle complements, doth the superstitious
Massing Priest beare about him! the Amice, the long
Albe, the Girdle, the Stole, the Maniple, the
Castula, the Napkin or Sudary, common to inferiour
Priests; besides the Sandals, the purple Coat with wide
sleeues, the Gloues, the Ring, the Pall or
Cope, the Crozier Staffe, a Chaire standing neere
the Altar: the last sort of which, are more proper to the
Bishops. The Pope (by the donation of the Emperor
Constantine the Great) weareth, in the Celebration of the
Masse, all the Robes vsed by the Emperors of
Rome; as, the Scarlet Coat, the short purple
Cloake, the Scepter, and the Triple Diadem, and wi^h these hee is arrayed in the
Vestry. Sure I am, that our Sauiour and his Apostles, when they
preached and baptized, had other kinde of accoutrements.
They boast much of their propitiatory
Sacrifice of the Masse, which the Doctors of
their Church hold fit to bee said in no other Language then in Latine; yea,
Rabanus auerreth,Raban. lib. 2. de
cler. instit. cap. 9. that it is no lesse then
Sacriledge, to think of changing it into another Tongue,
which the people can vnderstand. Now their common answer for the peoples
not vnderstanding their publick prayers, hath beene, That the
Priest, who pronounceth them, doth vnderstand them: but many of their
Priests cannot themselues interpret those very prayers which
they powre foorth for the people. The Masse-Book, as it is Latin
to the Vulgar, so it is Greek to the Priest: and
how Prayers, vnderstood neither by the one nor the
other, should be other then a dead Sacrifice, I cannot
vnderstand, euen by their owne Tenents. Saint Paul, 1.
Cor. 14.16. speaking of one, quisupplet locum Idiotae,
surely intended, that in the Church there should be at least one who
should bee of an higher forme then Idiota; but, for ought I
^ee, some of their Priests
must bee content in their Masse, to act two parts in one; both
of the Guide, and of the Idiote. For I am sure, some of
them whom I haue met withall in this Kingdom, when I haue spoken Latine to
them, they haue not beene able to distinguish whether it were
Irish or Welsh. One of their woodden Doctors I
will name, called Courtney, whom I met withall in
Lancashire: he was very busie talking, that none could be
saued without hearing Masse; and that Christ and his
Apostles went vp and downe saying Masse,
in all Villages and Countries. And I asked him, how he prooued that? He
could name no Scripture or Author, but told me, He had read it in a
Book, and, perceiuing me smile, said, It was in The Reuelation of
Saint Iohn. Hearing his Answer to this, I asked him another
Question, which was, What might be meant by the words so often
vsed together in the Masse, Kirie Eleison, Christe Eleison,
Kirie Eleison. He told me, The word Kirie signified The
Host; and Eleison, Christ. No maruell now, that they maintaine
Ignorance to bee the Mother of Deuotion, the old Prouerb beeing
still true, that They haue golden Chalices, but woodden
Priests. Talking another time in London with another Brother of
his, one Father Medcalf, who lyes at a Tobacco-shop in
Shoo-lane, I asked him, why he could not pray without a Pictures
He replied, How can you vnderstand what manner of man Christ is, but by
seeing him? or any Saint, but by their Picture? or how can you pray without a
Picture, but your minde will be carried some other way? Then thought I
vpon that sentence of Fulgentius, It a facile possit Christum
comprehendere, quem tota terra nequit apprehendere.Fulgent. So easy was it with him to comprehend Christ,
whom the whole world cannot apprehend. To goe on with their absurdities:
One F. Leech a Iesuite, who wrote the book called
Euangelicall Counsailes, told mee beeing with him in Christmas
last, That if any but heare Masse, and after hearing, be sprinkled
with holy water, and kisse the Priests garment, hee could not
commit that day any mortall sinne, si
maxime velit, though hee would neuer so fain. Which indeed,
though very grosse and absurd, is no lesse than some of their
Writers auouch.Barst in lib. inst. The
Propitiator, pag. 74. vid. Fitz-Sim. in fin. citat. in
diuers. loc.
O how doo they lead along poor silly soules into the gulf of
destruction, by telling them, such and such sinnes are but venial;
drunkennesse, lying, swearing, and (vpon occasion)
forswearing, but venial sinnes! whereas no sins are
lesser than the point of those thorns that pierced the head of Christ:
pro quibus abluendis, sanguis Christi effusus; for the washing
away of which, Christ shed drops of bloud in the garden, and opened the
spouts of bloud on the Crosse. Our sinnes, in Scripture, are compared
vnto sands; which are very small, con^idering them seuerally, and yet the greatest shippe is
swallowed vp of them quickly. 
Lactantius.Euery sinne, in its
owne nature, hath the sting of a Viper, and doth wound vs mortally:
yea, the least sin, legally considered, is damnable;
though euangelically, the greatest of all is pardonable. 
Augustine.Inexcusabilis est
omnis peccator, vel reatu originis, saith S. Augustine.
Bernard.And, Parentes ante-fecerunt
damnatum, quam natum, saith Bernard. And so I
conclude with Elias Cretensis his words: Expeccati fumo, ortae
sunt lachrymae.Cretens. in Naz.
orat. 4.
Lying, in some cases, the Papists hold not onely
to bee no sinne, but to bee lawfull: and a man may forsweare
himself before Authority sometimes, nay, ought to doo so, vnder pain
of damnation. Witnes their NotesAnno^. in 23. c. Act.
Apost. vpon the Rhemists Testament,
and diuerse their Books. According to the Rule of the
Parthians, they will keep faith with none, nisi quantum
expedit, but as it serues their turn. As for Oaths, to the
most of them, they are no other than Collars for Munkies; which,
vpon dispensation of Superiours, they slip off their necks at their
pleasure; especially if they be such State-Papists as haue
been inspired with Iesuitical Equiuocations and mentall Euasions: whom a
Reuerend Father of our ChurchD. King,
Bishop of London. doth blazon out by their true Epithets, and
Ensignes of their Family, stiling them
(...), the falsest cozeners of the
world; (...), with whom no bond of
nature, consanguinity, allegeance, alliance, affiance, wedlock, Oath,
Sacrament, standeth good, if they list to dissolue it. Dij terrae,
talem terris auertite pestem:Psal. 82.6 O yee
gods of the earth, purge this Region of the aire, as much as in you
lieth, of these pestilent exhalations. This I the rather obserue out of
his Writing, because it seemeth to mee, to bee spoken not onely
morally, at large, vpon generall experience of their dealing, but
also (in a sort) prophetically, as by a kinde of
fore-instinct;I meane, the monstrous Ly tearmed by them,
The Bishop of London his Legacy. implying, that himself,
though not in life, yet in death, should not be free from this their
audacious forgery.
Let me proceed to a further furuay of their doctrine and religion,
and acquaint you with what I finde true by my owne experience. Sure I am, that
the Papists, by diuers their Impostures,haue more
dishonoured Christ, than euer he was by any Sect or Profession
whatsoeuer: for, haue not their best Doctors, Bellarmine, Valentia,
Vasquez, with others, been the very Patrons of damnable Idolatry,
suam perditionem sentientes,Aug.
Epist. 48 ad Vinc. feeling themselues to perish,
and yet would not bee reclaimed? Bellarmine and Valentia
maintaining, that there is a proper worship due to Images;Bell. tract. and cont. de Imag.
Vasquez, implying, that the Diuell, in some cases,
may bee adored.Vasq. l. 3. de
adorat. disp. 1. c. 5. And howsoeuer, of late yeers,
they will a little refine their doctrine concerning Imageworship, by
Distinctions and Metaphysicall Notions, yet the practice of the people
among them (to my knowledge) is no lesse than Idolomania; that
practice, I say, not priuate, or forbidden by their Guides, but fostered,
increased, and kindled by those that pretend to be the Fathers and
Pastors of their soules. Reade Dauies his Catechisme,Dauies Catec. page 217. and a Book of theirs,
called, The Manual of Controuersies; and see whether they doo not
allow of falling down to Images, of kissing them, as they doo the
Pax in the Masse.
What shall I say of their much mumbling of
Masses, and jumbling of Beads? If there be twenty
Priests in a house, they must all say Masse before Noon,
though there be no body by, though they sacrifice to the wals. They must
haue beads, to pray by number, or else their prayers want weight.
They are commanded to say somtimes in one day an hundred and fifty
Pater-nosters, as many Aue-Maries, forty Creeds;
and, if they missebut one of the right number, all is
vaine and effectlesse: nay, the Confessors hold it to be
a mortall ^inne, if, among
so many Prayers appointed to be said for Penance, one onely be
omitted.Goddard, in his Treatise of
Confession, page 40.
As concerning their Processions, Praying to the Dead,
Inuocation of Saints, Ad^ration of
the consecrated Hoast, Administration of the Sacrament vnder one kinde,
sprinkling of Holy-water, tinkling of a Bell at the Eleuation, kissing the
ground where the Priest hath stood, worshipping of Reliques, repeating
the name Iesus nine times together, with nines vpon nines, often
crossing the fore-head and the brest, their necessary wetting of
their fingers in the holy Pot, before they go toward the Altar, their kneeling
down to euery Priest they meet, their ambling thrice about a Crosse,
their Pilgrimages, Dirges, seuerall sorts of Letanies, in which the Saints
only are inuocated, and other like trash, which are the very
Diana of the Romish Religion, what foundation haue they in
holy Scripture? Are they built vpon the Rock Christ? No; but vpon the
sands of humane brains; being inuented, and obtruded vpon the people, to
aduance the benefit and honour of their Clergie. So saith one of their owne
Writers: An non audis dicentes grata multitudini, flectentes, fingentes, ac
refingentes religionem ad nutum and c^piditates Dominorum and coetuum; quorum gloriam, nisi suam,
pluris faciunt, quam gloriam Dei?Ebber. in prae^. in com. Philip. super Christ. ad
Cor. Doo you not heare them, how they speak plausibly to the
itching eares of the multitude, inflecting, fashioning and refashioning
their religion according to the will and wantonnes of them,
whose glory, next vnto their owne, they preferre before the glory of God?
But shall not their owne Disciples one day
^peak vnto them, according to that
of Saint Augustine, Quare nos decepistis? Quare tanta mala and falsa
dixistis? Et erubescunt humanae infirmitati, and non erubescunt
inuictissimae veritati.Aug. ser. 22.
de verb. apost. Why did you seduce vs? Why did you tell vs
so many false things; more regarding the weaknes of men, than the
inuinciblenesse of Truth? Yes sure: Necesse est, cum
dies Iudicij venerit, etc. saith Saint Cyprian:Cyp. l. 1. ep. 3 to your charge, the
losse of so many soules, for which Christ gaue his life, will one
day bee laid, and a strict account exacted. Many wauing Babes
were carried away with the blast of your deceits, beaten and broken
against the rock of errour; many, I say, whom Saint Paul
tearmeth Paruulos fluctuantes, vnconstant yong-ones; not so much
swelling with pride, as deceiued and tossed with the rage of your
Imposture. But, my beloued Country-men, let not fuch vipers eat
out your hearts: let not the ignis fatuus of their preposterous
zeale mis-lead you: but discouer the hypocrites, and send them home to
hell, where they were hatched. For, they that dare thus dally with God, no
marnell, though they bee bold with your soules, consciences, your children,
and your estates, and all that belong to you. Many a poore Gentleman, that
cannot rule his wife, I knowe, is faine to weare their mark in capite;
and somewhat they must haue in marsupio, though the other 
lie for it in carcere. They must bee fed with
the daintiest cheere, the best wine, the best beer, the chiefest fruits
that can bee got; when ofttimes the poor husband is fain to slink away
hungry to his rest.
In the end, they proue Plagiarij, stealing away their
children, and sending them beyond the seas, to their vtter ruine and
ouerthrowe. This is too common a practice. Some friends of mineOne M. Dutton, a Lancashire Gentleman.  haue
felt the smart thereof. 
The Priests practice with a yong man in
London.I think it will not be amisse to insert, how they dealt
with a yong man heer in London, who is Grand-childe to the
Archbishop of York, about the end of February last. They
perswaded him, what a fine life it would bee to liue beyond the seas; and
withall told him, that, if hee would go-ouer to one of their Colledges, he
should want no maintenance: and, for that he was not fully grounded in their
religion, he was referred to one to conferre withall. It fortuned, that he came
to that man that must indoctrinate him, while I was by. I, smelling their
knauery, could not rest quiet, till I had found out the yong man, and
inquired his businesse with the Priests, with whom I had seene him
often conuersant; who presently tould mee their project, and acquainted
me, that he must suddenly take his iourney: o Saint Omers. But,
my self discouering vnto him diuerse of their cheats and tricks, and
assuring him, that he should finde the case altered, if he went out of
England; the young man, being very ingenuous, was deterred, and (I
hope) willhaue no more familiarity with them. Some of the
Priests Agents dealt in the same sort with a very pretty modest Youth,
one Henry Syluester (sonne to the no lesse worthy than famous
Poet, Iosuah Syluester, the Translator of Du Bartas);
who, being a scholar at Suttons Hospitall neere London,
was drawn to such places as the Priests often frequent, and there had books
bestowed on him. They inueigled and wrought so farre with him, that he
consented to bee sent beyond the seas. And away they had packed him, but
that their plot was in time discouered. Many others haue they of late daies
seduced: but, I hope, their Kingdome is now almost at an end.
As for you who haue occasion to liue neer the wals of these
Aduersaries, and it may bee, sometimes, of necessity, must
conuerse and haue some commerce with them, take heed you be not corrupted
by them. Haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull works of darknes,
though with the workers. Be like vnto the Riuer Arethusa,
which passeth through the Sicilian Sea, and yet takes no
saltnes.Virg. eccl. vlt. Liue
blamelesse in the midst of a peruerse and crooked generation.Phil. 2.15.
And let me now speak vnto you who are my Brethren of the
Ministery, and should (in regard of your office and example) be as Angels
in the Fi^mament of the Church:
Perceiue you not how heresie begins to spread, as that of Arrius
in the daies of Athanasius?Soz. eccl.
hist. Serpit vt Gangrena, it creeps as a Gangrene:
and yet mourn you not forour Sion in her
widow-hood, nor pray for the peace of Ierusalem? Behold you not the
ranke of our hollow-harted Neuteralists, who think the time is come, to pull
downe our Culuer-house, our little Church? How often hast thou heard them,
O God (though they whispered vnto themselues) say of the enemies of our
peace, Why are the wheeles of his Chariot so long a-comming?Iud. 5.28. Expectarunt diem: They haue long lookt
for a day. I hope they will but expect, till their very eyes drop out of their
heads. Againe, vnderstand you not, how laborious and vigilant our
Aduersaries now are, forbearing no time, sparing no paines, to captiuate
and destroy? Witnesse the swarmes of their bookes, which you may heare
humming vp and downe in euery corner both of City and Countrey. I speak it
with griefe; and in this respect, cor meum, tanquam cera
liquescens: my heart is as melting wax. I verily beleeue, they haue
vented more of their pamphlets within this Twelue-month, then they did in forty
yeeres before. They haue Printing-presses and
Book-sellers almost in euery corner. And how doe they by this
meanes put their poore Disciples vpon the tenters, selling that book for
forty or fifty shillings, which they might affoord for eight or ten; and
that for ten, which they might afford for one? For instance, I referre you to
the Cat alogue in the latter end of this book. I speak this by the way, to
discouer their extorting policie, who make a Treasury for themselues by
these means,and raise no small summes of money. You
are those whom God hath set vp as Lamps in his Sanctuary, to
giue light vnto those that sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of
death, to guide their feet into the way of Truth: hide not your glory
vnder a bushell; let not your beauty be eclipsed: but (as the
Spirit to the Angel of Philadelphia) Hold that which you
haue:Reu. 3.11. Stand with your loines
girt:Ephes. 6.14. Be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might: and remember, that Vincenti dabitur,
To him that ouercommeth, shall it be giuen:Reu.
3. Nec paranti ad praelium, nec pugnanti ad sanguinem, multo
minus te^giuersanti ad
peccatum, sed vincenti ad victoriam;Bern. Not
to him that prepares to fight, nor to him that resists to bloud, much
lesse him that shewes his back in cowardice, but to him that ouercomes to
conquest. And hence Saint Hieromes penne, like a Lance, was charged
against Vigilantius and others.Euseb. eccl.
hist. l. 3. cap. 22. Saint Augustine, in his
disputations, spake hot words, coles of Iuniper, against the
Arians, the Pelagians, the Donatists, and the
Manichees. Bee you as vigilant and seuere: Res postulat,
the times require it: and therefore beginne to blame the Church of
Ephesus, for imbracing the doctrine of the Nicolaitans; and the Church of
Smyrna, for imbracing the doctrine of Balaam; and the Church of Thyatyra, for
imbracing the doctrine of Iezabel: and shame not to tell the Lady of
Rome, that, notwithstanding all her paintings and complexions vpon her
face, the cup of fornication is in her hand.Apoc.
17. Peter spake as much vnto Simon the Sorcerer,
that he was 
Acts 8.23.in the gall of
bitternesse,and bond of iniquity; Paul
vnto Elymas, O full of misc^iefe, and enemy of all righteousnesse;Acts 13.10. Polycarpus, to Marcion,
calling him Diaboli primogenitum, the diuels first-borne.
Strabo.Strabo describeth a
certaine fountaine to be in Arabia beyond Iordan, which
poysoneth all Beasts that drink thereof: for which cause it is ordained,
that the Heardsmen shall make restitution for such Beasts
as perish by drinking of it; vnlesse they prooue, by violence they
approached. In like sort, there is a well of abomination: many
wilde Asses runne thereunto to quench their thirst: and yet they
that taste thereof, perish. The Pastors of Christs flock, who haue
Peters Pasce for their charge, if they keepe not their
Hold, that is, hould their sheepe within their fold, their soule
shall answer for the same, except it shall appeare, they drank the
deadly waters of sinne, through their owne wilfulnesse, rather then the
others negligence.
The Shepheard cannot step aside, but the Wolfe is
ready to seize vpon his Flock. There are many Wolues; so
termed, not so much in regard of the composition of their bodies, as the
disposition of their mindes; for they sh^ll come vnto you insheepes clothing:
but beleeue them not for inwardly they are rauening. There are subtile
Serpents, that still wait for their booty: Their poyson is like the
poyson of a Serpent,Psal. 58.4.
Psal. 58.4. or as the Apostle: Their tongue is full of deadly
poyson.Iames 3.8. Inficit,
Interficit: The infection thereof doth not onely beginne of late 
to spread, but hath left many for dead, that there is
little hope of their reuiuing; Non aegroti, sed defuncti, beeing
not diseased, but deceased. They are no sooner feuerous, but
their Physician holds them to a dyet-drink: they shall not haue the water
of the Sanctuary, that would coole them; but Marah, the
harsh, bitter, and ill-brewed drink of damnation, to destroy them.
I haue read of one Exagon, an Ambassadour to
Rome, beeing at the Consuls command cast into a Tunne of
Snakes, that they licked him with their tongues, and did him no harme:
But these Snakes, though they were sent vs from Rome, bring such
poyson with them, non in cauda, sed in lingua, not in
their taile, but in their tongues, that with their very breath they can infect
and infest. How many soules haue they so killed in our land!

Aspidis et morsu laesum dormire fatentur
In mortem, antidotum nec valuisse ferunt.

It behooueth vs to bee in our generation, as wise as
these Serpents, though as harmelesse as Doues.Mat. 10.16. Against the incantations of such
Sirens, let vs ring the Musicall bells of Aaron, and sing
the sweet songs of Sion, that is, arme our selues with the
(...) of God, treasured vp in the
Scriptures: so shall not the Locusts of the wildernesse,
with their Scorpion-like tayles (who now swarme in such
abundance) hurt any of our little ones with the deadly sting of their
contagious error: but, hauing the seale of God in their fore-heads, they 
shall be able to resist all such as cease not to
persecute the Spouse of Christ, and to make warre with her
seed.
Now for the better discouery of the impious tricks and deuices
of the Priests and Iesuites, and that all who meet within any of their
moderne bookes (whereof I told you, there is such plenty) may hoot at them
for most abominable Impostors and lyers. Let mee intreat you to reade a
few of such Tales as I haue culled and collected out of their books lately
sent ouer, the most or all of them according to the frontispice printed
at Doway; and you would think, any solid wit could not be
miscarried by them, but rather admire the poore shifts they are driuen
vnto, for the keeping of their weather-beaten cause aflote. So palpably doe
they proceed beyond the bounds of modesty and reason, vt nemo eorum
obtestationibus et iactationibus quicquam credat, nam eos mentiri
^t dupliciter mentiri certissimum
est, saith Luther.Luth. defen. v^. caen^. Fol. 381, 382. Let none beleeue their
protestations and vaunts: for it is most certaine, they lie, and that
lowdly. If they will needs be Architecti mendaciorum, still
hammering vntruths; I would aduise them to lay probable foundations, and
chuse such Materials as are more malleable.
To beginne then with one Tale of theirs, and it is a pretty one,
alleadged by one Henry Fitz-Simons Iesuite, in his book called
The iustification and Exposition of the Sacrifice of the Masse,
Lib. 1. page 131.Fitz-Simons lib. 1.
page 131.
In all the Tales I vse
their owne words.In Deepe (saith he), a Towne of
France, a woman of the Protestant Religion, dandling her infant,
that neuer before could speak; the childe distinctly pronounced, To
Masse, To Masse. The mother, warned so admirably, went instantly
with the infant in her armes to Church, and found therein a learned man
preaching of Religion. His Sermon beeing ended, shee felt her selfe so
sufficiently resolued, that, renouncing her heresie, shee forthwith
became Catholick.
It pleaseth God indeed to vse the weake sometimes
to confound the strong; to imploy the child, to conuert the
parent; and to indoctrine the innocent, to refute the
insolent: but that he should shew any such Miracle, for the
iustification and ratifying of that most impious and idolatrous
Sacrifice of the Masse, is beyond the lists of reason, I may
well say, the bounds of Christian faith, to beleeue. But for want
of better Argument, you shall heare what other Tales haue flowed from the
f^oth of their vnderstanding, to
delude the ignorant, and confirme this said Sacrifice.
Fitz-Simon Lib. 2. part. 6.
page. 402.A Mariner beeing supposed to bee drowned, a
Bishop of his Countrey caused Masse to bee said for him. The Mariner
at that time had beene some twenty daies without food, borne vp and downe
vpon the keele of a boat, and then ready for famine to die. In the houre (as
after was knowne) of the oblation for him, a man appeared, and deliuered him a
portion of bread: wherebysuddenly he had full force and
vigour; and shortly after, by a ship sayling by, he was rescued:
Fitz-Simon, qui supra, Lib. 2. part. 6. page
402.
R.L.P. in lib. Instit. The most
diuine Sacrifice. Fol. 36.There was a Gentlewoman neere
Naples, in Italy, whose husband was a Captaine: and shee,
hauing tidings that he was slaine in a battel, caused weekly Masses to
be said for him. It fell out, that this Captaine was imprisoned: and after
by good testimony it appeared, that at the very same time Masses were
saying for him, his chaines and fetters fell from him, and could not bee
fastned.
Let mee help to prompt this Tale-teller, with another of the
same Cut. 
A Frier that had more minde to fill his owne purse, then to
empty Purgatory, did very zealously and resolutely in his Sermon before
his Offering, auouch and warrant his Auditory, that whosoeuer came vp with
money to the Altar, and would think of any his dearest friend, whom he
thought to bee a Prisoner in Purgatory, should obtaine this grace by that
indulgence, that at the very instant of the moneys throwne in, and clinking
in the bason, the soule should leap out of Purgatory.
R L.P. in lib. praedici. Fol.
(...) The aforesaid Author
reporteth of another Prisoner supposed also to bee dead,
whose Brother (beeing an Abbot) saying Masse for him: his
bands fell alwaies, and could not restraine him, whereat his enemies at
length wearied, gaue him liberty to redeeme himselfe.
Quorsum haec? Why doe they take
such paines, and imploy their braines vpon these Inuentions, namely, to
hook-in the people, and bring greist to their Mill, that their
Masses may goe readily away for ready money?
But these former Inventions are but slight work, posted ouer
by some Prentice of the coyning trade. Behold heere following a more worthy
Master-piece, wherein a chief Architect, and a more nimble Interpreter of the
Puppets, is brought-in for an Actor.
A gentle-woman of England, in one of the yeers of Iubile,
trauelled to Rome; where beeing arriued, shee repaired to Father
Parsons, who was her Confessor, and he administring vnto her
the blessed Sacrament (which, in the forme of a little Wafer, hee put into
her mouth), obserued, shee was long chewing, and could not swallow the
same: whereupon he asked her, whether shee knew what it was shee
receiued? Shee answered, Yes, a Wafer. At which answer of hers, Father
Parsons beeing much offended, he thrust his finger into her mouth,
and thence drew out a piece of red flesh, which after was nailed vp against
a post in a Vespery or priuate Chappell within our Lady-Church: and though
this were done about some twenty yeeres since or more, yet doth that piece
of flesh there remaine to bee seene, very fresh and red as euer it was.
Witnesse I. Markes Iesuite, in a book of his written of late,
and intituled, The Examination of the new Religion, page 128.
Yea, heere is a knocking and long-lasting
lie, worthy to be nailed vpon a post or pillory, like the eare of a Rogue or
a railing Moore.This Moore lately lost
his eares in Cheapside, for speaking against the Protestant
Religion, etc.
Father Parsons was but a slender Iuggler, that could
not, without putting his finger into her mouth, suborne red for white. I
doubt, that hee that inuented this Tale, had sometimes beene at the shop of
Cowbuck the Smith (held by some to bee the putatiue Father
of Parsons), and there had seene the bottome hoo^e of a horse-foot nailed against
the Posts (which vse to be the triumphant Trophies of Farriers)
and therfore thought he should meet with some that would beleeue, a piece
of raw flesh could be as solid and lasting. But I doe not read, that
this woman was euer possest with that beliefe, as to adore the
fore-said post, with the forged Appendix: and I am glad to finde, euen in
the weaker sex, more truth, in calling a Spade, a Spade, then plain
dealing in her Master, that would mock her and others by a trick of
Leigerdemaine: and therefore the Tale-maker was heere
defectiue. For, to shew the acceptation and effect of this Miracle, he
should haue added, that the woman, yea and some wisemen too, adored not
onely the flesh, but euen the naile with which it was
crucified or rather postified. This my newcoyned word fits their
new-found Fable.
A Letter was sent vnto Father Parsons at Rome,
signifying vnto him, that a kinsmans house of his heere in England had
beene for the space of forty yeerestogether molested by
Diuels; but, by one Sacrifice or Masse offered by Father
Parsons, it was deliuered: and his kinred who liued there, hauing
beene all their life time before zealous Protestants, haue all of them
since become Catholicks. 
Io. Markes, in lib praedict, page 130.
I beleeue, many houses in England, within these forty yeeres,
especially those that pertained to the friends and wel-wishers of
Parsons and his fellowes, haue beene much haunted with sprites,
not of the kinde of Fairies, but of those of whom ingenuous
Chaucer speaketh;Chaucer. that where the
Limiter Ex^rcising
Priest went vp and downe, within his station, there were no diuels nor
Hobgoblins to molest, especially the weaker sex in the night time; the
reason he giues is demonstratiue, For See,
There n'is none other Incubus but hee.
But this difference I obserue betweene the antient Priests of
a course thread, and these refined Scraphicall Masters of the
Iesuiticall Loome: they droue away Spirits only by their presence: but
these can dart out a Masse from ouer Sea, some thousand
miles off, and with it blow away all the diuels that dance in such or such
an inchanted Castle in England; whereupon, all the Protestants
that dwell within kenning, must needs turne Romanists: Teste me
ipso, quoth the Diuell.
There was a man in Corduba, within
the con^ines of Spain,
aged fourescore yeers and odde; who for the space of thirty yeers, had been
in a dead palsie, and bedred, and then had a burning desire to heare
Masse and to haue the Bishops blessing; and so caused himself, by
his seruants to be transported to S. Stephens Church. The
Masse heard, and he born back to his house, within few daies he (to all
mens admiration) became whole and sound, and was as lusty as a man but of
twenty yeeres. He liued eighteen yeers after: during which space, hee came
euery day thankfully to the said Church, to acknowledge the miracle. 
Kelli^.
in a Treatise of his, called, Gods blessing, page 71.
At Corduba in Spain? A Palsie, and yet
fourescore and eighteen yeers? I am glad it is so farre off: I hope they
will haue mee excused, for trauelling so farre to enquire the truth. And
yet, in another respect, I should wish to liue in that aire, where
Masses grow so medicinall, that they prolong a mans life, till hee and
all his friends bee weary of him: like the Iles of Arren in
Ireland, which will not let the candle of our life bee blowne out,
though it be in the snuffe: whereof a blundering Frier wrote, Vbi tam diu
viuunt homines, ita quod habeant taed^um de suo viuere.
Leo Tuscus, a Confessor, Martyr, and Pope, vpon a
certain time was tempted by a woman, who would needs kisse him; but the
holy man by no means consentedto such immodesty: yet,
with much struggling, shee kissed his hand, whether he would or no.
Whereupon, he commanded it to bee cut off, because no corrupt flesh
should remain about him. Which when the people perceiued, they earnestly
intercessed our Lady for him; and she most mercifully restored it
again: and then hee said Masse as before, and acknowledged our Lady his
Sauiour.In lib. in^it. The liues of the Martyrs,
transl.
If our sacrificing Priests and ^esuites should execute so
seuere a Law vpon themselues, the King would haue in this City many
Subiects not onely inwardly lame in their obedience, but
also outwardly lame in their lims. I knowe two
Priests in London,F.H. F.M. who
are very vnable at this time to doo the King any seruice in the warres; for
which, they haue a necessary excuse, though not legall,
hauing imployed themselues in other hot warres already: so that
now they are fitter for an Hospitall, than the Camp. And
yet when the time of their Lying-in is expired, they will creep out of
the shell again, and look as bold as their brethren, laying it on with
Masses, in stead of muskets. Yet (mee thinks) they
should vse very fauourably their judical power in Confession,
who themselues haue had so much need of Indulgence. To say
nothing of a Catholique Maid, supposed to haue been, with others,
oppressed in the ruine at the Black-Friers; whose office hath
been to carry bands and shirts vnto the Priests chambers: but,
whatsoeuer her ill luck hath been, she hath met with some infectious 
blasting vapours, which now sequester her from all
company; being posted off, by her Ghostly Fathers, vnto the
Physicians.
But to leaue these noisome corners, and to return to the more
pleasing path of our old wonder-working Tales: He had need be a good
Chirurgion, who could cement a broken piece, especially a hand
so long cut off. But this is like vnto the Tale of Saint
Dominick; whose legs cut off at the knees, by praying vnto
our Lady, they were, without the help of any Artist, graffed on again;Read, concerning S. Dominick, a Book written by a
I. Heigham, intit. The life of S. Katharine of
Siena. or like that of Saint Denis, who, for a mile or
two, carried his head in his hand; or not vnlike the Story of Saint
Winifred: of whom they report, Her head, once cut off, sprung
and grew on again; but lopt off a second time, where it fell, there
arose a fine siluer stream, or a pleasant Fountain of running water,
which at this day (as they vaunt) cureth the Diseased: and the drops of
bloud which Saint Winifred there lost, are yet to be seen. The
place of this beheading, and where the miracle is more
extant, is at Holiwell in Wales, not many miles off the City
of Chester: whither once euery yeer, about Mid-summer,
many superstitious Papists of Lancashire,
Staffordshire, and other more remote Countries, go in
pilgrimage, especially those of the feminine and softer sex, who
keep there their Rendeuouz, meeting with diuerse Priests their
acquaintance; who make it their chief Synod or Conuention for Consultation,
and promoting the Catholique Cause, as they call it; yea, and
accountit their chiefest haruest for commodity
and profit, in regard of the crop they then reap by Absolutions
and Indulgences. Let me adde, that they were so bold, about
Mid-summer the last yeere, 1623. that they intruded themselues
diuers times into the Church or publick Chappell of Holiwell,
and there said Masse without contradiction. It is not vnlike,
they will easily presume to the same liberty heer in England,
which they haue vsed of late in Ireland;
The bold attempts of the Papists in
Ireland.where they disturbed the Minister at a
Funerall, erected one or two Frieries, with open profession, in their
Monasticall habits, and haue intruded titular Bishops, to
supplant the Churchgouernment there in force: as we see in like maner
old M. Bishop, sometimes Prisoner in the Gatehouse,
now perking vp and flanting with the vain, aeriall, fantastick bubble of an
Episcopall Title, far fetcht, and yet lightly giuen, hath rambled vp
and down Staffordshire, Buckinghamshire, and other places, 
The Bishop of Chalcedon.vnder
the name of the Bishop of Chalcedon; catching the ignorant, vulgar,
and deuoted Romanists with the pomp of his Pontificall Attire, and
that empty name of a Bishoprick: whereunto he hath as much right, as
he hath Lands there.
I commend the thriftinesse of the Popes
Holinesse, in erecting Bishopricks with such small
cost. The Title stands him in nothing but a piece of parchment,
with a Bosse of Lead, signed sub annulo
Piscatoris. As for iurisdiction and reuenues, there
needs nothing, but to send into England this new Puppet of
his owne making. The honest, liberall,Pope-holy, Lay-Catholiques of England, many of them,
especially the more ignorant, and therefore dotingly deuout, are so mad of
these trumperies, and so sick of their money, that his
Benedictions, Beads, Rings, Reliques, Agnus Dei, and the like, will
be good Merchandize, better (perhaps) than Virginian Tobacco, and
feeding as much as that fume. Physicians say, and experience
shews, that, for a Consumption, Asses milk is not the worst
Cure: and sure, to feed a-fresh the declining and staruing fopperies
of Popery in this Land, what better nourishment, than those no small
summes which are daily squeezed from many simple burden-bearing
Animals, whose radicall moysture of their purses is daily
exhausted by the Horse-leeches of Rome?
The name of Rome is able to these weak and bleared eyes
to imbelish any thing, to gild-ouer and make acceptable any Pils, though
being nothing else but sheeps trittles. A bundle of Beads worth
three pence, if sanctified from Rome, shall strain out of
Catholick purses so many pounds. The Preaching, the Liturgie
of the Church of England, is but dry meat, and hath no poison in it,
because it is not basted by the cookery of the Popes Court. The
catechizing of children heer is vnfruitfull, because not performed
by the sublimated, pedanticall Instructers, the Iesuites; such
reuerend Fathers as Ledesme, Vause, Dauies, Cox, Cortin. The
confirmation of our children by our English
Bishops, though done in decent form, and with conuenient 
praier, yet (forsooth) hath no sacred influence,
because our Bishops haue no Crozier staffe, no Holy water,
no Vnctions, no Chrisme, no binding of foreheads for seuen daies, no
deligate Authoritie a DOMINO DEO NOSTRO PAPA. But, if an
Eutopian, Chalcedonian, New-nothing, Puffe-paste Titulaedo come with
faculties in his budget from Rome, where he was miraculously
created ex nihilo, then what gadding, what gazing, what prostration,
to receiue but one drop of that sacred deaw! The least flash of light
from the snuffe of a Roman Lamp, out-shines and eclipseth all
the twinkling petty sparks of the Church of England. Strange it is,
that any of our Nation should so basely degenerate, as to captiuate their
wits, wils and spirits, to such a foraine Idoll Gull; composed
of palpable fiction and diabolicall fascination; whose enchanted Chalice
of heathenish Drugges and Lamian superstition hath the power of
Circes and Medaeas cup, to metamorphize men into Bayards and
Asses. The silly, doting Indian Nation fall down and perform
diuine adoration to a rag of red cloth.Damianus
a Goes, de mor. Gent. l. 1^ The fond and brainesick Papists of our
Nation doo little lesse, when they adore the very Cope and
Vestments (belonging to Bishops and inferior Priests) where they
lie alone, falling down to them, and kissing them.
But to view their new-intruding Hierarchy a little
neerer: Me thinks, the Ministers of the Prouince of Canterbury, now
meeting in Conuocation, are very forgetfull, in suffering
themselues to be destituteThe new
Arch-deacons of London and Lancashire. of a
worthy member, the new-stampt Arch-deacon of London, M. Collington;
who, by the experience he hath had in exercising Iurisdiction
ouer his fellow-Priests, as also in conuenting the
Laicks, is able, if hee were called by authority to the
Synod, to giue very good aduice for reformation, or
deformation of the Church of England, and laying it vnder the
Popes sacred foot. The like defect also is in the Prouince of
York, by the absence of the Arch-deacon of Lancaster, M. Cli^ton. No doubt, these two new
Chips, clouen out of the old Block of Rome, are the onely sound
Timber to build vp our Church, or rather to make wormewoodden Images,
for besotted Laicks to adore. I now hasten to acquaint you with
another of their tales, and it is a crafty one.
A poore old man in Rome, lost his vpper garment: and
beeing vnable to buy another, he came to the shrine of the twenty Martyrs,
and prayed alowd vnto them to help him to rayments. At his departure, he met
with one at the very Church dore a Priest, who deliuered vnto him from the
Pope a Purse, that had in it to the value of some twenty pound in siluer.
The poore man amazed, and not knowing what he meant hauing neuer before in all
his life-time had the carriage of so much money; the Priest told him, Our
holy Father the Pope commanded me to deliuer it vnto the next man I met going
into the Church-dore, who shall haue need of it, and bid him still pray to
the Martyrs. The poore man returnedioyfully to his home, and euer after
visited the place once a day. Thomas Lee,
in Tract. de Inuocat. et Adorat. Sanctor. Cap. 14. page
212.
I see no reason why this should come into the Legend of
strange Narrations, for that the Popes eares might easily bee so long, by
the Priests information, without any inspiration from heauen, as to take
notice of the poore mans desire, who (belike) was not so cold for want of
his coat, as hee was warme with zeale, to cry alowd for a new. But this by the
way. I learne the Popes price of Martyrs, namely, that they are worth pounds
apiece. Well might the Pope haue rated them at a higher value, whenas he
yeerely, nay, daily getteth farre more in their names, by bartering their
pretended Supererogations of Martyrs and Saints.
 In the yeere of our Lord 1612. one Lucia, an Italian
Virgin, came to a Towne called Multauia, in Bohemia, where
is taught the Waldensian doctrine, first preached to them by one Iohn
Hus, and by him generally receiued; wherby the traditions of the Romane
Church are at this day there vtterly neglected. This Virgin vnderstanding of
diuers their strange opinions, that they denied Purgatory, Prayer for the
dead, Benedictions, and hallowings of Water, the obseruing of Fasting
daies, and the like; shee spake somewhat disgracefully of their
Religion: whereupon, shee was adiudged and appointed by the Magistrate, to
bee burned in a field neere vnto the Towne where shee then remained. But the
maid notwilling to bee led by them vnto the place of
Execution, they began to tie ropes about her, and so to force her along: but
shee often crossing herselfe, and inuocating the blessed Virgin,
Mother of God, could not bee remooued by the strength of ropes, or Oxen, or
any power they vsed. At length shee vanished from them, and by a Miracle
was brought vnto a Nunnery, about an hundred miles off that place; where, to
this day she liueth, to praise God for her deliuerance. 
Richard Stannihurst, in the Preface of his Book,
intituled, The Principles of Catholique Religion.
Hee that made this tale, had a Chimaera in his
braine.

Desinet in piscem mulier formosa superne.

Hee had heard of an old Fable of the Gentiles, of the
Image of Aesculapius,Vid. Liuium de
Vest. virgine. that was to bee brought into the City of
Rome, but by no means would it stirre, though drawne with ropes,
till there came a Vestall Virgin, that with her girdle drew it after
her. This botcher patcheth such a one together, and fittens; that, in stead
of an immoueable Image drawne by a Virgin, heere is a Virgin
that could not bee drawne like the Image. And so he got a piece of bread
and cheese, and came away.
A tale to some such purpose, is repeated of one
Clarence a sacred Virgin, by the said Author;Stannihurst. vt sup. the one as well to bee
beleeued, as the other: yet of both I say to the Relator, 
Cui tua non odium, velcui portenta cachinnumNon moueant posthac, is mihi prodigium est.
 One George Sephocard, a Sc^ish Protestant happened to trauaile into
France, with a Brother of his: where seeing them one day goe in
Procession, this George scoffed at them, but accordingly he was
rewarded: for presently he fell to a pitifull screeching, and so died.
The night after his death, Iohn Sephocard his brother, and companion
into that Countrey, had a pitifull Vision. He thought hee saw a thousand
Diuels in hideous and vgly shapes tormenting his dead Brother. But he, hauing
had a faire warning thereby, changed his former Religion and course of life,
and became Catholick. 
F. Baker in his Watch-word, page
20.
Heere is a Procession of lies, one after another, ordine
longo. But yet, that a man should smile at their
Procession, is not strange; nor that hee should die, no
maruell; nor that another should dreame, no great wonder: but they
had best take heede, how they apply these narrations of vnexpected deaths,
lest the Story of Black-Friers be aswell inuerted vpon them.
Oswald Mulser, in the County of Tiroll,
neere Oenipont, would not be contented but with a Priestly
Host: hee receiued it no sooner into his mouth, but hee beganne to sink
into the ground, which swallowed him aliue. Fitz-Simon in his Iustification and Exposition of
the Sacrifice to the Masse, page 100.
This is a meere fiction, intended for the magnifying of the
Priest-hood: it is the steame of their impious policy,
adterrorem incutiendum, et fucum faciendum populo; to gull, terrifie,
and amaze the simple, ignorant people, and by bringing them into admiration
of their Priest-hood, the sanctity of their attire, and the diuine
potencie of their Sacrifice; by this meanes to inchaunt and bewitch their
innocent simple soules, and so to offer them vp for a prey to their great
Idol at Rome. Surely our Sauiour Christ ate of the same hee gaue
to his Disciples: but our sublimated Priests will haue finer bread then
is made of wheat. I maruell, none of our people in England sink
into the ground, for daring to eate of the same bread with the
Minister.
Francis Zauier, Apostle of the East-Indies,
and Iesuite, as often as hee extraordinarily trauelled in the
Indies, so often did a Crucifixe in Spaine, in his parents
house*sweat. At length, when the B. Bauiere dyed, the
afore-said Crucifixe, during a yeere after, did euery Friday sweat bloud. 
Hen. Fitz-Simon in Lib. praedict page
123.
Hee had read, be like, the verse of the Poet:
In templis sudauit ebur pecudesque loquutiInfandum.
Anno 36. of Henry the
Eightth, a Priest did pronounce at Pauls Crosse, and there
confessed in publick, that he himselfe saying Masse, pricked his
finger, and bebloudied the Corporas with the Altar-clothes, purposing to
make the people beleeue, that the Host had bloud miraculously.
 One Epachius a Priest, on Christmas Eeue, being at
Martens, resorted often to his owne house to drink, euen after
midnight: whereby hee was made incapable to receiue the blessed Sacrament
on Christmas day, as hauing in the beginning thereof, at midnight, broken the
Fast. The chiefe of the Towne beeing allied vnto him, not knowing of such
his intemperance, desired him to sing Masse. Hee, as hee was
presumptuous, vndertook to celebrate. But as hee receiued the heauenly
Host, suddenly hee began to ney like a horse, to tumble and wallow on
the ground, to fome at the mouth, and to deliuer vp the blessed Sacrament,
which hee was not able to swallow: vpon the disgorging of which, it was
seene to bee carried away visibly in the aire. The Priest beeing in this
plight, hee was by his kinred borne out of the Church, remaining subiect to
the falling-sicknesse all his life. 
Surius in vita S. Godefridi. l. 3. c.
12.
It seemes to me no more strange now to heare of a drunken
Priest, of the Iesuiticall fraternity, then when I read Petrus
Cluniacensis Abbas his book: in which hee reports,l. 2. c. 2. of some forty and odde
Benedictan Monks, and Dominican Friers, that were most famous and notorious Letchers and
Bredenbachius hath a Catalogue of others, who were
Coniurers;Lib. 1. collat. sacr.
c. 13. et 45. Thomas a Cantiprato,Th. a Cantip. l. 2. de proprutat. Apum
part. 6. cap. 40. of diuers others, who were very wicked
and carnall, one of which had his mouth and nose putrified, that none could
tolerate to look on him: another of which, a fire from heauen consumed the
hands and armes to his cubits, during his beeing at the Altar. Petrus
DamianusPet. Dam spec. exempt. D. 1.
F. 77. and PalladiusPallad. in
hist. Lausiaca, sect. 17. report of six other Priests
that were Sodomites; one of which was hideously deformed with a
canker, another deuoured of a wilde beast, and the rest miserably ended
their daies. All this is storied by their owne Writers.
Seuerall Miracles haue beene done in England and
else-where, saith F. Richard Conway the Iesuite, by the
honouring of Saints Reliques; which Protestants (saith he) will not
heed.
One M. Anderton, a Lancashire Gentleman, was cured of
the Stone, by the Reliques he had of F. Campian the blessed
Saint: and being afterwards of another disease, laid out so for dead
(vt ei iam pollices ligarentur) that his thumbes were bound; by the
help of the said Martyr, his flesh beeing laid vpon his body, he was
raised to life. 
Rich. Conway in Apol pag. 281.
This is like vnto diuers the blasphemous
Fables, which you shal finde in the Reuelations of Saint Bridget,
lib. 4. or like that of Vegas the Frier, in comment. in
cap. 6. Apoc. Aug. de vera relig. Gregor. hom.
29. in Euang. Paul. Bombin. in vit. Mart. Campian.What
prodigies are these? What horrible imp^eti^s? Are they not
Anti-christi and Pseudo-christi,that
breathe out these damnable forgeries? that shame not to affirme, that the
bones of a Traytor can raise a dead man, as did
Elias his bones? or that the flesh of Campian, could
performe that which was so much admired in our Sauiour himselfe, when hee
was amongst vs in the flesh? How can they but blush at these
things? When Father Campian came an Apostle into England,
there was an Earth-quake (say they) and so there might well bee.
Nay the great bell of Westminster tould of it selfe. But that I think
is a lye. When Father Campian was arraigned, Iudge Seth his
finger burst out a-bleeding through his gloue, Thames ouerflowed, and
diuers other obseruations haue our imposturizing Renagadoes. But those
saltlesse gulleries are no whit answerable to this their villainous and
prophane fiction. If M. Anderton were thus strangely raised, it is
maruell his friends in Lancashire speake not of it, with many of
whom I conuersed, and am sure (had it bin true) would haue recited this
tale in their discourse. Againe, if Reliques bee thus powerfull,
I wonder they had not tryed, and brought some of them for the reuiuing of
their Priests, or any other of them that were killed at the
Black-Friers: or why made they not vse of some of them, for the
curing of Lady Blackstones, and such as were, by the mischance
at the Black-Friers, sore wounded?
Campians Saint-ship sure came but from
Tiburn. And yet what admirable vertue doe our Papists conceiue to
bee in the poore Reliques of Story,Felton,
Sommeruile, Ard^n, Parry, Lopez,
Garnet, Campian, and the rest of that Saint-traitorly Cru^? The very paring of their nailes doth
help to doo miracles. Their pictures are so sanctified, that they
are hung ouer the Altars. And I much maruell, there were neuer strange
wonders performed by the wood of the Tree at Tiburn;
considering, it hath been blessed by some of their sacred bodies, and
bedewed with their last spritefull breath. 
Campians girdle.But did you
neuer heare of Campians girdle that hee wore? Then reade one
Edmunds his book of miracles, and that will tell you
strange newes: Hierosolyma (inquit) bene nouit ad quem pertinuit:
Tiburnus non ignorat, qui locus erat vbi Pater ipse Campianus
martyrio coronatus erat: Ierusalem (quoth hee) knowes this girdle:
for, it girdedabout the Sepulchre of our Sauiour. Tiburne knowes it, the place
where Father Campian receiued his crown of martyrdome: yea, saith
he further, and the Diuels knowe it, who detest all such manner
of geere, and whom it hath vexed so sore, that it hath put them to extreme
torments. This Girdle cured Lepers, the blinde, the dumb, all manner
of diseases. If the Girdle that imbraced onely his bare apparell, could doo
such miracles, what then should I think of the Rope that imbraced
Father Campian's holy neck? yet I heare of no wonders done by that.
The besotted Aegyptians, that kissed, with earnest deuotion,
the Asse vpon which the Idoll Isis sate; and the
lymphaticall Priests of Baal, that lanced their owne flesh
before an Idoll of wood, had as much religion, and I think
more wit than our moderne Reliquesauers haue. God hath giuen them
ouer to the spirit of illusion, to beleeue vnsauory lies.
He that sits in the heauens, laughs them to scorn.Psal. Almighty God, with his Angels and
Saints, will haue them (these mis-shapen monsters) in
derision.
Conway in apol. pag. 290.A
Virgin, a kinswoman of mine, saith Conway an English
Priest, was freed from the Diuell by anointing herself with oyle, into
which another Priest that prayed for her, had mingled his Teares.
I think, of late daies our Romish Priests haue wept
too little, and laught too much: and that is the reason, we are pestred
with more fiends, than friends. But when the sword of iustice is drawn, and
inflicted according to the waight and measure of their detestable
designes, we shall, I hope, haue fewer of them come ouer. This Couey of
night-birds may shrowd themselues warme vnder the gentle wings of their
holy Father at Rome. I am sure, as yet they play the
Bats and Moles with some of our Countrey-men; either
trenching themselues in the Mines of their Labyrinths at home, or masking in
their gold and siluer abroad, in the fashion of Rake-hels and Ruffians.

How to kenne or smell a Priest.If,
about Bloomesbury or Holborne, thou meet a good smug
Fellow in a gold-laced suit, a cloke lined thorow with veluet, one that hath
good store of coin in his purse, Rings on his fingers, a Watch in his 
pocket, it may be of some thirty-pound price, a very
broad-laced Band, a Stiletto by his side, a man at his heeles, willing (vpon
small acquaintance) to intrude into thy company, and still desiring
further to insinuate with thee; then take heed of a Iesuite, of the prouder
sort of Priests. This man hath vowed pouerty. Feare not to trust
him with thy wife: he hath vowed also chastity.
But are Priests teares so precious, that they are an
Antidote against the poison of Diuels? Oh yes: who knowes
not, that there is admirable power in a Priests breath, his
gloues, his hose, his girdle, his
shirts, to scortch the Diuell; in his Albe, his
Amice, his Maniple, and his Stole, to whip and
plague the Diuell? Or hath none read of the dreadfull power of Holy-water,
hallowed Candles, Frankincense, Brimstone, the Book of
Exorcismes, and the holy potion, to scald, broil, and to
sizle the Diuell? of the dreadfull power of the Crosse, and
Sacrament of the Altar, to torment the Diuell, and to make
him roar? If any think these strange, I referre him to a Book written by
D. Harsenet, now Bishop of Norwich, the Title whereof I
haue set in the Margent:A Declaration of egregious
Popish Impostures, to withdraw the harts of his Maiesties Subjects
from their alleageance, and from the truth of Christian Religion, vid.
c. 14. 15. 16. 18 and 20. and you shall finde, that one
Father Edmunds, alias Weston, F. Dibdale, F. Thomson, F. Stemp, F.
Tyrrell, F. Dryland, F. Tu^ce, F.
Sherwood, F. Winkefield, F. Mud, F. Dakins, and F. Bal^rd, Priests and
Iesuites, haue stoutly and strongly confirmed all this long
since. If the Book cannot easily bee gotten, I wish it might bee
imprinted again, for that the Priests exorcising power is 
there fully discouered: and I haue heard, that the most
of these Books which were formerly printed, were bought-vp by Papists, who
(no question) took so much delight in reading them, that they burned as
many as they could possibly get of them. But, to acquaint you with the
strange power of a Catholique Priests breath:
Plin. in hist.
nat.Pliny in his Naturall Story, tels vs of
certain people, that doo anhelitu or is enecare homines, kill men with
the breath that comes from their mouthes. And Leno in the Comedy is
noted to bee of so strong a breath, that hee had almost blowne downe the
young Gallant that stood in his way: but the PoetsOuid. Virgil. Homer. tell vs, that Hell hath a more
deadly breathing than all; so as if a Bird doo by chance flee ouer the
Stygian Floud, shee is quelled with the smell, and fals down
stark dead. Now, the company of Priests, for potency of
breath, doo put down Pliny, Leno, Hell, the Diuell
and all: for, the Diuell, who can well enough indure the lothsome odors and
euaporations of hell, is not able to indure the vapour issuing from the
mouth of a Priest; but had rather go to hell, than abide his smell. And
hence it is (I think), that, in their baptizing of children, the
Priest breathes and spets into the mouth of the
childe: which (no doubt) is very soueraigne, especially if the
priests lungs bee but a little vlcerated or pockified. One William
Trayford, and Sarah Williams (as you shall reade in
Bishop Harsenet's Book, page 71.) beeing
possessed, Trayfords Diuell rebounded at the dint of the
priestsbreath, and was glad to get him out
at Trayfords right eare, like a mouse, rather than he would come out
jump against the priests mouth. 
M^ngus the Canonist giueth vs a rule, that if the Diuell be
stubborn, and will not obey the formidable exorcisme of the Priest, then
that the Priest shall os suum quamproxime ad energu^enum admouere. Sarah
Williams lay past all sense in a transe, being vtterly bereaued of all
her senses at once: the priest no sooner came neer her, but she
discerned him by the smell. Was not this a jolly rank smell? Yea,
but this is but a flea-biting to the priests gloues, his hose, his
girdle, his shirts, which had in them a dreadfull power to burne out a
Diuell, nay, all the Diuels in the parties aforesaid
possessed. Which Diuels, because the
priests knew so well their names, shall not heer go vncited: 
Page 181.Lustie Dick, Killico, Hob,
Corner-cap, Puffe, Purre, Frateretto, Fliberdigibbet, Haberdicut, Cocobatto,
Maho, Kellicocam, Wilkin, Smolkin, lustie iolly Ienkin, Portericho, Pudding
of Thame, Pour-dieu, Boniour, Motubizanto, Nur, Bernon, Delicate. The
chief of these Diuels, when one of the priests gloues was but put
vpon the possessed's hands, durst not abide, but was
scared, and went straight away. One of the great Diuels was
slipt, ere he was aware, into Sarah Williams legge: 
Page 81.where finding himself caught
within the Priests hose which she had on, he plunges and tumbles
like a Salmon taken in a Net, and cries, Harro ho: out alas! pull
off, pull off: case the poore Diuell of his pain (oh, a goodly ginne to
catch a Woodcock withall). O but let me tell you of another trick, though not
so cleanly as I could wish. 
Page 87.One Fid (Landresse
^o the Diuels incarnate)
was washing a Buck of foule clothes: amongst which, was one of the
Priest-Exorcists shirts. The Diuell comes
sneaking behinde her, trips vp her heeles, and pitcheth her on her hip. And
wot you why the Diuell played her this vnmannerly trick? Because she was
washing-out a foule shirt of one of the Priests, which afterward serued
to whip the Diuell out of one of the possessed. There are yet
other Anti-daemoniacks of speciall account, which, in the
Diuell-hunting sport, are in stead of little Beagles to fill vp the Cry.
And they are the Amice, the Albe, and the holy
Stole; very scorpions and whips indeed: and therefore beware,
Diuell. 
page 89.F. Edmunds no
sooner laid the Amice vpon Sarah Williams her face, but a
spirit puffed at it, and could not endure to let it alone. The sacred
Stole was but wound about anothers neck that was
possessed, and it so pent and begirt the Diuell, that hee
stared, fumed and fomed, as he had been stark mad; and, in the end, was
squeezed out with pure violence, as water out of a squirt. An heroicall
combate was performed between Maho, one of the diuels, and the
Priest, during seuen houres long. 
page 90.Maho the diuell
stood vpon his guard, would not come in. He was summoned by the Priest,
first, with Salue Regina, and Aue Maria; then with
Mengus club, with his whip, with Holy-water. Maho stood
out, till the Priest prepared himself to afflict him with the
Maniple: and then he came in, and yeelded to parley or dialogue with
the Priest in a milde and temperate voice. See the puissance of the
Catholique Romish Church, whose silliestrag hath
power to change the diuels roaring note, and to cause him to speake in a
milde moderate key! Latet anguis in herba: a man would little
suspect, when he meets with the Amice, the Stole, and the
Maniple, wound vp in a little casket, that there were such black
hel-metall within them, to excoriate and lancinate a diuell.All these tricks and many more were acted at Denham in
Buckinghamshire, about the yeer 1590.
But I conclude: Nisi naenijs, tricis, et puppis vsa
esset Roma, poenas iam diu dedisset: If it were not for puppets,
apes-faces, and gawdes, with which Rome allures, maskes, and
disguises the poore silly people, shee had long since sung the
dolefull Song mentioned in holy Writ; Desolatione magn^ desolata est, et turpitudo eius
gentibus reuelata; that is, shee had bin cleane desolate, and her
turpitude had beene opened to the eyes of all the world. As for all the
tricks and iuggling shifts (so often discouered) which the
Priests, these Exorcists, vse; the
Exorcist driuing the Diuell within the lists of the
possessed body (with Come aloft, Iack-an-apes) from
one part to another: to what end doe all these their dealings tend, but to
this proiect, that the stande^s-by may be perswaded of some point of Popery, or of
the Priests power ouer the Diuels?
If any Christian in these daies hath been truely and really
possessed by the Diuell, and if the Romish Priests haue truely
such a scourging power to whip out Diuels, why vse they it not
effectually when most need is? For example
^ There was one M. Blewet,
a man of great reuenewes, and one M. Fowell, a man no lesse
famoused,both of which either were or seemed to bee
indiuelled. How often had they beene Exorcized in this Kingdom, by
Francis Kemp, by Philip Woodward, by F. Edmunds, by
F. Campian, by F. Sherwin, by F. Hil, by F.
Walpool, and diuers others, but especially, F. Collington, and
F. Warmington, who often promised, they would make the Diuell
speake in M. Blewet, and M. Fowell. But as those two had
many sweating combates heere in England, so had they tormentings
at Loretto, Sichem, Lile, Louaine, Doway, and elswhere beyond the
Seas; and all the consolation which they found, was to returne
worse, and farther from hope of deliuerance, then when they went. The
Popish sanctuaries rather added strength to the diuels. And yet
our Popish Thrasonical Priests will brag and boast, that
they can tosse a diuell like a Tennis-ball, or a Dog in
a blanket; whereat they are very nimble, especially in a
possessed woman, in whose body they can canuas a diuell by
contrectation and certaine inchanting nips, making him ferret vp and downe,
from tongue to toe, from toe back againe to finger. Oh the formidable magicall
power of sacred anointed hands, not onely infusing chastity but also
sanctity by their touch!
I could heere set foorth another Theatre of their
Exorcising plots and attempts, to weet, their practising with
Grace Sowrebuts of Salmisburie, in the County of
Lancaster; whom one Thomson, alias Southworth, a Priest,
caused to accuse IennetBierly, Helen
Bierly, and Iane Southworth, (the one of them her Grand-mother)
of Witchcraft, of the killing of the childe of Thomas
Walshman, with a Naile in the Nauill, the boyling, eating and oyling,
thereby to trans-forme themselues into diuers shapes: 
This was done about 14. yeers ago.all
which, at the Assises holden at Lancaster, prooued to
be false; and the said Grace Sowrebuts confessed, that she
was perswaded and counselled to accuse the said parties of
Witchcraft, by M. Thomson, alias, M. Christopher
Southworth a Priest, who comploted this, to gaine to himselfe some
credit by exorcising, or vnwitching her. This confession of Grace
Sowrebuts, with the Examination of others, who discouered the Priests
impious dealings, was taken before William Leigh, Batchelor in
Diuinity, and Edward Chisnall Esquire, two of his Maiesties
Iustices of peace in that County.The Examinations were
put since in print by Thomas Pots, Esquire. Sure, these
iuggling exorcismes are but ordinary with Priests and Iesuites: but
such a malicious and bloudy proiect of subornation, must bee a
master-trick of some sublimed spirit, fit to instruct a nouice
Assassine, and to read a Lecture in the Iesuites dark chamber
of meditation.
The Boy of Bilson.For the
next vnmasking of our Mirabilaries. I might adde the
Narration of certaine Priests, practising with the
Boy of Bilson. Anno 1621. whose name was William Perry,
Sonne of Tho. Perry of Bilson, in the County of Stafford.
But because there hath beene so lately a true discouery of the notorious
Impostures of certaine RomishPriests, in their pretended Exorcisme or expulsion of
the diuell out of the said young Boy; I referre you to M. Rich.
Baddeley his book vpon that occasion written: and I intreat you to
consider, whether they deserue not the reputation of the rarest
Mounte-banks of these times. Quam falsa dicendo voluptatem ceperint,
eandem vera legendo et audiendo amittant.In
praesat. lib. praedict.
Two Maids possest with the Virgin
Mary, Michael the Arch-Angell, etc.About some seuen
yeeres since, two Catholique Maids, forsooth, the one called
Mary, the other Amye, resorting to the Gatehouse
in Westminster, took such benefit by the Priests
conuersation with them, beeing sometimes sequestred from all the world
besides, that they were cast into extaticall raptures, and
possessed, not with Diuels, as the vulgar sort of
those that vndergoe the Priests hands, but with heauenly and
glorious guests, pretended to enter into them, and inhabit them, to the great
admiration of the stupid, gullifyed, Romanizing beholders, and to
the no small renowne of the Spirituall Fathers then present;
F. Benet, F. Aston, F. Palmer, F. Hanz. In very deedlaw, they were
somtimes possest with the Virgin Mary, other-while
with Saint Michael the Arch-Angell, Saint Iohn the
Baptist, M. Molineux the Martyr, and M. Roberts
the Martyr,Two Tiburn-martyrs. and diuers other
aswell Masculine as Feminine Saints; and, in the name of these
Saints, did giue blessings to such as were present. The
substance of which narration hath been, vpon the Examination of one of
their Exorcists, confessed. Yet when thiswas
blowne abroad, and beganne to breed scandall vnto the Catholick
cause, one of the maides gaue-ouer her pretended guest, and the other
was secretly conueyed away.
One Hanz, alias, Hance
possessed with the blessed Trinity.One of the forenamed
Priests calling himself Edward Hanz, alias, Hance, borne at
Lutterworth in Leicestershire, had a trick beyond all his
fellowes, and durst aspire so high, as to pretend himselfe to bee
cast into a deepe admirable extasie, and to bee corporally
possessed (horresco referens) with the blessed
Trinitie. Neither was hee more abominably knauish in this his
Impudencie, then some of his owne Coat, who were then blockishly
foolish in their credulity. For some of them, when hee acted this
his Trinitarian rapture c^me and kneeled to him, bringing Oblations triplici
numero, to present vnto the Trinity, inhabiting this
Mounte-banke. Among which gifts presented by these Lozels, one
was gold-coine, an oblation neuer vnacceptable to those that
pretend creare Creatorem. That it is no fiction in mee to relate this
their fiction, may appeare by the Examination of the said
Hanz ^aken, Iulij
5. 1616. before the L. Arcbishop of Canterbury, the LL. BB. of
London, Lincolne, Rochester, Litchfield, the Deane of
Westminster, and Sir W. Bird, D. of the Law: before whom
he denieth not such his rapture and possession. For beeing
then demanded, whether hee euer took on him to bee 
Verbatim, out of the
Examination.possessed with the blessed Trinity,
saying of himselfe, I God the Father, that made the world; I God the
Sonne, that redeemed the world; I God the holy Ghost,
that sanctified the world, the glorious, blessed and vndiuided Trinity,
doe giue you my blessing, and doe command you to adore mee: And beeing
further asked, whether some that were present, did not adore him,
and some other refused: hee answered, 
This Hans with his cogging transe, is
so bold and blasphemous, as to allude vnto S. Pauls rapture, 2
Cor. 12.3That once or twice when hee was about those actions, or
in the Interim of them, he was in a transe, and his soule did
see very supernaturall and admirable ioyes: and then whether God Almighty
or an Angell (hee will not meddle with it, but referreth it to God Almighty
and his Church) spake in the name of God and the blessed Trinity, and
gaue a Blessing, and that himselfe at those times, had no power in
himselfe, but that the Organs of his body were vsed to a supernaturall
purpose, and by a diuine or supernaturall cause: And as God did cause
the Aire to speak, in giuing downe the Law, saying, I AM THE LORD THY
GOD; and did cause Balaams Asse to vtter words: so hee
might cause the Organs of this Examinates body, to speak as best
pleased the will of his diuine Maiesty: and the truth of the whole action,
hee doth referre to God Almighty and his Church. And he doth say further for
his part, that no humane person whatsoeuer liuing can vse the Name of
the blessed Trinity; saying, I the blessed Trinity blesse
you, without sinne, vnlesse God almighty doo take the creature, and
speake in him: and then it is Gods owne word, and not the word of the party.
But touching adoration, there was no commandement of it, to his remembrance:
and if any did it, it was no more than due to the eternall Trinity, who may be
adored in all places.
This imposture, though neuer so odious and
blasphemous, yet flew abroad, and was fostered as a true Miracle. For
confirmation whereof, report was added, that this holy Priest thus
possessed by the Trinity, walking vp and down the streets daily
amongst the Hereticks, yet none of them had the power to apprehend or lay hands
on him.
I could acquaint you with other his horrible and sacrilegious
impieties: but let this suffice. It was foretold by Saint Iohn, that
their adulterous Mother should haue her mouth full of
blasphemies;Apoc. 13.6.which, to her shame,
wee doo now obserue. And according to that of the Apostle, The spirit
speaketh expresly, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the
faith, giuing heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of diuels, speaking
lies in hypocrisie, hauing their consciences seared with an hot
iron:1. Tim. 4.1,2,3. which beeing the propertie
of false prophets, it is more then manifest, who are specified,
especially if wee ponder those words of the Apostle, Such should
forbid marriage, and command men to abstain from meats, etc.
To these two last blasphemies, it will not bee amisse to
adde what our Papists report of Katharine of
Sienna.In vit. Sanct. Katharin de
Sienna. She (forsooth) and Christ Iesus, by
an admirable kinde of permutation, did enterchange their hearts; so
that Christ had the heart of Katharine; and
Katharine, that of Christ. Oh you ignorant and
desperately-superstitious Pontificians, who iustifie this
Fable! Obserue you not? vnderstand you not, that this miraculous chaffering
of hearts subuerteth a very Principle of Christian
Religion (receiued also by your selues) which is, that quod Christus
semel assumpsit, nunquam dimisit, what Christ did once
assume (to weet, by hypostaticall vnion) he neuer left the same.
I cannot by the way omit a fantasticall relation of the
Papists, which I read in Baronius, how the Virgin Mary
visited Fulbert in his sicknes, and gaue him her breasts to
suck, much comforting him thereby.(...) Baron.
(...) 1028. ff.
5.
I beleeue, there escaped at that time some drops of milk from
Fulbertus his lips, hee beeing not accustomed to suck, and those
are they which are kept in a siluer image of the Virgin Mary, in her
Church at Rhemes, and are there worshipped.
There was of late, viz. an. 1621. one imprisoned either
in the Gate-house or New-prison, who cald himself
Newton: he pretended, he had a Vision by night of the
Virgin Mary appearing vnto him, and saying, Newton, see that
thou doo not take the oath of alleageance.Vid.
High-Commission Records. And being of this publiquely examined, and
asked, How he knew it to be the Virgin Mary which appeared? he
answered, I knew it was shee: for, she appeared vnto me in the forme
of her Assumption. Of what nature that idle Vision was, the Reader
may finde in M. Widrington, who handleth the same, and doth in part
discouer the vanity thereof. A pretty Argument this was against taking the
Oath. Since I heard thereof, I asked a Priest,M.
Rich. what he thought of this vision of Newton's.
Hee told mee, that This Newton was a very holy
man, and hath had other visions besides that: which
if he should repeat, would make a man tremble and quake. Hereticks
(quoth he) haue no such visions and heauenly apparitions. I
knowe not whom he meant by the word Hereticks: but if he mean vs
Protestants, who haue more reason to inuert the phrase vpon them;
sure, we are not such listners to miracles. Prodigia nulla facimus:
signa nulla edimus: we work no wonders: wee shew no visions, as
Acosta a Iesuite of theirs once asseuerantly deliuered.Acost. Ies. de salut. Indor. l 4
Our Sauiour Christ himself (as Saint Augustine
obserueth)Aug. Tract. 13 in Ioh.
3 hath giuen vs a caution against these miracle-mongers; willing
vs to take heed, that we be not deceiued.Mark
13.5 Yea, their owne Preacher Stella (whom of late time they
haue gelt, as they doo all other their Writers, when they meet with any thing
that makes not for their turn) entring into this contemplation, taught
publiquely, that Miracles now would rather be an hinderance vnto
faith.Stel. in Luc. 11
Katharine de Bus, dwelling in the City of Lile,
in the County of Flanders, in the yeere 1602. was possessed of
the Diuell; insomuch that shee could bee scarce a quarter of an houre in
peace, without beeing seazed vpon and troubled by the enemie: which made her
speake (to the purpose) diuers sorts of Languages; as, Hebrew, Greeke,
and Latine. When they came neere vnto her with the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, shee writhed and wrested her selfe strangely, both with her
leggs, armes, and back, gnashing her teeth, and grizly drawing of her mouth.
The parents of this wench labouredso much, that shee
was diuers times exorcised, sometimes by certaine Fathers of the order of
the Capuchins, sometimes by other Priests: vnto whom the wicked Spirits
answered in diuers Languages, confessing at that time, that they were
seuen in number. They spake diuers iniurious things, and told the faults of
diuers that were present. No meanes could bee vsed for the casting out
of these wicked Fiends, till there was found a man that was come from
Mountague, and had brought with him a piece of the Oke of our Ladie.
Whereupon, one Sir Siluester Dennys, who came to see her, took the
said piece, and made the Patient to eat it: and immediatly after shee had
swallowed it, the enemy (who called himselfe Houilliu Clicquet and
Clinquart) shewed himselfe in her throat; crying out, that he
scorched and burned, because of the wood which was eaten: and hee added,
that he was compelled to depart, and that there remained in her as yet three.
And beeing demanded, by whose merit and intercession hee was to depart; The
wicked spirit answered, Of Mary of Mountague. Afterwards,
beeing demanded, what signe he would giue of his departure, he^ said, He would burst a glasse
of the Church-window. And immediatly after, two of them departed with the
said signe of bursting the glasse; and the third, saying that hee
was the last of tenne, cryed out (in going foorth) with aloud voice, Viue
N. Dame de Mountague, qui nous faict sortir: Honour bee to our Lady of
Mountague, who maketh vs to depart. And from that day afterwards, the
said Katharine remained whole and perfectly free from the
possession and vexation of the enemie, inioying
al^her limmes and senses as
freely as euer shee did before: In lib. intit. Miracles lately
wrought by the intercession of the glorious Virgin Mary at
Mountague; and translated out of the French into English, by
Rob. Chambers, Priest, page 209. 210. et seq.
This buzzing relation, penned and published by the Priests
themselues, is suteable and (in a sort) paralell to that which
Brerely tells vs of diuers who were dispossessed of
Diuels, by kissing of the Altar and the Priests vesture. But I will cap
this tale with a fresh-bleeding new Story, fetcht not farre without the
walles of London.
A certaine Catholicke collapsed Ladie (whose name I
spare, for the respect I beare to her best friends) about some two or
three yeeres since, departed from her husband (yet liuing) and went ouer to
Bruxels, and was admitted into the order of Nunnerie, I meane
a Nunne at large, one of the vncloistred sisters of the
order of Saint Clare, and there shee remained a while, till
there appeared in her some passion incompatible with Nunship.
Shee came ouer into England a companion with a religious
Iesuite, since of great note, F. D. and remaining afterwards
an inlarged Nunne in London, was (as it seemeth) more visibly
taken with a disease befalling that sexe, called flatus
vterinus: and thereupon, that this matter might bee carried the more
cleanely, it was giuen out, that shee was possessed with an euill
spirit, which did makeher belly to swell like a woman
with child. Certaine it is, many were deluded by this occasion: and the
practice of the Priests to hide her blemish, and gull poore people, was
lewd and abominable. For a certaine IesuiteP.
T. (whom I could also name, being a smug, spruce,
liquorish, young fellow, a fit man to bee called Father (forsooth)
at euery word, and of no high stature; and so, fit to be a disguised
Olympio, to act the part of Casina in Plautus, or
to act a womanized Chaerea in Terence his Eunuchus)
put on the Ladies or such like womanish apparel, with a Vaile ouer his
face: and that some found Ignaro's about the Towne might be perswaded of
the Priests power for the casting out of Diuels, they were
suffred to come to her chamber, where were two other IesuitesOne of these, namely, F. D. about halfe a yeare after,
was a chiefe Actor in a true lamentable Tragedy, yet memorable by a
Downfall. (prouided for the purpose, to act their parts in this
Comedie); who no sooner fell to their prayers, and began to vse their
exorcizing spels, but thereupon the supposed Ladie began to vtter her
mind both in Italian, Latin and Greeke: which much
astonished the standers by, they little dreaming of this deceit. Neither
was this all: I will yet proceed farther in this so comicall a Narration.
It was wont, when an Interlude was to bee acted in a Countrey
Towne, the first question that an Hob-naile Spectator made, before hee
would pay his penny to goe in, was, Whether there bee a Diuell and a Foole
in the play? And if the Foole get vpon the Diuels backe, and beate him
with his Cox-combe till hee roare, the play is compleat.Here is Foole vpon Foole, but extra scenam, off from the
Stage; the gaping, admiring, beleeuing Spectators. But to make this pageant
compleat, this disguised Diuel must roare; and that was, by the
bringing the consecrated Host in a Pix, and applying it
vnder the head of this Sheeknaue-Iesuite, or Hee-lubberly Lady.
Then his Diuel-ship raues and struggles, as if hee would
rather goe to hell againe, then indure the tormenting presence of the
Holy Pix. Diuers other feats were performed vpon this occasion,
which I will spare to declare, till I receiue Command on the one
side, or Challenge on the other.
Whether she euer heard of her selfe thus acted in her
absence, I know not, but sure I haue heard from a credible author, that
she was actiue, or rather passiue in one tragical part of this
Mummery; which (mee thinks) shee should rather some other had
performed it for her. Forsooth, these Medicinall Diuel-purgers
were not to seeke for the deuice of the consecrated potion (in
imitation of that which was giuen to Sarah Williams at
Denham before-mentioned): this potion must make her
vomit vp no lesse then seuen Diuels: and to that end,
shee was let downe into a darke roome, and there shut vp for a time without
light; and, after the operation of this Diuel-scowring vomit, light was
let-in, and seuen Todes shewed to her in the place, as regorged by
her, and being no lesse then (doub^lesse) dreadfull Diuels.
This last circumstance I doe not auerre vpon 
knowledge, as acted by them; but rather think it giuen-out
by the party and others, to pretend, that some great miracles haue been
wrought in her, or by her, that she might haue the better pretence to haue
been resembled vnto Mary Magdalen, out of whom seuen Diuels
were cast.
Leauing it then in medio, till I receiue better
information; yet sure I am, shee carrieth the name of working
miracles. And indeed well may it bee so said, that shee and
her Copes-mates the Priests do work miracles: for, to my
vnderstanding, it is little lesse than a miracle, that any of our Nation,
vncapable of Bedlam or a Bable, should be stricken with
such stupidity, as to beleeue in these Iugglers and Romish
Mounte-banks.
If I should heer recount all the Lies and
Tales of Priests, concerning the multitudes that haue been
dispossessed of Diuels, by the help of a whole Beuy of Ladies; Our
Lady of Mountague, our Lady of Loretto,
our Lady of Hales, and our Lady of Sienna:
no reasonable Volume would receiue or containe them. I referre him that would
spend idle time in idle fables, to Rob. Chambers his book
before-cited, and to T. P. his book intituled, The History of our
blessed Lady of Loretto, and to Lipsius his dotages of our
Lady of Hales, and to I. Heigham his book intituled,
The Lady of Sienna: and you will need no other Register of their
Impostures, no golden Legend. Doting Metaphrastes, fabulous
Lippoman, lying and voraginous Iacobus, superstitious
Antonine, confuse Vincentius, haue so cloyed 
the dwellers vpon earth with delusions and lies,
that (for very shame) the Papists haue exploded and pared out of their
Portesses and Breuiaries many and sundry of their
fabulous Histories, being indeed forced thereunto by the derisions and
outcries of Christians against them. Yea, Claudius Espencae^s (one of their owne) telles vs,Espenc. in 2 ad Tim. et digres. l.
c. 1. 11. that their Legends and Portesses
were as full of idle vanities, as any Stables could be full of dung. What
fruit was there in those things, wherof you are now ashamed?Rom. 6.11
Who (me thinks) could bee so bewitched, as be born in hand, that
A house was carried in the aire from Palestina to
Loretto;T. P. page 40. that a Dalmatian
Priest comming many miles to Loretto, and carrying vp with his
hand his bowels quite pulled out of his belly, by one onely praier to our Lady
there, was instantly healed;T. P. page 181. 182.
This is as true, as was our Dalmatian ventriosus Marcus
Amonius. that a blockish Image in a wall, doth work as high
miracles, as euer were performed by the eternall Sonne of God; that 
Vid. Ful. Andros. Naucler.
Costerum.Saint Francis had the prints of our Sauiours wounds;
that the two Tails of our Sauiours Asse, the 
S. Iohn Baptis^ head shewed both at Ami^s and at Rome.two
heads of Saint Iohn the Baptist, the milk of our
blessed Lady, are this day to bee seen; that at the great 
Franc-Sales in his introduct. to
a deuout life Fitz-Simon.Lake of Vister, Saint
Patrick (who chased all the venome out of Ireland) is one
day by the Priests yet visible, and that 
As N^ had with the nymph Aeg^they haue then conference with him; beside,
that there is a wonder-working Purgatory of his; that a 
A Carmelite
^uru^tting, reported by all the Priests now in
London: and one of them swore to me, that hee saw
it.Carmelit came lately to Paris, and there saying
Masse, euery day, at the eleuatio^ (...) consecrated
Host, himself was still eleuated or hoised on cock-horse into
the aire; that F.  Steuens a
Priest (now in London) hath a Crosse,
whereunto are affixed some Reliques of a dead Martyr, one M.
Maxfield: which Crosse beeing stolne from him, and carried one
day almost fifty miles (as was known), the night following, came back of its
owne accord, and hee found it in the morning vnder his beds head:If any man, being 50 miles from London, want an Hackney to carry
him back, let him hire F. Steuens galloping Crosse. which
Crosse, surely, must bee a kinne to a Stone in Anglesey,
reported to be of that property, that how-farresoeuer a man carried it in
the day, it would return of it self at night into the Iland; that the very
sight of Garnets straw hath made (at least) fiue hundred in our
Kingdome become good Catholiques:Vid. the
true Christian Catholick, written by I Heigham. which if it
be true, I see no reason, but euery Thresher in England
should become a Romanist, because they deale with strawes,
which haue as perfect an effigies of F. Garnet, as any other
straw without cquiuocation euer yet had; that M. Gennings executed
at Tiburn,Vid. a Book intit. The life
and death of Edmund Gennings, page 86.  his belly beeing
opened, his bowels cut out, and his heart in the Executioners hand, yet the
Martyr cryed out, Sancte Gregori, ora pro me; Holy
Gregory, pray for me; that the same mans holy anointed
Thumb, beeing touched by a Virgin after his death, of it self
came off, bone and flesh, from the rest of the hand;Page
93. A Tale of Tom Thumb. that when one M. Dakins a
Priest, executed at Tiburn, was a-dying,Heigham, vt sup. pag. 146. a certain Virgin,
a kinswoman of his, though many miles remote, longing after some of
the Martyrs flesh, she not knowing how to obtain her desire, yet being
full of faith, one of M. Dakins holy toes did miraculously
yield it self into her virginal hands;S^on
protesteth, that he heard him speak the same, vid. S^ of miracles, page 25.
that Robert Parsons could make the Diuell speak in any
English Bishop or Heretick whomsoeuer; that Robert
Parsons being apprehended by a Pursuiuant at
Norwich in Cheshire, and put into a chamber fast bolted
and locked vpon him, the dore did three times together miraculously and of
its owne accord flee open;R. Parsons a pick-lock
equiuocator. that one F. Scroop a Priest, being in
a Gentlemans house in Lancashire, and certain Pursuiuants
coming to search for him, notwithstanding hee was in the midst of the
Roum with them, yet he became inuisible to the said Searchers;I think, sometimes visible gold
(...) make a man inuisible
that one Katharine Riland within the City of London, with
eating one bit of flesh forbidden by her ghostly Father, was instantly
choked;G.A.P. in his book called, The rules of
obedience, page 12. G.A P. page 41 that one Thomas
Vincent of London, scoffing at a Priest saying M^ss, forthwith fell mad, and, for many
daies after, was heard pronounce no other words but these, O holy
Priest, O holy Masse; that old F. Chambers taking the
confession of a Nun at Bruxels, her name M.
Stan, she was me^amorphosed, and seemed vnto him a flame of fire;^ Pi^ing^ a Priest in (...), the (...)
that whensoeuer a certaine Priest put his finger nigh Sauerius his
heart, there issued out bloud and water;Tu^sel vit Saue
(...) c. 4. that Holy
Father Philip Nerius, vpon a certain night as hee was walking, and
falling into a certain ditch, was presently caught by the haires of his head
by an Angell, and so deliuered;Bar. in an.
1550 that an Image was crucified at Beritum, and did bleed;
that the diuell held both S. Edmunds his hands, that he could not make
the signe of the Crosse;(...) in his protest. page 162. that M.
Christopher Cusake, an Irish Iesuite,
had a Crucifix which could speak?
Are these gracelesse saltlesse gulleries, either to be
beleeued or countenanced? Is it possible, that men of wit, vnderstanding
and spirit, should bee intoxicated and carried away with such muddy
deuices; the end of which is, non ethnicos conuertendi, sed ipsos
euertendi,Tertul. de praescr. vers.
haereticos. not to conuert and bring any vnto the knowledge of the
truth, but rather to* make them wallow in the mire and sink of errour;
in which themselues haue long stuck fast? And by reading of all which you
may finde, that the Diuell hath no greater cunning, nor preuaileable art, then
to support the Romish Religion by such palpable, grosse, filthy and
idle inuentions. What is there in them (for the most part) more then in the
Poeticall fiction of the Gods; the Fables of Homer, Herodotus,
Ouid, Bocace, and the rest? All is but the deceits of lying tongues,
the presumption and bragging of Inchanters, and the ceremonies of
Augurers, Pythonists and Arts-masters in Incantations: against
whom the Poets themselues had many inuectiues, and condemned the Priests of
that time, as we do the Friers of this Age: as
Euripides,Eurip. Ion.
Hei mihi! versipelles vt homines semper odi,qui componentes iniusta, deinde fr^udes adornant.
The examples before-recited, shew the collusions the
Priests vse, vpon pretence of miraculous power: nor is their diligence
lesse in other means, which they vse by daily sollicitations for their
owne aduantage; 
Priests haue their Agents.euery
Priest of action,and any ability, hauing two
Assistants assign'd vnto him: whose office, like the Familiars of
the Inquisition, is to straggle abroad, for the bringing-in of game.
These subseruient procurers are Laicks, and though not able to
maintaine Argumen^, yet pry in
by-corners, nay, and put forward in open places, to shake and try any weake
wauering Protestants; and if they can get but to intertaine conference, and
giue ^are to their boasts and
insinuations, then they bring them to be better hammered vpon the Anuill of
their great Masters. Sometime they deale with tender game, scarce yet
fledge, I meane, young Youths, whom they inueigle, to transport to the
nests of their Seminaries. I haue giuen you some examples before, and could
afford you more. If at the Schooles o^ Westminster, Pauls, Winchester, Eaton,
Christ-Church or Suttons Hospitall, there chance bee some
young man discontented, for the losse of a place in the Vniuersitie hee
hoped for; or in the Vniuersities, some young graduate, halfe distracted
or discouraged, vpon the losse of some fellowship, or other promotion
hee aspired vnto; Oh then there is matter to work on; none of these, I
warrant you, shall escape without promise of better preferment; there
needs not one to informe them, what prouision is made beyond the Seas at
Saint Omers, Doway, Lisbon, Louaine, Spaine, Rome, for all such
Nouices; what beautifull Colledges, stately Edifices, large
Reuenewes thereunto annexed; what great liberty, what good
company, what practice of Piety.

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit
auceps.

Like the Fowler, they can allure with diuers these pleasing
notes, to tempt to their lure, and bring the Foot within the Snare: sed
terminu sistius gaudij, mors est,Bern. the
end of this prooues the most deadly and dangerous. Some of their scouts
haue I known about the vniuersity of Oxford, as one Kinsman,
Ford, Mason; and diuers others could I point, at this present, heere
in London, who indeed are no lesse perillous and pernicious then
the Priests themselues. If they can finde any, for extraordinary
pregnancie of wit, learning, parentage, friends, especially
possessions, fit to serue their turnes, and condescend to their
expectations, by no meanes must such scape their fingers.
What other shifts haue the Priests to wrest and wring from
their poore Disciples, wherewithall to maintaine their pomp and brauery?
How a Gentlewoman of Saint Giles in
the fields neere London, was cheated by a Priest.A
Gentlewoman of the parish of Saint Giles in the fields neere
Holborne, was of late time sick, and beeing one that was well
inclining and warping toward the Popish pale or bent, sent for a
Priest, a man very famous about this Towne, to come vnto her, and
assist her with his best comfort and counsell; who vnderstanding her
desire, was soone with her: and beeing come, shee acquainted him, how the
case stood betweene Almighty God and her distressed soule; and
hauing laid herselfe open vnto him, after the forme of Catholick
Confession, her Ghostly Fa her the
Priest, told her, that shee should not neede to take any
farther thought or care of her Soule, but commit all to him, his Absolution
would bee auaileable, and by Prayer himselfe would intercede for her.
Yet one thing farther hee must tel^ her; that shee might bee more certaine of M rcy and
Indulgence, if there were some care had for the saying of so many
Masses for her after her death at the high Altar. The woman listned
to this, and liked it very well. Yea, but the Priest had not said all;
These Masses (he told her) could not be had without a round
summe of money. Shee demanded of the Priest, what the whole charges
might bee. Hee told her, About some thirty pounds. The poore
gentlewoman answered, Shee had not so much money in her custodie; but
plate shee would deliuer him, sufficient to raise such a summe: and
accordingly shee deliuered it forthwith to his possession; who, hauing
met with such a booty, had little desire to visit any more his sick
patient. The woman within a short time after grew so weake in her body,
that shee was past ho^e of
recouery, and then sent againe for her spirituall Doctor to come and
administer some of his ghostly physick to her. But my Gentleman had
taken paines enough before, and by no meanes would bee brought the second
time vnto her. A good Caucat heere was, for her, and others to take heed of
such cogging and insinuating companions. It pleased God, this Gentlewoman
recouered; and, making good vse of that abuse shee receiued by this
Priest in her sicknesse, she altered her Religion: and now, to the
comfort of diuers worthy and painfull Ministers about
the City, shee is become a good Church-woman, and spends the most of her
time in Gods seruice, going daily vnto Sermons, and following nothing so
much as her deuotions.
The Priests insinuating with one Mistris
Reid, and fishing for her estate.In Summer 1623. A
Gentlewoman named Read, lying at that time sick at
Bednall-greene neere London, and hauing Land of inheritance, of
aboue fiue hundred pounds, per annum, was vehemently set vpon by
some Iesuites and Priests; insomuch, that shee was inclineable to
referre her estate to their disposall. Whereupon, some of her neere
kinne, repairing to a Doctor of Diuinitie, of good note in London,
informed him, how farre the Priests had wrought with her. Whereupon, hee
by conference and instruction, did set her right againe (as by Gods
blessing, hee hath confirmed diuers others). It is very probable, that
the greatest part of that estate should haue flowne beyond the Seas, as
much other our Countrey goods and Riches doe, to vnderline the
Nunneries.
The Priests visiting M. Netlam,
to get from him his Land.In August last, one
Musket a Iesuite, and another Priest, came to Francis
Netlam, lying very sick in M. Dawsons house in
Fetter-Lane; and vnderstanding of some Lands or
possessions he had, to a round value, inquired of him, how he
disposed of these his reuenues, and to whom he meant to leaue them after
his decease. Hee acquainted them, that he had brothers and sisters,
poore, and of his owne Religion (to weet, Papists) who didexpect them. But these insinuating Priests, more regarding
themselues then their Disciples, dealt so farre with him, that hee was
content to giue his La^ds to
themselues, or whom they should nominate, so to be at their
disposing. Which gra^ted, M. Muskets care was such, that a
Will was drawne, and the Lands thereby conueyed to the Priests, or to
some other for their vse. Therupon returning to the house where this
sick Catholick lay, they requested the woman of the house (Mistris
Dawson, her husband not being within), to bee a Witnesse to
the said Will. But shee, vnderstanding the Contents thereof,
refused so to doe: neither would shee suffer them to goe to the sick
mans chamber, vnlesse their intent were better. So soone as her husband
came home, shee told him what the Priests would haue done. Therevpon, her
husband intreated the Lecturer of the parish, and another
Minister, to perswade the said Francis Netlam, not to
bee so foolish and vnnaturall, as to giue his Land from his needy
brethren, to these cheating, coozening, and colloguing Priests. The sick
man followed the counsell of these Ministers, in whom hee found more
plaine dealing, then in the other his spirituall Fathers. And
notwithstanding hee had beene long misl^d by the said Romish Impostors, hee desired to bee prayed
for (according to the forme of our English Church) in Saint
Dunstanes in the West, at their next Wednesday Lecture:
an^ further to expresse his
conformity to our Church, heereceiued the blessed
Sacrament with vs before his death.
Hence then obserue, how industrious our Priests are, not
onely to get Proselyte men and women, but also Proselyte Lands and
possessions: notwithstanding all their pretended pouertie, bonus
odor lucri, they will omit no opportunitie to get what gaine they can. I
know this to be true, that in those parts where I haue liued, and where are
most Papists of any part of this Kingdome; there is not a Popish
Gentleman in all the Countrey, but there is a Priest to his Steward, and
disposer of houshold and reuenues; neither doth the Owner let, set, or
sell any land, without the approbation and consent of these pretended
spirituall guides. And that indeed is it which causeth Papists the more
to abound, for that a Land-lord led by such directors, will not suffer any
one quietly to liue vpon his Land, but such as the three-quarter Lord
Priest taketh to bee his holy children, and will be ready to doe him
seruice. A fine engine to wheele about, and scrue whole families and
Townes, by the pully which twineth the long rope of Spiritualls reaching out
ad temporalia.
Another of their engines is, If an offender come to one of these
Priests to Confession; as they inioyne him, for one part of his penance,
to say so many Pater-nosters, so many Creeds, so
many Aue-maries, by scores euery day: so likewise they
impose on his head a pecuniary mulct,hee must pay into
the hands of some other Priest 40, 30, 20, 10, 8, or 5 pounds (according
to the ability of the partie), to bee distributed by the said Priest, a
iudicious man, in pios vsus. Which money once fingered, is very
iudiciously shared betwixt these two shriuing Priests, who
(Iudas-like) will haue no waste, et tenentes marsupium,
tenentur amarsupio.
Againe, that their Lampes may want no Oyle, their pockets no
weight, how doe they gripe, exact and extort from their poore Disciples! If
a Shoomaker, or a Taylor, that hath nought but what hee earnes at his fingers
ends, chance to come vnder their fingers, his money is ill got, vnlesse hee
offer to his holy Father a third or fourth part of his gaine. If a Countrey
Farmer bee so rich in Tenement or Land, that hee haue but two Oxen to yoke,
and three kine to milke, before the yeeres end one of the beasts must bee
sold, to buy the honest Priest a new suit, perhaps of swaggering
Sattin. Nay, I haue known a taxation such, that out of a mans means worth
tenne pounds per annum, the Priest must perforce haue forty
shillings a yeere at least. And in a great Shire, where I haue conuersed,
there is not a man of that Religion, of 40 pounds a yeer reuenew and vpward,
but hee must, at his owne charge, keepe a Priest in his house: perhaps
some poor neighbours that are benefited hereby, contribute some small
matter toward it.
Thus, while they pretend, that they are forcedto creepe into priuate houses for feare of persecution, they carry
more dominion ouer the Family, then any Parish-Priest doth in those
Countries where Popish Religion publikely preuaileth.
The Author of The .B of Londons
Legacie.I should haue commended M. Muskets wit, if hee could
at so easie a rate haue purchased M. Netlams inheritance. Sure,
it was a better plot, and his time better spent, then in writing and forging
his book, called The Bishop of London his Legacie. A pamphlet, that
I much wondred who could haue so little wit, and lesse grace, to bee the
Author thereof, till that an incendiary brother of hisF.
Med. (who took dislike at it) confessed vnto mee; and F.
Musket himselfe, in some sort, acknowledged his paines-taking
therein. O perfrictam frontem! W^at impudence was heere ioynd with ignorance! How lewdly
did he and his Precursor Kellison bely Him, who is now as glorious
a Starre in the heauens aboue,Non comet a fuit, sed
Stella. as He was a shining Lamp in the firmamenr of the Church
heer on earth! 
Sophocl.(...), (as Sophocles commended Philoctetes) He
fought a good fight, both in defence of the faith, and in exp^gnation of Heresies, Schismes and
Seditions brought-in by these our Aduersaries. And as Augustine
spake of Cyprian, Multi erat meriti, multi pectoris, multioris, multae
virtutis:Aug. Hee was worthy, wise,
well-spoken, religious.
Now whereas they seek to get Prosel^tes by ^hese monstrous forgeries and trumperies, formy owne part, I confesse, that vpon the first view and reading
of it, I was somewhat mooued with wonder, and withall with possibility
of credence; which made mee the more diligently to enquire of it; especially
reading there, that the Bishop was reconciled to the Church of Rome,
by a certaine Priest there not named. I curiously searched among the
Priests, to learne who that might be. They named to mee F.
Preston: but him I finde to haue constantly disauowed
it, on examination: and otherwise I found good cause to think, that hee
spake his conscience in that deniall. Then was I posted off to F.
Palmer a Iesuite, and that hee was the very man: but asking him very
seriously and priuately about it, hee told me, hee neuer saw the Bishop
of London. And verily, if this Iesuite did meane to equiuocate with
mee, hee had no reason to speak doublely on that part, but rather to
auouch, that himselfe did that deed, or knew who did it, that he might the
better hold me in belief of that narration. In fine, I found this tale to be
nothing but a comicall fiction: and on better weighing this ridiculous
shamelesse pamphlet, so belying Integrity, so outfacing the open
Sunne with audacity, and so farre degenerating from all shew of verity; I
concluded, that the frame could not be sound, which was built vpon such a
rotten foundation; nor that Religion sincer^, which ^ath
slanderous leasings for her daily food. As Tertullian saith in
the behalfe of the Chri^tians
first persecuted by Nero, that hee that knewe
Nero well, might easily vnderstand, non nisi grande aliquod
bonum a Nerone damnatum:Tertul. in
Apologet. cont. Gentes. it was like to be a good thing, which
Nero opposed. So when I view the shamelesse slanders which
such Iugglers lay vpo^ that reuerend Bishop, I must needs say, that I
reuerenced his memory the more, and might well think him the more constant
in his Religion, by their faining him to bee wauering.
M. Anderton.Yet, thus I must needs
testifie of one the most sufficient and ingenuous of their Priests,
that, notwithstanding it might make somewhat against their common
cause, hee plainly told mee, hee was sorry that euer any such booke
should bee suffred to come forth; for it would doe them more hurt, then any
booke they euer wrote: meaning, as I take it, that the forgerie in it was
too palpable. But I find, that the booke is subscribed by publike authority
and particular commendation to it, nor will they inflict any censure vpon the
lewd Father of this monstrous lie. And hence it is, that of late they haue
altered The Title, and changed the Frontispice into a more darke
phrase, making it a Prosopopeia.
Doth Master Musket, who hath foure or fiue hundred (as
I haue heard him boast) that come to his chamber to a Sermon, feed them with
no better fare then such windy, light, empty, nay noysom exhalations? I can
then call it but, The dreamed bread of the sluggard. They may eat, but
not bee satisfied. Perhaps hee may paralell this andgreater fictions out of the Golden Legend, when he preacheth
vpon any By-Saints-day.
But I heare (me thinks) the noise of our hooting
Noctua's, the Priests and Iesuites, blind guides, and louers of
darknes more then the light, who are so farre from beleeuing that any
cataract or filme is on their eyes, that they are rather perswaded,
themselues are the most quicke-sighted. They know and see a farre off,
that although, non adhuc miserendi tempus, non adhuc exultandi dies, the
time to haue mercy,The wise words of him that wrote
The word of Comfort. their appointed day be not yet come, yet they
shall haue a time and a day whe^ Vaevobis, wo^ bee to their Aduersaries. Their best dayes of late
(perhaps) seeme to them but a leaden, or at best, a siluer age: but a
Priest now in London tould mee sometime this Lent (and it hath beene the
merry tune of many more), that they should ere long haue golden
daies. Many of the Iesuites haue of late cried, Woe to England.
Their meaning is lockt vp in a misery, and how they will explicate
themselues, I know not. Nocte dieque suum gestant in pectore
^estem; though they scape
restem.
Let mee then premonish the ignorant, and feebler sort
especially, who are like weak and silly flies, that they take heed how
they be caught in such cobwebs, wherein the chiefe thred they spinne, is,
that none out of their Church can be saued. And further, let them beware,
lest they depraue their ingenuous disposition, in tampering with tooles
that may cut their fingers, and soventure into that web
of hereticall fraud, which they want strength of wit to breake thorow. I
knowe, that whom nature or education hath made simple, heresie will make
proud.
For who more insolent then the ignorant? Which
Erasmus noted long agoe,Erasm. in Spong.
aduers. Hutten. and may well bee applyed vnto many of our
English Papists, who when they might bee informed de vita Christi, et
de via Christiani, they are resolued aforehand not to bee
satisfied.
Oh the blindnesse of vnderstanding of those that are
called Lay-Catholickes! Iust here were the complaint of the Prophet, My
people bee in captiuity, because they bee without knowledge.Esa. 5.13. Surely, when I begin to weigh and meditate on
the abuses that our Kingdome in generall, and these weake members thereof
in particular, sustaine by those Hornets and Drones who flee vp and
downe, stinging and wounding with the wily insinuation of errour,
sucking and gathering hony in our gardens, yea, resting vpon diuers golden
flowres; my heart begins to bleed, my bowels to yearne, and my soule is
plunged in much heauinesse. For wo is mee! Are wee not all sonnes to one
Father? all Subiects to one King, cuius sub vmbra
suauiter quiescimus, we rest vnder his shade, and his boughes haue
beene long distended for our securitie? How grieuous (alas!) is it now to
him to heare, that any his children and seruants should bee a prey to the
Harpies of Rome; that vipers should eat out their substance,
and dispoilethem of the meanes of the true knowledge of
Christ! All these things, vnlesse they keepe you still muffled, you
may easily discerne. Are they not Lords, not onely ouer your
faith, but also your inheritance,1 Pet. 5.
although, according to the rule of their Canonist, Praelatio
ecclesiastica ministerium habet, non dominium:Linwood. The Priests and Iesuites in their bookes pretend that
they are seruants to those ouer whom indeed they lord it. Their
office binds them (nay, the Iesuites vow ties them) to Seruice,
rather then Dominion. How is it possible (mee thinks) that they
should bring you to that seruitude as I find they doe, so subiugate
your vnderstanding, and imprison your wills, that if they command any
thing, quamuis adinteritum animaeet corporis, you are readie to obey
them? and doe they not accordingly make vassals and slaues of you?
Good-Friday cheere. A Procession from
Holborne to Tiburne.Yesterday being
Good-friday, this present yeere 1624. they made some of you in the
Morning, before day, goe in Procession to Tiburne, in
penitentiall manner; the forme of which is, for a man to walke naked from
the girdle vp ward, and scourge himself with a whip. The same day
twelue-month last past, at a place of your solemne meeting in London, you
made one whip himself so long, till he swouned, and was thought to bee
past hope of recouery, so that hot water was instantly fetched to reuiue
him. At Bruxels (as a Priest told mee, saying hee saw it, and
boasting of the meritorious work) a woman, about a yeere since, so
cruelly scourged her selfe, that shee died of it. Is this Mortification,
to murther our selues, lest sinne murther vs, to abolish our life in
the flesh, lest wee should liue after the
flesh? I am no enemy vnto austerity of life, and taming or
chastening our bodily sinfull members,Rom.
5. to bring them in subiection to the spirit, to abate the
lusts of the eye, and pride of life, to depose the Tyrant
sinne from his dominion: whatsoeuer tendeth this way, for the better
whetting of our members to become weapons of righteousnes, I wish
were more, rather then lesse vsed in our reformed Churches; so it bee
without the opinion of merit, without publike ostentation, without
excesse, and vnnaturall hating and disabling our corporal faculties. Such
kind of enormous flagellant Tragedies, proue sometime as absurd
remedies against sinne, as a Philosopher did bring against sicknes;
who visiting his diseased friend, that complained of the
irksomnesse of his disease, and desired his aduice for curing the
same, or easing his paine, departed from him, and shortly came againe,
and told him, hee had brought a medicine to cure all his diseases, and rid
him of paine. The Patient hearing that welcome word, promised hee would take
the medicine. To whom presently this Kil-cow Physicion shewed vnder the
lap of his coate a short sword, which would make short worke. To say no
more of this outrageous deuotion: as it is Baalaiticall,Like Baals Priests, who did lance their sides,
etc. wee cannot, vnlesse wee winke, but see it is also
Pharisaicall. If bitter chastisement in this case be
requisite, why should it not bee performed as priuately, as our Sauiour
inioyneth 
Mat. 6.secret prayer in the Clozet,
the doore shut,etc? Must this be done before
hundreds of spectatours? Yes verily, else the price of the
satisfaction, the glory of the merit, the ouer-weight of supererogation,
would be made lighter by many an ounce. And indeed, as in this, so in all the
rest of the whole pageant of Popery, euery thing must bee theatricall
ad pompam, else the gazing Vulgar would not be so frequently and
easily caught.
Lastly, if such inioyned penances must be performed in an
ambling fashion, with rouing abroad, would no other place serue to gad
vnto, but Tiburne? Is no other place in England left sacred
and vnpolluted? Oh, but there is more vertue in the goale they runne vnto, then
in the race they vndertake. It was antient, to visit memorias
Martyrum; and so, the sending of Disciples to visit
Tiburne, maketh a deep impression in their mindes, of the
Saint-ship of some that haue there paid their debt to our Lawes. Wee know,
Martyr and Persecutor are Correlatiues: and so,
in this action of pretended humiliation, there is intended an increase of
the Romanists hatred against the Church and State of England, as
persecuting, and guilty of the bloud of those whom they adore. Thus euery
step in such pilgrimage, makes those Penitents to walke further from vs:
nay, in euery stripe voluntarily receiued in that Iourney, the Confessor
that inioyned this performance, thinkes hee scourgeth the
Protestants.
Deare Country-men, let mee, in the spirit of
meeknesse, and out of the tendernesse of my heart and affection
inlarged toward you, a little intreat you to consider, how you are hood-winkt
and disguised. Doe yet, at last, lay your hands on your hearts, and loath
these despicable Impostors, returning vnto the truth, and assuring
your selues, that neuer any true Religion did assist and credit it
selfe by such iuggling shifts, tricks and deuices, as the Iesuiticall
brood are obserued daily to practise, and many of which (I am sure) they
shame to heare of.
The Periury of Tho Cornford
Iesuite.For example: Blush they not at this; that, one Thomas
Cornford a brother of theirs, examined before my Lords Grace of
Canterbury, Iune 25. 1612. did first giue vnto himselfe, the
name of Iohn Vnderwood, and so subscribed it; affirming that hee
was a married man, and that hee had married the daughter of one Robinson
in Irkinburge, where his wife at the time of his Examination
remained? Hee added also, he had beene married vnto her twelue yeers, and
that hee had by her six children. Hee said hee was by condition a Farmer,
and that hee came to Towne, to mooue the Lord Vaux, that himselfe
might be Tenant to his Lordship, for a certaine house and land lying
in Irkinburge, where his wife, Robinsons daughter,
remained. But this fellow, after, vpon some remorce of conscience, or
fearing lest his condition and estate might by some other meanes bee
discouered, doth of himselfe offer to manifest vnto his Grace,
his condition and profession; vntowhich, as it were on
a second examination, he is admitted; and then acknowledged, That for the
space of six yeeres, hee was brought vp in the Colledge of Rome;
and that there hee took the orders of Priest-hood, according to the
manner of that Church; and that from thence, some 12 yeeres since, hee was
sent by mission into England, where by F. Garnet hee was
admitted into the Society of Iesus: hee acknowledgeth also, that his name
was Tho. Cornford, and so subscribed the same the second
time, after that before hee had subsigned by the name of Iohn
Vnderwood.
Will you vnderstand how this ingenuous Iesuite did conciliate
such contrary sayings of his? Thus hee performed his part: 
Excellent equiuocation.Whereas he
affirmed himselfe to bee a married man, his meaning was, that his
wife was his Breuiarie, and that hee had beene married vnto it 12.
yeeres: as for his children had by Robinsons daughter,
those were his ghostly and spirituall children. The reason why hee
called himselfe a Farmer, was, because hee was so to God,
according to that Text, Redde rationem villicationis tuae: Giue an account
of thy Farmer-ship. The reason why hee said, hee came to take a
Farme of the L. Vaux, was, because hee was ready to doe him any
seruice for the spirituall tilling of his soule.
Read D. Sheldons book of the Miracles of
Antichrist, page 28. where you may read of another holy brother of the
Ignatian society, who did in the same sort wilfully p^ure himselfe.
Thus much for my present occasion, by way
of declaration, what wholesome vse (by Gods grace) I haue made of the
noxious and balefull weeds that grow in the Papall garden; whereof, through my
owne vanity and leuity, hauing taken some taste, it hath pleased God to
turn those poysons into an Antidote, happy for my selfe, and (as I hope)
not vnfruitfull for others.
But first, I am not ignorant, that some particulars related
by mee, are like to procure mee the hatred, and perhaps, some malicious
machinations of those that thought to hold me in perpetuall captiuity. But
I protest to God, that as I haue in sincerity of heart, without malicious
inuenting, or adding any thing, giuen account of those passages that
came to my knowledge: so I doe not hate the person of any of those, who
haue pretended to haue beene my Instructers while I remained with them; but
wish to them, as vnto my owne soule, a sight of those corruptions
and errours, wherein they are deepely dyed, and whereof they did cast
some tincture vpon me; and also an acknowledgement of Gods Truth
resplendent in the Scriptures, a forsaking and abominating of that
pernicious trade, of beeing Factors and Brokers for the Papacie: The
superstitions and tyrannies whereof, I maruaile, if they see not; and I
much more mourn, if, seeing and inwardly acknowledging, yet they should
entertaine and practise, for the keeping the poore Lay-people in awe, which
I take to bee one ofthe chiefest Arcana Imperij,
secrets of State, for the maintenance of their religion.
Secondly, I hold my selfe bound in conscience, vpon the
sight of mine owne error, and consideration of the scandall which I haue
iustly giuen, to make publick protestation of my recouery, with vnfained
and hnmble submission vnto our reuerend Mother the Church of
England (the most orthodox and pure Church now extant in the world, and
most suitable vnto the Apostolick and Primitiue times, both for faith and
discipline). Before her feet I prostrate my selfe with deepe sorrow of
heart, that I haue through rashnes of heart, discontent, or any other
mis-guiding passion, played the run-away out of her family and
obedience. Wherein my fault is farre the greater, forasmuch as I, by that
calling which shee hath vouchsafed mee (although vnworthy) in her family,
ought to haue beene a guid^ vnto
others, to keepe their feet in the waies of Truth and Peace. I implore
her motherly indulgence, to open her lap to mee, her wandring returning childe,
and to vouchsafe mee such pardon and absolution, as the power of the
Keyes which she hath receiued from our Sauiour, doth afford and
extend vnto penitent Delinquents. Nor did I think it sufficient, to doe this
by a simple profession of the cure of my vnderstanding; but I also
held it necessary for mee to adde a manifestation of such particular
meanes as I best knew to bee vsed by our aduersaries, as stratagems to
besiegevs, and snares to intrap vs. Whereupon it may
perhaps please some to whom that care belongeth, to make vse euen of
these slender informations, for the preuenting of future mischiefs in
that kinde, now growne very farre against the Church of England.
Thirdly, it behooued me not to be forgetfull of the bond of
nature, and of that duty which I owe to my aged Father, a Minister in the
Diocesse of Exon. whose righteous soule hath been vexed with
my infamous deuiation; whose fatherly care and paines toward mee, euen then
when I most forgot him, and my selfe, hath not beene wanting in his writing
to me diuers Letters of Argument and exhortation: which, together with other
meanes, concurring with Gods mercy, haue beene the loud Calls that haue
pierced my eares, and made mee look back, and withdraw my foot out of the
horrible mire and clay wherein I stuck. Euen of him, whom aboue others I
haue deepely offended, I humbly craue fatherly pardon and blessing, not
onely secretly in my heart, but more publikely and authentically thus vnder
my hand.
What a great debt lyeth vpon mee, not onely in regard of my
first beeing; my education especially in learning, and fitting mee for the
Ministery, by his care and cost, but also for the reparation of that
discontent which hee hath iustly taken at my obliquity! All that I can
promise and vowe, with the assistance of Gods grace, is, that I 
hope to pay double in future comforts, for that which I
haue run arrerage by procuring fatherly sorrowes. Faxit Deus.
Lastly, to touch again on that string which before I haue struck, but
neuer can sound too oft: This streaming of my pen from the fountaine of my
heart, runs that course, whither all things else ought to tend, euen into
the Ocean of Gods glory exalted by his Mercy, in reaching out his
helping hand to such miserable creatures as my self, intangled in danger,
and ready to tumble into perdition. To his glorious name I offer vp my
self, my soule and body, as a liuely reasonable sacrifice,
vowing to bend al my faculties and future indeuours, to the publishing of
his Truth, and to the setting forward, by word, and by example,
that orthodox faith, and Church, which I haue wickedly co^temn'd. And in
special, I make oblation of my particular thanksgiuing, as a repeated
Morning and Euening Sacrifice, for the double deliuerance
vouchsafed mee; the one Corporall, and concerning this life;
which in me, beyond expectation and naturall reason, was prolonged, when I
was saued, tanquam torris erutus e flamma, I meane, in that generall
and wofull downfall at the Blackfryers, wherein many lesse
sinners then my selfe breathed their last. The other deliuerance is
spirituall, beeing in some sort a child of that mother, as proceeding
from the due cogitation of the other; I meane, the loosing of my bands, the
vnfettering of my heart and soule from the Babylonian captiuity,
the dispelling of thatcloud of Romish errors, which
obscu^ed, though not wholy
extinguished the light of Gods Truth in me. There were (I know) that said
vnto mee, 
Psal. 41 8.An euill disease
cleaueth fast vnto him: and now that hee lyeth, he shall rise no more.
But thou (O Lord) hast put a new song into my mouth: Those that sit yet
in darknesse, shall see it, and feare: For, The Snare is broken, and I
am deliuered. Lord, establish me in thy Truth: thy Word is Truth.
FINIS.

