


A Womans woorth, defended against all the men in the worlde.
AS (according to Anaxagoras) the body of Nature is heauen, and the influence thereof her soule: euen so, the body of a woman is the heauen of humane perfections, and her soule the treasurie of celestiall and diuine vertues. That it must needes be so, the auncient Philosophers, as well morall as naturall, the speculatiue Astronomers, Poets, the interpreters of holye things, and maisters of the best approoued manners, chimerique Painters, and namely ^he professours of diuinitie, doo consent and maint^ine: that the fairest sciences, the ra^est ^^^tues,

the inimitable graces, ought to be represented in the forme and figure of women, as it may be seene in Hesiodus, who speaketh thus.

Faire Vertues face, with beautie honored,
Lookes like a field in Aprill diapred.
Or as the difference of enammeld flowers,
Which natures daughter forth in ple^tie powers.

In like maner, the formall vnderstanding of things that are, or may be, is signified to vs by the feminine vertue, wherof Rasis Arabe thus discourseth.
As Eleborus, of one and the selfe same substance brings foorth diuers effects for the heads diseases: Euen so a woman qualifies diuers manner of tempests, which wandring through a mans braines, do weaken his stronger powers, vntill this lawfull and naturall medicine be therto applyed. Timaeus the Scicillian reporteth, that the Lions of Lybia loose their force and furie, if they haue neuer so little sight of a maidens eyes. And Bandello witnesseth to

vs in his histories, that a Lord of Scandia, being by nature dull and blockish; at the very first sight and regarde of a Lady of Vicensa, became discreetlie wise and well gouerned. Reason it selfe (according to Homer) is figured to vs by the person of Minerua, who flew out armed from the braines of Iupiter: and Bacchus, that is the angrie facultie, beeing painted in the forme of a man, had no other birthe then from his thigh. Wherupon, Aristophanes the comicall Poet of the Athenians, thought good to set downe this description.

Vertue in man dooth not abide,
She's washt away with furies tyde.
But in faire women kinde she rests,
For mildenes harbours in their brests.
And did not women make men wise:
How many harmes would them surprize?

Aristotle, that profound Occean of Philosophie, and second author of Nature, acknowledged so much of womens merits: that he sacrificed (as it had bin to the gods) a million of times

to his beautifull Hermia, according to the report of Origen, and this which the Siracusane Poet sayeth:
No greater loue did Aristotle beareTo Thebane Hermia his soules soueraignesse:But farre beyond that loue (if more there were)Holde I to Tyna my faire Sheepheardesse.
Diuine Plato, of whom Saint Augustine that Eagle of the Doctors, deliuereth a most singuler testimonie: so highlye commended the vertues of Archanessa, as he not onely serued her like a slaue, but composed diuers himnes in praise of her, comparing her qualities to be celestiall and supernaturall, as Diogenes Laertius truely recordeth. What shall I say of Socrates, the ornament of men, the ground of Oracles, glorie of the Greekes, splendoure of the Athenians, and flood of diuine pluralities? did he not desire to make all posterities know, that man is somwhat lesse then a woman? yea, and that in sound earnest, whe^ to the great

scandale of beleeuing them of his own kind, in contempt of the critique Philosophers, ouerthrowe of the presumptuous, debasing the Athenians, and contrary to the opinion of all the Greekes: he preferred one onely Aspasia (as Clearchus reciteth) before a million of men, for her knowledge in all kinde of learning, and deepe skill, not onely in those things that best might serue, but enriching beside all humaine societie.
The meruaile of Cos, Hippocrates hath taught vs, that the most perfect bodyes are those, which haue lesse heate then moisture. Whereupon, the great sonne of kings, Prince of Arabia, three times together reprooued Galen, who held, that heate is cheefest in the building of all things, as maintaining, that moysture is onely fomented and seasoned by the heate. Diuine Homer likewise instructs vs, that the estate of all things is drawne from the Occean, and that it is the cheefest of the elements:

wherein the Cittizen of Millet Thales dooth second him, and likewise Pindarus in this Ode.

The Sea aboue all elements,
Hath the cheefest ornaments.
Euen as golde dooth lustre bright,
Like to a sacred flame in sight,
And shines more faire then all mettalls,
Dispersed in the mineralles.

Now as women are much more moyste then men, so in like manner may we discerne in them, that frenzies and furiousnes is not so familiar with them as men: in regarde they will neuer runne madde for loue, or any other worldly desire. Whereas men from time to time, make themselues as in a publique Theater, the subiect of very tragicall follies, such as the like can scant be imagined, yet customablie vsed in assemblie of their friends, agreeing with the oppinion of the Poet Antimachus.


The Cadmeane cittie brought foorth crueltie,
Those Germaine twins pale Death and Enuie*
Which more inhumaine then an angrie Beare,
Depriuing life, leaues yet a world of feare.

I will begin by state affaires to approoue, alleadging thereto sufficient witnesses, that the vertue feminine hath bin of greater efficacie then men, not onely in this subiect but any other whatsoeuer, especially the matter heer alleaged: for it consisteth much more of debating cases, and the facultie imaginatiue, which indeed are the happiest functions of the soule, then any other desseignes that we can deale withall. And so dooth Xenophon testifie, that the partie which is apte for the managing of publique occasions, whereon many welfares consist, euen infinite as it were: is endued with some perticuler gift of nature, or blessed from the heauens beyond many other. All the great Monarchies were instituted by the councell of women. Sbithea Sister to Nimrod, enstructed him

in the course of gouernement, according as Manethon reporteth. Presigithes a Sheepheardesse did the like to Cyrus. Dydo first founded the common wealth of Carthage. Semiramis reserued the Empire to her Sonne, albeit hee was thereof vncapable: and Fauna brought together the people of Italie dispersed heere and there, before she went to Cassino in Cassina, for agreeing of the one with the other; as it is recorded in certaine fragments of the Poet Ennius.

Fauna the Goddesse Vestaes woman preest,
First taught the Latines ciuill gouernement:
And whe^ in fields they wandred where they list,
She brought them into Citties regiment.

Tomyris Queene of the Scithians; appointing to them the lawes of Anacharsis the Philosopher: assured them to be more holy and better then those of the Athenians. She restored her Empire, being halfe brused by the Souldiours of Ariartsanes the Captaine,

and the death of her own Sonne, who suffered himselfe to be fondly surprized, and afterward cruelly slaine: notwithstanding, she valiantly triumphed ouer Cyrus, the vniuersall Monarche of the East.
Penthesilea knowing that it would be hard to squander the Greekes in Hellespont, by reason of their multitude, beeing well neere numberlesse: attended them on the frontiers of Misia, and there ouerthrew Hippoclus, conducter of the back bandes of all the Grecian people. Hippolita dissipated the troupes of great Theseus, dismounting himselfe in the fight, yet afterward (on meere grace) made him her husband.
The Siracusan women were cause of their Citties preseruation, beeing before abandoned by their husbands, whence arose the prouerbe of Venus armed, as Menander describeth in one of his Comedies.


Let none himselfe so much abuse,
As offer to take Syracuse*
For women haue it in respect,
And Venus dooth them safe protect.
Good were it then the God of warre,
Should lend to her his Cemiter.

Cyrus vanquished by the common flight of his Souldiours, and his owne proper faulte: thus deliuered the victorie to his enemie by this only exhortation, that they but came to fight with women. The Romaines surprized by the Sabines, and other people neere neighbours to them: were warrented from death and vtter destruction of their Cittie, by the meanes of women, who knew how to quenche the anger iustly enflamed in their fathers against their husbands. Parysatis, daughter to Cyrus, and mother to Artaxerxes, was so well enstructed in the state affayres: as shee made Asia tryumphe of the Greekes liberty, compassing by her gouernement the losse of all the allyed common weale, and

stealing by her gifts, the most liberall courages of her Empires enemies, which was (in shew) ruled by her son, but in verye deede maintained by her selfe. The mother of Coriolanus saued the citty of Rome, euen from the cradle to her glorious height, vsing so manie great maximes of and for the state, to her sonne being then the citties enemie: as all the Xenophons, Tacitusses, Machiauels, yea, whatsoeuer Councellers to the Princes of Europe, may iustly learne example by those noble resolutions, and admit them amongst the very cheefest desseignes. Cloelia gaue freedome to sixe score young men of her Cittie, by admiration of her fayre enterprise couragiously effected: which made Ennius the Poet thus write thereof.
What vertue male may with thy woorth co^tend,Can men h^pe any way to doe as muchBy their best meanes? Alas, tis to no end,In like affaires their haps were never such.

And elsewhere.

Young Romaines feeble are your mindes,
Your glorie of the least esteeme:
When Cloelia passage for you findes,
And must with honor you redeeme.

Rhea knew so well to temper the prodigious crueltie and tyrannie of Saturne, who not onely would disinherit her sonnes, but deuoure them, to asswage his more then brutish hunger: that as Orpheus rehearseth in his Songs.

Iupiter from blame had not been free,
If Rheas prudence had not been of might:
To sheeld him from the spightfull iealosie.
Her tyrant husband vsde both day and night.

Vesta deliuered the Hetrurians from the besiegings of Alsichoris. Medea made victorious Iason conquer the golden Isles, and defended the Argonautes from straunge ambuscadoes, which were preparde for them in the Isle of Colchos. A^alanta knew how

to enfranchise the Curetes, from their ordinarie tributes to the Princes of Achaia, euen till the day she triumphed ouer them in the race.
Debora, Iudith and Hester, wrought meruailes for conseruation of their people, euen to the enterprise of so high actions, as the issue of them could not be apprehended, their beginnings were so dreadfull, their effects beyond comparison, and their vertue bounded within no equalitie, to the confusion of men, amazement of the Gods, and perpetuall memorie of the feminine sexe.
Thus much for state affaires, although this is not the hundreth part of that I could produce to maintaine this subiect, which might be handled by Angels, and sufficient for my sences to stand and woonder at. Yet haue I heere made no mention of the Amazones in generall, nor of the Cipriotes, nor of the Sydonians, and many other sundry countries, who both in

common and perticuler, haue gotten so much glory by armies of wome^: as me^ durst hope no otherwise, but in the meere fables they haue written of the^selues, boasting of victories gotte^ ouer their equalles, and one while against Lions, then Beares, and some Tygers, with other of like strength and violence, wherein women haue done as much, or rather more then they.
They were wont to tryumph ouer Ladyes reputation, making vauntes of some thinges wherein their merites were vnequall, finding their courage to be eyther to feeble, or not answerable: whereupon diuine Sapho complained in this sort.

Diuers there be haue heard men say*
That ouer women they beare sway,
Making their tryumph of our hearts,
As vanquished by their deserts.
All which is nothing but a dreame,
And folly out of course extreame.

I haue knowne diuers, who but admitted to the sight of a Ladies sleeue, presently haue made theyr vauntes of

her maidenheades victory, when (God knows) they durst not intreate so much fauour as a kisse.
Constancy followeth so neere to the vertuous exercise of stare affaires, and occasions of war, as being the organe of fayrest desseignes, and only perfection of most commendable strength: that as I might heere (on mens behalf) present to your sight the same seuerally in Sceuola, Regulus, Marius, Cato Vtican, Scipio Affricanus, and Paulus Aemillius among the Romaines; so like wise for the Grecianes, Antigonas, surnamed the wise Anaxagoras, Socrates, Xantippa, Anaxarcus, Aristides, and Phocion: like wise out of holy Scripture, Eliazer, Tobias, the Machabees, all which are but as vassailes and meane seruants, in respect of the iust and lawfull constancy of women: who in this as all thinges else worthy to be commended, haue so farre out-gone the courage of men, as the Sunnes glorious bryghtnesse excelleth all the

candles of the night: I call them iust, because I shall neuer be perswaded, but that such as haue beene enforced to the abandoning of ouermuch sadnesse, and thence haue made choise of voluntarie deaths, more for obedience to reason then dispaire: well deserued to bee called constant or magnanimous, considering that no defect of courage, or feare of great punishment any iote dismayed them, but rather (to speake more properlie) gladly subiected them to this funerall resolution.
Soclaris, daughter to Cibaris Gouernour of Athens, first Prince of Morea, sometimes called Peloponnesus, after the conquest of Combly, was deliuered into the hands of Selim, to vse at his pleasure, according to the barbarous custome of his predecessours, who were more vniust in their victories, then the vanquished miserable in their ouerthrow: and hauing her at his disposing, hee commaunded the Bathe to bee prepared, which is the

critique signall of the Easterne luxuries. The young Princesse, who to the Catastrophe of this Greekish tragedie, would giue beginning to a new Historie, drawne rather from the despoyle of her owne life, then delight to loose her inuiolable chastitie; spake in this manner to the Prince of the East.
MY Lord, vntill this very instant I was perswaded, that the wrath of God, iustly dispersed among our familie, would serue it selfe with matters familiar, and ordinarie to afflict vs withall, as beeing doubtlesse guiltie of some farre greater punishment, then euer wee felt vnder your victorious hand: and beeing caried away with these sweete oppinions, I drew my comfort from mine owne proper ill, as onely hoping of remedie in your grac^ and fauour. But at this present, your Maiestie being rapte with what furie I knowe not, wherein royall

vertue is not to bee discerned: I cannot beleeue, that heauen hath limitted your thoughts to such an abhominable course, or rather a most prodigious violence, the beginning whereof I beholde, by the ende of my life, trayned through mine owne default, alongst the torrent of solasciuious an enterprise. Then shewing him a little needle: See heere (quoth shee) what armes are prepared as guardians of my virginity, behold the innocent organe of such vengeance, as I meane to take on my offending eyes, that wounded you so against the will of my soule, which from my mouth pronounceth sentence of death against them, and you shall see execution immediatly performed.
The great Monarch, toucht to the quicke with extraordinary compassion, made a sodaine change of his loue to a perpetuall admiration, and his ouer fond commaund tooke ending with a moste maiesticall respect, returning

these or the like words to the Princesse.
MAdame, if Kings could as wel tryumph ouer loues passions, as they can cherish mercy* and giue pardon to the faulty, euen against the first obiect of theyr owne vnruly motions, which figure in theyr courage a tempestious sea of vengeance, yet notwithstanding, becomes calme by a naturall inclynation of imbracing mildenesse: rather then pursuing the ouer-swift current of choller:) I should haue somewhat to complaine of to you, for grafting the trophees of my desires, on the firme rock of your chaste desseignes, which teach me the science of good life in so holy a Schoole.
It followes therefore, that I muste confesse the destinies to be vniust, for shewing that freedome to the body, wherewith the soule no way can bee forced.
Accuse loue then, who armed himselfe for you here in my house, where your beauties prisoners are become Princesses of my heart, entyrely enthralled: And neuer conceiue, that I am onely he, that desires the fruite of his victory, on a subiect of such merite, the enioying whereof is more to be coueted, then aduerse Fortune is to be credited.
Considering, that in prosecution of my good haps, vntill this present, I haue beene alwayes armed with reason, not enterprising any thing to disaduantage of the vanquished, otherwise then the securitye of mine owne estate did teach me. The proofes whereof remaine euident to be seene, in that I haue not made your countries mishaps greater, then the inconstancy of Fortune yeelded vnto: where I haue set downe my rest, giuing lymits to my iust ambition, which else had extended it selfe ouer the common libertye of Greece, if seruitude

were not called an exchange of state* rather happening by the prouidence of heauen, who would haue but one sole Monarch in the vniuersall world, for generall administration of his iustice, rather then any vnsatiable desire in my selfe of Soueraignety, which containes mine actions where they are only appropriate.
But if I haue trespassed, in requesting that of you, which my Kingdoms lawes cannot deny me, neyther may bee tearmed as an offence, but only that your will doth so holde and esteeme it: then custome is more to be blamed then I am, for she inuites me to take possession, of that which freely is reckoned mine owne.
Therefore Lady, that you may see I wil not deserue a Tyrants name, especially in the simple practise of victory, wherein vsuallye more rygour is expected, then in the gouernment of a peaceable estate: I will compell mine vnlawfull passions, to yeelde

vnto your iuster desires, entreating you to rest thus contented, that in repentaunce for offending you, I doo wronge to the nature of mine owne power, disarming my heart of that prerogatiue, which the very meanest men moste couet in theyr speciall Fortunes, namely, to tryumph in commaunding of their owne.
Demaund of mee those selfe same thynges, which you could not hope for in your former condition: and I will satisfie them with as much willingnesse, as there is worth and desert in your Princelye constancye. Such ende had the great Turkes loue, if the name of great bee worthye enough to dignifie his vertues, which in greatnesse did exceede hys Empyre.
The history of Tenora, taken prisoner in the Citty of Modon, and enfranchised for her constancy, best knowen to Bascha Ariaden, who gladly would haue marryed her: might

heere bee auouched to the great scandale of men, and perpetuall honour of the female sexe: but in regard of the l^ngth, let me referre yee to I^^^obaldus of Corfue, a most sound and faythfull expresser thereof.
The height of courage in three Spaniardes, who offered theyr chaste brestes to their miserable father* constrayned to graunt them so vnpleasing an execution, for shielding them from the shamefull seruitude prepared for them: is of such efficacy, as men (for preseruation of theyr renowne) had neuer the heart to endure so extreame a remedy. For reading of which excellent discourse, I must leaue yee to Nicholas de Nicholai, hys voyage of Constantinople, in the historye of the seidge of Trypoly.
I haue very much wherewith to enlarge my labour, as the maruaylous constancy of Ioan the Pucel, whose life the Englishmen had gladly saued, if

she would simply haue said, that shee was holpen by charmes, extraordinarie meanes, and supernaturall power in execution of her perillous enterprises: but she preferred her honor before life, yeelding her conscience to tormenters, and her tormenters to leasings, as louing rather to suffer a bodilie hell, then making hellish the freedome of her owne courage, in a purpose not beseeming the greatnesse of her deeds, nor the true oppinion iustlie conceiued of her behauiour, the principall organs of her valour, which made Fraunce more famous then euer it had beene before, yea, more then at this daye it hath attainde vnto: For though shee bee now troubled with some foure or fiue Spaniards in her liuer vaine; yet she then drew a million of Englishmen out of her entrailes.
I will not goe seeke out an Arbecha on Danubie, nor Gertrude on the Rheine, nor Flotensa on Tanais, seeing the histories of the North haue no

other honor, then onely of the subiect drawen from their constancies. Lesse cause shal I haue to produce Polixena, whose death made the life of the Grecians infamous, and theyr victory insolent, euen the vtter ouerthrow of all their renowne. The constancy of Antigone, described by Antimachus and Euripides, is of such merite, as all men together cannot boast of any thing to come neere it: her piety is of such commendation, as the most religious of our Aheistical age haue iust cause to complaine, that christianity as yet neuer conceiued the like. The constant patience of Grisilda, written by Frederick of Ast the Pied-montese, is vneuitable, and almost exceeding beleefe, in our weake soules so little inured to sufferancy. That of Virginia, Portia and Sophonisba, the ornament of Affricke and terror of Roome, is so great, as shee could endure more, then arte is able to describe. Oh cowardly men, what shal become of ye? or rather, what are you

among so many gallant women, that haue abid the violent assaults of death, euen of death vndeserued, and much lesse expected? you are no way firme, but in lookes: constant, but in words: dreadlesse, but in security: without corruptio^, but in feare to be made knowen to others. Better is it for you goe learne to spin, the^ to prefer your selues before women: as your graund Hercules came capable of that occupation, by the enstruction of his Mistresse Dianeira. Sampson was glad to reele hy his Dalila: Achilles sowed by his Brisis: king Demetrius did the like by his Latmia. Hesiodus acknowledged this imperfection in men of his time, saying.

You that are Natures infamy,
And to your sexe doe iniury.
Shewing your selues imperfect men,
By actions not beseeming men.
One sits, and by his Mistresse sowes,
Another, like a Goddesse goes.
Other, missled by iealousie,
Must weare his garments to his knee,
Yet all makes vaunts of Fortunes blisse,
When she most wretched to them is.

My paper is vnworthy to beare my p^n, in ^escribing my immaginations, (...) the high merit of holy Virgins, what contempt and disdaine they made of the most barbarous cruelties, that could be inuented by the enemies of the Christian faith, for defence wherof, they haue bin deliuered ouer to the feareful rage of persecuters, who haue beene more weary of tormenting them, then they (any iot dismaided) at the seuerall sorts of violence inflicted on their bodies; by nature soft and tender, and more worthy to be admired, then so bloodyly murdred. Like matter could neuer men set downe of themselues, albeit themselues were Authours of the legends: for theyr martirologe containes so few of them (making comparison with that of women) as the very wisest tearme theyrs but a meere vanity, dispearsed among the veritie of the Saintes sufferings. The Church it selfe is resembled to a woman without spot or blemish,

such as Salomon describes the Princesse of Aegypt, a figure of the Church. In the new Testament yee may note the three Maries, and the Chananean, who were so constant in their holy resolutions, as the blessed spirit (being speaker of the sacred history) hath left them a spectacle to all posterities. The mother of the seauen Martires, wherof description is made in the Machabees, deliuered such witnesse of her truely tearmd celestiall confidence, as that onely acte might beautifie the history of vertuous women, more then men can gleane glory, from the constant resolution of Abraham, Moyses or Iob: all which deserue not the tytle of constant, because a little detection did in some sort touch them.
As first to begin with Abraham for a leasing, who said that his wife was his Sister, only for a little feare of death, much more suspected, then any way prepared. Next for distrust, as whe^ Moyses said to the Lord: Howe may it

be, that I should present my selfe before Pharoah, seeing J can hardly abstaine from stammering? Js it possible that I should deliuer this message? Then for murmuring, as Job, who stood expostulating with the eternall. Which minde neuer came neere the Virgin of Virgins, for she said: I am the seruant of the Lord, be it vnto mee according to his word. Abraham, Moises and Iob, were but weake in resolution, if one should compare them with that vertuous woman, mother to these 7. Martires who suffered as many paines, as she saw diuersity of torments applied, to ruinate and ouerthrow the constancy of her Sons: yea, she did sollace her selfe in such sort among the rigours of theyr martirdome, with such behauiour and speeches in contempt of death, and assurance of better condition in the life succeeding; as they all were euen sorry they could dye but once. In sooth I must needs say, that the very greatest matter among me^, neither is or can be,

but the remainder and ouerplus of this one womans glory, who practised the same in her self, which she had taught to her Sons: for she dyed so constantly, that Antiochus (the very abhomination of Kings) became enraged (as it were) to see a simple woman mocke him and all his angry threatnings, no way able to enforce her from the seruice of God, after which she sighed and longed, euen to the latest office of her vitall powers. The daughter of Jeptah shal giue end to this discourse, because she concluded the rash vow of her Father with such resolution, as the sacrafice of her own life: for which, I had rather co^mit ye to read the history in the Iudges, for better sight of her death, then drowne my paper in iust teares, which fresh reuiued pitty of so ancient a maruel, would forcibly compel to fal from mine eies, so to conceale by weeping, what I could not set downe in writing, Thus much reme^bred for womens co^stancy, which makes me stand

in doubt, whether I should erect the same on any other collom or no, then their own greatnes and deserts, as more needing imitation, then any witnes, and therfore more requiring to be followed, then can be by words witnessed effectually: For me^ (malitiously iealous of womens honor) haue buried (as much as in them lay) the most commendable deeds of such, to whom themselues were no otherwise then Apes, nay worse imitators, if worse may bee. He that (of Poets) hath best writte^ amo^gst the Grecia^s, is Homere, yet not so much for his learning, as for ye subiect, where he makes men and the Gods co^bate together, those are his Jlliades, a worke in sooth praise worthy for his time, and not for any other consideratio^. Yet the Athenians made the^ be publikly burned, by reaso^ of the impiety wherwith they are furnished, eue^ as it were a shop of Atheisme, irreligio^, and imodesty, making the Gods to be vanquished by me^, and establishing a contempt of royalty, duty

and obeysance, in the person of Achillis (a meere brothell hunter) who preferred a brutish kinde of affection, before the loue of his Countrey, and his owne peculiar hate before the general welfare of his followers. Hee makes a dog of Agamemnon; a kitching fellow of Patrocles; a mad man of Hector; a bawde of Jris; a drunkerd of Vulcane; a Cony-catcher of Mercury; a Lacky of Appollo; a rauisher of Neptune; a paltry companion of Mars; a witch of Minerua; a Woolfe of Venus; a Megera of Iuno, a dreame of a man, and himself a contemner of the Gods, as Licras speaketh in this manner.

Curious Antiquity,
Made Homere a deitie,
For his booke, a meere fable,
Against the Gods abhominable,
Where all men that were vicious,
Haue praise before the vertuous.

Among Latine Poets, we may speak of Virgill: in the Hierarchie of Philosophers,

who but Aristotle? among Phisitions, Hippocrates: amongst the auncient diuines, Mercurius Trismegistus: in our latter times, S. Augustine: of Astronomers, Anaxagoras: of Mathematicians, Archimedes: of Ciuillians, Papinian: all which had (euen then liuing) two, nay three or foure women in their owne Artes, to whome I will send them seuerally to schoole, for apprehension of the chiefest principles in their sciences. Homere was taught by Clorinda the Samian, in the Citty of Argos, and to her hath bin attributed that so famous worke of the Illiads: and would ye but compare his Odisseaes therwith, you should finde such a large difference in one stile, so much rebated in the discourse of Vlisses: as you wold be constrained to confesse, that eyther the first is none of his, or els hee made neither the one nor other. Faire Sapho holpe him at a need, for changing the armes of Glaucus and Diomede, where it euidently appeares that hee dealt

scarce honestly: as also in his comparison of Aiax to an Asse, where he plaid the grinder too apparantly. She likwise corrected the works of Pindarus, as ye shal find it set downe in Plutarch. Carmenta was so learned in poesie, as she surpassed al the men of her time, and had indeed such a general name, as not any to this day did euer attaine the like, no ordinary matter among our me^ Poets whosoeuer: And she enstructed Pithagoras himselfe (true Prince of the very best Philosophy among the Pagans.) Aristotle searching the causes, whence the ebbing and flowing of the sea shuld proceed: had his resolutio^ from Sostrata the Lesbian, by a similitude taken from womens infirmity, as also from sweate: Nor did he drowne himselfe, (as some bawling curres wold make vs beleeue) in the Ocean sea, wherinto he should head-long cast himselfe. Hippocrates learned the curing of the Hemeroides, of Dorothea Abderita, as it was found written in Ephesus, in the

Temple of Diana, as also the other at Eleusina. Mercurius Trismegistus is not only the first or chiefest, of the celebrate and most commendable Diuines of antiquity: but (I dare say) of al men, bee it that wee speake of Salomon, or were it possible to find a wiser; his life did truely answere his doctrine, and his doctrine is both the schoole of vertue, and study of true piety.
Yet notwithstanding, hee is not to be extolled beyond the Sibilles, all which prophesied of the true Messias the Son of God so euidently, as there is not a text in the olde Testament, more expresse then their propheticall writings were. Wherein, it pleased the holy Ghost to serue himselfe by them, for confusion of the Pagane incredulity, and to giue these deuoute women, as theyr Iudges, being faithfull Trumpets of the comming of Christ Iesus, as also of his death and resurrection.
I may equal Marcella the virgin with

S. Augustine, as well for her excellent writings, full of all erudition, as for her sanctity: she only being the cause of the Hungars co^uerssion. Which good hap did neuer befal S. Augustine, who long time held very heretical opinions and far from the vniuersal beliefe: where contrariwise this woman, neuer had her thoughts toucht with any other consideration, then the community of Christians in the primatiue Church, which being snarled at in her time, and not as then knowen in the Northerne parts: she reduced from old ruines, and made it fauored in the most barbarous spirits: yea, they that were least capable of vnderstanding in Europe. The roots of her piety stretched the^selues so far as Albania, euen to the Citty of Ragusa, held then in subiection by Cyarsin the Sclanonian: whom shee not onely made a christian, but co^panion likwise of her deuout e^terprises, and that in such sort, as he came with a maine army so far as Danuby, and there adua^ced

the glorious standard of the euangelical truth. I could say, that Frenchmen had not been Christians, but by the especiall vertue of Clotilda, whom God ordained to inspire the heart of Clouis, onely made a Christian by her charitable admonitions and faithfull enstructions: who* by the losse of many battailes, could not else be so resolued. When shall it be sayd, that men haue been so soudious in like number of soueraigne exercises and sanctitie? that our God (the iust electer of purest soules, for communicating of his very dearest perfections) hath made more redound to his glorye vnder the persons of women, then euer it pleased him to doo the like by men.
Anaxagoras was as ignorant in the reason of the Seas ebbing and flowing, as Aristotle, vntill he had some enstruction therein, by Dyoris the wyfe of one Barquerot of Pyrea: she shewed him the originall of the Isles engirting neere to the firme land, where

the borrowing waues seemed to enlarge their waye by some violent meanes.
He learned the causes of coniunction of the great Planets, and their times, of a woman Gardiner of Smirna: by whome likewise hee came acquainted with the deepest secrets of the Meteores. Archimedes was mocked by Tyanea the Syracusaine, for hauing rudely said, that all bodyes were superficiall: which she shewed to bee false, by the Atomies and coullers in the ayre. Lachis of Athens, daughter to Megesteus, ordained lawes to the people of Attica, which were so venerable and commodious: as the Romaines receiued them naturally for their own limitting them vnto twelue tables, wherein there was contayned more iustice and pietie, then in all the volumes of Papinian.
I was too blaine (in this serious purpose) to forget Oratours, such as were Demosthenes, Aeschines, Jsocrates,

and manye other amonge the Grecians; Cicero, Hortensius, Marke Anthonie, etc. of the Romaines.
Most true is it, that this my forgetfulnes had been infinitely aduantageable for men, who likewise heerein are not exempt from theyr naturall imperfection, beeing ouer much weake in eloquence to women.
Demosthenes, of whome it is written, that if the Goddes would speake Greeke in Orations, they could no waye amend the sweete elocution of this Oratour: yet was hee so confounded, hearing Lais discourse of men and womens perticuler affections, as hee cryed out; that the Athenians did but stammer in theyr Schooles, and women at Corinthe spake Oratours-like in theyr familiar conferences.
To confirme this, Nature teacheth vs, that women are or may be most eloquent, considering the organes and

instruments of theyr voyce is more mylde and gentle, then those in men, whose pronunciation is very rough, sharpe and coorsely shapte, by reason of the aboundance of choller, which (with their woords) driues foorth so much vehemencie of spirit, as they are well neere choakt therewith, or breake their winde in vttering of their speeche: yet wee must confesse, that melancholly men are softer in words, then the swarthie and sanguine, such seuerall qualities remaine in men.
The nature of a woman being enclined to sadnesse, discouers wisedom, makes her prudent and apprehensiue: whereas men are commonly rashe and vnrulye, because diuers appetites transport them, to many friuolous and fleeting considerations, which mightie faulte you shall finde fewe women, or none at all infected with. In lyke manner, your high and soueraigne Courtes, are nothing else but filled with mens continuall tumults, whence

ensue iniurious offences to theyr betters: and that in matters of so meane reckoning, as womens modestie are ashamed thereof, and theyr height of spirit holdes it in most deepe disdaine.
Oh most happye sexe, if it were lawfull for me to speake, as Plato did, who thanked the Gods for making him a man, and not a beast: so could I haue wished, that I had beene created a woman, hauing attayned to such knowledge of feminine perfections, which is in euery respect accomplished, beyond all that can be tearmed perfect in humaine defects.
But returne wee to our Oratours, leauing the Asse, eares and all, to them that perswade themselues to be more eloquent then women: from whome the sweete Nightingale first learned her notes, as Pyes, Crowes and Rauens tooke theyrs from men, into which shapes they haue likewise been transformed, as the onely best forme the Greeke and Latine Poets could

giue them. You shall many times read, that the Gods haue made complaint to Jupiter, eyther of men, or their bad conditions, and could neuer gaine accomplishment of theyr desires; so grosse and absurde were they in theyr Orations, in regarde of the Goddesses, who were neuer sent backe but fully satisfied, euen in those things which humaine iustice made a conscience of graunting; so much well-speaking women haue preuayled, aboue the vnsauorie barking of rude men. Which wise Pithagoras well perceiuing, forbad his Schollers to speake, to keepe vnseene the great defect in nature, which is much more in men then women* Cornelia the mother of Gracchus, was so eloquent, as the Romaines erected her an Altar, and sacrificed to her in the Temple of Pitho, which Pitho was the Goddesse of eloquence, and surpassed both Gods and men in that vertue. Mercurie thus complained, as saith one of the Greekes.


Alas, what helps it me to be,
Ambassadour to Ioue
My father, and each day to see,
the roundnesse from aboue:
Of earth, and heauen all conuayd
within my wings faire flight:
When as my Godhead it missayed,
and robbed of his right?
Sweete speaking Pytho calleth me
abortiue, basely borne:
Because my speech is harsh to hers,
and held as common scorne.
A Goddesse I confesse shee is,
yet may she not like me,
Sit at that boord of highest blisse,
where but twelue Gods may be.
All which the heauens doo controule,
and one of them am I:
Yet thus she singeth from her soule,
my endlesse obloquie.

I shall neuer haue doone with this endlesse piece of worke, which by infinite pluralities doo offer themselues, for iustifying of the feminine eloquence, the vse whereof would God I might borrowe a while, as nothing more appropriate to this theame, for what else can make it so perfect

as it deserues? but onely the diuine eloquence of those celestiall creatures, and therefore had neede to be addorned with the excellencie of their nature, which of it selfe is so singuler, as nothing can be more. Oh might I be inspired but with the least of those perfections, which as the bodies shaddowe wayteth duely vppon women, an accident inseperable from the first substance of theyr heauen borne essence, that standeth exempt from bad thinking, much lesse blunt speaking: then should this discourse appeare in more excellent manner, witnesse that which the Greeke makes Calipso speak to Vlisses.

Twas not of me thou learndst such bitter breath
Against stout Aiax, who did seeke to scape
Thy iniurie, by prompt and present death,
Or to reuenge him on thy Cowards shape.
Nor, to the Ithacanes (vnapt, to lead,)
Learndst thou of thy too faint harted flight,
When as on heapes Sarpedon dung downe dead
The Argines which their vessels had in sight,
My words with infamie did nere take truce,
Or my faire soule endure base feares abuse,
Nor hadst thou there that day beheld my land,
Which on all sides the Sea dooth counterband.

If Painting were not reckoned among mechanicall Artes, I would approoue women to merit the very best trophee thereof: But as Nature euermore delighteth to create those things which to her selfe are most pleasing and conformable, and makes herselfe exercise in those matters, that doo describe her cheefest perfections; so may I say of women, who should too much wrong themselues by taking pleasure in painting, considering it is a matter impossible for them, to make such a rare representation, as their iust beauties doe require, becomming much lesse by Painting, then the diuine graces wherewith they are most richlye accompanyed, builded onely vppon inimitable liniaments of theyr behauiour, the very onely models of the angels beauties, which were neuer

fourmed but by the absolute (...).
Great Apostles, in his ordinarie painting of the Gods, very well knew how to figure Iupiter, Mars, Mercurie or Saturne: but when he went about to set downe the fourme of Venus; hee found his skill to be of such woonderous weakenesse, as hee was compeld to leaue his labour imperfect, testifying to all posterities, that his arte altered it selfe into ignoraunce, when hee went about to set downe the singularitie of women; among whom, Loue it selfe sought to be looked on, as in a publique Theater, where her maiestie receiued much more luster, then in any other subiect possible to be heard of or chosen. And this was the reason that kinde Leander thus spake to Hero.

Hero my most deare Princesse,
Loue her selfe liues in thine eyes:
The Graces, and their youthfulnesse,
Abide in thee as in the skies.
Who is it can thy shape depainte,
Or who can iustly (...)
Exce^^ (...)
^
^
^
^
^

Vulcane, as (...) ^eaded as hee was, yet could hee vse these woords to Venus.

The thunder well I wot to make,
And stout Aegides menacer:
The tempest that all earth dooth shake,
And through the ayre is wanderer.
Battailes faire figures I can frame,
All formall combates I can plot:
The height of walles, and whence they came,
Nor haue! Soldiours heate forg^t.
But should I offer to set downe,
Thy beauties woorth and soueraigntie:
Then heauen it selfe on me would frowne,
For passing my capacitie.

As for Musique, among women it is so familiare, as their very voyce is naturally a hermonie. Aelianus recounteth, that there was a woman

Musitian in Roome so excellent, as euery one imagined shee holpe her selfe by Magique: so rarely could she rauish by the eare the mindes of them that heard her; yea, it grewe to such effect, as many frantique people were thereby recouered from theyr furye. Most certaine is it, that Philliada the Tiriane inuented the Lute, whence rose the prouerbe: The Harpe of Idumea, and the Lute ef Phoenicia, and the testimonie heereof is drawne from others, by the Lord of Bartas.
The cunning Tirianes, who on barke of trees,Did first set downe the voices hermonies.
And a Grecian, thus.
Inuentresse was Philliada,Of Lutes in faire Phoenicia.She first gaue spirit and quick lifeTo dead dull wood, and made so rifeThe seuerall sweetes of Hermonie,By her rare wit and industrie.
When Alexander the great had conquered the kingdome of Darius, he found so skilfull a woman Musitian in the cittie of Susa, as could accomodate the varieties of her voice, to the seuerall noates of all kinde of birdes, and that with such exceeding dexteritie, as they which sawe her not, could make no difference from the verye thing it selfe. Great Caesar likewise was woont to saye, that mens tunes were learnde from the Birdes chattering on trees: but the voice of women came from the Gods themselues. The Syrens, so much described by the Grecians, had songs so wonderfull sweete and mellodious: as they could out-eare the windes, and rob all mouthes of their naturall offices. The Greekes returning from the warres of Troye, rested themselues a long while in the Isles where they inhabited, little caring for returne home into their owne country, by being rapt, or rather charmed with such an hermonious delight.
Perhaps some one will say vnto me, that the Tritons are verye excellent Musitians, but he must withall confesse, that they neuer had like powet and vertue as the Syrens haue, of whom they learned their very deepest knowledge, albeit their Musique stretche no further then the sound of a Trumpet. Which Misenus the Trompetter to Aeneas well perceiuing, prouoked them to sound, to trie whether he could goe beyond them or no: marie he lost his life therefore, if this narration be of any certaintie.

But whilst his Trompet he did sound,
with glorie indiscreetes
Vpon the marble of the waues,
the Tritons notes to meete.
They iealous to be so defyed,
in their owne pleasing arte:
In anger threw him in the waues,
and so his life did parte.

Istrina, the mother to Ariphita king of Scithia, was of such estimation in Musique: as the Poets haue feygned, that the Seas would neuer be calme, but when this Lady stood exchanging her sweete Zephires with the Northerne guskes, which blew very bitterly vpon them continually. The Astronomers do holde, that Venus is the patronesse of Musique, and that the influence of her Planet, brings most speciall felicitie to such as deale in that facultie.
Let vs admit, that Thespion the priest of the Gymnosophists, Zoroastes of the Persians, Hermes of the Aegiptians, Buda of the Chaldeans, Abbares of the Scithians, and Zalmosis of the Thracians, excelled no lesse in Musique, then in pietie and knowledge of sacred matters: yet notwithstanding, they were but simple admirers of fayre Clora, daughter to God Anubis, who could charme the Crocadils of Nylus, as also them of hot Cyrena,

by the benefit of her voice reputed incomparable, which Lycosthenes reports such wonders of, as they seeme to mooue more astonishment then beleefe. Enough hath been saide concerning sciences, and the glory which women haue gotten thereby, ouer-far beyond men: it remaines for me now to speake of the morall vertues, which serue perticulerly to the guiding of life and sanctitie. In which course (me thinkes) Temperance deserues to haue the first place, as beeing that, which according to Hyppocrates and Galen, is the dearest freend and fauourite of Nature. Euripides was not ignorant thereof, when he sayd.

Temperaunce makes men to liue,
And beside dooth freedome giue,
From death, who soonest dooth them smite,
With a deceiuing appetite,

The Greeke and Latine histories are growne grosse with millions of examples, which witnesse the rare sobrietie

of women, and excesse of men in all things whatsoeuer, according as it is sayd in Exodus: Men rose vp to playe, after they had long time wallowed in drunkennesse. Homer hath described this insolence vnto vs, in the persons of Penelopes Courtiers, who continued blamelesse, notwithstanding all theyr great immodestie. Hence is it, why Dioclea could not endure the lasciuious behauiour and dishonestie of the Tyrant Phalaris, and therefore threw her selfe downe from a windowe, of which fall shee dyed verye soone after, speaking these verses of Menander.

She that is in the grace of heauens happinesse,
Liueth not long in this worldes wretchednesse.

And when an Epicure sayd to her, that there was no other lyfe after this should bee finished, shee aunswered him out of Pindarus in this sorte.


When as the night lockes vp the day,
Yet heauen bideth at one stay.
Our soules are then in those faire fields,
That daintie coullerd Roses yeelds,
Couerd with Trees perfumde and pure,
And balmes that haue the richest cure.
Vpon whose braunches fruites of golde,
Doo hang most glorious to beholde.
There, diuers walke deliciouslie,
Some ride on horsses cheerefully.
Others to musiques hermonie,
Of instruments make mellodie.
There is a thousand thousand flowers,
Of different smell to sent the powers.
There a many Altars fume,
With Mirrhe and other sweete perfume.
And there is seene a shining fire,
In this rare place which soules desire.

She likewise rehearsed this sentence of Euripides.

That which by name we doe entitle life,
Is in effect but a continuall strife.

Indeed I well remember, that men haue beene famous for some rare qualities; as inuenting the sundrie idle

playes at Dice and Cardes, with other such like exercises beside: Wherevpon, Saint Bernard shaping his course to the young men of his time, sayde. You follow idlenesse, to shun idlenesse: you apply your selues to play, euen vntill yee fall into Deaths daunger. Iob in like manner cryed out against men, that they consumed their dayes in vaine delights, and so in the end were dispossessed of theyr liues. Good old Sara, hauing care of a holye conscience, discoursed in this sorte with the Eternall: I haue not frequented to these players, neither had accesse to vaine persons. Well then, we may say, that men are artezanes and continuall labourers, in things altogether apperteining to follie, as in superfluous tempering of meates, or in delicacies, the onely companion of inconstancie, the goade to luxurie and birthe of death, and from whence he receiueth his onlie conception.
Oh vile gourmandise, the onelye

pestilence to humane kinde, by good reason oughtest thou to liue amongst men, who naturally are enemyes to theyr owne selues. Thou art he which troublest the braine, impeachest reason, prophanest chaste eares, misorderest the behauiour of them thou possessest, thou beggerest them that inherit thee, thou layest ambuscadoes for chaste thoughts, thou loadest the spirits with lasciuiousnes; thou art hee that didst murder our first father, and so brought an vniuersall death vppon all mankinde, thou souldest Esaues birthright; thou massacredst the people in the deferr: in breefe, thou art the only instrument, wherwith are erected all circumuentions that worke violence to our soules, and especially in the persons of men, the ordinarie ministers of thy pernicious practises.
We read enough concerning intemperance, of Heliogabalus, of Caracalla, Caligula, Lucullus, Phaon, Xerxes, Aristippus, Myle of Crotona, and of Philoxenus,

who intreated Jupiter to grant him the neck of a Crane, to taste with more leysure the sweetnesse of his delicate viands: likewise of Candaules of Lidia, of Hermagoras, of Alexander, Darius, Marke Anthonie, with many other among the Pagans. Wee read beside in holy Scripture, of Holophernes the enemie to God, a most dissolute man, of Dauid in some sort, of Ammon his sonne, the Beniamites, the olde accusers of Susanna, the Gomorrhists and Sodomits: but of intemperate women, you shall verye hardly finde any that can be spoken of. Vesta was so sober in her life, that the Painters figured Fasting by her, as Exercise by Diana, Maiestie by Iuno, and Prudence by Minerua. I will referre to your owne iudgement, that (seeing these vertues could be no way better signified, for in me^ they would haue appeared most monstrous) if womens natures must not needs be celestial, yea euen in their ordinary and customarie functions.
Search thorow all Germanie, which is the empire of all drunkennesse and seruitude of the sober: yee shall not finde one woman, but she is not onely free from being taxed with that beastlinesse, but likewise if shee haue once ouer drunke; it is sufficient for her euer after. Where contrariwise the men, they hardly respect any other exercise, then tossing and emptying of the pottes, which is more shamefull to the vnsatiable, then the Wine they disgorge can be to them healthfull. But perhaps you will say vnto me, it is not seemely for a woman to drinke much, and therefore that folly may be tollerated in men. Let me returne yee this answere, euill dooing is no more permitted to men then women, the rather in this respect; because men make vaunts of beeing their superiours, and that womens primacie consisteth not in commanding* but in obeying. Alas, this excellence is not in the degree, but in such behauiour as makes them

woorthy therof: yet they will approue that good in themselues, which they thinke bad and condemne in women, as if vice and vertue were limitted by their desseignes, and as though by their maner of life and demeanor, they were no way subiect eyther to one or other. Wherin they declare, how much they dissent from nature, who neuer ordayned to the subiect where she appointed moouing, but what was apt and conuenient for it, or else such rest as shuld not be vnprofitable, like a faithfull Oeconomie of graces, and mother of all Hierarchie. Nay more, these prophane men would binde the feminine sexe to such laws as themselues are not able to obserue, lawes drawne from their own iealosie, their suspition, their weaknes, their auarice, their depraued conscie^ce, their pride, thinking it good to prohibite others, such things as the^selues could neuer effect: wherin they haue regarde to their owne perticuler imperfection* and not the law of nature:

who measures the constrainte of her will; her will by the inclination; her inclination by that which is most proper; and the most propper by that which is most common, and most necessarie for the conseruation of her kinde.
Let vs now speake of Liberalitie, which is as worthy noting in her own subiect, as anye other vertue in the worlde beside, so royall and seemely is shee in all faire mindes whatsoeuer. More familiar is shee with women, then men, for they are naturally full of pittie, mercie and diuinest charitie. They vse continually to visite Hospitalles, Prisons, and other places of wants, to giue assistance to the miseries of men, who fill the ayre with their wretched lamentations: yea, those places that commonly haue beene infected with theyr bad sauour, women haue not spared to make theyr vsuall accesse vnto. Mausolus monument, builded by a Woman in

remembrance of her husband, is a matter of such especiall estimation, as the very richest Sepultures of Kinges doe thence deriue their names, as from the fountaine of all honour and excellence.
Sarteshkia wife to Arphaxed, gaue instruction for building the proude and incomparable walles of Elchatana, as you may at large read in Memnon of Ephesus. Parisatis Queene of Persia, caused all the Monarches of Asia to be buried in pure golde, and instituted a sacrafice to Cyrus, the expence whereof amounted yeerely to a thousand Affricke tallentes, according to the report of Dionisius Milesianus.
Olympias, mother to Alexander, employed seauen hundred thousand crownes, in erecting an Alter to Iupiter Hammon, vpon the coast of Accium. Cleopatra redeemed fiue thousand Romaines, for two millions of golde and thirty crownes, which shee
(...)

in a perpetuall Aprill of theyr tyme.
Diana gaue chastity, diligence, and honest care of housholde affayres. So that but for the liberality of these before named: the Gods had had no Altars, and men had bin depriued of all vnderstanding.
Iuno placed Hercules among the Gods number: Pallas Vlisses, Venus Aeneas, Thetis Achilles, Diana Hippolitus, Vesta Romulus, Isis Pompilius, Calipso was so liberall, notwithstanding the ingratitude of Vlisses: as she would haue made him immortall, which he refused, through a base desire, of seeing once againe the chymneys smoke of Ithaca or Cassina, which caused Sapho to cry out in this sort.

Men through foolish malice led,
Esteeme base vice in vertues steed,
And doe conceipt iniquity,
In their rash braines a Diety.
To women they obliged be,
For shielding them from infamy,
Because they make them gracious,
And change their Fortunes ominous,
By perfection of their kinde,
To best good haps that they can finde.

Plato in like manner affirmeth, that womens society hath made ciuill the moste outragious condition of mens liues: yea, such as naturally haue been barbarous, and enemies to their owne kinde: as Caine was to his brother Abell: one of Noahs sonnes to his owne Father: Absolom to Dauid, and many others beside in the Holy Scripture.
Amongst the prophane they haue so exceeded, as there is not nowe so many women liuing, as we can number men reclaymed, onely by the discreete counsell of theyr company, and brought into the perfect path of wisedome: so especially it pleased Heauen to bestow these graces, vpon this sexe so diuine and bountifull in all vertues: as my vttermost praises comes farre too short of theyr exceeding merits.
Empedocles, that great searcher and friend to nature, was wont to say: that woman was her meere renewed Image, and her very least consideration in the subiect of thinges naturall, extended it selfe much more neere to truth, then the deepest search or curiositie of man could reach vnto. The Aegiptian Hieroglificques figured the Heauens by a woman, hauing her eyes couered, and laden with many mountaines on her backe: meaning heereby, that those diuine creatures saw all thinges, euen they which were to come, as them present, and withall, supported the misdeedes of men with a forgetfull remission; signifyed by the burdens so farre from theyr regard, as al mens defects whatsoeuer, were cast behinde theyr backes.
It nowe remaines for mee to shewe, howe Historyes doe abound with examples of men prodigiously

rich, as Dauid himselfe witnesseth in this verse: Men are so vnsatiable, as they thinke themselues poore, euen when they possesse riches in greatest aboundance.
Holy writ lets vs see in this apparell, the wealthy Naball: whose extreame auarice was approoued by the second King of Israell, euen with the perrill of his life almost.
It shewes vs Achab likewise, taking away the goodes of Naboth: And in the newe Testament, we may look vpon Simon Magus.
In prophane stories, wee behold Midas, Croesus, Septimilius, Dionisius, Chrisophilus, Tantalus, Lycaon.
Jugurth cryed out (as Salust recordeth) that the Empire of Rome beeing to bee solde: Fortune too much iniured him; in letting him knowe it, and not admytting him the meanes to compasse the wonderfull riches which belonged to

the Primates of the Romain common wealth.
Virgill, and (before him) Appolonius and Ctesias, depainted to vs Polimnestor of Thrace, a man so carried away with auarice, as he violated al the rights of hospitality, and wickedly murdered Polidore, son to King Priam his neighbour.
I might haue a world of worke, if I should heere set downe the Geraudes of Thylos, who solde theyr Sister to the Lappyans: Josephs bretheren, who offended in like sort: the King of Persia, that caused the tombe of Cyrus to be opened, within which this inscription was to be read.

Thou man insatiate, couetous,
Cruell, vnkinde and barbarous,
This Tombe by thee had not been ope,
But that thy couetous extreame,
Heere to haue found a Diademe,
Gaue thy thoughts that greedy scope.
Thy comming I right well did know,
For heauen did the same fore-shew,
And thy fruitlesse hope beside:
Heere get'st thou nothing for thy paine,
But this poore carkasse fraile and vaine,
To speedy death thy present guide.

I haue made mention sufficient of womens liberality, as also the auaritious nature of men: it is now high time, that by humility (wherewith they are much more endued then men theyr aduersaries:) I should cleuate them them so high, as the heauens may bee discerned vnder them, and that they serue to addorne heauen as vertues, or rather, that all vertues are (as it were) their seruants,
Trismegistus the Prince of auncient Theologie, names humility to be the guide of the soule, and onely regent of all our actions.
It is she that moderates violence, and yet is violent vpon immodesty, compelling it to an abatement of such heate, as many times makes itselfe too much acquainted with men, which very quickly carries them from a perswasiue

kinde of pride, to incredible forgetfulnes of themselues.
The holy Bible offers the examples of Sara, Hester; and beyond all other, the new Testament (which is the perfection of witnesse to the Prophets) deliuers vs the humility of the Saint aboue all Saintes, the blessed Virgin Marie, so humble both in apparaunce and effect, as it pleased God to make choyse of her, for the birth of his onely Sonne our Lord Christ Iesus.
Contrariwise, yee cannot but read of the ambition of Caine, of Nimrod, Cirus, Absolon, Haman, Rehoboam, and many others besides.
In histories likewise ye shall finde the presumption of Alexander, naming himselfe the Sonne of Iupiter: of Pirrhus the Epirote: of Menecrates, who called himselfe a God: of Caliphanes, Xerxes, Romulus, Caligula, Caesar, Senecion, Patricius, and Marke Anthonie.
Amongst our moderne men, of Borgi^, Leo, Boniface, Caraffa, Baldwin the imposture, and so many more beside: as I my selfe should seeme ambitious of a very vaine matter, if I would make recitall of them; producing withall, what is said of Hanniball, of Nicanor, of Salmoneus, of the Aloides, Prometheus: Icarus, Tiphon, Phaeton, the Giants in generall, and in breefe, a whole bedrole of the like: but especially such as S^esichorus speakes of in his Odes.
Mad men who in their proper praise,Will crowne themselues with laurell bayes,While other seeke effectually,Into the bottom of the graue.For that whereby they honor haue,And thereby liue in memory.
And Musaeus in his songs.

Those that were of Lesbos Isle,
Gaue themselues an honourd stile.
Which was indeed but villiany,
Like to an aged Rauens noate,
Into some withred Elme being got,
To tell the world her hermony,
The Sea they doe resemble well,
Which sinckes as if it were to hell.
Though to the cloudes it oft arise,
Or like the Sea-man, that would breake,
A huge rocke with his Oares too weake,
When fond conceite thus dimmes his eyes.

Where can be read a matter more insupportable, then the insolence of Caine, who answered his Lord and creator: Hast thou giuen Abell my brother to my custody; or am I to yeelde account of him?
Contrariwise, where can be heard of a more humble creature, then the Cananite, who hauing not offended at all, held her selfe not onely faulty in the fact of her religion: but comparing her selfe to the bruite beastes, combated against the rigour of Iesus Disciples, and that with such mighty modesty, as had not the holy Scripture expressely reported it, it would haue exceeded beleefe: yea, all

histories els in the world beside. Mary Magdaleins humility cannot be equalled in comparison, by the very humblest submission of men ingenerall or perticuler, wyping our Sauiours feete with the hayre of her head, being as then but scantly knowen vnto her.
But if yee will commend the insolence of a man, it is to be noted at that very instant, when one cryed out: What losse commits this Woman at this present? Such odours might haue been sold at a very good rate, and afterward bestowed vpon the poore.
But let vs leaue diuine authorityes, and looke into histories, Hippolita the Amazone was so humble and lowly to Theseus, that he hauing receiued a hurt with the Bulles horne of Praxila on his right shoulder: she vsed often times to lick the wound with her tongue; whereas euen Chiron the Centaure grewe offended.


This is not thy chiefest glory,
Nor thy Fortunes fairest story,
Oh Theseus, to haue conquered,
The mighty Bull of Praxila,
Whose wounding thee that very day,
Might full well haue done thee dead,
But to haue faire Hippolita,
So worthy noting euery way,
In thy house to waite on thee,
And destinies to grace her so,
When else thy life thou must forgoe,
Then she to giue thee remedy.

As goodnesse, honesty and vertue, are onely principall among the perfections of the minde, so in that only subiecte woulde I conclude heere my discourse: but that I cannot well doe it, vnlesse thereby I giue men to vnderstand, that whatsoeuer goodnesse abideth in them, is only but borrowed, and the very maine goodnesse of the whole world consisteth in women, who (to speake no more then truth) are as a soule to the whole vniuersse, and the especiall procurers of all celestiall blessings.
The Romaines amongst all their conquestes, made an intermingling of strange Goddes, and caused Altars to be erected vnto them, yet notwithstanding, in the despoyle of so many nations, they could neuer get any one God that bare the tytle of good, so rare was this qualitye amongst them which were figured in the shapes of men. And yet in the very cradle of their Empire, they had a Goddesse of goodnes, named Vesta, so highly eternized for her deserts, as at one time she was honored with seauen hundred crowns of pure golde, and neuer could men haue the credite to enter her Temple* Ennius the Poet renowneth her in this manner.

Vesta (good Goddesse) is sole guardiane,
Of our great Capitole, and people Romaine,
All other Gods are feeble in their might,
But she and Pallas, who giues wisedomes sight.

The goodnesse of Juno is noted of euery one, and farre to exceede the mallice of Iupiter, for though shee

had good cause to procure his ouerthrowe, for being so long time tyed by the heeles to one Mil-stone, agaynst all lawes of equity and reason: yet did she not forbeare to discouer to him, the secret traines laide for him by the other Gods, who were growen weary of his tyranie and oppression; which made the Greeke thus to speake of her.

Iuno, the goodnes ouer rare,
Made thee too kinde and debounaire,
To thy vngratefull husband still,
When fastned to his clog too long,
He vext the Gods, and did thee wrong,
Yet didst thou alwaies shield his ill.

The goodnesse of Sirua of Corinthe, was excessiue, if excesse be to be found in such a vertue, for being forsaken by her husband, a man beyond all measure dissolute, and wisely learning how he spent his time: to wit, in the stewes which was the moste infamous in all Greece, where hee had vtterly wasted

and consumed himselfe: She yet appointed him an annuall pension, that hauing wherewithall to diffray his charges, he might in time learne to leaue that wicked kinde of life.
Plutarch makes mention of a Courtezane so kinde and affable, that shee gaue a golden Crowne of maruailous valew, the very sum of all her riches consisting therein: to a young man, who had refused her for another, to whome he gaue the very same crown, with the will and consent of her, who had bin his before first Mistresse and louer. Oh worthy courtezane, the history doth thee wronge in giuing thee that name, for by this one deed thou hast raysed so many vertuous opinions of thee, and set downe such a memory of thy woorth: as they that shall defame thee, will be but infamous, those that accuse thee, but snarling detractours, and he that refused thee, well worthy the name of a wretch and vnthankfull.
Who can but maruaile at the goodnesse of Proserpine, she hauing beene stolne from the Theater of men: yea, from her mothers lap, the terrestriall Paradise of her contentment, and hurried into a place of darkenesse, horrour and dispayre, by a Tyrant, more couetous of her beauty, then matrymoniall coniunction: did neuerthelesse make Jupiters intent knowen to Pluto, to the heauens great scandale, and perpetuall prayse of the nether regions, where she was confined, to preuent a second subuerssion of the world, which would haue ensued vpon her rape againe, as witnesseth that which Pluto himselfe said.

Ere the loud thunder make me let her goe,
Ile burne the heauens, so doth her beauty moue,
Deare care to keep a Iewell gotten so,
Despight my brothers force, she is my loue,
And sooner shall the Sunnes bright golden torch,
Be saffrond in these dim and nether nookes,
Ire she be carried foorth of Plutoes portch,
That giues me life and essence by her lookes.

Empedocles, Aristotle and Plinie haue affirmed, that the best kinde of beastes are those which moste vse to weepe: if it be so, there is nothing more facile in a woman then teares, nay, it is a thing so naturally giuen vnto them, as I haue noted many Ladyes, not to loose one iotte of their perfection thereby, but rather to increase it much more by theyr teares, as especially proceeding from a spring or sourse of grace; howe strange then is the sauage nature of men, who neuer weepe but onely through chollor? But Al^meon yeeldes the reason therof, in this manner.

A woman being of her selfe more apprehensiue then man, cannot easily alter from her first conception, which makes her sooner to weepe then a man, who takes lo^ger time in seeking remedy for his grief.



But this is most certaine, teares only proceed from an exceeding good nature, and all those beastes (most capable of enstruction) are subiect thereto.

Lyons, Beares and Tygers neuer weepe, saith Auerroes, because rage is so familier with them, as they cannot bee taught to shunne theyr owne harmes. But horses and Elephantes vse to weepe, as some men doe, not so much for their natural humiditie, as a certayne feeling of inward sadnes, for the Hart (altogether hot) weepes oftentimes, being pursued and taynted: and after this manner is the weeping of men: but beyond all, the woman is subiect to teares, especially she, in whome moste sweetnesse and tendernes is found. It seemes the Comick Menander knew somewhat in this case, when he said.

For women do weep, for harmes may them befal,
Mean while their barbarous husbands sit and ioy
Neuer fore thinking on their illes at all,
When desperate hazard of most sharp annoy,
With hurly burly through the Citty flies,
Despoilde and widdowed of her liberties,
This foolish courage women doe despise,
And by their teares expresse themselues more wise.

Andromache the wife of Hector, was endued with such goodnes, as her seruantes were in her house as in a Temple: yea, shee tooke care and paines for managing her husbandes horses, he himselfe neuer hauing so much courage, as she had vertues. I may referre thee for further proofe heereof, to Homere where the Lackies of Paris tearmes her a Pithagorician for this cause.
It is strange to heare how some bawle against this text, for they talke of Metempsichosis, which we call transauimation, the passage of soules from one body to another: and then will not sticke withall to sweare, that the Authour heereby meaneth some deceipt: but heerein they resemble little chyldren, who imagine belles to

sound all that they sing.
Iulia Censorina hauing heard, that sentence of death was pronounced against her husband, disguised him so sodainely, as the Iaylor imagined him to be her, so she remained prisoner in his habite, while he escaped with safety of life.
They threatned her with torments to reueale where he was: but she replyed, neuer make spare of mee, for I haue done no more then a woman ought to doe.
There is no true historian, that euer did set downe like example of a man. I knowe very well that some will obiecte vnto mee, howe Diuine Orpheus descended into hell, there to demaund his fayre wife of Pluto: but if hee did so, it was more because hee coulde not liue without her, then for any especiall goodnesse remaining in himselfe, considering hee was a perpetuall enemy to women.
Likewise hee behaued himselfe so ill, if Aeschilus say true.

As he encurd the high disgrace,
Of all the beauteous dames of Thrace*
And being thus dishonoured,
Lost first his harpe and then his head*

I would not aduise men to shed any teares for him, because happily they haue too few for themselues. The generall historie of nations tells vs, that an infinite number of good women vowed themselues to their husbands graues, as not desiring any longer life after them.
Wise Salomon, hath figured forth a good woman to vs, and though she come short of many especiall qualities due to such perfection: yet hath hee described in her more excellent matters, then can bee in a man, whom he esteemeth not capable of any praise. For saith he: A good woman is an inestimable treasure.
In this Song of Songs, he sings nothing els then of the vertuous woman.
Plato held, that shee is no lesse to bee desired in a familye, then a iust Magistrate in a common wealth: this made them paynt Venus standing on a Tortuse, to shew, that a woman ought necessarilye to keepe at home. Possidonius nameth a woman, the eye of necessity, meaning thereby, that her fore-sight being as a Sun of grace, a house is waste and desolate without her beames, and men can neuer clearely see into their houshold affayres, but onely by the warie eye of theyr wiues.
There is such superaboundaunce of goodnesse in women, as wee may grieue to see them deceiued by the bolde mallice of men, who make no reckoning at all of theyr treasons and treacheries: for, while they weep like Crocadiles, they will sweare by Heauen and Earth, that theyr

affections are loyall, their words faithfull, their behaui^^ (...) yet for all this, in (...), they are (...) the Hiena, (...) ^^en vipers* more inconstant men the Polipe fish, more (...) men Tigers, and lesse worthie loue then Hornets. Aristophanes shall take my part, although he was an Athenian, to wit, gadding minded and vncertaine, lyke many other of his companions.

To seduce faire women kinde,
Pretending loyaltie of minde,
And yet not loue but for a while:
Or else for base desire of gaine,
A greefe that many may complaine,
When plaine apparance shewes the guyle*
It is a most vnwoorthy parte,
Farre different from the high desert*
That to women dooth belong,
Who being debounaire and milde,
Neuer thinke men to be so vilde
As to requite them with such wrong.

If yee will haue some of this good

stuffe out of mens storehouse, looke then on detestable and vngratefull Theseus, on Paris the lyer and periurde wretch, on inconstant Hercules, and disloyall Iason, who all most falselye deceiued their friends, after they had triumphed by their meanes and credit, I will not say on their honors: for these men (none woorse that euer were) could not any way wound the happie and laudable reputation, of these their faire fosterers and dearest friends, which made them (indeed) more enemyes to themselues, then they could be to the renowne of these Ladyes, whose vertues may perhaps bee toucht with some slaunder, but their innocent natures stand free from iniurie, and their good cariage from all base suspition. Yet let vs consider heerewithall, that a woman can haue no greater enemy then a man, who is like vnto a rauenous Lyon, continuallye seeking to deuoure new spoyle. Oh sexe abhominable, thou art too

much affected to thy selfe, to knowe rightly indeede howe to vse women kinde, especially in these dayes, wherein, as saith the Italian Poet.

Th'abortiues of this cittie in a flame,
Do at their countries woes but make a game.

And an other:
A Coridon, a Coridon gapes after gaine,And nothing pleaseth him but womens paine.
Not many moneths since, a Gascoigne Gentleman became amorous of a young and vertuous maiden, and raisde vp such a scandale to mens reputation, who spare not to fault in the lyke offence: as enforceth mee to set downe the historie, not so much to make them the more infamous, as to make knowne the iust vengeance, which this honest Virgin tooke on the ingratitude of her feygned and dissembling friend.
He, after a million of pursuites, fild full of seruices, complaines, teares and promises, yet not able to compasse his vnlawfull desires: forgot him selfe so farre, as to publish abroade with no sillie protestations, that hee was not meanely interested into the Maidens best fauours. She hauing no other supporte for her innocencie, then the true witnesse of her soule, vnattainted and free from so vile an infamie; raisde vp her spirits with such rightfull disdaine, against the vniust rauisher of her reputation, as she spared not to kill him in the middest of a verye honourable assembly, where she waited long for the effecting of such a woorthy enterprise, which (vnder correction of better iudgement) in my minde deserued rather pardon and recompence, then any ill reproche, scandale or punishment. For
Pacience importun'de dooth conuert to hate,And who so quitteth not an offered blame:Waites but a second blemish of his name.
Neuerthelesse, in the Parlement at Burdeaux, shee was condemned to loose her head, men did so earnestlye pursue the cause. But after their rigour became somewhat more moderate, shee was confyned vnto perpetuall prison, wherout I would very willinglie deliuer her, if I could conuert my selfe into a shower of golde, as sometime did the Sonne of Saturne.

If Loue deny to open me the gate,
By other meanes I will get in thereat:
Her guardians crueltie I meane to bend,
Euen by those beautious lookes which her defend
That way to make them mylde and debonaire.
No more to fright me from so sweete a faire.
Then on the house Ile raine a shower of golde,
To glut their eyes, while Loue makes mee more bolde.

When Juno would haue borrowed a fauour of Aeolus, shee esteemed no recompence woorthy of such grace, but the offer of one of her Nimphes: where to the God so well lent his eare, as he effected that, which before hee would by no means yeeld to promise.
(...)

will not admit thee to mollifie theyr furies, witnesse that which Linus saith.

Men of their furie would be much ashamde,
And their behauiour mightily be blamde,
Did they but see the wood Nimphes golden life,
So sweete, so pleasing, and so voide of strife.

Pharaohs daughter had more goodnesse in her, then all the Egiptians beside could be stoard with malice, shee was more kinde and affable, then her father was rigorous, let mee not saye cruell: for that great Captaine and lawe deliuerer Moyses, did shee saue from shipwrack, yea the gulfe of death, auouching him for her owne sonne in a time most dangerous, so that it may (vnder reuerence) be said, it pleased God to make her doo him seruice, as well as Moyses in such a neede, and all for the deliuerance of his people.
Heredotus the father of histories, (be it spoake in no dispraise to Plutarch,) makes rehearsall of a Spartane woman, who let scape a prisoner from her

house, that had in earnest smitten her: and because her husband should not kill him for it, she saued his life, by sending him to Thebes. Yee shall hardlie finde the like qualitie in men, by nature addicted to crueltie, and more enclined to offend their friends, then pardon any that haue doone them iniurie.
Homer maketh mention of Pallas, who quallified the rage of the fierie God of warre, that but for her would haue made a generall destruction, when he vnderstood the death of his sonne. The fugitiue Aeneas, might long enough haue wanted humaine succour, yea, lyfe and all had vtterlye miscaryed: if (as a helpe vnexpected) hee had not happened to the good Queene Dydo, where he found a blessed hauen after so many mishaps, and much better was entertained then his base trecherie deserued. Thrasilla saued Phorybus, who scaled her house to rob her treasurie, and as the neighbours

would haue slaine him, she said: Let him alone, he is but a foole, and hath doone no harme but to my windowe nayles. Hersilia seeing Melanthus in the Temple at Delphos, and that hee would haue stolne a Crowne thence, which Perseus had caused there to bee sacred: excused him to the Preestes, who had likewise perceiued him, telling them, that he was a Goldsmith of Athens, and her husbands hoste, who came not thither with any ill intent, but onlye had a curious desire after workemanshipe, which she allwayes had knowne him addicted vnto. All the frenche had miscaried at the Scicilian Vespres, except such as saued themselues in Sperlinga: but that they were aduertised by a Nursse, who serued the Podesta of the Ile, whereon was written:
Sperlinga only shall not burne,Else all the Isle to hauocke turne.
And else where.


A pittying Nurse did many French preserue,
That in Sperlinga sundry monthes did serue.

When the Thebanes recouered their libertie from them of Sparta, and that the tirannie of Charondas was vtterly extinguished: the women of Thebes preuayled so well with the two Captaines Pelopidas and Epaminondas, iustly displeased against them of Lacedemon; as there were but very few put to the swoord, albeit they had beene so iniuriouslye handled, as the remembraunce thereof could not but bee irkesome to them, and bloudy reuenge no more then lawfull. When Prometheus stole the fire from heauen, and Jupiter bound him to the mount Caucasus, where a vulture glutted her selfe continually on his entrayles: the Goddesse Iris rayned downe a shower of Nectar on this ouer-hardy mans brest, till Hercules at length became his deliuerer by Iunos

appointment, who grew into pittie of his hard extremitie, notwithstanding at one instant he had committed two mightie offences: the one by his great ingratitude to Jupiter, the other by his execrable theft, according to that which Aeschilus saith.

None more ingracefull then Prometheus was,
Who from the high and vaulty house of heauen:
Stole holy fire, and thence away would passe,
Hauing had gentle entertainement giuen,
By all the greatest Gods in seemely sorte,
Yea, Iupiter receiu'd him in his Courte.

Theoderita, the wife to John Paleologus, seeing that her husband would needes haue fiue slaues hanged for a small offence, and that shee durst not beg theyr liues, because he was so furious: gaue a summe of money to a Countie their keeper, who fled awaye with them, and were afterward neuer heard of. On the daye of Saint Bartholmew (when the French shew themselues the most barbarous that can be

imagined) there was a good and hardie woman, neere to whom a man had withdrawne himselfe, as if it had been to a sanctuarie of assurance, from the rage of those bruite beasts who forciblie followed him: she caught a dizeuier by the coller, and would not let him goe, albeit shee were halde and puld by the garments, vntill she iudged the man pursued to bee in sound safetie, as indeed by her means it came so to passe. If such a notable deede might not too much displease the conditions of men, especiallye the French executioners of their owne fellow Cittizens: I would bring such a rancke (among them that I could name) as strange histories should haue cause to complaine, that their subiects giue them not leaue once to rehearse matter so memorable.
Sophronia returning from Church, and seeing two young men come led as prisoners, laden with garments which they had stolne from her house,

when shee was tolde by the officers, they had robde her of all, and left iust nothing, shee answered: That what they had doone, was by her own consent, and they tooke these things but as a pledge of a certaine summe of money, which in her necessitie she had borrowed of them, and so they had no other punishment then feare onely.
Hee that would take vppon him to number the starres, should not finde himselfe so confounded by their infinitie in his sight: as I am dazeled with multiplicitie of matter, deliuered only vppon this subiect, which going beyond admiration, astonisheth my sences, rauisheth my spirits, wearies my hand, and by wearinesse dispossesseth mee of all hope, to get out of this boundlesse Oceane: but that the verie goodnesse it selfe of this matter I handle, supplyes my defects, as contented with a little in so vnable a person.
I haue saide sufficient, concerning

the happy qualities of women, which (to speake truely) triumpheth ouer men in all cheefe glory of perfections, that can be affoorded by heauen and nature, who ordinarily makes her selfe more admired in the feminine sexe, then any subiect else whatsoeuer: neuerthelesse, me thinkes I am iustly to condemne my selfe in all I haue done, because it hath not caried the weightie stile it deserueth; much more then am I to be affraide, if I should dare to make entrance among theyr diuine graces, the celestiall forme of theyr Angelicall beauties, with what spirit I should proceed in so high an employment.
Apelles that skilfull and absolute Painter, when hee should figure the graces of Venus, found him selfe to bee in such a straunge confusion, as hee was compelled to crye out: That hee was the onely enemie to his fame and credit, that did set him about such a difficult matter. I referre

it to your iudgements, seeing Thimantes could not portraite Agamemnons teares, for the sacrifising of his onely daughter: whether it be possible or no, to describe the most sweet attractions of a young Lady, who in one instant can cause both life and death, not onely in men of homely mettall, but euen the very resolutest person in the worlde, you may beholde (without any arte to helpe) a hayrie tufte, daintily floating vppon a front largely extended, where two eyes (or rather two Sunnes) make resplendaunce with such a temperate fire: as our sences forget their condition, our spirits their iudgment, our hearts their freedome, and our soules all conceit, as caryed away with intire consideration of so many meruailes. Neapolitane Sanazar aptlie discourseth thereon.

Beautie to the Lillie like,
Pleaseth with her daintie white:
Plaited into radiant curlles,
Which about sweete liking hurlles*
By so rare and pleasing couller,
Raising vp a second honor,
Beautie like the waters fall,
Running with a gentle braule.
In a chanell siluer hewde,
All the hearbes enammeled,
As it dooth her tresses spred,
By the standers by are viewd.
It is louely, like the Rose,
That in mornings dooth vnclose,
When faire heauen hath distilde,
On Auroraes cradle bed,
Which the Gangian worshipped,
Her pearled drops through the f^eld.

I can hardly thinke, that men should bee so misgouerned, as to presume to haue any grace aboue that of women* seeing at all times by this fayre ornament of nature (which I dare call the cheefest gift of heauen) there hath beene such woonders wrought thereby: as Tyrants haue beene made to forget theyr rigour; Iudges haue altered their settled determinations; sterne people haue been pacified, and the very wisest circumuented, as by a verye necessarie transportance of the minde.
By this gracious endowment, fayre Hester gaue conclusion to the Kings of Persiaes custome, constrayning Ahasuerus to offer her his royall rod, as well when hee seemed to be most mooued with choller, as in the time of more pleasing acceptance. By this means Juno, as Homer recordeth, knew how to lull a sleepe her husband, for the Grecians aduantage, and ruine of the Troyans. Prince Menelaus iustly offended with Helen his wife, perceiued her accompanyed with so many graces, when shee came into his presence with Diophoebus: as he durst do nothing against so rare a beautie, but became euen then to be more amourous, then he was before on the day of his nuptials. The graces of Cleopatra, comming for tryall before Marke Anthonie: the Iudge himselfe became sollicitour.
Augustus intending to destroy Alexandria; was put from his purpose by the very sight of Therinda, beeing but

the daughter to a poore Shipmaister. Aelianus rehearseth, that on the Sea coastes of Liguria, certaine marine monsters haue beene seene, bearing some shewe of humaine shape: that would stand gazing on the countrye damosels, as they went for water to the neighbouring Fountaines. Lycosthenes, and after him Boisteau de Launay, declareth, that a Triton was so rauished with the graces of a countrye mayde, as hee forsooke the Sea, and followed so farre after her, that hee was taken by the Village-dwellers, wherevpon hee dyed afterwarde with sorrowe.
That part of the bodye, where this gracious iewell receiueth most splendoure, is in the eye, the cheefe and principall piece of Natures woorkemanship.
In lyke manner dooth Aristotle call it, the onely ornament of the bodye: it is the messenger of the Soule; and also it is the Paynter

of our affections, and the faithfull speaker of all our desires. Hence is it, that the eye of a woman is naturally so sweete: that if all the salte in Pequay or Bronage might touch but one of the lids, it would immediatly conuert into the purest Suger. Homer and Pindarus had such sound knowledge of the eyes excellence, as for one word they stroue to giue diuers epithites, and by one body, to make consideration of all womens perfections, so to be discerned as in a mirrour of Christall.
Alexander the Great, so well apprehended the eyes of the Emperour of Perisiaes daughters his enemie, as afterward hee would not so much as looke on them, fearing to loose his liberty in the most happy prison of the world: whervpon he marryed one of them, to the end that this legittimate alliance, might keepe him within the boundes of perpetuall modestie and charitie.
Mahomet the second, drewe such admiration from the eye of an Armenian woman slaue, as (in fauour of her) he caused him to bee hanged vp that had taken her: which made her to complaine of his crueltie, albeit he requested not any thing preiudiciall to her honour. Selim, who was the very rudest enemie to Christendome, hauing seene a young Damosell in the kingdome of Bosleua named Isina, became in such sort attached: as he swore neuer to take any rest, till he had conquered the whole prouince, where a creature so rare and precious first receiued life. Neuer did he kisse but her eyes onely, and afterward married her to Horruccio Barbarossa, the father to the kings of Argire.
But how now? may not I seeme foolish and indiscreet (or rather vnwoorthye of any fauour) in presuming to discourse of things so little agreeing with my conceits, as that I dare bee seene in the glorious Theatre of so

faire resplendance? Oh pardon me, fayre eyes, for I imagined, that the refexion of so many graces as flowe from you, as from the source of glory and Maiestie; would giue such ornament to my woords, as else could not choose but want, and such lyfe to my lines, as might make them immortall. It seemes that Martiall was of my minde.

Your eyes, the Well-springs of faire light,
That chaseth hence the sable night:
Begetteth brightnesse perfectlie,
Where none (till then) had memorie.

Vigo hath written in his practise of medicine, that the eyes of a dead mayden are of such vertue, against charmes and enchauntments, as if one but laye the apple of the eye vnder a Candlestick of Brasse; immediatlie all visions and apparitions shall vanish away and not be seene. Many diseases haue beene cured, by the very behoulding of Women that came to visite the

parties. When the ayre and Sunne is obscured from the Tartares, as it is a case that often befalles them: they teare foorth the eyes of some woman slaue, thereby to ouercome the first charme of darkenesse, and so to haue the Sunne seene againe in theyr Horizon. It is very true, that they neuer vse this but on great necessities, as when they seeke after gaine, or when they haue lost some battaile: and thence forwarde is that slaue made free, and maintained at the charges of the common pursse.
The Persians so mightily feared the graces hid in theyr womens eyes, as when any Lady or other should come before their Iudges; they would turne their backes, and not looke vpon them.
When Philocus was reproched by Demetrius, for his ouermuch follie in loouing Latmia; he answered him* If thou thy selfe hadst but once behelde her eyes, thou wouldst chide me, and

say, I loue her not sufficiently. For this cause, the Italians will neuer suffer theyr wiues to go with their faces vncouered: so much they stand in feare, least others should loue them better then they themselues doe. Wherfore, euen as the braine is the seate of the soule, and the throne of loue is placed in a womans eye: so may we call it the bright burning beacon, or rather the perfect load-starre, to direct the way, in the Sea of our inconstant hearts and cogitations. By this windowe did Mars become amorous of Venus, according to the testimonie of Ouid.

Mars saw her, and by sight increast such fire,
As afterward gaue light to gaine desire.

Why then heereby I may conclude, that euen as the Sunne hath more light in his vnitie, then all the starres in number haue together: so the very eye of a woman containes more

graces in it, then is to bee found or imagined. (I speake vpon sound knowledge) in all mens perfections which (to write vprightly) could neither bee gracious, curteous or ciuill, but onely by the society of women. In this case I may likewise say, that as the Opall represents the colour of all precious stones: so a womans face, is the true liuely figure of all graces celestiall and humaine, and that God endued it only with perfections aboue all other creatures.
The goodly heauens might not compare with the ornament and graces of a woman, if nature had not made the^ of longer continuance: but by her death she doth so much the more enrich their beauty* encreasing their fairnesse, in no meane measure, and yet to our vnspeakeable losse. It is now high time I should speake of beauty, the faithfull companion of all those graces which I place formost in the hyerarchy of things that seeme to be, or

are corporall, albeit the minde haue the greater part thereof.
Bodily beauty is a continued proportion of the partes with their whole in perfect substance: This is the common definition of beauty, which only respectes the nature of the thing, and not the accidents. Plato holdes, that beauty is an Idea of perfection, which we attrybute to the subiect that best liketh vs.
And hereupon, being demaunded what was the verie fairest thing in the world: he answered, Loue. Now it is most certaine, that this Loue is a Woman; for as nothing can burne but the fire, or that which is of fiery nature: so can wee loue nothing but a woman, I meane in this Theater of humaine affaires, except we will build vp againe the walles of Sodom. Oh would to God it pleased him, that some two or three, who make a practise of such a horrible sin, yea, euen to the great scandale of Fraunce, had bin

but imployed in this busines, (which especially I vndertooke on so grieuous an occasion:) the kingdome could not then but bee much more flourishing, and the wrath of God in lesse measure follow vs. Well be it so then, that beauty onely appertaineth to a woman, according as Anacreon testifieth.

Nature on Bulles did hornes bestow,
And tallents to the Birdes she gaue,
Hoofes to the horse, and well we know
Swiftnes to Hares their liues to saue.
Fishes she made glide through the streame*
Teeth to the Lyon was her gift:
But as for man, his hap extreame,
Was to be witlesse, voide of thrift.
When woman came, then did she ioy,
And gaue such beauty to her face:
As worlds of hearts it should destroy,
And no power else haue greater grace*

Yet am not I of the vulgares opinion, who subiect beauty to some certaine rules, which cannot support the faire in any subiect, without dooing iniurye to a Myllion of beautyes,

rare and extraordinary, who neuerthelesse, haue manytimes none of those curious notes of antiquity: for a little woman may be faire: a low forehead may be so too: a black hayrde woman, a mouth somewhat large, and other such like parts, lesse to be wondered at then Apelles Venus, in whome it was sayd nothing to bee wanting. For
Beauty best we learne to know,By lookes not ouer swift nor slow:And when behauiour doth agree,The body straight, well shapt to see.
But tell me, will not you iudge the woman to bee moste fayre, that writte to her Louer in thys manner?

My Loue, I am a little blacke,
But say that I were much more blacke.
Mine eyes browne, my face like browne,
Admit my necke and brests more browne,
My haire and skin all black to be,
Sauing my teeth of Iuory:
Inuironed with a curroll fence,
Which breaths more sweet then frankinsence
That might delight both Gods and men,
Much more thy selfe, what saist thou then?
Must I for this my louely browne,
Haue my Loue on me to frowne?
Are not mine eyes as piercing still,
And able Marble hearts to kill?
Or can my Loue be ere the lesse,
My minde being made of gentlenesse?
Why night is duskie, sable blacke,
Yet no beauti^us starres doe locke:
When the Moone with siluer light,
Gallops through the thicke fac'd night.
Venus doth loue nights brownest howers,
The darkest nookes are her safe bowers,
Thickets and Forrestes most obscure.
Yea, where no haunt hath been in vre,
Thither doth she most repayre,
Sooner then to a garden faire.
There may be seene the liuely sparke,
Thats best discerned in the darke:
The ball that in a bright blacke eye,
Shines like a Meteor in the skie.
There browne and faire are both as one,
When two sweet soules are so alone:
Tell me then (Loue) in such a night,
Wouldst thou not thinke the brownest white?

In truth, it is not lawfull for any vpright iudgement to perswade it selfe, that beauty hath any perticuler

colour, a proportion definite, or a grace imaginary: for nature (the soueraigne worke-mistresse of all beauties, hath made an Ethiopian or Moore perfectly blacke, to be as faire as the whitest in our Europe. And the reason is, as Auicen affirmeth, because she would haue no monster in nature, but the very thing that her self should abhor: for to see a dogge with sixe feete, a calfe with two heades, a man of two natures, or a woman with two splenes: this is no monstrousnes, but rather an excellence of the first heate, whych would build vp many thinges in that moode, but often times sets downe her rest vpon one, and yet at some other time falles to plurality.
Monsters then are framed of thinges dissemblable to theyr kinde, and sometimes in the imagination, or a depraued appetite, which euer more is contrary to nature. Empedocles saith thus thereof.


The monster takes originall,
From seede of quite contrary kinde*
To that it should agree withall,
When it planting first did finde.

I may well-say, with a million of our elders, that there is sixe and thirty seuerall beauties in one woman, and hardly any one in a man: for he is the true anotomy of natures imperfection, yea, the very Image of her weaknesse, as a woman may iustly tearme her selfe, the perfecte mirrour of her vertues: whereof Plutarch was not ignorant when he said.

If nature wish her selfe to see,
A woman then her glasse may be.

Propertius was of the same opinion.

Is women not a miracle?
Her voice a perfect oracle?
Nay, is she not a deity,
By beauty of such maiesty?

Men being naturally composed of all corruption take no delight but in dessimulation. The reason is, because Loue and Venus withdrawing once from mens assembly, knowing the mallice which dayly frequented them: left them euen so to their fraudulent complexions, and gaue them the gift to be singuler in deceiuing. The report of Anacreon testifies as much.
Beholde the Dolphins how they play,And on their siluer finnes conuey:Loue and Venus naked both,To shield them from the great vntrothOf men most flattering and vntrue,Let still deceite false hearts pursue.
Although a woman were indued with any other perfection, then being beautifull, or admit she had but this ornament only: yet that alone may exalt her aboue all men, who neither are faire, well fauoured or good, nor indeed (to speake the truth) can they any way be capable of apprehending

these qualities, they are in such plenty bestowed vpon women. The holy scripture holds womanhood in such account; as it teacheth vs, that nothing can sooner put sadnesse from afflicted mindes, then the sight of a good woman: euen as one should say, for a celestiall remedy, because a husband can indeede haue greater comfort in his cares, The Prophet Dauid, euen in the coldest winter of his age, hoped for such consolation by beautie, as he made choise thereof, and age indeed can haue no better corasiue.
Timeus, Sticillianus rehearseth a maruailous historie, of a Shepheardesse of Affrica, who in the daies chiefest heate, casting off her garmentes, that shee might bath in the riuer well shadowed from the Sunne: a Lyon comming that way, for the space of three houres stood gazing vpon her, and seemed as surprized with exceeding contentment.
The poore Virgin was in wonderfull

feare, and durst not come to her cloathes, least the Lyon should deuour her: but growing to better courage in the end, hearing the noyse of certaine Cammell driuers not farre off: betooke her selfe to flight, naked as she was, not taking so much as her smocke with her; which the Lyon getting vp in his teeth, folowed withal, and laid it mildely at her feet, fetching afterward all her other garments, and then as making a signe of obeysance, left her and returned among the woodes, to her no little ioy, finding such seruice in so vnaccustomed a louer. Admetus wife was of such admirable beauty, as the Swannes of Meander would leaue the riuer to follow her, and pearch many times vpon her shoulders. A matter very strange, the like neuer hapning to any man whatsoeuer: as also the inconuenience of her death, onely for deliueraunce of her husband, hath more note of honour; piety and meritte, then all

the men in the world can brag of any vertue, in those thinges which moste may make for their aduantage. For shee sacrificed her selfe willingly, to redeeme her hasbandes life, which lessened euery day by mortall langour of an vlcer, that poured foorth more loathsome and filthy stench, then Augeus stable (clensed by Hercules) could compare withall. All which notwithstanding, he no sooner slept, but shee suckt foorth the venome, paying the ransome for him, who could not else liue, but by losse of her life.
Cambles the Prince of Sardys, being one day drunke, would needes kill his housholde seruants, and proceeding so farre in this rude determination, as hee had compassed the issue of his mercilesse rage, eyther by fire, swoord, or some other meanes.
But beautifull Soclea, being so faire as any woman possible could bee,

presented her selfe before him, and sweetly taking him by the hand, made him on a sodaine become so tractable, and not onely he desisted from further assayling them, but forgot likewise that hee had beene in any such fury, submitting himself mildely and gently to her, both being thus recouered of his drunkennes and fury.
Womens beauty then is aboue all else most maruellous: It is the excellencie of the Diuine workemanship, or rather the chiefest thing of his heauenly labour: It is the modell, not onely of thinges that beautifie the world, but the very especiall of all formes: It is the table of rhe celestiall powers: the gadge of natures alliance with the world, and the onelie mirrour of perfect Ideaes: briefly, it is that which I cannot worthily enough admire, and therefore am the more vnable to describe.
The man that will enter but into consideration thereof, shall in that one

book read all perfections whatsoeuer, and censuring of them by this little, or rather no part thereof at all: will vnfainedly confesse, that the body of a woman is a true Temple, and her soule the very image of God, or figure of his blessing.
He will say, himselfe is made but of slime and dung, whereas woman was formed of a matter otherwise prepared, finished in a happy and wel ordered substance, with all qualities beseeming a most perfect creation. Hee will like wise confesse, that woman was giuen him for his eternall good, and the house is not blessed where she wanteth.
By her is this huge masse subsisted, co^mon weales made immortal, citties peopled, Realmes strengthened, Kings assured, and subiects maintained. By her it is, that we liue againe in our children, posterity haue knowledge of vs, and our memory is continued. It is by her, that we remember our houses,

and respect our families. By her wee learne to growe heedfull, she makes vs quick and ready, she ripens our lawfull actions, and drawes vs from the world to liue in her company: as in a schoole of pietie, modestie, and iust apprehension of following accidents, wherein (else) we should but little differ from bruite beasts. It was shee that had her birthe in the terrestriall Paradise, and not man. Last of all, she is our meanes of comfort to God the Father, the cause of his blessings to vs in this life, and by her we are made sure of all happinesse in the life to come.
FINIS.



An other defence of womens vertues, written by an Honorable personage, of great reckoning in Fraunce, and therefore thought meete to be ioyned with the former discourse.

That a VVomans excellence is much greater then a mans.

MAny things brought foorth by Nature, are oft times made but slender account of, through want of diligent knowledge, as also searche into the excellencie of them: which being a matter vulgare and common, caryeth the lesse price and estimation with euery one.
Omitting other circumstances, whose number might grow well neer infinite, I find the rare and vnualuable vertues of women too much neglected, and their worth not lookt into as their merites iustly challenge: but though some (through ouermuch familiarity) haue bin bolder with them then beseemed: yet let me thus farre stand in their defence, that whosoeuer) with vnpartiall iudgement) will but see into their excellencies, shall finde them to be of no meane esteem, but will giue them more right then hitherto they haue done.
And me thinkes, their detractours sayings are not receiueable, alleadging a bed role of faultes found in their sexe; which yet (by their owne confession) are not so marke-able as those in men: for admitte they haue some fewe, and those but pritty little ones, let men but lay their handes on theyr harts, ransacke their muddy thoughts, and continuall bad cogitations, they

shall perceiue, that womens singularityes both in minde and body, do far out go whatsoeuer perfections in men; whom yet I will graunt to go beyond women in frailty. And to resolue yee herein, I take my first proofe from the womans first forming, who was not made of any vncleane, loathsome or base matter, as the body of man was: but euen of his purity and most refined part, as may appeare by her face, representing a very sweet and gracious complexion, without any ougly haires disfiguring, which sufficiently declares her to be the only piece of worke, extracted from the fountaine of al excelling beauty.
Beside, the exquisite proportion of sweet feminine bodies, is much more rare composed then those of men are, by iudgement of the very best maysters in depth of skill: not making deniall of any one part, but that all doe aboundantly expresse the true celestiall measures.
What shall I say of their singuler spirit, which ordinarily shewes it selfe most constant in aduersitie, most gratious and fauourable in felicitie, and farre beyond all abilitie remaining in men? How often times (if the auncient and moderne histories are of any trueth) haue they beene the cause of exceeding victories? How manye times haue they couragiously resisted against the troopes and feeble squadrons of mens vertues, whome they haue not only ouerthrowen, and broken their disseignes, but likewise compelled most shamfully to flight? Where is he that can produce the Captaine of any nation, who in valour, prowesse and councell, might be equalled with the victorious Volscian Queene Camilla, or the magnanimous Penthesilea? what dilligence or sagacitie so admirable, can yee produce to compare with that of Semiramis? was euer any vertue spoken of, to bee noted in truer shape, then in Zenobia, Valasca, and

many other famous Ladyes of elder times, so royally flourishing in all excellencies and perfections whatsoeuer? Name but one that surmounted them (or to speake more properly) that was not (indeede) greatly inferiour to them in fidelitie and constancie.
For mine owne parte, I haue turned ouer and ouer the leaues of Histories, as well of my natiue, as of most languages beside, and I haue obserued them with the greatest care I could: yet finde I not in them any examples of more weightie and illustrate vertues, then those which by Ladyes haue been taught at all times. How many of them (to maintaine theyr intire faith and feruent loue) haue opposed the^selues against a thousand dangers of wars: and neuer were their frends or esteemed thrust into exile, but (with infinit greefes) they haue gladly changed both name and habit, onely through pure affection borne to their husbands, beloued by the^ more dearly

then life, and more honored then ought els could be by them.
As for humanity and curtesie, yee shall not finde any man equal to them. Ye are not able to comprehend the number of noble Dames, who for releefe of hospitals, ayde of poore beggers, building of Churches, founding of Chappels, and redemption of prysoners, haue employed and consumed al their temporal goods, preferring the honour of God and care of Christians, before base loue to such corruptible trash. Yea, they haue done this with such affection and zeale, as (let men take it how they will) I neuer heard of any man, how noble or valiant soeuer hee was: that euer did but halfe so much, as a woman hath bin knowen in his time to haue done, being more renowned and honored therfore, then he with all his best attemptes could compasse.
What thinke yee of the noble womans minde, that deigned to receiue

al the Romaine hoast in her own land: with so great and bountifull liberality beside, as the memory thereof continues to this present day? Why should we forget the noble and kinde disposition of Phryne, who offered to build againe the whole compasse of Thebes walles? without demaunding any other recompence of the Cittizens, but onely to shew her so much fauour, as her name (for memories sake) might be engrauen on the building: thinke what manner of Citty Thebes was, that contained an hundred seuerall gates in the circuite thereof.
I let a number passe my pen, whose memory and fame are of such ample record, as there are none of so meane knowledge but doe very well remember.
As good Tabitha, whose charitye was reputed so great and memorable, that for the present reliefe of poore afflicted Widdowes, succour of Orphanes and needy soules, she scantly

left to serue her owne weake necessitie.
Such charitie was neuer heard of in any man, and therefore the more worthye to liue for euer. The like hath beene doone by diuers other women, sufficientlye to bee knowne by obserued writings, which are ordinarilye read in manye places of the world.
But to answere certaine greeuous obiections, which womens aduersaries haue falsely alleadged, as hoping that way to ouerthrowe womens honour; albeit those points (as I haue alreadie approoued) makes nothing at all against their excellence, which farre surmounteth all the slaunders inuented against them: Neuerthelesse, to shewe I am not vnprouided of an answer, I will euidentlie make it knowne, that the frailties against Women affirmed, are much more great and notorious in men then women, which prooues them so much

the rather superiour, then any waye subiect or inferiour to men.
One sayth, that for money (which is a vile and seruile thing) they somtimes part with that, which they ought to esteeme dearer then their proper liues. Nowe let vs regarde, whether this promptitude be caused by the sweetnesse of their noble blood and affection: or rather the kinde gentlenesse of their hearts, which makes them yeelde so easily to the intreats of their fauourites. But goe we a little further on, and then we shall finde, that this faulte ought rather to be imputed to the troublesome opportunities of men, theyr lasciuious eye-glaunces, theyr ambushes, threats and deceipts, which daily (without any care of conscience) they practise and procure against so noble a sex. As for my selfe, I neuer heard or knew, that any woman voluntarily gaue her selfe to a man, without his traynes and craftie sollicitings vsed before.
But I haue euermore well noted, in such as laboured most to detect them, first, a shew of long seruice, vrged on with feigned and dissembled teares, intermingled with a million of counterfeit sighes, beside infinite ingenious tromperies, which men haue at commaund to attend vppon them.
Moreouer, I haue sometimes obserued, that when by all these meanes they could not attaine their purpose: they haue sought by violence to compasse it, furthering their attempts by hatefull treasons, or the present villanie of some subtill seruant, whome such maisters are woonte to recompence very largely, for such an honest and seruiceable peice of worke.
See to what kindes of excellencie, the mindes of men are dayly addicted, and yet they will be Lordes and controullers ouer women, when basest infamie dooth thus commaund ouer themselues. Truely, the conceipts of

women are farre otherwise, and (if it be true that Aristotle saith) that the parties composed of most noble and delicate flesh, are of a higher and better spirite then the other: then none are so simple to doubt, but the flesh of women is much more soft and tender, then mens: do wee not likewise beholde by experience, that in all ingenious inuentions, their spirits doe exceede the greatest eminence of mens?
Looke in the catalogue of inuenters of things, if they haue not beene the inuentresses of many excellent and incomparable woorkes: especially of good letters, which at this day make men seeme so rare and excellent. Why then this serues to shew yee, that euen as men are borne of them; so likewise are the sciences which we call humaine. For proofe heereof, the vertuous Lady Carmenta first of all inuented them, by meanes whereof it happened, that the skilfull Leontia,

confuted and woone (by reason in disputation) the victorie ouer learned Theophrastus. Sappho inuented the verses, which (after her name) are called Sapphicks; and had great contention with many excellent Poets in her time, confuting all of them in the end, as the lyke (not without singuler praise) did faire Corinna.
If wee would speake of our time, where is the Italian Poet so hardie, and so sure in his composition, as to compare with the Ladye Marquesse of Pescara, or Veronica of Gambara, or gentle Armilla Angosciole? In Spaine and Germanie yee shall finde whole Legions, that kept Schooles of all Sciences, especiallye of good language, and purest writing, excelling the very skilfullest men in those countries.
How many is there in the Courte of Fraunce, whom the learnedst in the land (I say not in diuinitie) but in humaine sciences, dare not deale withall

or contradict? And as for them in Citties, we may remember the sweete Gentlewoman Elisena, Morella, Robertet the Bayli^esse of Touraine, young fayre Moyfa^ct, beside infinite others whom I leaue, able to instruct a right good secretary, how skilfull soeuer he be, to couche in writing any case of inuention, be it eyther in rime or prose. As for recluse women, most certain is it, that neither Valeria Proba, nor Paula, nor Eustochium, who liued in the time of S. Hierom, excelled them that now are at this present daye. For breuities sake I am constrained to let them passe, because their singularitie shall the more commend them, by such workes as shall make them liue perpetually renowmed: yet therein they begge not applause as men baselie doo, who will not be a little offended, if men reporte not of them to the vttermost.
I could wade very long in this discourse, and run far to assemble by breefe

recitall, diuers noble and ingenious women more: were it not, that euen as Hesiodus and Plutarch, haue largely written their vertues of elder time: so for our moderne dames, Maister Iohn Boccace and others haue honestly discharged their consciences, so that no further proofe neede to be produced in this place.
If yee will vrge me to confirme this case, by extraordinarie priuiledges graunted to women: I neede goe no further then the old Testament, where God commaunded Abraham, that he should doo what his good wife Sara willed him. Moreouer we finde, that our Sauiour (after his holy resurrection) did first of all appeare to women, Mereurius Trismegistus, who (of men) woorthily may be tearmed excellent, knowing the merueilous perfections and vertues of women; left written in his bookes, that the man who had not a wife ought especially to be auoyded, considering, that from the woman (as

from a most aboundant fountayne,) flowed all gifts of bountie and goodnesse: and the houses where no women were, ought to bee esteemed as vast Deserts, or vntilled lands.
Where is true pollicie, if not in a housholde? where is perfect honestie, if not where women are? Saint Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, when he would produce the example of peoples faithfulnesse, to bee kept and obserued betweene each other: did hee not alledge that of Rahab? But because it is a common matter in the most part of men, to obiect against women, that they are of weake courage, and so consequently, very niggardly and couetous: I would demaund of them, were not women in auncient time called Dames, because of their readinesse and francknesse in giuing? I haue not so many hayres on my head, as I haue knowne honest women, not onely prompt to giue most courteous and amiable presents; but withall, to offer

such a zealous heart and affection, as witnessed they could neuer bee sufficientlie requited againe: yet doone without expecting publique glorye and applause, as men doo, who are ambitious and couetous of vayne reportes.
Seeing women then haue showne themselues so vertuous and excellent, it may bee thought a matter not without great reason, that the vertuous Grecians retayned Womens names among them, and not mens: as well knowing by theyr first detracters, that Women were singuler freendes to honour and vertue.
I could (to this effect) alleadge infinite other reasons and examples, for confirmation of Womens excellencie: but because I haue referred yee to Histories, I will giue ende to this well imployed labour. Yet let mee first intreate yee, to make reuerend regarde of that you shall finde in

approoued good Authours: which if yee doo, the height and dignitie of women will be so ingrauen in your mindes, as no malignitie whatsoeuer can preuayle against them, and your selues will truly confesse, that the most I can deuise to write, can neuer reache to the least part of theyr especiall deseruing vertues, and most excellent graces wherewith they are decked and adorned.
And this I can assure yee beside, that the most parte of excellent and vertuous men, haue attributed all tytles of honour to Women, daylye becomming theyr seruantes in hart, yea, euen humble in prostration (as it were) to adore them, as if in some sorte they tooke parte with the highest diuinitie.
Then let vs not fayle hencefoorth to looue them hartilye, by example of our wise and discreete elders, yeelding our selues voluntarily

as subiect to them: neuer regarding venemous spightfull tongues, that haue not spared to speake their vttermost against them.
FINIS.

