



THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF PLANTS: Containing Grasses, Rushes, Reeds, Corne, Flags, and Bulbous, or Onion-rooted Plants.
IN this Historie of Plants it would be tedious to vse by way of introduction, any curious discourse vpon the generall (...) of Plants, contained in Latine vnder Arbor, Frutex, (...), Herba: or to speake of the differing names of their seuerall parts, more in Latine than our vulgar tongue can well expresse. Or to go about to teach thee, or rather to beguile thee by the smell or taste, to guesse at the temperature of Plants: when as all and euery of these in their place shall haue their true face and note, whereby thou maist both know and vse them.
In three bookes therefore, as in three gardens, all our Plants are bestowed; sorted as neere as might be in kindred and neighbourhood.
The first booke hath Grasses, Rushes, Corne, Reeds, Flags, Bulbous or Onion-tooted Plants,
The second, most sorts of herbes vsed for meate, medicine, or sweet smelling.
The third hath Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, Fruit-bearing Plants, Rosins, Gummes, Roses, Heathes, Mosses, Mushroms, Corall, and their seuerall kindes.
Each booke hath chapters, as for each herbe a bed: and euery Plant presents thee with the Latine and English name in the title, placed ouer the picture of the Plant.
Then followes the kindes, description, place, time, names, natures, and vertues, agreeing with the best receiued opinions.
Last of all thou hast a generall Index, as well in Latine as English, with a carefull supply likewise of an Index b linguis, of barbarous names.
And thus hauing giuen thee a generall view of this garden, now with our friendly labours wee will accompany thee, and leade thee through a Grasse-plot, little or nothing of many Herbarists heretofore touched; and begin with the most common or best knowne Grasse, which is called in Latine, Gramen pratense: and then by little and little conduct thee through most pleasant gardens and other delightfull places, where any herbe or plant may be found fit for meate or medicine.

CHAP. 1. Of Medow-Grasse.
THere be sundry and infinite kindes of Grasses not mentioned by the Antients, either as vnnecessarie to be set downe, or vnknowne to them: onely they make mention of some few, whose wants we meane to supply, in such as haue come to our knowledge, referring the rest to the curious searcher of Simples.

 The Description.
1 COmmon Medow Grasse hath very small tufts or roots, with thicke hairy threds depending vpon the highest turfe, matting and creeping on the ground with a most thicke and appatant shew of wheaten leaues, lifting vp long thinne ioynted and light stalks, a foot or a cubit high, growing small and sharpe at the top, with a loose (...) hanging downward, like the tuft or top of the common Reed.

2 Small medow Grasse differeth from the former in varietie of the soile; for as the first kind groweth in medowes, so doth this small grasse clothe the hilly and more dry grounds vntilled, and barren by nature; a Grasse more fit for sheepe than for greater cattell. And because the kindes of Grasse do differ apparantly in root, tuft, stalke, leafe, sheath, eare, or crest, we may assure our selues that they are endowed with seuerall vertues, formed by the Creator for the vse of man, although they haue been by a common negligence hidden and vnknowne. And therefore in this our Labor we haue placed each of them in their seuerall bed, where the diligent searcher of Nature may, if so he please, place his learned obseruations.


1 Gramen pratense. Medow Grasse.


2 Gramen pratense minus. Small Medow-grasse.




 The Place.
Common Medow-grasse groweth of it selfe vnset or vnsowen, euery where, but the small medow grasse for the most part groweth vpon dry and barren grounds, as partly wee haue touched in the description.


 The Time.
Concerning the time when Grasse springeth and seedeth, I suppose there is none so simple but knoweth it, and that it continueth all the whole yeare, seeding in Iune and Iuly. Neither needeth it any propagation or replanting by seed or otherwise; no not so much as the watery Grasses, but that they recouer themselues againe, although they haue beene drowned in water all the Winter long, as may appeare in the wilde fennes in Lincolnshire and such like places.


 The Names.
Grasse is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Gramen, as it is thought, a gradiendo, quod (...) is (...) serpat crebroquenouas spargat radices: for it groweth, goeth, or spreadeth it selfe vnset or vnsowen, naturally ouer all fields or grounds, cloathing them with a faire and perfect greene. It is yearely mowed, in some places twice, and in some rare places thrice, then is it dried and withered by the (...) of the Sunne, with often turning it; and then is it called Foenum, nescio an a foenore aut foetu. In English, Hay: in French, Le herbe du (...).


 The Nature.
The roots and seeds of Grasse are of more vse in physicke than the herbe, and are accounted of all Writers moderately to open obstructions, and prouoke vrine.



 The Vertues.
The decoction of Grasse with the roots of Parsley drunke, helpeth the dissurie, and prouoketh  vrine.
The roots of Grasse, according to Galen, doe glew and consolidate together new and bleeding  wounds.
The iuyce of Grasse mixed with honey and the pouder of Sothernwood taken in drinke, killeth  wormes in children; but if the childe be young, or tender of nature, it shall suffice to mixe the iuyce of Grasse, and the gall of an Oxe or Bull together, and therewith anoint the childes belly, and lay a clout wet therein vpon the nauell.
Fernelius saith, that grasse doth helpe the obstructions of the liuer, reines and kidnies and the  inflammation of the raines called Nephritis.
Hay sodden in water till (...) be tender, and applied hot to the chaps of beasts that be chap-fallen, through long standing in pound or stable without meate, is a present remedie.



CHAP. 2. Of Red Dwarfe-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 DWarfe Grasse is one of the least of Grasses. The root consists of many little bulbes, couered with a reddish (...) or skinne, with very many smal hairy and white strings: the tuft or eare is of a reddish colour, and not much differing from the grasse called Ischaemon, though the eare be softer, broader, and more beautifull.




@ 
 1 Gramen minimum rubrum, siue Xerampelinum. Red Dwarfe-grasse.


2 Gramen minimum album. White Dwarfe-grasse.




@ 
 2 This kinde of Grasse hath small hairy roots; the leaues are small and short, as also the stalke, which on the top thereof beares a pannicle not much vnlike the small medow (...), but lesse: the colour thereof is sometimes white, and otherwhiles reddish; whence some haue giuen two figures, which I thinking needlesse, haue onely retained the later, and for the former giuen the figure of another Grasse, intended by our Author to be comprehended in this Chapter.

3 Small hard Grasse hath small roots compact of little strings or threds, from which come forth many soure rushy leaues of the length of an inch and a halfe: the tuft or eare is compact of many pannicles or very little eares, which to your feeling are very hard or harsh. This Grasse is vnpleasant, and no wholesome food for cattell.
4 Rush-grasse is a small plant some handfull high, hauing many small rushy leaues tough and pliant, as are the common Rushes: whereupon do grow small scaly or chaffie huskes, in stead of floures, like those of Rushes, but smaller. The root is threddy like the former. @ There is a varietie of this to be found in bogs, with the seeds bigger, and the leaues and whole plant lesser. @


3 Gramen minus duriusculum. Small hard Grasse.


4 Gramen junceum. Rush-grasse, or Toad-grasse.




 The Place.
The Dwarfe-grasse doth grow on heathy rough and dry barren grounds in most places of England. @ That which I haue giuen you I haue not as yet obserued growing in any part of England. @
The white Dwarfe-grasse is not so common as the former, yet doth it grow very plentifully among the Hop gardens in Essex and many other places.
Small Hard-grasse groweth in moist fresh marishes, and such like places.
Rush-grasse groweth in salt marishes neere vnto the sea, where the marishes haue beene ouerflowne with salt water. @ It also groweth in many wet woods, lanes, and such places, as in the lane going by Totenham Court towards Hampstead. The lesser varietie hereof growes on the bogges vpon Hampstead heath. @


 The Time.
These kindes of Grasses do grow, floure, and flourish when the common Medow grasse doth.


 The Names.
It sufficeth what hath beene said of the names in the description, as well in English as Latine; onely that some haue deemed White Dwarfe-grasse to be called Xerampelinum.
Rush-grasse hath been taken for Holosteum Matthioli.


@  The Names in particular.
1 This I here giue you in the first place is the Gramenminimum Xerampelinum of Lobel: it is the  Gramen of Matthiolus, and Gramen bulbosum of Daleschampius. Our Author did not vnderstand what Xerampelinus signified, when as he said the white Dwarfe-grasse was so termed; for the word imports red, or murrey, such a colour as the withered leaues of Vines are of. 2. Tabern calls this, Gramen panniculatum minus. 3. Lobel calls this, Exile Gramen durius. 4. This by Matthiolus was called Holostium: by Thalius, Gramen epigonatocaulon: by Tabernamontanus, Gra. (...), that is, Toad-grasse. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
These kindes of Grasses doe agree as it is thought with the common (...)-grasse, in nature and vertues, notwithstanding they haue not beene vsed in physicke as yet, that I can reade of.


@ The first figure was onely a varietie of the second, according to (...); yet in my iudgement it was the same with the third, which is (...) (...).



CHAP. 3. Of Corne-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 COrne-grasse hath many grassie leaues resembling those of Rie, or rather Otes, amongst the which commeth vp slender benty stalkes, kneed or ioynted like those of corne, whereupon groweth a faire tuft or pannicle not much vnlike to the feather-like tuft of common Reed, but rounder compact together like vnto Millet. The root is threddy like those of Otes.


1 Gramen segetale. Corne-grasse.


2 Gramen (...). Reed-grasse, or Bent.


2 Reed-grasse hath many thin grassie leaues like the former: the bushy top, with his long feather-like pannicles doresemble the common Reed, which is lightly shaken with the winde, branched vpon a long slender reeden stalke, kneed or ioynted like corne. The root is small and fibrous.


 The Place and Time.
These kindes of Grasses grow for the most part neere hedges, and in fallow fields in most places. Their time of springing, flouring, and fading may be referred to the common Medow-grasse.



The Names.
@ The first is called in English, Corne-grasse. Lobelius calls this, Segetum gramen pannicula speciosa latiore: others termeit Gramen segetale, for that it vsually groweth among corne; the which I haue not as yet seene.
The second is called in English, Reed-grasse: of Lobelius in Latine, Gramen agrorum latiore, arundinacea, and comosa pannicula, for that his tuft or pannicles do resemble the Reed: and Spicaventi agrorum, by reason of his feather-top, which is easily shaken with the wind. @ Some in English, much agreeable to the Latine name, call these, Windle-strawes. Now I take this last to be the Grasse with which we in London do vsually adorne our chimneys in Sommer time: and we commonly call the bundle of it handsomely made vp for our vse, by the name of Bents. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These Grasses are thought to agree with common Grasse, as well in temperature as vertues, although not vsed in physicke.



CHAP. 4. Of Millet Grasse.


1 Gramen Miliaceum. Millet Grasse.


@ This which I giue you in the second place is not of the same (...) that was figured in the former edition; for that picture was of (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...). which hath a running root and large specious pannicle like to a Reed, of a browne colour. But it is most apparant that our Authour meant this, and framed his description by looking vpon this figure, especially the later part thereof. The (...) figure of this was in the second place in the next Chapter.

 2 Gramen majus aquaticum. Great Water-grasse.



 The Description.
1 MIllet Grasse is but a slender Grasse, bearing a tuft or eare like vnto the common Medow-grasse, but consisting of small seeds or chaffie heads like to Milium, or (...), whereof it tooke the name. The stalke or leaues do resemble the Bent, wherewith countrey people do trimme their houses.
2 The great Water-grasse in root, leafe, tuft, and reeden stalke doth very well resemble the Grasse called in Latine, Gramen sulcatum, or Pictum; and by our English women, Lady-laces, because it is stript or furrowed with white and greene streakes like silke laces; but yet differs from that, that this Water grasse doth get vnto it selfe some new roots from the middle of the stalks and ioynts, which the other doth not. @ This is a large Grasse, hauing stalkes almost as thicke as ones little finger, with the leaues answerable vnto them, and a little rougish: the tuft is somewhat like a reed, but lesse, and whitish coloured. @



 The Place, (...), Nature, and Vertues.
The former growes in medowes, and about hedges, and the later is to be found in most fenny and watery places, and haue their vertues and natures common with the other Grasses, for any thing that wee can finde in writing. The reason of their names may be gathered out of the description.



CHAP. 5. Of Darnell Grasse.

 The Description.
1 DArnell Grasse, or Gramen Sorghinum, as Lobel hath very properly termed it, hath a brownish stalke thicke and knotty, set with long sharpe leaues like vnto the common Dogs Grasse: at the top whereof groweth a tuft or eare of a grayish colour, somwhat like (...), whereof it tooke his name.


1 Gramen Sorghinum. Darnell Grasse.


@ The figure that (...) in the second place was of (...) (...) (...), being the second of the precedent Chapter. The true figure of this was page 21. (...) the title of (...) (...) (...). The third being there also, as I haue touched in the (...).
@ 2 Gramen harundinaceum panniculatum. Wilde Reed.


2 Wilde Reed, or Gramen harundinaceum (...), called also Calamogrostis, is far bigger than Couch grasse, or Dogs grasse, and in stalkes and leaues more rough, rugged, and cutting. It is bad food for cattell, though they want, or be very hungry; and deadly to Sheepe, because that, as the Husbandman saith, it is a cause of leannesse in them, thirst, and consumption: it cutteth their  @ 3 Gramen arundinaceum minus. The lesser Reed-Grasse. tongue, straitneth the gullet or throat, and draweth downe bloud into the stomacke or maw; whereof ensueth inflammation, and death for the most part. And not onely this Calamogrostis is hurtfull, but also all other kindes of shearing leaued reeds, flagges, sedge, or the like, which haue as it were edges; and cut on both sides like kniues as well mens fingers, as cattels mouthes. This herbe is in a meane between reed and grasse. The root is white, creeping downwards very deepe. The spike or eare is like vnto the reed, being soft and cottony, somewhat resembling Pannicke.
@ 3 This in root, stalkes, and leaues is like to the last described, but that they are lesser: the top or head is a long single spike or eare, not seuered or parted into many eares like (...) top of the precedent, and by (...) and the magnitude it may chiefely be distinguished from it. This was in the twelfth place in the sixteenth chapter, vnder the title of Gramen harundinaceum minus: and the Calamogrostis but now described, was also there againe in the eleuenth place. @


 The Place.
The first growes in fields and orchards almost euery where; the other grow in fenny waterish places.


 The Names.
2 This in Lincolneshire is called Sheeregrasse, or Henne: in other parts of England, wild Reed: in Latine, Calamogrostis: out of the Greeke, (...) As for their natures and vertues we doe not finde any great vse of them worth the setting downe. 






CHAP. 6. Of Feather-top, Ferne, and Wood-grasse.

 The Description.
@ 1 THis might fitly haue beene put to those mentioned in the foregoing chapter, but that our Author determined it for this, as may appeare by the mention made of it in the names, as also by the description hereof, framed from the figure we here giue you. @ This Grasse is garnished with chaffie and downie tufts, set vpon a long benty stalke of two cubits high or somewhat more, naked without any blades or leaues, for the most part. His root is tough and hard. @ The top is commonly of a red or murrey colour, and the leaues soft and downy. @
@ 2 This, whose figure was formerly by our Author giuen for the last described, though verie much different from it, is a very pretty and elegant (...): it in roots and leaues is not vnlike to the vsuall medow Grasse; the stalke riseth to the height of a foot, and at the top thereof it beareth a beautifull pannicle, (whence the French and Spanish Nations call it Amourettes, that is, the Louely Grasse.) This head consists of many little eares, shaped much like those of the ordinarie Quaking Grasse, longer and flatter, being composed of more scales, so that each of them somewhat resembles the leafe of a small Ferne, whence I haue called it Ferne-Grasse. These tops when they are ripe are white, and are gathered where they grow naturally to beautifie garlands. @
3 Wood-grasse hath many small and threddy roots, compact together in manner of a (...); from which spring immediately out of the earth many grassy leaues, among the which are sundrie  @ 1 Gramen tomentosum arundinaceum. Feather-top, or Woolly Reed-grasse. 2 Gramen panniculatum elegasis. Ferne-grasse. 3 (...) syluaticum majus. The greater Wood-grasse. benty stalkes, naked and without leaues or blades like the former, bearing at the top a soft spikie tuft or eare much like vnto a Fox-taile, of a brownish colour.
@ 4 This in leaues, stalks, roots, manner and place of growing is like the last described: the onely difference betweene them is, That this hath much lesse, yet sharper or rougher eares or tufts. The figure and description of this was formerly giuen by our Author in the sixteenth chapter, and ninth place, vnder the title of Gramen syluaticum minus. But because the difference between the last described and this is so small, we haue spared the figure, to make roome for others more (...) and note-worthy.


 The Time and Place.
1 This kinde of Grasse growes in fettil fields and pastures.
2 The second growes in diuers places of Spaine and France.
The other two grow in Woods.


 The Names.
1 Lobelius in Latine calls this Gramen tomentosum and Acerosum. Some haue taken it for the second kinde of (...); but most commonly  it is called Gramen plumosum: and in English, a Bent, or Feather-top Grasse.
2 Gramen panniculatum is called by some Heragrostis in Greeke. Lobel calls this Gramen panniculosum phalaroides. And it is named in the Hist. Lugd. Gramen filiceum, seu polyanthos: that is, Ferne, or many-floured Grasse. @
3 Gramen syluaticum, or as it pleaseth others, Gramen nemorosum, is called in our tongue, wood Grasse, or shadow Grasse.



CHAP. 7. Of great Fox-taile Grasse.

 The Description.
1 THe great Fox-taile Grasse hath many threddy roots like the common Medow grasse; and the stalke riseth immediatly from the root, in fashion like vnto Barley, with two or three leaues or blades like Otes; but is nothing rough in handling, but foft and downie, and somewhat hoarie, bearing one eare or tuft on the top, and neuer more; fashioned like a Fox-taile, whereof it tooke his name. At the approch of Winter it dieth, and recouereth it selfe the next yeare by falling of his seed.


1 Gramen Alopecuroides majus Great Fox-taile Grasse.


@ 2 Gramen Alopecuroides minus. Small Fox-taile Grasse.


2 The lesser Fox-taile Grasse hath a tuffe and hard root compact of many small strings, yeelding a strawie stalke like the former, though somwhat lesser, with the like top or crest, but of a whitish colour.
3 Great bastard Fox-taile Grasse hath a strawie stalke or stemme, which riseth to the height of a cubit and an halfe, hauing a small root consisting of many fibres. His leafe is small and grassie, and hath on his top one tuft or spike, or eare of a hard chaffie substance, some three inches long, composed of longish seeds, each hauing a little beard or awne.
4 Small bastard Fox-taile Grasse doth resemble the former, sauing that this kinde doth not  send forth such large stalkes and eares as the other, but smaller, and not so close packed together, neither hauing so long beards or awnes.


@ 3 Gramen Alopecurinum majus. Great bastard Fox-taile Grasse.


4 Gramen Alopecurinum (...). Small bastard Fox-taile Grasse.




 The Place and Time.
These wilde bastard Fox-taile Grasses doe grow in the moist furrowes of fertile fields, towards the later end of Sommer.


 The Names.
@ The first by Lobel and Tabern. is called Gramen phalaroides. The other Lobel calleth 2 Gramen Alopecuroides. 3. minus. 4. minus alterum.



CHAP. 8. Of Great Cats-taile Grasse.

 The Description.
1 GReat Cats-taile Grasse hath very small roots, compact of many small skins or threds, which may easily be taken from the whole root. The stalke riseth vp in the middest, and is somewhat like vnto wilde Barley, kneed and ioynted like corne, of a foot high or thereabout; bearing at the top a handsome round close compact eare resembling the Catstaile.
2 The small Cats-taile grasse is like vnto the other, differing chiefely in that it is lesser than it. The root is thicke and cloued like those of Rush Onions, or Ciues, with many small strings or hairie threads annexed vnto it.
@ 3 There is another that growes plentifully in many places about London, the which may fitly be referred to this Classis. The root thereof is a little bulbe, from whence ariseth a stalke some two foot or better high, set at each ioynt with long grassie leaues: the spike or eare is commonly  Gramen Typhinum minus. Small Cats-taile Grasse. foure or fiue inches long, closely and handsomely made in the fashion of the precedent, which in the shape it doth very much resemble. @


 The Place and Time.
These kindes of Grasses do grow very well neere waterie places, as Gramen Cyperoides doth, and flourish at the same time that all the others doe.
@ The latter may be found by the bridge entring into Chelsey field, as one goeth from Saint Iames to little Chelsey. @


 The Names.
The Latines borrow these names of the Greekes, and call it Gramen Typhinum, of Typha, a Cats taile: and it may in English as wel be called round Bent-grasse, as Cats-taile Grasse.
@ The last described is by (...), who first gaue the figure and description thereof in his Prodomus, pag. 10. called Gramen Typhoides maximum spica longissima; that is, The largest Foxetaile Grasse with a very long eare. @



CHAP. 9. Of Cyperus Grasse.


1 Gramen Cyperoides. Cyperus Grasse.


2 Gramen Iunceum aquaticum. Rushy Water-Grasse.




 The Description.
1 CYperus Grasse hath roots somewhat like Cyperus, whereof it tooke his name: his leaues are long and large like vnto the common reed: the stalke doth grow to the height of a cubit in some places; vpon which groweth little scaly knobs or eares, spike fashion, somewhat like vnto Cats-taile, or Reed-mace, very chaffie, rough, and rugged.
2 Rushy Water-grasse hath his roots like the former, with many fibres or strings hanging at them; and creepeth along vpon the vppermost face of the earth, or rather mud, wherein it groweth, bearing at each ioynt one slender benty stalke, set with a few small grassie blades or leaues, bringing forth at the top in little hoods, small feather-like tufts or eares.


 The Place, Time, and Names.
They grow, as I haue insinuated, in myrie and muddy grounds, in the same season that others do. And concerning their names there hath been said enough in their titles.



CHAP. 10. Of Water-Grasse.


1 Gramen aquaticum. Water-grasse.


2 Gramen aquaticum spicatum. Spiked Water-grasse.



 The Description.
@ 1 WAter-grasse, or as we terme it, Water Burre-grasse, hath a few long narrow slender and ioynted leaues: among which riseth vp a stalke of two foot high, bearing vpon his small and tender branches certaine little rough knobs, or brownish sharpe pointed seeds made vp into cornered heads: his root is small and threddy.
@ The figure of this plant is not well exprest, for it should haue had the leaues made narrower, and ioynts exprest in them, like as you may see in the Gramen junceum syluaticum, which is the ninth in the sixteenth chapter; for that and this are so like, that I know no other difference betweene them, but that this hath leaues longer and narrower than that, and the heads smaller and whiter. There is a reasonable good figure of this in the Historia Lugd. p. 1001. vnder the name of Arundo minima. @

2 Spiked Water-grasse hath long narrow (...): the stalke is small, single, and naked, without leaues or blades, bearing alongst the same toward the top an eare or spike made of certaine small buttons, resembling the buttonie floures of Sea Worme-wood. His root is thick and tough, full of fibres or threds.


 The Place and Time.
They differ not from the former kindes of Grasses in place and time: and their names are manifest.


 The Nature and Vertues.
Their nature and vertues are referred vnto Dogs Grasse, whereof we will speake hereafter.



CHAP. 11. Of Flote-Grasse.


1 Gramen fluviatile. Flote-grasse.


2 Gramen fluviatile spicatum. Spiked Flote-grasse.



 The Description.
@ 1 FLote-grasse hath a long and round root somewhat thicke, like vnto Dogs-grasse, set on euen ioynts with small strings or threds; from the which rise vp long and crooked stalkes, crossing, winding, and folding one within another with many flaggie leaues, which horses eate greedily of. At the top of these stalks, and somewhat lower, there come forth very many little eares of a whitish colour, composed of two ranks of little chaffie seeds set alternately, each of these small eares being almost an inch in length.
2 Spike Flote-Grasse, or spiked Flote-grasse beareth at the top of each slender creeping stalke one spiked eare and no more, and the other many, which maketh a difference betwixt them; otherwise they are one like the other. His root is compact, tufted; and made of many thrummie threds.


 The Place.
The first of these growes euery where in waters. The second is harder to be found.



 The Names.
The first is called Gramen fluviatile, and also Gramen aquis innatans: in English, Flote-grasse. Tragus calls it, Gramen Anatum, Ducks-grasse.
The second is called Gramen (...) spicatum, and fluviatile album by Tabernamontanus. Likewise in English it is called Flote-grasse, and Floter-grasse, because they swimme and flote in the water.



CHAP. 12. Of Kneed-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 KNeed-grasse hath straight and vpright strawie stalkes, with ioynts like to the straw of corne, and beareth small grassie leaues or blades spiked at the top like vnto Pannick, with a rough eare of a darke (...) colour. His roots are hairy and threddy, and the ioynts of the straw are very large and conspicuous.


1 Gramen geniculatum. Kneed-grasse.


2 Gramen geniculatum aquaticum. Water Kneed-grasse.


2 Water Kneed-grasse hath many long and slender stemmes, ioynted with many knobby and gouty knees like vnto Reed, set with broad flaggy leaues somewhat sharpe pointed; bearing at the top a tuft or pannicle diuided into sundry small branches, of a duskish colour. His root is threddie like the other.


 The Place, Time, and Names.
These Grasses do grow in fertile moist medowes; not differing in time from others. And they are called Geniculata, because they haue large ioynts like as it were knees.
We haue nothing deliuered vs of their nature and properties,




CHAP. 13. Of Bearded Panicke Grasse.


1 Gramen Paniceum. Bearded Panick Grasse.



 The Description.
1 BEarded Panicke grasse hath broad and large leaues like barly, somwhat hoarie, or os an oner-worne russet colour. The stalkes haue two or three ioynts at the most, and many (...) on the top, without order; vpon some stalkes more (...) on others fewer, much like vnto the eare of wilde Panicke, but that this hath many (...) or awnes, which the other wants.
2 Small Pannicke Grasse, as Lobelius writeth, in roots, leaues, ioynts, and stalkes is like the former, sauing that the eare is much lesse, consisting of fewer rowes of seed, contained in small chaffie blackish huskes. This, as the former, hath many eares vpon one stalke.
@ 3 This small Pannicke Grasse from a threddy root sendeth forth many little stalkes, whereof some are one handfull, other-some little more than an inch high; and each of these stalkes on the top sustaines one single eare, in shape (...) like vnto the eare of wilde Pannicke, but about halfe the length. The stalkes of this are commonly crooked, and set with grassie leaues like to the rest of this kinde. The figure hereof was vnfitly placed by our Author in the sixteenth place in the eighth chapter, vnder the title of Gramen (...) spicatum.


2 Gramen paniceum parvum. Small Panicke Grasse.




 The Place and Time.
The first of these two doth grow neere vnto mud walls, or such like places not manured, yet fertile or fruitfull.

The second groweth in shallow waterie plashes of pastures, and at the same time with others. @ I haue not as yet obserued any of these three growing wilde. @


@ 3 Gramen Pannici effigie spica simplici. Single eared Pannicke Grasse.




 The Names and Vertues.
They are called Panicke Grasses, because they are like the Italian corne called Panicke. Their nature and vertues are not knowne.



CHAP. 14. Of Hedge-hog Grasse.


It is euident by the name and description, that our Author (...) this which we here giue you in the (...) place; yet his figure was of another Grasse (...) like the (...), which figure and description you may finde here exprest in the third place.

 1 Gramen palustre (...). Hedge-hog Grasse.


2 Gramen exile Hirsutum. Hairy-grasse,





@ 3 Gramen Capitulis globosis. Round headed Siluer-grasse.



 The Description.
1 HEdge-hog Grasse hath long stiffe flaggy leaues with diuers stalkes proceeding from a thicke spreading root; and at the top of euery stalke growe certaine round and pricking knobs fashioned like an hedge-hog.
It is euident by the name and description, that our Author (...) this which we here giue you in the (...) place; yet his figure was of another Grasse (...) like the (...), which figure and description you may finde here exprest in the third place.

 2 The second is rough and hairie: his roots do spred and creep vnder the mud and myre as Cyperus doth; and at the top of the stalkes are certaine round soft heads, their colour being browne, intermixed with yellow, so that they looke prettily when as they are in their prime.
@ 3 This Grasse (whose figure was formerly in the first place in this Chapter) hath a small and fibrous root, from which rise leaues like those of Wheat, but with some long white hairs vpon them like those of the last described: at the tops of the stalks (which are some foot or better high) there grow two or three round heads consisting of (...) and white downie threds. These heads are said to shine in the night, and therefore they in Italy call it (according to Caesalpinus) (...), quia noctu lucet.
4 To this I may adde another growing also in Italy, and first described by Fabius Columna. It hath small creeping ioynted roots, out of which come small fibres, and leaues little and very narrow at the first, but those that are vpon the stalkes are as long againe, incompassing the stalks, as in Wheat, Dogs-grasse, and the like. These leaues are (...) all along, and a little forked at the end: the straw or stalke is very slender, at the top whereof growes a sharpe prickly round head, much after the manner of the last described: each of the seed-vessels whereof this head consists ends in a prickly stalke hauing fiue or seuen points, whereof the vppermost that is in the middle is the longest. The seed that is contained in these prickly vessels is little and transparent, like in colour to that of Cow-wheat. The floures (as in others of this kinde) hang trembling vpon yellowish small threds. @


 The Place and Time.
It is euident by the name and description, that our Author (...) this which we here giue you in the (...) place; yet his figure was of another Grasse (...) like the (...), which figure and description you may finde here exprest in the third place.

 1 2 They grow in watery medows and fields, as you may see in Saint Georges fields and such like places.
3 4 Both these grow in diuers mountainous places of Italy; the later whereof floures in May.


 The Names.
The first is called Hedge-hog Grasse, and in Latine, Gramen Echinatum, by reason of those prickles which are like vnto a hedge-hog.
The second hairy Grasse is called Gramen exile hirsutum Cyperoides, because it is small and little, and rough or hairy like a Goat: and Cyperoides, because his roots do spring and creepe like the Cyperus.
@ 3 This by Anguillara is thought to be Combretum of Pliny; it is Gram. lucidum of (...); and Gramen hirsutum capitulo globoso, of Bauhine, Pin. pag. 7.
4 Fabius Columna calls this, Gramen montanum Echinatum tribuloides capitatum: and Bauhine nameth it, Gramen spica subrotunda echinata. Wee may call it in English, Round headed Caltrope Grasse.


 The Vertues.
3 The heade of this (which I haue thought good to call Siluer-grasse) is very good to be applied to greene wounds, and effectuall to stay bleeding, Caesalp. @




CHAP. 15. Of Hairy Wood-(...).

 The Description.
1 HAiry Wood-grasse hath broad rough leaues somewhat like the precedent, but much longer, and they proceed from a threddy root, which is very thicke, and ful of strings, as the common Grasse, with small stalkes rising vp from the same roots; but the top of these stalkes is diuided into a number of little branches, and on the end of euery one of them standeth a little floure or huske like the top of Allium Vrsinum, or common Ramsons, wherein the seed is contained when the floure is fallen.
2 Cyperus Wood-grasse hath many sheary grassie leaues, proceeding from a root made of many hairy strings or threds: among which there riseth vp sundry straight and vpright stalkes, on whose tops are certaine scaly and chaffie huskes, or rather spikie blackish eares, not much vnlike the catkins or tags which grow on Nut-trees, or Aller trees.


1 Gramen hirsutum nemorosum. Hairy Wood-grasse.


2 Gramen Cyperinum nemorosum. Cyperus Wood-grasse.




 The Place, Time, and Names.
These two grow in woods or shadowie places, and may in English be called Wood-grasses. Their time is common with the rest.


 Their Nature and Vertues.
There is nothing to be said of their nature and vertues, being as vnknowne as most of the former.




CHAP. 16. Of Sea Spike-Grasse.

 The Description.
Formerly in the eighth place (but very vnsitly) was the sigure of Gramen (...) spica (...). being the third in the (...) chapter. The ninth also is restored to his due place, being the (...) in the (...) chapter. The two Reed-grasses that were in the eleuenth and (...) places are also before in the (...) Chapter.

 1 SEa Spike-grasse hath many small hollow round leaues about six inches long, rising from a bushy threddy white fibrous root, which are very soft and smooth in handling. Among these leaues there doe spring vp many small rushy stalkes; alongst which are at the first diuers small flouring round buttons; the sides whereof falling away, the middle part growes into a longish seed-vessell standing vpright.


1 Gramen marinum spicatum. Sea Spike-grasse.


2 Gramen spicatum alterum. Saltmarsh Spike grasse.


Formerly in the eighth place (but very vnsitly) was the sigure of Gramen (...) spica (...). being the third in the (...) chapter. The ninth also is restored to his due place, being the (...) in the (...) chapter. The two Reed-grasses that were in the eleuenth and (...) places are also before in the (...) Chapter.

 2 Salt-marsh Spike-grasse hath a woody tough thicke root with some small hairy threds fastned thereunto; out of which arise long and thicke leaues very like those of that Sea-grasse we vulgarly call Thrift. And amongst these leaues grow vp slender naked rushy stalkes which haue on one side small knobs or buttons of a greenish colour hanging on them.
3 The third hath many rushy leaues tough and hard, of a browne colour, well resembling Rushes: his root is compact of many small tough and long strings. His stalke is bare and naked of leaues vnto the top, on which it hath many small pretty chaffie buttons or heads.
4 The fourth is like the third, sauing that it is larger; the stalke also is thicker and taller than that of the former, bearing at the top such huskes as are in Rushes.
5 Great Cypresse Grasse hath diuers long three-square stalkes proceeding from a root compact of many long and tough strings or threds. The leaues are long and broad, like vnto the sedge called Carex. The spike or eare of it is like the head of Plantaine, and very prickly, and commonly of a yellowish greene colour.
6 Small Cypresse Grasse is like vnto the other in root and leaues, sauing that it is smaller. His stalke is smooth and plaine, bearing at the top certaine tufts or pannicles, like to the last described in roughnesse and colour.



3 Gramen junceum marinum. Sea Rush-grasse.


4 Gramen junceum maritimum. Marish Rush-grasse.


5 Gramen palustris Cyperoides. Great Cypresse Grasse.


6 Gramen Cyperoides parvum. Small Cypresse Grasse.





7 Gramen aquaticum Cyperoides vulgatius. Water Cypresse Grasse.


Formerly in the eighth place (but very vnsitly) was the sigure of Gramen (...) spica (...). being the third in the (...) chapter. The ninth also is restored to his due place, being the (...) in the (...) chapter. The two Reed-grasses that were in the eleuenth and (...) places are also before in the (...) Chapter.

 8 Gramen Cyperoides spicatum. Spike Cypresse Grasse.


9 Gramen (...) syluaticum. Wood Rushy-grasse.


7 The first of these two kindes hath many crooked and crambling roots of awoody substance, very like vnto the right Cyperus, differing from it onely in smell, because the right Cyperus roots haue a fragrant smell, and these none at all. His leaues are long and broad, rough, sharp or cutting at the edges like sedge. His stalke is long, big, and three square, like to Cyperus, and on his top a chaffie vmbel or tuft like vnto the true Cyperus.
@ 8 The second kinde hath many broad leaues like vnto those of Gillouers, but of a fresher greene: amongst the which riseth vp a short stalke some handful or two high, bearing at the top three or foure short eares of a reddish murrey colour, and these eares grow commonly together at the top of the stalk, and not one vnder another. There is also another lesser sort hereof, with leaues and roots like the former, but the stalke is commonly shorter, and it hath but one single eare at the top thereof. You haue the figures of both these exprest in the same table or piece. This kinde of Grasse is the Gramen spicatum (...) Vetonicae of Lobel. @
9 This hath long tough and hairy strings growing deepe in the earth like a turfe, which make the root; from which rise many crooked tough and rushy stalks, hauing toward the top scaly and chaffie knobs or buttons. @ This  growes some halfe yard high, with round brownish heads, and the leaues are ioynted as you see them expressed in the figure we here giue you. @


 The Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Vertues.
All the Grasses which we haue described in this chapter doe grow in marish and watery places neere to the sea, or other fenny grounds, or by muddy and myrie ditches, at the same time that the others do grow and flourish. Their names are easily gathered of the places they grow in, or by their Descriptions, and are of no vertue nor propertie in medicine, or any other necessarie vse as yet knowne.



CHAP. 17. Of Couch-Grasse, or Dogs-grasse.


1 Gramen Caninum. Couch-grasse, or Dogs-grasse.


2 Gramen Caninum nodosum. Knotty Dogs-grasse.



 The Description.
@ 1 THe common or best knowne Dogs-grasse, or Couch-grasse hath long leaues of a whitish greene colour: the stalke is a cubit and a halfe high, with ioynts or knees like wheaten straw, but these ioynts are couered with a little short down or woollinesse. The plume or tuft is like the reed, but smaller and more chaffie, and of a grayish colour: it creepeth in the ground hither and thither with long white roots, ioynted at certaine distances, hauing a pleasant sweet taste, and are platted or wrapped one within another very intricately, insomuch as where it hapneth in gardens amongst pot-herbes, great labour must be taken before it can be destroyed, each piece being apt to grow, and euery way to dilate it selfe.

@ 2 Knotty Dogs grasse is like vnto the former in stalke and leafe, but that they are of a deeper colour; also the spike or eare is greener, and about some two handfulls long, much in shape resembling an Oate, yet far smaller, and is much more dispersed than the figure (...) to you. The roots of this are somewhat knotty and tuberous, but that is chiefely about the Spring of the yeare, for afterwards they become lesse and lesse vntill the end of Summer. And these bulbes do grow confusedly together, not retaining auy certaine shape or number.


 The Place.
1 The first growes in gardens and arable lands, as an infirmitie or plague of the fields, nothing pleasing to Husbandmen; for after that the field is plowed, they are constrained to gather the roots together with harrowes and rakes; and being so gathered and laid vpon heapes, they set them on fire lest they should grow againe.
2 The second growes in plowed fields and such like places, but not euery where as the other. I haue found of these in great plenty, both growing, and plucked vp with harrowes, as before is rehearsed, in the fields next to S. (...) wall as ye go to Chelsey, and in the fields as ye go from the Tower-hill of London to Radcliffe.


 The Time.
These Grasses seldome come to shew their eare before Iuly.


 The Names.
It is called Gramen Caninum, or Sanguinale, and Vniola. The Countreymen of Brabant name it (...): others, Ledt grasse: of the Grecians, (...) of the Latines, by the common name, Gramen. It is of some named (...): in English, Couch-grasse, Quitch-Grasse, and Dogs-grasse.
Gramen Caninum bulbosum, or nodosum, is called in English, Knobby, or Knotty Couch-grasse.


 The Nature.
The nature of Couch-grasse, especially the roots, agreeth with the nature of common Grasse: although that Couch-grasse be an vnwelcome guest to fields and gardens, yet his physicke vertues do recompence those hurts; for it openeth the stoppings of the liuer and reines, without any manifest heate.
The learned Physitions of the Colledge and Societie of London do hold this bulbous Couch grasse in temperature agreeing with the common Couch-grasse, but in vertues more effectuall.


 The Vertues.
Couch-grasse healeth greene wounds. The decoction of the root is good for the kidneys and  bladder: it prouoketh vrine gently, and driueth forth grauell. (...) and Galen do agree, that the root stamped and laid vpon greene wounds doth heale them speedily.
The decoction thereof serueth against griping paines of the belly, and difficultie of making  water.
Marcellus an old Author maketh mention in his 26 chapter, That seuen and twenty knots of the  herbe which is called Gramen, or Grasse, boiled in wine till halfe be consumed, pressed forth, strained, and giuen to drinke to him that is troubled with the strangurie, hath so great vertue, that after the Patient hath once begun to make water without paine, it may not be giuen any more. But it must be giuen with water onely to such as haue a Feuer. By which words it appeareth, That this knotted Grasse was taken for that which is properly called Gramen, or Agrostis; and hath bin also commended against the stone and diseases of the bladder.
The later Physitions doe vse the roots sometimes of this, and sometimes of the other indifferently.



CHAP. 18. Of Sea Dogs-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 THe Sea Dogs-grasse is very like vnto the other before named: his leaues are long and slender, and very thicke compact together, set vpon a knotty stalke spiked at the top like the former. Also the root crambleth and creepeth hither and thither vnder the earth, occupying much ground by reason of his great encrease of roots.
@ This Grasse (whereof Lobel gaue the first figure and description, vnder the name of Gramen geniculatum Caninum marinum) I coniecture to be that which growes plentifully vpon the banks in the (...) marishes by Dartford in Kent, and most other salt places by the sea; as also in many banks and orchards about London, and most other places farre from the sea. Now Lobels figure being not good, and the description not extant in any of his Latine Workes; I cannot certainly affirme any thing. Yet I thinke it fit to giue you an exact description of that I do probably iudge to be it;  and not onely so, but I iudge it to be the same Grasse that Bauhine in his Prodromus hath set forth, pag. 17. vnder the name of Gramen latifolium spicatriticea compacta. This is a very tall Grasse; for it sends forth a stalke commonly in good ground to the height of a yard and an halfe: the leaues are large, stiffe, and greene, almost as big as those of white Wheat; the which it also very much resembles in the eare, which vsually is some handfull and an halfe long, little spokes standing by course with their flat sides towards the straw. About the beginning of Iuly it is hung with little 1 Gramen Caninum marinum. Sea Dogs-grasse. 2 Gramen Caninum marinum (...). Sea Couch-grasse. whitish yellow floures such as Wheat hath. The roots of this are like those of the first described. This sometimes varies in the largenesse of the whole Plant, as also in the greatnesse, sparsednesse, and compactnesse of the eare. @.
2 The second Sea Dogs-grasse is according vnto Lobel somewhat like the former: his roots are more spreading and longer, dispersing themselues vnder the ground farther than any of the rest. The leaues are like the former, thicke bushed at the top, with a cluster or bush of short thick leaues one folded within another. The stalke and tuft is of a middle kinde, betweene Ischaemon and the common Couch-grasse.


 The Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Vertues.
They grow on the sea shore at the same time that others do; and are so called because they grow neere the sea side. Their nature and vertues are to be referred vnto Dogs-grasse.



CHAP. 19. Of vpright Dogs-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 VPright Dogs-grasse, or Quich-grasse, by reason of his long spreading ioynted roots is like vnto the former, and hath at euery knot in the root sundry strings of hairie substance, shooting into the ground at euery ioint as it spreadeth: the stalks ly creeping, or rise but a little from the ground, and at their tops haue spokie pannicles farre smaller than the  common Couch-grasse. By which notes of difference it may easily be discerned from the other kindes of Dogs-grasse.


1 Gramen Caninum supinum. Vpright Dogs-grasse.


2 Ladies Laces hath leaues like vnto Millet in fashion, rough and sharpe pointed like to the Reed, with many white vaines or ribs, and siluer streakes running along through the midst of the leaues, fashioning the same like to laces or ribbons wouen of white and greene silke, very beautifull and faire to behold: it groweth vnto the height of wilde Pannicke, with a spoky top not very much vnlike, but more compact, soft, white, and chaffie. The root is small and hairie, and white of colour like vnto the Medowgrasse.


2 Gramen (...). Lady-lace Grasse.




 The Place.
1 Vpright Dogs-grasse groweth in dunged grounds and fertile fields.
2 Lady-laces growes naturally in woody and hilly places of Sauoy, and answers common Grasse in his time of seeding.
It is kept and maintained in our English gardens, rather for pleasure than vertue, which is yet knowne.


 The Names.
Lobelius calleth the later, Gramen sulcatum, and striatum, or Gramen pictum: in English, the Furrowed Grasse, the white Chamelion Grasse, or streaked Grasse; and vsually of our English women it is called Lady-laces, or painted Grasse: in French, Aiguillettes d'armes.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The vertues are referred vnto the Dogsgrasses.




CHAP. 20. Of Dew-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 DEw-grasse hath very hard and tough roots long and fibrous: the stalkes are great, of three or foure cubits high, very rough and hairy, ioynted and kneed like the common Reed: the leaues are large and broad like vnto corne. The (...) or eare is diuided into sundry branches, chaffie, and of a purple colour; wherein is contained seed like Milium, wherewith the Germanes do make pottage and such like meat, as we in England do with Otemeale; and it is sent into Middleborough and other townes of the Low-countries, in great quantitie for the same purpose, as Lobel hath told me.
2 The second kinde of Dew-grasse or Ischaemon is somewhat like the first kinde of Medowgrasse, resembling one the other in leaues and stalkes, sauing that the crest or tust is spred or stretched out abroad like a Cocks foot set downe vpon the ground, whereupon it was called Galli (...), by Apuleius. These tops are cleere and vpright, of a glistering purple colour, or rather violet; and it is diuided into foure or fiue branches like the former Dew-grasse. The root consists of a great many small fibres.
@ 3 To these may fitly be added another Grasse, which Clusius hath iudged to be the medicinall Grasse of the Antients: and Lobel referres it to the Dogs grasses, because it hath a root iointed thicke, and creeping like as the Dogs-grasses: the stalkes are some foot high, round, and of a purplish colour: but the top is very like to that of the last described, of a darke purple colour.


1 Gramen Mannae esculentum. Dew-grasse.


2 Ischaemon vulgare. Cocks-foot grasse.




 The Place and Time.
1 The first groweth naturally in Germanie, Bohemia, Italy, and in the territories of (...) and Carinthia, as Matthiolus reporteth.
2 The second groweth neere vnto rough bankes of fields, as I haue seene in the hilly bankes neere Greenhithe in Kent. It differeth not in time from those we haue spoken of.



@ 3 Gramen dactiloides radice repente. Cocks-foot Grassewith (...) roots.


@ 3 This groweth plentifully in most parts of Spaine and France; and it is probable, that this was the grasse that our Author found neere Greenhithe in Kent.


 The Names.
1 The Germanes call it (...): That is to say, Coeli ros; whereupon it was called Gramen Mannae: it seemeth to be Milij syluestris spurium quoddam genus, a certaine wilde or bastard kinde of Millet. Leonicenus and Ruellius name it Capriola, and Sanguinaria: some would haue it to be Gramen (...) Plinij, but because the description thereof is very short, nothing can be certainly affirmed. But they are far deceiued who thinke it be Coronopus, as some very learned haue set downe: but euery one in these dayes is able to controll that errour. Lobel calleth it Gramen Mannae esculentum, for that in Germany and other parts, as (...) and Italy, they vse to eate the same as a kind of breadcorne, and also make pottage therewith as wee do with Otemeale; for the which purpose it is there sowen as Corne, and sent into the Lowcountries, and there sold by the pound. In English it may be called Manna-grasse, or Dewgrasse; but more fitly Rice-grasse.
2 This is iudged to be Ischaemon of Pliny; and Galli crus of Apuleius.


 The (...)
These Grasses are astringent and drying, in (...) sweet like the common Dogs-grasse.


 The Vertues.
Apuleius saith, if a plaister be made of this  Grasse, Hogs grease, and leuen of household bread, it cureth the biting of mad dogs.
As in the description I told you, this plant in his tuft or eare is diuided into sundry branches, some tuft into three, some foure, and some fiue clouen parts like Cocks toes. Apuleius reporteth, If ye take that eare which is diuided onely into three parts, it wonderfully helpeth the running or dropping of the eyes, and those that begin to be bleare eyed, being bound about the necke, and so vsed for certaine dayes together, it turneth the humors away from the weake part.
@ Manna Grasse, or Rice-grasse is said to be very good to be put into pultesses, to discusse  hard swellings in womens brests.
The Cocks-foot Dogs-grasse is very good in all cases, as the other Dogs-grasses are, and equally  as (...). @



 CHAP. 21. Of diuers Cyperus Grasses.

 The Description.
@ 1 THe first of these hath reasonable strong fibrous roots, from whence rise stiffe long and narrow leaues like those of other Cyperus Grasses: the stalkes also (as it is proper to all the plants of this kindred) are three square, bearing at their tops some three brownish eares soft and chaffie like the rest of this kinde, and standing vpright, and not hanging downe as some others do.
2 This hath pretty thicke creeping blacke roots, from whence arise three square stalkes set with leaues shorter, yet broader than those of the last described; and from the top of the stalke come forth three or foure foot-stalkes, whereupon doe hang longish rough scaly and yellowish heads.
3 The roots of this are blacke, without smell, and somewhat larger than those of the last  @ 1 Gramen Cyperoides angustifolium majus. Great narrow leaued Cyperus Grasse. @ 2 Pseudocyperus. Bastard Cyperus.  3 Cyperus longus inodorus syluestris. Long Bastard Cyperus. described: the 3 square stalke also is some two (...) high, bearing at the top dispersedly round (...) heads somewhat like those of the wood Rush-grasse: the leaues are somewhat sharpe and triangular like those of the other Cyperus.
4 This Cyperus hath creeping blacke roots, hauing here and there knotty tuberous heads for the most part, putting vp leaues like those of the last described, as also a stalke bearing at the top long chaffy eares like to some others of this kinde.
5 This Cyperus Grasse hath pretty thicke fibrous and blacke roots, from whence ariseth a stalke some cubit high, pretty stiffe, triangular, ioynted, set at each ioynt with a large greene leafe which at the bottome incompasses the stalke, which is omitted in the figure. At the top of the stalke, as in the true Cyperus, come forth two or three pretty large leaues, betweene which rise vp many small foot-stalkes very much branched, and bearing many blacke seeds somewhat like Millet or rushes.


 The Place and Time.
All these grow in ditches and (...)  places, and are to be found with their heads about the middle of Sommer, and some of them sooner.


 The Names.
The first of these by Lobel is called Gramen palustre majus.
2 This by Gesuer, Lobel, and Dodonaeus is called Pseudocyperus.
3 Lobel names this, Cyperus longus inodor us syluestris.
4 He also calls this, Cyperus (...) (...).
5 This is the Cyperus graminea (...) of Lobel and Pena: the Iuncus latus in the Histor. Lugd. pag. 988. and the Pseudocyperus polycarpos of Thalius.


@ 4 Cypcrus rotundus inodorus syluestris. Round Bastard Cyperus.


@ 5 Cyperus gramineus miliaceus. Millet Cyperus grasse.




 The Temper and Vertue.
None of these are made vse of in physicke; but by their taste they seeme to be of a cold and astringent qualitie. @



@ CHAP. 22. Of diuers other Grasses.

 The Description.
@ 1 THis Ote or Hauer-grasse, described by Clusius, hath small creeping roots: the stalks are some cubit high, slender ioynted, and set with short narrow leaues: at the top of the stalke growes the eare, long, slender, and bending, composed of downy huskes containing a seed like to a naked Ote. The seed is ripe in Iuly. It growes in the mountainous and shadowie woods of Hungary, Austria, and Bohemia. Our Author mistaking himselfe in the figure, and as much in the title, gaue the figure of this for Burnt Barley, with this title, Hordeum Distichon. See the former edition, pag. 66.
2 I cannot omit this elegant Grasse, found by M. Goodyer vpon the wals of the antient city of Winchester, and not described as yet by any that I know of. It hath a fibrous and stringy root, from which arise leaues long and narrow, which growing old become round as those of Spartum or  Mat-weed: amongst these grassie leaues there growes vp a slender stalke some two foot long, scarse standing vpright, but oft times hanging down the head or top of the eare: it hath some two ioints, and at each of these a pretty grassy leafe. The eare is almost a foot in length, composed of many small and slender hairy tufts, which when they come to maturitie looke of a grayish or whitish colour, and do very well resemble a Capons taile; whence my friend, the first obseruer thereof, gaue it the title of Gramen (...), or Capons-taile Grasse: by which name I receiued the seed thereof, which sowen, tooke root, and flourishes.


@ 1 Gra. montanum avenaceum. Mountaine Hauer-grasse.


@ 2 Gramen murorum spica (...). Capon-taile Grasse.


3 Next to this I thinke fit to place the Gramen Cristatum, or Cocks-combe grasse of (...). This Grasse hath for the root many white fibrous threds thicke packt together; the leaues are but short, about the bignesse of the ordinarie medow grasse; the stalks are some cub it and halfe high, with some two or three knots a piece: the leaues of the stalke are some foure or fiue inches long: the eare is small, longish, of a pale greene colour, somewhat bending, so that in some sort it resembles the combe of a Cocke, or the seed-vessell of that plant which is called Caput Gallinaccum. This is ordinarily to be found in most medowes about Mid-summer.
4 There is also commonly about the same time in our medowes to be found a Grasse growing to some cub it high, hauing a small stalke, at the top whereof there growes an eare some inch and an halfe, or two inches long, consisting as it were of two rankes of corne: it very much resembles Rieboth in shape and colour, and in his short bearded awnes, wherefore it may very fitly be termed Gramen secalinum, or Rie-grasse. Yet is it not Gramen spica secalina which Bauhine describes in the fifty seuenth place, in his Prodromus, pag. 18. for that is much taller, and the eare much larger than this of my description.
5 In diuers places about hedges, in Iuly and August is to be found a fine large tall Grasse, which Bauhine (who also first described it) hath vnder the name of Gramen spica (...). This hath stalkes as tall as Rie, but not so thicke, neither are the leaues so broad: at the top of the stalk grow diuers pretty little flattish eares consisting of two rankes of (...) huskes or seed-vessells, which haue yellowish little floures like to those of Wheat.
6 There is also commonly to be found about May or the beginning of Iune, in medowes and  such places that grasse which in the Historia Lugdun. is set forth vnder the (...) of Cramen Lanatum Daleschampij: the stalkes and leaues are much like the common (...) grasse, but that they are more whitish and hairy; the head or panicle is also soft and woolly, and it is commonly of a gray, or else a murrie colour.
7 There is to be found in some bogs in Summer time about the end of Iuly a pretty rushie grasse some foote or better in height, the stalke is hard and rushie, hauing some three ioints, at each whereof therecomes forth aleafe as in other grasses; and out of the bosome of the two vppermost of these leaues comes out a slender stalke being some 2 or 3 inches high, and at the top thereof growes as in a little vmble a prety white (...) floure; and at, or nigh to the top of the maine stalke there grow three or foure such sloures clustering together vpon little short and slender foot stalkes: the leaues are but small, and some handfull or better long; the roote I did not obserue. This seemes to haue some (...) with the (...) junceum aquaticum, formerly described in the ninth chapter. I neuer found this but once, and that was in the companie of M. Thomas Smith, and M. Iames Clarke, Apothecaries of London; we riding into Windsore Forest (...) the search of rare plants, and we found this vpon a bogge neere the high way side at the (...) (...) the great parke. I thinke it may very fitly be called Gramen (...) leucanthemum: White (...) rush-grasse.
8 The last yeare at Margate in the Isle of Tenet, neere to the sea side and by the chalky (...) I obserued a pretty litle grasse which from a small white fibrous roote sent vp a number of (...) of an vnequall height; for the longest, which were those that lay partly spred vpon the (...), were some handfull high, the other that grew straight vp were not so much; and of this, one inch and halfe was taken vp in the spike or eare, which was no thicker than the rest of the stalke, and seemed nothing else but a plaine smooth stalke, vnlesse you looked vpon it earnestly, and then you might perceiue it to be like Darnell grasse: wherefore in the Iournal! that I wrot of this Simpling voyage, I called it pag. 3. Gramen parvum marinum spica Loliacea. I iudge it to be the (...) that Bauhinc in his Prodromus, pag. 19 hath set forth vnder the name of Gramen (...) (...) spica simplici. It may be called in English, Dwarfe Darnell Grasse.
9 The Darnell grasse that I compared the eare of this last described vnto, is not the Gramen (...) (which our Author called Darnel-grasse) but another grasse growing in most places with stalkes about some span high, but they seldome stand vpright, the eare is made iust like that which hereafter chap. 58. is called Lolium rubrum, Red Darnell, of which I iudge this a variety, differing little therefrom but in smallnesse of growth.
10 Vpon Hampsted heath I haue often obserued a small grasse whose longest leaues are seldome aboue two or three inches high, and these leaues are very greene, small, and perfectly round like the Spartum Austriacum, or Feather-grasse: I could neuer finde any stalke or eare vpon it: wherefore I haue brought it into the Garden to obserue it better. In the forementioned Iournall, pag. 33. you may finde it vnder the name of Gramen Spartium capillacco folio minimum. It may be this is that grasse which Bauhine set forth in his Prodromus, pag. 11. vnder the title of Gramen sparteum Monspeliacum capillacco folio minimum. I haue thought good in (...) place to explaine my meaning by these two names to such as are studious of plants, which may happen to light by chance (for they were not intended for publicke) vpon our Iournall, that they need not doubt of my meaning.
11 I must not passe ouer in silence two other Grasses, which for any thing that I know are strangers with vs, the one I haue seene whith M. Parkinson, and it is set forth by Bauhine, pag. 30. of his Prodromus. The other by Lobell in the second part of his Adversaria, pag. 468. The first (which Bauhine fitly calls Gramen alopecuriodes spica aspera, and thinkes it to be Gram. Echinatum Daleschampij, described Hist. Lugd. pag. 432.) hath a fibrous and white root, from which arises a stiffe stalke diuided by many knots, or knees: the leaues are like to the other fox-taile grasses, but grecner: the eare is rough, of some inch in length, and growes as it were vpon one side of the stalke: the eare at first is greene, and shewes yellowish little flowers in August.
12 This other Grasse which Lobell in the quoted place figures and describes by the name of Gramen Scoparium Ischaemi panniculis Gallicum, hath rootes some cubit long, slender, and very stiffe, (for of these are made the head brushes which are vulgarly vsed) the straw is slender, and some cubit high, being heere and there ioynted like to other Grasses: the top hath foure or fiue eares standing after the manner of Cocks foot Grasse, whereof it is a kinde. It growes naturally about Orleance, and may be called in English, Brush-grasse. @




CHAP. 23. Of Cotton Grasse.

 The Description.
1 THis strange Cotton grasse, which L'Obelius hath comprehended vnder the kindes of Rushes; notwithstanding that it may passe with the Rushes, yet I finde in mine owne experience, that it doth rather resemble grasse than rushes, and may indifferently be taken for either, for that it doth participate of both. The stalke is small and rushy, garnished with many grassy leaues alongst the same, bearing at the top a bush or tuft of most pleasant downe or cotton like vnto the most fine and soft white silke. The root is very tough, small and threddy.
2 This Water Gladiole, or grassy Rush, of all others is the fairest and most pleasant to behold, and serueth very well for the decking and trimming vp of houses, because of the beauty and braueric thereof: consisting of sundry small leaues, of a white colour mixed with carnation, growing at the top of a bare and naked stalke, fiue or six foot long, and sometime more. The leaues are long and flaggy, not much vnlike the common reed. The root is threddy, and not long.


1 Gramen Tomentarium. Cotton Grasse.


2 Gladiolus palustris Cordi. Water Gladiole.




 The place and time.
1 Cotton grasse groweth vpon bogs and such like moorish places, and it is to be seene vpon the bogs on Hampsted heath. It groweth likewise in Highgate parke neere London.
2 Water Gladiole groweth in standing pooles, motes, and water ditches. I found it in great plenty being in company with a Worshipfull Gentleman Master Robert Wilbraham, at a Village fifteene miles from London called Bushey. It groweth likewise neere Redriffe by London, and many other places: the season answereth all others.


 The Names.
1 Gramen Tomentosum is called likewise Iuncus bombicinus: of Cordus, Linum pratense, and Gnaphalium Hicronymi Bockij. In English Cotton grasse.

2 Water Gladiole is called of L' Obelius, Iuncus Cyperoides floridus paludosus, Flowring Cypresse Rush: Iuncus, for that his stalke is like the rush: Cyperoides, because his leaues resemble Cyperus: Floridus, because it hath on the top of euery stalke a fine vmble or tuft of small flowers, in fashion of the Lilly of Alexandria, the which it is very like, and therefore I had rather call it Lilly graffe.


The nature and vertues.
Cordus saith, That Iuncus bombicinus sodden in wine, and so taken, helpeth the throwes and gripings of the belly, that women haue in their childing.
There be also sundry kinds of Grasses wholly vnknowne, or at the least not remembred of the old Writers, whereof some few are touched in name onely by the late and new Writers: now for as much as they haue onely named them, I will referre the better consideration of them to the industrie and diligence of painefull searchers of nature, and prosecute my purposed labour, to vnfold the diuers sorts and manifold kindes of Cyperus, Flags, and Rushes: and because that there is added vnto many of the Grasses before mentioned, this difference, Cyperoides, that is to say, resembling Cyperus, I thought it therefore expedient to ioyne next vnto the history of grasses, the discourse of Cyperus, and his kindes, which are as follow.



CHAP. 24. Of English Galingale.


1 Cyperus longus. English Galingale


2 Cyperus rotundus vulgaris. Round Galingale.



 The Description.
1 ENglish Galingale hath leaues like vnto the common Reed, but lesser and shorter. His stalke is three square, two cubits high: vpon whose top stand sundry branches, euery little branch bearing many small chaffy spikes. The root is blacke and very long, creeping hither and thither, occupying much ground by reason of his spreading: it is of a most sweet and pleasant smell when it is broken.

2 The common round Cyperus is like the former in leaues and tops, but the roots are here and there knotty and round, and not altogether so well smelling as the former.
@ 3 There is also another Cyperus which growes in Syria and Aegypt, whose roots are round, blackish, and large, many hanging vpon one string, and hauing a quicke and aromaticke smell: the leaues and spokyn-tufts resemble the former.
4 There is said to be another kinde of this last described, which is lesser, and the roots are blacker, and it growes in Creet, now called Candy.
5 There is also another round Cyperus which growes about ditches and the bankes of Riuers whereas the salt water sometimes comes: the roots of this are hard and blacke without smell, many hanging sometimes vpon one string: the stalke and leaues are much like the former, but the heads vnlike, for they are rough and blackish, about the bignesse of a filbert, and hang some six or seuen at the top of the stalke. It floures in Iuly and August. @


5 Cyperus rotundus littorcus. Round Salt-marsh Cyperus.




 The place and time.
1 2 The first and second of these grow naturally in fenny grounds, yet will they prosper exceedingly in gardens, as experience hath taught vs.
3 4 The former of these growes naturally in Syria and Aegypt, the later in Candy.
5 This growes plentifully in the Marishes below Grauesend, in Shipey, Tenet, and other places.


 The name in generall.
Cyperus is called in Greeke, (...) Or (...): of the Latines as well Cypirus as Cyperus: of some Iuncus quadratus: of Pliny Iuncus Angulosus, and Triangularis: of others Aspalathum and (...): in French Souchet: in Dutch Galgan: in Spanish Iunco odorosa: By vs Cyperus and English Galangall.


@  The names in particular.
1 This is called Cyperus longus, and Cyperus longus Oderatior: in English, Common Cyperus, and English Gallingall. 2 This is called Cyperus rotundus vulgaris, Round English Galangall. 3 Cyperus rotundus Cyriacus, or Aegyptiacus, Syrian or Aegyptian round Cyperus. 4 Cyperus minor Creticus, Candy round Cyperus. 5 Cyperus rotundus inodorus Littoreus, Round Salt-marsh Cyperus, or Galingale. @


 The nature.
Dioscorides saith, That Cyperus hath an heating qualitie. Galen saith, The roots are most effectual in medicine, and are of an heating and drying qualitie: and some doe reckon it to be hot and dry in the second degree.


 The vertues.
It maketh a most profitable drinke to breake and expell  grauell, and helpeth the dropsie.
If it be boyled in wine, and drunke, it prouoketh vrine, driueth forth the stone, and bringeth  downe the naturall sicknesse of women.
The same taken as aforesaid, is a remedie against the stinging and poyson of Serpents. Fernelius saith, The root of Cyperus vsed in Baths helpeth the coldnesse and stopping of the  matrix, and prouoketh the termes.
He writeth also, that it increaseth bloud by warming the body, and maketh good digestion;  wonderfully refreshing the spirits, and exhilarating the minde, comforting the senses, and encreasing their liuelinesse, restoring the colour decayed, and making a sweet breath.
The powder of Cyperus doth not onely dry vp all moist vlcers either of the mouth, priuy members, and fundament, but stayeth the humor and healeth them, though they be maligne and virulent, according to the iudgement of Fernelius.




@ CHAP. 25. Of Jtalian Trasi, or Spanish Galingale.


1 Cyperus Esculentus sine Caule and flore. Italian Trasi, or Spanish Galingall, without stalke and floure.


2 Cyperus Esculentus, sine Trasi Italorum. Italian Trasi, or Spanish Galingall.


@ 1 THe Italian Trasi, which is here termed Spanish Galingale, is a plant that hath many small roots, hanging at stringy fibers like as our ordinary Dropwort roots do, but they are of the bignesse of a little Medlar, and haue one end flat and as it were crowned like as a Medlar, and it hath also sundry streakes or lines, seeming to diuide it into seueral parts; it is of a brownish colour without, and white within; the taste thereof is sweet almost like a Chesnut. The leaues are very like those of the garden Cyperus, and neuer exceed a cubit in length. Stalkes, flowers, or seed it hath none, as Iohn Pona an Apothecary of Verona, who diligently obserued it nigh to that city whereas it naturally growes, affirmes; but he saith there growes with it much wild Cyperus, which as he judges hath giuen occasion of their error who giue it the stalkes and flowers of Cyperus, or English Galingale, as Matthiolus and others haue done. It is encreased by setting the roots first steeped in water, at the beginning of Nouember. I haue here giuen you the figure of it without the stalke, according to Pona, and with the stalke, according to Matthiolus and others.

 The Names.
The Italian Trasi is called in Greeke by Theophrastus (...) Hist. plant. 4. cap. 10. as Fabius Columna hath proued at large: Pliny termes it Anthalium: the later writers Cyperus Esculentus, and Dulcichinum: The Italians, Trasi, and Dolzolini, by which names in Italy they are cryed vp and downe the streets, as Oranges and Lemmons are here.


 The (...) and vertues.
The milke or creame of these Bulbous rootes being drunke, mundifies the brest and lungs, wherefore it is very good for such as are troubled with coughs. Now you must beat these roots, and macerate them in broth, and then presse out the creame through a linnen cloath, which by some late Writers is commended also to be vsed in venereous potions.
The same creame is also good to be drunke against the heate and sharpnesse of the vrine, especially  if you in making it do adde thereto the seeds of Pompions, Gourds, and Cucumbers. The Citisens of Verona eate them for dainties, but they are somewhat windy. @




@ CHAP. 26. Of the true Galingale, the greater and the lesser.


@ 1 Galanga major. The greater Galingale.


@ 2 Galanga minor. The lesser Galingale.


THe affinitie of name and nature hath induced me in this place to insert these two, the bigger and the lesser Galingale; first therefore of the greater.

 The Description.
1 The great Galingale, whose root onely is in vse, and brought to vs from Iava in the East Indies, hath flaggy leaues some two cubits high, like these of Cats-taile or Reed-mace: the root is thicke and knotty, resembling those of our ordinary flagges, but that they are of a more whitish colour on the inside, and not so large. Their tast is very hot and biting, and they are somwhat reddish on the outside.
2 The lesser growing in China, and commonly in shops called Galingale, without any addition, is a small root of a brownish red colour both within and without; the taste is hot and biting, the smell aromaticall, the leaues (if we may beleeue Garcias ab Horto) are like those of Myrtles.


 The Names.
1 The first is called by Matthiolus, Lobell, and others, Galanga major. Some thinke it to be the Acorus of the Ancients: and Pena and Lobell in their Stirp. Aduers. question whither it be not the Acorus Galaticus of Dioscorides. But howsoeuer, it is the Acorus of the shops, and by many vsed in Mithridate in stead of the true. The Indians call it Lancuaz.
2 The lesser is called Galanga, and Galanga minor, to distinguish it from the precedent. The Chinois call it (...): the Indians Lancuaz: we in England terme it Galingale, without any addition.


 Their temper and vertue.
These roots are hot and dry in the third degree, but the lesser are somewhat the hotter.
They strengthen the stomacke, and mitigate the paines thereof arising from cold and flatulencies.
The smell, especially of the lesser, comforts the too cold braine; the substance thereof being  chewed sweetens the breath. It is good also against the beating of the heart.
They are vsefull against the Collicke proceeding of flatulencies, and the flatulent affects of  the wombe; they conduce to venery, and heate the too cold reines. To conclude, they are good against all cold diseases. @



@ CHAP. 27. Of Turmericke.
THis also challengeth the next place, as belonging to this Tribe, according to Dioscorides; yet the root, which onely is brought vs, and in vse, doth more on the outside resemble Ginger, but that it is yellower, and not so flat, but rounder. The inside thereof is of a Saffron colour, the taste hot and bitterish; it is said to haue leaues larger than those of Millet, and a leafie stalke. There is some varietie of these roots, for some are longer, and others rounder, and the later are the hotter, and they are brought ouer oft times together with Ginger.

 The place.
It growes naturally in the East-Indies about Calecut, as also at Goa.


 The Names.
This without doubt is the Cyperus Indicus of Dioscorides, Lib. 1. Cap. 4. It is now vulgarly by  most Writers, and in shops, called by the name of Terra merita, and Curcuma: yet some terme it Crocus Indicus, and we in English call it Turmericke.


 The temperature and vertues.
This root is certainly hot in the third degree, and hath a qualitie to open obstructions, and it  is vsed with good successe in medicines against the yellow Iaundise, and against the cold distempers of the liuer and spleene.



CHAP. 28. Of Zedoarie.


@ Zerumbeth, siue Zedoaria rotunda. Round Zedoarie.


@ ZEdoarie is also a root growing naturally in the woods of Malavar about Calecut and Cananor in the Indies; the leaues thereof are larger than Ginger, and much like them; the root is also as large, but consisting of parts of different figures, some long and small, others round; their colour is white, and oft times brownish on the inside, and they haue many fibers comming out of them, but they are taken away together with the outward rinde before they come to vs. These roots haue a strong medicine-like smell, and somewhat an vngratefull taste.

 The Names.
Some call the long parts of these roots Zedoaria, and the round (whose figure we here giue you) Zerumbeth, and make them different, whenas indeed they are but parts of the same root, as Lobell and others haue well obserued. Some make Zedoaria and Zerumheth different, as Auicen: others confound them and make them one, as Rhases and Serapio. Some thinke it to be (...) of Aegineta: but that is not so; for he saith, (...) It is an Aromaticke, and therefore chiefely mixed in ointments: which is as much as if he should haue said, That it was put into ointments for the smells sake, which in this is no wayes gratefull, but rather the contrarie.


 The temperature and vertues.
It is hot and dry in the second degree; it discusses flatulencies, and fattens by a certaine hidden  qualitie. It also dissipates and amends the vngratefull smell which Garlicke, Onions, or too much wine infect the breath withall, if it be eaten after them. It cures the bites and stings of venomous creatures, stops laskes, resolues the Abscesses of the wombe, stayes vomiting, helpes the Collicke, as also the paine of the stomacke.
It kills all sorts of wormes, and is much vsed in Antidotes against the plague, and such like  contagious diseases. @



CHAP. 29. Of Rushes.
@ I Do not here intend to trouble you with an accurate distinction and enumeration of Rushes; for if I should, it would be tedious to you, laborious to me, and beneficiall to neither. Therefore I will onely describe and reckon vp the chiefe and more note-worthy of them, beginning with the most vsuall and common. @

 The Description.
1 The roots of our common Rushes are long and hairy, spreading largely in the ground, from which, as from one entire tuft, proceed a great company of small rushes; so exceedingly well knowne, that I shall not need to spend much time about the description thereof.
2 There be sundry sorts of Rushes besides the former, whose pictures are not here exprest, and the rather, for that the generall description of Rushes, as also their common vse and seruice, are sufficient to leade vs to the knowledge of them. This great Water-Grasse or Bul-Rush, in stead of leaues bringeth forth many strait twiggie shoots or springs, which be round, smooth, sharpe pointed, and without knots. Their tuft or flower breaketh forth a little beneath the top, vpon the one side of the Rush, growing vpon little short stems like Grape clusters, wherein is contained the seed after the fashion of a speares point. The roots be slender and full of strings. Pliny, and Theophrastus before him, affirme that the roots of the Rush do die euery yeare, and that  it groweth againe of the seed. And they affirme likewise that the male is barren, and groweth againe of the yong shoots; yet I could neuer obserue any such thing.
@ 3 There growes a Rush to the thicknes of a Reed, and to some two yards and an halfe, or three yards high, in diuers fenny grounds in this kingdome; it is very porous and light, and they vsually make mats, and bottom chaires therewith. The seeds are contained in reddish tufts, breaking out at the top thereof. The roots are large and ioynted, and it grows not vnlesse in waters. @
4 (...) acutus, or the sharpe Rush, is likewise common and well knowne; not much differing from Iuncus laeuis, but harder, rougher, and sharper pointed, fitter to straw houses and chambers than any of the rest; for the others are so soft and pithy, that they turne to dust and filth with much treading; where contrariwise this rush is so hard that it will last sound much longer.
@ 5 There is also another pretty small kinde of Rush growing to some foot in heigth, hauing smooth stalkes which end in a head like to that of the ordinary Horse-taile. This rush hath also one little (...) towards the bottome thereof. It growes in watery places, but not so frequently as the former. @


1 (...) laeuis. Common Rushes.


4 Iuncus acutus. Sharpe Rush, or hard Rush.


3 Iuncus aquaticus maximus. Great Water-Rush, or Bul-Rush.




 The place.
1 Iuncus laeuis groweth in fertile fields, and meadowes that are somewhat moist.
2 3 5 Grow in standing pooles, and by riuers sides in sundry places.
4 Iuncus acutus groweth vpon dry and barren grounds, especially neere the furrows of plowed land. I need not speake of their time of growing, they being so common as they are.


 The Names.
The Rush is called in Greeke (...) in Latine Iuncus: in high Dutch Binken: in low Dutch Biesen: in Italian Giunco: in Spanish Iunco: in French Ionc: in English Rushes.
2 3 The Grecians haue called the Bull-Rush (...). The greater are commonly in many places termed Bumbles.
1 Iuncus laeuis is that Rush which Dioscorides called (...).
4 Iuncus acutus is called in Greeke (...): In Dutch (...) Bresen.
5 This is called by Lobell, Iuncus aquaticus minor Capitulis Equiseti: By Daleschampius, Iuncus clauatus, or Club-Rush.



 The Nature and vertues.
These Rushes are of a dry nature.
The seed of Rushes dried at the fire, and drunke with wine alayed with water, stayeth the (...) and the ouermuch flowing of womens termes.
Galen yeeldeth this reason thereof, because that their temperature consisteth of an earthy essence, moderately cold and watery, and meanly hot, and therefore doth the more easily drie vp the lower parts, and by little and little send vp the cold humours to the head, whereby it prouoketh drow sinesse and desire to sleepe, but causeth the head-ache; whereof Galen yeeldeth the reason as before.
The tender leaues that be next the root make a conuenient ointment against the bitings of the  Spider called Phalangium.
The seed of the Bull-Rush is most soporiferous, and therefore the greater care must be had in  the administration thereof, lest in prouoking sleepe you induce a drow sinesse or dead sleepe.



CHAP. 30. Of Reeds.

 The kindes.
OF Reeds the Ancients haue set downe many sorts. (...) hath brought them all first into two principall kindes, and those hath he diuided againe into moe sorts. The two principall are these, Auleticae, or Tibiales Arundines, and Arundo vallatoria. Of these and the rest we will speake in their proper places.


1 Arundo vallatoria. Common Reed.


2 Arundo Cypria. Cypresse Canes.




 The Description.
1 THe common Reed hath long strawie stalkes full of knotty joints or knees like vnto corne, whereupon do grow very long rough flaggy leaues. The tuft or spoky eare doth grow at the top of the stalkes, browne of colour, barren and without seed, and doth resemble a bush of feathers, which turneth into fine downe or cotton which is carried away with the winde. The root is thicke, long, and full of strings, dispersing themselues farre abroad,  wherby it doth greatly increase. @ Bauhinus reports, That he receiued from D. Cargill a Scottishman a Reed whose leaues were a cubit long, and two or three inches broad, with some nerues apparantly running alongst the leafe; these leaues at the top were diuided into two, three, or foure points or parts; as yet I haue not obserued it. Bauhine termes it Arundo Anglica (...) in (...) dissectis. @
1 The Cypresse Reed is a great Reed hauing stalkes exceeding long, sometimes twenty or thirty foot high, of a woody substance, set with very great leaues like those of Turky wheate. It carrieth at the top the like downie tuft that the former doth.


3 Arundo farcta. Stuffed Canes.


4 Calamus sagittalis Lobelij. Small stuffed Reed.


5 Nastos Clusij. Turky walking staues.


6 Arundo scriptoria. Turky writing Reeds.


3 These Reeds Lobelius hath seene in the Low countries brought from Constantinople, where, (...) it (...) said, the people of that countrey haue procured them (...) the parts of the Adriaticke sea side where they do grow. They are full stuft with a spongeous substance, so that there is no hollownesse in the same, as in Canes and other Reeds, except here and there certaine small pores or passages of the bignesse of a pinnes point; in manner such a pith as is to be found in the Bull-Rush, but more firme and solid.
4 The second differeth in smalnesse, and that it will winde open in fleakes, otherwise they are very like, and are vsed for darts, arrowes, and such like.
5 This great sort of Reeds or Canes hath no particular description to answer your expectation, for that as yet there is not any man which hath written thereof, especially of the manner of growing of them, either of his owne knowledge or report from others: so that it shall (...) that yee know that that great cane is vsed especially in Constantinople and thereabout, of aged and wealthy Citisens, and also Noblemen and such great personages, to make them walking staues of, caruing them at the top with sundry Scutchions, and pretty toyes of imagerie for the beautifying of them; and so they of the better sort do garnish them both with siluer and gold, as the figure doth most liuely set forth vnto you.
6 In like manner the smaller sort hath not as yet beene seene growing of any that haue beene curious in herbarisme, whereby they might set downe any certaintie thereof; onely it hath beene vsed in Constantinople and thereabout, euen to this day, to make writing pens withall, for the which it doth very fitly serue, as also to make pipes, and such like things of pleasure.


 The place.
The common Reed groweth in standing waters and in the edges and borders of riuers almost euery where: and the other being the angling Cane for Fishers groweth in Spaine and those hot Regions.


 The time.
They flourish and flower from April to the end of September, at what time they are cut down for the vse of man, as all do know.


 The Names.
The common Reed is called Arundo and Harundo vallatoria: in French Roseau: in Dutch (...): in Italian Canne a far siepo: of Diosc. Phragmitis: in English, Reed.
Arundo Cypria; or after Lobelius, Arundo Donax: in French Canne: in Spanish Cana: in Italian, Calami a far Connochia: In English, Pole reed, and Cane, or Canes.


 The nature.
Reeds are hot and dry in the second degree, as Galen saith.


 The vertues.
The roots of reed stamped smal draw forth thorns and splinters (...) in any part of mans body.
The same stamped with vineger ease all luxations and members out of ioynt.
And likewise stamped they heale hot and (...) inflammations. The ashes of them mixed  with vineger helpeth the scales and scurfe of the head, and helpeth the falling of the haire.

The great Reed or Cane is not vsed in physicke, but is esteemed to make slears for (...), sundry sorts of pipes, as also to light candles that stand before Images, and to make hedges: and pales, as we do of laths and such like; and also to make certaine diuisions in ships to diuide the sweet oranges from the sowre, the pomecitron and lemmons likewise in sunder, and many other purposes.



CHAP. 31. Of Sugar Cane.

 The Description.
1 SVgar Cane is a pleasant and profitable Reed, hauing long stalkes seuen or eight foot high, ioynted or kneed like vnto the great Cane; the leaues come forth of euerie joynt on euery side of the stalke one, like vnto wings, long, narrow, and sharpe pointed. The Cane it selfe, or stalke is not hollow as other Canes or Reeds are, but full, and stuffed (...) a spongeous substance in taste exceeding sweet. The root is great and long, creeping along within the vpper crust of the earth, which is likewise sweet and pleasant, but lesse hard or woody than other Canes or Reeds; from the which there doth shoot forth many yong siens, which are cut away from the maine or mother plant, because they should not draw away the nourishment from the old stocke, and so get vnto themselues a little moisture, or else some substance not much worth, and cause the stocke to be barren, and themselues little the better; which shoots do serue for plants to set abroad for encrease.


Arundo Saccharina. Sugar Cane.




 The place.
The Sugar Cane groweth in many parts of Europe at this day, as in Spaine, Portugal, Olbia, and in Prouence. It groweth also in Barbarie, generally almost euery where in the Canarie Islands, and in those of Madera, in the East and West Indies, and many other places. My selfe did plant some shoots thereof in my garden, and some in Flanders did the like: but the coldnesse of our clymate made an end of mine, and I thinke the Flemings will haue the like profit of their labour.


 The time.
This Cane is planted at any time of the yeare in those hot countries where it doth naturally grow, by reason they (...) no frosts to hurt the yong shoots at their first planting.


 The Names.
The Latines haue called this plant Arundo Saccharina, with this additament, Indica, because it was first knowne or brought from India. Of some it is called Calamus Saccharatus: in English Sugar Cane: in Dutch (...).


 The Nature and vertues. 
The Sugar or juice of this Reed is of a temperate qualitie; it drieth and cleanseth the stomacke, maketh smooth the roughnesse of the brest and lungs, cleareth the voice, and putteth away hoarsenesse, the cough, and all (...) and bitternesse, as Isaac saith in Dictis.


 The vse.
Of the iuyce of this Reed is made the most pleasant and profitable sweet, called Sugar, whereof is made infinite confections, confectures, syrups, and such like, as also preseruing and conseruing of sundry fruits, herbes, and flowers, as Roses, Violets, Rosemary flowers, and such like, which still retaine with them the name of Sugar, as Sugar Roset, Sugar violet, etc. The which to write of would require a peculiar volume, and not pertinent vnto this historie, for that it is not my purpose to make of my booke a Confectionarie, a Sugar Bakers furnace, a Gentlewomans preseruing pan, nor yet an Apothecaries shop or Dispensatorie; but onely to touch the chiefest matter that I purposed to handle in the beginning, that is, the nature, properties, and descriptions of plants. Notwithstanding I thinke it not amisse to shew vnto you the ordering of these reeds  when they be new gathered, as I receiued it from the mouth of an Indian my seruant: he saith, They cut them in small pieces, and put them into a trough made of one whole tree, wherein they put a great stone in manner of a mill-stone, whereunto they tie a horse, buffle, or some other beast which draweth it round: in which trough they put those pieces of Canes, and so crush and grind them as we do the barkes of trees for Tanners, or apples for Cyder. But in some places they vse a great wheele, wherein slaues do tread and walke as dogs do in turning the spit: and some others do feed as it were the bottome of the said wheele, wherein are some sharpe or hard things which do cut and crush the Canes into powder. And some likewise haue found the inuention to turne the wheele with water workes, as we do our iron mills. The Canes being thus brought into dust or powder, they put them into great cauldrons with a little water, where they boyle vntill there be no more sweetnesse left in the crushed reeds. Then doe they straine them through mats and such like things, and put the liquor to boyle againe vnto the consistence of honey, which being cold is like vnto sand both in shew and handling, but somewhat softer; and so afterward it is carried into all parts of Europe, where it is by the Sugar Bakers artificially purged and (...) to that whitenesse as we see.



CHAP. 32. Of Flowring Reed.


Arundo florida. Flowring Reed.



 The Description.
FLourishing Reed hath a thicke and fat stalke of foure or fiue foot high, great below neere the ground, and smaller toward the top, taper-wise: whereupon do grow very faire broad leaues ful of ribs or sinewes like vnto Plantaine, in shape representing the leaues of white Hellebor, or the great Gentian, but much broader and larger euery way: at the top of which stalkes do grow phantasticke flowers of a red or vermilion colour; which being faded, there follow round, rough, and prickly knobs, like those of Sparganium, or water-Burre, of a browne colour, and from the middle of those knobs three small leaues. The seed contained in those knobs is exceeding black, of a perfect roundnesse, of the bignesse of the smallest pease. The root is thicke, knobby, and tuberous, with certain small threds fixed thereto. @ There is a variety of this, hauing floures of a yellow or Saffron colour, with red spots. @


 The place.
It groweth in Italy in the garden of Padua, and many other places of those hot regions. My selfe haue planted it in my garden diuers times, but it neuer came to flowring or seeding, for that it is very impatient to endure the injurie of our cold clymate. It is a natiue of the West Indies.


 The time.
It must be set or sowen in the beginning of Aprill, in a pot with fine earth, or in a bed made with horsedung, and some earth strawed thereon, in such manner as Cucumbers and Muske-Melons are.


 The Names.
The name Arundo Indica is diuersly attributed to sundrie of the Reeds, but principally vnto this, called of Lobelius, Cannacorus: of others, Arundo florida, and Harundo florida: in English, the Flowring Reed.


 The Nature and vertues.
There is not any thing set downe as touching the temperature and vertues of this Flourishing Reed, either of the Ancients, or of the new or later Writers.




CHAP. 33. Of Paper Reed.
PAper Reed hath many large flaggie leaues somewhat triangular and smooth, not much vnlike those of Cats-taile, rising immediatly from a tuft of roots compact of many strings, among st the which it shooteth vp two or three naked stalkes, square, and rising some six or seuen cubits high aboue the water; at the top whereof there stands a tuft or bundle of chaffie threds set in comely order, resembling a tuft of flowers, but barren and void of seed.


Papyrus Nilotica. Paper Reed.



 The place.
This kinde of Reed growes in the Riuers about Babylon, and neere the city Alcaire, in the riuer Nilus, and such other places of those countries.


 The time.
The time of springing and flourishing answereth that of the common Reed.


 The Names.
This kinde of Reed which I haue Englished Paper Reed, or Paper plant, is the same (as I do reade) that Paper was made of in Aegypt, before the inuention of paper made of linnen clouts was found out. It is thought by men of great learning and vnderstanding in the Scriptures, and set downe by them for truth, that this plant is the same Reed mentioned in the second chapter of Exodus; whereof was made that basket or cradle, which was dawbed within and without with (...) of that countrey, called Bitumen Iudaicum, wherein Moses was put being committed to the water, when Pharaoh gaue commandement that all the male children of the Hebrewes should be drowned.


 The nature, vertues, and vse.
The roots of Paper Reed doe nourish, as may appeare by the people of Aegypt, which  do vse to chew them in their mouthes, and swallow downe the juice, finding therein great delight and comfort.
The ashes burned asswage and consume hard apostumes, tumors, and corrasiue vlcers in any  part of the body, but chiefely in the mouth.
The burnt paper made hereof doth performe those effects more forcibly.
The stalkes hereof haue a singular vse and priuiledge in opening the chanels or hollow passages  of a Fistula, being put therein; for they do swell as doth the pith of Elder, or a tent made of a sponge.
The people about Nilus do vse to burne the leaues and stalkes, but especially the roots.
The frailes wherein they put Raisins and Figs are sometimes made hereof; but generally with  the herbe Spartum, described in the (...) Chapter.



CHAP. 34. Of Mat-Weed.

 The kindes.
There be diuers kindes of Mat-Weeds, as shall be declared in their seuerall descriptions.


 The Description.
THe herbe Spartum, as Pliny saith, growerh of it selfe, and sendeth forth from the root a multitude of slender rushie leaues of a cubit high, or higher, tough and pliable, of a whitish colour, which in time drawetll narrow together, making the flat leafe to become round, as is the Rush. The stub or stalke thereof beareth at the top certaine feather-like tufts comming  forth of a sheath or huske, among the which chaffie huskes is contained the seed, long and chaffie. The root consisterh of many strings folding one within another, by meanes whereof it commeth to the forme of a turfe or hassocke.


1 Spartum Plinij Clufio. Plinies Mat-Weed.


2 Spartum alterum Plinij. Hooded Mat-Weed.


2 The second likewise Pliny describeth to haue a long stalke not much vnlike to Reed, but lesser, whereupon do grow many grassie leaues, rough and pliant, hard in handling as are the Rushes. A spokie chaffie tuft groweth at the top of the stalke, comming forth of a hood or sinewie sheath, such as encloseth the flowers of Onions, Leekes, Narcissus, and such like, before they come to flowring, with seed and roots like the precedent.
3 English Mat-weed hath a rushie root, deepely creeping and growing in heapes of sand and grauell, from the which arise stiffe and sharpe pointed leaues a (...) and a halfe long, of a whitish colour, very much resembling those of Camels hay. The stalke groweth to the height of a cubit or more, whereupon doth grow a spike @ or eare of some fiue or six inches long, somwhat resembling Rie; it is the thicknesse of a finger in the midst, and smaller towards both the ends. The seed is browne, as small as Canarie seed, but round, and somewhat sharpe at the one end @. Of this plant neither Sheepe nor any other Cattle will raste or eate.
4 The other English Mat-Weed is like vnto the former, sauing that the roots of this are long, not vnlike to Dogs Grasse, but do not thrust deepe into the ground, but creepe onely vnder the vpper crust of the earth. The tuft or eare is (...), and more resembling the head of Canary seed than that of Rie.
@ 5 Lobell giues a figure of another smaller Rush, leaued Spartum, with small heads, but hee hath not described it in his Latine Workes, (...) I can say nothing certainly of it.
6 To this kindred must be added the Feathered Grasse, though not partaking with the former in place of growth. Now it hath many small leaues of a foots length round, green, and sharp pointed, not much in forme vnlike the first described Mat-weed, but much lesse: amongst these leaues rise vp many small stalkes not exceeding the height of the leaues, which beare a spike vnlike the forementioned Mat-weeds, hauing 3 or foure (...) ending in, or sending vp very fine white Feathers, resembling the smaller sort of feathers of the wings of the Bird of Paradise. The root consists of many small grassie sibres.



3 Spartum Anglicanum. English Mat-Weed, or Helme.


4 Spartum Anglicanum alterum. Small English Mat-Weed, or Helme.


@ 6 Spartum Austriacum. Feather-Grasse.




 The place.
1 2 These two grow in diuers places of Spaine.
3 I being in company with M. Tho. Hicks, William Broad, and three other London (...) besides, in August, 1632, to finde out rare plants in the Island of Tenet, found this bigger English one in great plentie, as soone as we came to the sea side, going betweene Margate and Sandwich.
4 5 These it may be grow also vpon our Coasts; howeuer they grow neere the sea side in diuers parts of the Low-Countries.
6 This elegant Plant Clusius first obserued to grow naturally in the mountaines nigh to the Bathes of Baden in Germany, and in diuers places of Austria and Hungarie. It is nourished for the beautie in sundrie of our English gardens.


 The time.
These beare their heads in the middle, and some in the later end of Sommer.


 The Names.
1 This is called Spartum primum Plinij; that is, the first Mat-Weed described by Pliny: in Spaine they call it Sparto: the French in Prouence terme it Olpho.
2 This is Spartum alterum Plinij, Plinie his second Mat-Weed, or Hooded Mat-weed, it is called Albardin in Spaine.
3 This is Spartum tertium of Clusius, and Gramen Sparteum secundum Schaenanthinum of Taber. Our Author  gaue Clusius his figure for his first, and Tabernamontanus figure for the second Spartum Anglicanum; but I will thinke them both of one plant (though Bauhine distinguish them) vntill some shall make the contrary manifest. This the Dutch call (...); and our English in Tenet, Helme. Turner calls it Sea-Bent.
4 This is Spartum herba 4 Batavicum of Clusius; Gramen Sparteum, or Iunci Spartium of Tabern. and our Author gaue Tabern. figure in the 23 Chapter of this Booke vnder the title of Iuncus marinus gramineus; Lobell calls it Spartum nostras alterum.
5 Lobell calls this Spartum nostras parvum.
6 Clusius calls this Spartum Austriacum; Daleschampius, Gramen pinnatum; we in England call it Gramen plumosum, or Feathered Grasse. @


 The temperature, vertues, and vse.
These kindes of grassie or rather rushie Reed haue no vse in physicke, but serue to make Mats, and hangings for chambers, frailes, baskets, and such like. The people of the Countries where they grow do make beds of them, straw their houses and chambers in stead of Rushes, for which they do excell, as my selfe haue seene. Turner affirmeth, That they made hats of the English one in Northumberland in his time.
They do likewise in sundry places of the Islands of Madera, Canaria, Saint Thomas, and other  of the Islands in the tract vnto the West Indies, make of them their boots, shooes, Herd-mens Coats, fires, and lights. It is very hurtfull for cattell, as Sheere-grasse is.
The Feather-Grasse is worne by sundry Ladies and Gentlewomen in stead of a Feather, the which it exquisitely resembles.



CHAP. 35. Of Camels Hay.


1 Scoenanthum Camels Hay.


2 Scoenanthum adulterinum. Bastard Camels Hay.



 The Description.
1 CAmels Hay hath leaues very like vnto Mat-Weed or Helme; his roots are many, in quantitie meane, full of small haires or threds proceeding from the bigger Root deeply growing in the ground, hauing diuers long stalkes like Cyperus Grasse, set  with some smaller leaues euen vnto the top, where do grow many small chaffie tufts or pannicles like vnto those of the wilde Oats, of a reasonable good smell and sauour, when they are broken, like vnto a Rose, with a certaine biting and nipping of the tongue.
@ 2 Francis Penny, of famous memory, a good Physitian and skilfull Herbarist, gathered on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, between Aigues Mortes and Pescaire, this beautifull plant, whose roots are creeping, and stalkes and leaues resemble Squinanth. The flowers are soft, pappous, and thicke compact, and some fiue or six inches in length, like to Fox-taile; they in colour resemble white silke or siluer. Thus much Lobell. Our Author described this in the first place, Ch. 23. vnder Iuncus Marinus Gramineus, for so Lobell also calls it. @


 The place.
1 This growes in Africa, Nabathaea, and Arabia, and is a stranger in these Northerne Regions.
2 The place of the second is mentioned in the description.


 The time.
Their time answereth the other Reeds and Flags.


 The Names.
1 Camels Hay is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Iuncus odoratus, and Scoenanthum: in shops Squinanthum, that is, Flos Iunci: in French, Pasteur de Chammeau: in English, Camels Hay, and Squinanth.
2 This Lobell calls Iuncus marinus gramineus, and Pseudoschaenanthum: We call it Bastard Squinanth, and Fox-taile Squinanth.


 The temper.
This plant is indifferently hot, and a little astrictiue.


 The vertues.
Camels Hay prouoketh vrine, moueth the termes, and breaketh winde about the stomacke.
It causeth aking and heauinesse of the head, Galen yeeldeth this reason thereof, because it heateth  moderately, and bindeth with tenuitie of parts.
According to Dioscorides, it dissolues, digests, and opens the passages of the veines.
The floures or chaffie tufts are profitable in drinke for them that pisse bloud anywayes: It is  giuen in medicines that are ministred to cure the paines and griefes of the guts, stomacke, lungs, liuer, and reines, the fulnesse, loathsomenesse, and other defects of the stomacke, the dropsie, conuulsions, or shrinking of sinews, giuen in the quantitie of a dram, with a like quantitie of Pepper, for some few dayes.
The same boyled in wine helpeth the inflammation of the matrix, if the woman do sit ouer the  fume thereof, and bathe her selfe often with it also.



CHAP. 36. Of Burre-Reed.

 The Description.
1 THe first of these plants hath long leaues, which are double edged, or sharpe on both sides, with a sharpe crest in the middle, in such manner raised vp that it seemeth to be triangle or three square. The stalkes grow among the leaues, and are two or three foot long, being diuided into many branches, garnished with many prickly huskes or knops of the bignesse of a nut. The root is full of hairy strings.
2 The great Water Burre differeth not in any thing from the first kind in roots or leaues, saue that the first hath his leaues rising immediately from the tuft or knop of the root; but this kinde hath a long stalke comming from the root, whereupon, a little aboue the root, the leaues shoot out round about the stalke successiuely, some leaues still growing aboue others, euen to the top of the stalke, and from the top thereof downeward by certaine distances. It is garnished with many round wharles, or rough coronets, hauing here and there among the said wharles one single short leafe of a pale greene colour.


 The place.
Both these are very common, and grow in moist medowes, and neere vnto water-courses. They plentifully grow in the fenny grounds of Lincolnshire, and such like places; in the ditches about S. George his fields, and in the ditch right against the place of execution, at the end of Southwark, called S. Thomas Waterings.


 The time.
They bring forth their burry bullets or seedy knots in August.



1 Sparganium Ramosum. Branched Burre-Reed.


2 Sparganium latifolium. Great Water-Burre.




 The Names.
These Plants of some are called Sparganium: Theophrastus in his fourth Booke and eighteenth Chapter calleth them Butomus: of some, Platanaria: I call them Burre-Reed: in the Arabian tongue they are called Safarhe Bamon: in Italian Sparganio: of Dodoneus, Carex: Some call the first Sparganium ramosum, or Branched Burre-Reed. The second, Sparganium non ramosum, Notbranching Burre-Reed.


 The temperature.
They are cold and dry of complexion.


 The vertues.
Some write, that the knops or rough burres of these plants boyled in wine, are good against  the bitings of venomous beasts, if either it be drunke, or the wound washed therewith.



CHAP. 37. Of Cats Taile.

 The Description.
CAts Taile hath long and flaggy leaues, full of a spongeous matter, or pith, among which leaues groweth vp a long smooth naked stalke, without knot, fashioned like a speare, of a firme or solid substance, hauing at the top a browne knop or eare, soft, thicke and smooth, seeming to be nothing else but a deale of flockes thicke set and thrust together, which being ripe turneth into a downe, and is carried away with the winde. The Roots be hard, thicke, and white, full of strings, and good to burne, where there is plenty thereof to be had.


 The place.
It groweth in pooles and such like standing waters, and sometimes in running streames.
I haue found a smaller kinde hereof growing in the ditches and marshie grounds in the Isle of Shepey, going from Sherland house to Feuersham.


 The time.
They floure and beare their mace or torch in Iuly and August.



Typha. Cats Taile.




 The Names.
They are called in Greeke (...): in Latine Typha: of some Cestrum Morionis: in French Marteau Masses: in Dutch, (...), and (...): In Italian Mazza sorda: in Spanish Behordo, and Iunco amacorodato: In English, Cats Taile, and Reed-Mace. Of this Cars Taile Aristophanes maketh mention in his Comedy of Frogs, where he bringeth them forth one talking with (...), being very glad that they had spent the whole day in skipping and leaping inter Cyperum and Phleum, among Galingale and Cats Taile. Ouid seemeth to name this plant Scirpus; for he termeth the mats made of the leaues, Cats-taile Mats, as in his sixth Booke Fastorum,

At Dominus, discedite, ait, plaustroque morantes
Sustulit, in plaustro scirpea matta fuit.



 The nature.
It is cold and dry of complexion.


 The vertues.
The soft Downe stamped with swines grease well  washed, healeth burnings or scaldings with fire or water.
Some practitioners by their experience haue found, That the Downe of the (...) taile beaten with the leaues of Betony, the roots of Gladiole, and the leaues of Hippoglosson into powder, and mixed with the yelks of egges hard sodden, and so eaten, is a most perfect medicine against the disease in children called in Greeke (...), which is, when the gut called Intestinum caecum is fallen into the cods. This medicine must be ministred euery day fasting for the space of thirtie dayes, the quantitie thereof to be ministred at one time is 1. ^. This being vsed as before is specified doth not onely helpe children and striplings, but growne men also, if in time of their cure they vse conuenient ligature or trussings, and fit consounding plaisters vpon the grieued place, according to art appointed for that purpose in Chirurgerie.
This Downe in some places of the Isle of Elie, and the low countries adioyning thereto, is gathered  and well sold to make mattresses of, for plowmen and poore people.
It hath beene also often proued to heale kibed or humbled heeles (as they are termed) being  applied to them, either before or after the skinne is broken.



CHAP. 38. Of Stitchwort.

 The Description.
1 STitchwort, or as Ruellius termeth it Holosteum, is of two kindes, and hath round tender stalkes full of joints leaning toward the ground; at euery ioynt grow two leaues one against another. The flowers be white, consisting of many small leaues set in the manner of a starre. The roots are small, jointed, and threddy. The seed is contained in small heads somewhat long, and sharpe at the vpper end, and when it is ripe it is very small and browne.
2 The second is like the former in shape of leaues and flowers, which are set in forme of a starre; but the leaues are orderly placed, and in good proportion, by couples two together, being of a whitish colour. When the flowers be vaded then follow the seeds, which are inclosed in bullets like the seed of flax, but not so round. The chiues or threds in the middle of the floure are sometimes of a reddish, or of a blackish colour. @ There are more differences of this plant, or rather varieties, as differing little but in the largenesse of the leaues, floures, or stalkes. @


 The place.
They grow in the borders of fields vpon banke sides and hedges, almost euery where.


 The time.
They flourish all the Sommer, especially in May and Iune.



Gramen Leucanthemum. Stitchwort.




 The Names.
Some (as Ruellius for one) haue thought this to be the plant which the Grecians call (...): in Latine, Tota ossea: in English, All-Bones; whereof I see no reason, except it be by the figure Antonomia; as when we say in English, He is an honest man, our meaning is that he is a knaue: for this is a tender herbe hauing no such bony substance. @ Dodonaeus questions, whether this plant be not Crataeogonon; and he calls it Gramen Leucanthemum, or White-floured Grasse. The qualitie here noted with B. is by Dioscorides giuen to Crataeogonon; but it is with his (...), (that is) Some say or report so much: which phrase of speech hee often vseth when as he writes faculties by heare-say, and doubts himselfe of the truth of them. @


 The nature.
The seed of Stitchwort, as Galen writeth, is sharpe and biting to him that (...) it; and to him that vseth it very like to Mill.


 The vertues.
They are wont to drinke it in Wine with the pwoder  of Acornes, against the paine in the side, stitches, and such like.
Diuers report, saith Dioscorides, That the Seed of  Stitchwort being drunke causeth a woman to bring forth a man childe, if after the (...) of her Sicknesse, before she conceiue, she do drinke it fasting thrice in a day, halfe a dram at a time, in three (...) of water many dayes together.



CHAP. 39. Of Spiderwort.

 The Description.
1 THe obscure description which Dioscorides and Pliny haue set downe for Phalangium, hath bred much contention among late Writers. This plant Phalangium hath leaues much like Couch Grasse, but they are somewhat thicker and fatter, and of a more whitish greene colour. The stalkes grow to the height of a cubit. The top of the stalke is beset with small branches, garnished with many little white flowers, compact of six little leaues. The threds or thrums in the middle are whitish, mixed with a faire yellow, which being fallen, there follow blacke seeds, inclosed in small round knobs, which be three cornered. The roots are many, tough, and white of colour.
2 The second is like the first, but that his stalke is not branched as the first, and floureth a moneth before the other.
3 The third kinde of Spiderwort, which Carolus Clusius nameth Asphodelus minor, hath a root of many threddy strings, from the which immediately rise vp grassie leaues, narrow and sharpe pointed: among the which come forth diuers naked strait stalkes diuided towards the top into sundry branches, garnished on euery side with faire starre-like flowers, of colour white, with a purple veine diuiding each leafe in the middest: they haue also certaine chiues or threds in them. The seed followeth inclosed in three square heads like vnto the kindes of Asphodils.
@ 4 This Spiderwort hath a root consisting of many thicke, long, and white fibers, not much vnlike the precedent, out of which it sends forth some fiue or six greene and firme leaues, somewhat hollowed in the middle, and mutually inuoluing each other at the root: amongst these there riseth vp a round greene stalke, bearing at the top thereof some nine or ten floures, more or lesse; these consist of six leaues apiece, of colour white (the three innermost leaues are the broader, and more curled, and the three outmost are tipt with greene at the tops.) The whole floure much  resembles a white Lilly, but much smaller. Three square heads, containing a dusky and vnequall seed, follow after the floure.


1 Phalangium Ramosum. Branched Spiderwort.


2 Phalangium non ramosum. Vnbranched Spiderwort.


@ 3 Phalangium Cretae. Candy Spiderwort.


@ 4 Phalangium Antiquorum. The true Spiderwort of the Ancients.





@ 5 Phalangium Virginianum Tradescanti. Tradescants Virginian Spiderwort.


5 This plant in my iudgement cannot be sitlier ranked with any than these last described; therefore I haue here giuen him the fifth place, as the last commer. This plant hath many creeping stringy roots, which here and there put vp greene leaues, in shape resembling those of the last described: amongst these there riseth vp a pretty stiffe stalke jointed, and hauing at each joint one leafe incompassing the stalke, and out of whose bosome oft times little branches arise: now the stalke at the top vsually diuides it selfe into two leaues, much after the manner of Cyperus; between which there come forth many floures consisting of three pretty large leaues a piece, of colour deepe blew, with reddish chiues tipt with yellow standing in their middle. These fading (as vsually they doe the same day they shew themselues) there succeed little heads couered with the three little leaues that sustained the floure. In these heads there is contained a long blackish seed.


 The place.
1. 2. 3. These grow only in gardens with vs, and that very rarely. 4 This growes naturally in some places of Sauoy. 5 This Virginian is in many of our English gardens, as with M. Parkinson, M. Tradescant, and others.


 The time.
1. 4. 5. These floure in Iune: the second about the beginning of May: and the third about August.


 The Names.
The first is called Phalangium ramosum, Branched Spiderwort. 2 Phalangium non ramosum, Vnbranched Spiderwort. Cordus calls it Liliago. 3 This, Clusius calls Asphodelus minor: Lobell, Phalangium Cretae, Candy Spiderwort. 4 This is thought to be the Phalangium of the Ancients, and that of Matthiolus: it is Phalangium Allobrogicum of Clusius, Sauoy Spiderwort. 5 This by M. Parkinson (who first hath in writing giuen the figure and description thereof) is aptly termed Phalangium Ephemerum Virginianum, Soone-fading Spiderwort of Virginia, or Tradescants Spiderwort, for that M. Iohn Tradescant first procured it from Virginia. Bauhine hath described it at the end of his Pinax, and very vnfitly termed it Allium, siue Moly Virginianum. @


 The nature.
Galen saith, Phalangium is of a drying qualitie, by reason of the tenuitie of parts.


 The vertues.
Dioscorides saith, That the leaues, seed, and floures, or any of them drunke in Wine, preuaileth  against the bitings of Scorpions, and against the stinging and biting of the Spider called Phalangium, and all other venomous beasts.
The roots tunned vp in new ale, and drunke for a moneth together, expelleth poyson, yea although  it haue vniuersally spred it selfe through the body.



CHAP. 40. Of the Floure de-luce.

 The kindes.
THere be many kindes of Iris or Floure de-luce, whereof some are tall and great, some little, small, and low; some smell exceeding sweet in the root, some haue no smell at all: some floures are sweet in smell, and some without; some of one colour, some of many colours mixed: vertues attributed to some, others not remembred: some haue tuberous or knobby roots, others bulbous or Onion roots, some haue leaues like flags, others like grasse or rushes.



 The Description.
1 THe common Floure de-luce hath long and large flaggy leaues like the blade of a sword, with two edges, amongst which spring vp smooth and plaine stalkes two foot long, bearing floures toward the top, compact of six leaues ioyned together, whereof three that stand vpright are bent inward one toward another; and in those leaues that hang downward there are certaine rough or hairie welts, growing or rising from the nether part of the leafe vpward, almost of a yellow colour. The roots be thicke, long, and knobby, with many (...) threds hanging thereat.
2 The water Floure de-luce, or Water flag, or Bastard Acorus, is like vnto the garden Floure de-luce in roots, leaues, and stalkes, but the leaues are much longer, sometimes of the height of foure cubits, and altogether narrower. The floure is of a perfect yellow colour, and the Root knobby like the other; but being cut, it seemeth to be of the colour of raw flesh.


1 Iris vulgaris. Floure de-luce.


2 Iris palustris lutea. Water-flags, or Floure de-luce.




 The place.
The Water Floure de-luce or yellow flag prospereth well in moist medows, and in the borders and brinks of riuers, ponds, and standing lakes. And although it be a water plant of nature, yet being planted in gardens it prospereth well.


 The Names.
Floure de-luce is called in Greeke (...): Athenaeus and Theophrastus reade (...): as though they should say, Consecratrix; by which name it is also called of the Latines Radix Marica, or rather Radix Naronica, of the riuer Naron, by which the best and greatest store do grow. Whereupon Nicander in his Treacles commendeth it thus:
Iridem quam aluit Drilon, and Naronis (...).
Which may thus be Englished:

Iris, which Drilon water feeds,
And Narons bankes with other weeds.

The Italians, Giglio azurro: in Spanish, Lilio Cardeno: in French, Flambe: The Germanes, (...), (...): in Dutch, (...).
The second is called in Latine, (...) palustris lutea, Pseudoacorus, and Acorus palustris: in English,  Water flags, Bastard Floure de-luce, or Water Floure de-luce: and in the North they call them Seggs.


 The nature.
1 The roots of the Floure de-luce being as yet fresh and greene, and full of juyce, are hot almost in the fourth degree. The dried roots are hot and dry in the (...) degree, burning the throat and mouth of such as taste them.
2 The bastard Floure de-luce his root is cold and dry in the third degree, and of an astringent or binding facultic.


 The vertues.
The root of the common Floure de-luce cleane washed, and stamped with a few drops of Rose  water, and laid plaister-wise vpon the face of man or woman, doth in two dayes at the most take away the blacknesse or blewnesse of any stroke or bruse: so that if the skinne of the same woman or any other person be very tender and delicate, it shall be needfull that ye lay a piece of silke, sindall, or a piece of fine laune betweene the plaister and the skinne; for otherwise in such tender bodies it often causeth heate and inflammation.
The iuyce of the same doth not onely mightily and vehemently draw forth choler, but most  especially watery humors, and is a speciall and singular purgation for them that haue the Dropsie, if it be drunke in whay or some other liquor that may somewhat temper and alay his heate.
The dry roots attenuate or make thinne thicke and tough humours, which are hardly and with  difficultie purged away.
They are good in a loch or licking medicine for shortnesse of breath, an old cough, and all infirmities  of the chest which rise hereupon.
They remedie those that haue euill spleenes, and those that are troubled with convulsions or  cramps, biting of serpents, and the running of the reines, being drunke with vinegre, as saith Dioscorides; and drunke with wine it bringeth downe the monethly courses of women.
The decoction is good in womens baths, for it mollifieth and openeth the matrix.
Being boyled very soft, and laid to plaister-wise it mollifieth or softneth the kings euil, and old  hard swellings.
@ The roots of our ordinary flags are not (as before is deliuered) cold and dry in the third degree, nor yet in the second, as Dodonaeus affirmes; but hot and dry, and that at the least in the second degree, as any that throughly tastes them will confesse. Neither are the faculties and vse (as some would persuade vs) to be neglected; for as Pena and Lobell affirme, though it haue no smell, nor great heat, yet by reason of other faculties it is much to be preferred before the Galanga major, or forreigne Acorus of shops, in many diseases; for it imparts more heate and strength to the stomacke and neighbouring parts than the other, which rather preyes vpon and dissipates the innate heate and implanted strength of those parts. It bindes, strengthens, and condenses: it is good in bloudy flixes, and stayes the Courses. @



CHAP. 40. Of Floure de-luce of Florence.

 The Description.
1 THe Floure de-luce of Florence, whose roots in shops and generally euery where are called Ireos, or Orice (whereof sweet waters, sweet pouders, and such like are made) is altogether like vnto the common Floure de-luce, sauing that the flowers of the Ireos is of a white colour, and the roots exceeding sweet of smell, and the other of no smell at all.
2 The white Floure de-luce is like vnto the Florentine Floure de-luce in roots, flaggy leaues, and stalkes; but they differ in that, that this Iris hath his flower of a bleake white colour declining to yellownesse; and the roots haue not any smell at all; but the (...) is very sweet, as we haue said.
3 The great Floure de-luce of Dalmatia hath leaues much broader, thicker, and more closely compact together than any of the other, and set in order like wings or the fins of a Whale fish, greene toward the top, and of a shining purple colour toward the bottome, euen to the ground: amongst which riseth vp a stalke of foure foot high, as my selfe did measure oft times in my garden: whereupon doth grow faire large floures of a light blew, or as we terme it, a watchet colour. The floures do smell exceeding sweet, much like the Orenge floure. The seeds are contained in square cods, wherein are packed together many flat seeds like the former. The root hath no smell at all.



1 Iris Florentina. Floure de-luce of Florence.


2 Iris alba. White Floure de-luce.


3 Iris Dalmatica major. Great Flourede-luce of Dalmatia.





4 Iris Dalmatica minor. Small Dalmatian Iris.


5 Iris Biflora. Twice-flouring Floure (...).


6 Iris (...). Violet Floure de-luce.


7 Iris Pannonica. Austrian Floure de luce.





@ 8 Iris Camerarij. Germane Floure de-Iuce.


4 The small Floure de-Iuce of Dalmatia is in shew like to the precedent, but rather resembling Iris biflora, being both of one stature, small and dwarfe plants in respect of the greater. The floures be of a more blew colour. They flower likewise in May as the others do; but beware that ye neuer cast any cold water vpon them presently taken out of a Wel; for their tendernesse is such, that they wither immediatly, and rot away, as I my selfe haue proued: but those which I left vnwatred at the same (...) liue and prosper to this day.
5 This kinde of Floure de-luce came first from Portugal to vs. It bringeth forth in the Spring time floures of a purple or violet colour, smelling like a violet, with a white hairy welt downe the middle. The root is thick and short, stubborne or hard to breake. In leaues and shew it is like to the lesser Floure de-luce of Dalmatia, but the leaues be more spred abroad, and it commonly hath but one stalke, which in Autumne floureth againe, and bringeth forth the like floures; for which cause it was called Iris biflora.
6 Iris violacea is like vnto the former, but much smaller, and the floure is of a more deepe violet colour.
7 Carolus Clusius, that excellent and learned Father of Herbarists, hath set forth in his Pannonicke Obseruations the picture of this beautifull Floure de-luce, with great broad leaues, thicke and fat, of a purple colour neere vnto the ground, like the great Dalmatian Floure de-luce, which it doth very well resemble. The root is very sweet when it is dry, and striueth with the Florentine Iris in sweetnesse. The floure is of all the other most confusedly mixed with sundry colours, insomuch that my pen cannot set (...) (...) line or streake, as it deserueth. The three leaues that stand vpright do claspe or embrace one another, and are of a yellow colour. The leaues that looke downward, about the edges are of a pale colour, the middle part of white, mixed with a line of purple, and hath many small purple lines stripped ouer the said white floure, euen to the brim of the pale coloured edge. It smelleth like the Hauthorne floures being lightly smelled vnto.
8 The Germane Floure de-luce, which Camerarius hath set forth in his Booke named Hortus Medicus, hath great thicke and knobby roots: the stalke is thicke and full of iuyce: the leaues be very broad in respect of all the rest of the Floure de-luces. The floure groweth at the top of the stalke, consisting of six great leaues blew of colour, welted downe the middle, with white tending to yellow; at the bottome next the stalke it is white of colour, with some yellownesse fringed about the said white, as also about the brims or edges, which greatly setteth forth his beautie; the which Ioachimus Camerarius, the sonne of old Camerarius of Noremberg, had sent him out of Hungarie, and did communicate one of the plants thereof to Clusius; whose figure he hath most liuely set forth with this description, differing somewhat from that which Ioachimus himselfe did giue vnto me (...) his being in London. The leaues, saith he, are very large, twice so broad as any of the others. The stalke is single and smooth; the floure groweth at the top, of a most bright shining blew colour, the middle rib tending to whitenesse, the three vpper leaues somewhat yellowish. The root is likewise sweet as Ireos.


 The place.
These kindes of Floure de-luces do grow wilde in Dalmatia, Goritia, and Piedmont; notwithstanding our London gardens are very well stored with euery one of them.


 The time.
Their time of flouring answereth the other Floure de-luces.


 The Names.
The Dalmatian Floure de-Iuce is called in Greeke of Athenaeus and Theophrastes (...): it is named also (...) of the heauenly Bow or Rainbow: vpon the same occasion (...) or Admirable: for the Poets sometime do call the Rainbow (...): in Latine Iris, and in English Floure de-luce. Their seuerall titles do sufficiently distinguish them, whereby they may be knowne one from another.



 The nature.
The nature of these Floure de-luces are answerable to those of the common kinde; that is to say, the dry roots are hot and dry in the latter end of the second degree.


 The vertues.
The iuyce of these Floure de-luces doth not onely mightily and vehemently draw forth choler, but most especially waterie humors, and is a singular good purgation for them that haue the Dropsie, if it be drunke in sweet wort or whay.
The same are good for them that haue euill spleenes, or that are troubled with cramps or convulsions, and for such as are bit with Serpents. It profiteth also much those that haue the (...), or running of the reines, being drunke with Vineger, as Diosc. saith; and drunke with Wine they bring downe the monethly termes.



CHAP. 42. Of Variable Floure de-luces.


1 Iris lutea variegata. Variable Flourede-(...).


@ 2 Iris Chalcedonica. Turky Floure de-(...).



 The Description.
1 THat which is called the Floure de-luce of many colours loseth his leaues in Winter, and in the Spring time recouereth them anew. I am not able to expresse the sundrie colours and mixtures contained in this floure: it is mixed with purple, yellow, blacke, white, and a fringe or blacke thrum downe the middle of the lower leaues, of a whitish yellow, tipped or frized, and as it were a little raised vp; of a deep purple colour neere the ground.
2 The second kinde hath long and narrow leaues of a blackish greene, like the stinking Gladdon; among which rise vp stalkes two foot long, bearing at the top of euery stalke one floure compact of six great leaues: the three that stand vpright are confusedly and very strangely stripped, mixed with white and a duskish blacke colour. The three leaues that hang downeward are like a gaping hood, and are mixed in like manner, (but the white is nothing so bright as of the other) and are as it were shadowed ouer with a darke purple colour somewhat shining: so that  cording to my iudgement the whole floure is of the colour of a Ginny hen: a rare and beautifull floure to behold.


@ 3 Iris maritima Narbonensis. The Sea Floure de-luce.


4 Iris syluestris Bizantina. Wilde Bizantine Floure de-luce.


5 Chamaeiris Angustifolia. Narrow leafed Floure de-(...).


6 (...) (...). Grasse Floure de-(...).





@ 7 Iris flore caeruleo obsoleto polyanthos. Narrow-leafed many-floured Iris.


@ 8 Chamaeiris nivea (...) Candida. White Dwarfe Iris.


@ 9 Chamaeiris latifolia flore rubello. Red floured Dwarfe Iris.





@ 10 Chamaeiris Lutea. Yellow Dwarfe Iris.


@ 11 Camaeiris variegata. Varigated Dwarfe Iris.


3 The French, or rather Sea Floure de-luce (whereof there is also another of the same kinde altogether lesser) haue their roots without any sauour. In shew they differ little from the garden Floure de-luce, but that the leaues of these are altogether slenderer, and vnpleasant in smell, growing plentifully in the rough crags of the rocks vnder the Alpes, and neere vnto the sea side. The which Pena found in the grassie grauelly grounds of the sea coast neere to Montpellier. The learned Doctor Assatius a long time supposed it to be Medium Diosc. Matthiolus deceiued himselfe and others, in that he said, That the root of this plant hath the sent of the peach: but my selfe haue proued it to be without sauour at all. It yeeldeth his floures in Iune, which are of all the rest most like vnto the grasse Floure de-luce. The taste of his root is hot, bitter, and with much tenuitie of parts, as hath been found by physicall proofe.
@ 4 This Iris Bizantina hath long narrow leaues like those of the last described; very narrow, sharpe pointed, hauing no vngratefull smell; the stalks are some cubit and an halfe in length, and somtimes more; at the top they are diuided into 2 or 3 branches that haue 2 or 3 floures a piece, like in shape to the floures of the broad leafed variegated bulbous Iris; they haue also a good smell: the ends of the hanging-downe leaues are of a darke colour; the other parts of them are variegated with white, purple, or violet colour. The three other leaues that stand vp are of a deepe violet or purple colour. The root is blackish, slender, hard, knotty. @
5 Narrow leafed Floure de-luce hath an infinite number of grassie leaues much like vnto Reed, among which rise vp many stalkes: on the ends of the same spring forth two, sometimes three right sweet and pleasant floures, compact of nine leaues. Those three that hang downward are greater than the rest, of a purple colour, stripped with white and yellow; but those three small leaues that appeare next, are of a purple colour without mixture: those three that stand vpright are of an horse-flesh colour, tipped with purple, and vnder each of these leaues appeare three small browne aglets like the tongue of a small bird.
6 The small grassie Floure de-luce differeth from the former in smalnesse and in thinnesse of leaues, and in that the stalkes are lower than the leaues, and the floures in shape and colour are like those of the stinking Gladdon, but much lesse.
@ There are many other varieties of the broad leafed Floure de-luces besides these mentioned by our Authour; as also of the narrow leafed, which here wee doe not intend to insist vpon, but referre such as are desirous to trouble themselues with these nicities, to Clusius and others.  Notwithstanding I judge it not amisse to giue the figures and briefe descriptions of (...) more of the Dwarfe Floure de-luces, as also of one of the narrower leafed.
7 This therefore which we giue you in the seuenth place is Iris slorc (...) obsoleto, etc. (...). The leaues of this are small and long like those of the wild (...) Floure de-luce; (...) (...) (which is not very big) hath many strong threds or fibres comming out of it: the stalke (which is somewhat tall) diuides it selfe into two or three branches, whereon grow floures in shape like those of the other Floure de-luces, but their colour is of an ouer-worne blew, or Ash colour.
8 Many are the differences of the Chamaeirides latifoliae, or Broad leafed (...) Floure deluces, but their principall distinction is in their floures; for some haue flowers of violet or purple colour, some of white, other some are variegated with yellow and purple, etc. Therefore I will onely name the colour, and giue you their figure, because their shapes differ little. This eighth therefore is Chamaeiris nivea aut Candida, White Dwarfe Iris: The ninth, Chamaeiris (...) flore rubello, Red floured Dwarfe Iris: The tenth, Camaeiris lutea, Yellow Dwarfe Iris: The eleuenth, Chamaeiris variegata, Variegated Dwarfe Iris. The leaues and stalkes of these plants are vsually about a foot high; the floures, for the bignesse of the plants, large, and they floure betimes, as in April. And thus much I thinke may suffice for the names and descriptions of these Dwarfe varieties of Floure de-luces. @


 The place.
These plants do grow in the gardens of London, amongst Herbarists and other Louers of Plants.


 The nature.
They floure from the end of March to the beginning of May.


 The Names.
The Turky Floure de-luce is called in the Turkish tongue Alaia Susiani, with this additament from the Italians, Fiore Belle pintate; in English, Floure de-luce. The rest of the names haue (...) touched in their titles and historie.


 Their nature and vertues.
The faculties and temperature of these rare and beautifull floures are referred to the (...) sorts of Floure de-luces, whereunto they do very well accord.
There is an excellent oyle made of the floures and roots of Floure de-luce, of each a like quantitie, called Oleum Irinum, made after the same manner that oyle of Roses, Lillies, and such like be made: which oyle profiteth much to strengthen the sinewes and joints, helpeth the cramp proceeding of repletion, and the disease called in Greeke Peripneumonia.
The floures of French Floure de-luce distilled with Diatrion sandalon, and Cinnamon, and the  water drunke, preuaileth greatly against the Dropsie, as Hollerius and Gesner testifie.



CHAP. 43. Of stinking Gladdon.

 The Description.
STinking Gladdon hath long narrow leaues like Iris, but smaller, of a darke greene colour, and being rubbed, of a stinking smell very lothsome. The stalkes are many in number, and round toward the top, out of which do grow floures like the Floure de-luce, of an ouer-worne blew colour, or rather purple, with some yellow and red streakes in the midst. After the floures be vaded there come great huskes or cods, wherein is contained a red berry or seed as bigge as a pease. The root is long, and threddy vnderneath.


 The place.
Gladdon groweth in many gardens: I haue seene it wilde in many places, as in woods and shadowie places neere the sea.


 The time.
The stinking Gladdon floureth in August, the seed whereof is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Stinking Gladdon is called in Greeke (...) by Dioscorides; and (...) by Theophrastus, according to Pena: in Latine Spatula (...) among the Apothecaries: it is called also Xyris: in English, stinking Gladdon, and Spurgewort.


 The nature.
Gladdon is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The vertues.
Such is the facultie of the roots of all the Irides before named, that being pounding they prouoke  (...), and purge the head: generally all the kinds haue a heating and (...) quality.



Xyris. Stinking Gladdon.


They are effectuall against the cough; they easily  digest and consume the grosse humors which are hardly concocted: they purge choler and tough flegme: they procure sleepe, and helpe the gripings within the belly.
It helpeth the Kings Euill, and Buboes in the  groine, as Pliny saith. If it be drunke in Wine it prouoketh the termes, and being put in Baths for women to sit ouer, it prouoketh the like effects most exquisitly. The root put in manner of a pessarie hastneth the birth. They couer with flesh bones that be bare, being vsed in plaisters. The roots boyled soft, and vsed plaisterwise, (...) all old hard tumours, and the (...) of the throat called Strumae, that is, the Kings Euill; and emplaistered with honey it draweth out broken bones.
The meale thereof healeth all the rifts of the fundament, and the infirmities thereof called Condilomata; and openeth Hemorrhoides. The juice sniffed or drawne vp into the nose, prouoketh sneesing, and draweth downe by the nose great store of filthy excrements, which would fall into other parts by secret and hidden waies, and (...) of the channels.
It profiteth being vsed in a pessarie, to prouoke the  termes, and will cause abortion.
It preuaileth much against all euill affections of the  brest and lungs, being taken in a little sweet wine, with some Spiknard; or in Whay with a little Masticke.
The Root of Xyris or Gladdon is of great force  against wounds and fractures of the head; for it draweth out all thornes, stubs, prickes, and arrow-heads, without griefe; which qualitie it effecteth (as (...) saith) by reason of his tenuitie of parts, and of his attracting, drying, and digesting facultie, which chiefely consisteth in the seed or fruit, which mightily prouoketh vrine.
The root giuen in Wine, called in physicke Passum, profiteth much against Convulsions, Ruptures, the paine of the huckle bones, the strangury, and the flux of the belly. Where note, That whereas it is said that the potion aboue named stayeth the flux of the belly, hauing a purging qualitie; it must be vnderstood that it worketh in that manner as Rhabarbarum and Asarum do, in that they concoct and take away the cause of the laske; otherwise no doubt it moueth vnto the stoole, as Rheubarb, Asarum, and the other Irides do. Hereof the Countrey people of Somersetshire haue good experience, who vse to drinke the decoction of this Root. Others do take the infusion thereof in ale or such like, wherewith they purge themselues, and that vnto very good purpose and effect.
The seed thereof mightily purgeth by vrine, as Galen saith, and the country people haue found  it true.



CHAP. 44. Of Ginger.

 The Description.
1 GInger is most impatient of the coldnesse of these our Northerne Regions, as my selfe haue found by proofe, for that there haue beene brought vnto me at seuerall times sundry plants thereof, fresh, greene, and full of juyce, as well from the West Indies, as from Barbary and other places; which haue sprouted and budded forth greene (...) in my garden in the heate of Sommer, but as soone as it hath been but touched with the first sharp blast of Winter, it hath presently perished both blade and root. The true forme or picture hath not before this time beene set forth by any that hath written; but the World hath beene deceiued by a counterfeit figure, which the reuerend and learned Herbarist Matthias Lobell did set forth in his Obseruations. The forme whereof notwithstanding I haue here expressed, with the true and vndoubted  picture also, which I receiued from Lobelius his owne hands at the impression hereof. The cause of whose former errour, as also the meanes whereby he got the knowledge of the true Ginger, may appeare by his owne words sent vnto me in Latine, which I haue here inserted. His words are these:
How hard and vncertaine it is to describe in words the true proportion of Plants, (hauing no other guide than skilfull, but yet deceitfull formes of them, sent from friends, or other meanes) they best do know who haue deepliest waded in this sea of Simples. About thirty yeares past or more, an honest and expert Apothecarie William Dries, to satisfie my desire, sent me from Antwerpe to London the picture of Ginger, which he held to be truly and liuely drawne: I my selfe gaue him credit easily, because I was not ignorant, that there had bin often Ginger roots brought greene, new, and full of juice, from the Indies to Antwerpe; and further, that the same had budded and growne in the said Dries Garden. But not many yeares after, I perceiued that the picture which was sent me by my Friend was a (...), and before that time had been drawne and set forth by an old Dutch Herbarist. Therefore not suffering this error any further to spred abroad, (which I discouered not many yeares past at Flushing in Zeeland, in the Garden of William of Nassau Prince of Orange, of famous memorie, through the means of a worthy person, if my memorie faile me not, called Vander Mill; at what time he opened, and loosed his first young buds and shoots about the end of Sommer, resembling in leaues, and stalkes of a foot high, the young and tender shoots of the common Reed, called Harundo vallatoria) I thought it conuenient to impart thus much vnto Master Iohn Gerard, an expert Herbarist, and Master of happy successe in Surgerie; to the end he might let posteritie know thus much, in the painefull and long laboured trauels which now he hath in hand, to the great good and benefit of his Countrey. The plant it selfe brought me to Middleborrough, and set in my Garden, perished through the hardnesse of the Winter.
Thus much haue I set downe, truly translated out of his owne words in Latine; though too fauourably by him done to the commendation of my meane skill.


1 (...) ficta Icon. The feigned figure of (...).


1 Zinziberis verior Icon. The true figure of Ginger.




 The place.
Ginger groweth in Spaine, Barbary, in the Canary Islands, and the Azores. Our men which sacked Domingo in the Indies, digged it vp there in sundry places wilde.



 The time.
Ginger flourisheth in the hot time of Sommer, and loseth his leaues in Winter.


 The Names.
Ginger is called in Latine Zinziber and Gingiber: in Greeke, (...): In French, Gigembre.


 The nature.
Ginger heateth and drieth in the third degree.


 The vertues.
Ginger, as Dioscorides reporteth, is right good with meate in sauces, or otherwise in conditures: for it is of an heating and digesting qualitie; it gently looseth the belly, and is profitable for the stomacke, and effectually opposeth it selfe against all darknesse of the sight; answering the qualities and effects of Pepper. It is to be considered, That canded, greene or condited Ginger is hot and moist in qualitie, prouoking Venerie: and being dried, it heateth and drieth in the third degree.



CHAP. 45. Of Aromaticall Reeds.


2 Acorus verus officinis falso Calamus, cumjulo. The true Acorus with his floure.


Acorus verus sine julo. The true Acorus without the floure.



 The Description.
1 THis sweet-smelling Reed is of a darke dun colour, full of joints and knees, easie to be broken into small splinters, hollow, and full of a certaine pith cobweb-wife, somewhat gummy in eating, and hanging in the teeth, and of a sharpe bitter taste. It is of the thicknesse of the little finger, as Lobelius affirmeth of some which he had seene in Venice.
2 Bastard Calamus hath flaggy leaues like vnto the Water floure de-luce or flagge, but narrower, three foot long; of a fresh greene colour, and aromaticke smell, which they keepe a long time, although they be dried. Now the stalke which beares the floure or fruit is much like another  lease, but onely from the fruit downwards, whereas it is somewhat thicker, and not so broad, but almost triangular. The floure is a long thing resembling the Cats-tailes which grow on Hasels; it is about the thicknesse of an ordinarie Reed, some inch and halfe long, of a greenish yellow colour, curiously chequered, as if it were wrought with a needle with greene and yellow silke intermixt @. I haue not as yet seene it beare his tuft in my garden, and haue read that it is barren, and by proofe haue seene it so: yet for all that I beleeue Clusius, who saith hee hath seene it beare his floure in that place where it doth grow naturally, although in England it is altogether barren. The root is sweet in smell, and bitter in taste, and like vnto the common Flagge, but smaller, and not sored.


3 Calamus Aromaticus Antiquorum. The true Aromaticall Reed of the Antients.


@ 3 I thinke it very fitting in this place to acquaint you with a Plant, which by the conjecture of the most learned (and that not without good reason) is iudged to be the true Calamus of the Ancients. Clusius giues vs the historie thereof in his Notes vpon Garcias ab Horto, lib. 1. ca. 32. in these words: When as (saith he) this Historie was to be the third time printed, I very opportunely came to the knowledge of the true Calamus Aromaticus; the which the learned Bernard Paludanus the Frisian, returning from Syria and Aegypt, freely bestowed vpon me, together with the fruit Habhel, and many other rare seeds, about the beginning of the yeare 1579. Now wee hauc caused a figure to be exactly drawne by the fragments thereof (for that it seemes so exquisitly to accord with Dioscorides his description.) In myne opinion it is rather to be iudged an vmbelliferous plant than a reedy; for it hath a straight stalke parted with many knots or ioynts, otherwise smooth, hollow within, and inuested on the inside with a slender filme like as a Reed, and it breaketh into shiuers or splinters, as Dioscorides hath written: it hath a smell sufficiently strong, and the taste is gratefull, yet bitter, and pertaking of some astriction: The leaues, as by remaines of them might appeare, seeme by couples at cuery ioynt to engirt the stalke: the root at the top is somewhat tuberous, and then ends in fibres. Twenty fiue yeares after Paludanus gaue me this Calamus, the learned Anthony Coline the Apothecarie (who lately translated into French these Commentaries the fourth time set forth, Anno 1593) sent me from Lyons pieces of the like Reed, certifying me withall, That he had made vse thereof in his Composition of Treacle. Now these pieces, though in forme they resembled those I had from Paludanus, yet had they a more bitter taste than his, nether did they partake of any astriction; which peraduenture was to be attributed to the age of one of the two. Thus much Clusius. @


 The place.
The true Calamus Aromaticus groweth in Arabia, and likewise in Syria, especially in the moorish grounds betweene the foot of Libanus @ and another little hill, not the mountaine Antilibanus, as some haue thought, in a small valley neere to a lake, whose plashes are dry in Sommer. Pliny 12. 22. @
Bastard or false Calamus growes naturally at the foot of a hill neere to Prusa a city of Bithynia, not far from a great lake. It prospereth exceeding well in my garden, but as yet it beareth neither floures nor stalke. It groweth also in Candia, as Pliny reporteth: in Galatia likewise, and in many other places.


 The time.
They lose their leaues in the beginning of Winter, and do recouer them againe in the Spring of the yeare. @ In May this yeare 1632, I receiued from the Worshipfull Gentleman M. Thomas Glynn of Glynnlhivon in Carnaruanshire, my very good friend, the pretty Iulus, or floure of this plant; which I could neuer see here about London, though it groweth with vs in many Gardens, and that in great plenty. @


 The Names.
@ The want of the true Calamus being supplied by Acorus as a (...), was the cause (as Pena and Lobell probably coniecture) that of a substitute it tooke the prime place vpon it; and being as it were made a Vice-Roy, would needs be King. But the falsenesse of the title was discouered  by Matthiolus, and others, and so it is sent backe to its due place againe; though notwithstanding it yet in shops retaines the title of Calamus.
1 The figure that by our Author was giuen for this, is supposed, and that (as I thinke truly) to be but a counterfeit, of Marthiolus his inuention; who therein hath beene followed (according to the custome of the world) by diuers others. The description is of a small Reed called Calamus oderatus Libani, by Lobell in his Obseruations, and figured in his Irones, p. 54.
2 This is called (...) and (...) by the Greekes: by some, according to Apulcius, (...); and in Latine it is called Acorus and Acorum; and in shops, as I haue formerly said, Calamus Aromaticus: for they vsually take Galang a major, (described by me, Chap. 26.) for Acorus. It may besides the former names be fitly called in English, The sweet Garden Flag.
3 This is iudged to be the (...) of Dioscorides; the (...) of Theophrastus; that is, the true Calamus Aromaticus that should be vsed in Compositions. @


 The nature of the true Acorus, or our sweet garden Flag.
Dioscorides saith, the roots haue an heating facultie: Galen and Pliny do affirme, that they haue thin and subtill parts, both hot and dry.


 The vertues of the same.
The decoction of the root of Calamus drunke prouoketh vrine, helpeth the paine in the side, liuer, spleene, and brest; convulsions, gripings, and burstings; it easeth and helpeth the pissing by drops.
It is of great effect, being put in broth, or taken in fumes through a close stoole, to prouoke  womens naturall accidents.
The iuyce strained with a little honey, taketh away the dimnes of the eyes, and helpeth much  against poyson, the hardnesse of the spleene, and all infirmities of the bloud.
The root boyled in wine, stamped and applied plaisterwise vnto the cods, doth wonderfully  abate the swelling of the same, and helpeth all hardnesse and collections of humors.
The quantitie of two scruples and an halfe of the root drunke in foure ounces of Muskadel, helpeth  them that be bruised with grieuous beating, or falls.
The root is with good successe mixed in counterpoysons. In our age it is put into Eclegma's, that is, medicines for the lungs, and especially when the lungs and chest are opprest with raw and cold humors.
@ The root of this preserued is very pleasant to the taste, and comfortable to the stomacke and  heart; so that the Turks at Constantinople take it fasting in the morning, against the contagion of the corrupt aire. And the Tartars haue it in such esteeme, that they will not drinke Water (which is their vsuall drinke) vnlesse they haue first steeped some of this root therein. @


 The choice.
The best Acorus, as Dioscorides saith, is that which is substantiall, and well compact, white within, not rotten, full, and well smelling.
Pliny writeth, That those which grow in Candia are better than those of Pontus, and yet those of Candia worse than those of the Easterne countries, or those of England, although we haue no great quantitie thereof.


 The faculties of the true Calamus out of Dioscorides.
@ It being taken in drinke moueth vrine; wherefore boyled with the roots of grasse or Smallage  seeds, it helpeth such as are hydropick, nephritick, troubled with the strangurie, or bruised.
It moues the Courses, either drunke or otherwise applied. Also the fume thereof taken by the  mouth in a pipe, either alone or with dried Turpentine, helpes coughs.
It is boyled also in baths for women, and decoctions for Glysters; and it enters into plaisters  and perfumes for the smells sake. @



CHAP. 46. Of Corne.
THus farre haue I discoursed vpon Grasses, Rushes, Spartum, Flags, and Floure deluces: my next labour is to set downe for your better instruction, the historie of Corne, and the kindes thereof, vnder the name of Graine; which the Latines call Cerialia semina, or Bread-corne; the Grecians, (...) and (...); of which wee purpose to discourse. There belong to the historie of Graine all such things as be made of Corne, as Far, Condrus, Alica, Tragus, Amylum, Ptisana, Polenta, Maza, (...) or Malt, Zythum, and whatsoeuer are of that sort. There be also ioyned vnto them many seeds, which Theophrastus in his eighth booke placeth among the graines; as Millet, Sorgum, Panicke, Indian wheat; and such like. Galen in his first booke of the Faculties of nourishments, reckoneth  vp the diseases of Graine, as well those that come of the graine it selfe degenerating, or that are changed into some other kinde, and made worse through the fault of the weather, or of the soile; as also such as be cumbersome by growing among them, doe likewise fitly succeed the graines. And beginning with corne, we will first speake of Wheat, and describe it in the first place, because it is preferred before all other corne.


1 Triticum spica mutica. White Wheate.



 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Wheate which Lobelius, distinguishing it by the care, calleth Spica Mutica, is the most principal of all other, whose eares are altogether bare or naked, without awnes or chaffie beards. The stalke riseth from a threddy root, compact of many strings, joynted or kneed at sundry distances; from whence shoot forth grassie blades and leaues like vnto Rie, but broader. The plant is so well knowne to many, and so profitable to all, that the meanest and most ignorant need no larger description to know the same by.
2 The second kinde of Wheat, in root, stalkes, joints, and blades, is like the precedent, differing onely in care, and number of graines, whereof this kinde doth abound, hauing an eare consisting of many ranks, which seemeth to make the eare double or square. The root and graine is like the other, but not bare and naked, but bristled or bearded, with many small and sharpe eiles or awnes, not vnlike to those of Barley.
3 Flat Wheat is like vnto the other kindes of Wheat in leaues, stalkes, and roots, but is bearded and bordered with rough and sharpe ailes, wherein consists the difference. @ I know not what our Author means by this flat Wheat; but I conjecture it to be the long rough eared Wheat, which hath blewish eares when as it is ripe, in other things resembling the ordinary red wheat. @
4 The fourth kinde is like the last described, and thus differeth from it, in that, that this kind hath many smal ears comming forth of one great eare, and the beards hereof be shorter than of the former kind.
5 Bright wheate is like the second before described, and differeth from it in that, that this kind is foure square, somewhat bright and shining, the other not.
@ I thinke it a very fit thing to adde in this place a rare obseruation, of the transmutation of one species into another, in plants; which though it haue beene obserued of ancient times, as by Theophrastus, de caus. plant. lib. 3. cap. 6. whereas amongst others hee mentioneth the change of (...), Spelt into oates: and by Virgill in these verses;

Grandia saepe quibus mandauimus Hordea sulcis,
(...) Lolium, and steriles dominantur (...).


That is;
In furrowes where great Barley we did sow,
Nothing but Darnel and poore Oats do grow;

yet none that I haue read haue obserued, that two seuerall graines, perfect in each respect, did grow at any time in one eare: the which I saw this yeare 1632, in an eare of white Wheat, which was found by my very good Friend Master Iohn Goodyer, a man second to none in his industrie and searching of plants, nor in his iudgement or knowledge of them. This eare of wheat was as large and faire as most are, and about the middle thereof grew three or foure perfect Oats in all respects: which being hard to be found, I held very worthy of setting downe, for some reasons not to be insisted vpon in this place. @


 The place.
Wheat groweth almost in all the countries of the world that are inhabited and mannured, and requireth a fruitfull and fat soile, and rather Sunny and dry, than watery grounds and shadowie: for in a dry ground (as Columella reporteth) it groweth harder and better compact: in a moist and darke soile it degenerateth sometime to be of another kinde.



2 Triticum aristis circumvallatum. Bearded Wheat, or Red-Wheat.




 The time.
They are most commonly sowen in the fall of the leafe, or Autumne: somtime in the Spring.


 The Names.
Wheat is called of the Grecians (...): of the Latines, Triticum, and the white Wheate Siligo. Triticum doth generally signifie (...) kinde of Corne which is threshed out of the eares, and made clean by fanning or such ordinary meanes. The Germans call it (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Grano: the Spaniards, Trigo: the French men, Bled, ou Fourment: in England we call the first, WhiteWheat, and Flaxen Wheat. Triticum Lucidum is called. Bright Wheat: Red Wheat is called in Kent, Duck-bill Wheate, and Normandy Wheat.


 The nature.
Wheat (saith Galen) is very much vsed of men, and with greatest profit. Those Wheats do nourish most which be hard, and haue their whole substance so closely compact as they can scarcely be bit asunder; for such doe nourish very much: and the contrary but little.
Wheat, as it is a medicine outwardly applied, is hot in the first degree, yet can it not manifestly either dry or moisten. It hath also a certaine clamminesse and stopping qualitie.


 The vertues. 
Raw Wheat, saith Dioscorides, being eaten, breedeth wormes in the belly: being chewed and applied, it doth (...) the biting of mad dogs.


3 Triticum Typhinum. Flat Wheat.


4 Triticum multiplici spica. Double eared Wheat.


The floure of wheat being boyled with honey and water, or with oyle and water, taketh away  all inflammations, or hot swellings.
The bran of Wheat boyled in strong Vineger, clenseth away scurfe and dry scales, and dissolueth  the beginning of all hot swellings, if it be laid vnto them. And boyled with the decoction of Rue, it slaketh the swellings in womens brests.
The graines of white Wheat, as Pliny writeth in his two and twentieth booke, and seuenth  chapter, being dried brown, but not burnt, and the pouder thereof mixed with white wine is good for watering eyes, if it be laid thereto.
The dried pouder of red Wheat boyled with vineger, helpeth the shrinking of sinewes.
The meale of Wheat mingled with the juice of Henbane, and plaisterwise applied, appeaseth   5 Triticum lucidum. Bright Wheat. inflammations, as Ignis sacer, or Saint Anthonies Fire, and such like, staying the flux of humors to the ioynts, which the Grecians call Rheumatismata. Paste made of fine meale, such as Booke-binders vse, helpeth such as doe spit bloud, taken warme one spoonfull at once. The bran of wheat boiled in sharpe vineger, and rubbed vpon them that be scuruie and mangie, easeth the party very much.
The leauen made of Wheat hath vertue to  heate and draw outward, it resolueth, concocteth, and openeth all swellings, bunches, tumors, and felons, being mixed with salt.
The fine floure mixed with the yolke of an  egge, honey, and a little saffron, doth draw and heale byles and such like sores, in children and in old people, very well and quickely. Take crums of wheaten bread one pound and an halfe, barley meale (...) ij. Fennigreeke and Lineseed of each an ounce, the leaues of Mallowes, Violets, Dwale, Sengreene, and Cotyledon, ana one handfull: boyle them in water and oyle vntill they be tender: then stampe them very small in a stone morter, and adde thereto the yolks of three egges, oyle of Roses, and oyle of Violets, ana (...) ij. Incorporate them altogether; but if the inflammation grow to an Erysipelas, then adde thereto the juice of Nightshade, Plantaine, and Henbane, ana (...) ij. it easeth an Erysipelas, or Saint Anthonies fire, and all inflammations very speedily.
Slices of fine white bread laid to infuse or  steepe in Rose water, and so applied vnto sor^e eyes which haue many hot humors falling into them, doth easily defend the humour, and cease the paine.
The oyle of wheat pressed forth betweene two plates of hot iron, healeth the chaps and chinks  of the hands, feet, and fundament, which come of cold, making smooth the hands, face, or any other part of the body.
The same vsed as a Balsame doth excellently heale wounds, and being put among salues or vnguents, it causeth them to worke more effectually, especially in old vlcers.



CHAP. 47. Of Rie.

 The Description.
THe leafe of Rie when it first commeth vp, is somewhat reddish, afterward greene, as be the other graines. It groweth vp with many stalks, slenderer than those of wheat, and longer, with knees or ioynts by certaine distances like vnto Wheat: the eares are orderly framed vp in rankes, and compassed about with short beards, not sharpe but blunt, which when it floureth standeth vpright, and when it is filled vp with seed it leaneth and hangeth downward. The seed is long, blackish, slender, and naked, which easily falleth out of the huskes of it selfe. The roots be many, slender, and full of strings.


 The place.
Rie groweth very plentifully in the most places of Germany and Polonia, as appeareth by the great quantitie brought into England in times of dearth, and scarcitie of corne, as hapned in the yeare 1596, and at other times, when there was a generall want of corne, by reason of the aboundance of raine that fell the yeare before; whereby great penurie ensued, as well of cattell and all other victuals, as of all manner of graine. It groweth likewise very wel in most places of England, especially towards the North.



Secale. Rie.




 The time.
It is for the most part sowen in Autumne, and sometimes in the Spring, which proueth to be a Graine more subiect to putrifaction than that which was sowen in the fall of the leafe, by reason the Winter doth ouertake it before it can attaine to his perfect maturitie and ripenesse.


 The Names.
Rie is called in high Dutch, (...): in LowDutch, (...): in Spanish, Centeno: in Italian, Segala: in French, Seigle: which soundeth after the old Latine name which in Pliny is Secale and Farrago, lib. 18. cap. 16.


 The temperature.
Rie as a medicine is hotter than wheat, and more forcible in heating, wasting, and consuming away that whereto it is applied. It is of a more clammy and obstructing nature than Wheat, and harder to digest; yet to rusticke bodies that can well digest it, it yeelds good nourishment.


 The vertues.
Bread, or the leauen of Rie, as the Belgian  Physitians affirme vpon their practise, doth more forcibly digest, draw, ripen, and breake all Apostumes, Botches, and Byles, than the leuen of Wheat.
Rie Meale bound to the head in a Linnen  Cloath, doth asswage the long continuing paines thereof.



CHAP. 48. Of Spelt Corne.

 The Description.
SPelt is like to Wheat in stalkes and eare: it groweth vp with a multitude of stalks which are kneed and joynted higher than those of Barley: it bringeth forth a disordered eare, for the most part without beards. The cornes be wrapped in certaine dry huskes, from which they cannot easily be purged, and are joyned together by couples in two chaffie huskes, out of which when they be taken they are like vnto wheat cornes: it hath also many roots as wheat hath, whereof it is a kinde.


 The place.
It groweth in fat and fertile moist ground.


 The time.
It is altered and changed into Wheat it selfe, as degenerating from bad to better, contrary to all other that do alter or change; especially (as Theophrastus saith) if it be clensed, and so sowen, but that not forthwith, but in the third yeare.


 The Names.
The Grecians haue called it (...) and (...): the Latines Spelta: in the Germane tongue (...), and (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Espeautre: of most Italians, Pirra, Farra: of the Tuscans, Biada: of the Millanois, Alga: in English, Spelt Corne. Dioscorides maketh mention of two kindes of Spelt: one of which he names (...) or single: another, (...) which brings forth two cornes ioyned together in a couple of huskes, as before in the description is mentioned. That Spelt which Dioscorides calls Dicoccos, is the same that Theophr. and Galen do name Zea. The most ancient Latines haue called Zea or Spelta by the name of Far, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus doth sufficiently testifie: The old Romans (saith he) did call sacred marriages by the word (...) because  Zea siue Speltae. Spelt Corne. the Bride and Bridegroome did eate of that Far which the Grecians do call (...) The same thing Asclepiades affirmeth in Galen, in his ninth Booke according to the places affected, writing thus; Farris quod Zea appellant: that is to say, Far which is called Zea, etc. And this Far is also named of the Latines, Ador, (...), and Semen adoreum.


 The temper.
Spelt, as Dioscorides reporteth, nourisheth more than Barley. Galen writeth in his Bookes of the Faculties of simple Medicines, Spelt is in all his temperature in a meane betweene Wheat and Barley, and may in vertue be referred to the kindes of Barley and Wheat, being indifferent to them both.


 The vertues.
The floure or meale of Spelt corne boyled in  water with the pouder of red Saunders, and a little oyle of Roses and Lillies, vnto the forme of a Pultesse, and applied hot, taketh away the swelling of the legs gotten by cold and long standing.
@ Spelt (saith Turner) is common about Weisenburgh  in high Almanie, eight Dutch miles on this side Strausbourgh: and there all men vse it for wheat; for there groweth no wheat at all: yet I neuer saw fairer and pleasamer bread in any place in all my life, than I haue eaten there, made onely of this Spelt. The Corne is much lesse than Wheat, and somewhat shorter than Rie, but nothing so blacke. @



CHAP. 49. Of Starch Corne.


(...) Amyleum. Starch Corne.



 The Description.
THis other kind of Spelta or Zea is called of the Germane Herbarists Amyleum Frumentum, or Starch corne; and is a kinde of grain sowen to that end, or a three moneths graine, and is very like vnto wheat in stalke and seed; but the eare thereof is set round about, and made vp with two ranks, with certaine beards, almost after the manner of Barley, and the seed is closed vp in chaffie huskes, and is sowen in the Spring.


 The place.
Amil corne, or Starch corne is sowen in Germanie, Polonia, Denmarke, and other those Easterne Regions, as well to feed their cattel and pullen with, as also to make starch; for the which purpose it doth very fitly serue.


 The time.
It is sowen in Autumne, or the fall of the leafe, and oftentimes in the Spring; and for that cause hath beene called Trimestre, or three months grain: it bringeth his seed to ripenesse in the beginning of August, and is sowen in the Low-Countries in the Spring of the yeare.


 The Names.
Because the Germanes haue great vse of it to make starch with, they do call it (...): Wee  thinke good to name it in Latine Amyleum frumentum: in English it may be called (...), after the Germane word; and may likewise be called Starch Corne. Tragus and Fuchsius tooke it to be Triticum (...), or three moneths wheat; but it may rather be referred to the Farra: (...) Columella speaketh of a graine called Far Halicastrum, which is sowen in the Spring; and for that cause it is named Trimestre, or three moneths Far. If any be desirous to learne the making of Starch, let them reade Dodoneus last edition, where they shall be fully taught; my selfe not willing to spend time about so vaine a thing, and not pertinent to the story. It is vsed onely to feed cattell, pullen, and make starch, and is in nature somewhat like to wheat or Barley.



CHAP. 50. Of Barley.

 The Description.
BArley hath an helme or straw which is shorter and more brittle than that of Wheat, and hath more joints; the leaues are broader and rougher; the eare is armed with long, rough, and prickly beards or ailes, and set about with sundry rankes, sometimes two, otherwhiles three, foure, or six at the most, according to (...); but eight according to Tragus. The graine is included in a long chaffie huske: the roots be slender, and grow thicke together. Barley, as Pliny writeth, is of all graine the softest, and least subiect to casualtie, yeelding fruit very quickely and profitably.


1 Hordeum Distichon. Common Barley.


2 Hordeum Polystichum vernum. Beare Barley, or Barley Big.


1 The most vsuall Barley is that which hath but two rowes of Corne in the eare, each graine set iust opposite to other, and hauing his long awne at his end, is couered with a huske sticking close thereto.
2 This which commonly hath foure rowes of corne in the eare, and sometimes more, as wee haue formerly deliuered, is not so vsually sowen with vs; the eare is commonly shorter than the former, but the graine very like; so that none who knowes the former, but may easily know the later at the first sight.



 The place.
They are sowen, as Columella teacheth, in loose and dry ground, and are well knowne all Europe through.
2 The second is sowen commonly in some parts of Yorke shire and the Bishopricke of Durham.


 The Names.
1 The first is called of the Grecians (...): in high Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Orzo: in Spanish, (...): in French, Orge: in English, Barley.
2 The second is called of the Grecians (...), and also (...): Columella calleth it Galaticum; and Hippocrates, (...) of our English Northerne people, Big, and Big Barley. Crimmon (saith Galen in his Commentaries vpon the second booke of Hippocrates his Prognosticks) is the grosser part of Barley meale being grossely ground. Malt is well knowne in England, insomuch that the word needeth no interpretation; notwithstanding because these Workes may chance into the hands of Strangers, that neuer heard of such a word, or such a thing, by reason it is not (...) where made; I thought good to lay downe a word of the making thereof. First, it is steeped in water vntill it swell; then is it taken from the water, and laid (as they terme it) in a Couch; that is, spred vpon an euen floore the thicknesse of some foot and an halfe; and thus is it kept vntill it Come, that is, vntill it send forth two or three little strings or fangs at the end of each Corne: then it is spred vsually twice a day, each day thinner than other, for some eight or ten daies space, vntill it be pretty dry, and then it is dried vp with the heate of the fire, and so vsed. It is called in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Latine of later time, Maltum: which name is borrowed of the Germanes. Actius a Greeke Physitian nameth Barley thus prepared, (...), or Bine: The which Author affirmeth, That a plaister of the meale of Malt is profitably laid vpon the swellings of the Dropsie. Zythum, as Diodorus Siculus affirmeth, is not onely made in Aegypt, but also in Galatia. The aire is so cold (saith he, writing of Galatia) that the country bringeth forth neither wine nor oyle; and therefore men are compelled to make a compound drinke of Barley, which they call Zythum. Dioscorides nameth one kinde of Barley drinke Zythum; another, Curmi. Simeon Zethi a later Grecian calleth this kind of drinke by an Arabicke name, (...): in English we call it Beere and Ale which is made of Barley Malt.


 The temperature.
Barley, as Galen writeth in his booke of the Faculties of nourishments, is not of the same temperature that Wheat is; for Wheat doth manifestly heate, but contrariwise what medicine or bread soeuer is made of Barley, is found to haue a certaine force to coole and drye in the first degree, according to Galen in his booke of the faculties of Simples. It hath also a little abstersiue or cleansing qualitie, and doth dry somewhat more than Beane meale.


 The vertues.
Barley, saith Dioscorides, doth cleanse, prouoke vrine, breedeth windinesse, and is an enemie to  the stomacke.
Barley meale boyled in an honied water with figges, taketh away inflammations: with Pitch, Rosin, and Pigeons dung, it softneth and ripeneth hard swellings.
With Melilot and Poppy seeds it taketh away the paine in the sides: it is a remedy against  windinesse in the guts, being applied with Lineseed, Foenugreeke, and Rue: with tarre, wax, oyle, and the vrine of a yong boy, it doth digest, soften, and ripe hard swellings in the throat, called the Kings Euill.
Boyled with wine, myrtles, the barke of the pomegranate, wilde peares, and the leaues of brambles, it stoppeth the laske.
Further, it serueth for Ptisana, Polenta, Maza, Malt, (...), and Beere. The making whereof if any  be desirous to learne, let them reade Lobelius Aduersaria, in the chapter of Barley. But I thinke our London Beere-Brewers would scorne to learne to make beere of either French or Dutch, much lesse of me that can say nothing therein of mine owne experience more than by the Writings of others. But I may deliuer vnto you a Confection made thereof (as Columella did concerning sweet wine sodden to the halfe) which is this; Boyle strong (...) till it come to the thickenesse of hony, or the forme of an vnguent or salue, which applied to the paines of the sinewes and joints (as hauing the propertie to abate aches and paines) may for want of better remedies be vsed for old and new sores, if it be made after this manner.
Take strong ale two pound, one Oxe gall, and boyle them to one pound with a soft fire, continually  stirring it; adding thereto of Vineger one pound, of Olibanum one ounce, floures of Camomil and melilot of each ^ i. Rue in fine pouder ^ s. a little hony, and a small quantitie of the pouder of Comin seed; boyle them all together to the forme of an vnguent, and so apply it. There be sundry sorts of Confections made of Barley, as Polenta, Ptisana, made of water and husked or hulled barley, and such like. Polenta is the meate made of parched Barley, which the Grecians doe properly  call (...) Maza is made of parched Barley tempered with water, after Hippocrates and Xenophon: Cyrus hauing called his souldiers together, exhorteth them to drinke water wherein parched Barley hath beene steeped, calling it by the same name, Maza. Hesychius doth interpret (...) to be Barley meale mixed with water and oyle.
Barley meale boyled in water with garden Nightshade, the leaues of garden Poppie, the pouder of Foenugreeke and Lineseed, and a little Hogs grease, is good against all hot and burning swellings, and preuaileth against the Dropsie, being applied vpon the belly.



CHAP. 51. Of Naked Barley.


Hordeumnudum. Naked Barley.



 The Description.
HOrdeum nudum is called Zeopyrum, and Tritico-Speltum, because it is like to Zea, otherwise called Spelta, and is like to that which is called French Barley, whereof is made that noble drinke for sicke Folkes, called Ptisama. The plant is altogether like vnto Spelt, sauing that the eares are rounder, the eiles or beards rougher and longer, and the seed or graine naked without huskes, like to wheat, the which in it's yellowish colour it somewhat resembles.


 The place.
@ It is sowne in sundry places of Germany, for the same vses as Barley is.


 The Names.
It is called Hordeum Nudum, for that the Corne is without huske, and resembleth Barley. In Greeke it is called (...), because it participateth in similitude and nature with Zea, that is, Spelt, and Puros, (that is) wheat. @


 The vertues.
This Barley boyled in water cooleth vnnaturall  and hot burning choler. In vehement feuers you may adde thereto the seeds of white Poppie and Lettuse, not onely to coole, but also to prouoke sleepe.
Against the shortnesse of the breath, and paines of the brest, may be added to all the foresaid, figs, raisins of the Sunne, liquorice, and Annise seed.
Being boyled in the Whay of Milke, with the leaues of Sorrell, Marigolds, and Scabious, it  quencheth thirst, and cooleth the heate of the inflamed Liuer, being drunke first in the morning, and last to bedward.



Hordeum Spurium. Wall Barley.





CHAP. 52. Of Wall Barley.

 The Description.
THis kinde of wilde Barley, called of the Latines Hordeum Spurium; is called of Pliny, Holcus; in English, Wall Barley, Way Barley, or after old English Writers, Way Bennet. It groweth vpon mud walls and stony places by the wayes sides; very well resembling Selfe-sowed Barley, yet the blades are rather like grasse than Barley. @ This groweth some foot and better in height, with grassie leaues, the eare is very like that of Rie, and the corne both in colour and shape absolutely resembles it; so that it cannot be fitlier named than by calling it wilde Rie, or Rie grasse. @


 The vertues.
This Bastard wilde Barley stamped and applied  vnto places wanting haire, doth cause it to grow and come forth, whereupon in old time it was called (...).



CHAP. 53. Of Saint Peters Corne.


1 Brizamonococcos. S. Peters Corne.


2 Festuca Italica. Hauer Grasse.




 The Description.
@ 1 BRiza is a Corne whose leaues, stalkes, and eares are lesse than Spelt; the eare resembles our ordinary Barley, the corne growing in two rowes, with awnes at the top, and huskes vpon it not easily to be gotten off. In colour it much resembles barley; yet Tragus saith it is of a blackish red colour.
2 This Aegilops in leaues and stalkes resembles wheat or barley, and it growes some two handfuls high, hauing a little eare or two at the top of the stalke, wherein are inclosed two or three seeds a little smaller than Barley, hauing each of them his awne at his end. These seeds are wrapped in a crested filme or skinne, out of which the awnes put themselues forth.
(...) saith, That he by his owne triall hath found this to be true, That as Lolium, which is our common Darnel, is certainly knowne to be a seed degenerate from wheat, being found for the most part among wheat, or where wheat hath been: so is Festuca a seed or grain degenerating from barley, and is found among Barley, or where barley hath beene.


@  The place.
1 Briza is sowen in some parts of Germany and France; and my memorie deceiues me if I haue not often times found many eares thereof amongst ordinarie barley, when as I liued in the further side of Lincolneshire, and they there called it Brant Barley.
2 This Aegilops growes commonly amongst their Barley in Italy and other hot countries. @


 The Names.
1 Briza Monococcos, after Lobelius, is called by Tabernamontanus, Zea Monococcos: in English, Saint Peters Corne, or Brant Barley.
2 Festuca of Narbone in France is called (...): in Latine, Aegilops Narbonensis, according to the Greeke: in English, Hauer-grasse.


 The nature.
They are of qualitie somewhat sharpe, hauing facultie to digest.


 The vertues.
The iuice of Festuca mixed with Barley meale dried, and at times of need moistned with Rose  water, applied plaisterwise, healeth the disease called Aegilops, or Fistula in the corner of the eye: it mollifieth and disperseth hard lumps, and asswageth the swellings in the joynts.



CHAP. 54. Of Otes.

 The Description.
1 AVena Vesca, Common Otes, is called Vesca, a Vescendo, because it is vsed in many countries to make sundry sorts of bread; as in Lancashire, where it is their chiefest bread corne for Iannocks, Hauer cakes, Tharffe cakes, and those which are called generally Oten cakes; and for the most part they call the graine Hauer, whereof they do likewise make drink for want of Barley.
2 Auena Nuda is like vnto the common Otes; differing in that, that these naked Otes immediately as they be threshed, without helpe of a Mill become Otemeale fit for our vse. In consideration whereof in Northfolke and Southfolke they are called vnhulled and naked Otes. Some of those good house-wiues that delight not to haue any thing but from hand to mouth, according to our English prouerbe, may (whiles their pot doth seeth) go to the barne, and rub forth with their hands sufficient for that present time, not willing to prouide for to morrow, according as the Scripture speaketh, but let the next day bring with it.


 The nature.
Otes are dry and somewhat cold of temperature, as Galen saith.


 The vertues.
Common Otes put into a linnen bag, with a little bay salt quilted handsomely for the same  purpose, and made hot in a frying pan, and applied very hot, easeth the paine in the side called the stitch, or collicke in the belly.
If Otes be boyled in water, and the hands or feet of such as haue the Serpigo or Impetigo, that is;  certaine chaps, chinks, or rifts in the palmes of the hands or feet (a disease of great affinitie with the pocks) be holden ouer the fume or smoke thereof in some bowle or other vessell wherein the Otes are put, and the Patient (...) with blankets to sweat, being first annointed with that ointment or vnction vsually applied contra (...) Gallicum: it doth perfectly cure the same in sixe (...) so annointing and sweating.

Otemeale is good for to make a faire and wel coloured maid to looke like a cake of tallow, especially  if she take next her (...) a good draught of strong vineger after it.
Otemeale vsed as a (...) dries and moderately discusses, and that without biting; for  it hath somewhat a coole temper, with some astriction, so that it is good against scourings.


1 Auena (...). Common Otes.


2 Auena Nuda. Naked Otes.





CHAP. 55. Of Wilde Otes.

The description.
1 BRomos sterilis, called likewise Auena fatua, which the Italians do call by a very apt name Vena vana, and Auena Cassa, (in English, Barren Otes, or wilde Otes) hath like leaues and stalkes as our Common Otes; but the heads are rougher, sharpe, many little sharpe huskes making each eare.
@ 2 There is also another kinde of Bromos or wilde Otes, which Dodoneus calleth Festuca altera, not differing from the former wilde Otes in stalkes and leaues, but the heads are thicker, and more compact, each particular eare (as I may terme it) consisting of two rowes of seed handsomly compact and ioyned together; being broader next the straw, and narrower as it comes to an end.


@  The time and place.
@ The first in Iuly and August may be found almost in euery hedge; the later is to be found in great plenty in most Rie.


 The Names.
1 This is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Bromos stirilis by Lobell: Aegylops prima by Matthiolus: in English, Wilde-Otes, or Hedge-Otes.
2 Lobell calls this Bromos sterilis altera: Dodonaeus termes it Festuca altera: in Brabant they call it Drauich: in English, Drauke.



1 Bromos sterilis. Wilde Otes.


2 Bromos (...). Drauke, or small wilde Otes.




 The Nature and vertues.
1 It hath a drying facultie (as Dioscorides saith.) Boile it in water together with the roots vntill  two parts of three be consumed; then straine it out, and adde to the decoction a quantitie of honey equall thereto: so boile it vntill it acquire the thicknesse of thin honey. This medicine is good against the OZaena and filthy vlcers of the nose, dipping a linnen cloth therein, and putting it vp into the nosthrils; some adde thereto A loes finely poudred, and so vse it.
Also boiled in Wine with dried Rose leaues, it is good against a stinking breath. @ 



CHAP. 56. Of Bearded Wilde Otes.

 The Description.
AEGylops Bromoides Belgarum is a Plant indifferently partaking of the nature of Aegilops and Bromos. It is in shew like to the naked Otes. The seed is sharpe, hairy, and somewhat long, and of a reddish colour, inclosed in yellowish chaffie huskes like as Otes, and may be Englished, Crested or bearded Otes. I haue found it often among Barley and Rie in sundry grounds. This is likewise vnprofitable and hurtfull to (...); whereof is no mention made by the Antients worthy the noting.




CHAP. 57. Of Burnt Corne.


@ Aegilops Bromoides. Bearded Wilde Otes.



 The Description.
1 HOrdeum vstum, or (...) Hordei, is that burnt or (...) Barley which is altogether vnprofitable and good for nothing, an enemy vnto corne; for that in stead of an eare with corne, there is nothing else but blacke dust, which spoileth bread, or whatsoeuer is made thereof.
2 Burnt Otes, or Vstilago Auenae, or Auenacea, is likewise an vnprofitable Plant, degenerating from Otes, as the other from Barley, Rie, and Wheat. It were in vaine to make a long haruest of such euill corne, considering it is not possessed with one good qualitie. And therefore thus much shall suffice for the description.
3 Burnt Rie hath no one good property in phisicke, appropriate either to man, birds, or beast, and is a hurtfull maladie to all corne where it groweth; hauing an eare in shape like to corne, but in stead of graine it doth yeeld a blacke pouder or dust, which causeth bread to looke blacke, and to haue an euill taste: and that corne where it is, is called smootie corne, and the thing it selfe Burnt Corne, or blasted corne.


1 Hordeum vstum, siue (...) hordei. Burnt Barley.


2 Vstilago (...). Burnt Otes.


3 Vstilago Secalina. Burnt Rie.






CHAP. 58. Of Darnell.


1 Lolium album. White Darnell.


2 Lolium rubrum. Red Darnell.



 The Description.
1 AMong the hurtfull weeds Darnell is the first. It bringeth forth leaues or stalkes like those of wheat or barley, yet rougher, with a long eare made vp of many little ones, euery particular one whereof containeth two or three graines lesser than those of wheat, scarcely any chassie huske to couer them with; by reason whereof they are easily shaken out and scattered abroad.
2 Red Darnell is likewise an vnprofitable corne or grasse, hauing leaues like barly. The joints of the straw or stalke are sometimes of a reddish colour, bearing at the top a small and tender (...), flat, and much in forme resembling the former.


 The place.
They grow in fields among wheat and barley, of the corrupt and bad seed, as Galen saith, especially in a moist and dankish soile.


 The time.
They spring and flourish with the corne, and in August the seed is ripe.


 The Names.
1 Darnell is called in Greeke, (...) in the Arabian Tongue, Zizania and Sceylen: In French, Yuray: in Italian, Loglio: in low Dutch, Dolick: in English, Darnell: of some, Iuray, and Raye: and of some of the Latines, Triticum temulentum.
2 Red Darnell is called in Greeke (...), or Phoenix, because of the crimson colour: in Latine, Lolium Rubrum, and Lolium Murinum: of some, Hordeum Murinum, and Triticum Murinum: in Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Red Darnell, or great Darnell Grasse.


 The temperature.
Darnell is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. Red Darnell drieth without sharpenesse, as Galen saith.



 The (...).
The seed of Darnell, Pigeons dung, oile Oliue, and pouder of Lineseed, boiled to the sorme of  a plaister, consume wennes, hard lumpes, and such like excrescenses in any part of the body.
The new bread wherein Darnel is, eaten hot, causeth drunkennesse: in like manner doth beere  or ale wherein the seed is fallen, or put into the Malt.
Darnell taken with red wine stayeth the flux of the belly, and the ouermuch flowing of womens  termes.
Dioscorides saith, That Darnell meale doth stay and keepe backe eating sores, Gangrenes, and  putrified vlcers; and being boyled with Radish roots, salt, brimstone, and vineger, it cureth spreading scabs, and dangerous tetters, called in Greeke, (...), and leprous or naughty scurfe.
The seed of Darnell ginen in white or Rhenish wine, prouoketh the flowers or menses.
A fume made thereofwith parched barly meale, myrrh, saffron, and frankinsence, made in form  of a pultesse, and (...) vpon the belly, helps conception, and causeth easie deliuerance of childbearing.
Red Darnell (as Dioscorides writeth) being drunke in sowre or harsh red Wine, stoppeth the  laske, and the ouermuch flowing of the flowers or menses, and is a remedie for those that pisse in bed.


 The Danger.
Darnell hurteth the eyes, and maketh them dim, if it happen in corne either for bread or drinke: which thing Ouid in his first booke Fastorum hath mentioned, in this verse:
Et careant lolijs oculos vitiantibus agri.
And hereupon it seemeth that the old prouerbe came, That such as are dimme sighted should be said, Lolio victitare.



CHAP. 59. Of Rice.


Oryza. Rice.



 The Description.
RIce is like vnto Darnell in shew, as Theophrastus saith: it bringeth not forth an eare, like corne, but a certaine mane or plume, as Mill, or Miller, or rather like Panick. The leaues, as Pliny writeth, are fat and full of substance, like to the blades of leeks, but broader: but (if neither the soile nor climate did alter the same) the plants of Rice that did grow in my garden had leaues soft and grassie like barly. The floure did not shew it selfe with me, by reason of the iniurie of our vnseasonable yere 1596. Theophrastus concludeth, that it hath a (...) of a purple colour. But, saith my Author, Rice hath leaues like vnto Dogs grasse or Barley, a small straw or stem full of ioynts like corne: at the top whereof groweth a bush or tuft farre vnlike to barley or Darnell, garnished with round knobs (...) small gooseberries, wherein the seed or graine is contained: euery such round knob hath one small rough aile, taile, or beard like vnto barley hanging thereat. Aristobulus, as Strabo reporteth, sheweth, That Rice growes in water in Bactria, and neere Babylon, and is two yards high, and hath many eares, and bringeth forth plenty of seed. It is reaped at the setting of the seuen starres, and purged as Spelt and Otemeale, or hulled as French Barley.


 The place.
It groweth in the territories of the Bactrians, in Babylon, in Susium, and in the lower part of Syria. It groweth in those dayes not onely in those countries before named, but also in the fortunate Islands, and in Spaine, from whence it is brought vnto vs, purged and prepared as we see, after the manner of French Barley. It prospereth best in fenny and waterish places.



 The time.
It is sowen in the Spring in India, as Eratosthenes witnesseth, when it is moistned with Sommer showers.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...), or as Theophrastus saith, (...): the Latines keepe the Greeke word Oryza: in French it is called Riz: in the Germane tongue, (...), and (...): in English, Rice.


 The temperature and vertues.
Galen saith, That all men vse to stay the belly with this graine, being boiled after the same manner that Chondrus is. In England we vse to make with milke and Rice a certaine food or pottage, which doth both meanly binde the belly, and also nourish. Many other good kindes of food is made with this graine, as those that are skilfull in cookerie can tell.



CHAP. 60. Of Millet.


Milium. Mill, or Millet.



 The Description.
MIlium riseth vp with many hairy stalkes knotted or jointed like wheat. The leaues are long, and like the leaues of the Common Reed. It bringeth forth on the top of the stalke a spoky bush or mane, called in Greeke (...), like the plume or feather of the Pole reed, hanging downewards, of colour for the most part yellow or white; in which groweth the seed, small, hard, and glistering, couered with a few thinne huskes, out of which it easily falleth. The roots be many, and grow deep in the ground.
2 Milium nigrum is like vnto the former, sauing that the eare or plume of this plant is more loose and large, and the seed somewhat bigger, of a shining blacke colour.


 The place.
It loueth light and loose mould, and prospereth best in a moist and rainy time. And after Columella, it groweth in greatest aboundance in Campania. I haue of it yearely in my garden.


 The time.
It is to be sowen in Aprill and May, and not before, for it ioyeth in warme weather.


 The Names.
It is named of the Grecians, (...): of some, (...): and of Hippocrates, Paspale, as Hermolaus saith: In Spanish, Mijo: in Italian, Miglio: in High-Dutch, (...): in French, Millet: in Low-Dutch, (...): in English, Mill, or Millet.


 The temper.
It is cold in the first degree, as Galen writeth, and dry in the third, or in the later end of the second, and is of a thinne substance.


 The vertues.
The meale of Mill mixed with tarre is laid to the bitings of serpents, and all venomous beasts.
There is a drinke made hereof bearing the name of Sirupus Ambrosij, or Ambrose his syrup, which  procureth sweat, and quencheth thirst, vsed in the city of Milan in Tertian agues. The receit whereof Henricus Rantszonius in his booke of the gouernment of health setteth downe in this manner: Take (saith he) of vnhusked Mill a sufficient quantitie, boile it till it be broken; then take fiue ounces of the hot decoction, and adde thereto two ounces of the best white wine, and so giue it hot vnto the patient, being well couered with clothes, and then he will sweat throughly. This is likewise commended by Iohannes Heurneus, in his booke of Practise.
Millet parched, and so put hot into a linnen bag, and applied, helpes the griping paines of the  belly, or any other paine occasioned by cold.




CHAP. 61. Of Turkie Corne.


1 Frumentum Asiaticum. Corne of Asia.


2 Frumentum Turcicum. Turkie Corne.



 The kindes.
OF Turkie cornes there be diuers sorts, notwithstanding of one stocke or kindred, consisting of sundry coloured graines, wherein the difference is easie to be discerned, and for the better explanation of the same, I haue set forth to your view certaine eares of different colours, in their full and perfect ripenesse, and such as they shew themselues to be when their skinne or filme doth open it selfe in the time of gathering.
The forme of the eares of Turky Wheat.


3 Frumenti Indici spica. Turkie wheat in the huske, as also naked or bare.





 The Description.
1 COrne of Asia beareth a long great stem or stalke, couered with great leaues like the great Cane reed, but much broader, and of a darke brownish colour towards the bottome: at the top of the stalkes grow idle or barren tufts like the common Reed, somtimes of one colour, and sometimes of another. Those (...) which are fruitfull do grow vpon the sides of the stalkes, among the leaues, which are thicke and great, so couered with skins or filmes, that a man cannot see them vntill ripenesse haue discouered them. The graine is of sundrie colours, sometimes red, and sometimes white, and yellow, as my selfe haue seene in myne owne garden, where it hath come to ripenesse.


4 Frumentum (...) luteum. Yellow Turky wheat.


5 Frumentum Indicum rubrum. Red Turky wheat.


6 Frumentum Indicum Caeruleum. Blew Turky wheat.


2 The stalke of Turky Wheat is like that of the Reed, full of spongie pith, set with many ioynts, fiue or six foot high, bigge beneath, and now and then of a purple colour, and by little and little small aboue: the leaues are broad, long, setwith vaines like those of the Reed. The eares on the top of the stalke be a spanne long, like vnto the feather top of the common Reed, diuided into many plumes hanging downward, empty and barren without seed, yet blooming as Rie doth. The floure is either white, yellow, or purple, that is to say, euen as the fruit will be. The Fruit is contained in very bigge (...), which grow out of the ioynts of the stalke, three or foure from one stalke, orderly placed one aboue another, couered with cotes or filmes like huskes and leaues, as if it were a certaine sheath; out of which do stand long and slender beards, soft and tender, like those laces that grow vpon Sauorie, but greater and longer, euery one fastned vpon his owne seed. The seeds are great, of the bignesse of common peason, (...) in that part whereby they are fastned to the (...), and in the outward part round: being of colour sometimes white, now and then yellow, purple, or red; of taste sweet-and pleasant, very closely ioyned together in eight or tenne orders or rankes. This graine hath many roots, strong, and full of strings.


 The place.
These kindes of graine were first brought into Spaine, and then into other prouinces of Europe: not (as some suppose) out of Asia minor, which is the Turks Dominions; but out of America and the Islands adioyning, as out of Florida and Virginia, or Norembega, where they vse to sow or set it, and to make bread of it, where it groweth much higher than in other countries. It is planted in the gardens of these Northerne regions, where it commeth to ripenesse when the sommer falleth out to be faire and hot, as my selfe haue seene by proofe in myne owne garden.



 The time.
It is sowen in these countries in March and Aprill, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
@ Turky wheat is called of some Frumentum Turcicum, and Milium Indicum, as also (...), and Maiz, or Mays. It in all probabilitie was vnknowne to the antient both Greeke and Latine Authors. In English it is called Turky corne, and Turky wheat. The Inhabitants of America and the Islands adioyning, as also of the East and West Indies, do call it Mais: the Virginians, Pagatowr.


 The temperature and vertues.
Turky wheat doth nourish far lesse than either wheat, rie, barley, or otes. The bread which is made thereof is meanly white, without bran: it is hard and dry as Bisket is, and hath in it no clamminesse at all; for which cause it is of hard digestion, and yeeldeth to the body little or no nourishment; it slowly descendeth, and bindeth the belly, as that doth which is made of Mill or Panick. We haue as yet no certaine proofe or experience concerning the vertues of this kinde of Corne; although the barbarous Indians, which know no better, are constrained to make a vertue of necessitie, and thinke it a good food: whereas we may easily iudge, that it nourisheth but little, and is of hard and euill digestion, a more conuenient food for swine than for men.



CHAP. 62. Of Turkie Millet.


Sorghum. Turky Millet.



 The Description.
TVrky Millet is a stranger in England. It hath many high stalkes, thicke, and jointed commonly with some nine ioynts, beset with many long and broad leaues like Turky Wheat: at the top whereof groweth a great and large tuft or (...) like the great Reed. The seed is round and sharpe pointed, of the bignesse of a Lentill, sometimes red, and now and then of a fuller blacke colour. It is fastned with a multitude of strong slender roots like vnto threds: the whole plant hath the forme of a Reed: the stalkes and eares when the seed is ripe are red.


 The place.
It ioyeth in a fat and moist ground: it groweth in Italy, Spaine, and other hot regions.


 The time.
This is one of the Sommer graines, and is ripe in Autumne.


 The Names.
The Millanois and other people of Lombardy call it Melegua, and Melega: in Latine, Melica: in Hetruria, Saggina: in other places of Italy, Sorgho: in Portugal, Milium Saburrum: in English, Turky Mill, or Turky Hirsse.
@ This seemes to be the Milium which was brought into Italy out of India, in the reigne of the Emperour Nero: the which is described by Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 7. @


 The temperature and vertues.
The seed of Turky Mill is like vnto Panicke-In taste and temperature. The country People sometimes make bread hereof, but it is brittle, and of little nourishment, and for the most part it serueth to fatten hens and pigeons with.




CHAP. 63. Of Panick.


1 Panicum Indicum Indian Panick.


2 (...) Caeruleum. Blew Panicke.



 The kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of Panicke, although of the Antients there haue beene set downe but two, that is to say, the wilde or field Panicke, and the garden or manured Panicke.


 The descrip tin.
1 THe Panick of India groweth vp like Millet, whose straw is knotty, or full of ioynts; the ears be round, and hanging downward, in which is contained a white or yellowish seed, like Canarie seed, or Alpisti.
2 Blew Panick hath a reddish stalke like to Sugar cane, as tall as a man, thicker than a finger, full of a fungous pith, of a pale colour: the stalkes be vpright and knotty; these that grow neere the root are of a purple colour: on the top of the stalk commeth forth a spike or eare like the water Cats Taile, but of a blew or purple colour. The Seed is like to naked Otes: The Roots are very small, in respect of the other parts of the plant.


@ 3 Panicum Americanum (...). West-Indian Panicke with a very long eare.



@ 3 To these may be added another West-Indian Panicke, sent to Clusius from M. Iames (...) of London. The eare hereof was thicke, close, compact and made Taper-fashion, smaller at the one end than at the other; the length thereof was more than a foot and halfe. The shape of the seed is much like the last described, but that many of them together are contained in one hairie huske, which is fastned to a very short stalke, as you may see represented apart by the side of the figure @


4 Panicum vulgare. Common or Germane Panicke.


5 Panicum syluestre. Wild Panicke.


4 Germane Panicke hath many hairy roots growing thicke together like vnto wheat, as is all the rest of the plant, as well leaues or blades, as straw or stalke. The eare groweth at the top single, not vnlike to Indian Panicke, but much lesser. The graines are contained in chaffie scales, red declining to tawny.
5 The wilde Panicke groweth vp with long reeden stalkes, full of ioynts, set with long leaues like those of Sorghum, or Indian Panicke: the tuft or feather-like top is like vnto the common reed, or the eare of the grasse called Ischaemon, or Manna grasse. The root is small and threddy.


 The place and time.
The kindes of Panick are sowen in the Spring, and are ripe in the beginning of August. They prosper best in hot and dry Regions, and wither for the most part with much watering, as doth Mil and Turky wheat: they quickly come to ripenesse, and may be kept good a long time.


 The Names.
Panick is called in Greeke (...), and (...). Diocles the Physition nameth it Mel Frugum: the Spaniards, Panizo: the Latines, Panicum, of Pannicula: in English, Indian Panicke, or Otemeale.


 The temperature.
Panicks nourish little, and are driers, as Galen saith.


 The vertues.
Panicke stoppeth the laske, as Millet doth, being boyled (as Pliny reporteth) in Goats milke, and drunke twice in a day. Outwardly in Pultesses or otherwise, it dries and cooles.
Bread made of Panick nourisheth little, and is cold and dry, very brittle, hauing in it neither  clamminesse nor fatnesse; and therefore it drieth a moist belly.




CHAP. 64. Of Canary seed, or Pety Panicke.


1 Phalaris. Canarie seed.


2 Phalaris pratensis. Quaking grasse.



 The Description.
1 CAnarie seed, or Canarie grasse after some, hath many small hairy roots, from which arise small strawie stalkes ioynted like corne, whereupon do grow leaues like those of Barley, which the whole plant doth very well resemble. The small (...) eare groweth at the top of the stalke, wherein is contained small seeds like those of Panicke, of a yellowish colour, and shining.
2 Shakers, or Quaking Grasse groweth to the height of halfe a foot, and sometimes higher, when it groweth in fertile medowes. The stalke is very small and benty, set with many grassie leaues like the common medow grasse, bearing at the top a bush or tuft of flat scaly pouches, like those of Shepheards purse, but thicker, of a browne colour, set vpon the most small and weake hairy foot stalkes that may be found, whereupon those small pouches do hang: by meanes of which small hairy strings, the knaps which are the floures do continually tremble and shake, in such sort that it is not possible with the most stedfast hand to hold it from shaking.
@ 3 There is also another Grassie plant which may fitly be referred to these: the leaues and stalkes resemble the last described, but the heads are about the length and bredth of a small (...), and handsomely compact of light scaly filmes much like thereto; whence some haue termed it Gramen Lupuli glumis. The colour of this pretty head when it commeth to ripenesse is white. @


 The place.
1 Canarie seed groweth naturally in Spaine, and also in the Fortunate or Canary Islands, and doth grow in England or any other of these cold Regions, if it be sowen therein.



3 Phalaris pratensis altera. Pearle Grasse.


2 Quaking Phalaris groweth in fertile pastures; and in dry medowes.
3 This growes naturally in some (...) of Spaine, and it is sowen yearely in many of our London Gardens.


 The time.
1 3 These Canarie seeds are sowen in May, and are ripe in August.


 The Names.
1 Canary seed, or Canarie corne is called of the Grecians, (...): the Latines retaining the same name Phalaris: in the Islands of Canarie, Alpisti: in English, Cana rie seed, and Canary grasse.
2 Phalaris pratensis is called also Gramen tremulum: in Cheshire about Nantwich, Quakers and Shakers: in some places, Cow-quakes.
3 This by some is termed Phalaris altera: Clusius calleth it Gramen Amourettes majus: Bauhine, Gramen tremulum maximum: In English they call it Pearle-Grasse, and Garden-Quakers.


 The Nature and vertues.
I finde not any thing set downe as touching the temperature of Phalaris, notwithstanding it is thought to be of the nature of Millet.
The iuyce and seed, as Galen saith, are thought to be profitably drunke against the paines of the bladder. Apothecaries  for want of Millet doe vse the same with good successe in fomentations; for in dry fomentations (...) in stead thereof, and is his succedaneum, or quid pro quo. We vse it in England also to feed the Canarie Birds.


(...). Fox-taile.





CHAP. 65. Of Fox-Taile.

 The Description.
1 FOx-taile hath many grassie leaues or blades, rough and hairy, like vnto those of Barley, but lesse and shorter. The stalke is likewise soft and hairy; whereupon doth grow a small spike or eare, soft, and very downy, bristled with very small haires in shape, like vnto a Fox-taile, whereof it tooke his name, which dieth at the approch of Winter, and recouereth it selfe the next yeare by falling of his seed.
@ There is one or two varieties of this Plant in the largenesse and smalnesse of the eare.
2 Besides these forementioned strangers, there is also another which growes naturally in many watry Salt places of this kingdome, as in Kent by Dartford, in Essex, etc. The stalkes of this plant are grassy, and some two foot high, with leaues like Wheat or Dogs Grasse. The eare is very large, being commonly foure or fiue inches long, downy, soft like silke, and of a brownish colour. @



 The place.
1 This kinde of Fox-taile Grasse groweth in England, onely in gardens.


 The time.
1 This springeth vp in May, of the seed that was scattered the yere before, and beareth his taile with his seed in Iune.
2 This beares his head in Iuly.


 The Names.
1 There hath not beene more said of the antient or later writers, as touching the name, than is set downe, by which they called it in Greeke Alopecuros; that is in Latine, Cauda vulpis: in English, Fox-taile.
2 This by Lobell is called Alopecuros alter a maxima Anglica paludosa; that is, The large English Marsh Fox-taile.


 The temperature and vertues.
I finde not any thing extant worthy the memorie, either of his nature or vertues.



CHAP. 66. Of Jobs Teares.


Lachrimae Iob. Iobs Teares.



 The Description.
IObs Teares hath many knotty stalks, proceeding from a tuft of threddy roots, two foot high, set with great broad leaues like vnto those of reed; amongst which leaues come forth many small branches like straw of corne: on the end whereof doth grow a gray shining seed or graine (...) to breake, and like in shape to the seeds of Gromell, but greater, and of the same colour, whereof I hold it a kinde: euery of which grains are bored through the middest like a bead, and out of the hole commeth a small idle or barren chaffie eare like vnto that of Darnell.


 The place.
It is brought from Italy and the countries adjoyning, into these countries, where it doth grow very well, but seldome commeth to ripenesse; yet my selfe had ripe seed thereof in my garden, the Sommer being very hot.


 The time.
It is sowen early in the Spring, or else the winter will ouertake it before it come to ripenesse.


 The Names.
Diuers haue thought it to be Lithospermi (...), or a kinde of Gromell, which the seed doth very notably resemble, and doth not much differ from Dioscorides his Gromell. Some thinke it Plinies Lithospermum; and therefore it may verie aptly be called in Latine, Arundo Lithospermos, that is in English, Gromell reed, as Gesner saith. It is generally called Lachrima (...), and Lachrima Iobi: of some it is called Diospiros: in English it is called Iobs Teares, or Iobs Drops, for that euery graine resembleth the drop or teare that falleth from the eye.


 The Nature and vertues.
There is no mention made of this herbe for the vse of physicke: onely in France and those places (where it is plentifully growing) they do make beads, bracelets, and chaines thereof, as we do with pomander and such like.




CHAP. 67. Of Buck-wheat.


(...). Buckwheat, or Bucke.



 The Description.
BVck-wheat may very well be placed among the kinds of graine or corne, for that oftentimes in time of necessitie bread is made thereof, mixed among other graine. It hath round fat stalkes somewhat crested, smooth and reddish, which is diuided in many armes or branches, whereupon do grow smooth and soft leaues in shape like those of Iuie or one of the Bindeweeds, not much vnlike Basil, whereof Tabernamontanus called it Ocymum Cereale: The floures be small, white, and clustred together in one or moe tufts or vmbels, slightly dasht ouer here and there with a flourish of light Carnation colour. The seeds are of a darke blackish colour, triangle, or three square like the seed of blacke Binde-weed, The root is small and threddy.


 The place.
It prospereth very wel in any ground, be it neuer so dry or barren, where it is commonly sowen to serue as it were in stead of a dunging. It quickly commeth vp, and is very soone ripe: it is verie common in and about the Namptwich in Cheshire, where they sow it as well for food for their cattell, pullen, and such like, as to the vse aforesaid. It groweth likewise in Lancashire, and in some parts of our South country, about London in Middlesex, as also in Kent and Essex.


 The time.
This base kinde of graine is sowen in Aprill and the beginning of May, and is ripe in the beginning of August.


 The Names.
Buck-wheat is called of the high Almaines, (...): of the base Almaines, (...); that is to say, Hirci triticum, or Goats wheat: of some, Fagi triticum, Beech Wheat: In Greeke, (...), by Theophrastus; and by late Writers; (...): in Latine, Fago triticum, taken from the fashion of the seed or fruit of the Beech tree. It is called also Fegopyrum, and Tragopyron: In English, French wheat, Bullimong, and Buck-wheat: In French, Dragee aux (...):


 The temper.
Buck-wheat nourisheth lesse than Wheat, (...), Barley, or Otes; yet more than either Mill or Panicke.


 The vertues.
Bread made of the meale of Buck-wheat is of easie digestion, and speedily passeth through the belly, but yeeldeth little nourishment.




CHAP. 68. Of Cow Wheat.


1 Melampyrum album. White Cow-wheat.


@ 2 Melampyrum purpureum. Purple Cow-wheat.


@ 3 Melampyrum caeruleum. Blew Cow-wheat.


@ 4 Melampyrum luteum. Yellow Cow-wheat.



 The Description.
1 MElampyrum growes vpright, with a straight stalke, hauing other small stalkes comming from the same, of a foot long. The leaues are long and narrow, and of a darke colour. On the top of the branches grow bushy or spikie eares full of floures and small leaues mixed together, and much iagged, the whole eare resembling a Foxe-taile. This  eare beginneth to floure below, and so vpward by little and little vnto the top: the small leaues before the opening of the floures, and likewise the buds of the floures, are white of colour. Then come vp broad husks, wherein are enclosed two seeds somewhat like wheat, but smaller and browner. The root is of a woody substance.
@ 2 3 These two are like the former in stalkes and leaues, but different in the colour of their floures, the which in the one are purple, and in the other blew. Clusius calls these, as also the Crataeogonon treated of in the next Chapter, by the names of Parietariae sylvestres. @
4 Of this kinde there is another called Melampyrum luteum, which groweth neere vnto the ground, with leaues not much vnlike Harts horne, among which riseth vp a small straw with an eare at the top like Alopecuros, the common Fox-taile, but of a yellow colour.


 The place.
1 The first groweth among corne, and in pasture grounds that be fruitfull: it groweth plentifully in the pastures about London.
The rest are strangers in England.


 The time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Melampyrum is called of some Triticum vaccinium: in English, Cow-wheat, and Horse-floure: in Greeke, (...): The fourth is called Melampyrum luteum: in English, Yellow Cow-wheat.


 The Danger.
The seed of Cow Wheat raiseth vp fumes, and is hot and dry of nature, which being taken in meats and drinks in the manner of Darnell, troubleth the braine, causing drunkennesse and headache.



CHAP. 69. Of Wilde Cow-Wheat.


1 Crataeogonon album. Wilde Cow-wheat.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of wilde Cow-Wheat Clusius in his Pannonick history calls Parietaria sylvestris, or wilde Pellitorie: which name, according to his owne words, if it do not fitly answer the Plant, hee knoweth not what to cal it, for that the Latines haue not giuen any name thereunto: yet because some haue so called it, he retaineth the same name. Notwithstanding he referreth it vnto the kindes of Melampyrum, or Cow-wheat, or vnto Crataeogonon, the wilde Cow-wheat, which it doth very wel answer in diuers points. It hath an hairy foure square stalke, very tender, weake, and easie to breake, not able to stand vpright without the helpe of his neighbours that dwell about him, a foot high or more; whereupon do grow long thin leaues, sharp pointed, and oftentimes lightly snipt about the edges, of a darke purplish colour, sometimes greenish, set by couples one opposite against the other; among the which come forth two floures at one ioynt, long and hollow, somewhat gaping like the floures of a dead nettle, at the first of a pale yellow, and after of a bright golden colour; which do floure by degrees, first a few, and then more, by meanes whereof it is long in flouring. Which being past, there succeed small cups or seed vessels, wherein is contained browne seed not vnlike to wheat. The whole plant is hairy, not differing from the plant Stichwort.
2 Red leafed wilde Cow-wheat is like vnto the former, sauing that the leaues be narrower; and the tuft of leaues more iagged. The stalkes and leaues are of a reddish horse-flesh colour. The  floures in forme are like the other, but in colour differing; for that the hollow part of the floure with the heele or spurre is of a purple colour, the rest of the floure yellow. The seed and vessels are like the precedent.


3 Crataeogonon Euphrosine. Eyebright Cow-wheat.




 The Description.
3 This kinde of wilde Cow-wheat Tabernamontanus hath set forth vnder the title of Odontites: others haue taken it to be a kinde of Euphrasia or Eyebright, because it doth in some sort resemble it, especially in his floures. The stalks of this plant are small, woody, rough, and square. The leaues are indented about the edges, sharpe pointed, and in most points resembling the former Cow-wheat; so that of necessitie it must be of the same kinde, and not a kinde of Eyebright, as hath beene set downe by some.


 The place.
These wilde kindes of Cow-wheat doe grow commonly in fertile pastures, and bushy Copses, or low woods, and among bushes vpon barren heaths and such like places.
The two first doe grow vpon Hampsted heath neere London, among the Iuniper bushes and bilberry bushes in all the parts of the said heath, and in euery part of England where I haue trauelled.


 The time.
They floure from the beginning of May, to the end of August.


 The Names.
1 The first is called of Lobelius, Crataeogonon: and of Tabernamontanus, Milium Syluaticum, or Wood Millet, and Alsine syluatica, or WoodChickweed.
2 The second hath the same titles: in English, Wilde Cow-wheat.
3 The last is called by Tabernamontanus, Odontites: of Dodonaeus, Euphrasia altera, and Euphrosine. Hippocrates called the wilde Cow-wheat, Polycarpum, and Polycritum.


 The Nature and vertues.
There is not much set downe either of the nature or vertues of these plants: onely it is reported that the seeds do cause giddinesse and drunkennesse as Darnell doth.
The seed of Crataeogonon made in fine pouder, and giuen in broth or otherwise, mightily prouoketh Venerie.
Some write, that it will likewise cause women to bring forth male children.
@ See the vertues attributed to Crataeogonon by Dioscorides before, Chap. 38. B.



CHAP. 70. Of White Asphodill.

 The kindes.
HAuing finished the kindes of corne, it followeth to shew vnto you the sundry sorts of Asphodils, whereof some haue bulbous roots, other tuberous or knobby roots, some of yellow colour, and some of mixt colours: notwithstanding Dioscorides maketh mention but of one Asphodill, but Pliny setteth downe two; which Dionysius confirmeth, saying, That there is the male and female Asphodil. The latter age hath obserued many more besides the bulbed one, of which Galen maketh mention.



1 Asphodelus non ramosus. White Asphodill.


2 Asphodelus ramosus. Branched Asphodill.




 The Description.
1 THe white Asphodill hath many long and narrow leaues like those of leeks, sharpe pointed. The stalke is round, smooth, naked, and without leaues, two cubits high, garnished from the middle vpward with a number of floures starre-fashion, made of fiue leaues apiece; the colour white, with some darke purple streakes drawne downe the backe-side. Within the floures be certaine small chiues. The floures being past, there spring vp little round heads, wherein are contained hard, blacke, and 3 square seeds like those of Buck-wheat or Staues-acre. The toot is compact of many knobby roots growing out of one head, like those of the Peonie, full of juyce, with a small bitternesse and binding taste.
2 Branched Asphodill agreeth well with the former description, sauing that this hath many branches or armes growing out of the stalke, whereon the floures do grow, and the other hath not any branch at all, wherein consisteth the difference.
3 Asphodill with the reddish floure groweth vp in roots, stalke, leafe, and manner of growing like the precedent, sauing that the floures of this be of a dark red color, and the others white, which (...) forth the difference, if there be any such difference, or any such plant at all: for I haue conferred with many most excellent men in the knowledge of plants, but none of them can giue mee certaine knowledge of any such, but tell me they haue heard it reported that such a one there is, and so haue I also, but certainly I cannot set downe any thing of this plant vntill I heare more certaintie: for as yet I giue no credit to my Authour, which for reuerence of his person I forbeare to name.
4 The yellow Asphodill hath many roots growing out of one head, made of sundry tough, fat, and oleous yellow sprigs, or grosse strings, from the which rise vp many grassy leaues, thick and grosse, tending to squarenesse; among the which commeth vp a strong thicke stalke set with the like leaues euen to the floures, but lesse: vpon the which do grow starre-like yellow floures, otherwise like the white Asphodill.



3 Asphodelus (...) rubente. Red Asphodill.


4 Asphodelus (...). Yellow Asphodill.


@ 5 Asphodelus minimus. Dwarfe Asphodil.


@ 5 Besides these there is an Asphodill which Clusius for the smalnesse calls Asphodelus minimus. The roots thereof are knotty and tuberous, resembling those of the formerly described, but lesse: from these arise fiue or sixe very narrow and long leaues; in the middest of which growes vp a stalk of the height of a foot, round and without branches, bearing at the top thereof a spoke of floures, consisting of six white leaues a piece, each of which hath a streake running alongst it, both on the inside and outside, like as the first described. It floures in the beginning of Iuly, when as the rest are past their floures. It loseth the leaues in Winter, and gets new ones againe in the beginning of Aprill. @


 The time and place.
They floure in May and Iune, beginning below, and so flouring vpward: and they grow naturally in France, Italy, Spaine, and most of them in our London Gardens.


 The Names.
Asphodill is called in Latine, Asphodelus, Albucum, (...), and Hastula Regia: in Greeke, (...): in English, Asphodill, not Daffodil; for Daffodill is Narcissus, another plant differing from Asphodill. Pliny writeth, That the stalke with the floures is called Anthericos; and the root, that is to say, the bulbs Asphodelus.

Of this Asphodill (...) maketh mention in his Works, where he saith, (...) fooles know not how much good there is in the Mallow and in the Asphodill, because the roots of Asphodill are good to be eaten. Yet Galen doth not beleeue that he meant of this Asphodill, but of that bulbed one, whereof we will make mention hereafter. And he himselfe testifieth, that the bulbes thereof are not to be (...) without very long seething; and therefore it is not like that Hesiod hath commended any such: (...) he seemeth to vnderstand by the Mallow and the Asphodil, such kinde of food as is easily prepared, and soone made ready.


 The nature.
These kindes of Asphodils be hot and dry almost in the third degree.


 The vertues.
After the opinion of Dioscorides and (...), the roots of Asphodill eaten, prouoke vrine and the  termes effectually, especially being stamped and strained with wine, and drunke.
One dram thereof taken in wine in manner before rehearsed, helpeth the paine in the sides, ruptures, convulsions, and the old cough.
The roots boiled in dregs of wine cure foule eating vlcers, all inflammations of the dugges or  (...), and easeth the felon, being put thereto as a pultesse.
The iuyce of the root boyled in old sweet Wine, together with a little myrrh and saffron, maketh  an excellent Collyrie profitable for the eyes.
Galen saith, the roots burnt to ashes, and mixed with the grease of a ducke, helpeth the Alopecia, and bringeth haire againe that was fallen by that disease.
The weight of a dram thereof taken with wine helpeth the drawing together of sinews, cramps, and burstings,
The like quantitie taken in broth prouoketh vomit, and helpeth those that are bitten with any  venomous beasts.
The iuyce of the root cleanseth and taketh away the white morphew, if the face be annointed  therewith; but first the place must be chafed and wel rubbed with a course linnen cloath.



CHAP. 71. Of the Kings Speare.


1 Asphodelus luteus minor. The Kings Speare.


2 Asphodelus Lancastriae. (...) Asphodil.





@ 3 Asphodelus Lancastriae verus. The true Lancashire Asphodil.



 The Description.
1 THe leaues of the Kings Speare are long, narrow, and chamfered or furrowed, of (...) blewish greene colour. The stalk is round, of a cubit high. The floures which grow (...) from the middle to the top are very many, in shape like to the floures of the other; which being past, (...) come in place thereof little round heads or seed-vessels, wherein the seed is contained. The roots in like manner are very many, long, and slender, smaller than those of the other yellow sort. Vpon the sides whereof grow forth certaine strings, by which the plant it selfe is easily encreased and multiplied.
2 There is found in these dayes a certaine waterie or marish Asphodill like vnto this last described, in stalke and floures, without any difference at all. It bringeth forth leaues of a beautifull greene somwhat chamfered, like to those of the Floure de-luce, or corne-flag, but narrower, not full a span long. The stalke is strait, a foot high, whereupon grow the floures, consisting of sixe small leaues: in the middle whereof come sorth small yellow chiues or threds. The seed is very small, contained in long sharpe pointed cods. The root is long, ioynted, and creepeth as grasse doth, with many small strings.
@ 3 Besides the last described (which our Author I feare mistaking, termed Asphodelus Lancastriae) there is another water Asphodill, which growes in many rotten moorish grounds in this kingdome, and in Lancashire is vsed by women to die their haire of a yellowish colour, and therefore by them it is termed Maiden-haire, if we may beleeue Lobell.) This plant hath leaues of some two inches and an halfe, or three inches long, being somewhat broad at the bottome, and so sharper towards their ends. The stalke seldome attaines to the height of a foot, and it is smooth without any leaues thereon; the top thereof is adorned with pretty yellow star-like floures, wherto succeed longish little cods, vsually three, yet sometimes foure or fiue square, and in these there is contained a small red seed. The root consists onely of a few small strings. @


 The place.
1 The small yellow Asphodill groweth not of it selfe wilde in these parts, notwithstanding we haue great plenty thereof in our London gardens.
2 The Lancashire Asphodill groweth in moist and marish places neere vnto the Towne of Lancaster, in the moorish grounds there, as also neere vnto Maudsley and Martom, two Villages not farre from thence; where it was found by a Worshipfull and learned Gentleman, a diligent searcher of simples, and feruent louer of plants, M. Thomas Hesket, who brought the plants thereof vnto me for the encrease of my garden.
I receiued some plants thereof likewise from Master Thomas Edwards, Apothecarie in Excester, learned and skilfull in his profession, as also in the knowledge of plants. He found this Asphodill at the foot of a hill in the West part of England, called (...) hill, neere vnto a village of the same name.
@ This Asphodill figured and described out of Dodonaeus, and called Asphodelus Lancastriae by our Author, growes in an heath some two miles from Bruges in Flanders, and diuers other places of the Low-countries; but whether it grow in Lancashire or no, I can say nothing of certaintie: but I am certaine, that which I haue described in the third place growes in many places of the West of England; and this yeare 1632, my kinde friend M. George Bowles sent mee some plants thereof, which I keepe yet growing. Lobell also affirmes this to be the Lancashire Asphodill.


 The time.
They floure in May and Iune: most of the leaues thereof remaine greene in the Winter, if it be not extreme cold.


 The Names.
Some of the later Herbarists thinke this yellow Asphodill to be Iphyon of Theophrastus, and  others iudge it to be Erizambac of the Arabians. In Latine it is called Asphodelus luteus: of (...) it is called (...) Regia. We haue Englished it, the Speare for a King, or small yellow Asphodill.
2 The Lancashire Asphodill is called in Latine, Asphodelus Lancastriae: and may likewise be called Asphodelus palustris, or Pseudoasp hodelus luteus, or the Bastard yellow Asphodill.
@ 3 This is Asphodelus minimus luteus palustris Scoticus and Lancastriensis, of Lobell; and the Pseudoasphodelus pumilio folijs Iridis, of Clusius, as farre as I can iudge; although Bauhine distinguisheth them. @


 The temperature and vertues.
It is not yet found out what vse there is of any of them in nourishment or medicines.



CHAP. 72. Of Onion Asphodill.


Asphodelus Bulbosus. Onion Asphodill.



 The Description.
THe bulbed Asphodill hath a round bulbus or Onion root, with some fibres hanging thereat; from the which come vp many grassie leaues, very well resembling the Leeke; among the which leaues there riseth vp a naked or (...) stem, garnished toward the top with many (...) floures, of a whitish greene on the inside, and wholly greene without, consisting of six little leaues sharpe pointed, with certaine chiues or threads in the middle. After the floure is past there succeedeth a small knop or head three square, wherein lieth the seed.


 The place.
It groweth in the gardens of Herbarists in London, and not elsewhere that I know of, for it is not very common.


 The time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly, and somewhat after.


 The Names.
The stalke and floures being like to those of the Asphodill before mentioned, do shew it to be Asphodeli species, or a kinde of Asphodill; for which cause also it seemeth to be that Asphodil of which Galen hath made mention in his second book of the Faculties of nourishments, in these words; The root of Asphodill is in a manner like to the root of Squill, or Sea Onion, as well in shape as bitternes. Notwithstanding, saith Galen, my selfe haue known certaine countrymen, who in time of famine could not with many boilings and steepings make it fit to be eaten. It is called of Dodonaens, Asphodelus foemina, and Asphodelus Bulbosus, Hyacintho-Asphodelus, and Asphodelus Hyacinthinus by Lobell, and that rightly; for that the root is like the Hyacinth, and the floures like the Asphodill: and therefore as it doth participate of both kindes, so likewise doth the name: in English we may call it Bulbed Asphodill. Clusius calls it Ornithogalum majus, and that fitly.


 The nature.
The round rooted Asphodil, according to Galen, hath the same temperature and vertue that Aron, Arisarum, and Dracontium haue, namely an abstersiue and cleansing qualitie.


 The vertues.
The yong sprouts or springs thereof is a singular medicine against the yellow Iaundise, for that the root is of power to make thin and open.
Galen saith, that the ashes of this Bulbe mixed with oile or hens grease cureth the falling of the  haire in an Alopecia or scalld head.




CHAP. 73. Of Yellow Lillies.

 The kindes.
BEcause we shall haue occasion hereafter to speake of certaine Cloued or Bulbed Lillies, wee will in this chapter entreat onely of another kinde not bulbed, which likewise is of two sorts, differing principally in their roots: for in floures they are Lillies, but in roots Asphodils, participating as it were of both, though neerer approching vnto Asphodils than Lillies.


1 Lilium non bulbosum. The yellow Lillie.


2 Lilium non bulbosum Phoeniceum. The Day-Lillie.




 The Description.
1 THe yellow Lillie hath very long flaggie leaues, chamfered or channelled, hollow in the middest like a gutter; among the which riseth vp a naked or bare stalke, two cubits high, branched toward the top, with sundry brittle armes or branches, whereon do grow many goodly floures like vnto those of the common white Lillie in shape and proportion, of a shining yellow colour; which being past, there succeed three cornered huskes or cods, full of blacke shining seeds like those of the Peonie. The root consisteth of many knobs or tuberous clogs, proceeding from one head, like those of the white Asphodill or Peonie.
2 The Day-Lillie hath stalkes and leaues like the former. The floures be like the white Lillie in shape, of an Orenge tawny colour: of which floures much might be said which I omit. But in briefe, this plant bringeth forth in the morning his bud, which at noone is full blowne, or spred abroad, and the same day in the euening it shuts it selfe, and in a short time after becomes as rotten and stinking as if it had beene trodden in a dunghill a moneth together, in foule and rainie weather: which is the cause that the seed seldome followes, as in the other of his kinde, not bringing forth any at all that I could euer obserue; according to the old prouerbe, Soone ripe, soone rotten. His roots are like the former.



 The place.
These Lillies do grow in my garden, as also in the gardens of Herbarists, and louers of fine and rare plants; but not wilde in England, as in other countries.


 The time.
These Lillies do floure somewhat before the other Lillies, and the yellow Lillie the soonest.


 The Names.
Diuers do call this kinde of Lillie, Liliasphodelus, Liliago, and also Liliastrum, but most commonly Lilium non bulbosum: In English, Liriconfancie, and yellow Lillie. The old Herbarists name it Hemerocallis: for they haue two kindes of Hemerocallis; the one a shrub or woody plant, as witnesseth Theophrastus, in his sixth booke of the historie of Plants. Pliny setteth downe the same shrub among those plants, the leaues whereof onely do serue for garlands.
The other Hemerocallis which they set downe, is a Floure which perisheth at night, and buddeth at the Sunnerising, according to (...); and therefore it is fitly called (...); that is, Faire or beautifull for a day: and so we in English may rightly terme it the Day-Lillie, or Lillie (...) a day.


 The nature.
The nature is rather referred to the Asphodils than to Lillies.


 The vertues.
Dioscorides saith, That the root stamped with honey, and a mother pessarie made thereof with  wooll, and put vp, bringeth forth water and bloud.
The leaues stamped and applied do allay hot swellings in the dugges, after womens trauell in  childe-bearing, and likewise taketh away the inflammation of the eyes.
The roots and the leaues be laid with good successe vpon burnings and scaldings.



CHAP. 73. Of Bulbed Floure de-Luce.


@ 1 (...) Bulbosa Latifolia. Broad leaued Bulbous Floure de-luce.


2 Iris Bulbosa Anglica. Onion Floure de-Luce.




 The kindes.
LIke as we haue set downe sundry sorts of Floure de-luces, with flaggy leaues, and tuberous or knobby roots, varying very notably in sundry respects, which we haue distinguished in their proper Chapters: it resteth that in like manner we set forth vnto your view certaine bulbous or Onion-rooted Floure de-luces, which in this place do offer themselues vnto our consideration, whereof there be also sundry sorts, sorted into one chapter as followeth.


3 Iris Bulbosa flore vario. Changeable Floure de-luce.


@ 4 Iris Bulbosa versicolor Polyclonos. Many branched changeable Floure de-luce.




 The Description.
@ 1 THe first of these, whose figure here we giue you vnder the name of Iris Bulbosa Latifolia, hath leaues somewhat like those of the Day-Lillie, soft, and somewhat palish greene, with the vnder sides somewhat whiter; amongst which there riseth vp a stalk bearing at the top thereof a Floure a little in shape different from the formerly described Floure de-luces. The colour thereof is blew; the number of the leaues whereof it consists, nine: three of these are little, and come out at the bottome of the Floure as soone as it is opened; three more are large, and being narrow at their bottome, become broader by little and little, vntill they come to turne downwards, whereas then they are shapen somewhat roundish or obtuse. In the middest of these there runnes vp a yellow variegated line to the place whereas they bend backe. The three other leaues are arched like as in other Floures of this kinde, and diuided at their vpper end, and containe in them three threads of a whitish blew colour.
This is called Iris Bulbosa Latifolia, by Clusius; and Hyacinthus Poetarum Latifolius, by Lobell.
It floures in Ianuarie and Februarie, whereas it growes naturally, as it doth in diuers places of Portugall and Spaine. It is a tender plant, and seldome thriues well in our gardens. @
2 Onion Floure de-luce hath long narrow blades or leaues, crested, chamfered, or streaked on the backe side as it were welted; below somewhat round, opening it selfe toward the top, yet remaining as it were halfe round, whereby it resembleth an hollow trough or gutter. In the bottome of the hollownesse it tendeth to whitenesse; and among these leaues do rise vp a stalke of a cubit high; at the top whereof groweth a faire blew Floure, not differing in shape from the common  Floure de-luce: the which being past, there come in the place thereof long thicke cods or seed-vessels, wherein is contained yellowish seed of the bignesse of a tare or fitch. The root is round like an Onion, couered ouer with certaine browne skinnes or filmes. Of this kind there are some fiue or six varieties, caused by the various colours of the Floures.


5 Iris Bulbosa Flore luteo cum flore and semine. Yellow bulbed Floure de-luce in floure and seed.


3 Changeable Floure de-luce hath leaues, stalkes, and Roots like the former, but lesser. The Floure hath likewise the forme of the Floure de-luce, that is to say, it consisteth of sixe greater leaues, and three lesser; the greater leaues fold backward and hang downward, the lesser stand vpright; and in the middle of the leaues there riseth vp a yellow welt, white about the brimmes, and shadowed all ouer with a wash of thinne blew tending to a Watchet colour. Toward the stalke they are stripped ouer with a light purple colour, and likewise amongst the hollow places of those that stand vpright (which cannot be expressed in the figure) there is the same faire purple colour; the smell and sauour very sweet and pleasant. The root is Onion fashion, or bulbous like the other.
@ 4 There is also another variegated Floure de-luce, much like this last described, in the colour of the Floure; but each plant produceth more branches and Floures, whence it is termed Iris Bulbosa versicolor polyclonos, Many-branched changeable Floure de-luce. @
5 Of which kinde or sort there is another in my Garden, which I receiued from my Brother Iames Garret Apothecarie, far more beautifull than the last described; the which is dasht ouer, in stead of the blew or watchet colour, with a most pleasant gold yellow colour, of smell exceeding sweet, with bulbed roots like those of the other sort.
6 It is reported, that there is in the garden of the Prince Elector the Lantgraue of Hessen, one of this sort or kinde, with white Floures, the which as yet I haue not seene.
@ Besides these sorts mentioned by our Author, there are of the narrow leaued bulbous Floure de-luces, some twenty foure or more varieties, which in shape of roots, leaues, and Floures differ very little, or almost nothing at all; so that he which knows one of these may presently know the rest. Wherefore because it is a thing no more pertinent to a generall historie of Plants, to insist vpon these accidentall nicities, than for him that writes a historie of Beasts to describe all the colours, and their mixtures, in Horses, Dogs, and the like; I refer such as are desirous to informe  themselues of those varieties, to such as haue onely and purposely treated of Floures and their diuersities, as De-Bry, Swerts, and our Countreyman M. Parkinson, who in his Paradisus terrestris, set forth in English, Anno 1629. hath iudiciously and exactly comprehended all that hath beene deliuered by others in this nature. @


@ 6 Iris Bulbosa (...) cinereo. Ash-coloured Floure de-(...).


@ 7 Iris Bulbosa flore albido. Whitish Floure de-luce.




 The place.
The second of these bulbed Floure de-luces growes wilde, or of it selfe, in the corne fields of the West parts of England, as about Bathe and Wells, and those places adiacent; from whence they were first brought into London, where they be naturalised, and encrease in great plenty in our London gardens.
The other sorts do grow naturally in Spaine and Italy wilde, from whence we haue had Plants for our London gardens, whereof they do greatly abound.


 The time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly, and seldome after.


 The Names.
The Bulbed Floure de-luce is called of Lobelius, Iris Bulbosa, and also Hyacinthus flore Iridis: of some, Hyacinthus Poetarum; and peraduenture it is the same that Apuleius mentioneth in the one and twentieth Chapter, saying, That Iris, named among the old Writers Hieris, may also be called, and not vnproperly, Hierobulbus, or Hieribulbus: as though you should say, Iris Bulbosa, or (...) Ireos; vnlesse you would haue (...), called a greater or larger Bulbe: for it is certaine, that great and huge things were called of the Antients, (...), or Sacra: in English, Holy.


 The nature.
The nature of these Bulbed Floure de-luces are referred to the kindes of Asphodils.


 The vertues.
Take, saith Apuleius, of the herbe Hierobulbus six ^. Goats suet as much, Oile of Alcanna one pound; mix them together, being first stamped in a stone morter, it taketh away the paine of the  Gout.
(...), if a woman do vse to wash her face with the decoction of the (...), (...) with the meale of Lupines, it forthwith cleanseth away the freckles and morphew, and such like deformities.




CHAP. 75. Of Spanish Nut.


1 Sisynrichium majus. Spanish Nut.


@ 2 Sisynrichium minus. Small Spanish Nut.


3 Iris Tuberosa. Veluet Floure de-luce.



 The Description.
1 SPanish Nut hath small grassie leaues like those of the Starres of Bethlem, or Ornithogalum; among which riseth vp a small stalke of halfe a foot high, garnished with the like leaues, but shorter. The Floures grow at the top, of a skie colour, in shape resembling the Floure de-luce, or common Iris; but the leaues that turne downe are each of them marked with a yellowish spot: they fade quickely, and being past, there succeed small cods with seeds as small as those of Turneps. The root is round, composed of two bulbes, the (...) lying vpon the other as those of the Corne flag vsually do; and they are couered with a skinne or filme in shape like a Net. The Bulbe is sweet in taste, and may be eaten before any other bulbed (...).
2 There is set forth another of this kinde, somewhat lesser, with Floures that smell sweeter than the former.
3 Veluet Floure de-luce hath many long square leaues, spongeous or full of pith, trailing vpon the ground, in shape like to the leaues (...) Rushes: among which riseth vp a stalke of a foot  high, bearing at the top a Floure like the Floure de-luce. The lower leaues that turne downward are of a perfect blacke colour, soft and smooth as is blacke Veluet; the blacknesse is welted about with greenish yellow, or as wee terme it a Goose-turd greene; of which colour the vppermost leaues do consist: which being past, there followeth a great knob or crested seed vessell of the bignesse of a mans thumbe, wherein is contained round white seed as bigge as the Fetch or tare. The root consisteth of many knobby bunches like fingers.


 The place.
These bastard kindes of Floure de-luces are strangers in England, except it be among some few diligent Herbarists in London, who haue them in their gardens, where they increase exceedingly; especially the last described, which is said to grow wilde about Constantinople, Morea, and Greece: from whence it hath beene transported into Italy, where it hath beene taken for Hermodactylus, and by some exprest or set forth in writing vnder the title Hermodactylus; whereas in truth it hath no semblance at all with Hermodactylus.


 The time.
The wilde or Bastard Floure de-luces do floure from May to the end of Iune.


 The Names.
1 2 These bulbed bastard Floure de-luces, which we haue Englished Spanish Nuts, are called in Spaine, Nozelhas; that is, little Nuts: the lesser sort Parua Nozelha, and Macuca: wee take it to be that kinde of nourishing Bulbe which is named in Greeke, (...): of Pliny, Sisynrichium.
@ 3 Some, as Vlysses Aldroandus, would haue this to be Louchitis Prior, of Dioscor. Matthiolus makes it Hermodactylius verus, or the true Hermodactill: Dodonaeus and Lobell more fitly refer it to the Floure de-luces, and call it Iris tuberosa. @


 The Nature and vertues.
Of these kindes of Floure de-luces there hath beene little or nothing at all left in writing concerning their natures or vertues; only the Spanish nut is eaten at the tables of rich and delicious, nay vitious persons, in sallads or otherwise, to procure lust and lecherie.



CHAP. 76. Of Corne-Flagge.


1 Gladiolus Narbonensis. French Corne-Flag, or Sword-Flag.


2 Gladiolus Italicus. Italian Corne-Flag, or Sword-Flag.





@ 4 Gladiolus Lacustris. Water Sword-Flag.



 The Description.
1 FRench Corne-Flagge hath small stiffe leaues, ribbed or chamfered with long nerues or sinewes running through the same, in shape like those of the small Floure deluce, or the blade of a sword, sharpe pointed, of an ouer-worne greene colour, among the which riseth vp a stiffe brittle stalke two cubits high, whereupon doe grow in comely order many faire purple Floures, gaping like those of Snapdragon, or not much differing from the Fox-Gloue, called in Latine Digitalis. After them come round knobbie seed-vessels, full of chaffie seed, very light, of a browne reddish colour. The root consisteth of two Bulbes, one set vpon the other; the vppermost whereof in the beginning of the Spring (...) lesser, and more ful of juice; the lower greater, but more loose and lithie, which a little while (...) perisheth.
2 Italian Corn-Flag hath long narrow leaues with many ribbes or nerues running through the same: the stalke is stiffe and brittle, whereupon do grow Floures orderly placed vpon one side of the stalke, whereas the precedent hath his floures placed on both the sides of the stalke, in shape and colour like the former, as are also the roots, but seldome seene one aboue another, as in the former.
3 There is a third sort of Corne-Flag which agreeth with the last described in euerie point, sauing that the Floures of this are of a pale colour, as it were betweene white, and that which we call Maidens Blush.
@ 4 This Water Sword-Flag, described by (...) in his Cur. Post. hath leaues about a span long, thicke and hollow, with a partition in their middles, like as wee see in the cods of StockeGillouers, and the like: their colour is greene, and taste sweet, so that they are an acceptable food to the wilde Ducks ducking downe to the bottome of the water; for they sometimes lie some ells vnder water: which notwithstanding is ouer-topt by the stalke, which springs vp from among these leaues, and beares Floures of colour white, larger than those of Stock-Gillouers, but in that hollow part that is next the stalke they are of a blewish colour, almost in shape resembling the Floures of the Corne-Flag, yet not absolutely like them. They consist of fiue leaues, whereof the two vppermost are reflected towards the stalke; the three other being broader hang downewards. After the floures there follow round pointed vessels filled with red seed. It floures at the end of Iuly.
It was found in some places of West-Friseland, by Iohn Dortman a learned Apothecary of Groningen. It growes inwaters which haue pure grauell at the bottome, and that bring forth no plant besides.
Clusius, and Dortman who sent it him, call it Gladiolus Lacustris, or Stagnalis. @


 The place.
These kindes of Corne-Flags grow in medowes, and in earable grounds among corne, in many places of Italy, as also in the parts of France bordering thereunto. Neither are the fields of Austria and Morauia without them, as Cordus writeth. We haue great plenty of them in our London Gardens, especially for the garnishing and decking them vp with their seemly Floures.


 The time.
They floure from May to the end of Iuly.


 The Names.
Corne-Flag is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Gladiolus; and of some, Ensis: of others, (...), and Gladiolus Segetalis. Theophrastus in his discourse of Phasganum maketh it the same with Xiphion. Valerius Cordus calleth Corne-Flag Victorialis foemina: others, Victorialis rotunda: in the Germane  Tongue, Seigwurtz: yet we must make a difference betweene Gladiolus and Victorialis longa; for that is a kinde of Garlicke found vpon the highest Alpish mountaines, which is likewise called of the Germanes Seigwurtz. The Floures of Corne-Flag are called of the Italians, Monacuccio: in English, Corne-Flag, Corne-Sedge, Sword-Flag, Corne Gladin: in French, Glais.


 The nature.
The root of Corne-Flag, as Galen saith, is of force to draw, waste, or consume away, and dry, as also of a subtill and digesting qualitie.


 The vertues.
The root stamped with the pouder of Frankincense and wine, and applied, draweth forth splinters  and thornes that sticke fast in the flesh.
Being stamped with the meale of Darnell and honied water, doth waste and make subtill hard  lumps, nodes, and swellings, being emplaistred.
Some affirme, that the vpper root prouoketh bodily lust, and the lower causeth barrennesse.
The vpper root drunke in water is profitable against that kinde of bursting in children called  (...).
The root of Corne-Flag stamped with hogs grease and wheaten meale, hath been found by late  Practitioners in physicke and Surgerie, to be a certaine and approued remedie against the (...) Scrophulae, and such like swellings in the throat.
The cods with the seed dried and beaten into pouder, and drunk in Goats milke or Asses milke, presently taketh away the paine of the Collicke.



CHAP. 77. Of Starry Hyacinths and their kindes.


1 Hyacinthus stellatus Fuchsij. Starry Iacinth.


@ 2 Hyacinthus stellaris albicans. The white floured starry Iacinth.



 The kindes.
THere be likewise bulbous or Onion rooted plants that do orderly succeed, whereof some are to be eaten, as Onions, Garlicke, Leekes, and Ciues; notwithstanding I am first to entreat  of those bulbed roots, whose faire and beautifull Floures are receiued for their grace and ornament in gardens and garlands: the first are the Hyacinths, whereof there is found at this day diuers sorts, differing very notably in many points, as shall be declared in their seueral descriptions.


@ 3 Hyacinthus stellatus bifolius. Two-leaued starry Iacinth.


4 Hyacinthus stellatus Lilifolius cum flore and semine. The Lilly leaued starry Iacinth in floure and seed.


@ (...) (...) stellaris (...). The starry Iacinth of Constantinople.





 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Iacinth hath three very fat thicke browne leaues, hollow like a little trough, very brittle, of the length of a finger: among which shoot vp fat, thick brownish stalkes, soft and very tender, and full of juyce; whereupon do grow many small blew Floures consisting of six little leaues spred abroad like a starre. The seed is contained in small round bullets, which are so ponderous or heauy that they lie trailing vpon the ground. The root is bulbous or Onion fashion, couered with brownish scales or filmes.
2 There is also a white floured one of this kinde.
3 There is found another of this kinde which seldome or neuer hath more than two leaues. The roots are bulbed like the other. The Floures be whitish, starre-fashion, tending to blewnesse, which I receiued of Robinus of Paris.


@ 8 Hyacinthus stellaris Someri. Somers starry Iacinth.


@ 9 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus major. The greater starry Summer Iacinth.


4 This kinde of Hyacinth hath many broad leaues spread vpon the ground, like vnto those of Garden Lilly, but shorter. The stalkes do rise out of the middest thereof bare, naked, and very smooth, an handfull high; at the top whereof do grow small blew floures starre-fashion, very like vnto the precedent. The root is thicke and full of juyce, compact of many scaly cloues of a yellow colour.
@ There are some tenne or eleuen varieties of starry Iacinths, besides these two mentioned by our Authour. They differ each from other either in the time of flouring (some of them flouring in the Spring, other some in Sommer) in their bignesse, or the colours of their floures. The leaues of most of them are much like to our ordinarie Iacinth, or Hare-bels, and lie spread vpon the ground. Their floures in shape resemble the last described, but are vsually more in number, and somewhat larger. The colour of most of them are blew or purple, one of them excepted, which is of an Ash colour, and is knowne by the name of Somers his Iacinth. I thinke it not amisse to giue you their vsuall names, together with some of their figures; for so you may easily impose them truly vpon the things themselues whensoeuer you shall see them.

5 Hyacinthus stellaris Byzantinus nigra radice, flore (...).
The blew starry Iacinth of Constantinople, with the blacke root.
6 Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus major (...) (...).
The greater blew starry Iacinth of Constantiple.
7 Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus alter flore boraginis.
The other blew starry Iacinth of Constantinonople, with Floures somewhat resembling Borage.
8 Hyacinthus stellaris aestivus, siue exoticus Someri flore cinereo.
Ash coloured starry Iacinth, or Somers Iacinth.
9 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus major.
The greater starry Sommer Iacinth.
10 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus minor.
The lesser starry Summer Iacinth.
11 Hyacinthus stellaris Poreti flore (...) strijs purpureis.
Porets starry Iacinth with blew Floures, hauing purple streakes alongst their middles.
12 Hyacinthus (...) stellaris flore (...) caeruleo.
The Spanish starry Iacinth with deepe blew floures.
13 There is another starry Iacinth more large and beautifull than any of these before mentioned. The leaues are broad and not very long, spread vpon the ground, and in the midst of them there riseth vp a stalke which at the top beareth a great spoke of faire starry floures, which first begin to open themselues below, and so shew themselues by little and little to the top of the stalke. The vsuall sort hereofhath blew or purple floures. There is also a sort hereof which hath flesh-coloured floures, and another with white Floures: This is called Hyacinthus stellatus Peruanus, The starry Iacinth of Peru.


10 Hyacinthus stellatus aestivus minor. The lesser starry Summer Iacinth.


13 Hyacinthus Peruanus. Hyacinth of Peru.


Those who are studious in varieties of Floures, and require larger descriptions of these, may haue recourse to the Workes of the learned Carolus (...) in Latine, or to M. Parkinsons Worke in English, where they may haue full satisfaction. @


 The place.
The three-first mentioned Plants grow in many places of Germany in woods and mountaines, as (...) and Gesner do testifie: In Bohemia also vpon diuers bankes that are full of Herbes. In  England we cherish most of these mentioned in this place, in our gardens, onely for the beauty of their floures.


 The time.
The three first begin to floure in the midst of Ianuarie, and bring forth their seed in May. The other floures in the Spring.


 The Names.
1 The first of these Hyacinths is called Hyacinthus stellatus, or Stellaris Fuchsij, of the starre-like Floures: Narcissus caeruleus Bockij: of some, Flos Martius stellatus.
3 This by Lobell is thought to be Hyacinthus Bifolius, of Theophrastus: Tragus calls it Narcissus caeruleus: and Fuchsius, Hyacinthus caeruleus minor mas. Wee may call it in English, The small two leaued starrie Iacinth.
4 The Lilly Hyacinth is called Hyacinthus Germanicus Liliflorus, or Germane Hyacinth, taken from the countrey where it naturally groweth wilde.


@  The vertues.
@ The faculties of the starry Hyacinths are not written of by any. But the Lilly leaued Iacinth, (which growes naturally in a hill in Aquitaine called Hos, where the Herdmen call it Sarahug) is said by them to cause the heads of such cattell as feed thereon to swell exceedingly, and then kils them: which shewes it hath a maligne and poysonous qualitie. Clus. @



CHAP. 78. Of Autumne Hyacinths.


1 Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor. Small Autumne Iacinth.


2 Hyacinthus Autumnalis major. Great Autumne Iacinth.



 The Description.
1 AVtumne Iacinth is the least of all the Iacinths: it hath small narrow grassy leaues spread abroad vpon the ground; in the middest whereof springeth vp a small naked stalke an handfull high, set from the middle to the top with many small starre-like blew floures, hauing certaine small loose chiues in the middle. The seed is blacke contained in small huskes: the root is bulbous.

2 The great Winter Iacinth is like vnto the precedent, in leaues, stalkes, and floures, not differing in any one point but in greatnesse.
@ 3 To these I thinke it not amisse to adde another small Hyacinth, more different from these last described in the time of the flouring, than in shape. The root of it is little, small, white, longish, with a few fibres at the bottome; the leaues are small and long like the last described. The stalke, which is scarce an handfull high, is adorned at the top with three or foure starry floures of a blewish Ash colour, each floure consisting of six little leaues, with six chiues and their pointals, of a darke blew, and a pestill in the middest. It floures in Aprill. @


 The place.
@ The greater Autumne Iacinth growes not wilde in England, but it is to be found in some gardens.
The first or lesser growes wilde in diuers places of England, as vpon a banke by the Thames side betweene Chelsey and London. @


 The time.
They floure in the end of August, and in September, and sometimes after.


 The Names.
1 The first is called Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor, or the lesser Autumne Iacinth, and Winter Iacinth.
2 The second, Hyacinthus Autumnalis major, the great Autumne Iacinth, or Winter Iacinth.
3 This is called by Lobell, Hyacinthus parvulus stellaris vernus, The small starry Spring Iacinth.



CHAP. 79. Of the English Iacinth, or Hare-Bels.


1 Hyacinthus Anglicus. English Hare-bels.


2 Hyacinthus albus Anglicus. White English Hare-bels



 The Description.
1 THe blew Hare-bels or English Iacinth is very common throughout all England. It hath long narrow leaues leaning towards the ground, among the which spring vp naked  or bare stalkes loden with many hollow blew Floures, of a strong sweet smell, somewhat stuffing the head: after which come the coddes or round knobs, containing a great quantitie of small blacke shining seed. The root is bulbous, full of a slimy glewish juyce, which wil serue to set feathers vpon arrowes in stead of glew, or to paste bookes with: whereof is made the best starch next vnto that of Wake-robin roots.


4 Hyacinthus Orientalis caeruleus. The blew Orientall Iacinth.


5 Hyacinthus Orientalis Polyanthos. Many floured Orientall Iacinth.


2 The white English Iacinth is altogether like vnto the precedent, sauing that the leaues hereof are somewhat broader, the Floures more open, and very white of colour.
3 There is found wilde in many places of England, another sort, which hath Floures of a faire carnation colour, which maketh a difference from the other.
@ There are also sundry other varieties of this sort, but I thinke it vnnecessarie to insist vpon them, their difference is so little, consisting not in their shape, but in the colour of their Floures. @
The blew Hare-bels grow wilde in woods, copses, and in the borders of fields euery where thorow England.
The other two are not so common, yet do they grow in the woods by Colchester in Essex, in the fields and woods by South-fleet, neere vnto Graues-end in Kent, as also in a piece of ground by Canturbury called the Clapper, in the fields by Bathe, about the woods by Warrington in Lancashire, and other places.


 The time.
They floure from the beginning of May vnto the end of Iune.


 The Names.
1 The first of our English Hyacinths is called Hyacinthus Anglicus, for that it is thought to grow more plentifully in England than elsewhere; of Dodonaeus, Hyacinthus non scriptus, or the vnwritten Iacinth.
2 The second, Hyacinthus Belgicus candidus, or the Low-Countrey Hyacinth with white Floures.
@ 3 This third is called Hyacinthus Anglicus, aut (...) (...), Carnation Harebels.



@ 6 Hyacinthus Orientalis polyanthos alter. The other many-Floured Oriental Iacinth.


@ 7 Hyacinthus Orientalis (...). Reddish purple Oriental Iacinth.


@ 8 Hyacinthus Orientalis albus. White Oriental Iacinth.


@ 9 Hyacinthus Brumalis. Winter Iacinth.





 The Description.
4 The Orientall Iacinth hath great leaues, thicke, fat, and full of juyce, deepely hollowed in the middle like a trough: from the middle of those leaues riseth vp a stalke two hands high, bare without leaues, very smooth, soft, and full of juice, loden toward the top with many faire blew Floures, hollow like a bell, greater than the English Iacinth, but otherwise like them. The root is great, bulbous, or Onion fashion, couered with many scaly reddish filmes or pillings, such as couer Onions.
5 The Iacinth with many Floures (for so doth the word Polyanthos import) hath very many large and broad leaues, short and very thicke, fat, or full of slimy juyce: from the middle whereof rise vp strong thicke grosse stalkes, bare and naked, set from the middle to the top with many blew or skie coloured Floures growing for the most part vpon one side of the stalke. The root is great, thicke, and full of slimy juyce.


@ 10 Hyacinthus Orientalis caule folioso Orientall Iacinth with leaues on the stalke.


@ 11 Hyacinthus Orientalis florepleno. The double floured Oriental Iacinth.


@ 6 There is another like the former in each respect, sauing that the floures are wholly white on the inside, and white also on the outside, but three of the out-leaues are of a pale whitish yellow. These floures smell sweet as the former, and the heads wherein the seeds are contained are of a lighter greene colour. @
7 There is come vnto vs from beyond the seas diuers other sorts, whose figures are not extant with vs; of which there is one like vnto the first of these Oriental Iacinths, sauing that the floures thereof are purple coloured; whence it is termed Hyacinthus purpuro rubeus.
8 Likewise there is another called Orientalis albus, differing also from the others in colour of the floures, for that these are very white, and the others blew.
9 There is another called Hyacinthus Brumalis, or winter Iacinth: it is like the others in shape, but differeth in the time of flouring.
@ 10 There is another Hyacinth belonging rather to this place than any other, for that in root, leaues, floures, and seeds it resembles the first described Oriental Iacinth; but in one respect it differs not onely from them, but also from all other Iacinths: which is, it hath a leauie stalke, hauing sometimes one, and otherwhiles two narrow long leaues comming forth at the bottome of  @ 14 Hyacinthus obsoleto flore Hispanicus major. Thegreater dusky floured Spanish Iacinth. @ 15 Hyacinthus minor Hispanicus. The lesser Spanish Iacinth. @ 16 Hyacinthus Indicus (...). The tuberous rooted Indian Iacinth. the setting on of the floure. Whereupon Clusius calls it Hyacinthus Orientalis (...) solioso: That is, the Oriental Hyacinth with leaues on the stalke.


 Of double floured Oriental Hyacinths.
Of this kindred there are two or three more varieties, whereof I wil giue you the description of the most notable, and the names of the other two; which, with that I shall deliuer of this, may serue for sufficient description. The first of these (which Clusius calls Hyacinthus Orientalis subvirescente flore, or, the greenish floured double Orientall Iacinth) hath leaues, roots, and seeds like vnto the formerly described Oriental Iacinths; but the floures (wherin the difference consists) are at the first, before they be open, greene, and then on the out side next to the stalke of a whitish blew; and they consist of six leaues whose tips are whitish, yet retaining some manifest greenes: then out of the midst of the floure comes forth another floure consisting of three leaues, whitish on their inner side, yet keeping the great veine or streake vpon the outer side, each floure hauing in the middle a few chiues with blackish pendants. It floures in Aprill.

12 This varietie of the last described is called Hyacinthus Orientalis flore (...) pleno, The double blew Orientall Iacinth
13 This, Hyacinthus Orientalis candidissimus flore pleno, The milke-white double Orientall (...).
14 This, which Clusius calls Hyacinthus obsoletior Hispanicus, hath leaues somewhat narrower, and more flexible than the Muscari, with a white veine running alongst the inside of them: among these leaues there riseth vp a stalke of some foot high, bearing some fifteene or sixteene floures, more or lesse, in shape much like the ordinarie English, consisting of six leaues, three standing much out, and the other three little or nothing. These floures are of a very dusky colour, as it were mixt with purple, yellow, and greene: they haue no smell. The seed, which is contained in triangular heads, is smooth, blacke, scaly, and round. It floures in Iune.
15 The lesser Spanish Hyacinth hath leaues like the Grape-floure, and small floures shaped like the Orientall Iacinth, some are of colour blew, and other some white. The seeds are contained in three cornered seed-vessels. I haue giuen the figure of the white and blew together, with their seed-vessels.
16 This Indian Iacinth with the tuberous root (saith Clusius) hath many long narrow sharpe pointed leaues spread vpon the ground, being somewhat like to those of Garlicke, and in the middest of these rise vp many round firme stalkes of some two cubits high, and oft times higher, sometimes exceeding the thicknesse of ones little finger; which is the reason that oftentimes, (...) they be borne vp by something, they lie along vpon the ground. These stalkes are at (...) spaces ingirt with leaues which end in sharpe points. The tops of these stalkes are adorned with many white floures, somewhat in shape resembling those of the Orientall Iacinth. The roots are knotty or tuberous, with diuers fibres comming out of them. @


 The place.
These kindes of Iacinths haue beene brought from beyond the Seas, some out of one countrey, and some out of others, especially from the East countries, whereof they tooke their names Orientalis.


 The time.
They floure from the end of Ianuarie vnto the end of Aprill.


 The nature.
The Hyacinths mentioned in this Chapter do lightly cleanse and binde; the seeds are dry in the third degree; but the roots are dry in the first degree, and cold in the second.


 The vertues.
The Root of Hyacinth boyled in Wine and drunke, stoppeth the belly, prouoketh vrine, and  helpeth against the venomous bitings of the field Spider.
The seed is of the same vertue, and is of greater force in stopping the laske and bloudy flix. Being  drunke in wine it preuaileth against the falling sicknesse.
The roots, after the opinion of Dioscorides, being beaten and applied with white Wine, (...) or keepe backe the growth of haires.
@ The seed giuen with Southerne-wood in Wine is good against the Iaundice. @ 



CHAP. 80. Of Faire baired Iacinth.

 The Description.
1 THe Faire haired Iacinth hath long fat leaues, hollowed alongst the inside, trough fashion, as are most of the Hyacinths, of a darke greene colour tending to rednesse. The stalke riseth out of the middest of the leaues, bare and naked, soft and full of slimie juyce, which are beset round about with many small floures of an ouerworne purple colour: The top of the spike consisteth of a number of faire shining purple floures, in manner of a tuft or bush of haires, whereof it tooke his name Comosus, or faire haired. The seed is contained in small bullets, of a shining blacke colour, as are most of those of the Hyacinths. The roots are bulbous or Onion fashion, full of slimy juyce, with some hairy threads fastned vnto rheir bottome.
2 White haired Iacinth differeth not from the precedent in roots, stalkes, leaues, or seed. The floures hereof are of a darke white colour, with some blacknesse in the hollow part of them, which setteth forth the difference.
3 Of this kinde I receiued another sort from Constantinople, resembling the first hairy Hyacinth very notably: but differeth in that, that this is altogether greater, as well in leaues, roots, and floures, as also is of greater beauty without all comparison.



1 Hyacinthus comosus. Faire haired Iacinth.


2 Hyacinthus comosus albus: White haired Iacinth.


@ 3 Hyacinthus comosus Bizantinus. Faire-haired Iacinth of Constantinople.


@ 5 Hyacinthus comosus ramosus elegantior. Faire curld-haired branched Iacinth.



@ 4 There are two other more beautifull haired Iacinths nourished in the gardens of our prime Florists. The first of these hath roots and leaues resembling the last described: the stalke commonly riseth to the height of a foot, and it is diuided into many branches on euery side, which are small and threddy; and then at the end as it were of these threddy branches there come forth many smaller threds of a darke purple colour, and these spread and diuaricate themselues diuers wayes, much after the manner of the next described; yet the threds are neither of so pleasing a colour, neither so many in number, nor so finely curled. This is called Hyacinthus comosus ramosus purpureus, The faire haired branched Iacinth.
5 This is a most beautiful and elegant plant, and in his leaues and roots he differs little from the last described; but his stalke, which is as high as the former, is diuided into very many slender branches, which subdiuided into great plenty of curled threads variously spread abroad, make a very pleasant shew. The colour also is a light blew, and the floures vsually grow so, that they are most dilated at the bottome, and so straiten by little and little after the manner of a Pyramide. These floures keepe their beautie long, but are succeeded by no seeds that yet could be obserned. This by Fabius Columna (who first made mention hereof in writing) is called Hyacinthus (...) panniculosa coma: By others, Hyacinthus comosus ramosus elegantior, The faire curld-haire Iacinth.
These floure in May. @


6 Hyacinthus botryoides (...). Blew Grape-floure.


7 Hyacinthus botryoides caeruleus major, Great Grape-floure.


6 The small Grape floure hath many long fat and weake leaues trailing vpon the ground, hollow in the middle like a little trough, full of slimie juyce like the other Iacinths; amongst which come forth thicke soft smooth and weake stalkes, leaning this way and that way, as not able to stand vpright by reason it is surcharged with very heauy floures on his top, consisting of many little bottle-like blew floures, closely thrust or packed together like a bunch of grapes, of a strong smell, yet not vnpleasant, somewhat resembling the sauour of the Orange. The root is round and bulbous, set about with infinite young cloues or roots, whereby it greatly increaseth.
7 The great Grape-floure is very like vnto the smaller of his kinde. The difference (...), in that this plant is altogether greater, but the leaues are not so long.
8 The sky-coloured Grape-floure hath a few leanes in respect of the other Grape-floures, the which are (...), fuller of juyce, stiffe and vpright, whereas the others traile vpon the ground.  The floures grow at the top, thrust or packt together like a bunch of Grapes, of a pleasant bright sky colour, euery little bottle-like floure set about the hollow entrance with small white spots not easie to be perceiued. The roots are like the former.


8 Hyacinthus Botryoides caeruleus major. Great Grape-floure.


9 The white Grape-floure differeth not from the sky-coloured Iacinth, but in colour of the floure: for this Iacinth is of a pleasant white colour tending to yellownes, tipped about the hollow part with White, whiter than White it selfe; otherwise there is no difference.


 The Place.
These plants are kept in gardens for the beautie of their floures, wherewith our London gardens do abound.


 The Time.
They floure from Februarie to the end of May.


 The Names.
The Grape-floure is called Hyacinthus (...), and Hyacinthus (...) Dodonaei: of some, Bulbus Esculentus, Hyacinthus syluestris cordi, Hyacinthus exiguus Tragi. Some iudge them to be (...), of (...).
@ The faire haired Iacinth described in the first place is the Hyacinthus of Dioscorides and the Antients. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
@ The vertues set downe in the precedent Chapter properly belong to that kinde of Hyacinth which is described in the first place in this Chapter.



CHAP. 81. Of Muscari, or Musked Grape-floure.

 The Description.
1 YEllow Muscarie hath fiue or six long leaues spread vpon the ground, thicke, fat, and full of slimie juyce, turning and winding them selues crookedly this way and that way, hollowed alongst the middle like a trough, as are those of faire haired Iacinth, which at the first budding or springing vp are of a purplish colour; but being growne to perfection, become of a darke greene colour: amongst the which leaues rise vp naked, thicke, and fat stalkes, infirme and weake in respect of the thicknesse and greatnesse thereof, lying also vpon the ground as do the leaues; set from the middle to the top on euery side with many yellow floures, euerie one made like a small pitcher or little box, with a narrow mouth, exceeding sweet of smell like the sauor of muske, whereof it tooke the name Muscari. The seed is inclosed in puffed or blowne vp cods, confusedly made without order, of a fat and spongeous substance, wherein is contained round blacke seed. The root is bulbous or onion fashion, whereunto are annexed certaine fat and thicke strings like those of Dogs grasse.
2 Ash-coloured Muscari or grape-floure, hath large and fat leaues like the precedent, not differing in any point, sauing that these leaues at their first springing vp are of a pale dusky colour like ashes. The floures are likewise sweet, but of a pale bleake colour, wherein consisteth the difference,



1 Muscari (...). Yellow musked Grape-floure.


2 Muscari Clusij. Ash-coloured Grape-floure.


Muscari caulis siliquis (...). The stalke of Muscari hanged with the seed-vessels.




 The Place.
These Plants came from beyond the Thracian Bosphorus, out of Asia, and from about Constantinople, and by the meanes of Friends haue been brought into these parts of Europe, whereof our London gardens are possessed.


 The Time.
They floure in March and Aprill, and sometimes after.


 The Names.
They are called generally Muscari: In the Turky Tongue, Muschoromi, Muscurimi, Tipcadi, and Dipcadi, of their pleasant sweet smell: Of Matthiolus, Bulbus Vomitorius. These plants may be referred vnto the Iacinths, whereof vndoubtedly they be kindes.


 The Nature and Vertues.
There hath not as yet any thing beene touched concerning the nature or vertues of these Plants, onely they are kept and maintained in gardens for the pleasant smell of their floures, but not for their beauty, for that many stinking field floures do in beautie farre surpasse them. But it should seem that Matthiolus called them Vomitorius, in that he supposed they procurevomiting; which of other Authors hath not bin remembred.




CHAP. 82. Of Woolly Bulbus.


Bulbus Eriophorus. Woolly Iacinth.



 The Description.
THere hath fallen out to be here inserted a bulbous plant consisting of many Bulbes, which hath passed currant amongst all our late Writers. The which I am to set forth to the view of our Nation, as others haue done in sundry languages to theirs, as a kind of the Iacinths, which in roots and leaues it doth very wel resemble; called of the Grecians, (...): in Latine, Laniferus, because of his aboundance of Wooll-resembling substance, wherewith the whole Plant is in euery part full fraught, as well roots, leaues, as stalkes. The leaues are broad, thicke, fat full of juyce, and of a spider-like web when they be broken. Among these leaues riseth vp a stalke two cubits high, much like vnto the stalke of Squilla or Sea-Onion; and from the middle to the top it is beset round about with many small starre-like blew floures without smell, very like to the floures of Asphodill; beginning to floure at the bottome, and so vpward by degrees, whereby it is long before it hath done flouring: which floures the learned Physitian of Vienna, Iohannes Aicholzius, desired long to see; who brought it first from Constantinople, and planted it in his Garden, where he nourished it tenne yeares with great curiositie: which time being expired, thinking it to be a barren plant, he sent it to Carolus Clusius, with whom in some few yeres it did beare such floures as before described, but neuer since to this day. This painefull Herbarist would gladly haue seene the seed that should succeed these floures; but they being of a nature quickly subiect to perish, decay, and fade, began presently to pine away, leauing onely a few (...) and idle seed-vessels without fruit. My selfe hath beene possessed with this plant at the least twelue yeares, whereof I haue yearely great encrease of new roots, but I did neuer see any token of budding or flouring to this day: notwith standing I shall be content to suffer it in some base place or other of my garden, to stand as the cipher o at the end of the figures, to attend his time and leisure, as those men of famous memorie haue done. Of whose temperature and vertues there hath not any thing beene said, but kept in gardens to the end aforesaid.



CHAP. 83. Of two feigned Plants.

 The Description.
1 I Haue thought it conuenient to conclude this historie of the Hyacinths with these two bulbous Plants, receiued by tradition from others, though generally holden for feigned and adulterine. Their pictures I could willingly haue omitted in this historie, if the curious eye could elsewhere haue found them drawne and described in our English Tongue: but because I finde them in none, I will lay them downe here, to the end that it may serue for excuse to others who shall come after, which list not to describe them, being as I said condemned for feined and adulterine, nakedly drawne onely. And the first of them is called (...) (...) by others, Bulbus Bomb cinus (...). The description consisteth of these points, viz. The floures (saith the Author) are no lesse strange than wonderfull. The leaues and roots are like to those of Hyacinths,  which hath caused it to occupie this place. The floures resemble the Daffodils or Narcissus. The whole plant consisteth of a woolly or flockie matter: which description with the Picture was sent vnto Dodonaeus by Iohannes Aicholzius. It may be that Aicholzius receiued instructions from the Indies, of a plant called in Greeke (...), which groweth in India, whereof Theophrastus and Athenaeus do write in this manner, saying, The floure is like the Narcissus, consisting of a flockie or woolly substance, which by him seemeth to be the description of our bombast Iacinth.


1 Bulbus Bombicinus Commentitius. False bumbaste Iacinth.


2 Tigridis flos. The floure of Tygris.


2 The second feigned picture hath beene taken of the Discouerer and others of later time, to be a kinde of Dragons not seene of any that haue written thereof; which hath moued them to thinke it a feigned picture likewise; notwithstanding you shall receiue the description thereof as it hath come to my hands. The root (saith my Author) is bulbous or Onion fashion, outwardly blacke; from the which spring vp long leaues, sharpe pointed, narrow, and of a fresh greene colour: in the middest of which leaues rise vp naked or bare stalkes, at the top whereof groweth a pleasant yellow floure, stained with many small red spots here and there confusedly cast abroad: and in the middest of the floure thrusteth forth a long red tongue or stile, which in time groweth to be the cod or seed-vessell, crooked or wreathed, wherein is the seed. The vertues and temperature are not to be spoken of, considering that we assuredly persuade our selues that there are no such plants, but meere fictions and deuices, as we terme them, to giue his friend a gudgeon.
@ Though these two haue beene thought commentitious or feigned, yet Bauhinus seemeth to vindicate the latter, and Iohn Theodore de Bry in his Florilegium hath set it forth. He giues two Figures thereof, this which we here giue you being the one; but the other is farre more elegant, and better resembles a naturall plant. The leaues (as Bauhine saith) are like the sword-flag, the root like a leeke, the floures (according (...) De Bries Figure) grow sometimes two or three of a stalke: the floure consists of two leaues, and a long stile or pestill: each of these leaues is diuided into three parts, the vttermost being broad and large, and the innermost much narrower and sharper: the tongue or stile that comes forth of the midst of the floure is long, and at the end diuided into three crooked forked points. All that De Bry saith thereof is this; Flos Tigridis rubet egregie circa medium tamen pallet, albusque est and maculatus; ex Mexico a Casparo Bauhino. That is; Flos Tigridis is wondrous red, yet is it pale and whitish about the middle, and also spotted; it came from about Mexico, I had it from Caspar Bauhine. @




CHAP. 84. Of Daffodils.

 The Kindes.
DAffodill, or Narcissus, according to Dioscorides, is of two sorts: the floures of both are white, the one hauing in the middle a purple circle or coronet; the other with a yellow cup circle or coronet. Since whose time there hath been sundry others described, as shall be set forth in their proper places.


1 Narcissus medio purpureus. Purple circled Daffodill.


@ 4 Narcissus medio croceus serotinus Polyanthos. The late many floured Daffodill with the Saffron-coloured middle.




 The Description.
1 THe first of the Daffodils is that with the purple crowne or circle, hauing small narrow leaues, thicke, fat, and full of slimie juyce; among the which riseth vp a naked stalke, smooth and hollow, of a foot high, bearing at the top a faire milk-white floure growing forth of a hood or thinne filme, such as the floures of onions are wrapped in: in the middest of which floure is a round circle or small coronet of a yellowish colour, purfled or bordered about the edge of the said ring or circle with a pleasant purple colour; which beeing past, there followeth a thicke knob or button, wherein is contained blacke round seed. The root is white, bulbous or Onion fashion.
2 The second kinde of Daffodill agreeth with the precedent in euery respect, sauing that this Daffodill floureth in the beginning of Februarie, and the other not vntill Aprill, and is somewhat lesser. It is called Narcissus medio purpureus praecox; That is, Timely purple ringed Daffodill. The next may haue the addition praecocior, More timely: and the last in place, but first in time, praecocissimus, Most timely, or very early flouring Daffodill.



@ 5 Narcissus (...)-(...) flore pleno. Double floured (...) circled Daffodill.


6 Narcissus minor serotinus. The late flouring small Daffodill.


7 Narcissus medioluteus. Primrose Pearles, or the common white Daffodill.


8 Narcissus medioluteus polyanthos. French Daffodill.





9 Narcissus Pisanus. Italian Daffodill.


10 Narcissus albus multiplex. The double white Daffodill of Constantinople.


@ 11 Narcissus flore pleno (...). The other double white Daffodill.


@ 12 Narcissus flore pleno, medio luteo. Double white Daffodil with the middle yellow.



3 The third kind of Daffodil with the pnrple ring or circle in the middle, hath many small narrow leaues, very flat, crookedly bending toward the top; among which riseth vp a slender bare stalke, at whose top doth grow a faire and pleasant floure, like vnto those before described, but lesser, and floureth sooner, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ There is also another somewhat lesse, and flouring somewhat earlier than the last described.
4 This in roots, leaues, and stalkes differeth very little from the last mentioned kindes; but it beares many floures vpon one stalke, the out-leaues being like the former, white, but the cup or ring in the middle of a saffron colour, with diuers yellow threds contained therein.
5 To these may be added another mentioned by Clusius, which differs from these onely in the floures; for this hath floures consisting of six large leaues fairely spread abroad, within which are other six leaues not so large as the former, and then many other little leaues mixed with threds comming sorth of the middle. Now there are purple welts which runne betweene the first and second ranke of leaues, in the floure, and so in the rest. This floures in May; and it is Narcissus pleno flore quintus, of Clusius. @


@ 13 Narcissus flore pleno, medio versicolore. Double Daffodill with a diuers coloured middle.


14 Narcissus totus albus. Milke white Daffodill.


6 This late flouring Daffodill hath many fat thicke leaues, full of juice, among the which riseth vp a naked stalke, on the top whereof groweth a faire white floure, hauing in the middle a ring or yellow circle. The seed groweth in knobby seed vessels. The root is bulbous or Onion fashion. It floureth later than the others before described, that is to say, in April and May.
7 The seuenth kinde of Daffodill is that sort of Narcissus or Primerose peerelesse that is most common in our countrey gardens, generally knowne euery where. It hath long fat and thicke leaues, full of a slimie juice; among which riseth vp a bare thicke stalke, hollow within and full of juice. The floure groweth at the top, of a yellowish white colour, with a yellow crowne or circle in the middle; and floureth in the moneth of Aprill, and sometimes sooner. The root is bulbous fashion.
8 The eighth Daffodill hath many broad and thicke leaues, fat and full of juice, hollow and spongeous. The stalkes, floures, and roots are like the former, and differeth in that, that this plant  bringeth forth many floures vpon one stalk, and the other fewer, and not of so perfect a sweet smel, but more offensiue and stuffing the head. It hath this addition, Polyanthos, that is, of many floures, wherein especially consisteth the difference.
9 The Italian Daffodill is very like the former, the which to distinguish in words, that they may be knowne one from another, is impossible. Their floures, leaues, and roots are like, sauing that the floures of this are sweeter and more in number.


15 Narcissus Iuncifolius praecox. Rush Daffodill, or Iunquilia.


16 Narcissus Iuncifolius serotinus. Late flouring Rush Daffodill.


10 The double white Daffodill of Constantinople was senr into England vnto the right honourable the Lord Treasurer, among other bulbed sloures: whose roots when they were planted in our London gardens, did bring forth beautifull floures, very white and double, with some yellownesse mixed in the middle leaues, pleasant and sweet in smell, but sinee that time we neuer could by any industrie or manuring bring them vnto flouring againe. So that it should appeare, when they were discharged of that birth or burthen which they had begotten in their owne country, and not finding that matter, soile, or clymate to beget more floures, they remaine euer since barren and fruitlesse. Besides, we found by experience, that those plants which in Autumne did shoor forth leaues, did bring forth no floures at all; and the others that appeared not vntill the Spring did flourish and beare their floures. The stalks, leaues, and roots are like vnto the other kindes of Daffodils. It is called of the Turks, Giul Catamer lale; That is, Narcissus with double floures. Notwithstanding we haue receiued from beyond the seas, as well from the Low Countries, as also from France, another sort of greater beautie, which from yeare to yeare doth yeeld forth most pleasant double floures, and great encrease of roots, very like as well in stalkes as other parts of the plant, vnto the other sorts of Daffodils. It differeth onely in the floures, which are very double and thicke thrust together, as are the floures of our double Primrose, hauing in the middle of the (...) some few chiues or welts of a bright purple colour, and the other mixed with yellow as aforesaid.
@ 11 This alsowith double white floures, which Clusius sets forth in the sixth place, is of the same kinde with the last described; but it beares but one or two floures vpon a stalke, whereas the other hath many.
12 This, which is Clusius his Narcissus flore pleno 2. is in roots, leaues, and stalkes very like the  precedent; but the floures are composed of six large white out-leaues; but the middle is filled with many faire yellow little leaues much like to the double yellow wall-floure. They smel sweet like as the last mentioned.
13 This differs from the last mentioned onely in that it is lesse, and that the middle of the floure within the yellow cup is filled with longish narrow little leaues, as it were crossing each other. Their colour is white, but mixed with some greene on the outside, and yellow on the inside. @
14 The milke white Daffodill differeth not from the common white Daffodill, or Primrose peerelesse, in leaues, stalkes; roots, or floures, sauing that the floures of this plant hath not any other colour in the floure but white, whereas all the others are mixed with one colour or other.


@ 17 Narcissus juncifolius Roseoluteus. Rose or round floured Iunquilia.


@ 18 Narcissus juncifolius amplo calice. White Iunquilia with the large cup.


@ 19 Narcissus juncifolius reflexus flore (...). The white reflex Iunquilia.


15 The Rush Daffodill hath long, narrow, and thicke leaues, very smooth and flexible, almost round like Rushes, whereof it tooke his syrname Iuncifolius or Rushie. It springeth vp in the beginning of Ianuarie, at which time also the floures doe shoot forth their buds at the top of small rushy stalkes, sometimes two, and often more vpon one stalke, made of six small yellow leaues. The cup or crowne in the middle is likewise yellow, in shape resembling the other Daffodills, but smaller, and of a strong sweet smell. (...) (...) is bulbed, white within, and couered with a blacke skin or filme.
16 This Rush Daffodil is like vnto the precedent in each respect, sauing that it is altogether lesser, and longer before it come to flouring. There is also a white floured one of this kinde.

@ 17 There is also another Rush Daffodill or Iunquilia, with floures not sharpe pointed, but round with a little cup in the middle: the colour is yellow or else white. This is Lobels Narcissus juncifolius flore (...) circinitatis roseo.
18 There is also another Iunquilia whose leaues and stalkes are like those of the first described Rushy Daffodill, but the cup in the middest of the floure is much larger. The colour of the floure is commonly white. Clusius calls this Narcissus 1 (...) amplo calice.
19 There are three or foure reflex Iunquilia's, whose cups hang downe, and the sixe incompassing leaues turne vp or backe, whence they take their names. The floures of the first are yellow; those of the second all white, the cup of the third is yellow, and the reflex leaues white. The fourth hath a white cup, and yellow reflex leaues. This seemes to be Lobels Narcissus montanus minimus coronatus.
20 This is like to the ordinarie lesser Iunquilia, but that the floures are very double, consisting of many long and large leaues mixed together; the shorter leaues are obtuse, as if they were clipt off. They are wholly yellow. @


@ 19 Narcissus Iuncifolius reflexus minor. The lesser reflex Iunquilia.


@ 20 Narcissus juncifolius multiplex. The double Iunquilia.


21 The Persian Daffodill hath no stalke at all, but onely a small and tender foot stalke of an inch high, such as the Saffron floure hath: vpon which short and tender stalk doth stand a yellowish floure consisting of six small leaues; of which the three innermost are narrower than those on the out side. In the middle of the floure doth grow forth a long stile or pointall, set about with many small chiues or threds. The whole floure is of an vnpleasant smel, much like to Poppy. The leaues rise vp a little before the floure, long, smooth, and shining. The root is bulbed, thicke, and grosse, blackish on the out side, and pale within, with some threds hanging at the lower part.
22 The Autumne Daffodill bringeth forth long smooth, glittering leaues, of a deepe greene colour: among which riseth vp a short stalke, bearing at the top one floure and no more, resemling the floure of Mead Saffron or common Saffron, consisting of six leaues of a bright shining yellow colour; in the middle whereof stand six threds or chiues, and also a pestell or clapper yellow likewise. The root is thicke and grosse like vnto the precedent.
@ 23 To this last may be adioyned another which in shape somewhat resembles it. The  leaues are smooth, greene, growing straight vp, and almost a fingers breadth; among which riseth vp a stalke a little more than halfe a foot in height; at the top of which groweth forth a yellow floure not much vnlike that of the last described Autumne Narcisse: it consisteth of sixe leaues some inch and halfe in length, and some halfe inch broad, sharpe pointed, the three inner leaues being somewhat longer than the outer. There grow forth out of the middest of the floure three whitish chiues, tipt with yellow, and a pestell in the midst of them longer than any of them. The root consists of many coats, with fibres comming forth of the bottome thereof like others of this kinde. It floures in Februarie. @


21 Narcissus Persicus. The Persian Daffodill.


22 Narcissus Autumnalis major. The great Winter Daffodill.


24 Small Winter Daffodill hath a bulbous root, much like vnto the root of Rush Daffodil, but lesser: from the which riseth vp a naked stalke without leaues, on the top whereof groweth a small white floure with a yellow circle in the middle, sweet in smell, something stuffing the head as do the other Daffodils.


 The Place.
The Daffodils with purple coronets do grow wilde in sundry places of France, chiefly in Bourgondie, and in Suitzerland in medowes.
The Rush Daffodill groweth wilde in sundry places of Spaine, among grasse and other herbes. Dioscorides saith, That they be especially found vpon mountaines. Theocritus affirmeth the Daffodils to grow in medowes, in his nineteenth Eidyl. or twentieth, according to some editions: where he writeth, That the faire Ladie Europa entring with her Nymphs into the medowes, did gather the sweet smelling Daffodils; in these Verses:
(...), etc.

Which we may English thus:
But when the Girles were come into
The medowes flouring all in sight,
That Wench with these, this Wench with those
Trim floures, themselues did all delight:
She with the Narcisse good in (...),
And she with Hyacinths content.


But it is not greatly to our purpose particularly to seeke out their places of growing wilde, seeing that we haue them all and euery of them in our London gardens, in great aboundance. The common white Daffodill groweth wilde in fields and sides of Woods in the West parts of England.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part in the Spring, that is, from the beginning of Februarie vnto the end of Aprill.
The Persian and Winter Daffodils do floure in September and October.


@ 23 Narcissus vernus praecocior (...) flore. The timely Spring yellow Daffodill.


24 Narcissus Autumnalis minor. Small Winter Daffodill.




 The Names.
Although their names be set forth in their seuerall titles, which may serue for their appellations and distinctions; notwithstanding it shall not be impertinent to adde a supply of names, as also the cause why they are so called.
The Persian Daffodill is called in the Sclauonian or Turkish tongue, Zaremcada Persiana, and Zaremcatta, as for the most part all other sorts of Daffodils are. Notwithstanding the double floured Daffodill they name Giul catamer lale: Which name they generally giue vnto all double floures.
The common white Daffodil with the yellow circle they call Serin Cade, that is to say, the kings Chalice; and Deuebohini, which is to say, Camels necke, or as we do say of a thing with long spindle shinnes, Long-shankes, vrging it from the long necke of the floure.
The Rush Daffodill is called of some Ionquillias, of the similitude the leaues haue with Rushes. Of Dioscorides, Bulbus Vomitorius, or Vomiting Bulbe, according to Dodonaeus.
Generally all the kindes are comprehended vnder this name Narcissus, called of the Grecians (...): in Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Iennetten: in English, Daffodilly, Daffodowndilly, and Primerose peerelesse.
Sophocles nameth them the garland of the infernal gods, because they that are departed and dulled with death, should worthily be crowned with a dulling floure.
Of the first and second Daffodill Ouid hath made mention in the third booke of his Metamorphosis,  where hee describeth the transformation of (...) faire boy Narcissus into a floure of his own name; saying,

Nusquam corpus erat, croceum pro corpore florem
Inueniunt, folijs medium cing entibus albis.


But as for body none remain'd; in stead whereof they found
A yellow floure, with milke white leaues ingirting of it round.

Pliny and Plutarch affirme, as partly hath been touched before, that their narcoticke quality was the very cause of the name Narcissus, that is, a qualitie causing sleepinesse; which in Greekes is (...): or of the fish Torpedo, called in Greeke (...), which benummes the hands of them that touch him, as being hurtfull to the sinewes; and bringeth dulnesse to the head, which properly belongeth to the Narcisses, whose smell causeth drowsinesse.


 The Nature.
The roots of Narcissus are hot and dry in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
Galen saith, That the roots of Narcissus haue such wonderfull qualities in drying, that they consound  and glew together very great wounds, yea and such gashes or cuts as happen about the veins, sinewes, and tendons. They haue also a certaine cleansing and attracting facultie.
The roots of Narcissus stamped with honey, and applied plaister-wise, helpeth them that are burned  with fire, and ioyneth together sinewes that are cut in sunder.
Being vsed in manner aforesaid, it helpeth the great wrenches of the ankles, the aches and pains  of the ioynts.
The same applied with hony and nettle seed helpeth Sun burning and the morphew.
The same stamped with barrowes grease and leuen of rie bread, hastneth to maturation hard impostumes, which are not easily brought to ripenesse.
Being stamped with the meale of Darnell and honey, it draweth forth thornes and stubs out of  any part of the body.
The root, by the experiment of Apuleius, stamped and strained, and giuen in drinke, helpeth the  cough and collicke, and those that be entred into a ptisicke.
The roots whether they be eaten or drunken, do moue vomit, and being mingled with Vineger  and nettle seed, taketh away lentiles and spots in the face.



CHAP. 85. Of the Bastard Daffodill.

 The Description.
1 THe double yellow Daffodill hath small smooth narrow leaues, of a darke greene colour; among which riseth vp a naked hollow stalke of two hands high, bearing at the top a faire and beautifull yellow floure, of a pleasant sweet smell: it sheddeth his floure, but there followeth no seed at all, as it hapneth in many other double floures. The root is small, bulbous, or onion fashion, like vnto the other Daffodils, but much smaller.
2 The common yellow Daffodill or Daffodowndilly is so well knowne to all that it needeth no description.
3 We haue in our London gardens another sort of this common kind, which naturally groweth in Spaine, very like vnto our best knowne Daffodill in shape and proportion, but altogether fairer, greater, and lasteth longer before the floure doth fall or fade.
@ 4 This hath leaues and roots like the last described, but somewhat lesse; the floure also is in shape not vnlike that of the precedent, but lesse, growing vpon a weake slender greene stalke, of some fingers length: the seed is contained in three cornered, yet almost round heads. The root is small, bulbous, and blacke on the outside.
5 This hath a longish bulbous root, somwhat blacke on the outside, from which rise vp leaues not so long nor broad as those of the last described: in the midst of these leaues springs vp a stalk, slender, and some halfe foot in height; at the top of which, forth of a whitish filme, breakes forth a floure like in shape to the common Daffodill, but lesse, and wholly white, with the brim of the cup welted about. It floures in Aprill, and ripens the seeds in Iune. @


 The Place.
The double yellow Daffodill I receiued from Robinus of Paris, which he procured by meanes of friends from Orleance and other parts of France.



1 Pseudonarcissus luteus multiplex. Double yellow Daffodill.


2 Pseudonarcissus Anglicus. Common yellow Daffodill.


@ 3 Pseudonarcissus Hispanicus. The Spanish yellow Daffodill.


@ 4 Pseudonarcissus minor Hispanicus. The lesser Spanish Daffodill.





@ 5 Pseudonarcissus albo flore. White Bastard Daffodill.


The yellow English Daffodill groweth almost euerie where through England. The yellow Spanish Daffodill doth likewise decke vp our London Gardens, where they increase infinitely.


 The time.
The double Daffodill sendeth forth his leaues in the beginning of Februarie, and his floures in Aprill.


 The Names.
The first is called Pseudonarcissus multiplex, and Narcissus luteus Polyanthos: in English, the double yellow Daffodill, or Narcissus.
The common sort are called in Dutch, Geel Sporckel bloemen: in English, yellow Daffodill, Daffodilly, and Daffodowndilly.


 The Temperature.
The temperature is referred vnto the (...) of (...).


 The Vertues.
Touching the vertues hereof, it is found out by experiment  of some of the later Physitians, that the decoction of the roots of this yellow Daffodill do purge by siege tough and flegmaticke humors, and also waterish, and is good for them that are full of raw humors, especially if there be added thereto a little anise seed and ginger, which will correct the churlish hardnesse of the working.
The distilled water of Daffodils doth cure the Palsie, if the Patient be bathed and rubbed with the sayd liquor by the fire. It hath beene proued by an especiall and trusty Friend of myne, a man learned, and a diligent searcher of nature, M. Nicholas Belson, sometimes of Kings Colledge in (...).



CHAP. 86. Of diuers other Daffodils or Narcisses.
@ THere are besides the forementioned sorts of Daffodils, sundry others, some of which may be referred to them; other some not. I do not intend an exact enumeration of them, it being a thing not so fitting for a historie of Plants, as for a Florilegie, or booke of floures. Now those that require all their figures, and more exact descriptions, may finde satisfaction in the late Worke of my kinde friend M. Iohn Parkinson, which is intitled Paradisus terrestris: for in other Florilegies, as in that of De Bry, Swertz, etc. you haue barely the names and figures, but in this are both figures, and an exact historie or declaration of them. Therefore I in this place will but onely briefely describe and name some of the rarest that are preserued in our choice gardens, and a few others whereof yet they are not possest.

 The Descriptions.
1 The first of these, which for the largenesse is called Nonpareille, hath long broad leaues and roots like the other Daffodils. The floure consists of six very large leaues of a pale yellow colour, with a very large cup, but not very long: this cup is yellower than the incompassing leaues, narrower also at the bottome than at the top, and vneuenly cut about the edges. This is called Narcissus omnium maximus, or Non pareille; the figure well expresseth the floure, but that it is somewhat too little. There is a varietie of this with the open leaues and cup both yellow, which makes the difference. There is also another Non pareille, whose floures are all white, and the six leaues that stand spred abroad are vsually a little folded, or turned in at their ends.
2 Besides these former there are foure or fiue double yellow Daffodils, which I cannot passe ouer in silence; the first is that, which is vulgarly amongst Florists knowne by the name of Robines  Narcisse; and it may be was the same our Author in the precedent chapter mentions he receiued from Robine; but he giuing the figure of another, and a description not well (...) this, I can affirme nothing of certaintie. This double Narcisse of Robine growes with a stalke (...) foot in height, and the floure is very double, of a pale yellow colour, and it seemes commonly to (...) it selfe into some six partitions, the leaues of the floure lying one vpon another euen to the middle of the floure. This may be called Narcissus pallidus multiplex Robini, Robines double pale Narcisse.


@ 1 Narcissus omnium maximus. The (...) Daffodill.


@ 3 Pseudonarcissus flore pleno. The double yellow Daffodill.


3 The next to this is that which from our Author, the first obseruer thereof, is vulgarly called Gerrards Narcisse: the leaues and root do not much differ from the ordinarie Daffodill; the stalk is scarce a foot high, bearing at the top thereof a floure very double; the sixe outmost leaues are of the same yellow colour as the ordinarie one is; those that are next are commonly as deepe as the tube or trunke of the single one, and amongst them are mixed also other paler coloured leaues, with some green stripes here and there among those leaues: these floures are somtimes all contained in a trunk like that of the single one, the sixe out-leaues excepted: other whiles this inclosure is is broke, and then the floure stands faire open like as that of the last described. Lobel in the second part of his Aduersaria tells, That our Author Master Gerrard found this in Wiltshire, growing in the garden of a poore old woman; in which place formerly a Cunning man (as they vulgarly terme him) had dwelt.
This may be called in Latine, according to the English, Narcissus multiplex Gerardi, Gerrards double Narcisse.

The figure we here giue you is expressed somewhat too tall, and the floure is not altogether so double as it ought to be.

4 There are also two or three double yellow Daffodils yet remaining. The first of these is called Wilmots Narcisse, (from Master Wilmot, late of Bow) and this hath a very faire double and large yellow floure composed of deeper and paler yellow leaues orderly mixed.
The second (which is called Tradescants Narcisse, from Master Iohn Tradescant of South-Lambeth) is the largest and (...) of all the rest; in the largenesse of the (...) it exceeds Wilmots, which otherwise it much resembles; some of the leaues whereof the floure consists are sharp pointed,  and these are of a paler colour; other some are much more obtuse, and these are of a deeper and fairer yellow.
This may be called Narcissus Roseus Tradescanti, Tradescants Rose Daffodill.
The third M. Parkinson challengeth to himselfe; which is a floure to be respected, not so much for the beautie, as for the various composure thereof, for some of the leaues are long and sharpe pointed, others obtuse and curled, a third sort long and narrow, and vsually some few hollow, and in shape resembling a horne; the vtmost leaues are commonly streaked, and of a yellowish green; the next to them fold themselues vp ronnd, and are vsually yellow, yet sometimes they are edged with greene. There is a deepe yellow pestill diuided into three parts, vsually in the midst of this floure. It floures in the end of March. I vsually (before M. Parkinson set forth his Florilegie, or garden of floures) called this floure Narcissus (...), by reason of its various shape and colour: but since I thinke it fitter to giue it to the Author, and terme it Narcissus multiplex varius Parkinsoni, Parkinsons various double Narcisse.


@ 5 Narcissus Iacobaeus Indicus. The Indian or Iacobaean Narcisse.


@ 6 Narcissus juncifolius montanus minimus. The least Rush-leaued Mountaine Narcisse.


5 Now come I to treat of some more rarely to be found in our gardens, if at all. That which takes the first place is by Clusius called Narcissus Iacobaeus Indicus, the Indian or Iacobaean Narcisse. The root hereof is much like to an ordinarie onion, the leaues are broad like the other Narcisses, the stalke is smooth, round, hollow, and without knots, at the top whereof, out of a certaine skinny huske comes forth a faire red floure like that of the flouring Indian reed, but that the leaues of this are somewhat larger, and it hath six chiues or threds in the middle thereof of the same colour as the floure, and they are adorned with brownish pendants; in the midst of these there stands a little farther out than the rest, a three forked stile, vnder which succeeds a triangular head, after the falling of the floure.
This giues his floure in Iune or Iuly.
6 This Lobell calls Narcissus montanus juncifolius minimus, The least Rush-leaued mountaine Narcisse. The leaues of this are like the Iunquilia; the stalke is short, the floure yellow, with the six winged leaues small and paler coloured, the cup open and large to the bignesse of the floure.

7 This also is much like the former; but the six incompassing leaues are of a greenish faint yellow colour; the cup is indented, or vnequally curled about the edges, but yellow like the precedent. Lobell calls this Narcissus montanus juncifolius flore (...), The mountaine Rush-leaued Narcisse with an indented or curled cup.


@ 7 Narcissus montanus juncifolius flore fimbriato, The mountaine Rush leaued Narcisse with an indented or curled cup.


@ 8 Narcissus omnium minimus montanus albus. The least mountaine white Narcisse.


8 The leaues of this are as small as the Autumne Iacinth, the stalke some handfull high, and the floure like the last described, but it is of a whitish colour. Lobell calls this last described, Narcissus omnium minimus montanus albus, The least mountaine white Narcisse. These three last vsually floure in Februarie. @



CHAP. 87. Of Tulipa, or the Dalmatian Cap.

 The Kindes.
TVlipa, or the Dalmatian Cap is a strange and forreine floure, one of the number of thebul bed floures, whereof there be sundry sorts, some greater, some lesser, with which all studious and painefull Herbarists desire to be better acquainted, because of that excellent diuersitie of most braue floures which it (...). Of this there be two chiefe and generall kindes, viz. Praecex and Serotina; the one doth beare his floures timely, the other later. To these two we will adde another sort called Media, flouring betweene both the others. And from these three sorts, as from their heads, all other kindes do proceed, which are almost infinite in number. Notwithstanding, my louing friend M. Iames Garret, a curious searcher of Simples, and learned Apothecary of London, hath vndertaken to finde out, if it were possible, the infinite sorts, by diligent sowing of their seeds, and by planting those of his owne propagation, and by others receiued from his Friends



1 Tulipa Bononie nsis. Italian Tulipa.


2 Tulipa Narbonensis. French Tulipa.


3 Tulipa praecox tota lutea. Timely flouring Tulipa.


4 Tulipa Coccinea serotina. Late flouring Tulipa.



5 Tulipa media sanguinea albis oris. Apple bloome Tulipa.6 Tulipa Candida suaue (...) oris. Blush coloured Tulipa.7 Tulipa bulbifera. Bulbous stalked Tulipa.@ 8 Tulipa sanguinea luteo fundo. The bloud-red Tulip with a yellow bottome. beyond the seas for the space of twenty yeares, not being yet able to attaine to the end of his trauell, for that each new yeare bringeth forth new plants of sundry colours, not before seene: all which to describe particularly were to roll Sisiphus stone, or number the sands. So that it shall suffice to speake of and describe a few, referring the rest to some that meane to write of Tulipa a particular volume.


@ 9 Tulipa purpurea. The purple Tulip.


@ 10 Tulipa rubra amethistina. The bright red Tulip.




 The Description.
1 THe Tulipa of Bolonia hath fat, thicke, and grosse leaues, hollow, furrowed or chanelled, bending a little backward, and as it were folded together: which at their first comming vp seeme to be of a reddish colour, and being throughly growne turne into a whitish greene. In the middest of those leaues riseth vp a naked fat stalke a foot high, or something more, on the top whereof standeth one or two yellow floures, sometimes three or more, consisting of six small leaues, after a sort like to a deepe wide open cup, narrow aboue, and wide in the bottome. After it hath beene some few dayes floured, the points and brims of the floure turne backward, like a Dalmatian or Turkish cap, called Tulipan, Tolepan, Turban, and Turfan, whereof it tooke his name. The chiues or threads in the middle of the floures be sometimes yellow, otherwhiles blackish or purplish, but commonly of one ouer-worne colour or other, Nature seeming to play more with this floure than with any other that I do know. This floure is of a reasonable pleasant smell, and the other of his kinde haue little or no smell at all. The seed is flat, smooth, shining, and of a gristly substance. The root is bulbous, and very like to a common onion of Saint Omers.
2 The French Tulipa agreeth with the former, except in the blacke bottome which this hath in the middle of the floure, and is not so sweet of smell, which setteth forth the difference.
3 The yellow Tulipa that floureth timely hath thicke and grosse leaues full of iuyce, long, hollow, or gutter fashion, set about a tender stalke, at the top whereof doth grow a faire and pleasant shining yellow floure, consisting of six small leaues without smell. The root is bulbous or like an onion.



@ 11 Tulipa flore albo strijs purepureis. The white Tulip with purple streakes.


@ 12 Tulipa flore albo oris dilute rubentibus. The white Tulip with light red edges.


@ 13 Tulipa flore pallido. The straw-coloured Tulip.


@ 14 Tulipa flammea strijs flauescentibus. The flame coloured Tulip with yellowish streakes.


@ 15 Tulipa polyclonos minor serotina flore rubro vel flauo, Clusij. The lesser many-branched late Tulip of Clusius, with red, or else yellow floures.


@ 16 Tulipa serotina polyclados major flo. (...) fundo nigro, Clusij. Clusius his greater many branched Tulip with a yellow floure, and blacke bottome.





@ 17 Tulipa pumilio obscure rubeus oris virentibus. The dwarfe Tulip with darke red floures edged with greene.


@ 18 Tulipa pumilio flore purpurascenti intus candido. The Dwarfe Tulip with a purplish floure, white within.


@ 19 Tulipa pumilio lutea. The yellow Dwarfe Tulip.


@ 20 Tulipa Persica flore rubro, oris albidis elegans. The pretty Persian Tulip hauing a red floure with whitish edges.


@ 21 Tulipa aurea oris rubentibus. The gold yellow with red edges



(...) fourth kinde of Tulipa, that floureth later, hath leaues, stalks, and roots like vnto the (...). The floures hereof be of a skarlet colour, welted or bordered about the edges with (...) middle part is like vnto a hart tending to whitenesse, spotted in the same whitenes with (...) or spots. The seed is contained in square cods, flat, tough, and sinewie.


22 Tulipa miniata. The Vermilion Tulip.


@ 23 Tulipa albo and rubro striatus. The white and red striped Tulip.


5 The fift sort of Tulipa, which is neither of the timely ones, nor of the later flouring sort, but one that buddeth forth his most beautifull floures betweene both. It agreeth with the last described Tulipa, in leaues, stalkes, roots, and seed, but differeth in floures. The floure consisteth of six small leaues ioyned together at the bottome: the middle of which leaues are of a pleasant bloudy colour, the edges be bordered with white, and the bottome next vnto the stalke is likewise white; the whole floure resembling in colour the blossomes of an Apple tree.
6 The sixth hath leaues, roots, stalkes, and seed like vnto the former, but much greater in euery point. The floures hereof are white, dasht about the brimmes or edges with a red or blush colour. The middle part is stripped confusedly with the same mixture, wherein is the difference.
7 Carolus Clusius setteth forth in his Pannonicke historie a kinde of Tulipa that beareth faire red floures, blacke in the bottome, with a pestell in the middle of an ouer-worne greenish colour; of which sort there happeneth some to haue yellow floures, agreeing with the others before touched: but this bringeth forth encrease of root in the bosome of his lowest leafe next to the stalke, contrarie to all the other kindes of Tulipa.
8 Lobelius in his learned Obseruations hath set forth many other sorts; one he calleth Tulipa Chalcedonica, or the Turky Tulipa, saying it is the least of the small kindes or Dwarfe Tulipa's, whose floure is of a sanguine red colour, vpon a yellow ground, agreeing with the others in roote, leafe, and stalke.
9 He hath likewise set forth another; his floure is like the Lilly in proportion, but in colour of a fine purple.
10 We may also behold another sort altogether greater than any of the rest, whose floure is in colour like the stone called Amethist, not vnlike to the floures of Peonie.
11 We haue likewise another of greater beauty, and very much desired of all, with white floures dasht on the backside, with a light wash of watchet colour.



@ 24 Tulipa luteo and rubro striatus. The red and yellow Fooles coat.


@ 25 Tulipa flore color is sulphur The sulphur-coloured (...)


@ 26 Tulipa rubra oris pallidis. The red Tulip with pale edges.


12 There is another also in our London gardens, of a snow white colour; the edges slightly washt ouer with a little of that we call blush colour.
13 We haue another like the former, sauing that his floure is of a straw colour.
14 There is another to be seene with a floure mixed with streaks of red and yellow, resembling a flame of fire, wherupon we haue called it Flambant.
There be likewise so many more differing so notably in colour of their floures, although in leaues, stalke, and roots for the most part one like another, that (as I said before) to speake of them seuerally would require a peculiar volume.
@ Therefore not to trouble you any further, I haue giuen you onely the figures and names of the notablest differences which are in shape; as, the dwarfe Tulipa's, and the branched ones, together with the colour of their floures, contained in their titles, that you need not far to seeke it. @
There be a sort greater than the rest, which in forme are like; the leaues whereof are thicke, long, broad, now and then somewhat folded in the edges; in the middest whereof doth rise vp a stalk a foot high, or somthing higher, vpon which standeth onely one floure bolt vpright, consisting of six leaues, after a sort like to a deepe wide cup of this forme, viz. the bottome turned vpwards, with  threds or chiues in the middle, of the colour of Saffron. The colour of the floure is sometimes yellow, sometimes white, now and then as it were of a light purple, and many times red; and in this there is no small varieties of colours, for the edges of the leaues, and oftentimes the nailes or lower part of the leaues are now and then otherwise coloured than the leaues themselues, and many times there doth runne all along these streakes some other colours. They haue no smell at all that can be perceiued. The roots of these are likewise bulbed, or Onion fashion; euery of the which to set forth seuerally would trouble the writer, and wearie the Reader; so that, what hath bin said shall suffice touching the description of Tulipa's. @ True it is that our Author here affirmes, The varieties of these floures are so infinite, that it would both tyre the Writer and Reader to recount them. Yet for that some are more in loue with floures than with Plants in generall, I haue thought good to direct them where they may finde somewhat more at large of this Plant: Let such therefore as desire further satisfaction herein haue recourse to the Florilegies of De (...), Swerts, Robin, or to M. Parkinson, who hath not onely largely treated of the floures in particular, but also of the ordering of them. @


@ 27 Tulipa lutea serotina. The late flouring yellow Tulip.


@ 28 Tulipa serotina lutea gutt is sanguineis fundo nigro. The late Yellow with sanguine spots and a blacke bottome.




 The Place.
Tulipa groweth wilde in Thracia, Cappadocia, and Italy; in Bizantia about Constantinople, at Tripolis and Alepo in Syria. They are now common in all the gardens of such as affect floures, all ouer England.


 The Time.
They floure from the end of Februarie vnto the beginning of May, and somewhat after; although Augerius Busbequius in his journey to Constantinople, saw between Hadrianople and Constantinople, great aboundance of them in floure euery where, euen in the middest of Winter, in the moneth of Ianuarie, which that warme and temperate climate may seeme to performe.



The Names.
The later Herbarists by a Turkish and strange name call it Tulipa, of the Dalmatian Cap called Tulipa, the forme whereof, the floure when it is open seemeth to represent.
It is called in English after the Turkish name Tulipa, or it may be called Dalmatian Cap, or the Turkes Cap. What name the antient Writers gaue it is not certainly knowne. A man might fuspect it to be (...), if it were a Bulbe that might be eaten, and were of force to make milke cruddy; for Theophrastus reckoneth it among those Bulbes that may be eaten: and it is an herbe, as Hesychius saith, wherewith milke is crudded. Conradus Gesnerus and diuers others haue taken Tulipa to be that Satyrium which is syrnamed Erythronium, because one kinde hath a red floure; or altogether a certaine kinde of Satyrium: with which it doth agree reasonable well, if in Dioscorides his description we may in stead of (...), reade (...) or (...); for such mistakes are frequent in antient and moderne Authors, both in writing and printing. In the Turky Tongue it is called Cafe lale, Cauale lale, and likewise Turban and Turfan, of the Turks Cap so called, as beforesaid of Lobelius.


@ 29 (...) Holias alba strijs and punctis sanguineis. The white Holias with sanguine spots and streakes.


@ 30 Tulipa media sature purpurea fundo (...). A middle Tulip of a deepe Purple colour with a blewish bottome.


@ I do verily thinke that these are the (...), the Lillies of the field mentioned by our Sauiour, Mat. 6. 28, 29. for he saith, That Solomon in all his royaltie was not arayed like one of these. The reasons that induce me to thinke thus are these: First, their shape; for their floures resemble Lillies, and in these places whereas our Sauiour was conuersant they grow wilde in the fields. Secondly, the infinite varietie of colour, which is to be found more in this than any other sort of floure: and thirdly, the wondrous beautie and mixtures of these floures. This is my opinion, and these my reasons, which any may either approue of or gainsay as he shall thinke good. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There hath not beene any thing set downe of the antient or later Writers as touching the Nature or Vertues of the Tulipa's, but they are esteemed especially for the beauty of their floures.

@ The roots preserued with sugar, or otherwise dressed, may be eaten, and are no vnpleasant  nor any way offensiue meat, but rather good and nourishing. @



CHAP. 88. Of Bulbous Violets.

 The Kindes.
THeophrastus hath mentioned one kinde of bulbous Leucoion, which Gaza translates Viola alba, or the white Violet. Of this Viola Theophrasti, or Theophrastus his Violet, we haue obserued three sorts, whereof some bring forth many floures and leaues, others fewer; some floure very early, and others later, as shall be declared.


1 Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus. Timely flouring bulbous Violet.


@ 2 Leucoium bulbosum praecox Byzantinum. The Byzantine early bulbous Violet.




 The Description.
1 THe first of these bulbous Violets riseth out of the ground, with two small leaues flat and crested, of an ouerworne greene colour, betweene the which riseth vp a small and tender stalke of two hands high; at the top whereof commeth forth of a skinny hood a small white floure of the bignesse of a Violet, compact of six leaues, three bigger, and three lesser, tipped at the points with a light greene: the smaller are fashioned into the (...) forme of a heart, and pretily edged about with greene; the other three leaues are longer, and sharpe pointed. The whole floure hangeth (...) his head, by reason of the weake foot stalke whereon it groweth. The root is small, white, and bulbous.
@ 2 There are two varieties of this kind which differ little in shape, but the first hath a floure as bigge againe as the ordinarie one, and Clusius calls it Leucoium bulbosum praecox Byzantinum, The greater early Constantinopolitan bulbous Violet. The other is mentioned by Lobel, and differs onely in colour of floures; wherefore he calls it (...) triphyllum flore caerulco, The blew floured bulbous Violet.



3 (...) bulbosum serotinum. Late flouring bulbous Violet.


4 Leucoium bulbosum majus polyanthemum. The many floured great bulbous violet.


@ 5 Leucoium bulbosum Autumnale minimum. The least Autumne bulbous Violet


3 The third sort of bulbed Violets hath narrow leaues like those of the leeke, but lesser and smoother, not vnlike to the leaues of the bastard Daffodill. The stalks be slender and naked, two hands high, whereupon doe grow faire white floures, tipped with a yellowish greene colour, with many small chiues or threds in the middest of the floure. The seed is contained in smal round buttons. The root is white and bulbous.
4 The great bulbed Violet is like vnto the third in stalke and leaues, yet greater and higher. It bringeth forth on euery stalke not one floure onely, but fiue or six, blowing or flouring one after another, altogether like the other floures in forme and bignesse.
@ 5 This small bulbous plant may be annexed to the former, the root is small, compact of many coats: the leaues are also small, and the stalke an handfull high, at the top whereof there hang downe one or two small white floures consisting of six leaues a piece, much resembling the last described, but farre lesse. It floures in (...).
6 Besides these, Clusius makes mention of a small one much like this, and it floures in the Spring, and the floures are somewhat reddish nigh the stalke, and smell sweet. Clusius cals this, Leucoium bulbosum vernum minimum, The smallest Spring bulbous Violet. @



 The Place.
These plants do grow wilde in Italy and the places adiacent. Notwithstanding our London (...) haue taken possession of most of them many yeares past.


 The Time.
The first floureth in the beginning of Ianuary; the second in September; and the third in May; the rest at their seasons mentioned in their descriptions.


 The Names.
@ The first is called of Theophrastus, (...); which Gaza renders Viola alba, and Viola Bulbosa, or Bulbed Violet. Lobelius hath from the colour and shape called it (...), and that very properly, considering how it doth as it were participate of two sundry plants, that is to say, the root of the Narcissus, the leaues of the small Lilly, and the white colour; taking the first part (...), of his whitenesse; Narcisso, of the likenesse the roots haue vnto Narcissus; and Lirium, of the leaues of Lillies, as aforesaid. In English we may call it the bulbous Violet; or after the Dutch name, (...) (...); that is, Sommer fooles, and (...). Some call them also Snow drops. This name Leucoium, without his Epithite Bulbosum, is taken for the Wall-floure, and stock Gillofloure, by all moderne Writers.


 The Nature and Vertues.
Touching the faculties of these bulbous Violets we haue nothing to say, seeing that nothing is set downe hereof by the antient Writers, nor any thing obserued by the moderne, only they are maintained and cherished in gardens for the beautie and rarenesse of the floures, and sweetnesse of their smell.



CHAP. 89. Of Turkie or Ginny-hen Floure.


1 (...). Checquered Daffodill.


2 Frittillaria variegata. Changeable Checquered Daffodil.




 The Description.
1 THe Checquered Daffodill, or Ginny-hen Floure, hath small narrow grassie leaues; among which there riseth vp a stalke three hands high, hauing at the top one or two floures, and sometimes three, which consisteth of six small leaues checquered most strangely: wherein Nature, or rather the Creator of all things, hath kept a very wonderfull order, surpassing (as in all other things) the curiousest painting that Art can set downe. One square is of a greenish yellow colour, the other purple, keeping the same order as well on the backside of the floure, as on the inside, although they are blackish in one square, and of a Violet colour in an other; insomuch that euery leafe seemeth to be the feather of a Ginny hen, whereof it tooke his name. The root is small, white, and of the bignesse of halfe a garden beane.
2 The second kinde of Checquered Daffodill is like vnto the former in each respect, sauing that this hath his floure dasht ouer with a light purple, and is somewhat greater than the other, wherein consisteth the difference.


@ 3 Frittillaria Aquitanica minor flore luteo obsoleto. The lesser darke yellow Fritillarie.


@ 9 Frittillaria alba praecox. The early white Fritillarie.


@ There are sundry differences and varieties of this floure, taken from the colour, largenes, doublenesse, earlinesse and latenes of flouring, as also from the many or few branches bearing floures. We will onely specifie their varieties by their names, seeing their forme differs little from those you haue here described.
4 Fritillaria maxima ramosapurpurea. The greatest branched purple checquered Daffodill.
5 Fritillaria flore purpureo pleno. The double purple floured checquered Daffodill.
6 Fritillaria polyanthos flauoviridis. The yellowish greene many floured checquered Daffodill.
7 Fritillaria lutea Someri. Somers his yellow Checquered Daffodill.
8 Fritillaria alba purpureo tessulata. The white Fritillarie checquered with purple.
9 Fritillaria albapraecox. The early white Fritillarie or Checquered Daffodill.
10 Fritillaria minor (...) luteo absoleto. The lesser darke yellow Fritillarie.
11 Fritillaria angustifolia lutea variegata paruo flore, and altera flore majore. Narrow leaued yellow (...) Fritillarie with small floures; and another with a larger floure.
12 Fritillaria (...) pluribus floribus. The least Fritillarie with many floures.

Fritillaria Hispanica vmbellifera. The Spanish Fritillarie with the floures standing as it were in an vmbell. @


 The Names.
The Ginny hen floure is called of (...), Flos Melcagris: of Lobelius, Lilio-narcissus variegata, for that it hath the floure of a Lilly, and the root of Narcissus: it hath beene called Fritillaria, of the table or boord vpon which men play at Chesse, which square checkers the floure doth very much resemble; some thinking that it was named Fritillus: whereof there is no (...); for Martialis seemeth to call Fritillus, Abacus, or the Tables whereat men play at Dice, in the fifth Booke of his Epigrams, writing to Galla.

Iam tristis, nucibus puer relictis,
Clamoso reuocatur a magistro:
Et blando male (...) Fritillo
Arcanamodo raptus e popina
Aedilem rogat vdus aleator. etc.


The sad Boy now his nuts cast by,
Call'd vnto Schole by Masters cry:
And the drunke Dicer now betray'd
By flattring Tables as he play'd,
Is from his secret tipling house drawne out,
Although the Officer he much besought. etc.

In English we may call it Turky-hen or Ginny-hen Floure, and also Checquered Daffodill, and Fritillarie, according to the Latine.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Of the facultie of these pleasant floures there is nothing set downe in the antient or later Writer, but are greatly esteemed for the beautifying of our gardens, and the bosoms of the beautifull.



CHAP. 90. Of true Saffron, and the wilde or Spring Saffrons.


Crocus florens and sine flore. Saffron with and without floure.




The Description.
ALthough I haue expressed two pictures of Saffrons, as you see, yet are you to vnderstand that these two do but set forth one kinde of plant, which could not so easily be perceiued by one picture as by two, because his floure doth first rise out of the ground nakedly in September, and his long smal grassy leaues shortly after the floure, neuer bearing floure and leafe at once. The which to expresse, I thought it conuenient to set downe two pictures before you, with this description, viz. The root is small, round, and bulbous. The floure consisteth of sixe small blew leaues tending to purple, hauing in the middle many small yellow strings or threds; among which are two, three, or more thicke fat chiues of a fierie colour somewhat reddish, of a strong smell when they be dried, which doth (...) and trouble the head. The first picture setteth forth the Plant when it beareth floures, and the other expresseth nothing but leaues.


1 Crocus vernus. Early flouring wilde Saffron.


2 Crocus vernus minor. Small wilde Saffron.




 The Place.
Common, or the best knowne Saffron groweth plentifully in Cambridge-shire, Saffron-Walden, and other places thereabout, as corne in the fields.


 The Time.
Saffron beginneth to floure in September, and presently after spring vp the leaues, and remaine greene all the Winter long.


 The Names.
Saffron is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Crocus: in Mauritania, Saffaran: in Spanish, (...): in English, Saffron: in the Arabicke tongue, Zahafaran.


 The Temperature.
Saffron is a lirtle astringent or binding, but his hot qualitie doth so ouer-rule in it, that in the whole essence it is in the number of those herbes which are hot in the second degree, and drie in the first: therefore it also hath a certaine force to concoct, which is furthered by the small astriction rhat is in it, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
Auicen affirmeth that it causeth head-ache, and is hurtfull to the braine, which it cannot do by  taking it now and then, but by too much vsing of it: for too much vsing of it cutteth off sleepe, through want whereof the head and sences are out of frame. But the moderate vse of it is good for the head, and maketh the sences more quicke and liuely, shaketh off heauy and drowsie sleepe, and maketh a man merry.
Also Saffron strengthneth the heart, concocteth crude and raw humors of the chest, openeth  the lungs, and remoueth obstructions.



@ 3 Crocus vernus flore luteo. Yellow Spring Saffron.


@ 4 Crocus vernus flore albo. White Spring Saffron.


@ 5 Crocus (...) flore (...). Purple Spring Saffron.


@ 6 Crocus montanus (...). Autumne mountaine Saffron.



It is also such a speciall remedic for those that haue consumption of the lungs, and are, as wee  terme it, at deaths doore, and almost past breathing, that it bringeth breath again, and prolongeth life for certaine dayes, if ten, or twentie graines at the most be giuen with new or sweet Wine. For we haue found by often experience, that being taken in that sort, it presently and in a moment remoueth away difficultie of breathing, which most dangerously and suddenly hapneth.
Dioscorides teacheth, That being giuen in the same sort it is also good against a surfet.
It is commended against the stoppings of the liuer and gall, and against the yellow Iaundise: And hereupon Dioscorides writeth, That it maketh a man well coloured. It is put into all drinkes that are made to helpe the diseases of the intrailes, as the same Authour affirmeth, and into those especially which bring downe the floures, the birth, and the after burthen. It prouoketh vrine, stirreth fleshly lust, and is vsed in Cataplasmes and pultesses for the matrix and fundament, and also in plaisters and seare-cloaths which serue for old swellings and aches, and likewise for hot swellings that haue also in them S. Anthonies fire.


@ 7 Crocus montanus Autumnalis flore majore albido caeruleo. Autumne mountaine Saffron with a large whitish blew floure.


@ 8 Crocus Autumnalis flore albo. White Autumne Saffron.


It is with good successe put into compositions for infirmities of the eares.
The eyes being annointed with the same dissolued in milke, or fennell or rose water, are preserued  from being hurt by the small pox and measels, and are defended thereby from humours that would fall into them.
The chiues steeped in water, serue to illumine or (as we say) limne pictures and imagerie, as also  to colour sundry meats and confections. It is with good successe giuen to procure bodily lust. The confections called Crocomagna, Oxycroceum, and (...), with diuers other emplaisters and electuaries cannot be made without this Saffron.
The weight of tenne graines of Saffron, the kernels of Wall-nuts two ounces, Figges two ounces, Mithridate one dram, and a few sage leaues, stamped together with a sufficient quantitie of Pimpernell water, and made into a masse or lumpe, and kept in a glasse for your vse, and thereof twelue graines giuen in the morning fasting, preserueth from the Pestilence, and expelleth it from those that are infected.



@ 9 Crocus vernus angustifolius flore violaceo. Narrow leaued Spring Saffron with a violet floure.


@ 10 Crocus vernus latifolius flore flauo strijs violaceis. Broad leaued Spring Saffron with a yellow floure and purple streaks.


@ 11 Crocus vernus latifolius striatus flore duplici. Double floured streaked Spring Saffron.




 The Kindes of Spring Saffron
OF wilde Saffrons there be sundry sorts, differing as well in the colour of the floures, as also in the time of their flouring. Of which, most of the figures shall be set forth vnto you.


 The Description of wilde Saffron
1 THe first kind of wilde Saffron hath small short grassie leaues, surrowed or chanelled downe the midst with a white line or streake: among the leaues rise vp small floures in shape like vnto the common Saffron, but differing in colour; for this hath floures of mixt colours; that is to say, the ground of the floure is white, stripped vpon the backe with purple, and dasht ouer on the inside with a bright shining murrey colour; the other not. In the middle of the floures come forth many yellowish chiues, without any smel of saffron at all. The root is small, round, and couered with a browne skinne or filme like vnto the roots of common Saffron.
2 The second wilde Saffron in leaues, roots, and floures is like vnto the precedent, but altogether lesser, and the floures of this are of a purple violet colour.
3 We haue likewise in our London gardens another sort, like vnto the otherwilde Saffrons  @ 12 Crocus vernus latifolius flore purpureo. Broad leaued Spring Saffron with the purple floure. @ 13 Crocus vernus flore cinereo striato. Spring Saffron with an Ash-coloured streaked floure. @ 14 Crocus vernus latifolius flore flauovario duplici. Broad leaued Spring Saffron with a double floure yellow and streaked. in euery point, sauing that this hath floures of a most perfect shining yellow colour, seeming a far off to be a hot glowing cole of fire, which maketh the difference.
4 There is found among Herbarists another sort, not differing from the others, sauing that this hath white floures, contrarie to all the rest.
5 Louers of Plants haue gotten into their gardens one sort hereof with purple or Violet coloured floures, in other respects like vnto the other.
6 Of these we haue another that floureth in the fall of the (...), with floures like to the common Saffron, but destitute of those chiues which yeeld the colour, smell, or taste that the right manured Saffron hath.
@ 7 And of this last kinde there is another with broader leaues, and the floure also is larger, with the leaues thereof not so sharpe pointed, but more round; the colour being at the first whitish, but afterwards intermixt with some blewnesse. @
8 There is also another of Autumne wild Saffrons with white floures, which sets forth the distinction.
Many sorts there are in our gardens besides those before specified, which I thought needlesse to entreat of, because their vse is not great. @ Therefore I will only giue the figures and names of some of the chiefe of them, and refer such as delight to see or please themselues with the varieties (for they are no specificke differences) of these plants, to the gardens and the bookes of Florists, who are onely the preseruers and admirers of these varieties, not sought after for any vse but delight. @



 The Place.
All these wilde Saffrons we haue growing in our London Gardens. Those which doe floure in Autumne do grow vpon certaine craggy rockes in Portugall, not far from the sea side. The other haue been sent ouer vnto vs, some out of Italy, and some out of Spaine, by the labour and diligence of that notable learned Herbarist Carolus Clusius; out of whose Obseruations, and partly by seeing them in our owne gardens, we haue set downe their descriptions.
That pleasant plant that bringeth forth yellow floures was sent vnto me from Robinus of Paris, that painfull and most curious searcher of Simples.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part in Ianuarie and Februarie; that of the mountain excepted, which floureth in September.


 The Names.
All these Saffrons are vnprofitable, and therefore they be truly said to be Croci syluestres, or wild Saffrons: in English, Spring Saffrons, and vernall Saffrons.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Of the faculties of these we haue nothing to set downe, for that as yet there is no knowne vse of them in Physicke.



CHAP. 91. Of Medow Saffron.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of Medow Saffrons differing very notably as well in the colour of their floures, as also in stature and Countrey, from whence they had their being, as shall be declared.


1 Colchicum Anglicum Purpureum. Purple English Medow Saffron.


2 Colchicum Anglicum album. White English Medow Saffron.





 The Description.
1 MEdow Saffron hath three or foure leaues rising immediately forth of the ground, long, broad, smooth, fat, much like to the leaues of the white Lilly in forme and smoothnesse: in the middle whereof spring vp three or foure thicke cods of the bignesse of a small Wall-nut, standing vpon short tender foot-stalkes three square, and opening themselues when they be ripe, full of seed something round, and of a blackish red colour: and when this seed is ripe, the leaues together with the stalkes doe fade and fall away. In September the floures bud forth, before any leaues appeare, standing vpon short tender and whitish stemmes, like in forme and colour to the floures of Saffron, hauing in the middle small chiues or threads of a pale yellow colour, altogether vnfit for meat or medicine. The root is round or bulbous, sharper at the one end than at the other, flat on the one side, hauing a deepe clift or furrow in the same flat side when it floureth, and not at any time else: it is couered with blackish coats or filmes; it sendeth downe vnto the lowest part certaine strings or threds. The root it selfe is full of a white substance, yeelding a juyce like milke, whilest it is greene and newly digged out of the earth. It is in taste sweet, with a little bitternesse following, which draweth water out of the mouth.


3 Colchicum Pannonicum florens and sine flore. Hungary mede Saffron with and without Floure.


2 The second kinde of Mede Saffron is like the precedent, differing onely in the colour of the floures, for that this plant doth bring forth white leaues, which of some hath beene taken for the true Hermodactylus; but in so doing they haue committed the greater error.
3 These two figures expresse both but one and the selfe same plant, which is distinguished because it neuer beareth floures and leaues both at one time. So that the first figure sets it forth when it is in leaues and seed, and the other when it floureth; and therefore one description shall suffice for them both. In the Spring of the yeare it bringeth forth his leaues, thicke, fat, shining, and smooth, not vnlike the leaues of Lillies, which do continue greene vnto the end of Iune; at which time the leaues do wither away, but in the beginning of September there shooteth forth of the ground naked milke white floures without any greene leafe at all: but so soone as the Plant hath done bearing of floures, the root remaines in the ground, not sending forth any thing vntill Februarie in the yeare following.

@ It beares plentifull store of reddish seed in loose triangular heads. The root hereof is bigger than that of the last described. @
That which was set forth by our Author in the fourth place, vnder the title of Colchicum (...) (...), was nothing but the former (...) (...) (...) in seed. The ninth and tenth were the same with the first and second. The sixth and (...), which are (...) (...) and (...) I haue left with their (...) and historie, (...) they be suspected to be (...); and (...) probably gesses, that the latter is the (...) (...), the Painter making the leaues (...) the floure too round, and those of the plant (...) broad and short. @

 4 The small medow Saffron hath three or foure thicke fat leaues narrower than any of the rest. The floure appeareth in the fall of the leafe, in shape, colour, and manner of growing like the common mede Saffron, but of a more reddish purple colour, and altogether lesser. The leaues in this, contrarie to the nature of these plants, presently follow after the floure, and so continue all the Winter and Spring, euen vntill May or Iune. The root is bulbous, and not great; it is couered with many blackish red coats, and is white within.
@ 5 This medow Saffron hath roots and leaues like to those of the last described, but the leaues of the floure are longer and narrower, and the colour of them is white on the inside, greene on the middle of the backe part, and the rest thereof of a certaine flesh colour.


4 Colchicum montanum minus Hispanicum cum flore and semine. Small Spanish medow Saffron in floure and seed.


6 The medow Saffron of Illyria hath a great thicke and bulbous root, full of substance: from which riseth vp a fat, thicke, and grosse stalke, set about from the lower part to the top by equall distances, with long, thicke, and grosse leaues, sharpe pointed, not vnlike to the leaues of leekes; among which leaues do grow yellowish floures like vnto the English medow Saffron, but smaller.
7 The Assyrian medow Saffron hath a bulbous root, made as it were of two pieces; from the middle cleft whereof riseth vp a soft and tender stalke set with faire broad leaues from the middle to the top: among which commeth forth one single floure like vnto the common medow Saffron, or the white Anemone of Matthiolus description.
8 The mountaine wilde Saffron is a base and low plant, but in shape altogether like the common medow Saffron, but much lesser. The floures are smaller, and of a yellow colour, which setteth forth the difference. @ The leaues and roots (as Clusius affirmes) are more like to the Narcisses; and therefore he calls this Narcissus Autumnalis minor, The lesser Autumne Narcisse. @
@ 9 This, whose figure we here giue you, is by Clusius called Colchicum Byzantinum latifolium, The broad leaued Colchicum of Constantinople. The leaues of this are not in forme and magnitude much vnlike to those of the white Hellebor, neither lesse neruous, yet more greene. It beares many floures in Autumne, so that there come sometimes twenty from one root. Their forme and colour are much like the ordinarie sort, but that these are larger, and haue thicker stalkes. They  are of a lighter purple without, and of a deeper on the inside, and they are marked with certaine veines running alongst these leaues. The roots and seeds of this plant are thrice as large as those of the common kinde.
10 This hath roots and leaues like to the first described, but the floure is shorter, and growes vpon a shorter stalke, so that it rises but little aboue the earth: the three inner leaues are of a reddish purple; the three out leaues are either wholly white, or purplish on the middle in the inside, or streaked with faire purple veins, or spotted with such coloured spots: all the leaues of the floure are blunter and rounder than in the common kinde.
11 This in leaues, roots, manner and time of growing, as also in the colour of the floures, differs not from the first described, but the floures, as you may perceiue by the figure here expressed, are very double, and consist of many leaues.


@ 5 Colchicum montanum (...) versicolore flore. The lesser mountaine Saffron with a various coloured floure.


6 Colchicum Illyricum. Greeke medow Saffron.


12 This Colchicum differs little from the first ordinarie one, butthat the floures are somewhat lesse, and the three out-leaues are somwhat bigger than the three inner leaues; the colour is a little deeper also than that of the common one; but that wherein the principall difference consists, is, That this floures twice in a yeare, to wit, in the Spring and Autumne: and hence Clusius hath called it Colchicum biflorum, Twice-flouring Mede Saffron.
13 This also in the shape of the root and leaues is not much different from the ordinary, but the leaues of the floure are longer and narrower, the colour also when they begin to open and shew themselues, is white, but shortly after they are changed into a light purple: each leafe of the floure hath a white thread tipt with yellow growing out of it, and in the middle stands a white three forked one longer than the rest. The floure growes vp between three or foure leaues narrower than those of the ordinarie one, and broader than those of the small Spanish kinde. Clusius, to whom we are beholden for this, as also for most of the rest, calls it Colchicum vernum, or Spring Mede-Saffron, because it then floures together with the Spring Saffrons and Dogs Tooth.
14 There are other Mede-Saffrons besides these I haue mentioned, but because they may be  7 Colchicum Syriacum Alexandrinum. Assyrian Mede Saffron. referred easily to some of these, for that their difference chiefely consists either in the doublenesse or colour of the floures, whereof some are striped, some fraided, others variegated, I will not insist vpon them, but referre such as desire their further acquaintance to look into the gardens of our Florists, as M. Parkinsons, M. Tuggies, etc. or else into the booke of floures set forth not long since by M. Parkinson, where they shall finde them largely treated of. Yet I (...) passe ouer in silence that curious Colchicum which is called by some, Colchicum variegatum Chiense. The floure thereof is very beautiful, consisting of six pretty broad and sharp pointed leaues, all curiously checkered ouer with deepe blew or purple, the rest of the floure being of a light whitish colour: the leaues, that rise vp in the Spring, are not very long, but somewhat broad and sharpe pointed; the root is like others of this kinde. I haue giuen you an exact and large figure of this, as I tooke it from the growing floure some three yeares agone, it being at that time amongst her Maiesties floures kept at Edgcombe in Surry, in the garden of my much honoured friend Sir Iohn Tunstall, Gentleman Vsher vnto her Maiestie.
15 I giue you here in this place the true Hermodactill of the shops, which probably by all is adiudged to this Tribe, though none can certainly say what floures or leaues it beares: the Roots are onely brought to vs, and from what place I cannot tell; yet I coniecture from some part of Syria or the adiacent countries. Now how hard it is to iudge of Plants by one part or particle, I shall shew you more at large when I come to treat of Pistolochia, wherefore I will say nothing thereof in this place. These roots, which wanting the maligne qualitie of Colchicum, either of their owne nature, or by drinesse, are commonly about the bignesse of a Chesnut, smooth, flattish, and sharpe at the one end, but somewhat full at the other, and on the one side there is a little channell or hollownesse, as is in the roots of Mede-Saffron where the stalke of the floure comes vp. Their colour is either white, browne, or blackish on the outside, and very white within, but those are the best that are white both without and within, and may easily be made into a fine white meale or pouder. @


8 Colchicum parvum montanum luteum. Yellow mountaine Saffron.





 The Place.
Medow Saffron, or Colchicum, groweth in Messinia, and in the Isle of Colchis, whereof it tooke his name. The titles of the rest do set forth their natiue countries; notwithstanding our London gardens are possessed with the most part of them.
The two first do grow in England in great aboundance, in fat and fertile medowes, as about Vilford and Bathe, as also in the medowes neere to a small village in the West part of England, called Shepton Mallet, in the medowes about Bristoll, in Kingstroppe medow neere vnto a Water-mill as you go from Northampton to Holmeby House, vpon the right hand of the way, and likewise in great plenty in Nobottle wood two miles from the said towne of Northampton, and many other places. @ The rest for the most part may be (...) in the gardens of the Florists among vs. @


@ 9 Colchicum latifolium. Broad leaued Mede Saffron.


@ 10 Colchicum ver sicolore flore. Party-coloured Mede Saffron.




 The Time.
The leaues of all the kindes of Mede-Saffron do begin to shew themselues in Februarie; The seed is ripe in Iune. The leaues, stalkes, and seed do perish in Iuly, and their pleasant floures doe come forth of the ground in September.


 The Names.
Dioscorides calleth Medow Saffron (...): some, (...): notwithstanding there is another Ephemeron which is not deadly. Diuers name it in Latine Bulbus agrestis, or wild Bulbe: in high Dutch it is called Zeitloosen: in low Dutch, Tilteloosen: in French, Mort au Chien. Some haue taken it to be the true Hermodactyl, yet falsely. Other some call it Filius ante Patrem, although there is a kinde of Lysimachia or Loose-strife so called, because it first bringeth forth his long cods with seed, and then the floure after, or at the same time at the end of the said cod. But in this MedeSaffron it is far otherwise, because it bringeth forth leaues in Februarie, seed in May, and floures in September, which is a thing cleane contrarie to all other plants whatsoeuer, for that they do first floure, and after seed; but this Saffron seedeth first, and foure moneths after brings forth floures: and therefore some haue thought this a fit name for it, (...) ante Patrem: and we accordingly may  @ 11 Colchicum flore pleno. Double floured Mede-Saffron. @ 12 Colchicum biflorum. Twice-flouring Mede-Saffron. @ 13 Colchicumvernum. Spring Mede-Saffron. @ 14 Colchicum variegatum Chiense. Checquered Mede Saffron of Chio.  @ 15 Hermodactyli Officinarum. The true Hermodactyls of the shops. call it, The Sonne before the Father.
@ Our Author in this chapter was of many mindes; for first, in the deseription of Colchicum Anglicum, being the second, hee reproues such as make that white floured Colchicum the true Hermodactyl. Then in the description of the eighth he hath these words, which being omitted in that place I here set downe. Of all these kindes (saith he) of Medow Saffrons it hath not beene certainly knowne which hath been the true Hermodactyll; notwithstanding wee haue certaine knowledge that the Illyrian Colchicum is the Physicall Hermodactyll. Yet when he comes to speake of the names, after that out of Dodonaeus he had set downe the truth in these words; But notwithstanding that Hermodactyll which we do vse in compound medicines, differeth from this (to wit, Colchicum) in many notable points, for that the true Hermodactyll hath a bulbe or round root, which being dried continueth very white within, and without not wrinkled at all, but full and smooth, of a meane hardnesse; and that he had out of the same Authour alledged the words of Valerius Cordus and Auicen, (which are here omitted) he concludes contrarie to the truth, his first admonition, and second assertion, That the white Medow Saffron which we haue in the West part of England, growing especially about Shepton Mallet, is the Hermodactyll vsed in shops.
Those we haue in shops seeme to be the Hermodactyls of Paulus (...); yet not those of Nicholaus and Actuarius, which were cordial, and increasers of sperme; the which the Authors of the Aduersaria, pag. 55. thinke to be the Behen album and rubrum of the Arabians. And to these vnknowne ones are the vertues set downe by our Author in the third place vnder C, to be referred. @


 The Temperature.
Medow Saffron is hot and dry in the second degree.


 The Vertues of Hermodactyls.
That which was set forth by our Author in the fourth place, vnder the title of Colchicum (...) (...), was nothing but the former (...) (...) (...) in seed. The ninth and tenth were the same with the first and second. The sixth and (...), which are (...) (...) and (...) I haue left with their (...) and historie, (...) they be suspected to be (...); and (...) probably gesses, that the latter is the (...) (...), the Painter making the leaues (...) the floure too round, and those of the plant (...) broad and short. @

 The roots of Hermodactyls are of force to purge, and are properly giuen (saith Paulus) to  those that haue the Gout, euen then when the humors are in flowing. And they are also hurtful to the stomacke.
The same stamped, and mixed with the whites of egges, barley meale, and crums of bread, and  applied plaisterwise, ease the paine of the Gout, swellings and aches about the ioynts.
The same strengthneth, nourisheth, and maketh good iuyce, encreaseth sperme or naturall seed, and is also good to cleanse vlcers or rotten sores.


 The correction.
The pouder of Ginger, long Pepper, Annise seed or Cumine seed, and a little Masticke, correcteth the churlish working of that Hermodactyll which is vsed in Shops. But those which haue eaten of the common medow Saffron must drinke the milke of a cow, or else death presently ensueth.


 The Danger.
The roots of all the sorts of Mede Saffrons are very hurtfull to the stomacke, and being eaten they kill by choaking, as Mushromes do, according vnto (...); whereupon some haue called it Colchicum strangulatorium.




CHAP. 92. Of Starre of Bethlem.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of wilde field Onions called Starres of Bethlehem, differing in stature, taste, and smell, as shall be declared.


1 Ornithogalum. Star of Bethlehem.


2 Ornithogalum luteum, siue Cepa agraria. Yellow, or wilde Star of Bethlehem.




 The Description.
1 OVr common Starre of Bethlehem hath many narrow leaues, thicke, fat, full of iuyce, and of a very greene colour, with a white streake downe the middle of each leafe: among the which rise vp small naked stalkes, at the top whereof grow floures compact of six little leaues, stripped on the backeside with lines of greene, the inside being milkewhite. These floures open themselues at the rising of the Sunne, and shut againe at the Sun setting; whereupon this Plant hath beene called by some, Bulbus Solsequius. The floures being past, the seed doth follow inclosed in three cornered husks. The root is bulbous, white both within and without,
That which was the second of our (...). vnder the (...) of (...) (...), and the third vnder (...) (...) were figures of the same plant, but in the (...), as (...) (...), the bottome leaues are omitted, because they fall away when as it is growne vp to floure. @

 2 The second sort hath two or three grassy leaues proceeding from a clouen bulbous root. The stalke riseth vp in the middest naked, but toward the top there doe thrust forth more leaues like vnto the other, but smaller and shorter; among which leaues do step forth very small, weake, and tender foot-stalkes. The floures of this are on the backeside of a pale yellow stripped with greene, on the inside of a bright shining yellow colour, with Saffron coloured threds in their middles. The seed is contained in triangular vessels.
That which was the second of our (...). vnder the (...) of (...) (...), and the third vnder (...) (...) were figures of the same plant, but in the (...), as (...) (...), the bottome leaues are omitted, because they fall away when as it is growne vp to floure. @

 3 This Star of Hungarie, contrarie to the custome of other plants of this kinde, sendeth forth before Winter fiue or six leaues spread vpon the ground, narrow, and of some fingers length, somewhat whitish greene, and much resembling the leaues of Gillofloures, but somewhat roughish. In Aprill the leaues beginning to decay, amongst them rises vp a stalke bearing at the (...) a  spoke of floures, which consisting of six leaues apiece shew themselues open in May; they in colour are like the first described, as also in the greene streake on the lower side of each leafe. The seed is blacke, round, and contained in triangular heads. The root is bulbous, long, and white. @
@ 4 This fourth, which is the Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus of Clusius, hath a little white root which sends forth leaues like the common one, but narrower, and destitute of the white line wherwith the other are marked. The stalke is some two handfulls high, bearing at the top thereof some seuen or eight floures growing each aboue other, yet so, as that they seeme to make an vmbell: each of these floures hath six leaues of a shitish blew colour, with so many white chiues or threds, and a little blewish vmbone in the midst. This floures in Aprill.
5 This fifth first sends vp one onely leafe two or three inches long, narrow, and of a whitish colour, and of an acide taste: nigh whereto riseth vp a small stalke some inch or two high, hauing one or two leaues thereon, betweene which come forth small star-floures, yellow within, and of a greenish purple without. The seed, which is reddish and small, is contained in triangular heads. The root is white, round, and couered with an Ash-coloured filme.


3 Ornithogalum Pannonicum. Star of Hungary.


@ 4 Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus. The lesser Spanish Star-floure.


6 I thinke it not amisse, hereto to adde another small bulbous plant, which Clusius calls Bulbus (...), The one leaued Bulbe. This from a small root sends forth one rush-leafe of some foot in length, which about two inches aboue the earth, being somewhat broader than in the other places, and guttered, sends forth a little stalke some three inches long, whose top is set with three little floures, each standing aboue other, about the bignesse here presented vnto your view in the figure: each of those consisteth of six very white leaues, and are not much vnlike the floures of the grasse of Parnassus, but yet without leaues to sustaine the floure, as it hath: six white threds tipt with yellow, and a three square head with a white pointall possesse the middest of the floure; the smell thereof is somewhat like that of the floures of the Haw-thorne. It floures in the midst of Iune.
7 Hauing done with these two small plants, I must acquaint you with three or foure larger, belonging also to this Classis. The first of these is that which Dodonaeus calls Ornithogalum majus, and Clusius, Ornithogalum Arabicum: This by Lobel and some others is called Lilium Alexandrinum,  @ 5 Ornithogalum luteum parvum. Dwarfe yellow Star of Bethlehem. @ 6 Bulbus vnifolius. The one leaued Bulbe. @ 7 Ornithogalum majus Arabicum. The great Arabicke Star-floure. or the Lilly of Alexandria, as our Author calls it in the chapter of Cotton-grasse. This faire, but tender plant, hath broad greene leaues comming from a large white flat bottomed root; amongst which (...) vp a stalke some cubit high, whose top is garnished with sundry pretty large floures made of sixe very white leaues, with a shining blackish head, ingirt with six white threds tipt with yellow. This floures in May.
8 This, which is commonly called Ornithogalum spicatum, hath large leaues and roots, and the flalke growes some cubit or more high, wheron grow many starre-floures in shape and colour like those of the ordinarie, but larger, and they begin to floure below, and floure vpwards to the top. There is a larger sort of this Spicatum, whose floures are not streaked with greene on their backes. There is also a lesser, differing from the first of these onely in bignesse.
9 This Neapolitan hath three or foure long leaues not much vnlike those of the Hyacinths, but narrower, the stalke is pretty thicke, some foot high, and hath vsually growing theron some fiue or six floures hanging one way, though their stalkes grow alternately out of each side of the maine stemme. These floures are composed of six leaues, being about an inch long, and some quarter of an inch broad, white within, and of an Ash-coloured greene without, with white edges,  the middle of the floure is possessed by another little floure, consisting also of six little leaues, hauing in them six threads headed with yellow, and a white pointall. A blacke wrinkled seed is contained in three cornered heads, which by reason of their bignesse weigh downe the stalke. This floures in Aprill. @


@ 8 Ornithogalum spicatum. Spike fashioned Star-floure.


@ 9 Ornithogalum Neapolitanum. The Neapolitan Star-floure.




 The Place.
Stars of Bethlehem, or Star-floures, especially the first and second, grow in sundry places that lie open to the aire, not onely in Germany and the Low-countries, but also in England, and in our gardens very common. The yellow kinde Lobell found in Somerset-shire in the corne fields. The rest are strangers in England; yet we haue most of them, as the third, fourth, eighth, and ninth, in some of our choice gardens.


 The Time.
These kindes of bulbed plants do floure from Aprill to the end of May.


 The Names.
Touching the names, Dioscorides calls it (...): Pliny, Ornithogale: in high Dutch it is called Feldz (...), Ackerz (...): as you should say, (...) agraria: in English, Stars of Bethlehem.
@ The rest are named in their titles and history; but Clusius questions whether the Bulbus vnifolius be not (...) of Theophrastus, 7. hist. 13. Bauhinus seemes to affirme the Spicatum to be Moly of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, and Epimedium of Pliny.


 The Nature.
These are temperate in heate and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
The vertues of most of them are vnknowne; yet Hieronymus Tragus writeth, That the root of the  Star of Bethlehem rosted in hot embers, and applied with honey in manner of a Cataplasme or pultesse, healeth old eating vlcers, and softens and discusses hard tumors.
The roots, saith Dioscorides, are eaten both raw and boyled.




CHAP. 93. Of Onions.

 The Kindes.
THere be, saith Theophrastus, diuers sorts of Onions, which haue their syr-names of the places where they grow: some also lesser, others greater; some be round, and diuers others long; but none wilde, as Pliny writeth.


1 Cepa alba. White Onions.


@ 3 Cepa Hispanica oblonga. Longish Spanish Onions.




 The Description.
1 THe Onion hath narrow leaues, and hollow within; the stalke is single, round, biggest in the middle, on the top whereof groweth a round head couered with a thinne skin or filme, which being broken, there appeare little white floures made vp in forme of a ball, and afterward blacke seed three cornered, wrapped in thinne white skinnes. In stead of the root there is a bulbe or round head compact of many coats, which oftentimes becommeth great in manner of a Turnep, many times long like an egge. To be briefe, it is couered with very fine skinnes for the most part of a whitish colour.
2 The red Onion differeth not from the former but in sharpnesse and rednesse of the roots, in other respects there is no difference at all.
@ 3 There is also a Spanish kinde, whose root is longer than the other, but in other respects very little different.
@ 4 There is also another small kinde of Onion, called by Lobel, Ascalonit is Antiquorum, or Scallions; this hath but small roots, growing many together: the leaues are like to Onions, but lesse. It seldome beares either stalke, floure, or seed. It is vsed to be eaten in sallads.



 The Place.
The Onion requireth a fat ground well digged and dunged, as Palladius saith. It is cherished euery where in kitchen gardens: it is now and then in beds sowne alone, and many times mixed with other herbes, as with Lettuce, Parseneps, and Carrets. Palladius liketh well that it should be sowne with Sauory, because, faith Pliny, it prospereth the better, and is more wholesome.


@ 4 Ascalonitides. Scallions.




 The Time.
It is sowne in March or Aprill, and somtimes in September.


 The Names.
The Onion is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Cepa, and many times Cepe in the neuter gender: the shops keepe that name. The old Writers haue giuen vnto this many syr-names of the places where they grow, for some are named Cipriae, Sardiae, Creticae, (...), Ascaloniae, of a towne in Iudea, otherwise called Pompeiana: in English, Onions. Moreouer, there is one named Marisca, which the Countrey-men call Vnio, saith Columella; and thereupon it (...) that the French men call it (...), as (...) thinketh: and peraduenture the Low. Dutch men name it (...), of the French word corrupted: they are called Setaniae which are very little and sweet; and these are (...) to be those which Palladius nameth Cepullae, as though he called them parvae Cepae, or little Onions.
There is an Onion which is without an head or bulbe, and hath as it were a long necke, and spends it selfe wholly in the leaues, and it is often cropped or cut for the pot like the Leekes. This Theophrastus names (...): of this Pliny also writeth, in his nineteenth booke, and sixt chapter. There is with vs two principall forts of Onions, the one seruing for a sauce, or to season meate with, which some call (...), and others Pallacana: and the other is the headed or common Onion, which the Germanes call Onion zwibel: the Italians, Cipolla: the Spaniards, Cebolla, Ceba, and Cebola.


 The Temperature.
All Onions are sharpe, and moue teares by the smell. They be hot and dry, as Galen saith, in the fourth degree, but not so extreme hot as Garlick. The iuyce is of a thin waterie and airy substance: the rest is of thicke parts.


 The Vertues.
The Onions do bite, attenuate, or make thinne, and cause drinesse: being boyled they doe lose  their sharpenesse, especially if the water be twice or thrice changed, and yet for all that they doe not lose their attenuating qualitie.
they also breake winde, prouoke vrine, and be more soluble boyled than raw; and raw they nourish  not at all, and but a little though they be boyled.
They be naught for those that are cholericke, but good for such as are replete with raw and  flegmaticke humors; and for women that haue their termes stayed vpon a cold cause, by reason they open the passages that are stopped.
Galen writeth, That they prouoke the Hemorrhoides to bleed if they be laid vnto them, either  by themselues, or stamped with vineger.
The iuyce of Onions sniffed vp into the nose, purgeth the head, and draweth forth raw (...) humors.
Stamped with salt, rew, and honey, and so applied, they are good against the biting of a mad  Dog.
Rosted in the embers, and applied, they ripen and breake cold Apostumes, Biles, and such  like.

The iuyce of Onions mixed with the decoction of Penniriall, and annointed vpon the goutie  member with a feather, or a cloath wet therein, and applied, easeth the same very much.
The iuice annointed vpon a pild or bald head in the sunne, bringing againe the haire very speedily.
The iuyce taketh away the heate of scalding with water or oyle, as also burning with fire and  gun-pouder, as is set forth by a very skilfull Chirurgion named Master William (...), one of the Queens Chirurgions; and before him by Ambrose Parey, in his Treatise of (...) (...) by gun shot.
Onions sliced, and dipped in the iuyce of Sorrell, and giuen vnto the sicke of a tertian Ague, to  eate, take away the fit in once or twice so taking them.


 The Hurts.
The Onion being eaten, yea though it be boyled, causeth head-ache, hurteth the eyes, and maketh a man dimme sighted, dulleth the sences, ingendreth windinesse, and prouoketh (...) sleepe, especially being eaten raw.



CHAP. 94. Of Squils, or Sea-Onions.


@ 1 Scilla Hispanica vnlgaris. The common Spanish Squill.



The Description.
@ 1 THe ordinarie Squill or sea Onion hath a pretty large root, composed of sundrie white coats filled with a certain viscous humiditie, and at the bottome thereof grow forth sundry white and thicke fibres. The leaues are like those of Lillies, broad, thicke, and very greene, lying spred vpon the ground, and turned vp on the sides. The stalke groweth some cubit or more high, straight, naked without leaues, beautified at the top with many starre-(...) floures, very like (...) of the bigger Ornithogalum. The seed is contained in (...) three cornered seed-vessels, being it selfe also black, smooth, and chaffie. It floures in August and September, and the seed is ripe in October. The leaues spring vp in Nouember and December, after that the seed is ripe, and stalke decayed. @
2 The great Sea Onion, which (...) hath set forth in his Spanish historie, hath very great and broad leaues, as Dioscorides saith, longer than those of the Lilly, but narrower. The bulbe or headed root is very great, consisting of many coats or scaly filmes of a reddish colour. The floure is sometimes yellow, sometimes purple, and (...) of a light blew. @ Clusius saith it is like that of the former, I thinke he meanes both in (...) and colour. @
3 The sea-Onion of Valentia, (...) rather the (...) (...), hath many long and sat leaues, and narrow like those of Narcissus, but (...) (...) (...), lying vpon the ground; among which riseth vp a stalke a foot high, bare and naked, (...) at (...) (...) a tuft of white floures, in shape like  vnto our common yellow Daffodil. The seed is inclosed in thicke knobby huskes, blacke, flat, and thicke, very soft, in shape like vnto the seeds of Aristolochia longa, or long Birth-wort. The root is (...), white, long, and bulbous.
4 Red floured Sea Dasfodill, or sea Onion, hath a great bulbe or root like to the precedent; the leaues long, fat, and sharpe pointed, the stalke bare and naked, bearing at the top sundry faire red floures in shape like to the last described.


2 Pancratium Clusij. Great Squill, or Sea Onion.


3 Pancratium Marinum. Sea Onion of Valentia.


5 The yellow floured sea Daffodill, or sea Onion, hath many thicke fat leaues like vnto the common Squill or sea Onion, among which riseth vp a tender straight stalke full of iuyce; bearing at the top many floures like the common yellow Daffodill. The seed and root is like the precedent.
@ 6 To these may fitly be added that elegant plant which is knowne by the name of Narcissus tertius of Matthiolus, and may be called White Sea Daffodill. This plant hath large roots, as bigge sometimes as the ordinarie Squill; the leaues are like those of other Daffodils, but broader, rounder pointed, and not very long. The stalke is pretty thicke, being sometimes round, otherwhiles cornered, at the top whereof grow many large white floures: each floure is thus composed; it hath six long white leaues, in the midst growes forth a white pointall which is incompassed by a welt or cap diuided into six parts, which six are againe by threes diuided into eighteen iagges ordiuisions, a white thred tipt with greene, of an inch long, comming forth of the middle of each diuision. This floureth in the end of May. It is said to grow naturally about the sea coast of Illyria. @


 The Place.
The first is found in Spaine and Italy, not far from the sea side.
The second also neere vnto the sea, in Italy, Spaine, and Valentia. I haue had plants of them brought me from sundry parts of the Mediterranean sea side, as also from Constantinople, where it is numbred among the kindes of Narcissus.
The third groweth in the sands of the sea, in most places of the coast of Narbone, and about Montpellier.
The fourth groweth plentifully about the coasts of Tripolis and Aleppo, neere to the sea, and also in the salt marshes that are sandie (...) lie open to the aire.



 The Time.
They floure from May to the end of Iuly, and their seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
The first is called of the Grecians, (...): and of the Latines also Scilla: the Apothecaries name it Squilla: Diuers, Cepamuris: the Germanes, Meer zwibel: the Spaniards, Cebolla albarrana: the French-men, Oignon de (...): in English, Squill, and Sea Onion.
@ The second is called (...), and Scilla rubr a major.
3, 4, 5. These are all figures of the same plant, but the least (which is the worst) is the figure of the (...), where it is called Pancratium marinum: Dodonaeus calls it Narcissus marinus: and Clusius, Hemerocallis Valentina; and it is iudged to be the (...) of Theoporastus, Lib. 6. Hist. cap. 1. The Spaniards call this Amores mios: the Turkes, Con (...) the Italians, Giglio marino. These three (as I said) differ no otherwise than in the colour of their floures.
The sixth is Narcissus tertius, or Constantinopolitanus, of Matthiolus: (...) calls it Lilionarcissus Hemerocallidis facie. @


4 Pancratium floribus rubris. Red floured sea Daffodill.


@ 6 Narcissus tertius Matthioli. The white sea Daffodill.




 The Temperature.
The sea Onion is hot in the second degree, and cutteth very much, as Galen saith. It is best (...) it is taken baked or rosted, for so the vehemencie of it is taken away.


 The Vertues of Squills.
The root is to be couered with paste or clay, (as (...) teacheth) and then put into an ouen  to be baked, or else buried in hot embers till such time as it be throughly rosted: for not being so baked or rosted it is very hurtfull to the inner parts.
It is likewise baked in an earthen pot close couered and set in an ouen. That is to be taken  especially which is in the midst, which being cut in pieces must be boyled, but the water is still to be changed, till such time as it is neither bitter nor sharpe: then must the pieces be hanged on a thread, and dried in the shadow, so that no one piece touch another. @ Thus vsed it loseth most of the strength; therefore it is better to vse it lightly dried, without any other preparation. @

These slices of the Squill are vsed to make oyle, wine, or vineger of Squill. Of this vineger of  Squill is made an Oxymel. The vsew whereof is to cut thicke, tough, and clammy humors, as also to be vsed in vomits.
This Onion rosted or baked is mixed with potions and other medicines which prouoke vrine, and open the stoppings of the liuer and spleene, and is also put into treacles. It is giuen to those that haue the Dropsie, the yellow Iaundise, and to such as are tormented with the gripings of the belly, and is vsed in a licking medicine against an old rotten cough, and for shortnesse of breath.
One part of this Onion being mixed with eight parts of salt, and taken in the morning fasting  to the quantitie of a spoonefull or two, looseth the belly.
The inner part of Squilla boyled with oyle and turpentine, is with great profit applied to the  chaps or chil-blanes of the feet or heeles.
It driueth forth long and round wormes if it be giuen with honey and oyle.
@ The Pancratium marinum, or Hemerocallis Valentina (saith Clusius) when as I liued with Rondeletius, at Montpellier, was called Scilla; and the Apothecaries thereof made the trochisces for the composition of Treacle: afterwards it began to be called Pancratium flore Lilij. Rondeletius also was wont to tell this following story concerning the poysonous and maligne qualitie thereof. There were two Fishermen, whereof the one lent vnto the other (whom he hated) his knife, poysoned with the iuyce of this Hemerocallis, for to cut his meate withall; he suspecting no treachery cut his victuals therewith, and so eat them, the other abstaining therefrom, and saying that he had no stomacke. Some few dayes after, he that did eate the victuals died; which shewed the strong and deadly qualitie of this plant: which therefore (as Clusius saith) cannot be the Scilla Epimenidia of Pliny, which was eatable, and without malignitie @



CHAP. 95. Of Leekes.


(...) Porrum capitatum. Headed, or set Leeke.


@ 2 Porrum sectivum aut tonsile. Cut, or vnset Leeke.




 The Description.
1 THe leaues or the blades of the (...) be long, somewhat broad, and very many, hauing a keele or crest in the backside, in smell and taste like to the Onion. The stalks, if the blades be not often cut, do in the second or third yeare grow vp round, bringing forth on the top floures made vp in a round head or ball as doth the Onion. The seeds are like. The bulbe or root is long and slender, especially of the vnset Leeke. That of the other Leeke is thicker and greater.
@ 2 Most Writers distinguish the common Leeke into Porrum capitatum and (...); and Lobel giues these two figures wherewith we here present you. Now both these grow of the same seed, and they differ onely in culture; for that which is often cut for the vse of the kitchen is called Sectivum: the other, which is headed, is not cut, but spared, and remoued in Autumne. @


 The Place.
It requireth a meane earth, fat, well dunged and digged. It is very common euery where in other countries, as well as in England.


 The Time.
It may be sowne in March or Aprill, and it to be remoued in September or October.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latines, Porrum. The Emperour Nero had great pleasure in this root, and therefore he was called in scorne, Porrophagus. But Palladius in the masculine gender called it Porrus: the Germanes, (...): the Brabanders, (...): the Spaniards, Puerro: the French, Porrean: the English-men, Leeke, or Leekes.


 The Temperature.
The Leeke is hot and dry, and doth attenuate or make thinne as doth the Onion.


 The Vertues.
Being boyled it is lesse hurtfull, by reason that it loseth a great part of his sharpenesse: and yet being so vsed it yeeldeth no good iuyce. But being taken with cold herbes his too hot quality is tempered.
Being boyled and eaten with Ptisana or barley creame, it concocteth and bringeth vp raw humors  that lie in the chest. Some affirme it to be good in a loch or licking medicine, to (...) the pipes of the lungs.
The iuyce drunke with honey is profitable against the bitings of venomous beasts, and likewise  the leaues stamped and laid thereupon.
The same iuyce, with vineger, frankincense, and milke, or oyle of roses, dropped into the eares, mitigateth their paine, and is good for the noyse in them.
Two drams of the seed, with the like weight of myrtill berries drunk, stop the spitting of bloud  which hath continued a long time. The same ingredients put into Wine keepe it from souring, and being alreadie soure, amend the same, as diuers write. It cutteth and attenuateth grosse and tough humors.
@ Lobel commends the following Loch as very effectuall against phlegmatick Squinances, and  other cold catarrhes which are like to cause suffocation. This is the description thereof; Take blanched almonds three ounces, foure figges, soft Bdellium halfe an ounce, iuyce of Liquorice, two ounces, of sugar candy dissolued in a sufficient quantitie of iuyce of Leekes, and boyled in (...) to the height of a (...), as much as shall be requisit to make the rest into the forme of an Eclegma. @


 The Hurts.
It heateth the body, ingendreth naughty bloud, causeth troublesome and terrible dreames, offendeth the eyes, dulleth the sight, hurteth those that are by nature hot and cholericke, and is noysome to the stomacke, and breedeth windinesse.



CHAP. 96. Of Ciues or (...), and wilde Leekes.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers kindes of Leekes, somewilde, and some of the garden, as shall be declared. Those called Ciues haue beene taken of some for a kinde of wilde Onion: but all the Authors that I haue beene acquainted with, do accord that there is not any wild Onion.



1 Schoenoprason. Ciues or Chiues.


2 Porrum vitigineum. French Leekes, or Vine Leekes.


3 Ampeloprason siue porrum siluestre. Wilde Leeke.




 The Description.
1 CIues bring forth many leaues about a hand-full high, long, slender, round, like to little rushes; amongst which grow vp small and tender stalkes, sending forth certaine knops with floures like those of the Onion, but much lesser. They haue many little bulbes (...) headed roots fastned together: out of which grow downe into the earth a great number of little strings, and it hath both the smell and taste of the Onion and Leeke, as it were participating of both.
2 The Vine Leeke or French Leeke groweth vp with blades like those of Leekes: the stalke is a cubit high, on the top whereof standeth a round head or button, couered at the first with a thinne skinne, which being broken, the floures and seeds come forth like those of the Onion. The bulbe (...) headed root is round, hard, and sound, which is quickly multiplied by sending forth many bulbes.
@ 3 The wilde Leeke hath leaues much like vnto those of Crow-garlicke, but larger, and more acride. The floures and seeds also resemble those of the Crow-garlicke, the seeds being about the bignesse of cornes of wheat, with smal strings comming forth at their ends. @



 The Time and Place.
1 Ciues are set in gardens, they flourish long, and continue many yeares, they suffer the cold of Winter. They are cut and polled often, as is the vnset Leeke.
2 The Vine-leeke groweth of it selfe in Vineyards, and neere vnto Vines in hot regions, wherof it both tooke the name Vine-Leeke, and French Leeke. It beareth his greene leaues in Winter, and withereth away in the Sommer. It groweth in most gardens of England.
@ Thus farre our Author describes and intimates to you a garden Leeke, much like the ordinarie in all respects, but somewhat larger. But the following names belong to the wilde Leeke, which here we giue you in the third place. @


 The Names.
Ciues are called in Greeke, (...), Shoenoprasum: in Dutch, (...), as though you should say, Iunceum Porrum, or Rush Leeke: in English, Ciues, Chiues, Ciuet and Sweth: in French, Brelles.
The figure of (...) was in the first place, in the Chapter next bat one, by the name of Allium (...).

 2 The Vine-leeke, or rather wild Leeke, is called in Greeke, (...), of the place where it naturally groweth: it may be called in Latine, Porrum Vitium, or Vitigineum Porrum: in English, after the Greeke and Latine, Vine Leeke, or French Leeke.


 The Temperature.
Ciues are like in facultie vnto the Leeke, hot and dry. The Vine leeke heateth more than doth the other Leeke.


 The Vertues.
Ciues attenuate or make thinne, open, prouoke vrine, ingender hot and grosse vapours, and are hurtfull to the eyes and braine. They cause troublesome dreames, and worke all the effects that the Leeke doth.
The Vine-leeke, or Ampeloprason, prouoketh vrine mightily, and bringeth downe the floures. It cureth the bitings of venomous beasts, as Dioscorides writeth.



CHAP. 97. Of Garlicke.

 The Description.
1 THe bulbe or head of Garlicke is couered with most thinne skinnes or filmes of a very lightwhite purple colour, consisting of many cloues seuered one from another, vnder which in the ground below groweth a tassell of threddy fibres: it hath long greene leaues like those of the Leeke, among which riseth vp a stalke at the end of the second or third yeare, whereupon doth grow a tuft of floures couered with a white skinne, in which, being broken when it is ripe, appeareth round blacke seeds.
@ 2 There is also another Garlicke which growes wilde in some places of Germanie and France, which in shape much resembles the ordinarie, but the cloues of the roots are smaller and redder. The floure is also of a more duskie and darke colour than the ordinarie. @


 The Place and Times.
Garlick is seldome sowne of seed, but planted in gardens of the small cloues in Nouember and December, and sometimes in Februarie and March.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine, (...) in Greeke, (...): The Apothecaries keepe the Latine name: the Germanes call it (...): the Low Dutch, Look: the Spaniards, Aios, Alho: the Italians, Aglio: the French, (...) or (...) the Bohemians, Czesnek: the English, Garlicke, and poore mans Treacle.


 The Temperature.
Garlicke is very sharpe, hot, and dry, as Galen saith, in the fourth degree, and exulcerateth the skinne by raising blisters.


 The Vertues.
Being eaten, it heateth the body extremely, attenuateth and maketh thinne thicke and grosse  humors; cutteth such as are tough and clammy, digesteth and consumeth them; also openeth obstructions, is an enemie to all cold poysons, and to the bitings of venomous beasts: and therefore Galen nameth it Theriaca Rusticorum, or the husbaudmans Treacle.
It yeeldeth to the body no nourishment at all, it ingendreth naughty and sharpe bloud. (...)  such as are of a hot complexion must especially abstaine from it. But if it be boyled in water vntill such time as it hath lost his sharpenesse, it is the lesse forcible, and retaineth no longer his euill iuyce, as Galen saith.
It taketh away the roughnesse of the throat, it helpeth an old cough, it prouoketh vrine, it breaketh  and consumeth winde, and is also a remedie for the Dropsie which procceedeth of a cold cause.
It killeth wormes in the belly, and driueth them forth. The milke also wherein it hath beene  sodden is giuen to yong children with good successe against the wormes.


1 Allium. Garlicke.


@ 2 Allium syluestre rubentibus nucleis. Wilde Garlicke with red cloues.


It helpeth a very cold stomacke, and is a preseruatiue against the contagious and pestilent  aire.
The decoction of Garlick vsed for a bath to sit ouer, bringeth downe the floures and secondines  or after-burthen, as Dioscorides saith.
It taketh away the morphew, tetters, or ring-wormes, scabbed heads in children, dandraffe and  scurfe, tempered with honey, and the parts anointed therewith.
With Fig leaues and Cumin it is laid on against the bitings of the Mouse called in Greeke, (...): in English, a Shrew.




CHAP. 98. Of Crow-Garlicke and Ramsons.

 The Description.
1 THe wilde Garlicke or Crow-garlicke hath small tough leaues like vnto rushes, smooth and hollow within; among which groweth vp a naked stalke, round, slipperie, hard and sound: on the top whereof, after the floures be gone, grow little seeds made vp in a round cluster like small kernels, hauing the smell and taste of Garlick. In stead of a root there is a bulbe or round head without any cloues at all.
2 Ramsons do send forth two or three broad longish leaues sharpe pointed, smooth, and of a light greene colour. The stalke is a span high, smooth and slender, bearing at the top a cluster of white star-fashioned floures. In stead of a root it hath a long slender bulbe, which sendeth downe a multitude of strings, and is couered with skinnes or thicke coats.


@ 1 Allium syluestre. Crow Garlicke.


2 Allium vrsinum. Ramsons.




 The Time.
They spring vp in Aprill and May. Their seed is ripe in August.


 The Place.
The Crow Garlicke groweth in fertile pastures in all parts of England. I found it in great plentie in the fields called the Mantels, on the backside of Islington by London.
Ramsons grow in the Woods and borders of fields vnder hedges, among the bushes. I found it in the next field vnto Boobies barne, vnder that hedge that bordereth vpon the lane; and also vpon the left hand, vnder an hedge adioyning to a lane that leadeth to Hampsted, both places neere London.



 The Names.
Both of them be wilde Garlicke, and may be called in Latine, Alliua syluestria: in Greeke, (...): The first, by (...) and Lobell is called Allium syluestretenuifolium.
Ramsons are named of the later practioners, Allium Vrsinum, or Beares Garlicke: Allium latifolium, and Moly Hippocraticum: in English, Ramsons, Ramsies, and Buckrams.


 The Nature.
The temperatures of these wilde Garlickes are referred vnto those of the gardens.


 The Vertues.
Wilde Garlicke, or Crow-Garlicke, as Galen saith, is stronger and of more force than the garden  Garlicke.
The leaues of Ramsons be stamped and eaten of diuers in the Low-countries, with fish for a  sauce, euen as we do eate greene-sauce made with sorrell.
The same leaues may very well be eaten in April and May with butter, of such as are of a strong  constitution, and labouring men.
The distilled water drunke breaketh the stone, and driueth it forth, and prouoketh vrine.



CHAP. 99. Of Mountaine Garlicks:


1 Scorodoprasum. Great mountaine Garlicke.


@ 2 Scorodoprasum primum Clusij. Clusius his great mountaine Garlicke.



 The Description.
1 2 THe great Mountaine Garlicke hath long and broad leaues like those of Leekes, but much greater and longer, embracing or clasping about a great thicke stalke, soft and full of juyce, bigger than a mans finger, and (...) toward the top; vpon which is set a great head bigger than a tennise ball, couered with a skinne after the manner of an Onion. The skinne when it commeth to perfection breaketh, and discouereth a great multitude of whitish floures; which being past, blacke seeds follow, inclosed in a three cornered huske. The root is (...), of the bignesse of a great Onion. The whole plant smelleth very strong like vnto  Garlicke, and is in shew a Leeke, whereupon it was called Scorodoprasum, as if we should say, Garlicke Leeke; participating of the Leeke and Garlicke, or rather a degenerate Garlicke growne monstrous.
@ I cannot certainely determine what difference there may be betweene the (...) expressed by the first figure, which is our Authors, and the second figure which is taken out of Clusius. Now the historie which Clusius giues vs to the second, the same is (out of him) giuen by our Author to the first: so that by this reason they are of one and the same plant. To the which opinion I rather incline, than affirme the contrarie with Bauhine, who distinguishing them, puts the first amongst the Leekes, vnder the name of Porrum folio latissinio: following Tabernamontanus, who first gaue this figure, vnder the name of Porrum (...).
3 This plant is lesser in all the parts than the former; the root is set about with longer and slenderer bulbes wrapped in brownish skinnes; the floures and leaues are like, yet smaller than Garlicke.


@ 3 Scorodoprasum minus. The lesser leeke-leaued Garlicke.


@ 4 Ophioscoridon. Vipers Garlike.


4 The third, which Clusius makes his second Scorodoprasum, hath stalkes some two cubits high, hauing many leaues like those of Leekes from the bottome of the stalke to the middle thereof; their smell is betweene that of Leekes and Garlicke; the rest of the stalke is naked, green, smooth, sustaining at the top a head composed of many bulbes, couered with a whitish skinne ending in a long greene point; which skinne by the growth of the bulbes being broken, they shew themselues, being first of a purplish, and afterwards of a whitish colour, amongst which are some floures. The top of the stalke at first twines it selfe, so that it in some sort represents a serpent; then by little it vntwines againe, and beares the head straight vp. The root consists of many cloues much like that of Garlicke. @
5 The broad leaued Mountaine Garlicke, or rather the Mountaine Ramsons, riseth vp with a stalke a cubit high, a finger thicke, yet very weake, full of a spongeous substance, neere to the bottome of a purplish colour, and greene aboue, bearing at the top a multitude of small whitish floures, somewhat gaping, star-fashion. The leaues are three or floure, broad ribbed like the leaues (...) (...) Gentian, resembling those of Ramsons, but greater. The root is great and long, couered with many scaly coats and hairy strings.



5 Allium Alpinum latifolium, seu Victorialis. Broad leaued Mountaine Garlicke.




 The Place.
The great mountaine Garlicke growes about Constantinople, as saith Clusius. I receiued a plant of it from M. Thomas Edwards Apothecary of Excester, who found it growing in the West parts of England.
Victorialis groweth in the mountaines of Germany, as saith Carolus Clusius, and is yet a stranger in England for any thing that I do know.


@.  The Time.
@ Most of these plants floure in the months of Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Of the first and second I haue spoken already. The third is Scorodoprassum minus of Lobell. The fourth is Allium sativum secundum of (...), and Scorodoprasum secundum of Clusius. The fifth is Allium anguinum of Matthiolus; Ophioscoridon of (...), and Victorialis of Clusius and others, as also Allium Alpinum. The Germanes call it Seigmurtz.


 The Temper.
They are of a middle temper between Leekes and Garlicke.


 Their Vertues.
Scorodoprasum, as it partakes of the temper, so also of the vertues of Leekes and Garlicke; that is, it attenuates grosse and tough matter, helpes expectoration, etc.
Victorialis is like Garlicke in the operation thereof. Some (as (...) writeth) hang the root thereof about the necks of their cattell being falne blinde, by what occasion (...) it happen, and persuade themselues that by this meanes they will recouer their sight. Those that worke in the mines in Germany affirme, That they find this root very powerfull in defending them from the assaults of impure spirits or diuels, which often in such places are troublesome vnto them. Clus. @



CHAP. 100. Of Moly, or the Sorcerers Garlicke.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Moly hath for his root a little whitish bulbe somewhat long, not vnlike to the root of the vnset Leeke, which sendeth forth leaues like the blades of (...) or grasse: among which doth rise vp a slender weake stalke, fat and sull of iuyce, at the top whereof commeth forth of a skinny filme a bundle of milke-white floures, not vnlike to those of Ramsons. The whole plant hath the smell and taste of Garlicke, whereof no doubt it is a kinde.
2 Serpents Moly hath likewise a small bulbous root with some fibres fastned to the bottom, from which rise vp weake grassie leaues of a shining greene colour, crookedly winding and turning themselues toward the point like the taile of a Serpent, whereof it tooke his name: the stalke is tough, thicke, and full of iuyce, at the top whereof standeth a cluster of small red bulbes, like vnto the smallest cloue of Garlicke, before they be pilled from their skinne. And among those bulbes there do thrust forth small and weake foot-stalkes, euery one bearing at the end one small white floure tending to a purple colour: which being past, the bulbes do fall downe vpon the ground, where they without helpe do take hold and root, and thereby greatly encrease, as also by the infinite bulbes that the root doth cast off: all the whole plant doth smell and taste of Garlick, whereof it is also a kinde.
3 Homers Moly hath very thicke leaues, broad toward the bottome, sharpe at the point, and  1 Moly (...). (...) his Moly. 2 Moly Serpentinum. Serpents Moly. 3 Moly (...). Homers Moly. hollowed like a trough or gutter, in the bosome of which leaues neere vnto the bottome commeth forth a certaine round bulbe or ball of a goose-turd greene colour: which being ripe and set in the ground groweth and becommeth a faire plant such as is the mother. Among those leaues riseth vp a naked smooth thicke stalke, of two cub its high, as strong as a small walking staffe: at the top of the stalke standeth a bundle of faire whitish floures, dashed ouer with a wash of purple colour, smelling like the floures of Onions. When they be ripe there appeareth a blacke seed wrapped in a white skinne or huske. The root is great and bulbous, couered with a blackish skinne on the outside, and white within, and of the bignesse of a great Onion.
4 Indian Moly hath verythicke fat short leaues, and sharpe pointed; in the bosome wherof commeth forth a thicke knobby bulbe like that of Homers Moly. The stalke is also like the precedent, bearing at the top a cluster of scaly bulbes included in a large thinne skin or filme. The root is great, bulbous fashion, and full of iuyce.
5 Caucafon, or withering Moly, hath a very great bulbous root, greater than that of Homers Moly, and fuller of a slimie iuyce; from which do arise three or foure great thicke and broad leaues withered alwaie at the (...);  wherein consisteth the difference betweene these leaues and those of Homers Moly, which are not so. In the middle of the leaues riseth vp a bunch of smooth greenish bulbes set vpon a tender footstalke, in shape and bignesse like to a great garden Worme, which being ripe and planted in the earth, do also grow vnto a faire plant like vnto their mother.
@ These two last mentioned (according to Bauhine, and I thinke the truth) are but figures of one and the same plant; the later whereof is the better, and more agreeing to the growing of the plant.
6 To these may be fitly added two other Molyes: the first of these, which is the yellow Moly, hath roots whitish and round, commonly two of them growing together; the leaues which it sends sorth are long and broad, and somwhat resemble those of the Tulip, and vsually are but two in number; betweene which rises vp a stalke some foot high, bearing at the top an vmbell of faire yellow star-like floures tipt on their lower sides with a little greene. The whole plant smelleth of Garlicke.


4 Moly Indicum. Indian Moly.


5 Caucafon. Withering Moly.


7 This little Moly hath a root about the bignesse of an Hasell nut, white, with some fibres hanging thereat; the stalke is of an handfull or little more in height, the top thereof is adorned with an vmbel of ten or twelue white floures, each of which consists of six leaues, not sharpe pointed, but turned round, and pretty large, considering the bignesse of the plant. This plant hath also vsually but two leaues, and those like those of Leekes, but far lesse. @


 The Place.
@ These plants grow in the garden of M. Iohn Parkinson Apothecarie, and with M. Iohn Tradescant and some others, studious in the knowledge of plants.


 The Time.
They spring forth of the ground in Februarie, and bring forth their floures, fruit, and seed in the end of August.


 The Names.
@ Some haue deriued the name Moly from these Greeke words, (...): that is, to driue away diseases. It may probably be argued to belong to a certaine bulbous plant, and that a kind  of Garlicke, by the words (...), and (...). The former, Galen in his Lexicon of some of the difficulter words vsed by Hippocrates, thus expounds: (...). That is, Moliza is a Garlicke hauing a simple or single head, and not to be parted or distinguished into cloues: some terme it Moly. Erotianus in his Lexicon expounds the later thus: (...) (saith hee) (...), etc. That is; Molyx is a head of Garlicke, round, and not to be parted into cloues. @


 The Names in particular.
@ 1 this is called Moly by Matthiolus; Moly Angustifolium by Dodonaeus; Moly Dioscorideum by Lobel and Clusius.
2 This, Moly Serpentinum vocatum, by Lobel and the Author of the Hist. Lugd.
3 This same is thought to be the Moly of Theophrastus and Pliny, by Dodonaeus, Clusius, etc. and some also would haue it to be that of Homer, mentioned in his twentieth Odyss. Lobel calleth it Moly Liliflorum.
4 5 The fourth and fifth being one, are called Caucafon, and Moly Indicum by Lobel, Clusius, and others.
6 This is Moly Montanum latifolium flauo flore of Clusius, and Moly luteum of Lobel, Aduersar, par. 2.
7 This same is Moly minus of Clusius. @


@ 6 Moly latifolium flore (...). Broad leaued Moly with the yellow floure.


@ 7 Moly minus flore albo. Dwarfe white floured Moly.




 The Temperature and Vertues.
These Molyes are very hot, approching to the nature of Garlicke, and I doubt not but in time some excellent man or other will find out as many good vertues of them, as their stately and comely proportion should seeme to be possessed with. But for my part, I haue neither proued, nor heard of others, nor found in the writings of the Antients, any thing touching their faculties. Only Dioscorides reporteth, That they are of maruellous efficacie to bring downe the termes, if one of them be stamped with oyle of Floure de-luce according to art, and vsed in manner of a pessarie or mother suppositorie.




@ CHAP. 79. Of diuers other Molyes.
@ BEsides the Garlickes and Molyes formerly mentioned by our Author, and those I haue in this Edition added, there are diuers others, which, mentioned by Clusius, and belonging vnto this Tribe, I haue thought good in this place to set forth. Now for that they are more than conueniently could be added to the former chapters, (which are sufficiently large) I thought it not amisse to allot them a place by themselues.


@ 1 Moly (...) folijs primum. The first Narcisse-leaued Moly.


@ 2 Moly (...) folijs secundum. The second Narcisse-leaued Moly.



 The Description.
@ 1 THis, which in face nighest represents the Molyes described in the last Chapter, hath a root made of many scales, like as an Onion in the vpper part, but the lower part is knotty, and runnes in the ground like as Solomons Seale; the Onion-like part hath many fibres hanging thereat; the leaues are like those of the white Narcisse, very greene and shining, amongst which riseth vp a stalke of a cubit high, naked, firme, greene, and crested; at the top come forth many floures consisting of six purplish leaues, with as many chiues on their insides: after which follow three (...) heads, opening when they are ripe, and containing a round blacke seed.
2 This other being of the same kinde, and but a varietie of the former, hath softer and more Ash-coloured leaues, with the floures of a lighter colour. Both these floure at the end of Iune, or in Iuly.
3 This hath fiue or six leaues equally as broad as those of the last described, but not so long, being somewhat twined, greene, and shining. The stalke is some foot in length, smaller than that of the former, but not lesse stiffe, crested, and bearing in a round head many floures, in manner of growing and shape like those of the former, but of a more elegant purple colour. In seed and root  @ 3 Moly Narcissinis folijs tertium. The third Narcisse-leaued Moly. @ 4 Moly montanum (...) (...). Clusij. The first broad leaued mountaine Moly. @ 5 Moly montanum (...) Clusij. The second mountaine Moly. it resembles the precedent. There is also avarietie of this kinde, with leaues longer and narrower, neither so much twined, the stalks weaker, and floures much lighter coloured.
This floures later than the former, to wit, in Iuly and August.
All these plants grow naturally in Leitenberg and other hills neere to Vienna in Austria, where they were first found and (...) by (...) Clusius.
4 This hath a stalke some two cubits high, which euen to the middle is incompassed with leaues much longer and broader than those of Garlicke, and very like those of the Leeke: on the top of the smooth and rush-like (...) groweth a tuft consisting of many darke purple coloured bulbs growing close together, from amongst which come forth pretty long stalkes bearing light purple starre-fashioned floures, which are succeeded by three cornered seed-vessels. The root is bulbous, large, consisting of many cloues, and hauing many white fibres growing sorth thereof. Moreouer, there grow out certain round bulbes about the root, almost like those which grow in the head, and being planted apart, they (...) plants of the same kinde. This is Allium, siue Moly montanum latifolium 1. Clusij.
5 This hath a smooth round greene stalke some cubit high, whereon doe grow most commonly  three leaues narrower than those of the former, and as itwere grassy. The top of the (...) sustaines a head wrapped in two lax filmes, each of them running out with a sharpe point like two hornes, which opening themselues, there appeare many small bulbes heaped together, amongst which are floures composed of six purplish little leaues, and fastned to long stalkes. The root is round and white, with many long white fibres hanging thereat. Clusius calls this, Allium, siue Moly montanum secundum. And this is Lobels Ampeloprason proliferum.
6 Like to the last described is this in height and shape of the stalke and leaues, as also in the forked or horned skinne inuoluing the head, which consisteth of many small bulbes of a reddish greene colour, and ending in a long greene point; amongst which, vpon long and slender stalkes hang downe floures like in forme and magnitude to the former, but of a whitish colour, with a darke purple streake alongst the middle, and vpon the edges of each leafe. The root is round and white, like that of the last described. This Clusius giues vnder the title of Allium siue Moly (...) tertium.


@ 6 Moly montanum 3. Clus. The third mountaine Moly.


@ 7 Moly montani quarti spec. 1. Clus. The fourth mountaine Moly; (...) first (...) thereof.


7 This also hath three rushy leaues, with a round stalke of some cubit high, whose top is likewise adorned with a forked membrane, containing many pale coloured floures hanging vpon long stalkes, each floure consisting of six little leaues, with the like number of chiues, and a pestil in the midst. This tuft of floures cut off with the top of the stalke, and carried into a chamber, wil yeeld a pleasant smell (like that which is found in the floures in the earlier Cyclamen) but it will quickly decay. After these floures are past succeed three cornered heads containing a blacke small seed, not much vnlike Gillofloure seed. The root is round like the former, sometimes yeelding off-sets. This is Alij montani 4. species 1. of Clusius.
8 There is another kinde of this last described, which growes to almost the same height, and hath like leaues, and the head ingirt with the like skinny long pointed huskes; but the floures of this are of a very darke colour. The roots are like the former, with off-sets by their side. This is  Clusius his Moly montani quarti species secunda. The roots of the three last described smell of garlick, but the leaues haue rather an hearby or grasse-like smell.
The fifth and sixth of these grow naturally in the Styrian and Austrian Alpes. The seuenth growes about Presburg in Hungarie, about Niclaspurg in Morauia, but most aboundantly about the Baths in Baden.


@ 8 Moly (...) quarti species (...) Clusij. The second kinde of the fourth mountaine Moly.


@ 9 Moly montanum quintum Clusij. The fifth mountaine Moly.


9 This growes to the like height as the former, with a greene stalke, hauing few leaues thereupon, and naked at the top, where it carieth a round head consisting of many star-like small floures, of a faire purple colour, fastned to short stalkes, each floure being composed of sixe little leaues, with as many chiues, and a pestill in the middle. The root is bulbous and white, hauing somtimes his off-sets by his sides. The smell of it is like Garlicke. This groweth also about Presburgh in Hungarie, and was there obserued by Clusius to beare his floure in May and Iune. He calleth this Allium, seu Moly montanum quintum. @



CHAP. 102. Of White Lillies.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of Lillies, whereof some be wilde, or of the field; others tame, or of the garden; some white, others red; some of our owne countries growing, others from beyond the seas: and because of the variable sorts we will diuide them into chapters, beginning with the two white Lillies, which differ little but in the natiue place of growing.



 The Description.
1 THe white Lillie hath long, smooth, and full bodied leaues, of a grassie or light greene colour. The stalkes be two cubits high, and sometimes more, set or garnished with the like leaues, but growing smaller and smaller toward the top; and vpon them (...) grow faire white floures strong of smell, narrow toward the foot of the stalke whereon they doe grow, wide or open in the mouth like a bell. In the middle part of them doe grow small tender pointals tipped with a dusty yellow colour, ribbed or (...) on the backe side, consisting of six small leaues thicke and fat. The root is a bulbe made of scaly cloues, full of tough and clammie iuyce, wherewith the whole plant doth greatly abound.
2 The white Lilly of Constantinople hath very large and fat leaues like the former, but narrower and lesser. The stalke riseth vp to the height of three cubits, set and garnished with leaues also like the precedent, but much lesse. Which stalke oftentimes doth alter and degenerate from his naturall roundnesse to a flat forme, as it were a lath of wood furrowed or chanelled alongst the same, as it were ribs or welts. The floures grow at the top like the former, sauing that the leaues do turne themselues more backward like the Turkes cap, and beareth many more floures than our English white Lilly doth.


1 Lilium album. The white Lilly.


2 Lilium album Bizantinum. The white Lilly of Constantinople.




 The Place.
Our English white Lilly groweth in most gardens of England. The other groweth naturally in Constantinople and the parts adiacent, from whence wee had plants for our English gardens, where they flourish as in their owne countrey.


 The Time.
The Lillies floure from May to the end of Iune.


The Names.
The Lillie is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Lilium, and also Rosa Iunonis, or Iuno's Rose, because as it is reported it came vp of her milke that fell vpon the ground. For the Poets feigne, That Hercules, who (...) had by Alcumena, was put to Iuno's breasts whilest shee was asleepe; and after the sucking there fell away aboundance of milke, and that one part was spilt in the heauens, and the other on the earth; and that of this sprang the Lilly, and of the other the circle in the heauens  called Lacteus Circulus, or the milky way, or otherwise in English Watling street. Saint Basill in the explication of the 44. Psalme saith, That no floure so liuely sets forth the frailty of mans life as the Lilly. It is called in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Giglio: in Spanish, Lirio blanco: in French, Lys blanc: in English, the white Lilly.
The other is called Lilium album Bizantinum, and also Martagon album Bizantinum: in English, the white Lilly of Constantinople: of the Turkes themselues, Sultan Zambach, with this addition, (that they might be the better knowne which kinde of Lilly they meant when they sent roots of them into these countries) Fa sioragrandi Bianchi; so that Sultan Zambach fa sioragrandi Bianchi, is as much to say as, Sultans great Lilly with white floures.


 The Nature.
The white Lilly is hot, and partly of a subtill substance. But if you regard the root, it is dry in the first degree, and hot in the second.


 The (...).
The root of the garden Lilly stamped with honey gleweth together sinewes that be cut in sunder. It consumeth or (...) away the vlcers of the head called Achores, and (...) all scuruinesse of the beard and face.
The Root stamped with Vineger, the leaues of Henbane, or the meale of Barley, cureth the  tumours and apostumes of the priuy members. It bringeth the haire againe vpon places which haue beene (...) or scalded, if it be mingled with oyle or grease, and the place anointed therewith.
The same root rosted in the embers, and stamped with some (...) of Rie bread and Hogges  grease, breaketh pestilentiall botches. It (...) Apostumes in the flankes, comming of venery and such like.
The floures steeped in Oyle Oliue, and shifted two or three times during (...), and set in  the Sunne in a strong glasse, is good to soften the hardnesse of sinewes, and the hardnesse of the matrix.
Florentinus a writer of husbandry saith, That if the root be (...) opened, and therein be put  some red, blew, or yellow colour that hath no causticke or burning qualitie, it will cause the floure to be of the same colour.
Iulius Alexandrinus the Emperors Physitian saith, That the water thereof distilled and drunke  causeth easie and speedy (...), and expelleth the second me or after-burthen in most speedy manner.
He also saith, the leaues boyled in red Wine, and applied to old wounds or (...), doe much  good, and forward the cure, according to the doctrine of Galen in his seuenth booke (...) (...). med. facultat.
The root of a white Lilly stamped and strained with wine, and giuen to drinke for two or three  dayes together, expelleth the poyson of the pestilence, and causeth it to breake (...) in blisters in the outward part of the skinne, according to the experience of a learned Gentleman M. William Godorus, Sergeant Surgeon to the Queenes Maiestie: who also hath cured many of the Dropsey with the iuyce thereof, tempered with Barley meale, and baked in cakes, and so eaten ordinarily for some moneth or six weekes together with meate, but no other bread during that time.



CHAP. 103. Of Red Lillies.

 The Kindes.
THere be likewise sundry sorts of Lillies, which we do comprehend vnder one generall name in English, Red Lillies, whereof some are of our owne countries growing, and others of beyond the seas, thewhich shall be distinguished seuerally in this chapter that followeth.


 The Description.
1 THe gold-red Lilly groweth to the height of two, and sometimes three cubits, and often higher than those of the common white Liily. The leaues be blacker and narrower, set very thicke about the stalke. The floures in the top be many, from ten to thirty floures, according to the age of the plant, and fertilitie of the soile, like in (...) and greatnesse to those of the white Lilly, but of a red colour tending to a Saffron, sprinkled or poudred with many little blacke specks; like to rude vnperfect draughts of certaine letters. The roots be great bulbes, consisting of many cloues, as those of the white Lilly.

@ 2 In stead of the Plantaine leaued red Lilly, described and figured in this second place by our Author out of Tabernamontanus, for that I iudge both the figure and description counterfeit, I haue omitted them, and here giue you the many-floured red Lilly in his stead. This hath a root like that of the last described, as also leaues and stalkes; the floure also in shape is like that of the former, but of a more light red colour, and in number of floures it exceedeth the precedent, for sometimes it beares sixty floures vpon one stalke. @
@ 3 This red Lilly is like vnto the former, but not so tall; the leaues be fewer in number, broader, and downy towards the top of the stalke, where it beares some bulbes. The floures in shape be like the former, sauing that the colour hereof is more red, and thicke dasht with blacke specks. The root is scaly like the former.
4 There is another red Lilly which hath many leaues somewhat ribbed, broader than the last mentioned, but shorter, and not so many in number. The stalke groweth to the height of two cubits, and sometimes higher, whereupon do grow floures like the former: among the foot-stalks of which floures come forth certaine bulbes or cloued roots, browne of colour, tending vnto rednesse; which do fall in the end of August vpon the ground, taking root and growing in the same place, whereby it greatly encreaseth, for seldome or neuer it bringeth forth seed for his propagation.


1 Lilium aureum. Gold-red Lilly.


@ 2 Lilium rubrum. The red Lilly.


5 There is another sort of red Lillie hauing a faire scaly or cloued root, yellow aboue, and browne toward the bottome; from which riseth vp a faire stiffe stalke crested or furrowed, of an ouer-worne browne colour, set from the lower part to the branches, whereon the floures doe grow with many leaues, confusedly placed without order. Among the branches close by the stem grow forth certaine cloues or roots of a reddish colour, like vnto the cloues of Garlicke before they are pilled: which being fallen vpon the ground at their time of ripenesse, do shoot forth certaine tender strings or roots that do take hold of the ground, whereby it greatly encreaseth. The floures are in shape like the other red Lillies, but of a darke Orange colour, resembling a flame of fire spotted with blacke spots.
@ 6 This hath a much shorter stalke, being but a cubit or lesse in height, with leaues blackish,  and narrower than those afore going. The floures, as in the rest, grow out of the top of the stalke, and are of a purplish Saffron colour, with some blackish spots. The root in shape is like the precedent. @


 The Place.
These Lillies do grow wilde in the plowed fields of Italy and Languedocke, in the mountaines and vallies of Hetruria and those places adiacent. They are common in our English gardens, as also in Germany.


 The Time.
These red Lillies do floure commonly a little before the white Lillies, and sometimes together with them.


3 Lilium cruentum latifolium. The fierie red Lilly.


@ 4 Lilium cruentum (...). Red bulbe-bearing Lilly.




 The Names.
@ 1 The first of these is thought by some to be the Bulbus cruentus of Hippocrates; as also the Lilium purpureum of Dioscorides: Yet Matthiolus and some others would haue it his Hemerocallis. Dodonaeus and Bapt. Porta thinke it the Hyacinthus and (...) (...) of the Poets, of which you shall finde more hereafter. It is the Martagon Chymistarum of Lobell, and the Lilium aureum (...) of Tabernamontanus.
2 This is Martagon Chymistarum alterum of Lobell. 3 This is Clusius his (...) (...) secundum. 4 Martagon bulbiferum primum of Clusius. 5 This (...) (...) Lilium purpureum tertium, and it is Martagon bulbiferum tertium of Clusius. 6 This last Lobell and (...) call Lilium purpureum minus.
I haue thought good here also to giue you that discourse touching the Poets Hyacinth, which being translated out of Dodonaeus, was formerly vnfitly put into the chapter of (...); which therefore I there omitted, and haue here restored to his due place, as you may (...) by Dodonaeus, Pempt. 2. lib. 2. cap. 2. @
@ There is a Lilly which Ouid, Metamorph. lib. 10. calls Hyacinthus, of the boy (...), of whose bloud he feigneth that this floure sprang, when he perished as he was (...) (...) (...),  for whose sake, he saith, that Apollo did print certaine letters and notes of his (...). These are his words:

Eccecruor, quifusus humo signauerat herbas,
Desinit esse cruor, Tyrioquenitentior ostro
Flos oritur, formamque capit, quam Lilia, si non
Purpureus color his argenteus esset in illis.
Non satis hoc Phoebo est, (is enim fuit auctor honoris)
Ipse suos gemitus folijs inscribit, and ai ai,
Flos habet inscriptum, funestaque litera ducta est.

Which lately were elegantly thus rendred in English by M. Sands:

Behold! the bloud which late the grasse had dy'de
Was now no bloud: from thence a floure full blowne,
Far brighter than the Tyrian scarlet shone:
Which seem'd the same, or did resemble right
A Lilly, changing but the red to white.
Nor so contented, (for the Youth receiu'd
That grace from Phoebus) in the leaues he weau'd
The sad impression of his sighs, Ai, Ai,
They now in funerall characters display, etc.



@ 5 Lilium cruentum secundum caulem bulbulis donatum. Red Lilly with bulbes growing alongst the stalke.


@ 6 Lilium purpureum minus. The small red Lilly.


Theocritus also hath made mention of this Hyacinth, in Bions Epitaph, in the 19. Eidyl. which Eidyl by some is attributed to Moschus, and made his third. The words are these:

(...).
(...).


In English thus:
Now Iacinth speake thy letters, and once more
Imprint thy leaues with Ai, Ai, as before.


Likewise Virgill hath written hereof in the third Eclog of his Bucolicks.

Et me Phoebus amat, Phoebo sua semper apud me
Munerasunt, lauri and suaue rubens Hyacinthus.


Phoebus loues me, his gifts I alwayes haue,
The e're greene Laurel, and the lacinth braue.

In like manner also Nemesianus in his second Eclog of his Bucolicks:

Te sine me, misero (...) Lilia nigra videntur,
Pallentesque Rosae, nec dulce rubens Hyacinthus:
At si tu venias, and candida Lilia fient
Purpureaeque Rosae, and dulce rubens Hyacinthus.


Without thee, Loue, the Lillies blacke do seeme;
The Roses pale, and Hyacinths I deeme
Not louely red. But if thou com'st to me,
Lillies are white, red Rose and Iacinths be.

The Hyacinths are said to be red which Ouid calleth purple; for the red colour is somtimes termed purple. Now it is thought this Hyacinthus is called Ferrugineus, for that it is red of a rusty iron colour: for as the putrifaction of brasse is named Aerugo; so the corruption of iron is called Ferrugo, which from the reddish colour is stiled also Rubigo. And certainly they are not a few that would (...) Color ferrugineus to be so called from the rust which they thinke Ferrugo. Yet this opinion is not allowed of by all men; for some iudge, that Color ferrugineus is inclining to a blew, for that when the best iron is heated and wrought, when as it is cold againe it is of a colour neere vnto blew, which from Ferrum (or iron) is called Ferrugineus. These latter ground themselues vpon Virgils authoritie, who in the sixth of his Aeneidos describeth Charons ferrugineous barge or boat, and presently calleth the same blew. His words are these:

Ipseratem conto subigit velisque ministrat,
Et ferruginea subuectat corpora Cymba,


He thrusting with a pole, and setting sailes at large,
Bodies transports in ferrugineous barge.

And then a little after he addes;

Coeruleam aduertit puppim, ripaeque propinquat.


He then turnes in his blew Barge, and the shore
Approches nigh to.

And Claudius also, in his second booke of the carrying away of Proserpina, doth not a little confirme their opinions; who writeth, That the Violets are painted, ferrugine dulci, with a sweet iron colour.

Sanguineo splendore rosas, vaccinea nigro
Induit, and aulci violas ferrugine pingit.


He trimmes the Rose with bloudy bright,
And Prime-tree berries blacke he makes,
And decks the Violet with a sweet
Darke iron colour which it takes.

But let vs returne to the proper names from which we haue digressed. Most of the later Herbarists do call this Plant Hyacinthus Poeticus, or the Poets Hyacinth. Pausanias in his second booke of his Corinthiackes hath made mention of Hyacinthus called of the Hermonians, Comosandalos, setting downe the ceremonies done by them on their festiuall dayes, in honour of the goddesse Chthonia. The Priests (saith he) and the Magistrates for that yeare being, doe leade the troupe of the pompe; the women and men follow after; the boves solemnly leade forth the goddesse with a stately shew: they go in white vestures, with garlands on their heads made of a floure which the Inhabitants call Comosandalos, which is the blew or sky-coloured Hyacinth, hauing the marks and letters of mourning as aforesaid.


 The Nature.
The floure of the red Lilly (as Galen saith) is of a mixt temperature, partly of thinne, and partly of an earthly essence. The root and leaues do dry and cleanse, and moderately digest, or waste and consume away.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of the herbe applied are good against the stinging of Serpents.
The same boiled and tempered with vineger are good against burnings, and heale green wounds  and Vlcers.
The root rosted in the embers, and pounded with oyle of Roses cureth burnings, and softneth  (...) of the matrix.

The same stamped wtth honey cureth the wounded sinewes and members out of ioynt. It takes  away the morphew, wrinkles, and deformitie of the face.
Stamped with Vineger, the leaues of Henbane, and wheat meale, it remoueth hot swellings of  the stones, the yard, and matrix.
The roots boyled in Wine (saith Pliny) causeth the cornes of the feet to fall away within (...) dayes, with remouing the medicine vntill it haue wrought his effect.
Being drunke in honied water, they driue out by siege vnprofitable bloud.



CHAP. 104. Of Mountaine Lillies.

 The Description.
1 THe great mountaine Lilly hath a cloued bulbe or scaly root like to those of the Red Lilly, yellow of colour, very small in respect of the greatnesse of the plant: From the which riseth vp a stalke, sometimes two or three, according to the age of the plant; whereof the middle stalke commonly turneth from his roundnesse into a flat sorme, as those of the white Lilly of Constantinople. Vpon these stalkes do grow faire leaues of a blackish greene colour, in roundles and spaces as the leaues of Woodroofe, not vnlike to the leaues of white Lillie, but smaller at the top of the stalkes. The floures be in number infinite, or at the least hard to be counted, very thicke set or thrust together, of an ouerworne purple, spotted on the inside with many small specks of the colour of rusty iron. The whole floure doth turne it selfe backeward at such time as the Sunne hath cast his beames vpon it, like vnto the Tulipa or Turkes Cap, as the Lilly or Martagon of Constantinople doth; from the middle whereof doe come forth tender pointalls with small dangling pendants hanging thereat, of the colour the floure is spotted with.


1 Lilium montanum majus. The great mountaine Lilly.


2 Lilium montanum minus. Small Mountaine Lilly.



2 The small mountaine Lilly is very like vnto the former in root, leafe, stalke, and floures: differing in these points; The whole plant is lesser, the stalke neuer leaueth his round forme, and beareth fewer floures.
@ There are two or three more varieties of these plants mentioned by Clusius; the one of this lesser kinde, with floures on the outside of a flesh colour, and on the inside white, with blackish spots; as also another wholly white without spots. The third varietie is like the first, but differs in that the floures blow later, and smell sweet.
These plants grow in the woody mountaines of Styria and Hungarie, and also in such like places on the North of Francfort, vpon the Moene. @
The small sort I haue had many yeares growing in my garden; but the greater I haue not had till of late, giuen me by my louing friend M. Iames Garret Apothecarie of London.


 The Time.
These Lillies of the mountaine floure at such time as the common white Lilly doth, and sometimes sooner.


 The Names.
The great mountaine Lilly is called of Tabernamontanus, Lilium Saracenicum, receiued by Master Garret aforesaid from Lisle in Flanders, by the name of Martagon Imperiale: of some, Lilium Saracenicum mas: It is Hemerocallis flore rubello, of Lobel.
The small mountaine Lilly is called in Latine, Lilium montanum, and Lilium syluestre: of Dodonaeus, Hemerocallis: of others, Martagon: but neither truly; for that there is of either, other Plants properly called by the same names. In high Dutch it is called Goldwurtz, from the yellownesse of the roots: in low Dutch, Lilikens van Caluarien: in Spanish, Lirio Amarillo: in French, Lys Sauvage: in English, Mountaine Lilly.


 The Nature and Vertues.
There hath not beene any thing left in writing either of the nature or vertues of these plants: notwithstanding we may deeme, that God which gaue them such seemely and beautifull shape, hath not left them without their peculiar vertues; the finding out whereof we leaue to the learned and industrious Searcher of Nature.



CHAP. 105. Of the Red Lillie of Constantinople.


1 Lilium Bizantinum. The red Lilly of Constantinople.


@ 2 Lilium Byzantinum flo. purpuro sanguineo. The Byzantine purplish sanguine-coloured Lilly.




 The Description.
1 THe red Lilly of Constantinople hath a yellow scaly or cloued Root like vnto the Mountaine Lilly, but greater: from the which ariseth vp a faire fat stalke a finger thicke, of a darke purplish colour toward the top; which sometimes doth turne from his naturall roundnesse into a flat forme, like as doth the great mountaine Lilly: vpon which stalk grow sundry faire and most beautifull floures, in shape like those of the mountaine Lilly, but of greater beauty, seeming as it were framed of red wax, tending to a red leade colour. From the middle of the floure commeth forth a tender pointall or pestell, and likewise many small chiues tipped with loose pendants. The floure is of a reasonable pleasant sauour. The leaues are confusedly set about the stalke like those of the white Lilly, but broader and shorter.
@ 2 This hath a large Lilly-like root, from which ariseth a stalke some cubit or more in height, set confusedly with leaues like the precedent. The floures also resemble those of the last described, but vsually are more in number, and they are of a purplish sanguine colour.


@ 3 Lilium Byzantinum flo. dilute rubente. The light red Byzantine Lilly.


@ 4 Lilium Byzantinum miniatum polyanthos. The Vermilion Byzantine manyfloured Lilly.


3 This differs little from the last, but in the colour of the floures, which are of a lighter red colour than those of the first described. The leaues and stalkes also, as Clusius obserueth, are of a lighter greene.
4 This may also more fitly be termed a varietie from the former, than otherwise: for according to Clusius, the difference is onely in this, that the floures grow equally from the top of the stalke, and the middle floure rises higher than any of the rest, and sometimes consists of twelue leaues as it were a twinne, as you may perceiue by the figure. @


 The Time.
They floure and (...) with the other Lillies.



 The Names.
The Lilly of Constantinople is called likewise in England, Martagon of Constantinople: of Lobel, Hemerocallis Chalcedonica, and likewise Lilium Bizantinum: of the Turks it is called Zufiniare: of the Venetians, Marocali.


 The Nature and Vertues.
Of the nature or vertues there is not any thing as yet set down, but it is esteemed especially for the beautie and rarenesse of the floure; referring what may be gathered hereof to a further consideration.



@ CHAP. 106. Of the narrow leaued reflex Lillies.

 The Description.
@ 1 THe root of this is not much vnlike that of other Lillies; the stalke is some cubit high, or better; the leaues are many and narrow, and of a darker green than those of the ordinarie Lilly; the floures are reflex, like those treated of in the last chap. of a red or Vermilion colour. This floures in the end of May: wherefore Clusius calls it Lilium rubrum praecox, The early red Lilly.


@ 1 Lilium rubrum angustifolium. The red narrow leaued Lilly.


@ 3 Lilium mont. flore flauo punctato. The yellow mountaine Lilly with the spotted floure.


2 This Plant is much more beautiful than the last described; the roots are like those of Lillies, the stalke some cubit and an halfe in height, being thicke set with small grassie leaues. The floures grow out one aboue another, in shape and colour like those of the last described, but ofrtimes  are more in number, so that some one stalke hath borne some 48 floures. The root is much like the former.


@ 4 Lilium mont. flore flauo non punctato. The yellow Mountaine Lilly with the vnspotted floure.


3 This in roots is like those afore described; the stalke is some 2 cubits high, set confusedly with long narrow leaues, with three conspicuous nerues running alongst them. The floures are at first pale coloured, afterwards yellow, consisting of six leaues bended backe to their stalkes, and marked with blackish purple spots.
4 There is also another differing from the last described onely in that the floure is not spotted, as that of the former.


 The Place.
These Lillies are thought Natiues of the Pyrenean mountaines, and of late yeares are become Denizons in some of our English gardens.


 The Time.
The first (as I haue said) floures in the end of May: the rest in Iune.


 The Names.
1 This is called by Clusius, Lilium rubrum praecox.
2 Clusius names this, Lilium rubrum praecox 3. angustifolium. Lobel stiles it, Hemerocallis Macedonica, and Martagon Pomponeum.
3 This is Lilium slauo flore maculis distinctum of Clusius, and Lilium montanum flauo (...). of Lobel.
4 This being a varietie of the last, is called by Clusius, Lilium flauo flore maculis (...) distinctum.


 The Temper and Vertues.
These in all likelihood cannot much differ from the temper and vertues of other Lillies, which in all their parts they so much resemble. @



CHAP. 107. Of the Persian Lilly.

 The Description.
THe Persian Lilly hath for his root a great white bulbe, differing in shape from the other Lillies, hauing one great bulbe firme or solid, full of juyce, which commonly each yeare setteth off or encreaseth one other bulbe, and sometimes more, which the next yeare after is taken from the mother root, and so bringeth forth such floures as the old plant did. From this root riseth vp a fat thicke and straight stemme of two cubits high, whereupon is placed long narrow leaues of a greene colour, declining to blewnes as doth those of the woade. The floures grow alongst the naked part of the stalke like little bels, of an ouer-worne purple colour, hanging down their heads, euery one hauing his owne foot-stalke of two inches long, as also his pestell or clapper from the middle part of the floure; which being past and withered, there is not found any seed at all, as in other plants, but is increased onely in his root.


 The Place.
This Persian Lilly groweth naturally in Persia and those places adiacent, whereof it tooke his name, and is now (by the industrie of Trauellers into those countries, louers of Plants) made a Denizon in some few of our London gardens.



 The Time.
This plant floureth from the beginning of May, to the end of Iune.


 The Names.
This Persian Lilly is called in Latine, Lilium Persicum, Lilium Susianum, Pennacio Persiano, and Pannaco Persiano, either by the Turks themselues, or by such as out of those parts brought them into England; but which of both is vncertaine. Alphonsus Pancius, Physition to the Duke of Ferrara, when as he sent the figure of this Plant vnto Carolus Clusius, added this title, Pennacio Persiano e Piantabellissima and e specie di Giglio o Martagon, diuerso della corona Imperiale: That is in English, This most elegant plant Pennacio of Persia is a kinde of Lilly or Martagon, differing from the floure called the Crowne Imperiall.


Lilium Persicum. The Persian Lilly.




 The Nature and Vertues.
There is not any thing knowne of the nature or vertues of this Persian Lilly, esteemed as yet for his rarenesse and comely proportion; although (if I might be so bold with a stranger that hath vouchsafed to trauell so many hundreds of miles for our acquaintance) we haue in our English fields many scores of floures in beauty far excelling it.



CHAP. 108. Of the Crowne (...).

 The Description.
THe Crowne Imperial hath for his root a thicke firme and solid bulbe, couered with a yellowish filme or skinne, from the which riseth vp a great thicke fat stalke two cubits high, in the bare and naked part of a darke ouerworne dusky purple colour. The leaues grow confusedly about the stalke like those of the white Lilly, but narrower: the floures grow at the top of the stalke, incompassing it round in forme of an Imperiall crowne (whereof it tooke his name) hanging their  Corona Imperialis. The Crowne Imperiall. Corona Imperialis duplici corona. The double Crowne Imperiall. Corona Imperialis cum semine. Crowne Imperiall with the seed. heads downward as it were bels: in colour it is yellowish; or to giue you the true colour, which by words otherwise cannot be expressed, if you lay sap berries in steepe in faire water for the space of two houres, and mix a little Saffron with that infusion, and lay it vpon paper, it sheweth the perfect colour to limne or illumine the floure withall. The backside of the said floure is streaked with purplish lines, which doth greatly set forth the beauty thereof. In the bottome of each of these bells there is placed six drops of most cleere shining sweet water, in tast like sugar, resembling in shew faire Orient pearles; the which drops if you take away, there do immediately appeare the like: notwithstanding if they may be suffered to stand still in the floure according to his owne nature, they wil neuer fall away, no not if you strike the plant vntill it be broken. Amongst these drops there standeth out a certaine pestell, as also sundry smal chiues tipped with small pendants like those of the Lilly: aboue the whole floures there growes a tuft of green leaues like those vpon the stalke, but smaller. After the floures be faded, there (...) cods or seed-vessels six square, wherein  is contained flat seeds, tough and limmer, of the colour of Mace. The whole plant, as well roots as floures, do sauour or smell very like a Fox. As the plant groweth old, so doth it wax rich, bringing forth a Crowne of floures amongst the vppermost greene leaues, which some make a second kinde, although in truth they are but one and the selfe same, which in time is thought to grow to a triple crowne, which hapneth by the age of the root, and fertilitie of the soile; whose figure or tipe I haue thought good to adioyne with that picture also which in the time of his infancie it had.


 The Place.
This plant likewise hath been brought from Constantinople amongst other bulbous roots, and made Denizons in our London gardens, whereof I haue great plenty.


 The Time.
It floureth in Aprill, and sometimes in March, when as the weather is warme and pleasant. The seed is ripe in Iune.


 The Names.
This rare and strange Plant is called in Latine, Corona Imperialis, and Lilium Byzantinum: the Turks doe call it Cauale lale, and Tusai. And as diuers haue sent into these parts of these roots at sundry times, so haue they likewise sent them by sundry names; some by the name Tusai; others, Tousai, and Tuyschiachi, and likewise Turfani and Turfanda. @ Clusius, and that not without good reason, iudgeth this to be the Hemerocallis of Dioscorides, mentioned lib. 3. cap. 120.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The vertue of this admirable plant is not yet knowne, neither his faculties or temperature in working. 

If this be the (...) of (...), you may (...) the vertues thereof specified pag. 99. of this Worke; where in my iudgement they are not so sitly placed as they might haue beene here: yet we at this day haue no knowledge of the physicall operation of either of those plants mentioned in that place, or of this treated of in this chapter.




CHAP. 109. Of Dogs Tooth.

 The Description.
1 THere hath not long since beene found out a goodly bulbous rooted plant, and termed Satyrion, which was supposed to be the true Satyrion of Dioscorides, after that it was cherished, and the vertues thereof found out by the studious searchers of nature. Little difference hath bin found betwixt that plant of Dioscorides and this Dens caninus, except in the colour, which (as you know) doth commonly vary according to the diuersitie of places where they grow, as it falleth out in Squilla, Onions, and the other kindes of bulbous plants. It hath most commonly two leaues, very seldome three; which leafe in shape is very like to Allium Vrsinum, or Ramsons, though farre lesse. The leaues turne downe to the groundward; the stalke is tender and flexible like to Cyclamen, or Sow-bread, about an handfull high, bare and without leaues to the root. The proportion of the floure is like that of Saffron or the Lilly floure, full of streames of a purplish white colour. The root is bigge, and like vnto a date, with some fibres growing from it: vnto the said root is a small flat halfe round bulbe adioyning, like vnto Gladiolus, or Corn-flag.
2 The second kinde is farre greater and larger than the first, in bulbe, stalke, leaues, floure, and cod. It yeeldeth two leaues for the most part, which do close one within another, and at the first they doe hide the floure (for so long as it brings not out his floure) it seemes to haue but one leafe like the Tulipa's, and like the Lillies, though shorter, and for the most part broader; wherefore I haue placed it and his kindes next vnto the Lillies, before the kinds of Orchis or stones. The leaues which it beareth are spotted with many great spots of a darke purple colour, and narrow below, butby little and little toward the top wax broad, and after that grow to be sharpe pointed, in form somewhat neere Ramsons, but thicker and more oleous. When the leaues be wide opened the floure sheweth it selfe vpon his long weake naked stalke, bowing toward the earth-ward, which floure consisteth of six very long leaues of a sine delayed purple colour, which with the heat of the Sunne openeth it selfe, and bendeth his leaues backe againe after the manner of the Cyclamen floure, within which there are six purple chiues, and a white three forked stile or pestell. This floure is of no pleasant smell, but commendable for the beauty: when the floure is faded, there succeedeth a three square huske or head, wherein are the seeds, which are very like them of Leucoium butbosum praecox; but longer, slenderer, and of a yellow colour. The root is long, thicker below than aboue, set with many white fibres, waxing very tender in the vpper part, hauing one or more off-sets, or young shoots, from which the stalke ariseth out of the ground (as hath been said) bringing forth two leaues, and not three, or onely one, saue when it will not floure.

3 The third kinde is in all things like the former, saue in the leaues, which are narrower, and in the colour of the floure, which is altogether white, or consisting of a colour mixt of purple and white. Wherefore sith there is no other difference, it shall suffice to haue said thus much for the description.


 The Place.
These three plants grow plentifully at the foot of certain hills in the greene and moist grounds of Germanie and Italy, in Styria not far from Gratz, as also in Modena and Bononia in Italy, and likewise in some of the choice gardens of this countrey.


 The Time.
They floure in Aprill, and sometimes sooner, as in the middle of March.


1 Dens caninus. Dogs tooth.


2 Dens caninus flore albo angustioribus (...). White Dogs tooth.




 The Names.
This plant is called in Latine, Dens caninus; and some haue iudged it Satyrium Erythronium. Matthiolus calls it Pseudohermodactylus. The men of the countrey where it groweth call it (...): and the Physitians about Styria call it Dentali. The secoud may for distinctions sake be termed Dens caninus flore albo, angustioribus folijs; that is, Dogs tooth with the white floure and narrow leaues.


 The Nature.
These are of a very hot temperament, windie, and of an excrementitious nature, as may appeare by the vertues.


 The Vertues.
The Women that dwell about the place where these grew, and do grow, haue with great profit  put the dried meale or pouder of it in their childrens pottage, against the wormes of the belly.
Being drunke with Wine it hath been proued maruellously to asswage the Collicke passion.
It strengthneth and nourisheth the body in great measure, and being drunke with water it cureth  children of the falling sicknesse.




CHAP. 110. Of Dogs stones.

 The Kindes.
STones or Testicles, as Dioscorides saith, are of two sorts, one named Cynosorchis, or Dogs stones, the other Orchis Serapias, or Serapias his stones. But because there be many and sundry other sorts differing one from another, I see not how they may be contained vnder these two kinds onely: therefore I haue thought good to diuide them as followeth. The first kind we haue named Cynosorchis, or Dogs stones: the second, Testiculus Morionis, or Fooles stones: the third, Tragorchis, or Goats stones: the fourth, Orchis Serapias, or Serapia's stones: the fifth, Testiculus odoratus, or sweet smelling stones, or after Cordus, Testiculus Pumilio, or Dwarfe stones.


The (...) of the first (...) second were (...) (...) the (...) (...): the third was of the (...) (...) (...), following in the next chapter.

 1 Cynosorchismaior. Great Dogs stones.


The (...) of the first (...) second were (...) (...) the (...) (...): the third was of the (...) (...) (...), following in the next chapter.

 2 Cynosorchis major altera. White Dogs stones.




 The Description.
1 GReat Dogs stones hath foure, and sometimes fiue, great broad thicke leaues, somwhat like those of the garden Lilly, but smaller. The stalke riseth vp a foot or more in height; at the top whereof doth grow a thicke tuft of carnation or horse-flesh coloured floures, thick and close thrust together, made of many small floures spotted with purple spots, in shape like to an open hood or helmet. And from the hollow place there hangeth forth a certain ragged chiue or tassell, in shape like to the skinne of a Dog, or some such other foure footed beast. The roots be round like vnto the stones of a Dog, or two oliues, one hanging somewhat shorter than the other, whereof the highest or vppermost is the smaller, but fuller and harder. The lowermost is the greatest, lightest, and most wrinkled or shriueled, not good for any thing.
2 Whitish Dogs stones hath likewise smooth, long broad leaues, but lesser and narrower than those of the first kinde. The stalke is a span long, set with fiue or six leaues clasping or embracing the same round about. His spikie floure is short, thicke, (...), compact of many small whitish  purple coloured floures, spotted on the inside with many small purple spots and little lines or streakes. The small floures are like an open hood or helmet, hauing hanging out of euery one as it were the body of a little man without a head, with armes stretched out, and thighes stradling abroad, after the same manner almost that the little boyes are wont to be pictured hanging out of Saturnes mouth. The roots be like the former.
3 Spotted Dogs stones bring forth narrow leaues, ribbed in some sort like vnto the leaues of narrow Plaintaine or Rib-wort, dasht with many blacke streakes and spots. The stalke is a cubit and more high: at the top whereof doth grow a tuft or eare of violet-coloured floures, mixed with a darke purple, but in the hollownesse thereof whitish, not of the same forme or shape that the others are of, but lesser, and as it were resembling somewhat the floures of Larkes-spur. The roots be like the former.
4 Marish Dogs stones haue many thicke blunt leaues next the root, thick streaked with lines or nerues like those of Plantaine. The floure is of a whitish red or carnation: the stalk and roots be like the former.


The (...) of the first (...) second were (...) (...) the (...) (...): the third was of the (...) (...) (...), following in the next chapter.

 3 Cynosorchis maculata. Spotted Dogs stones.


4 Cynosorchis palustr is. Marish Dogs stones.


@ 5 This hath fiue or six little leaues; the stalke is some handfull or better in height, set aboutwith somewhat lesse leaues: the tuft of floures at the top of the stalke are of a purple colour, small, with a white lip diuided into foure partitions hanging downe, which also is lightly spotted with purple; it hath a little spurre hanging downe on the hinder part of each floure. The seed is small, and contained in such twined heads as in other plants of this kinde. The roots are like the former, but much lesse. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Dogs stones do grow in moist and fertile medowes. The marish Dogs stones grow for the most part in moist and waterish woods, and also in marish grounds. @ The 5 growes in many hilly places of Austria and Germanie. @


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of May to the midst of August.



 The Names.
The first and second are of that kinde which Dioscorides calleth Cynosorchos; that is in English, Dogs stones, after the common or vulgar speech; the one the greater, the other the lesser.
@ 1 This is Cynosorchis prior of Dodonaeus; Cynosorchis nostra major of Lobel.
2 Dodonaeus names this Cynosorchis altera. (...), Cynosorchis majoris secunda species.
3 This Lobel calls Cynosorchis (...), etc. Tabern. Cynosorchis maculata.
4 Dodonaeus calls this, Cynosorchis tertia: Lobel, Cynosorchis major altera nostras: Tabernam. Cynosorchis major quarta.
5 This is Clusius his Orchis Pannonica quarta.


 The Temperature.
These kindes of Dogs stones be of temperature hot and moist; but the greater or fuller stone seemeth to haue much superfluous windinesse, and therefore being drunke it stirreth vp fleshly lust.


@ 5 Cynosorchis minor Pannnonica. The lesser Austrian Dogs stones.


The second, which is lesser, is quite contrarie in nature, tending to a hot and dry temperature; therefore his root is so far from mouing venerie, that contrariwise it staieth and keepeth it backe, as (...) teacheth.
He also affirmeth, that Serapia's stones are of (...) more dry facultie, and doe not so much preuaile to stirre vp the lust of the flesh.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth that it is reported, That if  men doe eate of the great full or fat roots of these kindes of Dogs stones, they cause them to beget male children; and if women eate of the lesser dry or barren root which is withered or shriueled, they shall bring forth females. These are some Doctors opinions onely.
It is further reported, That in Thessalia the  women giue the tender full root to be drunke in Goats milke, to moue bodily lust, and the dry to restraine the same.


 The Choice.
Our age vseth all the kindes of stones to stirre vp venery, and the Apothecaries mix any of them indifferently with compositions seruing for that purpose. But the best and most effectuall are these Dogs stones, as most haue deemed: yet both the bulbes or stones are not to be taken indifferently, but the harder and fuller, and that which containes most quantity of iuyce, for that which is wrinkled is lesse profitable, or not fit at all to be vsed in medicine. And the fuller root is not alwaies the greater, but often the lesser, especially if the roots be gathered before the plant hath shed his floure, or when the stalke first commeth vp; for that which is fuller of iuyce is not the greatest before the seed be perfectly ripe. For seeing that euery other yeare by (...) one stone or bulbewaxeth full, the other empty and perisheth, it cannot be that the harder and fuller of iuyce should be alwaies the greater; for at such time as the leaues come forth, the fuller then beginns to encrease, and whilst the same by little and little encreaseth, the other doth decrease and wither till the seed be ripe: then the whole plant, together with the leaues and stalkes doth forthwith fall away and perish, and that which in the meane time encreased, remaineth still fresh and full vnto the next yeare.




CHAP. 111. Of Fooles Stones.

 The Description.
1 THe male Foole stones hath fiue, sometimes six long broad and smooth leaues, not vnlike to those of the Lilly, sauing that they are dasht and spotted in sundry places with blacke spots and streakes. The floures grow at the top, tuft or spike fashion, somewhat like the former, but thrust more thicke together, in shape like to a fooles hood, or cocks combe, wide open, or gaping before, and as it were crested aboue, with certaine eares standing vp by euery side, and a small taile or spur hanging downe, the backeside declining to a violet colour, of a pleasant sauour or smell.


The first was of (...) (...), being the third in the (...) chapter.

 1 Cynosorchis Morio mas. The male Foole stones.


2 Cynosorchis Morio foemina. The female Foole stones.


2 The Female Fooles stones haue also smooth narrow leaues, ribbed with nerues like those of Plantaine. The floures be likewise gaping, and like the former, as it were open hoods, with a little horne or heele hanging behinde euerie one of them, and small greene leaues sorted or mixed among them, resembling cockes combes, with little eares, not standing straight vp, but lying flat vpon the hooded floure, in such sort, that they cannot at the sudden view be perceiued. The roots are a paire of small stones like the former. The floures of this sort doe varie infinitely in colour, according to the soile or countrey where they do grow: some bring forth their floures of a deepe violet colour, some as white as snow; some of a flesh colour, and some garnished with spots of diuers colours, which are not possible to be distinguished.
@ 3 This hath narrow spotted leaues, with a stalke some foot or more high, at the top wherof groweth a tuft of purple floures in shape much like those of the last described, each floure consisting of a little hood, two small wings or side leaues, and a broad lippe or leafe hanging downe. @



@ 3 Cynosorchis Morio minor. The lesser spotted Fooles stones.




 The Place.
These kindes of Fooles stones do grow naturally to their best liking in pastures and fields that seldome or neuer are dunged or manured.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune. Their stones are to be gathered for medicine in September, as are those of the Dogs stones.


 The Names.
The first is called Cynosorchis Morio: of Fuchsius, Orchis mas angustifolia: of Apuleius, Satyrion: and also it is the Orchis Delphinia of (...) Gemma.
@ The second is Cynosorchis morio foemina of Lobel: Orchis angustifolia foemin. of Fuchsius: Testiculus Morionis foemina of Dodonaeus.
3 This is Cynosorchis minimis and secundum caulem, etc. maculosis folijs, of Lobel. @


 The Temperature.
Fooles stones both male and female are hot and moist of nature.


 The Vertues.
These Fooles stones are thought to haue the vertues of Dogs stones, whereunto they are referred.



CHAP. 112. Of Goats Stones.

 The Description.
1 THe greatest of the Goats stones bringeth forth (...) leaues, ribbed in some sort like vnto the broad leaued Plantaine, but larger: the stalke groweth to the height of a cubit, set with such great leaues euen to the top of the stalke by equall distances. The tuft or bush of floures is small and flat open, with many tender strings or laces comming from the middle part of those small floures, crookedly tangling one with another, like to the small tendrels of the Vine, or rather the laces or strings that grow vpon the herbe Sauorie. The whole floure consisteth of a purple colour. The roots are like the rest of the Orchides, but greater.
2 The male Goats stones haue leaues like to those of the garden Lilly, with a stalke a foot long, wrapped about euen to the tuft of the floure with those his leaues. The floures which grow in this bush or tuft be very small, in forme like vnto a Lizard, because of the twisted or writhen tailes, and spotted heads. Euery of these small floures is at the first like a round close huske, of the bignesse of a pease, which when it openeth there commeth out of it a little long and tender spurre or taile, white toward the setting of it to the floure, the rest spotted with red dashes, hauing vpon each side a small thing adioyning vnto it, like to a little leg or foot; the rest of the said taile is twisted crookedly about, and (...) downward. The whole plant hath a (...) or stinking smel or sauour like the smell of a Goat, whereof it tooke his name.
3 The female Goats stones haue leaues like the male kinde, sauing that they be much smaller, hauing many floures on the tuft resembling the flies that feed vpon flesh, or rather ricks. The stones or roots, as also the sinell are like the former.



1 Tragorchis maximus. The greatest Goat stones.


2 Tragorchis mas. The male Goat stones.


3 Tragorchis foemina. The female Goats stones.


@ 4 Tragorchis minor Bataulca. The small Goat stones of Holland.



@ 4 This also because of the vnpleasant smell may sitly be referred to this Classis. The roots hereof are small, and from them arise a stalke some halfe a foot high, beset with three or foure narrow leaues: the tuft of floures which groweth on the top of this stalke is small, and the colour of them is red without, but somewhat paler within; each floure hanging downe a lippe parted in three. @


 The Place.
1. 2. 3. These kindes of Goats stones delight to grow in fat clay grounds, and seldome in any other soile to be found.
@ 4 This growes vpon the sea bankes in Holland, and also in some places neere (...) the Hage. @


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune with the other kindes of Orchis.


 The Names.
@ 1 Some haue named this kind of Goats stones in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Testiculus Hircinus, and also Orchis Saurodes, or Scincophora, by reason that the floures resemble Lizards.
The second may be called Tragorchis mas, male Goats stones; and Orchu Saurodes, or Scincophora, as well as the former.
The third, Tragorchis foemina, as also Coriosmites, and Coriophora, for that the floures in shape and their vngratefull smell resemble Ticks, called in Greeke (...): @


 The Nature and Vertues.
The temperature and vertues of these are referred to the Fooles stones, notwithstanding they are seldome or neuer vsed in physick, in regard of the stinking and loathsome smell and sauor they are possessed with.



CHAP. 113. Of Fox Stones.


1 Orchis Hermaphroditica. Butter-fly Satyrion.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 2 Testiculus psycodes. Gnat Satyrion.




 The Kindes.
THere be diuers kindes of Fox-stones, differing very much in shape of their leaues, as also in floures: some haue floures wherein is to be seene the shape of sundry sorts of liuing creatures; some the shape and proportion of flies, in other gnats, some humble bees, others like vnto honey Bees; some like Butter-flies, and others like Waspes that be dead; some yellow of colour, others white; some purple mixed with red, others of a browne ouer-worne colour: the which seuerally to distinguish, as well those here set downe, as also those that offer themselues dayly to our view and consideration, would require a particular volume; for there is not any plant which doth offer such varietie vnto vs as these kindes of Stones, except the Tulipa's, which go beyond all account: for that the most singular Simplest that euer was in these later ages, Carolus Clusius (who for his singular industrie and knowledge herein is worthy triple honour) hath spent at the least siue and thirty yeares, sowing the seeds of Tulipa's from yeare to yeare, and to this day he could neuer attaine to the end or certaintie of their seuerall kindes of colours. The greatest reason whereof that I can yeeld is this; that if you take the seeds of a Tulipa that bare white floures, and sow them in some pan or tub with earth, you shall receiue from that seed plants of infinite colours: contrariwise, if you sow the seeds of a plant that beareth floures of variable colours, the most of those plants will be nothing like the plant from whence the seed was taken. It shall be sufficient therefore to set downe most of the varieties, and comprehend them in this chapter.


 The Description.
1 BVtter-fly Orcis, or Satyrion, beareth next the root two very broad leaues like those of the Lilly, seldome three: the floures be white of colour, resembling the shape of a Butter-fly: the stalke is a foot high; the root is two stones like the other kindes of stones or Cullions, but somewhat sharper pointed.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 3 Testiculus Vulpinus 2. sphegodes. Humble Bee Orchis.


4 Testiculus Vulpinus major sphegodes. Waspe Orchis.


2 Waspe Satyrion commeth forth of the ground, bearing two, somtimes three leaues like the former, but much smaller. The stalke groweth to the height of an hand, whereon are placed very orderly small floures like in shape to Gnats, and of the same colour. The root is like the former.

3 The Humble Bee Orchis hath a few small weake and short leaues, which grow scatteringly about the stalke: the floures grow at the top among the small leaues, resembling in shape the humble Bee. The root consisteth of two stones or bulbes, with some few threds annexed thereunto.
4 The Waspe Satyrion groweth out of the ground, hauing stalkes small and tender. (...) leaues are like the former, but somewhat greater, declining to a browne or darke colour. The floures be small, of the colour of a dry Oken leafe, in shape resembling the great Bee, called in English an Hornet or drone Bee. The root is like the other.
5 The leaues of Bee Satyrion are longer than the last before mentioned, narrower, turning themselues against the Sun as it were round. The stalke is round, tender, and very fragile. At the top grow the floures, resembling the shape of the dead carkasse of a Bee. The stones or bulbes of the roots be smaller and rounder than the last described.
6 The Fly Satyrion is in his leaues like the other, sauing that they be not of so dark a colour: the floures be smaller and more plentifully growing about the stalke, in shape like vnto flies, of a greenish colour.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 5 Orchis Melittias. Bee Orchis.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 6 Orchis Myodes. Fly Satyrion.


7 Yellow Orchis riseth out of the ground with browne leaues, smaller than the last before mentioned: the stalk is tender and crooked. The floures grow at the top yellow of colour, in shape resembling the yellow flies bred in the dung of Kine after raine.
8 The small yellow Satyrion hath leaues spread vpon the ground, at the first comming vp; the slender stalke riseth vp in the midst, of halfe a hand high. The floures grow scatteringly toward the top, resembling the flies last before mentioned, darke or rusty of colour. The stones or bulbes are very round.
9 Birds Orchis hath many large ribbed leaues, spread vpon the ground like vnto those of Plantaine; among the which rise vp tender stalkes couered euen to the tuft of the floures with the like leaues, but lesser, in such sort that the stalkes cannot be seene for the leaues. The floures grow (...) the top, not so thicke set or thrust together as the others, purple of colour, like in shape vnto little Birds, with their wings spread abroad ready to fly. The roots be like the former.
10 Spotted Birds Satyrion hath leaues like vnto the sormer, sauing that they be (...) or  spotted here and there with darke spots or streakes, hauing a stalke couered with the like leaues, so that the plants differ not in any point, except the blacke spots which this kinde is dasht with.
11 White Birds: Satyrion hath leaues rising immediately forth of the ground like vnto the blades or leaues of Leekes, but shorter; among the which riseth vp a slender naked stalke two handfulls high; on the top whereof be white floures resembling the shape or forme of a small bird ready to fly, or a white Butter-fly with herwings spread abroad. The roots are round, and smaller than any of the former.
12 Souldiers Satyrion bringeth forth many broad large and ribbed leaues, spred vpon the ground like vnto those of the great plantaine: among the which riseth vp a fat stalke full of sap or iuyce, cloathed or wrapped in the like leaues euen to the tuft of floures, whereupon do grow little floures resembling a little man hauing a helmet vpon his head, his hands and legges cut off, white vpon the inside, spotted with many purple spots, and the backe part of the floure of a deeper colour tending to rednesse. The roots be greater than any of the other kindes of Satyrions.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 7 Orchis Myodes Lutea. Yellow Satyrion.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 9 Orchis Myodes minor. Small yellow Satyrion.


13 Souldiers Cullions hath many leaues spread vpon the ground, but lesser than the soldiers Satyrion, as is the whole plant. The backside of the floures are somwhat mixed with whitenesse, and sometimes are ash coloured: the inside of the floure is spotted with white likewise.
14 Spider Satyrion hath many thinne leaues like vnto those of the Lilly, scatteringly set vpon a weake and feeble stalk; whereupon doth grow small floures, resembling as well in shape as colour the body of a dead humble Bee, @ or rather of a Spider; and therefore I thinke Lobel, who was the Author of this name, would haue said Arachnitis, of (...) a Spider. @
@ 15 This by right should haue beene put next the Gnat Satyrion, described in the second place. It hath short, yet pretty broad leaues, and those commonly three in number, besides those small ones set vpon the stemme. The floures are small, and much like those of the second formerly described.
@ 16 Our Author gaue you this figure in the fourteenth place, vnder the title of Orchis (...); but it is of the Orchis 16. minor of Tabernam. or Orchis Angustifolia of (...). This Orchis is of the kinde of the Myodes, or Fly Satyrions, but his leaues are farre longer and (...)

These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 9 Orchis Ornithophora. Birds Satyrion.These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 10 Orchis Ornithophora folio maculoso; Spotted Birds Orchis.These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 11 Orchis Ornithophora candida. White Birds Orchis.These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 12 Orchis Strateumatica. Souldiers Satyrion. than any of the rest of that kinde, and therein consists the onely and chiefest difference. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Orchis grow for the most part in moist medowes and fertile pastures, as also in moist woods.
The Bee, the Fly, and the Butter-fly Satyrions do grow vpon barren chalkie hills and heathie grounds, vpon the hils adioyning to a village in Kent named Green-hithe, vpon long field downes by South-fleet, two miles from the same place, and in many other places of Kent: likewise in a field adioyning to a small groue of trees, halfe a mile from Saint Albons, at the South end thereof. They grow likewise at Hatfield neere S. Albons, by the relation of a learned Preacher there dwelling, M. Robert Abot, an excellent and diligent Herbarist.


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 13 Orchis Strateumatica minor. Souldiers (...).


These Figures in this Chapter were formerly much misplaced: as thus; The second was (...) (...) (...). fol. (...). being the tenth. The third was of Triorchis (...) (...) of Tabern. being a varietie of (...) morio (...). The fifth was of Orchis (...). The sixth, of Orchis (...). The seuenth and eighth were onely transposed, (...) put the one for the other. The ninth was of the second, called (...) (...) (...). The tenth was of the third, called (...) (...). The eleuenth was of (...). The twelfth was of Strateumatica minor. The (...) was a varietie of the fourth. The fourteenth was of Orchis (...), which we here giue you in the sixteenth place.

 14 Orchis Andrachnitis. Spider Satyrion.


That kinde which resembleth the white Butter-fly groweth vpon the declining of the hill at the North end of Hampsted heath, neere vnto a small cottage there in the way side, as yee go from London to Henden a village thereby. It groweth in tfie fields adioyning to the pound or pinnefold without the gate, at the Village called High-gate, neere London: and likewise in the wood belonging to a Worshipfull Gentleman of Kent named Master Sidley, of South-fleet; where doe grow likewise many other rare and daintie Simples, that are not to be found elsewhere in a great circuit.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part from May to the end of August, and some of them sooner.


 The Names.
These kindes of Orchis haue not bin much written of by the Antients, neither by the late writers to any purpose, so that it may content you for this time to receiue the names set down in their  seuerall titles, reseruing what else might be said as touching the Greeke, French, or Dutch names, or any generall definition vntill a further consideration.


@ 15 Orchis trifolia minor. Small Gnat Satyrion.


@ 16 Orchis angustifolia. Narrow leaued Satyrion.




 The Nature and Vertues.
The nature and vertues of these kindes of Orchis are referred vnto the others, namely to those of the Fox stones; notwithstanding there is no great vse of these in physicke, but they are chiefly regarded for the pleasant and beautifull floures, wherewith Nature hath seemed to play and disport her selfe.



CHAP. 114. Of Sweet Cullions.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of sweet smelling Testicles or Stones, whereof the first is most sweet and pleasant in smell, the others of lesse smell or sauour, differing in floure and roots. Some haue white floures, others yellow; some flesh coloured; some dasht vpon white with a little reddish wash: some haue two stones, others three, and some foure, wherein their difference consisteth.


 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Sweet stones is a small base and low plant in respect of all the rest: The leaues be small, narrow, and short, growing flat vpon the ground; amongst the which riseth vp a small weake and tender stalke of a finger long, whereupon doe grow  small white floures spike fashion, of a pleasant sweet smel. The roots are two small stones in shape like the other.
2 Triple Orchis hath commonly three, yet sometimes foure bulbes or tuberous roots, somewhat long, set with many small fibres or short threads; from the which roots rise immediately many flat and plaine leaues, ribbed with nerues alongst them like those of Plantaine: among the which come forth naked stalkes, small and tender, whereupon are placed certaine small white floures, trace fashion, not so sweet as the former in smell and sauour. @ The top of the stalke whereon the floures do grow, is commonly as if it were twisted or writhen about. @
3 Frieseland Lady traces hath two small round stones or bulbes, of the bignesse of the pease that we call Rouncifalls; from the which rise vp a few hairy leaues, lesser than those of the triple stones, ribbed as the small leafed Plantaine: among the which commeth forth a small naked stalk, set round about with little yellow floures, not trace fashion as the former.
4 Liege Lady traces hath for his roots two greater stones, and two smaller; from the which come vp two and sometimes more leaues, furrowed or made hollow in the midst like to a trough, from the which riseth vp a slender naked stalke, set with such floures as the last described, sauing that they be of an ouerworne yellow colour.


1 Testiculus (...). Lady Traces.


2 Triorchis. Triple Lady Traces.




 The Place.
These kindes of Stones or Cullions do grow in dry pastures and heaths, and likewise vpon chalkie hills, the which I haue found growing plentifully in sundry places, as in the field by Islington, neere London, where there is a bowling place vnder a few old shrubby Okes. They grow likewise vpon the heath at Barne-elmes, neere vnto the head of a conduit that sendeth water to the house belonging to the late Sir Francis Walsingham. They grow in the field next vnto a Village called Thistleworth, as you go from Branford to her Maiesties house at Richmond; also vpon a common Heath by a Village neere London called Stepney, by the relation of a learned merchant of London, named M. Iames Cole, exceedingly well experienced in the knowledge of Simples.
The yellow kindes grow in barren pastures and borders of fields about Ouenden and Clare in  (...). Likewise neere vnto Muche Dunmow in Essex, where they were shewed me by a learned Gentleman Master Iames Twaights, excellently well seene in the knowledge of plants.
@ I receiued some roots of the second from my kinde friend M. Thomas Wallis of Westminster, the which he gathered at Dartford in Kent, vpon a piece of ground commonly called the Brimth: but I could not long get them to grow in a garden, neither do any of the other Satyrions Ioue to be pent vp in such straight bounds. @


3 Orchis Frisia lutea. Frieseland Lady-traces.


4 Orchis Leodiensis. Liege Lady-traces.




 The Time.
These kindes of stones do floure from August to the end of September.


 The Names.
The first is called in Latine Testiculus Odoratus: in English, Sweet smelling Testicles or stones, not of the sweetnesse of the roots, but of the floures. It is called also Orchis spiralis, or Autumnalis, sor that this (as also that which is set forth in the next place) hath the top of the stalke as it were twisted or twined spire fashion, and for that it commeth to flouring in Autumne: of our English women they be called Lady-traces; but euery countrey hath a seuerall name; for some call them Sweet Ballocks, sweet Cods, sweet Cullions, and Stander-grasse. In Dutch, (...), and (...): In French, Satyrion.
The second sort is called Triorchis, and also Tetrorchis: in English, Triple Lady-traces, or white Orchis.
The third is called Orchis Frisia: in English Frieseland Orchis.
The last of these kindes of Testicles or Stones is called of some in Latine, Orchis Leodiensis, and Orchis Lutea, as also Basilica minor Serapias, and Triorchis Aeginetae: In English, Yellow Lady-traces.


 The Temperature.
These kindes of sweet Cullions are of nature and temperature like the Dogs stones, although not vsed in Physicke in times past; notwithstanding later Writers haue attributed some vertues vnto them as followeth.


 The Vertues.
The full and sappy roots of Lady-traces eaten or boyled in milke, and drunke, prouoke venery, nourish and strengthen the body, and be good for such as be fallen into a Consumption or Feuer Hectique.




CHAP. 115. Of Satyrion Royall.

 The Description.
1 THe male Satyrion royal hath large roots, knobbed, not bulbed as the others, but branched or cut into sundry sections like an hand, from the which come vp thick and fat stalkes set with large leaues like those of Lillies, but lesse; at the top whereof groweth a tuft of floures, spotted with a deepe purple colour.


1 Palma Christimas. The male Satyrion Royall.


2 Palma Christi foemina. The female Satyrion Royall.


2 The female Satyrion hath clouen or forked roots, with some fibres ioyned thereto. The leaues be like the former, but smaller and narrower, and confusedly dashed or spotted with black spots: from the which springeth vp a tender stalke, at the top whereof doth grow a tuft of purple floures, in fashion like vnto a Friers hood, changing or varying according to the soile and clymat, sometimes red, sometimes white, and sometimes light carnation or flesh colour.
@ 3 This in roots and leaues is like the former, but that the leaues want the black spots, the stalke is but low, and the top thereof hath floures of a whitish colour, not spotted: they on the (...) resemble gaping hoods, with eares on each side, and a broad lip hanging down; the backe part ends in a broad obtuse spur. These floures smell like Elder blossomes. @


 The Place.
The royall Satyrions grow for the most part in moist and fenny grounds, medowes, and Woods that are very moist and shadowie. I haue found them in many places, especially in the midst of a wood in Kent called Swainescombe wood neere to Grauesend, by the village Swainescombe, and likewise in Hampsted wood foure miles from London.


 The Time.
They foure in May and Iune, but seldome later.



@ 3 Orchis Palmata Pannonica 8. Clus. The Austrian handed Satyrion.




 The Names.
This (...) of purging and (...), which our Author out of (...), and he out of (...), giue to the root of Palma Christi, I doubt is mistaken and put in the wrong place: for I iudge it to belong to the Ricinus, which also is called (...) Christi; for that Nicolus (...), a (...) of root must be taken as (...) (...) (...); now the whole root of this plant is not so long. And besides, (...) is knowne to haue a vomitorie or (...) facultie.

 Royal Satyrion, or finger Orchis is called in Latine, Palma Christi; notwithstanding there is another herbe or plant called by the same name, which otherwise is called Ricinus. This plant is called likewise of some, Satyrium Basilicum, or Satyrium regium. Some would haue it to be Buzeiden, or Buzidan Arabum, but Auicen saith Buzeiden is a woody Indian medicine: and Serapio saith, Buzeiden be hard white roots like those of Behen album, and that it is an Indian drug: but contrariwise the roots of Palma Christi are nothing lesse than woody, so that it cannot be the same. Matthiolus would haue Satyrion royall to be the Digiti Citrini of (...); finding fault with the Monkes which set forth Commentaries vpon Mesues Compositions, for doubting and leauing it to the iudgement of the discreet Reader. Yet do we better allow of the Monkes doubt, than of Matthiolus his assertion. For (...) words be these; What is (...), or Digiti Citrini? and answering the doubt himselfe, he saith, It is in figure or shape like the palme of a mans hand, of a mixt colour betweene yellow and white, and it is hard, in which there is a little sweetnesse, and there is a Citrine sort dusty and without sweetnesse. Rhasis also in the last booke of his Continent calls these, Digiti Crocei, or Saffron fingers; and he saith it is a gumme or veine for Dyars. Now these roots are nothing lesse than of a Saffron colour, and wholly vnfit for Dying. Wherefore without doubt these words of Auicen and Rhasis, in the eares of men of iudgment do confirme, That Satyrion Royall, or Palma Christi, are not those Digiti Citrini. The Germans call it Creutsblum: the low Dutch, Handekens cruyt: the French, Satyrion royal.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Roots of Satyrion royall are like to Cynosorchis or Dogs stones, both in sauour and taste, and therefore are thought by some to be of like faculties. Yet Nicolaus Nicolus, in the chapter of the cure of a Quartaine Ague, saith, That the roots of Palma Christi are of force to purge vpward and downward; and that a piece of the root as long as ones thumbe stamped and giuen with wine before the fit commeth, is a good remedie against old Quartaines after purgation: and reporteth, That one Baliolus, after he had endured 44 fits, was cured therewith.



CHAP. 116. Of Serapia's Stones.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of Serapias stones, whereof some be male, others female; some great, and some of a smaller kinde; varying likewise in colour of the floures, whereof some be white, others purple; altering according to the soile or clymate, as the greatest part of bulbous roots do. Moreouer, some grow in marshie and fenny grounds, and some in fertile pastures, lying open to the Sun, varying likewise in the shape of their floures; retaining the forme of flies, Butter-flies, and Gnats, like those of the Fox stones.



1 Serapias Candido flore. White handed Orchis.


2 Serapias minor, nitente flore. Red handed Orchis.


3 Serapias palustris latifolia. Marish Satyrion.


4 (...) (...) (...). Fenny Satyrion.





The fifth was the figure of (...) (...) of (...) and is a kinde of (...) (...). 6 In this place formerly was the figure of the last before, to wit (...) (...). (...) (...) was the figure of (...) (...), which should haue beene in the sixth place in the 101 Chapter of the (...) Edition, being the 113 of this.

 5 Serapias Montana. Mountaine Satyrion.


The fifth was the figure of (...) (...) of (...) and is a kinde of (...) (...). 6 In this place formerly was the figure of the last before, to wit (...) (...). (...) (...) was the figure of (...) (...), which should haue beene in the sixth place in the 101 Chapter of the (...) Edition, being the 113 of this.

 6 Serapias Gariophyllat a cum rad. and sem. Sweet-smelling Satyrion, with the root and seed exprest at large.


7 Serapias Castrata. Gelded Satyrion.





 The Description.
1 THe white handed Orchis or Satyrion hath long and large leaues, spotted and dashed with blacke spots, from the which doth rise vp a small fragile or brittle stalke of two hands high, hauing at the top a bush or spoky tuft of white floures, like in shape to those of Palma Christi, whereof this is a kinde. The root is thicke, fat, and full of iuyce, fashioned like the hand and fingers of a man, with some tough and fat strings fastned to the vpper part thereof.
2 Red handed Satyrion is a small low and base herbe, hauing a small tender stalke set with two or three small leaues, like vnto those of the Leeke, but shorter. The floure groweth at the top tuft fashion, of a glistering red colour, with a root fashioned like an hand, but lesser than the former.
3 Serapia's stones, or marish Satyrion hath a thicke knobby root, diuided into fingers like those of Palma Christi, whereof it is a kinde: from which rise thicke fat and spongeous stalkes, set with broad leaues like those of Plantaine, but much longer, euen to the top of the tuft of floures; but the higher they rise toward the top the smaller they are. The floure consisteth of many small hooded floures somewhat whitish, spotted within with deepe purple spots; the backside of these little floures are Violet mixed with purple.


The fifth was the figure of (...) (...) of (...) and is a kinde of (...) (...). 6 In this place formerly was the figure of the last before, to wit (...) (...). (...) (...) was the figure of (...) (...), which should haue beene in the sixth place in the 101 Chapter of the (...) Edition, being the 113 of this.

 8 Serapias Batrachites. Frog Satyrion.


@ 9 Scrapias Batrachites altera. The other Frog Satyrion.


4 Fenny Satyrion (or Serapia's stones) differeth little from the former, sauing that the leaues are smaller, and somewhat spotted, and the tuft of floures hath not so many greene leaues, nor so long, mixed with the floures, neither are they altogether of so darke orpurplish a colour as the former. The roots are like those of the last described.
5 (...) Orchis or Satyrion hath thicke fat and knobby roots, the one of them for the most part being handed, and the other long. It growes like the former in stalkes, leaues, and floures, but is somewhat bigger, with the leaues smoother, and more shining.
6 Cloue Satyrion, or sweet smelling Orchis, hath flat and thicke roots diuided into fingers  like those of Palma Christi, sauing that the fingers are longer, smaller, and more in number; from the which rise vp long and narrow leaues like those of Narcissus or Daffodill: among which commeth forth a small tender stalke, at the top whereof groweth a purple tuft compact of many small floures resembling Flies, but in sauour and smell like the Cloue, or Cloue Gillo-floure; but farre sweeter and pleasanter, as my selfe with many others can (...) now liuing, that haue both seene and smelt them in my garden. @ After the floure is past; come many seed vessels filled with a small seed, and growing after the manner as you see them here at large expressed in a figure, together with the root also set forth at full. @
7 Gelded Satyrion hath leaues with nerues and sinewes like to those of Daffodill, set vpon a weake and tender stalke, with floures at the top white of colour, spotted within the floure, and in shape they are like Gnats and little Flies. The stalke is gelded as it were, or the stones and hands cut off, leauing for the root two long legges or fingers, with many strings fastned vnto the top.
8 Frog Satyrion hath small flat leaues set vpon a (...) weake stem; at the top wherof growes a tuft of floures compact of sundry small floures, which in shape do resemble little frogges, whereof it tooke his name. The root is likewise gelded, onely reserued two small mishapen lumps with certaine fibres annexed thereto.
@ 9 This also may fitly be added to the last described, the root shewing it to be of a kinde betweene the Serapia's and Orchis. It groweth to the height of the former, with short leaues engirting the stalke at their setting on. The floures on the top resemble a Frogge, with their long leaues; and if you looke vpon them in another posture, they will somewhat resemble little Flies: wherefore Lobel calls it as well Myoides, as Batrachites. @


 The Time.
These Plants flourish in the moneth of May and Iune, but seldome after, except some degenerate kinde, or that it hath had some impediment in the time when it should haue floured, as often hapneth.


 The Names.
We haue called these kindes, Serapia's stones, or Serapiades, especially for that sundry of them do bring forth floures resembling Flies and such like (...) and lasciuious insects, as taking their name from Serapias the god of the citisens of Alexandria in Aegypt, who had a most famous Temple at Canopus, where he was worshipped with all kinde of lasciuious wantonnesse, songs, and dances, as we may reade in Strabo, in his seuenteenth Booke. Apuleius confounds the Orchides and Serapiades, vnder the name of both the Satyrions; and withall saith it is called Entaticos, Panion, and of the Latines, Testiculus Leporinus. In English we may call them Satyrions, and finger Orchis, and Hares stones.


 The Nature and Vertues.
(...) stones are thought to be in nature, temperature, and Verthes, like vnto the Satyrion Royall; and although not so much vsed in physicke, yet doubtlesse they worke the effect of the other Stones.



CHAP. 117. Of Fenny Stones.

 The Description.
@ 1 THis hath cleft or diuided roots like fingers, much like vnto the Roots of other Palma Christi's; whereof this is a kinde: from the which riseth vp a stalke of a foot high, set here and there with very faire Lilly-like leaues, of colour red, the which do clip or embrace the stalkes almost round about, like the leaues of Thorow-wax. At the  top of the stalke groweth a faire bush of very red floures, among the which floures do grow many small sharpe pointed leaues. The seed I could neuer obserue, being a thing like dust that flieth in the winde.
2 The other Marish handed Satyrion differeth little from the precedent, but in the leaues and floures, for that the leaues are smaller and narrower, and the floures are faire white, gaping wide open; in the hollownesse whereof appeare certaine things obscurely hidden, resembling little helmets, which setteth forth the difference.


The first of these was the third in the (...) Chapter; in lieu whereof I giue you the (...) of (...), whose figure was here in the second place.

 1 Serapias Dracontias palustris. Marish Dragon Satyrion.


The first of these was the third in the (...) Chapter; in lieu whereof I giue you the (...) of (...), whose figure was here in the second place.

 2 Serapias palustris leptophylla (...). The other Marish handed Satyrion.


3 This third handed Satyrion hath roots fashioned like an hand, with some strings fastned to the vpper part of them; from which riseth vp a faire stiffe stalke armed with large leaues, very notably dasht with blackish spots, clipping or embracing the stalke round about: at the top of the stalke standeth a faire tuft of purple floures, with many greene leaues mingled amongst the same, which maketh the bush or tuft much greater. The seed is nothing else but as it were dust like the other of his kinde: @ and it is contained in such twined vessels as you see exprest apart by the side of the figure; which vessels are not peculiar to this, but common to most part of the other Satyrions. @
4 The creeping rooted Orchis or Satyrion without testicles, hath many long roots dispersing themselues, or creeping far abroad in the ground, contrarie to all the rest of the Orchides: which Roots are of the bignesse of strawes, in substance like those of Sopewort; from the which immediately doth rise foure or fiue broad smooth leaues like vnto the small Plantaine, from the which shooteth vp a small and tender stalke, at the top whereof groweth a pleasant spikie eare of a whitish colour, spotted on the inside with little speckes of a bloudie colour. The seed also is very small.
@ 5 This from handed roots like others of this kinde sends vp a large stalke, sometimes attaining to the height of two cubits; the leaues are much like to those of the marish Satyrions; the floures are of an elegant purple, with little hoods like the top of an helmet (whence Gemma  3 Palma Christi palustris. The third handed marish Satyrion. 4 Palma Christi, radice repente. Creeping Satyrion. @ 5 Palma Christi maxima. The greatest handed Satyrion. (...) the plant, Cynosorch. conopsoea; and from the height he called it Macrocanlos.) These floures smel sweet, and are succeeded by seeds like those of the rest of this kindred.
It delights to grow in grounds of an indifferent temper, not too moist nor too dry. It floures from mid-May to mid-Iune. @


The Place.
They grow in marish and fenny grounds, and in shadowie woods that are very moist.
The fourth was found by a learned Preacher called Master Robert Abbot, of Bishops Hatfield, in a boggy groue where a Conduit head doth stand, that sendeth water to the Queenes house in the same towne.
@ It growes also plentifully in Hampshire, within a mile of a market Towne called Petersfield, in a moist medow named Wood-mead, neere the path leading from Peters-field, towards Beryton. @


 The Time.
They floure and flourish about May and Iune.


@  The Names.
@ 1 This is Cynosorchis (...) of Lobell and Gemma.

2 This is Cynosorchis palustris alter a Leptaphylla, of Lobell; Testiculus Galericulatus, of Tabernamontanus.
3 Lobell and Gemma terme this, Cynosorchis palustris altera Lophodes, velnephelodes.
4 This is Orchis minor radice repente, of Camerarius.
5 This by Lobell and Gemma is called Cynosorchis macrocaulos, siue Conopsoea.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is little vse of these in physicke; onely they are referred vnto the handed Satyrions, whereof they are kindes: notwitstanding Dalescampius hath written in his great Volume, that the Marish Orchis is of greater force than any of the Dogs stones in procuring of lust.
Camerarius of Noremberg, who was the first that described this kinde of creeping Orchis, hath set it forth with a bare description onely; and I am likewise constrained to do the like, because as yet I haue had no triall thereof.



CHAP. 118. Of Birds nest.


1 Satyrium abortinum, siue Nidus anis. Birds nest.



 The Description.
1 BIrds Nest hath many tangling roots platted or crossed one ouer another very intricately, which resembleth a Crowes nest made of stickes; from which riseth vp a thicke soft grosse stalk of a browne colour, set with small short leaues of the colour of a dry Oken leafe that hath lien vnder the tree all the winter long. On the top of the stalke groweth a spikie eare or tuft of floures, in shape like vnto Maimed Satyrion, whereof doubtlesse it is a kinde. The whole plant, as well sticks, leaues, and floures, are of a parched browne colour.
@ I receiued out of Hampshire from my often remembred friend Master Goodyer this following description of a Nidus auis found by him the twenty ninth of Iune, 1621.


 Nidus avis flore and caule (...) (...) (...); an Pseudoleimodoron Clus. Hist. Rar. plant. pag. 270.
This riseth vp with a stalke about nine inches high, with a few smal narrow sharpe pointed short skinny leaues, set without order, very little or nothing at all wrapping or inclosing the stalke; hauing a spike of floures like those of Orobanche, without tailes or leaues growing amongst them: which fallen, there succeed small seed-(...). The lower part of the stalke within the ground is not round like Orobanche, but slender or long, and of a yellowish white colour, with many small brittle roots growing vnderneath confusedly, wrapt or solded together like those of the common Nidus auis. The whole plant as it appeareth aboue ground, both stalkes, leaues, and floures, is of a violet or deepe purple colour. This I found wilde in the border of a field called Marborne, neere Habridge in Haliborne, a mile from a towne called (...) in Hampshire, being the land of one William Balden. In this place also groweth wilde the (...) called Corona fratrum. Ioh. Goodyer.


 The Place.
This bastard or vnkindely Satyrion is very seldome seene in these Southerly parts of England.  It is reported, That it groweth in the North parts of England, neere vnto a village called Knaesborough. I found it growing in the middle of a Wood in Kent two miles from Grauesend, neere vnto a worshipfull Gentlemans house called Master William Swan, of Howcke Greene. The wood belongeth to one Master Iohn Sidley: which plant I did neuer see elsewhere; and because it is very rare, I am the more willing to giue you all the markes in the wood for the better finding it, because it doth grow but in one piece of the Wood: that is to say, The ground is couered all ouet in the same place neere about it with the herbe Sanycle, and also with the kinde of Orchis called (...), or Butter-fly Satyrion.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in Iune and August. The dusty or mealy seed (if it may be called seed) falleth in the end of August; but in my iudgement it is an vnprofitable or barren dust, and not any seed at all.


 The Names.
It is called Satyrium abortirum: of some, Nidus auis: in French Nid d'oiseau: in English, Birds nest, or Goose-nest: in Low-Dutch, Uogels nest: in High-Dutch, Margen Drehen.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It is not vsed in Physicke that I can finde in any authoritie either of the antient or later Writers, but is esteemed as a degenerate kinde of Orchis, and therefore not vsed.






THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF PLANTS:

Containing the description, place, time, names, nature, and vertues of all sorts of Herbes for meate, medicine, or sweet smelling vse, etc.

WE haue in our first booke sufficiently described the Grasses, Rushes, Flags, Corne, and bulbous rooted Plants, which for the most part are such as with their braue and gallant floures decke and beautifie Gardens, and feed rather the eyes than the belly. Now there remaine certaine other bulbes, whereof the most (though not all) serue for food: of which we will also discourse in the first place in this booke, diuiding them in such sort, that those of one kinde shall be separated from another. @ In handling these and such as next succeed them, we shall treat of diuers, yea the most part of those Herbes that the Greekes call by a generall name (...) and the Latines, Olera: and we in English, Salletherbes. When we haue past ouer these, we shall speake of other plants, as they shall haue resemblance each to other in their externall forme. @

CHAP. 1. Of Turneps.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of Turneps; some wilde; some of the garden; some with round roots globe fashion; other ouall or peare fashion; and another sort longish or somwhat like a Radish: and of all these there are sundry varieties, some being great, and some of a smaller sort.


 The Description.
1 THe Turnep hath long rough and greene leaues, cut or snipt about the edges with deepe gashes. The stalke diuideth it selfe into sundry branches or armes, bearing at the top small floures of a yellow colour, and sometimes of a light purple: which being past, there do succeed long cods full of small blackish seed like rape seed. The root is round like a bowle, and sometimes a little stretched out in length, growing very shallow in the ground, and often shewing it selfe aboue the face of the earth.
@ 2 This is like the precedent in each respect, but that the root is not made so globous or bowle-fashioned as the former, but slenderer, and much longer, as you may perceiue by the sigure wee here giue you. @
3 The small Turnep is like vnto the first described, sauing that it is lesser. The root is much sweeter in taste, as my selfe hath often proued.
4 There is another sort of small Turnep said to haue red roots; @ and there are other-some whose roots are yellow both within and without; some also are greene on the outside, and othersome blackish. @


 The Place.
The Turnep prospereth wel in a light, loose, and fat earth, and so loose, as (...) Crescentius saith,  that it may be turned almost into dust. It groweth in fields and diuers vineyards or Hop gardens in most places of England.
The small Turnep groweth by Hackney, in a sandy ground; and those that are brought to Cheape-side market from that Village are the best that euer I tasted.


 The Time.
Turneps are sowne in the spring, as also in the end of August. They floure and seed the second yeare after they are sowen: for those which floure the same yeare that they are sowen are a degenerate kinde, called in Cheshire about the Namptwitch, Mad neeps, of their euill qualitie in causing frensie and giddinesse of the braine for a season.


1 Rapum majus. Great Turnep.


@ 2 Rapum radice oblonga. Longish rooted Turnep.




 The Names.
The Turnep is called in Latine, Rapum: in Greeke, (...): the name commonly vsed in shops and euery where is Rapa. The Lacedemonians call it (...): the Boetians, (...), as Athenaeus reporteth: in high Dutch, Ruben: in low Dutch, Rapen: in French, Naueau rond: in Spanish, Nabo: in English, Turnep, and Rape.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The bulbous or knobbed root, which is properly called Rapum or Turnep, and hath giuen the  name to the plant, is many times eaten raw, especially of the poore people in Wales, but most commonly boiled. The raw root is windy, and engendreth grosse and cold bloud; the boyled doth coole lesse, and so little, that it cannot be perceiued to coole at all, yet it is moist and windy.
It auaileth not a little after what manner it is prepared; for being boyled in water, or in a certaine  broth, it is more moist, and sooner descendeth, and maketh the body more soluble; but being rosted or baked it drieth, and ingendreth lesse winde, and yet it is not altogether without winde. But howsoeuer they bedressed, they yeeld more plenty of nourishment than those that are eaten raw: they do increase milke in womens brests, and naturall seed, and prouoke vrine.
The decoction of Turneps is good against the cough and hoarsenesse of the voice, being drunke  in the euening with a little sugar, or a quantitie of clarified honey.
(...) writeth, That the Turnep it selfe being stamped, is with good successe applied vpon   mouldie or kibed heeles, and that also oile of roses boiled in a hollow turnep vnder the hot embers doth cure the same.
The young and tender shootes or springs of Turneps at their first comming forth of the  ground, boiled and eaten as a sallade, prouoke vrine.
The seed is mixed with counterpoisons and treacles: and being drunke it is a remedie against  poifons.
They of the lowe countries doe giue the oile which is pressed out of the seed, against the after  throwes of women newly brought to bed, and also minister it to young children against the wormes, which it both killeth and driueth sorth.
The oile washed with water doth allaie the feruent heat and ruggednesse of the skin.



CHAP. 2. Of wilde Turneps.

 The Kindes.
THere be three sorts of wilde Turneps; one our common Rape which beareth the seed whereof is made rape oile, and feedeth singing birds: the other the common enemy to corne, which call Charlock; whereof there be two kindes, one with a yellow, or els purple floure, the other with a white floure: there is also another of the water and marish grounds.


1 Rapum syluestre. Wilde Turneps.


2 Rapistrum aruorum. Charlocke or Chadlocke.




 The Description.
1 WIlde Turneps or Rapes, haue long, broad, and rough leaues like those of Turneps, but not so deeply gashed in the edges. The stalkes are slender and brittle, somewhat (...), of two cubits high, diuiding themselues at the top into many armes or branches, whereon doe grow little yellowish flowers: which being past, there doe succeed small long cods which containe the seed like that of the Turnep, but smaller, somewhat reddish, and of a firie hot  and biting taste as is the mustard, but bitterer. The root is small, and perisheth when the seed is ripe.
2 Charlocke, or the wilde rape, hath leaues like vnto the former, but lesser, the stalke and leaues being also rough. The stalkes bee of a cubite high, slender, and branched; the floures are sometimes purplish, but more often yellow. The rootes are slender, with certaine threds or strings hanging on them.
@ There is also another varietie hereof with the leaues lesse diuided, and much smoother than the two last described, hauing yellow floures and cods not so deeply joynted as the last described: this is that, which is set sorth by Matthiolus vnder the name of Lampsana.
3 Water Chadlock groweth vp to the height of three foot or somewhat more, with branches slender and smooth in respect of any of the rest of his kinde, set with rough ribbed leaues, deeply indented about the lower part of the leafe. The floures grow at the top of the branches, vmble or tust fashion, sometimes of one colour, and sometimes of another. @ The root is long, tough, and sull of strings, creeping and putting forth many stalkes: the seed vessells are short and small. (...) hath this vnder the title of Raphanus (...) alter. @


2 Rapistrum aruense alterum. Another wilde Charlocke.


3 Rapistrum aquaticum. Water Chadlocke.




 The Place.
Wilde Turneps or Rapes, doe grow of themselues in fallow fields, and likewise by highwayes neere vnto old walls, vpon ditch-bankes, and neere vnto townes and villages, and in other vntoiled and rough places.
The Chadlocke groweth for the most part among corne in barraine grounds, and often by the borders of fields and such like places.
Water Chadlocke groweth in moist medowes and marish grounds, as also in water ditches, and such like places.


 The Time.
These doe floure from March, till Summer be farre spent, and in the meane season the seed is ripe.



 The Names.
Wilde Turnep is called in Latine Rapistrum, Rapum syluestre, and of some, Sinapi (...), or wild mustard: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Vclar: in English, Rape, and Rape seed. Rapistrum aruorum is called Charlock, and Carlock.


 (...) Temperature.
The seed of these wild kindes of Turneps as also the water Chadlock, are hot and drie as mustard seed is. Some haue thought that Carlock hath a drying and clensing qualitie, and somewhat digesting.


 The Vertues.
Diuers vse the seed of Rape in steed of mustard seed, who either make hereof a sauce bearing  the name of mustard, or else mixe it with mustard seed: but this kinde of sauce is not so pleasant to the taste, because it is bitter.
Galen writeth that these being eaten engender euill blood: yet Disoscorides saith, they warme the  stomacke and nourish somewhat.



CHAP. 3. Of Nauewes.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundrie kindes of Nape or Nauewes degenerating from the kindes of Turnep; of which some are of the garden; and other wilde, or of the field.


 The Description.
1 NAuew gentle is like vnto Turneps in stalkes, floures, and seed, as also in the shape of the leaues, but those of the Nauew are much smoother; it also differeth in the root: the Turnep is round like a globe, the Nauew root is somewhat stretched forth in length.


The figure that was in the first place is a kinde of the long Turnep described by me in the second place of the first chapter of this second booke. (...) that in the second place was a lesser kinde of the same.

 1 Bunias. Nauew Gentle.


The figure that was in the first place is a kinde of the long Turnep described by me in the second place of the first chapter of this second booke. (...) that in the second place was a lesser kinde of the same.

 2 Bunias (...) (...). Wilde Nauew.


2 The small or wilde Nauew is like vnto the former, sauing that it is altogether lesser. The root is small, somewhat long, with threads long and tough at the end thereof.



 The (...).
Nauew-gentle requireth a loose and yellow mould euen as doth the Turnep, and prospereth in a fruitfull soile: he is sowen in France, Bauaria, and other places in the fields for the seeds sake, as is likewise that wild Colewort called of the old writers Crambe: for the plentifull increase of the seeds bringeth no small gaine to the husbandmen of that countrey, because that being pressed they yeeld an oile which is vsed not onely in lampes, but also in the making of sope; for of this oile and a lie made of certaine ashes, is boiled a sope which is vsed in the Lowe-countries euery where to scoure and wash linnen clothes. I haue heard it reported that it is at this day sowen in England for the same purpose.
The wilde Nauew groweth vpon ditch bankes neere vnto villages and good townes, as alsovpon fresh marshie bankes in most places.


 The Time.
The Nauew is sowen, floureth and seedeth at the same time that the Turnep doth.


 The Names.
The Nauew is called in Latine Napus, and also Bunias: in Greeke (...): the Germaines call it Steckruben: the Brabanders, Steckropen: in Spanish, Naps: in Italian, Nauo: the Frenchmen, Naueau: in English, Nauew-gentle, or French Naueau. The other is called Napus sylvestru, or wild Nauew.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Nauew and the Turnep are all one in temperature and vertues, yet some suppose that the Nauew is a little drier, and not so soone concocted, nor (...) downe so easily, and doth withall ingender lesse winde. In the rest it is answerable to the Turnep.
@ The seeds of these taken in drinke or broth are good against poyson, and are vsually put into  Antidotes for the same purpose. @.



CHAP. 4. Of Lyons Turnep, or Lyons leafe.


Leontopet alon. Lyons leafe.



 The Description.
LYons Turnep or Lyons leafe, hath broad leaues like vnto Coleworts, or rather like the pionyes cut and diuided into sundry great gashes: the stalke is two foot long, thicke, and full of iuyce, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches or wings; in the tops whereof stand red floures: afterward there appeareth long cods in which lie the seeds like vnto tares, or wilde chichs. The root is great, bumped like a Turnep, and blacke without.


 The Place.
It groweth among corne in diuers places of Italy, in Candie also, and in other Prouinces towards the South and East. The right honorable Lord Zouch brought a plant hereof from Italy at his returne into England, the which was planted in his garden. But as farre as I doe know, it perished.


 The Time.
It floureth in winter, as witnesseth Petrus Bellonius.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...), that is, Leonis folium, or Lyons leafe: Plinie doth call it also Leontopetalon: Apuleius, Leontopodion: yet there is another plant called by the same name. There bee many bastard Names giuen vnto it, as  Rapeium, Papauerculum, Semen Lconinum, Pes Leoninus, and Brumaria: in English Lyons leafe, and Lyons Turnep.


 The Temperature.
Lyons Turnep is of force to digest; it is hot and drie in the third degree, as Galen teacheth.


 The Vertues.
The root (saith Dioscorides) taken in wine doth helpe them that are bitten of Serpents, and it  doth most speedily alay the paine. It is put into glisters which are made for them that bee tormented with the Sciatica.



CHAP. 5. Of Radish.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundrie sorts of Radish, whereof some be long and white; others long and blacke; some round and white; others round, or of the forme of a peare, and blacke of colour; some wilde, or of the field; and some tame, or of the garden, whereof we will intreat in this present chapter.


@ 1 Raphanus sativus. Garden Radish.


@ 2 Radicula satina minor. Small garden Radish.




 The Description.
1 THe garden Radish sendeth forth great and large leaues, greene, rough, cut on both sides with deepe gashes, not vnlike to the garden Turnep, but greater. The stalkes bee round and parted into many branches; out of which spring small floures of a light purple colour, made of foure little leaues: and when they be past, there doe come in place sharpe pointed cods huft or blowne vp toward the stalke, full of spungious substance, wherein is contained the seed, of a light browne colour, somewhat greater than the seeds of Turneps or Coleworts. The root is grosse, long, and white both without and within, and of a sharpe taste.

2 The small garden Radish hath leaues like the former, but smaller, and more brittle in handling. The stalke of two cubits high, whereon be the floures like the former. The seed is smaller, and not so sharpe in taste. The root is small, long, white both within and without, (...) a little that sheweth it selfe aboue the ground of a reddish colour.
3 Radish with a round root hath leaues like the garden Turnep: among which (...) springeth vp a round and smooth stalke, diuiding it selfe toward the top into two or three branches, whereon doe grow small purplish floures made of (...) leaues (...): which being past, there doe come in place small long cods puft vp or bunched in two, and sometimes three places, full of pith as the common Radish; wherein is contained the seed, somewhat smaller than the Colewort seed, but of a hotter taste. The root is round and firme, (...) waterish like the common Radish, more pleasant in taste, wholsomer, not causing such stinking belchings as the garden Radish doth.
4 The Radish with a root fashioned like a peare, groweth to the height of three or foure cubits, of a bright reddish colour. The leaues are deeply cut or iagged like those of the (...), somewhat rough. The floures are made of foure leaues, of a light carnation or fleshie colour. The seed is contained in small bunched cods like the former. The root is fashioned like a peare or long Turnep, blacke without and white within, of a firme and solide substance. The taste is quicke and sharpe, biting the tongue as the other kindes of Radish, but more strongly.


3 Rhaphanus orbiculatus. Round Radish.


4 Rapharus (...), siue xadice (...). The blacke, or Peare-fashion Radish.




 The Place.
All the kindes of Radish require a loose ground which hath beene long manured and is somewhat fat. They prosper well in sandie ground, where they are no t so subiect to wormes, as in other grounds.


 The Time.
These kindes of Radish are most fitly sowen after the Summer Solstice in Iune or Iulie: for being sowen betimes in the spring they yeeld not their roots so kindly nor profitably, for then they doe for the most part quickly run vp to stalke and seed, where otherwise they doe not floure and seed till the next spring following. They may be sowen ten moneths in the yeere, but as I said before, the best time is in Iune and Iulie.



 The Names.
Radish is called in Greeke of Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Galen, and other old writers (...) in shops, Raphanus, and (...) Radicula: in high Dutch, Rettich: in low Dutch, Radus: in French, (...): in Italian, Raphano: in Spanish, Rauano: in English, Radish, and Rabone: in the Bohemian tongue, Rzedfew. Caelius affirmeth that the seed of Radish is called of Marcellus Empericus, (...); and so likewise of (...) in the second chapter of the second booke of his Tetrabible: yet (...) doth not reade Bacanon, but Cacanon: The name of (...) is also found in N. Myrepsus, in the 255. Composition of his first booke.


 The Temperature.
Radish doth manifestly heat and drie, open and make thin by reason of the biting quality that ruleth in it. Galen maketh them hot in the third degree, and drie in the second, and sheweth that it is rather a sauce than a nourishment.


 The Vertues.
Radish are eaten raw with bread in stead of other food; but being eaten after that manner, they  yeeld very little nourishment, and that faultie and ill. But for the most part, they are vsed as sauce with meates to procure appetite, and in that sort they ingender blood lesse faulty, than eaten alone or with bread onely: but seeing they be of a harder digestion than meates, they are also many times troublesome to the stomacke; neuerthelesse, they serue to distribute and disperse the nourishment, especially being taken after meat; and taken before meat, they cause belchings, and ouerthrow the stomacke.
Before meate they cause vomiting, and especially the rinde: the which as it is more biting (...) the inner substance, so doth it with more force cause that effect if it be giuen with Oximel, which is a syrupe made with vineger and hony.
Moreouer, Radish prouoketh vrine, and dissolueth cluttered sand, and driueth it (...), if a good  draught of the decoction thereof be drunke in the morning. Pliny writeth, and (...) likwise, that it is good against an old cough; and to make thin, thicke and grosse flegme which sticketh in the chest.
In stead hereof the Phisitions of our age doe vse water distilled thereof: which likewise procureth  vrine mightily, and driueth forth stones in the kidnies.
The root sliced and laid ouer night in white or Rhenish wine, and drunke in the morning, driueth  out vrine and grauell mightily, but in taste and smell it is very loth some.
The root stamped with hony and the powder of a sheepes heart dried, causeth haire to grow in  short space.
The seed causeth vomite, prouoketh vrine: and being drunke with honied vineger, it killeth and  driueth forthwormes.
The root stamped with the meale of Darnell and a little white wine vineger, taketh away all  blew and blacke spots, and brused blemishes of the face.
The root boiled in broth, and the decoction drunke, is good against an old cough: it moueth  womens sicknesse, and causeth much milke. 

Those figures that were in the first and second place, were varietyes of the long Turnep described in the second place, in the first Chapter of this second booke.




CHAP. 6. Of wilde Radish.

 The Description.
1 WIlde Radish hath a shorter narrower leafe than the common Radish, and more deeply cut or iagged, almost like the leaues of Rocket, but much greater. The stalke is slender and rough, of two cubits high, diuided toward the top into many branches. The floures are small and white: the cod is long, slender, aud ioynted, wherein is the seed. The root is of the bignesse of the finger, white within and without, of a sharpe and biting taste.
2 The water Radish hath long and broad leaues, deeply indented or cut euen to the middle (...). The stalke is long, weake, and leaneth this way and that way, being not able to stand vpright without a prop, in so much that yee shall neuer find it, no not when it is very young, but leaning down vpon the mud or mire where it groweth. The floures grow at the top made of foure small yellow leaues. The root is long, set in sundrie spaces with small fibres or threds like the rowell of a spur, hot and burning in taste more than any of the garden Radishes.


 The Place.
The first growes vpon the borders of bankes and ditches cast vp, and in the borders of fields.

The second growes in ditches, standing waters, and riuers; as on the stone wall that bordereth vpon the riuer Thames by the Sauoy in London.


1 Raphanus syluestris. Wilde Radish.


2 Raphanus aquaticus. Water Radish.




 The Time.
They floure in Iune, and the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
@ The first of these is Rapistrum flore albo Erucae folijs, of Lobell: Armoratia, or Rapistrum album of Tabernamontanus: and Raphanus sylvestris, of our Author: in English, wilde Radish.
The second is Radicula sylvestris of Dodonaeus: and Rhaphanus aquaticus, or palustris of others: in English, water Radish.


 The Temperature.
The wilde Radishes are of like temperature with the garden Radish, but hotter and drier.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that the leaues are receiued among the pot herbes, and likewise the boiled  root, which as he (...), doth heate, and prouoke vrine.



CHAP. 7. Of Horse Radish.

 The Description.
1 HOrse Radish bringeth forth great leaues, long, broad, sharpe pointed and (...) about the edges, of a deepe greene colour like those of the great garden Docke, called, of some Monkes Rubarbe, of others Patience, but longer and rougher. The stalke is slender and brittle, bearing at the top small white floures: which being past, there follow small cods, wherein is the seed. The root is long and thicke, white of colour, in taste sharpe, and very much biting the tongue like mustard.
2 Dittander or pepperwort, hath broad leaues, long, and sharpe pointed, of a blewish greene colour like woad, (...) snipt or cut about the edges like a sawe. The stalke is round and  tough: vpon the branches whereof grow little white floures. The root is long and hard, creeping farre abroad in the ground, in such sort that when it is once taken in a ground, it is not possible to root it out, for it will vnder the ground creepe and shoot vp and bud forth in many places farre abroad. The root also is sharp and biteth the tongue like pepper, whereof it tooke the name pepperwort.
@ 3 This which we giue you in the third place hath a small fibrous root, the stalke growes vp to the height of two cubits, and it is diuided into many branches furnished with white floures, after which follow seeds like in shape and taste to Thlaspi, or Treacle mustard. The leaues are somewhat like those of Woad. This is nourished in some Gardens of the Low Countryes, and Lobell was the first that gaue the figure hereof, and that vnder the same title as wee here giue you it. @.


1 Raphanus rusticanus. Horse Radish.


2 Raphanus syluestris Offic. Lepidium Aeginetae Lob. Dittander, and Pepperwort.




 The Place.
Horse Radish for the most part groweth and is planted in gardens, yet haue I found it (...) in sundrie places, as at Namptwich in Cheshire, in a place called the Milne eye, and also at a small village neere London called Hogsdon, in the field next vnto a farme house leading to Kings-land, where my very good friend master Bredwell practitioner in Phisick, a learned and diligent searcher of Simples, and master William Martin one of the fellowship of Barbers and (...), my deere aud louing friend, in company with him found it, and gaue me knowledge of the place, where it flourisheth to this day.
Dittander is planted in gardens, and is to be found wild also in England in sundry places, as at Clare by Ouenden in Essex, at the Hall of Brinne in Lancashire, and neere vnto Excester in the West parts of England. It delighteth to grow in sandie and shadowie places somewhat moist.


 The Time.
Horse Radish for the most part (...) in Aprill or May, and the seed is ripe in August, and that so rare or seldome seene, as that (...) (...) hath written, that it bringeth forth no seed at all. Dittander floures in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Horse Radish is commonly called Raphanus rusticanus, or Magnus, and of diuers simply Raphanus  (...): of the high Dutch men, (...), (...) (...) (...): in French, Grand raifort: of the low Germaines, (...): in English, mountaine radish, Great Raifort, and Horse Radish. It is called in the North part of England, Redcole.
Diuers thinke that this Horse Radish is an enemy to Vines, and that the hatred betweene them is so great, that if the roots hereof be planted neere to the Vine it bendeth backward from it, as not willing to haue fellowship with it.
It is also reported that the root hereof stamped, and cast into good and pleasant wine, doth forthwith turne it into vineger: but the old writers doe ascribe this enmity to the vine and Brassica, our coleworts, which the most ancients haue named (...)
Dittander is described of Pliny by the name of Lepidium in his 19. booke, 9. Chapter: likewise Aegineta maketh mention of this plant, by the name Lepidium: in shops, Raphanus (...), and Piperitis: the Germans call it, (...): the lowe Dutch men, (...) (...): the English men, Dittander, Dittany, and Pepperwort.


3 Lepidium Annum. Annuall Dittander.




 The Temperature.
These kindes of wilde Radishes, are hot and drie in the third degree: they haue a drying and clensing quality, and somewhat digesting.


 The Vertues.
Horse Radish stamped with a little vineger put  thereto, is commonly vsed among the Germanes for sauce to (...) fish with, and such like meates, as we doe mustard; but this kinde of sauce doth heate the stomacke better, and causeth-better digestion than mustard.
Oximel or syrupe made with vineger and honie, in which the rindes of Horse radish haue beene infused three dayes, causeth vomit, and is commended against the quartaine ague.
The leaues boiled in wine, and a little oile  (...) added thereto and laid vpon the grieued parts in manner of a Pultis, doe mollifie and take away the hard swellings of the liuer and milte; and being applied to the bottome of the belly is a remedie for the strangurie.
It profiteth much in the expulsion of the secondine  or after-birth.
It mittigateth and asswageth the paine of the  hip or haunch, commonly called Sciatica.
It profiteth much against the collicke, strangurie, and difficultie of making water, vsed in stead of mustard as aforesaid.
The root stamped and giuen to drinke, killeth  the wormes in children: the iuyce giuen doth the same: an ointment made thereof, doth the like, being annointed vpon the belly of the child.
The leaues of Pepperwort but especially the rootes, be extreame hot, for they haue a burning  and bitter taste. It is of the number of scorching and blistring simples, saith Pliny in his 20. booke, the 17. chap. and therefore by his hot qualitie, it mendeth the skin in the face, and taketh away scabs, scarres, and manginesse, if any thing remaine after the healing of vlcers and such like.



CHAP. 8. Of Winter Cresses.

 The Description.
THe Winter Cresses hath many greene, broad, smoothe and flat leaues like vnto the common turneps, whose stalkes be round, and full of branches, bringing forth at the top small yellow floures: after them doe follow small cods, wherein is conteined small reddish seed.



1 Barbarea. Winter Cresses.




 The Place.
It groweth in gardens among pot herbes, and very common in the fields, neere to pathes and high wayes, almost euery where.


 The Time.
This herbe is green all winter long, it floureth in May, and seedeth in Iune.


 The Names.
Winter Cresse is called of the Latines, Cardamum, or Nasturtium Hibernum, of some, Barbarea, and Pseudobunium: the Germanes call it (...). (...) (...): in lowe Dutch, (...) (...).
It seemeth to be Dioscorides his (...), that is to say, false or bastard (...): in English, winter Cresses, or herbe Saint Barbara.


 The Nature.
This herbe is hot and drie in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed of winter Cresse causeth one to  make water, and driueth forth grauell, and helpeth the strangurie.
The iuyce thereof mundifieth corrupt and filthy  vlcers, being made in forme of an vnguent with waxe, oyle, and turpentine.
In winter when salad herbes bee scarce, this  herbe is thought to be equall with Cresses of the garden, or Rocket.
This herbe helpeth the scuruie, being boiled  among scuruie grasse, called in Latine Cochlearia, causing it to worke the more effectually.



CHAP. 9. Of Mustard.

 The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Mustard, hath great rough leaues like to those of the Turnep, but rougher and lesser. The stalke is round, rough, and hairie, of three cubits high, diuided into many branches, whereon doe grow small yellow floures, and after them long cods, slender and rough, wherein is contained round seed bigger then Rape seed, of colour yellow, of taste sharpe, and biting the tongue as doth our common field mustard.
@ 2 Our ordinary Mustard hath leaues like Turneps, but not so rough, the stalkes are smooth, and grow sometimes to three, foure, or siue cubits high, they haue many branches, and the leaues vpon these branches, especially the vppermost, are long and narrow, and hang downeward on small stalkes; the cods are short, and lie flat and close to the branches, and are somewhat square; the seed is reddish or yellow. @
3 The other tame Mustard is like to the former in leaues, and branched stalkes, but lesser, and they are more whitish and rough. The floures are likewise yellow, and the seed browne like the Rape seed, which is also not a little sharpe or byting.
@ 4 This which I giue you bere being the Sinapi sativum alterum, of Lobel; and the Sinapi album of the shops, growes but low, and it hath rough crooked cods, and whitish seeds; the stalks, (...), and leaues, are (...) like the first described. @.
5 The wilde Mustard hath leaues like those of shepheards purse, but larger, and more deeply indented, with a stalke growing to the height of two foot, bearing at the top small yellow floures made of foure leaues: the cods be small and-slender, wherein is contained reddish seed, much smaller than any of the others, but not so sharpe or biting.



The three figures in the (...) edition were all false: The first was of (...), described in the precedent chapter: The second, of Eruca (...) (...) of (...). The third, of Eruca (...). (...), (...).

 1 Sinapi sativum. Garden Mustard.


The three figures in the (...) edition were all false: The first was of (...), described in the precedent chapter: The second, of Eruca (...) (...) of (...). The third, of Eruca (...). (...), (...).

 3 Sinapi sativum alterum, Dod. Field Mustard.


@ 4 Sinapi album. White Mustard.


The three figures in the (...) edition were all false: The first was of (...), described in the precedent chapter: The second, of Eruca (...) (...) of (...). The third, of Eruca (...). (...), (...).

 5 Sinapi syluestre minus. Small wilde Mustard.





 The Place.
@ Our ordinarie Mustard (whose description I haue added) as also the wilde and small grow wilde in many places of this kingdome, and may all three be found on the bankes about the back of Old-street, and in the way to Islington. @


 The Time.
Mustard may be sowen in the beginning of the Spring: the seed is ripe in Iuly or August: (...) commeth to perfection the same yeare that it is sowen.


 The Names.
The Greekes call Mustard, (...): the Athenians called it (...): the Latines, Sinapi: the rude and barbarous, Sinapium: the Germanes, (...): the French, Seneue and Moustarde: the low- Dutchmen, (...) (...): the Spaniards, Mostaza, and Mostalla: the Bohemians, Horcice: Pliny calls it Thlaspi, whereof doubtlesse it is a kinde: and some haue called it Saurion.
@ These kindes of Mustard haue beene so briefely treated of by all Writers, that it is hard to giue the right distinctions of them, and a matter of more difficultie than is expected in a thing so vulgarly knowne and vsed: I will therefore endeauour in a few words to distinguish those kindes of mustard which are vulgarly written of.
1 The first is Sinapi primum of Matthiolus and Dodonaeus; and Sinapi sativum (...) aut Rapifolio of Lobel.
2 The second I cannot iustly referre to any of those which are written of by Authours; for it hath not a cod like Rape, as Pena and Lobel describe it; nor a seed bigger than it, as Dodonaeus affirmeth; yet I suspect, and almost dare affirme that it is the same with the former mentioned by them, though much differing from their figures and description.
3 The third (which also I suspect is the same with the fourth) is Sinapi alterum of Matthiolus, and Sinapi agreste Apij, aut potius Laueris folio, of Lobel: and Sinapi sativum alterum of Dodonaeus.
4 The fourth is by Lobel called Sinapi alterum sativum; and this is Sinapi album Ofsicinarum, as Pena and Lobel affirme, Aduers. pag. 68.
5 The fifth is Sinapi syluestre of Dodonaeus: and Sinapi syluestre minus (...) pastoris folio, of Lobel. It is much like Rocket, and therefore Bauhine fitly calls it Sinapi Erucae folio: in English it may be called Small wilde Mustard. @


 The Temperature.
The seed of Mustard, especially that which we chiefely vse, doth heat and make thinne, and also draweth forth. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, according to Galen.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Mustard pound with vineger, is an excellent sauce, good to be eaten with any grosse  meates either fish or flesh, because it doth helpe digestion, warmeth the stomacke, and prouoketh appetite.
It is giuen with good successe in like manner to such as be short winded, and are stopped in the  breast with tough flegme from the head and braine.
It appeaseth the tooth-ache being chewed in the mouth.
They vse to make a gargarisme with honey, vineger, and mustard seed, against the tumours and  swellings of the Vuula, and the almonds about the throat and root of the tongue.
Mustard drunke with water and honey prouoketh the termes and vrine.
The seed of mustard beaten and put into the nosthrils, causeth sneesing, and (...) women sicke  of the mother out of their fits.
It is good against the falling sickenesse, and such as haue the Lithargie, if it be laid plaisterwise  vpon the head (after shauing) being tempered with figs.
It helpeth the Sciatica, or ache in the hip or huckle bone: it also cureth all manner of paines  proceeding of a cold cause.
It is mixed with good successe with drawing plaisters, and with such as waste and consume  nodes and hard swellings.
It helpeth those that haue their haire pulled off; it taketh away the blew and blacke marks that  come of bruisings.
@ The seed of the white Mustard is vsed in some Antidotes, as Electuarium (...) ouo, etc.




CHAP. 10. Of Rocket.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry kindes of Rocket, some tame, or of the garden; some wilde, or of the field; some of the water, and of the sea.


The figure that was in the third place, vnder the title of (...). (...), is of the same plant that in the Chapter of (...) is called (...), where you shall finde (...) treated of (...) large. And that in the first place is (...) (...) of (...). and I question (...) it be not of (...) (...) (...).

 1 Eruca satiua. Garden Rocket.


2 Eruca syluestris. Wilde Rocket.




 The Description.
1 GArden Rocket, or Rocket gentle, hath leaues like those of Turneps, but not neere so great nor rough. The stalks rise vp of a cubit, and somtimes two cubits high, weak and brittle; at the top whereof grow the floures of a whitish colour, and sometimes yellowish; which being past, there do succeed long cods, which containe the seed, not vnlike to rape seed, but smaller.
2 The common Rocket, which some keepe in Gardens, and which is vsually called the wilde Rocket, is lesser than the Romane (...), or Rocket-gentle, the leaues and stalkes narrower, and more iagged. The floures be yellow, the cods also slenderer, the seed thereof is reddish, and biteth the tongue.
3 This kinde of Rocket hath long narrow leaues almost such as those of Tarragon, but thicker and fatter, resembling rather the leaues of Myagrum, altogether vnlike any of the rest of the Rockets, sauing that the branch, floure, and seed are like the garden Rocket.
4 There is another kinde of Rocket, thought by that reuerend and excellent Herbarist Carelus Clusius to be a kinde of Cresses; if not Cresses it selfe, yet cousine germane at the least. Vnto whose (...) (...) is indifferent, whether to call it Rocket with thinne and narrow leaues, or to call it Cousine to the kindes of Cresses, hauing the taste of the one, and the shape of the other. The leaues are much diuided, and the floures yellow.
5 There is is a wild kind of Sea-Rocket which hath long weake and tender branches trailing  vpon the ground, with long leaues like vnto common Rocket, or rather Groundswell, hauing small and whitish blew floures; in whose place commeth small cods, wherein is contained seed like that of Barley.
@ 6 Besides these there is another plant, whose figure which here I giue was by our Author formerly set forth in the precedent chapter, vnder the title of Sinapi syluestre; together with a (...) kinde thereof, vnder the name of Sinapi sativum alterum. Now I will onely describe the later, which I haue sometimes found in wet places: The root is woody: the stalke some foot long, crested, and hauing many branches, lying on the ground: the leafe is much diuided, and that after the manner of the wilde Rocket: the floures are of a bright yellow, and are succeeded by short crooked cods, wherein is contained a yellowish seed. @


The figure that was in the third place, vnder the title of (...). (...), is of the same plant that in the Chapter of (...) is called (...), where you shall finde (...) treated of (...) large. And that in the first place is (...) (...) of (...). and I question (...) it be not of (...) (...) (...).

 3 Eruca syluestris angustifolia. Narrow leaued wilde Rocket.


@ 4 Erucanasturtio cognata (...). Cressy-Rocket.




 The Place.
Romane Rocket is cherished in Gardens.
Common or wilde Rocket groweth in most gardens of it selfe: you may see most bricke and stone walls about London and elsewhere couered with it.
The narrow leaued Rocket groweth neere vnto water sides, in the chinkes and creuises of stone walls among the morter. I found it as ye go from Lambeth bridge to the village of Lambeth, vnder a small bridge that you must passe ouer hard by the Thames side.
I found Sea Rocket growing vpon the sands neere vnto the sea in the Isle of Thanet, hard by a house wherein Sir Henry Crispe did sometimes dwell, called Queakes house.


 The Time.
These Kindes of Rocket floure in the moneths of Iune and Iuly, and the seed is tipe in September.
The Romane Rocket dieth euery yeare, and recouereth it selfe againe by the falling of his owne seed.



 The Names.
Rocket is called in Greeke; (...): in Latine, Eruca: in high Dutch, (...): in (...), Roquette: in Low-Dutch, Rakette: in Italian, Ruchetta: in Spanish, Oruga; in English, Rocket, and Racket. The Poets do oft times name it Herbasalax: Eruca doth signifie likewise a certaine canker worme, which is an enemie to pot-herbes, but especially to Coleworts.
@ The first is called Eruca satiua, or Hortensis major: Great Garden Rocket.
2 The second, Eruca sylucstris: Wilde Rocket.
3 This third is by Lobel called Eruca syluestris angustifolia: Narrow leaued wilde Rocket.
4 Clusius fitly calls this, Nasturtium syluestre: and he reprehendeth Lobel for altering the name into Eruca Nasturtio (...): Cressy-Rocket.
5 The fifth is Eruca marina, (thought by Lobel and others to be Cakile Serapionis,) Sea Rocket.
6 Eruca aquatica: Water Rocket.


@ 5 Erucamarina. Sea Rocket.


The figure that was in the third place, vnder the title of (...). (...), is of the same plant that in the Chapter of (...) is called (...), where you shall finde (...) treated of (...) large. And that in the first place is (...) (...) of (...). and I question (...) it be not of (...) (...) (...).

 6 Eruca aquatica. Water Rocket.




 The Temperature.
Rocket is hot and dry in the third degree, therefore saith Galen it is not fit nor accustomed to be eaten alone.


 The Vertues.
Rocket is a good sallet herbe, if it be eaten with Lettuce, Purslane, and such cold herbes; for being  so eaten it is good and wholesome for the stomacke, and causeth that such cold herbes do not ouer-coole the same: otherwise, to be eaten alone, it causeth head-ache, and heateth too much.
The vse of Rocket stirreth vp bodily lust, especially the seed.
It prouoketh vrine, and causeth good digestion.
Pliny reporteth, That whosoeuer taketh the seed of Rocket before he be whipt, shall be so hardened, that he shall easily endure the paines.
The root and seed stamped, and mixed with Vineger and the gall of an Oxe, taketh away freckles, lentiles, blacke and blew spots, and all such desormities of the face.




CHAP.11. Of Tarragon.


Draco herba. Tarragon.



 The Description.
TArragon the sallade herbe hath long and narrow leaues of a deepe greene colour, greater and longer than those of common Hyssope, with slender brittle round stalkes two cubites high: about the branches whereof hang little round flowers, neuer perfectly opened, of a yellow colour mixed with blacke, like those of common VVormewood. The root is long and fibrous, creeping farre abroad vnder the earth, as doe the rootes of Couch-grasse, by which sprouting forth it increaseth, yeelding no seede at all, but as it were a certaine chaffie or dustie matter that flieth away with the winde.


 The place.
Tarragon is cherished in gardens, and is encreased by the young shootes: Ruellius and such others haue reported many strange tales hereof scarse worth the noting, saying, that the seed of flaxe put into a radish roote or sea Onion, and so set, doth bring forth this herbe Tarragon.


 The time.
It is greene all Summer long, and a great part of Autumne, and floureth in Iuly.


The names.
It is called in Latine, Draco, Dracunculus hortensis, and Tragum vulgare by Clusius; Of the Italians, Dragoncellum; in French, Dragon, in English, Tarragon.
It is thought to be that Tarchon which Auicen mentioneth in his 686. chapter: but he writeth so little thereof, as that nothing can certainly be affirmed of it. Simeon Sethi the Greeke also maketh mention of Tarchon.


 The temperature and vertues.
Tarragon is hot and drie in the third degree, and not to be eaten alone in sallades, but ioyned with other herbes, as Lettuce, Purslain, and such like, that it may also temper the coldnes of them, like as Rocket doth, neither doe we know what other vse this herbe hath.



CHAP.12. Of garden Cresses.

 The Description.
1 GArden Cresses or Towne Cresses hath small narrow iagged leaues, sharpe and burning in taste. The stalks be round, a cubite high, which bring sorth many small white flowers, andafter little flat huskes or seede vessels, like to those of she pheards purse, wherein are contained seeds of a browne reddish colour. The roote dieth when the seede is ripe.
2 There is another kinde in taste like the former, but in leaues farre different, which I recouered of seedes, sent me from Robinus dwelling in Paris. The stalkes rise vp to the height of a foot, garnished with many broad leaues deepely cut or indented about the edges: the middle of the leafe is deckt and garnished with many little small leaues or rather shreds of leaues, which make the same like a curlde fanne of feathers. The seede is like the former in shape.
3 Spanish Cresses riseth forth of the ground like vnto Basill, afterwards the leaues grow larger and broader, like those of Marigolds; among the which riseth vp a crooked lymmer stalke,  whereupon do grow smaall tufts or spokie rundles of white flowers. The seede followeth, browne of colour, and bitter in taste. The whole plant is of a loathfome smell and sauour.
4 Stone-Cresse groweth flat vpon the ground, with leaues iagged and cut about the edges like the oake leafe, resembling well the leaues of shepheardes purse. I haue not seene the flowers, and therefore they be not exprest in the figure; notwithstanding it is reported vnto me, that they bee small and white of colour, as are those of the garden Cresses. The seed is contained in small pouches or seede vessels, like those of Treacle mustard or Thlaspi.


 The Place.
Cresses are sowne in gardens, it skils not what soile it be; for that they like any ground, especially if it be well watered. @ M. Bowles found the fourth growing in Shropshire in the fields about Birch in the parish of Elesmere, in the grounds belonging to M. Richard Herbert, and that in great plenty. @


 The Time.
It may be sowne at any time of the yeere, vnlesse it be in Winter; it groweth vp quickly, and bringeth forth betimes both stalke and seede: it dieth euery yeere, and recouereth it selfe of the fallen or shaken seed.


1 Nasturtium hortense. Garden Cresses.




 The Names.
Cresses is called in Greeke (...): in Latine Nasturtium; in English Cresses: the Germaines call it kersse: and in French, Cresson: the Italians, Nasturtio, and Agretto: of some, towne Cresses, and garden Karsse. It is called Nasturtium, as Varro and (...) thinke a narribus torquendis, that is to say, of writhing the nosthrils, which also by the loathsome smell and sharpnesse of the seede doth cause sneesing. @ The first is called Nasturtium hortense, Garden Cresses. 2 Nasturtium hortense crispum, Garden Cresses with crispe, or curled leaues. 3 Nasturtium Hispanicum, or Latifolium; Spanish Cresses, or Broad-leaued Cresses. 4 This is Nasturtium (...) of Tabernamontanus (and not of Lobell, as out Author termed it.) Stone Cresses. @


 The Temperature.
The herbe of garden Cresses is sharpe and biting the tongue; and therefore it is very hot and drie, but lesse hot whilest it is yong and tender, by reason of the waterie moisture mixed therewith, by which the sharpenesse is somewhat allaied.
The seede is much more biting then the herbe, and is hot and drie almost in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
Galen saith that the Cresses may be eaten with  bread Velutiobsonium, and so the Antient (...) vsually did; and the low-Countrie men many times doe, who commonly vse to feed of Cresses with bread and butter. It is eaten with other sallade hearbes, as Tarragon and Rocket: and for this cause it is chiefely sowen.
It is good against the disease which the Germaines call Scorbuch and Scorbuye: in Latine, Scorbutus: which we in England call the Scuruie, and Scurby, and vpon the seas the Skyrby: it is as good and as effectuall as the Scuruie grasse, or water Cresses.
Dioscorides saith, if the seed be stamped and mixed with hony, it cureth the hardnesse of the  milt: with Vineger and Barley meale parched it is a remedie against the Sciatica, and taketh away hard swellings and inflammations. It scoureth away tetters, mixed with brine: it ripeneth felons, called in Greeke, (...): it forcibly cutteth and raiseth vp thicke and tough humors of the chest, if it be mixed with things proper against the stuffing of the lungs.
Dioscorides saith it is hurtfull to the stomacke, and troubleth the belly.



3 Nasturtium Hispanicum. Spanish Cresses.


4 Nasturtium Petreum. Stone Cresses.


It driueth forth wormes, bringeth downe the floures, killeth the child in the mothers womb, and prouoketh bodily lust.
Being inwardly taken, it is good for such as haue fallen from high places: it dissolueth cluttered  bloud, and preuenteth the same that it do not congeale and thicken in any part of the body: it procureth sweat, as the later Physitions haue found and tried by experience.



CHAP. 13. Of Indian Cresses.

 The Description.
CResses of India haue many weake and feeble branches, rising immediately from the ground, dispersing themselues far abroade; by meanes whereof one plant doth occupie a great circuit of ground, as doth the great Bindeweede. The tender stalkes diuide themselues into sundry branches, trailing likewise vpon the ground, somewhat bunched or swollen vp at euery ioint or knee, which are in colour of a light red, but the spaces betweene the ioints are greene. The leaues are round like wall peniwort, called Cotyledon, the footestalke of the leafe commeth forth on the backeside almost in the middest of the leafe, as those of Frogbit, in taste and smell like the garden Cresses. The flowers are dispersed throughout the whole plant, of colour yellow, with a crossed starre ouerthwart the inside, of a deepe orange colour; vnto the backe part of the same doth hang a taile or spurre, such as hath the Larkes heele, called in Latine Consolida Regalis, but greater, and the spurre or heele longer; which being past there succeed bunched and knobbed cods or seede vessels, wherein is contained the seede, rough, browne of colour, and like vnto the seedes of the beete, but smaller.


 The Place.
The seedes of this rare and faire plant came first from the Indies into Spaine, and thence into France and Flanders, from whence I receiued seede that bore with me both flowers and (...) especially those I receiued from my louing friend Iohn Robin of Paris.


 The Time.
The seedes must be sowen in the beginning of Aprill, vpon a bed of hot horse dung, and some  fine sifted earth cast thereon of an handfull thicke. The bed must be couered in (...) places with hoopes or poles, to sustaine the mat or such like thing that it must be (...) with in the night, and layd open to the Sunne in the day time. The which being sprung vp, and hauing gotten three leaues, you must replant them abroad in the hottest place of the garden, and most fine and fertile mold. Thus may you do with Muske-Melons, Cucumbers, and all cold fruits that require haste; for that otherwise the frost will ouertake them before they come to fruit-bearing.
@ They may also be sowen in good mold like as other seeds, and vsually are. @


Nasturtium Indicum cum flore and semine. Indian Cresses with floure and seed.




 The Names.
This beautifull plant is called in Latine, Nasturtium Indicum: in English, Indian Cresses. Although some haue deemed it a kinde of Conuolvulus, or Binde-weed; yet I am well contented that it retaine the former name, for that the smell and taste shew it to be a kinde of Cresses.


 The Nature and Vertues.
We haue no certain knowledge of his nature or vertues, but are content to refer it to the kindes of Cresses, or to a further consideration.



CHAP. 14. Of Sciatica Cresses.

 The Description.
1 SCiatica Cresses hath many slender branches growing from a stalke of a cubit high, with small long and narrow leaues like those of Garden Cresses. The floures be very small, and yellow of colour; the seed-vessels be little flat chaffie huskes, wherein is the seed of a reddish gold colour, sharpe and very bitter in taste. The root is small, tough, white within and without, and of a biting taste.
@ The plant whose figure I here giue you in stead of that with the narrower leaues of our Author, hath leaues somewhat like Rocket, but not so deepe cut in, being only snipt about the edges:  the vpper leaues are not snipt, nor diuided at all, and are narrower. The floures decking the tops of the branches are small and white, the seed vessels are lesse then those of Cresses, and the seed it selfe exceeding small, and of a blackish colour; the root is woody, sometimes single, (...) diuided into two branches. @


 The Place.
It groweth vpon old wals and rough places by high waies sides, and such like: I haue found it in corne fields about Southfleete neere to Grauesend in Kent.


Iberis Cardamantica. Sciatica Cresses.




 The Time.
It floureth according to the late or (...) sowing of it in the fields, in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Sciatica Cresses is called in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine Iberis: of Plinie, Heberis, and Nasturtium syluestre, and in like manner also Lepidium. There is another Lepidium of Plinie: in English, Sciatrica Cresse. @ The first described may be called Iberis Cardamantica tenuifolia, Small leaued Sciatica Cresses. The second, Iberis latiore folio, broad leaued Sciatica Cresses. @


 The Nature.
Sciatica Cresse is hot in the fourth degree, and like to garden Cresses both in smell and in taste.


 The Vertues.
The rootes gathered in Autumne, saith Dioscorides, doe heate and burne, and are with good successe with swines grease made vp in manner of a plaister, and put vpon such as are tormented with the Sciatica: it is to lie on the (...) place but foure hours at the most, and then taken away, and the patient bathed with warme water, and the place afterwards anointed with oile, and wooll laid on it; which things Galen in his ninth booke of medicines, according to the place greeued, citeth out of Democrates, in certaine verses tending to that effect.



CHAP. 15. Of Banke Cresses.

 The Description.
1 BAnke Cresses hath long leaues, deepely cut or jagged vpon both sides, not vnlike to those of Rocket, or wilde mustard. The stalkes be smal, limber or pliant, yet very tough, and wil twist and writhe as doth the (...) or water willow, wherupon do grow small yellow flowers, which being past there do succeed little slender cods, full of small seedes, in taste (...) and biting the tongue as those of Cresses.
2 The second kinde of banke Cresses hath leaues like vnto those of Dandelion, somewhat (...) Spinach. The branches be long, tough, and pliant like the other. The flowers be yellowish, which are succeeded by smal long cods, hauing leaues growing amongst them: in these cods is contained small biting seed like the other of this kinde. The smell of this plant is very vngratefull.


 The Place.
Banke Cresses is found in stonie places among rubbish, by path waies, vpon earth or mudde (...), and in other vntoiled places.

The second kinde of banke Cresses groweth in such places as the former doth: I found it growing at a place by Chelmes forde in Essex called little Baddowe, and in sundrie other places.
@ If our Author meant this which I haue described and giuen you the figure of, (as it is probable he did) I doubt he scarce found it wilde: I haue seene it in the garden of Master Parkinson, and it groweth wilde in many places of Italy. @


 The Time.
They flower in Iune and Iuly; and the seed is ripe in August and September.


 The Names.
Banke Cresses is called in Latine Irio and Erysimum: in Greeke (...), and of some, (...) according to Dioscorides: Theophrastus hath an other Erysimum. @ The first is called Irio, or Erysimum by Matthiolus (...), and others. (...), Fuchsius and Tragus call it Verbena foemina, or recta. The second is Irio alter of Matthiolus, and Saxifraga Romanorum, Lugd. It may be called Italian Banke Cresses: or Roman Saxifrage. @


1 Erysimum Dioscoridis, Lobelij. Bancke Cresses.


The figure that was here in the second place was of the (...) (...), or Libanotis (...) sterilis of (...). You shall finde mention of it (...) the (...), or (...).

 2 Erysimum alterum Italicum. Italian bancke Cresses.




 The Nature.
The seed of bancke Cresses is like in taste to garden Cresses, and is as Galen saith of a fietie temperature, and doth extreamely attenuate or make thinne.


 The Vertues.
The seed of bancke Cresses is good against the rheume that falleth into the chest, by rotting  the same.
It remedieth the cough, the yellow jaundise, and the Sciatica or ache of the hucklebones, if it  be taken with hony in manner of a lohoc and often licked.
It is also drunke against deadly poisons, as Dioscorides addeth: and being made vp in a plaister  with water and hony and applied, it is a remedie against hidden cankrous apostumes behind the eares, hard swellings and inflammations of the pappes and stones.
@ The seeds of the Italian Banke Cresses, or Roman Saxifrage taken in the weight of a dram,  in a decoction of Grasseroots, effectually cleanse the reines, and expell the stone, as the Authour of the hist. Lugd. affirmes. @



CHAP. 16. Of Docke Cresses.


The figure that was here, was of the (...) (...), described in the second chapter of this booke; and the true figure of this plant here described was (...). (...) vnder the name of (...) (...),Lampsana. Docke Cresses.



 The Description.
The figure that was here, was of the (...) (...), described in the second chapter of this booke; and the true figure of this plant here described was (...). (...) vnder the name of (...) (...),

 DOcke-Cresses is a wilde Wort (...) pot-herbe hauing roughish hairy leaues of an ouerworne greene colour, deepely cut or indented vpon both sides like the leaues of small Turneps. The stalkes grow to the height of two or three cubits, and sometimes higher, diuiding themselues toward the top into sundry little branches, whereon do grow many small yellow floures like those of Hieracium, or Hawke-weed; which decaying, are succeeded by little crested heads containing a longish small seed somewhat like Lettice seed, but of a yellowish colour: the plant is also milkie, the stalke woody, and the root small, fibrous, and white.


 The Place.
Dock-Cresses grow euery where by Highwaies, vpon walls made of mud or earth, and in stony places.


 The Time.
It floureth from May to the end of August: the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Docke-Cresses are called in Greeke, (...) in Latine, Lampsana, and Napium, by Dodonoeus: Tabernamontanus calleth this, Sonchus syluaticus: Camerarius affirmes, That in Prussia they call it Papillaris.


 The Nature.
Docke-Cresses are of nature hot, and somewhat abstersiue or cleansing.


 The Vertues.
Taken in meate, as Galen and Dioscorides affirme, it ingendreth euill iuyce and naughtie nourishment.
@ Camerarius affirmeth, That it is vsed with good successe in Prussia against vlcerated or sore  breasts. @



CHAP. 17. Of Water-Parsenep, and Water-Cresses.
1 GReat Water-Parsenep groweth vpright, aud is described to haue leaues of a pleasant sauour, fat and full of iuyce as those of Alexanders, but somewhat lesser, resembling the Garden Parsenep: the stalke is round, smooth, and hollow, like to Kexe or Cashes: the root consisteth of many small strings or threds fastned vnto the stalke within the water  1 Sium majus latifolium. Great Water Parsenep. @ Sium majus angustifolium. The lesser water Parsenep. @ 4 Sium alterum Olusatri facie. Long leaued water-Cresses. or miry ground: at the top go grow many white floures, in spoky roundles like fennell; which being bruised do yeeld a very strong sauour, smelling like Petroleum, as doth the rest of the plant.
@ 2 This plant much resembles the last described, and (...) vp some cubit and a halfe high, with many leaues finely snipt about the edges, growing vpon one rib, and commonly they stand bolt vpright. The vmbell consists of little white floures: the root is smal, and consisteth of many strings.
@ 3 There is another very like this, but they thus differ: the stalkes and leaues of this later are lesse than those of the precedent, and not so many vpon one rib; the other growes vpright, to some yard or more high: this neuer growes vp, but alwaies creepes, and almost at euerie ioynt puts forth an vmbel of floures.
4 To these may be added another, whose root consists of aboundance of writhen and small blacke fibres; the stalkes are like Hemlock, some three cubits high; the leaues are long, narrow, and snipped  about the edges, growing commonly two or three together: the vmbel of floures is commonly of a yellowish greene: the seed is like parsley seed, but in taste somewhat resembles (...), (...) Creticus, and the rinde of a Citron, yet seemes somewhat hotter. @
5 Water-Cresse hath many fat and weake hollow branches trailing vpon the grauell and earth where it groweth, taking hold in sundry places as it creepeth; by meanes whereof the plant spreadeth ouer a great compasse of ground. The leaues are likewise compact and winged with many small leaues set vpon a middle rib one against another, except the point leafe, which stands by it selfe, as doth that of the ash, if it grow in his naturallplace, which is in a grauelly spring. The vpper face of the whole plant is of a browne colour, and greene vnder the leaues, which is a perfect marke to know the physicall kinde from the others. The white floures grow alongst the stalkes, and are succeeded by cods wherein the seed is contained. The root is nothing else but as it were a thrumme or bundle of threds.


@ 5 Nasturtium aquaticum, siue Crateua Sium. Common Water-Cresses.


@ 6 Sium Matthioli and (...). Italian Water-Cresse.


6 There is also another kinde hereof, hauing leaues growing many on one stalke, snipt about the edges, being in shape betweene the garden Cresses and Cuckow-floures: the stalke is crested, and diuided into many branches; the floures white, and are succeeded by cods like those of our ordinarie Water-Cresse last described.

 The Place.
@ 1 The first of these I haue not found growing, nor as yet heard of within this kingdome.
2 The second I first found in the company of M. Robert Larkin, going betweene Redriffe and Deptford, in a rotten boggy place on the right hand of the way.
3 The third growes almost in euery watery place about London.
4 This is more rare, and was found by Mr. Goodyer in the ponds about Moore Parke; and by M. George Bowles in the ditches about Ellesmere, and in diuers ponds in Flint-shire.
5 The fifth is as frequent as the third, and commonly they grow neere together.
6 This Lobel saith he found in Piemont, in riuelets amongst the hills: I haue not yet heard that it growes with vs. @



 The Time.
They spring and wax greene in Aprill, and floure in Iuly.
The water Cresse to be eaten in sallads sheweth it selfe in March, when it is best, and floureth in Summer with the rest.


 The Names.
@ 1 The first of these is Sium maius latifolium of Tabernamontanus.
2 This is Sion odoratum Tragi: Sium, of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, and others: it is taken to be Sium, or Lauer, of Dioscorides. Lobel calls it also Pastinaca aquatica, or water Parsenep.
3 This may be called Sium vmbellatum repens, Creeping water Parsenep. Of this there is a reasonable good figure in the Historia Lugdunensis, pag. 1092. vnder the title of Sium verum Matthioli; but the description is of that we here giue you in the sixth place.
4 This is Sium alterum of Dodonaeus: and Sium alterum (...) facie of Lobel.
5 Many iudge this to be the Sisymbrium alterum, or Cardamine of Dioscorides: as also the (...) of Crateuas: and therefore Lobel termes it Sion Crateuae erucae folium. It is called by Dodonaeus, and vulgarly in shops knowne by the name of Nasturtium aquaticum, or water Cresses.
6 This is called Sium vulgare by Matthiolus: Lobel also termes it (...) Malthioli and Italorum. This was thought by our Countrey-man Doctor Turner to be no other than the second here described: of which opinion I must confesse I also was; but vpon better consideration of that which Lobel and Bauhine haue written, I haue changed my minde. @


 The Temperature.
Water-Cresse is euidently hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
Water-Cresse being boyled in Wine or Milke, and drunke for certaine dayes together, is very  good against the Scuruy or Scorbute.
Being chopped or boyled in the broth of flesh, and eaten for thirty dayes together, at morning, noone, and night, it prouoketh vrine, wasts the stone, and driueth it forth. Taken in the same maner, it doth cure yong maidens of the green sicknesse, bringeth downe the termes, and sendeth into the face their accustomed liuely colour, lost by the stopping of their Menstrua.



CHAP. 18. Of wilde Water-Cresses, or Cuckow Floures.

 The Description.
1 THe first of the Cuckow floures hath leaues at his springing vp somwhat round, and those that spring afterward grow iagged like the leaues of Greeke Valerian: among which riseth vp a stalke a foot long, set with the like leaues, but smaller, and more iagged, resembling those of Rocket. The floures grow at the top in small bundles, white of colour, hollow in the middle, resembling the white sweet-Iohn: after which do come small chaffie husks or seed vessels, wherein the seed is contained. The root is small and threddy.
2 The second sort of Cuckow floures hath small iagged leaues like those of small water Valerian, agreeing with the former in stalkes and roots: the floures be white, ouerdasht or declining toward a light carnation.
@ 3 The leaues and stalks of this are like those of the last described; neither are the floures which first shew themselues much vnlike them; but when as they begin to faile, in their middle rise vp heads of pretty double floures made of many leaues, like in colour to these of the single. @
4 The fourth sort of Cuckow Floures groweth creeping vpon the ground, with small threddy stalkes, whereon do grow leaues like those of the field Clauer, or three leaued Grasse: amongst which do come vp small and tender stalkes two handfulls high, hauing floures at the top in greater quantitie than any of the rest, of colour white; and after them follow cods containing a small seed. The root is nothing else but as it were a bundle of thrums or threds.
5 Milke white Lady-smocke hath stalkes rising immediately from the root, diuiding themselues into sundry small twiggy and hard branches, set with leaues like those of Serpillum. The floures grow at the top, made of foure leaues of a yellowish colour: the root is tough and woody, with some fibres annexed thereto. @ This is no other than the first described, differing onely therefrom in that the floures are milke white, as our Author truly in the title of his figure made them; yet forgetting himselfe in his description, he makes them yellowish, contrarie to himselfe and the truth. @



1 Cardamine. Cuckow floures.


2 Cardamine altera. Ladies-smocks.


@ 3 Cardamine altera flore pleno. Double floured Lady-smocke.


4 Cardamine Trifolia. Three leaued Lady-smocke.





6 Cardamine Alpina. Mountaine Lady-Smocke.


@ 7 Sium minus impatiens. The impatient Lady-smocke.


8 Cardamine pumila Bellidis folio Alpina. The Dwarfe Dasie-leaued Ladysmocke of the Alpes.


6 Mountaine Lady-smocke hath many roots, nothing else but as it were a bundle of threddy strings, from the which do come (...) three or foure small weak or tender leaues made of sundry small leaues, in shew like to those of small water Valerian. The stalkes be small and brittle, whereupon doe grow small floures like the first kinde.
@ 7 I should be blame-worthy if in this place I omitted that pretty conditioned Sium which is kept in diuers of our London gardens, and was first brought hither by that great Treasurer of Natures rarieties, M. Iohn Tradescani. This plant hath leaues set many vpon a rib, like as the other Sium described in the second place hath; but they are cut in with two or three prety (...) gashes: the stalk is some cubit high, and diuided into many branches, which haue many small white floures growing vpon them: after these floures are past there follow small long (...) containing a small white seed. Now the nature of this plant is such, that if you touch but the cods when as the seed is ripe, though you do it neuer so gently, yet will the seed fly all abroad with violence, as disdaining to be touched: whence they vsually call it Noli me tangere; as they for the like qualitie name the Persicaria siliquosa. The nature of this plant is somewhat admirable, for if the seeds (as I said) be fully  ripe, though you put but your hand neere them, as profering to touch them, though you doe it not, yet will they fly out vpon you, and if you expect no such thing, perhaps make you affraid by reason of the suddennesse thereof. This herbe is written of onely by Prosper Alpinus, vnder the title of Sium Minimum: and it may be called in English, Impatient Lady-smocke, or Cuckow floure. It is an annuall, and yeerely sowes it selfe by the falling seeds. @
@ 8 The leaues of this somewhat resemble those of Dasyes, but lesse, and lie spread vpon the ground, amongst which rises vp a weake and slender stalke set with 3 or 4 leaues at certaine distances, it being some handful high, the top is adorned with smal white floures consisting of foure leaues apeece, after which follow large and long cods, considering the smallnes of the plant; within these in a double order is conteined a small reddish seed, of somewhat a biting taste. The root creepes vpon the top of the ground, putting vp new buds in diuers places. Clusius found this growing vpon the rockes on the Etscherian mountaine in Austria, and hath giuen vs the history and figure thereof vnder the name of Plantula Cardamines emula, and Sinapi pumulum Alpinum.


 The Time and Place.
That of the Alpish mountaines is a stranger in these cold Countries: the rest are to be found euery where, as aforesaid, especially in the castle ditch at Clare in Essex. @ The seuenth growes naturally in some places of Italy.
These flower for the most part in Aprill and May, when the Cuckowe doth begin to sing her pleasant notes with out stammering.


 The Names.
They are commonly called in Latine, Flos Cuculi, by Brunfelsius and Dodonaeus, for the reason aforesaid; and also some call them Nasturtium aquaticum minus, or lesser water Cresse: of some, Cardamine, and Sisymbrium alterum of Dioscorides: it is called in the Germane tongue, (...): in French, Passerage sanuage: in English, Cuckowe flowers: in Northfolke, Canterbury bells: at the Namptwich in Cheshire, where I had my beginning, Ladie smockes, which hath giuen me cause to Christen it after my Country fashion.


 The Nature and Vertues.
These herbes be hot and drie in the second degree: we haue no certaine proofe or authority of their vertues, but surely from the kindes of water Cresse they cannot much differ, and therefore to them they may be referred in their vertues. 

The figure that was in the fourth place; being of the same plant that is described in the first place; the counterfeit stalkes and heades being taken away, as (...) rightly (...) obserued; as also the description thereof, which (as many other) our Author frames hy looking vpon the figure, and the strength of his owne fancie: I (...) omitted as (...).




CHAP. 19. Of Treacle Mustard.

 The Description.
1 TReacle mustard hath long broad leaues, especially those next the ground, the others lesser, slightly indented about the edges like those of Dandelion. The stalkes be long and brittle, diuided into many branches euen from the ground to the top, where grow many small idle flowers tuft fashion, after which succeed large, flat, thin, chaffie huskes or seed vessels heart fashion, wherein are conteined browne flat seeds, sharpe in taste, burning the tongue as doth mustard seed, leauing a taste or sauour of Garlicke behinde for a farewell.
2 Mithridate Mustard hath long narrow leaues like those of Woad, or rather Cow Basil. The stalkes be inclosed with small snipt leaues euen to the branches, Pyramidis fashion, that is to say, smaller and smaller toward the top, where it is diuided into sundrie branches, whereon doe grow small flowers: which being past, the cods, or rather thinne chaffie huskes do appeare full of sharpe seed, like the former. The roote is long and slender.
3 The third kinde of Treacle Mustard, named Knaues Mustard, (for that it is too bad for honest men) hath long, fat, and broad leaues, like those of Dwale or deadly Night shade: in taste like those of Vuluaria or stinching Orach, set vpon a round stalke two cubits high, diuided at the top into small armes or branches, whereon do grow small foolish white spokie flowers. The seed is conteined in flat pouches like those of Shepheards purse, brown, sharpe in taste, and of an ill sauor
4 Bowyers Mustard hath the lower leaues resembling the ordinary Thlaspi, but the vpper are very small like tode flaxe but smaller. The stalkes be small, slender, and many. The flowers be small, and white, each consisting of foure leaues. The seeds be placed vpon the branches from the lowest part of them to the top, exceeding sharpe and hot in taste, and of a yellowish colour. The roote is small and woody.
5 Grecian mustard hath many leaues spred vpon the ground, like those of the common Daisie, of a darke greenish colour: from the midst whereof spring vp stalkes two foote long, diuided



1 Thlaspi Dioscoridis. Treacle (...).


2 Thlaspi Vulgatiss mum. Mithridate Mustard.


3 Thlaspi maius. Knaues Mustard.


4 Thlaspi minus. Bowyers Mustard.



5 Thlaspi Graecum. Grecian Mustard.6 Thlaspi (...). Clownes Mustard.7 Thlaspi Clypeatum Lobelij. Buckler Mustard.8 Thlaspi minus Clypeatum. Small Buckler Mustard. into many small branches, whereupon grow small white flowers composed of foure leaues, after which succeed round flat huskes or seed vessels, set vpon the stalke by couples, as it were sundry paires of spectacles, wherein the seed is contained, sharpe and biting as the other. This is sometimes seen with yellow flowers.
@ 6 Clownes mustard hath a short white fibrous root, from whence ariseth vp a stalke of the height of a foot, which a little aboue the root diuides it selfe into some foure or fiue branches, and these againe are subdiuided into other, smaller so that it resembles a little shrub: longish narrow leaues notched after the manee of Sciatica Cresses by turees garnish these branches, and these leaues are as bitter as the smaller Centaury. The flowers stand thicke together at the tops of these branches in manner of little vmbels, and are commonly of a light blew and white mixed together (being seldome onely white, or yellow.) After the flowers succeed seed vessels after the manner of the other plants of this kinde, and in them is conteined a small hot seed @
7 Buckler mustard hath many large leaues, spread vpon the ground like Hieracium or Hawkeweede, somewhat more toothed or snipt about the edges: among which comes vp stalkes small and brittle, a cubit high, garnished with many small pale yellowish flowers: in whose place succeed many round flat cods or pouches, buckler fashion, conteining a seed like vnto the others.
8 Small Buckler Mustard, is a very small, base, or low plant, hauing whitish leaues like those of wild Time, set vpon small, weake and tender branches. The flowers grow at the top like the other buckler Mustard. The seed vessels are like, but not so round, somewhat sharpe pointed, sharp in taste, and burning the tongue. The whole plant lieth flat vpon the ground, like wild Tyme.


 The Place.
Treacle or rather Mithridate Mustard growes wild in sundry (...) in corn fields, ditch banks, and in sandy, drie, and barren ground. I haue found it in corne fields betweene Croydon and Godsstone in Surrey, at South-fleete in Kent, by the path that leadeth from Harnsey (a small village by London) vnto Waltham crosse, and in many other places.
The other do grow vnder hedges, oftentimes in fields and in stonie and vntoiled places; they grow plentifully in Bohemia and Germany: they are seene likewise on the stonie bankes of the riuer Rhene. They are likewise to be found in England in sundrie places wilde, the which I haue gathered into my garden. @ I haue found none but the first and second growing wilde in any part of England as yet; but I deny not, but that some of the other may be found, though not all. @


 The Time.
These treacle Mustards are found with their flowers from May to Iuly, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
The Grecians call these kindes of herbes (...), of the huske or seed vessell, which is like a little shield. They haue also other names which be found among the bastard words: as Scandulaceum, Capsella, Pes gallinaceus. Neither be the later writers without their names, as Nasturtium tectorum, and Sinapi rusticum: it is called in Dutch, Wilde (...): in French, (...) sauuage: in English, Treacle Mustard, dish Mustard, Bowyers Mustard: of some, Thlaspi, after the Greeke name, Churles mustard, and wilde Cresses.
@ 1 This is Thlaspi Dioscoridis Drabae, aut Chamelinae folio of Lobell: Thlaspi Latius of Dodonaeus: and the second Thlaspi of Matthiolus.
2 This, Thlaspi Vulgatissimum Vaccariae folio of Lobell: the first Thlaspi of Matthiolus, and second of Dodonaeus; and this is that Thlaspi whose seed is vsed in shops.
3 This is Thlaspi majus of Tabernamontanus.
4 This is Thlaspi minus of Dodonaeus: Thlaspi: (...) of Fuchsius: Thlaspi minus hortense Osyridis solio, etc. of Lobell: and Nasturtium sylvestre of Thalius.
5 This is Alysson of Matthiolus: Thlaspi Graecum Polygonati folio, of Lobell and Tabern.
6 This the Author of the Hist. Lug. calls Nasturtium sylvestre; Tabern. calls it Thlaspi (...).
7 Lobell termes this Thlaspi parvum Hieracifolium, and Lunaria Lutea Monspeliensium.
8 This is Thlaspi minus clypeatum Serpillifolio of Lobell. @ 

The figures of these two last mentioned were transposed in the former Edition.



 The Temperature.
The seed of these kindes of Treacle Mustards be hot and drie in the end of the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Thlaspi or treacle Mustard eaten, purgeth colour both vpward and downeward, prouoketh flowers, and breaketh inward aposthumes.
The same vsed in clysters, helpeth the sciatica, and is good vnto those purposes for which Mustard seed serueth.


 The Danger.
The seed of these herbes be so extreame hot and vehement in working, that being taken in too  great a quantitie, purgeth and scoureth euen vnto bloud, and is hurtfull to women with child, and therefore great care is to be had in giuing them inwardly in any great quantitie.



CHAP. 20. Of Candie Mustard.

 The Description.
CAndie mustard excelleth all the rest, as well for the comely floures that it bringeth forth for the decking vp of gardens and houses, as also for that it goeth beyond the rest in his physicall vertues. It riseth vp with a very brittle stalke of a cubit high, which diuideth it selfe into sundry bowes or branches, set with leaues like those of stocke gillifioures, of a gray or ouerworne greene colour. The floures grow at the top of thes stalke roundt, hicke clustering together, like those of Scabious or diuels bit, sometimes blew, often purple, carnation or horse flesh, but seldome white for any thing that I haue seen; varying according to the soile or Clymate. The seed is reddish, sharpe, and biting the tongue, wrapped in little huskes fashioned like an heart. @ There is a lesser variety of this with white well smelling flowers, in other respects little differing from the ordinary. @


Thlaspi Candiae. Candie Mustard.


@ Thlaspi Candiae parvum slo albo. Small Candy mustard with a white floure.




 The Place.
This growes naturally in some places of Austria, as also in Candy, Spaine, and Italy, from whence I receiued seeds by the liberality of the right Honorable the Lord Edward Zouch, at his returne into England from those parts. @ Clusius found the later as he trauelled through Switzerland into Germany. @


 The Time.
It floureth from the beginning of May vnto the end of September, at which time you shall haue floures and seeds vpon one branch, some ripe, ond some that will not ripen at all.


 The Name.
@ This plant is called by Dodonaeus (but not rightly) Arabis and Draba: as also Thlaspi Candiae, which last name is reteined by most writers: in English, Candy Thlaspi, or Candy Mustard. @


 The Temperature.
The seed of Candie Mustard is hot and drie at the end of the third degree, as is that called (...), or treacle mustard.




CHAP. 21. Of Treacle Mustard.

 The Description.
1 ROund leaued Mustard hath many large leaues laid flat vpon the ground like the leaues of the wilde Cabbage, and of the same colour; among which rise vp many (...) stalkes of some two handfulls high or thereabouts, which are set with leaues far vnlike to those next the ground, enclosing or embracing the stalkes as do the leaues of Perfoliatum, or Thorow-wax. The floures grow at the top of the branches, white of colour; which being past, there do succeed flat huskes or pouches like vnto those of Shepheards purse, with hot seed biting the tongue.


1 Thlaspi rotundifolium. Round leaued Mustard.


2 Thlaspi Pannonicum Clusij. Hungary Mustard.


2 Hungary Mustard bringeth forth slender stalkes of one cubit high: the leaues which first appeare are flat, somewhat round like those of the wilde Beet; but those leaues which after (...) garnish the stalkes are long and broad like those of the garden Colewort, but lesser and softer, greene on the vpper side, and vnder declining to whitenesse, smelling like Garlicke. The floures be small and white, consisting of foure small leaues, which in a great tuft or vmbel do grow thick thrust together: which being past, there followeth in euery small huske one duskish seed and no more, bitter and sharpe in taste. The root is white and small, creeping vnder the ground far abroad like the roots of Couch-grasse; preparing new shoots and branches for the yeare following, contrarie to all the rest of his kinde, which are encreased by seed, and not otherwise.
3 Churles Mustard hath many small twiggy stalkes, slender, tough, and pliant, set with small leaues like those of Cudweed, or Lauander, with small white floures: the huskes and seeds are small, few, sharpe, bitter, and vnsauorie: the whole plant is of a whitish colour.
4 Peasants Mustard hath many pretty large branches, with thin and iagged leaues like those of Cresses, but smaller, in sauor and taste like to the ordinarie Thlaspi: the floures be whitish, and grow in a small spoky tuft. The seed in taste and sauor is equall with the other of his kinde and countrey, or rather exceeds them in sharpnesse.



3 Thlaspi Narbonense Lobelij. Churles Mustard.


4 Thlaspi vmbellatum (...). Peasants Mustard of Narbone.


@ 5 Thlaspi supinum luteum. Yellow Mustard.


5 Yellow Mustard hath an exceeding number of whitish leaues spred vpon the ground in manner of a turfe or hassocke; from the midst whereof riseth vp an vpright stalke of three foot high, putting forth many small branches or armes: at the top whereof grow many small yellow floures like those of the wall-floure, but much lesser: which being past, the husks appeare flat, pouch-fashion, wherein is the seed like Treacle Mustard, sharp also and biting.
6 White Treacle Mustard hath leaues spred vpon the ground like the other, but smaller: the stalkes rise vp from the middest thereof, branched, set with leaues smaller than those that lie vpon the ground euen to the top, where doth grow a tuft of white floures in fashion like to those of the other Thlaspies: the seed is like the other: @ The cods of this are sometimes flat, and otherwhiles round: the floures also grow sometimes spikefashion, otherwhiles in an vmbell. I haue giuen you two figures expressing (...) these varieties. @



6 Thlaspi album supinum, and (...) White Treacle Mustard.


7 Thlaspi minus Clusij. Clusius his small Mustard.


@ 8 Thlaspi petraeum minus. Small Rocke Mustard.



7 This small kinde of Mustard hath a few small leaues spread vpon the ground like those of the lesser Dasie, but of a blewisher greene colour; from which rise vp small tender stalks set with three, and sometimes foure small sharpe pointed leaues: the floures grow at the top, small and white; the cods are flat; pouch-fashion, like those of Shepheards purse, and in each of them there is contained two or three yellowish seeds.
@ 8 To these we may fitly adde another small mountaine Thlaspi, first described by that diligent and learned Apothecarie Iohn Pona of Verona, in his description of Mount Baldus. This from a threddy root brings forth many small whitish leaues lying spred vpon the ground, and a little nicked about their edges: among these riseth vp a stalke some two or three handfulls high, diuaricated toward the top into diuers small branches, vpon which grow white little floures consisting of foure leaues (...): which fading, there follow round seed-vessels, like to those of Myagrum: whence Pona, the first describer thereof, calls it Thlaspi (...) myagrodes. The seed is as sharpe and biting as any of the other Thlaspies. This growes naturally in the chinkes of the rocks, in that part of Baldus that is termed Vallis frigida, or, The cold Valley. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Treacle Mustard grow vpon hills and mountaines in come fields, in stony barren and grauelly grounds.


 The Time.
These floure in May, Iune, and Iuly: the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
@ 1 This is Thlaspi oleraceum of Tabernamontanus: Thlaspi primum, of (...): Thlaspi mitius rotundifolium of Columna. Our Author confounded it with that whose figure is the first in the ensuing Chapter, and called it Thlaspi incanum.
2 Thlaspi montanum (...) of Clusius: and Thlaspi Pannonicum of Lobel and Taber.
3 Thlaspi Narbonense centunculi angustifolio, of Lobel: and Thlaspi maritimum of Daleschampius.
4 Thlaspi vmbellatum Nasturtij hortensis solio Narbonense, of Lobel. The figures of this and the precedent were transposed in the former edition.
5 Thlaspi supinum luteum of Lobel. Our Authors figure was a varietie of the next following.
6 Thlaspi album supinum of Lobel: Thlaspi montanum secundum of Clusius.
7 Thlaspi (...) of Clusius: Thlaspi minimum of Tabernamontanus.
8 Thlaspi petraeum myagrodes of Pona: Thlaspi tertium saxatile of Camerarius, in his Epit. of Matthiolus. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The seeds of these churlish kindes of Treacle Mustard haue a sharpe or biting qualitie, breake  inward apostumes, bring downe the floures, kill the birth, and helpeth the Sciatica or pain in the hip. They purge choler vpward and downeward, if you take two ounces and a halfe of them, as (...) writeth. They are mixed in counterpoysons, as Treacle, Mythridate, and such like Compositions.



CHAP. 22. Of Wooddy Mustard.

 The Description.
1 WOoddy Mustard hath long narrow leaues declining to whitenesse, like those of the stocke Gilloflower, but smaller, very like the leaues of Rosemary, but somewhat broader, with rough stalks very tough and pliant, being of the substance of wood: the floures grow at the top, white of colour: the seeds do follow, in taste sharpe and biting. The huskes or seed-vessels are round and somewhat longish.
2 Small wooddy Mustard groweth to the height of two cubits, with many stalkes set with small narrow leaues like those of Hyssop, but rougher; and at the top grow floures like those of Treacle Mustard, or Thlaspi. The whole plant groweth as a shrub or hedge-bush.
3 Thorny Mustard groweth vp to the height of foure cubits, of a wooddy substance, like vnto a hedge-bush, or wilde shrub, with stalkes beset with leaues, floures, and seeds like the last before mentioned; agreeing in all points, sauing in the cruell pricking sharpe thornes wherewith this plant is armed; the other not. The root is tough, wooddy, and some strings or fibres annexed thereto.



1 Thlaspi fruticosum incanum. Hoary wooddy Mustard.


2 Thlaspi fruticosum minus. Small wooddy Mustard.


3 Thlaspi spinosum. Thorny Mustard.


@ 4 Thlaspi fruticosum folio (...). Bushy Mustard.





@ 5 Thlaspi hederacium. Iuy Mustard.


4 There is another sort of wooddy Mustard growing in shadowie and obscure mountaines, and rough stony places resembling the last described; sauing that this plant hath no pricks at all, but many small branches set thick with leaues, resembling those of the lesser sea (...): the floures are many and white; the seed like the other Thlaspies: the root is wooddy and fibrous.
@ 5 There is (saith Lobel) in Portland and about Plimouth, and vpon other rockes on the sea coast of England, a creeping little herbe hauing small red crested stalkes about a spanne high: the leaues are thicke and fashioned like Iuy; the white floures and small seeds do in taste and shape resemble the Thlaspies. @


 The Place.
@ 1 The first of these groweth about Mcchline.
2. 3. 4. These plants grow vpon the Alpish and Pyrene mountaines: in Piemont and in Italy, in stony and rockie grounds.


 The Time.
They floure when the other kindes of Thlaspies do; that is, from May to the end of August.


 The Names.
@ 1 This Clusius and Lobel call Thlaspi incanum Mechliniense: Bauhine thinks it to be the Iberis prima of Tabernamontanus, whose figure retained this place in the former edition.
2 This is Thlaspi fruticosum alterum of Lobel: Thlaspi 5. Hispanicum of Clusius.
3 Lobel calls this, Thlaspi fruticosum spinosum.
4 Camerarius calls this, Thlaspi sempervirens (...) folio Leucoij, etc. Lobel, Thlaspi fruticosum folio Leucoij, etc.
5 This Lobel calls Thlaspi hederaceum. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
I finde nothing extant of their nature or vertues, but they may be referred to the kinds of Thlaspies, whereof no doubt they are of kindred and affinitie, as well in facultie as forme.



CHAP. 23. Of Towers Mustard.

 The Description.
1 TOwers Mustard hath beene taken of some for a kinde of Cresses, and referred by them to it: of some, for one of the Mustards, and so placed among the Thlaspies as a kinde thereof; and therefore my selfe must needs bestow it somewhere with others. Therefore I haue with Clusius and Lobel placed it among the Thlaspies, as a kinde thereof. It commeth out of the ground with many long and large rough leaues, like those of Hounds-tongue, especially those next the ground: amongst which riseth vp a long stalke of a cubit or more high, set abont with sharpe pointed leaues like those of Woad. The floures grow at the top, if I may terme them floures, but they are as it were a little dusty chaffe driuen vpon the leaues and branches with the winde: after which come very small cods, wherein is small reddish seed like that of Cameline or English Worm-seed, with a root made of a tuft full of innumerable threds or strings.

@ 2 This second kinde hath a thicker and harder root than the precedent, hauing also fewer fibers; the leaues are bigger than those of the last described, somewhat curled or sinuated, yet lesse, rough, and of a lighter greene; in the middest of these there rise vp one or two stalkes or more, vsually some two cubits high, diuided into some branches, which are adorned with leaues almost ingirting them round at there setting on. The floures are like those of the former, but somewhat larger, and the colour is either white, or a pale yellow: after these succeed many long cods filled with a seed somewhat larger than the last described. @
3 Gold of pleasure is an herbe with many branches set vpon a straight stalke, round, and diuided into sundry wings, in height two cubits. The leaues be long, broad, and sharpe pointed, somewhat snipt or indented about the edges like those of Sow-thistles. The flowers along the stalkes are white; the seed contained in round little vessels is fat and oily.


1 Turritis. Towers Mustard.


@ 2 Turritis major. Great Tower Mustard.


4 (...) Wormeseed riseth vp with tough and pliant branches, whereupou do grow many small yellow flowers; after which come long slender cods like Flixe-weed, or Sophia, wherein is conteined small yellowish seed, bitter as Wormeseed or Coliquintida. The leaues are small and darke of colour, in shape like those of the wilde stocke Gillofloures, but not so thicke, nor fat. The root is small and single.


 The Place.
Towers Treacle groweth in the West part of England, vpon dunghils and such like places. I haue likewise seen it in sundrie other places, as at Pyms by a village called Edmonton neere London, by the Citie wals of West-chester in corne fields, and where flaxe did grow about Cambridge. @ The second is a stranger with vs; yet I am deceiued if I haue not seene it growing in M. Parkinsons garden. @
The other grow in the territorie of Leiden in Zeeland, and many places of the Low-countries; and likewise wilde in sundrie places of England.


 The Time.
These herbes doe floure in May and Iune, and their seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
@ 1 This is (...) of Lobell: Turrita Vulgatior of Clusius.
2 This is Turrita maior, of Clusius, who thinkes it to be Brassica Virgata of Cordus.

3 Matthiolus calls this, Pseudomyagrum: Tragus calls it, Sesamum: Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others call it Myagrum.
4 This Lobel calls Myagrum thlaspi effigie. Tabernamontanus hath it twice; first vnder the name of Erysimum tertium: secondly, of Myagrum secundum. And so also our Authour (as I formerly noted) had it before vnder the name of Eruca syluestris angustifolia; and here vnder the name of Camelina. @


3 Myagrum. Gold of pleasure.


4 Camelina. Treacle Worm-seed.




 The Temperature.
These Plants be hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
It is thought, saith Dioscorides, That the roughnesse of the skinne is polished and made smooth  with the oylie fatnesse of the seed of Myagrum.
Ruellius teacheth, That the iuyce of the herbe healeth vlcers of the mouth; and that the poore  peasant doth vse the oile in banquets, and the rich in their lampes.
The seed of Camelina stamped, and giuen children to drinke, killeth the wormes, and driueth  them forth both by siege and vomit. 

The two (...) omitted are treated of at large in the following Chapter.




@ CHAP. 24. Of Turky Cresses.
@ OVr Author did briefely in the precedent Chapter make mention of the two plants wee first mention in this Chapter; but that so briefely, that I thought it conuenient to discourse more largely of them, as also to adde to them other two, being by most Writers adiudged to be of the same Tribe or kindred. The vertues of (...) first were by our Author out of Dodonaeus formerly put to the Thlaspi Candiae, Chapter 20. from whence I haue brought them to their proper place, in the end of this present Chapter.


 The Description.
@ 1 The first hath crested slender, yet firme stalkes of some foot long, which are set with leaues of some inch in length, broad at the setting on, sinuated about the edges, and sharpe pointed; their colour is a whitish greene, and taste acride; the leaues that are at the bottome of the stalke are many, and larger. The tops of the stalkes are diuided into many branches of an vnequall length, and sustain many floures; each whereof consists of soure litle white leaues, so that together they much resemble the vmbell of the Elder when it is in floure. Little swolne seed vessels diuided into two cells follow the fading floures: the seed is whitish, about the bignesse of millet; the root also is white, slender and creeping.
@ 2 This hath creeping roots, from which arise many branches lying vpon the ground here and there, taking root also; the leaues, which vpon the lower branches are many, are in forme and colour much like those of the last described, but-lesse, and somewhat suipt about the edges. The stalkes are about a handfull high, or somewhat more, round, greene, and hairy, hauing some leaues growing vpon them. The floures grow spoke fashion at the top of the stalkes, white, and consisting of foure leaues; which fallen, there follow cods conteining a small red seed.


1 Draba Dioscoridis. Turkie Cresses.


@ 2 Draba prima repens. The first creeping Cresse.


3 From a small and creeping root rise vp many shootes, which while they are young haue many thicke juicy and darke greene leaues rose fashion adorning their tops, out of the middest of which spring out many slender stalkes of some foot high, which at certain spaces are encompassed (as it were) with leaues somewhat lesser then the former, yet broader at the bottome: the floures, cods, and seed are like the last mentioned.
4 There is a plant also by some refer'd to this Classis; and I for some reasons thinke good to make mention thereof in this place. It hath a strong and very long root of colour whitish, and of as sharpe a taste as Cresses; the stalkes are many, and oft times exceed the height of a man, yet slender, and towards their tops diuided into some branches, which make no vmbell, but carry their floures dispersed; which consist of foure small yellow leaues: after the floure is past there follow long slender cods conteining a small, yellowish, acride seed. The leaues which adorne this plant are long, sharpe pointed, and snipt about the edges, somewhat like those of Saracens Confound, but that these towards the top are more vnequally cut in.



@ 3 Draba altera repens. The other creeping Cresse.




 The Time.
The first of these floures in May and the beginning of Iune. The 2 and 3 in Aprill. The fourth in Iune and Iuly.


 The Place.
None of these (that I know of) are found naturally growing in this kingdome; (...) last excepted, which I thinke may be sound in some places.


 The Names.
1 This by a generall consent of (...), Anguillara, Lobell, etc. is iudged to be the Arabis, or Draba of the Ancients.
2 Draba alter a of Clusius.
3 Draba tertia succulento folio, of Clusius: Eruca Muralis of Daleschampius.
4 This by Camerarius is set forth vnder the name of Arabis quorundam, and he affirmes in his Hor. Med. that he had it outof (...) vnder the name of Solidago; The which is very likely, for without doubt this is the very plant that our Author mistooke for Solidago (...); for he bewraies himselfe in the Chapter of Epimedium, whereas he saith it hath cods like Sarraccens Consound; when as both he, and all other giue no cods at all to Sarracens Consound. My very good friend Mr. Iohn Goodyer was the first, I thinke, that obserued this mistake in our Author; for which his obseruation, together with some others formerly and hereafter to be remembred, I acknowledge my selfe beholden to him.


 The Vertues, attributed to the first.
1 Dioscorides saith, that they vse to eate the dryed seed of this herbe with meate, as we do pepper  especially in Cappadocia.
They vse likewise to boyle the herbe with the decoction of barly, called Ptisana; which being  so boiled, concocteth and bringeth forth of the chest tough and raw flegme which sticketh therein.
The rest are hot, and come neere to the vertues of the precedent. @ 



CHAP. 25. Of Shepheards-purse.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of Shepheards purse grow vp at the first long, gashed in the edges like those of Rocket, spred vpon the ground: from these spring vp very many little weake stalks diuided into sundry branches, with like leaues growing on them, but lesser; at the top whereof are orderly placed small white floures: after these come vp little seed vessels, flat, and cornered, narrow at the stem like to a certaine little pouch or purse, in which lieth the seed. The root is white not without strings. @ There in another of this kinde with leaues not sinuated, or cut in. @
2 The small Shepheards purse commeth forth of the ground like the Cuckow floure, which I haue Englished Ladie-smockes, hauing small leaues deepely indented about the edges; among which rise vp many small tender stalkes with floures at the top, as it were chasse. The huskes and seed is like the other before mentioned.


 The Place.
These herbes do grow of themselues for the most part, neere common high waies, in (...) and vntilled places, among rubbish and old walls.



1 Bursa Pastoris. Shepheards purse.


2 Bursa Pastoria minima. Small Shepheards purse.




 The Time.
They floure, flourish, and seed all the Sommer long.


 The Names.
Shepheards purse is called in Latine, Pastorus bursa, or Pera pastoris: in high Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Bourse de pasteur on Cure: in English, Shepheards purse or scrip: of some, Shepheards pouch, and poore mans Parmacetie: and in the North part of England, Toy-wort, Pick-purse, and Case-weed.


 The Temperature.
They are of temperature cold and dry, and very much binding, after the opinion of Ruellius, (...), and Dodonaeus; but Lobel and Pena hold them to be hot and dry, iudging the same by their sharpe taste: which hath caused me to insert them here among the kindes of Thlaspi, considering the fashion of the leaues, cods, seed, and taste (...): which do so wel agree together, that I might very well haue placed them as kindes thereof. But rather willing to content others that haue written before, than to please my selfe, I haue followed their order in marshalling them in this place, where they may stand for cousine germanes.


 The Vertues.
Shepheards purse stayeth bleeding in any part of the body, whether the iuyce or the decoction  thereof be drunke, or whether it be vsed pultesse-wise, or in bath, or any other way else.
In a Clyster it cureth the bloudy flix: it healeth greene and bleeding wounds: it is maruellous  good for inflammations new begun, and for all diseases which must be checked backe and cooled.
The decoction doth stop the laske, the spitting and pissing of bloud, and all other fluxes of  bloud.




CHAP. 26. Of Italian Rocket.

 The Description.
1 ITalian Rocket hath long leaues cut into many parts or diuisions like those of the Ash tree, resembling Ruellius his Bucks-horne: among which rise vp stalks weake and tender, but thicke and grosse, two foot high, garnished with many small yellowish floures like the middle part of Tansie floures, of a naughty sauor or smell. The seed is small like sand or dust, in taste like Rocket seed, whereof in truth wee suspect it to be a kinde. The root is long and wooddy.


1 Rheseda Plinij. Italian Rocket.


2 (...) maxima. Crambling Rocket.


2 Crambling Rocket hath many large leaues cut into sundry sections, deeply diuided to the middle rib, branched like the hornes of a stag or hart: among which there do rise vp long fat and fleshy stalkes two cubits high, lying flat vpon the ground by reason of his weake and feeble branches. The floures grow at the top, clustering thicke together, white of colour, with brownish threds in them. The seed is like the former. @ Lobel affirmes it growes in the Low-country gardens with writhen stalkes, sometimes ten or twelue cub its high, with leaues much diuided. @


 The Place.
These Plants grow in sandy, stony, grauelly, and chalky barren grounds. I haue found them in sundry places of Kent, as at South-fleet, vpon Long-field downes, which is a chalkie and hilly ground very barren. They grow at Greenhithe vpon the hills, and in other places of Kent. @ The first growes also vpon the Wolds in Yorke-shire. The second I haue not seene growing except in gardens, and much doubt whether it grow wilde with vs or no. @


 The Time.
These Plants do flourish in Iune, Iuly, and August.



 The Names.
The first is called of Pliny, Reseda, Erucaperegrina, and Eruca Cantabrica: in English, Italian Rocket.
The second is called Reseda maxima: of Anguillara, Pignocomon, whereof I finde nothing extant worthy the memorie, either of temperature or vertues.



CHAP. 27. Of Groundsell.

 The Description.
1 THe stalke of Groundsell is round, chamfered and diuided into many branches: the leaues be greene, long, and cut in the edges almost like those of Succorie, but lesser, like in a manner to the leaues of Rocket. The floures be yellow, and turne to downe, that is carried away with the winde. The root is full of strings and threds.


1 Erigerum. Groundsell.


2 Erigerum Tomentosum. Cotton Groundsell.


2 Cotton Groundsel hath a straight stalke of a browne purple colour, couered with a fine cotton or downy haire, of the height of two cubits. The leaues are like those of S. Iames Wort, (...) Rag-wort; and at the top of the stalke grow small knops, from which come floures of a pale yellow colour; which are no sooner opened and spred abroad, but they change into downe like that of the Thistle, (...) the same houre of his flouring, and is carried away with the winde: the root is small and tender.
@ 3 There is another with leaues more iagged, and finelier cut than the last mentioned, soft also and downie: the floures are fewer, lesse and paler than in the ordinarie, but turne speedily into downe like as the former. @


 The Place.
These herbes are very common throughout England, and do grow almost euery where.


 The Time.
They flourish almost euery moneth of the yeare.



@ 3 Erigeron tomentosum alterum. The other Cotton Groundsell.




 The Names.
Groundsel is called in Greek (...): in Latine, Senecio, because it waxeth old quickely: by a bastard name Herbutum: in Germany, Creuszwurtz: in low-Dutch, Cruys crupt, and Cruysken cruyt: in Spanish, (...) cana: in Italian, Cardoncello, Speliciosa: in English, Groundsel.
Cotton Groundsell seemeth to be all one with Theophrastus his Aphace; hee maketh mention of Aphace in his seuenth booke, which is not onely a kinde of pulse, but an herbe also, vnto which this kinde of Groundsell is very like. For as Theophrastus saith, The herbe Aphace is (...) of the pot-herbs and kindes of Succorie: adding further, That it floureth in haste, but yet soone is old, and turneth into down; and such a one is this kind of Groundsell. But Theophrastus saith further, That it floureth all the winter long, and so long as the Spring lasteth, as my selfe haue often seene this Groundsell do.


 The Temperature.
Groundsell hath mixt faculties; it cooleth, and withall digesteth, as Paulus Aegineta writeth.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Groundsell boyled in wine or water, and drunke, healeth the paine and ache of the stomacke that proceedeth of choler.
The leaues and floures stamped with a little  Hogs grease ceaseth the burning heat of the stones and fundament. By adding to a little saffron or salt it helpeth the Struma or Kings Euill.
The leaues stamped and strained into milke and drunke, helpeth the red gummes and frets in  children.
Dioscorides saith, That with the fine pouder of Frankinsence it healeth wounds in the sinewes. The like operation hath the downe of the floures mixed with vineger.
Boyled in Ale with a little honey and vineger, it prouoketh vomit, especially if you adde thereto  a few roots of Assarabacca.



CHAP. 28. Of Saint James his Wort.

 The Kindes.
THe herbe called Saint Iames his wort is not without cause thought to be a kinde of Groundsel: of which there be sundry sorts; some of the pasture, and one of the sea; some sweet-smelling; and some of a loathsome sauor. All which kindes I will set downe.


 The Description.
1 SAint Iames his wort or Rag-wort is very well knowne euery where, and bringeth forth at the first broad leaues, gashed round about like to the leaues of common Wormewood, but broader, thicker, not whitish or soft, of a deepe greene colour, with a stalke which riseth vp aboue a cubit high, chamfered, blackish, and somewhat red withall. The armes orwings are set with lesser leaues like those of Groundsell or of wilde Rocket. The floures at the top be of a yellow colour like Marigolds, as well the middle button as the small floures that stand in a pale round about, which turne into downe as doth Groundsell. The root is threddy.
@ 2 This hath stalkes some cubit high, crested, and set with long whitish leaues; the lower leaues are the shorter; but the vpper leaues the longer, yet the narrower: at the top of the stalke grow some foure or fiue floures as in an vmbell, which are of a darke red colour before they open

1 (...). Rag-wort.@ 2 Iacobaea angustifolia. Narrow leaued Rag-weed.@ 3 Iacobaea latifolia. Broad leaued Rag-weed,4 Iacobaea marina. Sea Rag-weed. themselues; but opened, of a bright golden colour, and those are ingirt by fifteene or more little leaues, which are of a flame colour aboue, and red vnderneath. The floures fly away in downe, and the seed is blackish, and like that of the former. The roots are made of many strings like those of the precedent.
3 This broad leaued Rag-weed hath stiffe crested stalkes, which are set with broad wrinckled sharpe pointed leaues, of a greene colour: the bottome leaues are the larger and rounder, the top leaues the lesse, and more diuided. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, in shape and colour like those of the common Rag-weed, but much bigger: They also turne into Downe as the former. @
4 Sea Rag-wort groweth to the height of two cubits: the stalkes be not reddish as the other, but contrariwise Ash-coloured, gray and hoary: the leaues be greater and broader than the other: the floures grow at the top, of a pale yellow colour, couered on the cup or huske of the floure, as also the leaues, with a certaine soft white Downe or freese: the floures vanish into Downe, and fly away with the winde.


 The Place.
Land Rag-wort groweth euery where in vntilled pastures and fields, which are somewhat moist especially, and neere vnto the borders of fields.
@ 2 3 These grow vpon the Austrian and Heluetian Alpes. @
The fourth kinde of Rag-wort groweth neere the sea side in sundry places: I haue seene it in the field by Margate, by Queakes house, and by Byrchenton in the Isle of Tenet: likewise it groweth neere the Kings ferry in the Isle of Shepey, in the way leading to Sherland house, where Sr. Edward Hobby dwelleth: and likewise at Queenborough castle in the same Isle; and in other places. @ I haue been at the former and later of these places to finde out plants, yet could I not see this plant. It growes in the garden of Mr. Ralph Tuggy; but I feare hardly wilde in this kingdome. @


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August, at which time they are carried away with the Downe.


 The Names.
The first is called in Latine, Herba S. Iacobi, or S. lacobi slos; and Iacobaea: in high-Dutch, Sant Jacobs bloumen: in low-Dutch, Sant Jacobs cruyt: in French, Fluer de S. lacques: in English, S. Iames his Wort: the countrey people do call it Stagger-wort, and Staner-wort, and also Rag-wort, @ and Rag-weed. In Holdernesse in Yorke-shire they call it Seggrum.
The second is Iacobaea Pannonica (...). of Clusius.
The third is his Iacobaea latifolia. Gesner calls it Coniza montana. @
The fourth is named Cineraria, or Ash-coloured S. Iames Wort: some call it Erigeron marinum, or Sea Groundsell: of some, (...). @ And by Prosper Alpinus, Artemisia alba. @


 The Temperature.
S. Iames wort is hot and dry in the second degree, and also cleansing, by reason of the bitternesse which it hath.


 The Vertues.
It is commended by the later Physitions to be good for greene wounds, and old filthy Vlcers  which are not scoured, mundified, and made cleane; it also healeth them, with the iuyce hereof tempered with honey and May butter, and boyled together to the forme of an Vnguent or salue.
It is much commended, and not without cause, to helpe old aches and pains in the armes, hips, and legs, boyled in hogs grease to the forme of an ointment.
Moreouer, the decoction hereof gargarised is much set by as a remedie against swellings and  impostumations of the throat, which it wasteth away and throughly healeth.
The leaues stamped very small, and boyled with some hogs grease vnto the consumption of the  iuyce, adding thereto in the end of the boyling a little Masticke and Olibanum, and then strained, taketh away the old ache in the huckle-bones called Sciatica.
@ The Egyptians (saith Prosper Alpinus) vse the Sea Rag-wort, for many things: for they commend  the decoction made with the leaues thereof against the stone in the kidnies and bladder, as also to helpe the old obstructions of the inward parts, but principally those of the wombe; as also the coldnesse, strangulation, barrennesse, inflation thereof, and it also brings downe the intercepted courses: wherefore women troubled with the mother are much eased by baths made of the leaues and (...) hereof. @




CHAP. 29. Of Garden Succorie.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of plants comprehended vnder the title of Cichoracea, that is to say Cichorie, Endiue, Dandelion, etc. differing not so much in operation and working, as in shape and forme, which hath caused many to deeme them diuers, who haue distinguished them (...) the titles aforesaid: of euery which kinde there be diuers sorts, the which shall be (...) in (...) seuerall chapters, wherein the differences shall be exprest.


 The Description.
1 GArden Succory is of two sorts, one with broad leaues, and the other with narrow, deeply cut and gashed on both sides. The first hath broad leaues somewhat hairie, not much vnlike to Endiue, but narrower; amongst which doe rise vp stalkes, whereon are placed the like leaues, but smaller. The stalke diuideth it selfe toward the top into many branches, whereon doe grow little blew floures consisting of many small leaues, afterwhich followeth white seed. The root is tough, long, and white of colour, continuing many yeeres; from the which as from euery part of the plant doth issue forth bitter and milkie juice. The whole plant is of a bitter taste likewise.


2 Cichorium sativum. Garden Succorie.


3 Itybus (...). Garden Endiue.


2 The second kinde of Succorie is like vnto the former, but greater in euery point. That which causeth the difference is, that this beareth floures white of colour tending to blewnesse; the others blew, as I haue said.
3 Garden Endiue bringeth forth long leaues, broad, smooth, more greene than white, like almost to those of lettuce, something nicked in the edges. The stalke groweth vp among the leaues, being round and hollow, diuided into branches; out of which being broken or cut there issueth a juice like milke, somewhat bitter: the floures vpon the branches consist of many leaues, in colour  @ 5 Cichorium spinosum. Thornie Succory. commonly blew, seldome white. The root is long, white, with strings growing thereat, which withereth after the seed is ripe.
4 Curled Endiue hath leaues not vnlike to those of the curled or Cabbage lettuce, but much greater; among which rise vp strong and thicke stalkes, set with the like leaues, but lesser, and not so notably curled or crisped. The flours grow at the top, blew of colour. The (...) perisheth, as doth the whole plant, when it hath brought forth his ripe seed.
@ 5 To these may fitly be added the thorny or prickly Succory of Candy, being of this kindred, and there vsed in defect of the true Succorie, in stead thereof. The root is pretty long, white, with few fibers hanging thereat; the stalke is hard, wooddy, and diuaricated into many branches, which commonly end in two or three prickes like hornes: The leaues are bitter, long, narrow, and sharpe pointed, and lie spread vpon the ground, and are a little sinuated, or cut about the edges: The flours, which vsually grow vpon little footstalkes at the diuisions of the branches, are much like those of the ordinary Succory, yet much lesse, consisting of fiue blew leaues, with yellow chiues in the middle. The seed is like those of the common Succory. It floures in Iuly and August. @


 The Place and Time.
This Succory, and these Endiues are only sowne in gardens.
Endiue being sowen in the spring quickly commeth vp to floure, which seedeth in haruest, and afterward dieth. But being sowen in Iuly it remaineth till winter, at which time it is taken vp by the roots, and laid in the sunne or aire for the space (...) two houres; then will the leaues be tough, and easily endure to be wrapped vpon an heape, and buried in the earth with the roots vpward, where no earth can get within it (which if it did, would cause rottennesse) the which so couered may be taken vp at times conuenient, and vsed in sallades all the winter, as in London and other places is to be seen; and then it is called white Endiue, whereof Pliny seemeth not to be ignorant, speaking to the same purpose in his 20. booke and 8. chapter.


 The Names.
These herbes be called by one name in Greek (...) notwithstanding for distinctions sake they called the garden Succory, (...) and the wilde Succory, (...); Pliny nameth the Succory (...): and the bitterer Dioscorides calleth (...): in Latine, Intybum syluestre, Intybum agreste, Intybum (...), and Cichorium: in shops it is called Cichorea, which name is not onely allowed of the later Physitions, but also of the Poet Horace in the 31. Ode of his first booke,

Me pascunt (...),
Me Cichorea, leuesque (...).

With vs, saith Pliny in his 20. booke, 8. chapter, they haue called Intybum erraticum, or wilde Endiue, Ambugia (others reade Ambubeia:) and some there be that name it Rostrum porcinum: and others, as Guilielmus Placentinus, and Petrus Crescentius, terme it Sponsa (...): the Germanes call it (...), which is as much to say, as the keeper of the waies: the Italians, Cichorea: the Spaniards, Almerones: the English-men, Cicorie and Succory: the Bohemians, (...).
Endiue is named in Greeke (...) in Latine, Intybum sativum: of some, Endiuia: of Auicen and Serapio, Taraxacon: of the Italians, Scariola, which name remaineth in most shops; also Seriola, as (...) they should fitly call it Seris, but not so well Serriola, with a double r: for Serriola is (...) sylue, tris, or wilde lettuce: it is called in Spanish, Serraya Enuide: in English, Endiue, and Scariole: and when it hath been in the earth buried as aforesaid, then it is called white Endiue.

@ 5 This was first set forth by Clusius vnder this name, Chondrillae genus elegans (...) (...): since, by Pona and Bauhine, by the title we giue you, to wit, Cichorium spinosum. Honorius Bellus writes that in Candy where as it naturally growes, they vulgarly terme it (...) that is, (...) spina, the Pitcher Thorne; because the people fetch all their water in stone pots or Pitchers, which they (...) with this plant, to keepe mice and other such things from creeping into them: and it growes (...) round, that it seems by nature to be prouided sor that purpose. @


 The Nature.
Endiue and Succorie are cold and drie in the second degree, and withall somewhat binding: and because they be something bitter, they doe also clense and open.
Garden Endiue is colder, and not so drie or clensing, and by reason of these qualities they are thought to be excellent medicines for a hot liuer, as Galen hath written in his 8. book of the compositions of medicines according to the places affected.


 The Vertues.
These herbs when they be greene haue vertue to coole the hot burning of the liuer, to helpe the  stopping of the gall, yellow jaundice, lacke of sleepe, stopping of vrine, and hot burning feauers.
A syrup made thereof and sugar is very good for the diseases aforesaid.
The distilled water is good in potions, cooling and purging drinkes.
The distilled water of Endiue, Plantaine, and roses, profiteth against excoriations in the conduit  of the yard to be iniected with a syringe, whether the hurt came by vncleanenesse or by small stones and grauell issuing forth with the vrine; as often hath been seene.
These herbes eaten in sallades or otherwise, especially the white Endiue, doth comfort the  weake and feeble stomacke, and cooleth and refresheth the stomacke ouermuch heated.
The leaues of Succorie brused are good against inflammation of the eyes, being outwardly  applied to the grieued place.



CHAP. 30. Of wilde Succorie.


The first figure was of (...) (...) sativum of (...). The second is (...) (...). But the true figures of those our Author meant, were vnder (...). The first, of (...) (...). The second, (...) Leonis (...); for that is (...) (...).

 1 Cichorium syluestre. Wilde Succorie.


The first figure was of (...) (...) sativum of (...). The second is (...) (...). But the true figures of those our Author meant, were vnder (...). The first, of (...) (...). The second, (...) Leonis (...); for that is (...) (...).

 2 Cichorium luteum. Yellow Succorie.




 The Kindes.
IN like manner as there be sundrie sorts of (...) and Endiues, so is there wilde kindes of either of them.


 The Description.
1 WIlde Succorie hath long leaues; somewhat snipt about the edges like the leaues of Sow-thistle, with a stalke growing to the height of two cubits, which is diuided towards the top into many branches. The floures grow at the top blew of colour: the root is tough, and wooddie, with many strings fastned thereto.
2 Yellow Succorie hath long and large leaues, deepely cut about the edges like those of the Hawkeweed. The stalke is branched into sundry arms, wheron do grow yellow flours very double, resembling the floures of Dandelion, or Pisse-abed; the which being withered, it flieth away in downe with euery blast of winde.


3 Intybum (...). Wilde Endiue.


3 Wilde Endiue hath long smooth leaues slightly snipt about the edges. The stalke is brittle and full of milkie juice, as is all the rest of the plant: the floures grow at the top, of a blew or skie colour: the root is tough and threddie.
4 Medow Endiue, or Endiue with broad leaues, hath a thicke, tough, and wooddie root with many strings fastened thereto, from which rise vp many broad leaues spread vpon the ground like those of garden Endiue, but lesser, and somewhat rougher, among which rise vp many stalkes immediately from the root; (...) of them are deuided into sundrie branches, whereupon doe grow many floures like those of the former, but smaller.


 The Place.
These plants doe grow wilde in sundrie places in England, vpon wilde and vntilled barren grounds, especially in chalkie and stonie places.


 The Time.
They floure from the middest to the end of August.


 The Names.
@ The first of these is Scris Picris of Lobell, or Cichorium syluestre: or Intybus erratica of Tabernamontanus. @
Yellow Succorie is not without cause thought to be Hyosiris, or (as some copies haue it) Hyosciris, of which Pliny in his 20. booke and 8. chapter writeth; Hyosiris (saith he) is like to Endiue, but lesser and rougher: it is called of Lobelius, Hedypnois: the rest of the names set forth in their seueall titles shall be sufficient for this time.


 The Temperature.
They agree in temperature with the garden Succorie, or Endiue.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of these wilde herbes are boiled in pottage or brothes, for sicke, and feeble persons  that haue hot, weake, and feeble stomackes, to strengthen the same.
They are iudged to haue the same vertues with those of the garden, if not of more force in working.




CHAP. 31. Of Gumme Succorie.

 The Description.
1 GVmme Succorie with blew floures hath a thicke and tough root, with some strings annexed thereto, full of a milkie iuyce, as is all the rest of the plant, the floures excepted. The leaues are great and long, in shape like to those of garden Succorie, but deeplier cut or iagged, somewhat after the manner of wilde Rocket: among which rise tender stalkes very easie to be broken, branched toward the top in two or sometimes three branches, bearing very pleasant floures of an azure colour or deepe blew; which being past, the seed flieth away in downe with the winde.


1 Chondrilla coerulea. Blew Gum Succorie.


2 Chondrilla coerulea latifolia, Robinus Gum Succory.


2 Gum Succorie with broad leaues, which I haue named Robinus Gum Succorie (for that he was the first that made any mention of a second kind, which he sent me as a great dainty, as indeed I confesse it) in roots is like the former: the leaues be greater, not vnlike to those of Endiue, but cut more deeply euen to the middle rib: the stalkes grow to the height of two foot: the floures likewise are of an azure colour, but sprinckled ouer as it were with siluer sand; which addeth vnto the floure great grace and beauty.
3 Yellow gum Succorie hath long leaues like in forme and diuision of the cut leaues to those of wild Succorie, but lesser, couered all ouer with a hoarie down. The stalke is two foot high, white and downie also, diuided into sundry branches, whereupon doe grow torne floures like those of Succorie, but in colour yellow, which are turned into downe that is caried away with the winde. The root is long, and of a meane thicknesse, from which, as from all the rest of the plant, doth issue forth a milky iuyce, which being dried is of a yellowish red, sharp, or biting the tongue. There is found vpon the branches hereof a gum, as Dioscorides saith, which is vsed at this day in physicke in the Isle Lemnos, as Bellonius witnesseth.

4 Spanish Gum Succorie hath many leaues spred vpon the ground, in shape like those of Groundsell, but much more diuided, and not so thicke nor fat: amongst which rise vp branched stalkes set with leaues like those of Stoebe salamanticaminor, or Siluer-weed, where of this is a kinde. The floures grow at the top, of an ouerworne purple colour, which seldome shew themselues abroad blowne: @ The seed is like that of Carthamus in shape, but blacke and shining. @


The figure of the third was of the same plant as the (...), and was (...) of (...). The fourth was of (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...) (...) you (...) finde in the tenth place in the (...) and (...) Chapter.

 3 Chondrilla lutea. Yellow Gum Succorie.


The figure of the third was of the same plant as the (...), and was (...) of (...). The fourth was of (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...) (...) you (...) finde in the tenth place in the (...) and (...) Chapter.

 4 Chondrilla Hispanica. Spanish Gum Succorie.


5 Rushy Gum Succorie hath a tough and hard root, with a few short threds fastned thereto; from the which rise vp a few iagged leaues like those of Succorie, but much more diuided: The stalke groweth vp to the height of two foot, tough and limmer like vnto rushes, whereon are set many narrow leaues. The floures be yellow, single, and small; which being faded doe fly away with the winde: the whole plant hauing milky iuyce like vnto the other of his kinde.
@ There is another sort of this plant to be found in some places of this kingdome, and it is mentioned by Bauhinus vnder the name of Chondrilla viscosa humilis.
@ 6 Sea Gum Succorie hath many knobby or tuberous roots full of iuyce, of a whitish purple colour, with long strings fastned to them; from which immediately rise vp a few small thinne leaues fashioned like those of Succory, narrower below, and somewhat larger towards their ends; among which spring vp small tender stalkes, naked, smooth, hollow, round, of some foot high, or thereabout: each of these stalkes haue one floure, in shape like that of the Dandelion, but lesser, The whole plant is whitish or hoary, as are many of the sea plants. @
7 Swines Succorie hath white small and tender roots, from the which rise many indented leaues like those of Dandelion, but much lesse, spred or laid flat vpon the ground; from the midst whereof rise vp small soft and tender stalkes, bearing at the top double yellow floures like those of Dandelion or Pisse-abed, but smaller: the seed with the downy tuft flieth away with the wind.
8 The male Swines Succorie hath a long and slender root, with some few threds or strings fastned thereto; from which spring vp small tender leaues about the bignesse of those of Dasies, spred vpon the ground, cut or snipt about the edges confusedly, of an ouerworne colour, full of a milky iuyce: among which rise vp diuers small tender naked stalkes, bearing at the top of euery stalke one floure and no more, of a faint yellow colour, and something double: which being ripe,

5 Chondrilla (...). Rushy Gum Succorie.6 Chondrilla marina Lobelij. Sea Gum Succorie.7 (...), Porcellia. Swines Succorie.8 Hyoseris mascula. Male Swines Succorie. doe turne into downe that is carried away with the winde: the seed likewise cleaueth vnto the said downe, and is also carried away with the winde. The whole plant perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, and recouereth it selfe againe by the falling thereof.


@ 9 Cichorium verracarium. Wart-Succorie.


@ 9 I thinke it expedient in this place to deliuer vnto you the historie of the Cichorium (...), or Zacintha of (...); of which our Author maketh mention in his Names and Vertues, although he neither gaue figure, nor the least description thereof. This Wart-Succory (for so I will call it) hath leaues almost like Endiue, greene, with pretty deepe gashes on their sides; the stalkes are much crested, and at the top diuided into many branches; betweene which, and at their sides grow many short stalkes with yellow floures like those of Succorie, but that these turne not into Downe, but into cornered and hard heads, most commonly diuided into eight cels or parts, wherein the seed is contained. @


 The Place.
@ These plants are found only in gardens in this country; the seuenth and eighth excepted, which (...) may be sound to grow in vntilled places, vpon ditches bankes and the borders of fields, or the like.


 The Time.
They do floure from May to the end of August.


 The Names.
Gum Succorie hath beene called of the Grecians, (...) of the Latines, (...), and (...): Dioscorides and Pliny call it Cichorion, and (...), by reason of some likenesse they haue with Succorie, especially the two first, which haue blew floures as those of the Succories. Lobelius maketh Cicherea verrucaria to be Zacintha of (...).


@  Names in particular.
@ 1 This is called Chondrilla coerulea Belgarum, of Lobel: Apate, of Daleschampius.
2 Condrilla 2. of Matthiolus: Chondrilla (...) coerulea, of Tabernamontanus.
3 Chondrilla prior Discoridis, of (...) and Lobel.
4 Chondrilla rara purpurea, etc. of Lobel: Chondrilla Hispanica Narbonensis, of Tabern. Seneciocarduus Apulus, of (...).
5 Chondrilla prima Dioscoridis, of Columna and Bauhinus: Viminea, viscosa, of Lobel and Clusius.
6 Chondrilla altera Dioscoridis, of Columna: some thinke it to be (...) of Theophrastus: Lobell calls it, Chondrilla pusilla marina lutea bullosa.
7 Hypochaeris, porcellia, of Tabernamontanus.
8 Hieracium minimum 9. of Clusius: Hyoseris latifolia, of (...). The two last should haue bin put among the Hieracia.
9 Cichorium verrucarium, and Zacinthus of Matthiolus and Clusius. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
These kinds of gum Succoric are like in temperature to the common Succory, but drier.
The root and leaues tempered with hony, and made into Trochiskes, or little flat cakes, with niter  or salt-peter added to them, cleanse away the morphew, sun-burnings, and all spots of the face.
The gum which is gathered from the branches, whereof it tooke his name, layeth downe the  stairing haires of the eye-browes and such like places: and in some places it is vsed for Mastick, as Bellonius obserues.
The gum poudered with myrrh, and put into a linnen cloath, and a pessarie made thereof like a  finger, and put vp, bringeth downe the termes in yong Wenches and such like.

The seedes of Zazintha beate to powder, and giuen in the decreasing of the Moone to the quantitie  of a spoonefull, taketh away warts, and such like excrescence, in what part of the body soeuer they be; the which medicine a certaine (...) of Padua did much vse, whereby he gained great sums of mony, as reporteth that ancient Physition Ioachimus Camerarius of Noremberg a famous citie in Germanie. And Matthiolus affirmes that he hath knowne some helped of warts, by once eating the leaues hereof in a Sallade.



CHAP. 32. Of Dandelion.

 The Description.
1 THe herbe which is commonly called Dandelion doth send forth from the root long leaues deepely cut and gashed in the edges like those of wilde Succorie, but smoother: vpon euery stalke standeth a floure greater than that of Succorie, but double, and thicke set together, of colour yellow, and sweet in smell, which is turned into a round downie blowball, that is carried away with the winde. The root is long, slender, and full of milkie juice when any part of it is broken, as is the Endiue or Succorie, but bitterer in taste than Succorie.
@ There are diuers varieties of this plant, consisting in the largenesse, smallnesse, deepenesse, or shallownesse of the diuisions of the leafe, as also in the smoothnesse and roughnesse thereof. @


1 Dens (...). Dandelion.


@ 3 Dens Leonis bulbosus. Knottie rooted Dandelion.


2 There is also another kinde of Succorie which may be referred heereunto, whose leaues are long, cut like those of broad leafed Succorie: the stalkes (...) (...) vnlike, being diuided into branches as those of Dandelion, but lesser, which also vanisheth into downe when the seed is ripe, hauing a long and white root.
@ 3 There is another Dens Lconis, or Dandelion, which hath many knotty, and tuberous roots  like those of the Asphodil; the leaues are not so deeply cut in as those of the common Dandelion, but larger, and somewhat more hairy: the floures are also larger, and of a paler yellow, which flie away in such downe as the ordinary. @


 The Place.
They are found often in medowes neere vnto water ditches, as also in gardens and high waies much troden.


 The Time.
They floure most times in the yeere, especially if the winter be not extreame cold.


 The Names.
These plants belong to the Succory which Theophrastus, and Pliny call Aphaca, or Aphace Leonardus: Fuchsius thinketh that Dandelion is Hedypnois Plinij, of which he writeth in his 20. booke, and eighth chapter, affirming it to be a wilde kinde of broad leafed Succorie, and that Dandelion is Taraxacon: but Taraxacon, as Auicen teacheth in his 692. chapter, is garden Endiue, as Serapio mentioneth in his 143. chapter; who citing Paulus for a witnesse concerning the faculties, setteth down these words which Paulus writeth of Endiue and Succorie. Diuers of the later Physitions do also call it Dens Leonis, or Dandelion: it is called in high Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in French, Pissenlit ou couronne de prestre, or Dent de lyon: in English, Dandelion: and of diuers, Pisseabed. The first is also called of some, and in shops Taraxacon, Caput monach, Rostrum porcinum, and Vrinaria. The other is Dens (...) Monspeliensium of (...), and Cichoreum Constant inopolitanum, of (...).


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Dandelion is like in temperature to Succorie, that is to say, to wilde Endiue. It is cold, but it drieth more, and doth withall clense, and open by reason of the bitternesse which it hath ioyned  with it: and therefore it is good for those things for which Succory is, @ Boiled, it strengthens the weake stomacke, and eaten raw it stops the bellie, and helpes the Dysentery, especially being boyled with Lentiles; The juice drunke is good against the vnuoluntary effusion of seed; boyled in vineger, it is good against the paine that troubles some in making of water; A decoction made of the whole plant helpes the yellow jaundice. @ 

The (...) which was in the 2 place was of the (...). (...), where you may (...) it, but to what plant the description may be reserred, I cannot yet determine,




CHAP. 20. Of Sow-thistle.


@ 1 Sonchus asper. Prickly Sow-thistle.


@ 2 Sonchus asperior. The more (...) Sow-thistle.




 The Kindes.
THere be two chiefe kindes of Sow-thistles; one tenderer and softer; the other more pricking and wilder: but of these there be sundry sorts more found by the diligence of the later Writers; all which shall be comprehended in this chapter, and euery one be distinguished with a seuerall description.


 The Description.
1 THe prickly Sow-thistle hath long broad leaues cut very little in, but full of smal prickles round about the edges something hard and sharpe, with a rough and hollow stalke: the floures stand on the tops of the branches, consisting of many small leaues, single, and yellow of colour; and when the seed is ripe it turneth into downe, and is carried away with the winde. The whole plant is full of a white milky iuyce.
@ 2 There is another kinde of this, whose leaues are sometimes prettily deepe cut in like as those of the ordinarie Sow-thistle; but the stalkes are commonly higher than those of the last described, and the leaues more rough and prickly; but in other respects not differing from (...) of this kinde. It is also sometimes to be found with the leaues lesse diuided. @


@ 3 Sonchus Laeuis. Hares Lettuce.


4 Sonchus laeuis latifolius. Broad leaued Sow-thistle.


3 The stalke of Hares Lettuce, or smooth-Thistle is oftentimes a cub it high, edged and hollow, of a pale colour, and sometimes reddish: the leaues be greene, broad, set round about with deepe cuts or gashes, smooth, and without prickles. The floures stand at the top of the branches, yellow of colour, which are caried away with the winde when the seed is ripe. @ This is sometimes found with whitish, and with snow-white floures, but yet seldome: whence our Authour made two kindes more, which were the fourth and fifth; calling the one, The white floured Sowthistle; and the other, The snow-white Sow-thistle. Both these I haue omitted as impertinent, and giue you others in their stead. @
4 Broad leaued Sow-thistle hath a long thicke and milky root, as is all the rest of the Plant, with many strings or fibres; from the which commeth forth a hollow stalke branched or diuided into sundry sections. The leaues be great, smooth, sharpe pointed, and greene of colour: the floures  be white, in shape like the (...). @ The floures of this are for the most part yellow like as the former. @
@ 5 Wall Sow-thistle hath a fibrous wooddy root, from which rises vp a round stalke not crested: the leaues are much like to those of the other Sow-thistles, broad at the setting on, then narrower, and after much broader, and sharpe pointed, so that the end of the leafe much resembles the shape of an iuy leafe; these leaues are very tender, and of somewhat a whitish colour on the vnder side: the top of the stalke is diuided into many small branches, which beare little yellow floures that fly away in downe.
6 This hath longish narrow leaues soft and whitish, vnequally diuided about the edges. The stalkes grow some foot high, hauing few branches, and those set with few leaues, broad at their setting on, and ending in a sharpe point: the floures are pretty large like to the great Hawk-weed, and fly away in downe: the root is long, white, and lasting. It floures most part of Summer; and in Tuscany, where it plentifully growes, it is much (...) in sallets, with oile and vineger, it hauing a sweetish and somewhat astringent taste. @


@ 5 Sonchus laeuis muralis. Wall (or Iuy-leaued) Sow-thistle.


@ 6 Sonchus laeuis angustifolius. Narrow leaued Sow-thistle.


@ 7 This blew floured Sow-thistle is the greatest of all the rest of the kindes, somewhat resembling the last described in leaues; but those of this are somewhat rough or hairy on the vnder side: the floures are in shape like those of the ordinarie Sow-thistle, but of a faire blew colour; which fading, flie away in Downe that carries with it a small ash-coloured seed. The whole plant yeeldeth milke as all the rest do. @
8 Tree Sow-thistle hath a very great thicke and hard root set with a few hairy threds; from which ariseth a strong and great stalke of a wooddy substance, set with long leaues not vnlike to (...), but more deepely cut in about the edges, and not so rough: vpon which do grow faire double yellow floures, which turne into Downe, and are caried away with the winde. The whole plant is possest with such a milky iuyce as are the tender and hearby Sow-thistles; which certainly (...) it to be a kinde thereof: otherwise it might be referred to the Hawke-weeds, whereunto in face and shew it is like. @ This hath a running root, and the heads and tops of the stalkes are very rough and hairy. @



7 Sonchus slore (...). Blew-floured Sow-thistle.


8 Sonchus Arborescens. Tree Sow-thistle.


@ 9 Sonchus arborescens alter. The other Tree Sow-thistle.


@ 10 Sonchus syluaticus. Wood Sow-thistle.



@ 9 This other Tree Sow-thistle growes to a mans height or more, hauing a firme crested stalke, smooth, without any prickles, and set with many (...) incompassing the stalke at their setting on, and afterwards cut in with foure, or sometimes with two gashes only: the vpper leaues are not diuided at all: the colour of these leaues is green on the vpper side, and grayish vnderneath: the top of the stalke is hairy, and diuided into many branches, which beare the floures in an equall height, as it were in an vmbell: the floures are not great, considering the largenesse of the plant, but vsually as big as those of the common Sow-thistle, and yellow, hauing a hairy head or cap: the seed is crested, longish, and ash-coloured, and flies away with the downe: the root is thicke, whitish, hauing many fibres, putting out new shoots, and spreading euery yeare. (...) maketh this all one with the other, according to (...) his description: but in my opinion there is some difference betweene them, which chiefely consists, in that the former hath larger and fewer floures; the plant also not growing to so great a height. @
@ 10 This plant (whose figure our Author formerly gaue, pag. 148. vnder the title of Erysimum sytuestre) hath long knotty creeping roots, from whence ariseth a round slender stalke some two foot high, (...) at first with little leaues, which grow bigger and bigger as they come neerer the middle of the stalke, being pretty broad at their setting on, then somewhat narrower, and so broader againe, and sharpe pointed, being of the colour of the Wall (or Iuy-leaued) Sow-Thistle. The top is diuided into many small branches, which end in small scaly heads like those of the wilde Lettuce, containing floures consisting of foure blewish purple leaues, turned backe and snipped at their ends; there are also some threds in the midle of the floure, which turning into Downe, carry away with them the seed, which is small, and of an Ash-colour. Bauhine makes a bigger and a lesser of these, distinguishing betweene that of Clusius (whose figure I here giue you) and that of Columna; yet Fabius Columna himselfe could finde no difference, but that Clusius his plant had fiue leaues in the floure, and his but foure: which indeed Clusius in his description affirmes; yet his figure (as you may see) expresses but foure: adding, That the root is not well expressed; which notwithstanding Clusius describes according to Columna's expression. @


 The Place.
The first soure grow wilde in pastures, medowes, woods, and marishes neere the sea, and among pot-herbes.
The fifth growes vpon walls, and in wooddy mountainous places.
The Tree Sow-thist'e growes amongst corne in waterie places.
The sixth, seuenth and tenth are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune, Iuly, August, and sometimes later.


 The Names.
Sow-thistle is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Sonchus: of diuers, Cicerbitae, lactucella, and Lacterones: Apuleius calleth it Lactuca Leporina, or Hares-thistle: of some, Brassica Leporina, or Hares Colewort. The English names are sufficiently touched in their seuerall titles: In Dutch it is called Hasen Latouwe: the French, Palays delieure.


@  Names in particular.
1 This is Sonchus asper major of Cordus: Sonchus tenerior aculeis asperior of Lobel: Sonchus 3. asperior of Dodonaeus.
2 This is Sonchus asper, of Matthiolus, Fuchsius, and others.
3 This, Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others call Sonchus laeuis: Tragus calls it Intybus (...) tertia.
4 This Tabernamontanus onely giues, vnder the title as you haue it here.
5 Matthiolus stiles this, Sonchus laeuis (...): Caesalpinus calls it Lactuca murorum: and Tabern. Sonchus syluaticus quartus: Lobel, Sonchus alter folio sinuato hederaceo.
6 Lobel calls this, Sonchus laeuis Matthioli: it is Terracrepulus of (...): and Crepis of Daleschampius.
7 Clusius and Camerarius giue vs this vnder the title of Sonchus coeruleus.
8 Onely Tabern. hath this figure, vnder the title our Author giues it: (...) puts it amongst the Hieracia, calling it Hieracium arborescens palustre.
9 This Bauhine also makes an Hieracium, and would persuade vs that Clusius his description belongs to the last mentioned, and the figure to this: to which opinion (...) cannot consent. Clusius giueth it vnder the name of Sonchus 3 laeuis (...) (...).
10 This Clusius giues vnder the name of Sonchus laeuior Pannonicus 4. flore purp. Tabern. calls it Libanotis Theophrasti sterilis: Columna hath it by the name of (...) (...) (...) (...) Cordus, Gesner, Thalius, and (...) refer it to the Lactucae syluestres: the last of them (...) it, (...) (...) purpuro-coerulea. @



 The Temperature.
The Sow-thistles, as Galen writeth, are of a mixt temperature; for they consist of a watery and earthy substance, cold, and likewise binding.


 The Vertues.
Whilest they are yet yong and tender they are eaten as other pot-herbes are; but whether they  be eaten, or outwardly applied in manner of a pultesse, they do euidently coole: therefore they be good for all inflammations or hot swellings, if they be laid thereon.
Sow-thistle giuen in broth taketh away the gnawings of the stomacke proceeding of an hot  cause; and increase milke in the breasts of Nurses, causing the children whom they nurse to haue a good colour: and of the same vertue is the broth if it be drunken.
The iuyce of these herbes doth coole and temper the heate of the fundament and priuy parts.



CHAP. 34. Of Hawke-weed.

 The Kindes.
HAwke-weed is also a kinde of Succorie; of which Dioscorides maketh two sorts, and the later Writers more: the which shall be described in this chapter following, where they shall be distinguished as well with seuerall titles as sundry descriptions.


@ 1 Hieracium majus Dioscoridis. Great Hawke-weed


2 Hieracium minus, siue Leporinum. Small Hares Hawk-weed, or Yellow Diuels-bit.




 The Description.
2 THe great Hawke-weed hath large and long leaues spred vpon the ground, in shape like those of the Sow-thistle: the stalk groweth to the height of two cubits, branched into sundry armes or diuisions, hollow within as the yong Kexe, reddish of colour; whereupon do grow yellow floures thicke and double, which turne into Downe that flieth away with the winde when the seed is ripe. The root is thicke, tough and threddy.

2 The small Hawke-weed, which of most writers hath been taken for yellow Diuels-bit, hath long leaues (...) cut about the edges, with some sharpe roughnesse thereon like vnto Sow-thistle. The stalkes and floures are like the former: the root is compact of many small strings, with a small knob, or as it were the stumpe of an old root in the middle of those strings, cut or bitten off; whereupon it tooke his name Diuels bit.
3 Blacke Hawke-weed hath very many long iagged leaues, not much vnlike to those of Bucks horne, spred flat and (...) abroad vpon the ground, which the picture cannot expresse as is requisite, in so little roome: among which rise vp many stalkes slender and weake, the floures growing at the top yellow and very double: it hath also a threddy root.
@ Our Author formerly gaue three figures, and so many descriptions of this small (...), which I haue contracted into two; for the onelydifference that I can finde is, that the one hath the root as it were bitten off, with the leaues lesse cut in; the other hath a root (...) (...), and fibrous as the former; the leaues also in this are much more finely and deepe cut in: in other respects there is no difference. @


3 Hieracium nigrum. Blacke Hawke-weed.


4 Hieracium (...). Succory Hawke-weed.


4 Succory Hawke-weed hath many long and large leaues spred vpon the ground, deepely cut on both sides almost to the middle rib; from which rise vp small stalkes and floures like those of the lesse Dandelion, but lesser. The root consisteth of many small threddy strings.
5 Endiue Hawke-weed hath many broad leaues, indented about the edges very like vnto Garden Endiue, but narrower; among which rise vp stalkes a foot or more high, slender, hairy, and brittle: the floures are yellow, and grow at the top double, and thick set in a scaly huske like the Knapweed or Iacea, hauing great thicke and threddy roots. @ This hath a stalke sometimes more, and otherwhiles lesse rough, with the leaues somtimes more cut in, more long and narrow, and againe otherwhiles more short and broad. @
6 Long rooted Hawk-weed hath many broad leaues spread vpon the ground, sleightly and confusedly indented about the edges, with somewhat a bluntish point; among which leaues spring vp strong and tough stalks a foot and halfe high, set on the top with faire double yellow floures much like vnto a Pisse-abed. The root is very long, white and tough.
7 Sharpe Hawk-weed hath leaues like those of Languebeefe or Ox-tongue, but much narrower, sharpe about the edges, and rough in the middle: the stalks be long and slender; set with the like leaues, butlesser: the floures grow at the top, double and yellow: the root is tough and threddy.



5 Hieracium intybaceum. Endiues Hawke-weed.


6 Hieracium longius (...). Long rooted Hawke-weed.


7 Hieracium (...). Sharpe Hawke-weed.


8 Hieracium falcatum Lobelij. Crooked Hawke-weed.



@ 8 Crooked or falked Hawkeweed hath leaues like vnto the garden Succory, yet much smaller, and lesse diuided, slightly indented on both sides, with tender, weake, and crooked stalkes; whereupon doe grow floures like those of Lampsana, of a blacke, or pale yellow colour, and the roote small and threddy. The seedes are long, and falcated, or crooked, so that they somewhat resemble the foot or clawes of a bird, and from these seeds the plant hath this Epithite, Falcatum, or crooked in maner of a Sicle or Sithe.
@ 9 This in leaues is not much vnlike the last described, but that they are somewhat broader, and lesse cut in, hauing little or no bitternesse nor milkinesse, the stalkes are some foot high commonly bending, or falling vpon the ground; the floures are small and yellow, and seeme to grow out of the middest of the seed, whenas indeed they grow at the top of them, the rest being but an empty huske which is falcated like that of the last described. This figure we giue you was taken before the floures were blowne, so that by that meanes the falcated or crooked seed vessels are not exprest in this, but you may see there manner of growing by the former. @


@ 9 Hieracium falcatum alterum. The other crooked Hawkeweed.


@ 10 Hieracium Latifolium montanum. Broad leaued mountaine Hawkeweed.


10 The broad leaued (...) Hawkeweed hath broad, long, smooth leaues, deepely (...) toward the stalke, resembling the leaues of the greatest Sowthistle. The stalke is (...), and spungious, full of a milkie iuice, as is the rest of the plant, as also all the other of his (...): the floures grow at the top of the stalkes, double and yellow.
11 The narrow leaued mountaine Hawkeweed hath leaues like those of the (...) described, but narrower. The stalkes be fat, hollow, and full of milke: the floures grow at the (...) double, and yellow of colour. The root is small and threddy.
There is a small mountaine Hawkeweed hauing leaues like vnto the former, but more deepely cut about the edges, and sharper pointed; the stalkes are tender and weake; the floures be double and yellow like those of Pilosella, or great Mouse-care; the root is small and threddy.


 The Place.
These kindes of herbes doe grow in vntoiled places neere vnto the borders of (...) fields, in medowes, high-waies, woode, mountaines, and hillie places, and neere to the brinks of ditches. @ The two falcated Hawkeweeds grow onely in some few gardens. @



11 Hieracium montanum Latifolium minus. The lesser broad leaued mountaine Hawke-weed.




 The Time.
They floure for the most part all the summer long, some sooner, and others later.


 The Names in generall.
These plants are all conteined vnder the name of Hieracium: which is called in Greeke also (...): diuers name it in Latine, (...), which is termed in French, Cichoree iaulne: in English, Hawkeweed. These herbes tooke there name from a Hawke, which is called in Latin (...), and in Greeke, (...) for they are reported to cleere their sight by conueying the juice heereof into their eyes. (...) calleth it Porcellia for it is numbred among the Succories, they are called also Lampuca.
Yellow Hawkeweed is called of some (...) diaboli, or yellow Diuels bit, for that the root doth very well resemble the bitten or cropt root of the common Diuels bit, being like Scabious.


@  The Names in particular.
1 Matthiolus, Fuchsius, Dodonaeus, and others call this Hieracium (...).
2 3 These are varieties of the same plant, the first of them being called by Fuchsius, (...), and Matthiolus, Hieracium minus, Lobell calls it, Hieracium minus praemorsa radice. That sort of this with more cut leaues is by Tabernamontanus (...), Hieracium nigrum.
4 Lobell calls this Hieracium folijs and facie Chondrillae; Bauhinus makes this to differ from (...) which our Author gaue in this 4. place out of Tabern. for he termes this Hieracium (...) (...) hirsutum, and the other, (...) Chondrillae folio Glabrum; the one smooth leaued, the other rough; yet that which growes frequently with vs, and is very well represented by this figure, hath smooth leaues, as he also obserued it to haue in Italy and about Mountpelier in France.
5 This is Hieracium alterum grandius, and Hieracium montanum angustifolium primum of (...).
6 Lobell calls this from the length of the root (though sometimes it be not so long) Hieracium Longius radicatum; as also Taber. Hieracium macrorhizon, it is thought to be the Apargia of (...), by Daleschampius in the Hist. Lugd. pag. 562. but the figure there that beares the title is of Huracium minus.
7 Tabernamontanus first gaue this vnder the name of Hieracium intybaccum asperum: Bauhine refers it to the wilde yellow Succories, and calls it Cichoreum montanum angustifolium hirsutie asperum.
8 This Lobell calls Hieracium Narbonense falcata siliqua.
9 He calls this Hieracium facie Hedypnois: and Caesalpinus termes this Rhagadiolus; and the last mentioned, Rhagadiolus alter.
10 This by Tabernamontanus is called Hieracium montanum majus Latifolium; The figure of this was giuen by our Author, chap. 30. vnder the title of Chondrilla Hispanica.
11 Tabernamontanus also stiles this Hieracium montanum Latifolium minus. @


 The Nature.
The kindes of Hawkeweed are cold and dr ie, and somewhat binding.


 The Vertues.
They are in vertue and operation like to Sonchus or Sowthistle, and being vsed after the same  manner, be as good to all purposes that it doth serue vnto.
They be good for the eie-sight, if the juice of them be dropped into the eyes, especially that  which is called Diuels bit, which is thought to be the best, and of greatest force.

Therefore as Dioscorides writeth, it is good for an hot stomacke, and for inflammations if it be  laid vpon them.
The herbe and root being stamped and applied, is a remedie for those that be stung of the scorpion;  which effect not onely the greater Hawkeweeds, but the lesser ones also doe performe.



CHAP. 35. Of Clusius Hawkeweed.

 The Kindes.
THere be likewise other sorts of Hawkeweeds, which Carolus Clusius hath set forth in his Pannonicke obseruations, the which likewise require a particular chapter, for that they do differ in forme very notably.


1 Hieracium primum latifolium Clusij. The first Hawkeweed of Clusius.


2 Hieracium 5. Clusij. Clusius his 5. kinde of Hawkeweed.




 The Description.
1 THe first of Clusius his Hawkeweeds haue great broad leaues spred vpon the ground, somewhat hairie about the edges, oftentimes a little iagged, also soft as is the leafe of Mullen, or Higtaper, and sometimes dasht here and there with some blacke spots, in shape like the garden Endiue, full of a milkie juice: among which riseth vp a thicke hollow stalke of a cubit high, diuiding it selfe at the top into two or three branches, whereupon do grow sweete smelling floures not vnlike to those of yellow Succorie, set or placed in a blacke hoarie and woollie cup or huske, of a pale bleake yellow colour, which turneth into a downie blowball that is caried away with the winde: the root entereth deepely into the ground, of the bignesse of a finger, full of milke, and couered with a thicke blacke barke.
2 The second sort of great Hawkeweed according to my computation, and the 5. of Clusius, hath leaues like the former, that is to say soft, and hoarie, and as it were couered with a kinde of  white woollinesse or hairinesse, bitter in taste, of an inche broad. The stalke is a foot high, at the top whereof doth grow one yellow floure like that of the great Hawkeweed, which is caried away with the winde when the seed is ripe. The root is blacke and full of milkie juice, and hath certaine white strings annexed thereto.
3 This kinde of Hawkeweed hath blacke roots a finger thicke, full of milkie juice, deepely thrust into the ground, with some small fibers belonging thereto: from which come vp many long leaues halfe an inch or more broad, couered with a soft downe or hairinesse, of an ouerworne (...) colour: and amongst the leaues come vp naked and hard stalkes, whereupon doe grow yellow floures set in a woollie cup or chalice, which is turned into downe, and caried away with his seed by the winde.
4 The fourth Hawkeweed hath a thicke root aboue a finger long, blackish, creeping vpon the top of the ground, and putting out some fibres, and it is diuided into some heads, each whereof at the top of the earth putteth out some six or seuen longish leaues some halfe an inche broad, and somewhat hoarie, hairie, and soft as are the others precedent, and these leaues are snipt about the edges, but the deepest gashes are neerest the stalkes, where they are cut in euen to the middle rib, which is strong and large. The stalke is smooth, naked, and somewhat high: the floures be yellow and double as the other.


3 Hieracium 6. Clusij. Clusius his 6. Hawkeweed.


4 Hieracium 7. Clusij. Clusius his 7. Hawkeweed.


@ 5 The same Author hath also set forth another Hieracium, vnder the name of Hieracium parvum Creticum, which he thus describes; this is an elegant little plant spreading some six, or more leaues vpon the top of the ground, being narrower at that part whereas they adhere to the (...), and broader at the other end, and cut about the edges, hauing the middle rib of a purple colour; amongst these rise vp two or three little stalkes about a foot high, without knot vntill you come almost to the top, whereas they are diuided into two little branches, at which place (...) forth leaues much diuided; the floures grow at the top of a sufficient bignesse, considering the magnitude of the plant, and they consist of many little leaues lying one vpon another, on the vpper side wholly white, and on the vnder side of a flesh colour. The root is single, longish, growing small  towards the end, and putting forth stringy fibres on the sides. Thus much Clusius, who receiued this figure and description from his friend Iaques Plateau of Tournay. I coniecture this to be the same plant that Bauhine hath somewhat more accurately figured and described in his Prod. pag. 68. vnder the title of Chondrilla purpurascens foetida: which plant being an annuall, I haue seen growing some yeares since with Mr. Tuggy at Westminster; and the last Summer with an honest and skilfull Apothecarie one Mr. Nicholas Swayton of Feuersham in Kent: but I must confesse I did not compare it with Clusius; yet now I am of opinion, that both these figures and descriptions are of one and the same plant. It floures in Iuly and August, at the later end of which moneth the seeds also come to ripenesse.
6 This other (not described by Clusius, but by Lobel) hath long rough leaues cut in and toothed like to Dandelion, with naked hairy stalkes, bearing at their tops faire large and very double yellow floures, which fading fly away in downe. It growes in some medowes.


@ 5 Hieracium parvum Creticum. Small Candy Hawk-weed.


@ 6 Hieracium Dentis leonis folio hirsutum. Dandelion Hawk-weed.




 The Place.
These kinds of Hawke-weeds, according to the report of Clusius, do grow in Hungarie and Austria, and in the grassy dry hills, and herby and barren Alpish mountaines, and such like places: notwithstanding if my memorie faile me not I haue seene them growing in sundry places in England; which I meane, God willing, better to obserue hereafter, as opportunitie shall serue me.


 The Time.
He saith they floure from May to August, at what time the seed is ripe.


 The Names.
The Author himselfe hath not said more than here is set downe as touching the names, so that it shall suffice what hath now been said, referring the handling thereof to a further consideration.


 The Nature and Vertues.
I finde not any thing at all set downe either of their nature or vertues, and therefore I forbeare to say any thing else of them, as a thing not necessarie to write of their faculties vpon my owne conceit and imagination.




CHAP. 36. @ Of French or Golden Lung-wort.


@ 1 Pulmonaria Gallica siue aurea latifolia. Broad-leaued French or golden Lung-wort.


@ 2 Pulmonaria Gallica siue aurea (...) Narrow leaued French or golden Lung-wort.



 The Description.
@ 1 THis which I here giue you in the first place, as also the other two, are of the kinds of Hawke-weed, or Hieracium; wherefore I thought it most fit to treat of them in this place, and not to handle them with the Pulmonaria maculosa, or Sage of Ierusalem: whereas our Author gaue the name Pulmonaria Gallorum, and pointed at the description; but his figure being false, and the description imperfect, I iudged it the best to handle it here next to those plants which both in shape and qualities it much resembles. This first hath a pretty large yet fibrous and stringy root; from the which arise many longish leaues, hairy, soft, and vnequally diuided, and commonly cut in the deepest neerest the stalke; they are of a darke green colour, and they are sometimes broader and shorter, and otherwhiles narrower and longer (whence Tabernamontanus makes three sorts of this, yet are they nothing but varieties of this same plant.) Amongst these leaues grow vp one or two naked stalks, commonly hauing no more than one leafe apiece, and that about the middle of the stalke; these stalks are also hairy, and about a cubit high, diuided at their tops into sundry branches, which beare double yellow floures of an indifferent bignesse, which fading and turning into downe, are together with the seed carried away with the winde. This whole plant is milky like as the other Hawk-weeds.
2 This Plant (though confounded by some with the former) is much different from the last described; for the root is small and fibrous; the leaues also are small, of the bignesse, and somewhat of the shape (though otherwise indented) of Dasie leaues, whitish and hoarie; the stalke is not aboue an handfull high, crested, hoary, and set with many longish narrow leaues; and at the top on short foot-stalkes it beares foure or fiue floures of a bright yellow colour, and pretty large,  @ 3 Hieracium hortense latifolium, siue Pilosella major. Golden Mouse-eare, or Grimme the Colliar. considering the smallnesse of the plant. The floures, like as others of this kinde, fly away in downe, and carry the seeds with them.
3 This plant (which some also haue confounded with the first described) hath a root at the top, of a reddish or brownish colour, but whitish within the earth, and on the lower side sending forth whitish fibres: it bringeth forth in good and fruitfull grounds leaues about a foot long, and two or three inches broad, of a darke greene colour, and hairy, little or nothing at all cut in about the edges; amongst these leaues riseth vp a stalke some cubit high, round, hollow, and naked, but that it sometimes hath a leafe or two toward the bottome, and towards the top it puts forth a branch or two. The floures grow at the top as it were in an vmbell, and are of the bignes of the ordinarie Mouse-eare, and of an orange colour. The seeds are round, and blackish, and are caried away with the downe by the wind. The stalkes and cups of the floures are all set thicke with a blackish downe or hairinesse as it were the dust of coles; whence the women, who keep in it gardens for noueltie sake, haue named it Grim the Colliar.


 The Time.
All these floure in Iune, Iuly, and August, about the later part of which moneth they ripen their seed.


 The Place.
1 I receiued some plants of this from Mr. Iohn Goodyer, who first found it May 27, 1631. in floure; and the 3 of the following May, not yet flouring, in a copse in Godlemen in Surrey, adioyning to the orchard of the Inne whose signe is the Antilope.
2 This I had from my kinde friend Mr. William Coote, who wrot to mee, That he found them growing on a hill in the Lady Bridget Kingsmills ground, in an old Romane campe, close by the Decumane port, on the quarter that regards the West-South-West, vpon the skirts of the hill.
3 This is a stranger, and onely to be found in some few gardens.


 The Names.
1 This was first set forth by Tragus, vnder the name of Auricula muris major: and by Tabern. (who gaue three figures expressing the seuerall varieties thereof) by the name of Pulmonaria Gallicasiue aurea: Daleschampius hath it vnder the name of Corchorus.
2 This was by Lobel (who first set it forth) confounded with the former, as you may see by the title ouer the figure in his Obseruations, pag. 317. yet his figure doth much differ from that of Tragus, who neither in his figure nor description allowes so much as one leafe vpon the stalke; and Tabernamontanus allowes but one, which it seldome wants. Now this by Lobels figure hath many narrow leaues; and by the Description, Aduers. pag. 253. it is no more than an handfull, or handfull and halfe high: which very well agrees with the plant wee heere giue you, and by no meanes with the former, whose naked stalkes are at least a cubit high. So it is manifest that this plant I haue described is different from the former, and is that which Pena and Lobel gaue vs vnder the title of Pulmonaria Gallorum flore Hieracij. Bauchine also confounds this with the former.
3 Basil Besler in his Hortus Eystettensis hath well exprest this plant vnder the title of Hieracium latifolium peregrinum Phlomoides: Bauhinus calls it Hieracium hortense floribus atropurpurascentibus; and saith that some call it Pilosella major: and I iudge it to be the Hieracium Germanicum of Fabius Columna. This also seemes rather to be the herbe Costa of Camerarius, than the first described; and I dare almost be bold to affirme it the same: for he saith that it hath fat leaues lying flat vpon the ground, and as much as he could discerne by the figure, agreed with the Hieracium latifolium of Clusius: to which indeed in the leaues it is very like, as you may see by the figure which is in the first place in the foregoing chapter, which very well resembles this plant, if it had more and smaller floures.



 The Temper and (...).
I iudge these to be temperate in qualitie, and endued with a light astriction.
1 The decoction or the distilled water of this herbe taken inwardly, or outwardly applied, conduce much to the mundifying and healing of greene wounds; for some boyle the herb in wine, and so giue it to the wounded Patient; and also apply it outwardly.
It also is good against the internall inflammations and hot distempers of the heart, stomacke, and liuer.
The iuyce of this herbe is with good successe dropped into the eares when they are troubled  with any pricking or shooting paine or noyse.
Lastly, The water hath the same qualitie as that of Succorie. Tragus.
2 (...) and Lobel affirme this to be commended against whitlowes, and in the diseases of the  lungs.
3 This (if it be the Costa of Camerarius) is of singular vse in the Pthisis, that is, the vlceration  or consumption of the lungs: whereupon in Misnia they giue the conserue, syrrup, and pouder thereof for the same purpose: and they also vse it in broths and otherwise. Cam. @



CHAP. 37. Of Lettuce.


1 Lactuca (...). Garden Lettuce.


2 Lactuca crispa. Curled Lettuce.



 The Kindes.
THere be according to the opinion of the Antients, of Lettuce two sorts; the one wilde, or of the field; the other tame, or of the Garden: but time, with the industrie of later Writers haue found out others both wilde and tame, as also artificiall, which I purpose to lay downe.



 The Description.
1 GArden Lettuce hath a long broad leafe, smooth, and of a light green colour: the stalke is round, thicke set with leaues full of milky iuyce, bushed or branched at the top: whereupon do grow yellowish floures, which turne into downe that is carried away with the winde. The seed sticketh fast vnto the cottony downe, and flieth away likewise, white of colour, and somewhat long: the root hath hanging on it many long tough strings, which being cut or broken, do yeeld forth in like manner as doth the stalke and leaues, a iuyce like to milke. And this is the true description of the naturall Lettuce, and not of the artificiall; for by manuring, transplanting, and hauing a regard to the Moone and other circumstances, the leaues of the artificiall Lettuce are oftentimes transformed into another shape: for either they are curled, or else so drawne together, as they seeme to be like a Cabbage or headed Colewort, and the leaues which be within and in the middest are something white, tending to a very light yellow.


5 Lactuca capitata. Cabbage Lettuce.


6 Lactuca intybacea. Lumbard Lettuce.


2 The curled Lettuce hath great and large leaues deeply cut or gashed on both the sides, not plaine or smooth as the former, but intricately curled and cut into many sections. The floures are small, of a bleake colour, the which do turne into downe, and is carried away with the winde. The seed is like the former, sauing that it changeth sometime into blacknesse, with a root like vnto the former.
3 This small sort of curled Lettuce hath many leaues hackt and torne in pieces very confusedly, and withall curled in such an admirable sort, that euery great leafe seemeth to be made of many small leaues set vpon one middle rib, resembling a fan of curled feathers vsed among Gentlewomen: the floures, roots, and seeds agree with the former.
4 The Sauoy Lettuce hath very large leaues spred vpon the ground, at the first comming vp broad, cut or gasht about the edges, crisping or curling lightly this or that way, not vnlike to the leaues of Garden Endiue, with stalkes, floures, and seeds like the former, as well in shape, as yeelding that milky iuyce wherewith they do all abound.
5 Cabbage Lettuce hath many plaine and smooth leaues at his first growing vp, which for the most part lie flat still vpon the ground: the next that do appeare are those leaues in the midst, which turn themselues together, embracing each other so closely, that it is formed into that globe  or round head, whereof the simplest is not ignorant. The seed hereof is blacke, contrary to all the rest; which may be as it were a rule whereby ye may know the seed of Cabbage Lettuce from the other sorts.
6 The Lumbard Lettuce hath many great leaues spred vpon the ground like vnto those of the garden Endiue, but lesser. The stalkes rise vp to the height of three foot: the floures be yellowish, which turne into downe and flie away with the winde: the seed is white as snow.


 The Place.
Lettuce delighteth to grow, as Palladius saith, in a mannured, fat, moist, and (...) ground: it must be sowen in faire weather in places where there is plenty of water, as Columella saith, and prospereth best if it be sowen very thin.


 The Time.
It is certaine, saith Palladius, that Lettuce may well be sowen at any time of the yeare, but especially at euery first spring, and so soone as winter is done, till summer be well nigh spent.


 The Names.
Garden Lettuce is called in Latine, Lactuca (...): Galen names it (...): the Pythagorians (...) some iudge it to be Lactuca, a Lactco succo, called of the milkie (...) which issueth forth of the wounded stalkes and rootes: the Germanes name it (...): the low Duch, (...): the Spaniards, Lechuga, and Alface: the English, Lettuce: and the French, Laictue. When the leaues of this kinde are curled or crompled, it is named of Pliny, Lactucacrispa: and of Columella, Lactuca (...): in English, curl'd or crompled Lettuce.
The Cabbage Lettuce is commonly called Lactuca capitata, and Lactuca sessilis: Pliny nameth it Lactuca Laconica: Columella, Lactuca Baetica: Petrus Crescentius, Lactuca Romana: in English, Cabbage Lettuce, and Loued Lettuce.
There is another fort with reddish leaues, called of Columella, Lactuca Cypria: in English, red Lettuce.


 The Temperature.
Lettuce is a cold and moist pot-herbe, yet not in the extreame degree of cold or moisture, but altogether moderately; for otherwise it were not to be eaten.


 The Vertues.
Lettuce cooleth the heate of the stomacke, called the heart-burning; and helpeth it when it is  troubled with choller: it quencheth thirst, causeth sleepe, maketh plenty of milke in nurses, who through heate and drinesse grow barren and drie of milke: for it breedeth milke by tempering the drienesse and heate. But in bodies that be naturally cold, it doth not ingender milke at all, but is rather an hinderance thereunto.
Lettuce maketh a pleasant sallad, being eaten raw with vineger, oyle, and a little salt: but if it  be boyled it is sooner digested, and nourisheth more.
It is serued in these dayes, and in these countries in the beginning of supper, and eaten first before  any other meate: which also Martiall testifieth to be done in his time, maruelling why some did vse it for a seruice at the end of supper, in these verses.


Claudere quae coenas Lactuca solebat anorum,


Dic mihi, cur (...) incohatilla dapes?

Tell me why Lettuce, which our Grandsires last did eate,
Is now of late become, to be the first of meate?

Notwithstanding it may now and then be eaten at both those times to the health of the body: for being taken before meat it doth many times stir vp appetite: and eaten after supper it keepeth away drunkennesse which commeth by the wine; and that is by reason that it stayeth the vapors from rising vp into the head.
The iuice which is made in the veines by Lettuce is moist and cold, yet not ill, nor much in quantitie: Galen (...) that it doth neither binde the belly nor loose it, for it hath in it no harshnes nor stiptike qualitie by which the belly is stayed, neither is there in it any sharpe or biting facultie, which scoureth and prouoketh to the stoole.
But howsoeuer Galen writeth this, and howsoeuer the same wanteth these qualities, yet it is found  by experience, that it maketh the body soluble, especially if it be boyled; for by moistning of the belly it maketh it the more slippery: which Martial very well knew, writing in his 11. booke of Epigrams in this manner: Prima tibi dabitur; ventri Lactuca mouendo Vtilis.
Lettuce being outwardly applied mitigateth all inflammations; it is good for burnings and scaldings, if it be laid thereon with salt before the blisters doe appeare, as Plinie writeth.
The iuice of Lettuce cooleth and quencheth the naturall seed if it be too much vsed, but procureth sleepe.




@ CHAP. 38. Of Wilde Lettuce.

 The Description.
@ THere are three sorts of wilde Lettuce growing wilde here with vs in England, yet I know not any that haue mentioned more than two; yet I thinke all three of them haue beene written of, though two of them be confounded together and made but one (a thing often happening in the history of Plants) and vnlesse I had seene three distinct ones, I should my selfe haue beene of the same opinion.
1 The first and rarest of these hath long and broad leaues, not cut in, but only snipt about the edges, and those leaues are they that are on the lower part of the stalke almost to the midle thereof: then come leaues (...) thence to the top, which are deepely diuided with large gashes: the stalke if it grow in good grounds exceeds the height of a man, (for I haue seene it grow in a garden to the height of eight or nine foot) it is large, round, and smooth, and towards the top diuided into many branches which beare yellow floures somewhat like to the garden Lettuce, after which also succeed blackish seeds like to other plants of this kinde. The whole plant is full of a clammy milky iuice, which hath a very strong and grieuous smell of Opium.


@ 1 Lactuca syl. maior odore Opij. The greater wilde Lettuce smelling of Opium.


@ 3 Lactuca sylvestris folijs dissectis. The wilde Lettuce with the diuided Leafe.


2 This hath broad leaues only cut about the edges, but not altogether so large as those of the last described: the stalke, which commonly is two cubits or better high, is also smooth, and diuided into many branches, bearing such floures and seeds as the last described; and this also hath a milky iuice of the same smell as the last described, from which it differs only in the magnitude, and that this hath all the leaues whole, and not some whole and some diuided, as the former.
3 This in stalkes, floures and seedes is like to the last described, but the leaues are much different, for they are all deeply (...) or cut in like as the leaues of Succory, or Dandelion. This also is sull of a milky iuice, but hath not altogether so strong a sent of Opium as the two former, though it partake much thereof. The stalke of this is sometimes a little prickly, and so also is the middle rib vpon the backeside of the leafe. All these three haue wooddy roots which die euery yeare, and so they come vp againe of the scattered seed.


 The Place.
The first of these was found in Hampshire by Mr. Goodyer and the seeds hereof sent to Mr. Parkinson  in whose garden I saw it growing some two yeares agoe. The other grow plentifully betweene London and (...) Church, about the ditches and highway side.


 The Time.
They come vp in the Spring, and sometimes sooner, and ripen their seed in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
1 I take the first of these to be the Lactuca Sylvestris of Dioscorides and the Ancients, and that which the Authours of the Adversaria gaue vs vnder the title of (...) (...) (...) (...) folio, Lactucae siore, Opij odore vehementi, soporisero and (...).
2 This is the (...) of Tragus, pag. 268. and the Thesion of (...), pag. 564. (...) confounds this with the former.
3 This is the Lactuca Sylvestris prior, of Tragus: the Lactuca Sylvestris of (...), Fuchsius, Dodonaeus, and others: it is the Seris Domestica of Lobell.


The Temper.
These certainly, especially the two first, are cold, and that in the later end of the third or beginning of the fourth degree (if (...) be cold in the fourth.)


The Vertues.
Some (saith Dioscorides) mix the milkie iuice hereof with Opium; (for his (...) is our  Opium.) in the making thereof.
He also saith, that the iuice hereof drunke in Oxycrate in the quantity of 2 obuli, (which make  some one scruple) purgeth (...) humors by stoole; it also clenseth the little vlcer in the eye called Argemon in Greeke, as also the mystines or darkenesse of sight.
Also beaten and applied with womans milke it is good against burnes and scaldes.
Lastly, it procures sleepe, asswages paine, moues the courses in women, and is drunke against  the stingings of scorpions, and bitings of spiders.
The seed taken in drinke, like as the Garden Lettuce, hindreth generation of seed and venereous  imaginations. @



CHAP. 39. Of Lambs Lettuce, or Corne sallad.


1 Lactuca Agnina. Lambes Lettuce.


2 Lactuca Agnina latifolia. Corne sallade.




 The Description.
1 THe plant which is commonly called Olus album, or the white pot-herbe (which of some hath been set out for a kinde of Valerian, but vnproperly, for that it doth very notably resemble the Lettuce, as well in forme, as in meate to be eaten, which propertie is not to be found in Valerian, and therefore by reason and authoritie I place it as a kinde of Lettuce) hath many slender weake stalkes trailing vpon the ground, with certaine edges a (...) high when it growes in most fertile ground; otherwise a hand or two high, with sundry ioynts or knees: out of euery one whereof grow a couple of leaues narrow and long, not vnlike to Lettuce at the first comming vp, as well in tendernesse as taste in eating; and on the top of the stalkes stand vpon a broad tuft as it were certaine white floures that be maruellous little, which can scarsely be known to be floures, sauing that they grow many together like a tuft or vmbel: it hath in stead of roots a few slender threads like vnto haires.
2 The other kind of Lettuce, which Dodonaeus in his last edition setteth forth vnder the name of Album olus: the Low-countrey men call it (...), and vse it for their meate called Wermose; with vs, Loblollie. This plant hath small long leaues a finger broad, of a pale green colour; among which shooteth vp a small cornered and slender stem halfe a foot high, ioynted with two or three ioynts or knees, out of which proceed two leaues longer than the first, bearing at the top of the branches tufts of very smal white floures closely compact together, with a root like the former.
@ Both these are of one plant, differing in the bignesse and broadnesse of the leafe and the whole plant besides. @


 The Place.
These herbes grow wilde in the corne fields; and since it hath growne in vse among the French and Dutch strangers in England, it hath beene sowen in gardens as a sallad herbe.


 The Time.
They are found greene almost all Winter and Sommer.


 The Names.
The Dutch-men do call it (...); that is to say, Album olus: of some it is called (...): the French terme it Sallade de Chanoine it may be called in Greeke, (...): in English, The White Pot-herbe; but commonly, Corne sallad.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
This herbe is cold and something moist, and not vnlike in facultie and temperature to the garden Lettuce; in stead whereof, in Winter and in the first moneths of the Spring it serues for a sallad herbe, and is with pleasure eaten with vineger, salt and oile, as other sallads be, among which it is none of the worst.



CHAP. 40. Of Coleworts.

 The Kindes.
DIoscorides maketh two kindes of Coleworts; the tame and the wilde: but Theophrastus makes more kindes hereof; the (...) or curled Cole, the smooth Cole, and the wilde Cole. Cato imitating Theophrastus, setteth downe also three Coleworts: the first hee describeth to be smooth, great, broad leaued, with a big stalke; the second ruffed; the third with little stalks, tender, and very much biting. The same distinction also Pliny maketh, in his twentieth booke, and ninth chapter; where he saith, That the most ancient Romanes haue diuided it into three kindes; the first roughed, the second smooth, and the third which is properly called (...), or Colewort. And in his nineteenth booke he hath also added to these, other moe kindes; that is to say, Tritianum, Cumanum, Pompeianum, Brutianum, Sabellium, and Lacuturrium.
The Herbarists of our time haue likewise obserued many sorts, differing either in colour or else in forme; other headed with the leaues drawne together, most of them white, some of a deepe greene, some smooth leaued, and others curled or ruffed; differing likewise in their stalkes, as shall be expressed in their seuerall descriptions.



1 (...) vulgaris (...). Garden Colewort.


2 Brassica (...) crispa. Curled Garden Cole.


3 Brassica rubra. Red Colewort.


4 Brassica capitata alba. White Cabbage Cole.





 The Description.
1 THe Garden Colewort hath many great broad leaues of a deepe blacke greene colour, mixed with ribs and lines of reddish and white colours: the stalke groweth out of the middest from among the leaues, branched with sundry armes bearing at the top little yellow floures: and after they be past, there do succeed long cods full of round seed like those of the Turnep, but smaller, with a wooddy root hauing many strings or threds fastned thereto.
2 There is another lesser sort than the former, with many deepe cuts on both sides euen to the middest of the rib, and very much curled and roughed in the edges; in other things it differeth not.
3 The red kinde of Colewort is likewise a Colewort of the garden, and differeth from the common in the colour of his leaues, which tend vnto rednesse; otherwise very like.
4 There is also found a certaine kinde hereof with the leaues wrapped together into a round head or globe, whose head is white of colour, especially toward Winter when it is ripe. The root is hard, and the stalkes of a wooddy substance. @ This is the great ordinarie Cabbage knowne euery where, and as commonly eaten all ouer this kingdome. @


5 Brassica capitata rubra. Red Cabbage Cole.


6 Brassica patula Open Cabbage Cole.


5 There is another sort of Cabbage or loued Colewort which hath his leaues wrapped together into a round head or globe, yet lesser than that of the white Cabbage, and the colour of the leaues of a lighter red than those of the former.
6 The open loued Colewort hath a very great hard or wooddy stalke, whereupon do grow very large leaues of a white greene colour, and set with thicke white ribs, and gathereth the rest of the leaues closely together, which be lesser than those next the ground; yet when it commeth to the shutting vp or closing together, it rather dilateth it selfe abroad, than closeth all together.
7 Double Colewort hath many great and large leaues, whereupon doe grow here and there other small iagged leaues, as it were made of ragged shreds and iagges set vpon the smooth leafe, which giueth shew of a plume or fan of feathers. In stalke, root, and euery other part besides it doth agree with the Garden Colewort.

8 The double crispe or curled Colewoort agreeth with the last before described in euery respect, onely it differeth in the leaues, which are so intricately curled, and so thick set ouer with other small cut leaues, that it is hard to see any part of the leafe it selfe, except ye take and put aside some of those iagges and ragged leaues with your hand.


9 Brassica florida. Cole-Florie.


10 Brassica Tophosa. Swollen Colewoort.


9 Cole flore, or after some Colieflore, hath many large leaues sleightly indented about the edges, of a whitish greene colour, narrower and sharper pointed than Cabbage: in the middest of which leaues riseth vp a great white head of hard floures closely thrust together, with a root full of strings; in other parts like vnto the Coleworts.
10 The swollen Colewort of all other is the strangest, which I receiued from a worshipfull merchant of London master Nicholas (...), who brought the seed thereof out of France; who is greatly in loue with rare and faire floures and plants, for which he doth carefully send into Syria, hauing a seruant there at Aleppo, and in many other countries, for the which my selfe and likewise the whole land are much bound vnto him. This goodly Colewort hath many leaues of a blewish green, or of the colour of (...), bunched or swollen vp about the edges as it were a peece of leather wet and broiled on a gridiron, in such strange sort that I cannot with words describe it to the full. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a bleake yellow colour. The root is thicke and strong like to the other kindes of Coleworts.
11 Sauoy Cole is also numbred among the headed Colewoorts or (...). The leaues are great and large very like to those of the great Cabbage, which turne themselues vpwards as though they would embrace one another to make a loued Cabbage, but when they come to the shutting vp they stand at a stay, and rather shew themselues wider open, than shut any neerer together; in other respects it is like vnto the Cabbage.
12 The (...) Sauoy Cole in euery respect is like the precedent, sauing that the leaues, hereof doe somewhat curle or crispe about the midle of the plant: which plant if it be opened in the spring time, as sometimes it is, it sendeth sorth branched stalks, with many small white floures at the top, which being past their follow long cods and seeds like the common or first kinde (...).
13 This kinde of Colewoort hath very large leaues deepely iagged euen to the middle rib in face resemblinggreat and ranke parsley. It hath a great and thicke stalke of three (...) high. whereupon doe grow floures, cods, and seed like the other Colewoorts.



11 Brassica Sabanda. Sauoy Cole.


12 Brassica Sabauda crispa. Curled Sauoy Cole.


13 Brassica Selinoides. Parseley Colewoort.


The fifteenth and sixteenth figures were (...) transposed.

 15 Brassica marina Anglica. English sea Colewoorts.



14 The small cut Colewoort hath very large leaues, wonderfully cut, hackt and hewen euen to the middle rib, resembling a kinde of curled parsley, that shall be described in his place, (which is not common nor hath not beene knowne nor described vntill this time) very well agreeing with the last before mentioned, but differeth in the curious cutting and iagging of the leaues: in stalke floures and seed not vnlike.


The fifteenth and sixteenth figures were (...) transposed.

 16 Brassica syluestris. Wilde Colewoorts.


15 Sea Colewoort hath large and broad leaues very thicke and curled, and so brittle that they cannot be handled without breaking, of an ouerworne greene colour, tending to graynesse: among which rise vp stalkes two cubits high, bearing small pale floures at the top; which being past their follow round knobs wherein is contained one round seed and no more, blacke of colour, of the bignesse of a tare and a fetch: @ And therefore Pena and Lobell called it Brassica marina monospermos. @
16 The wilde Colewoort hath long broad leaues not vnlike to the tame Colewoort, but lesser, as is all the rest of the plant, and is of his owne nature wilde, and therefore not sought after as a meate, but is sowen and husbanded up on ditch bankes and such like places for the seeds sake, by which oftentimes great gaine is gotten.


 The Place.
The greatest sort of Colewoorts doe grow in gardens, and doe loue a soile which is fat and throughly dunged and well manured: they doe best prosper when they be remooued, and every of them grow in our English gardens, except the wilde, which groweth in fields and new digged ditch banks.
The sea Colewoort groweth naturally vpon the bayche and brims of the sea, where there is no earth to bee seene, but sand and rowling pibble stones, which those that dwell neere the sea doe call Bayche: I found it growing betweene Whytstable and the Ile of Thanet neere the brinke of the sea, and in many places neere to Colchester and elsewhere by the sea side.


 The Time.
Pertus Crescentius saith that the Colewoort may bee sowen and remooued at any time of the yeere; whose opinion I altogether mislike. It is sowen in the spring, as March, April, and oftentimes in May, and sometimes in August, but the speciall time is about the beginning of September.
The Colewoort, saith Columella, must be remoued when it attaineth to six leaues, after it is come vp from seed; the which must be done, in April or May, especially those that were sowne in Autumne; which afterwards flourish in the winter moneths, at what time, they are fittest for meate.
But the Sauoy-Cole, and the Cole florey, must be sowne in Aprill, in a bed of hot horsedung, and couered with straw or such like, to keepe it srom the cold, and frosty mornings; and when it hath gotten six leaues after this sort, then shall you remoue him as aforesaid, otherwise if you tarry for temperate weather before you sow, the yeare will be spent, before it come to ripenesse.


 The Names.
Euery of the Colewoorts, is called in Greeke by Dioscorides and Galen (...): it is also called (...): so named, not only because it driueth away drunkennesse, but also for that it is like in colour to the precious stone called the Amethyst: which is meant by the first and garden Colewoort. The Apothecaries and the common Herbarists doe call it Caulis, of the goodnesse of the stalke: in the Germane tongue it is called (...) (...): in French, des Choux: in English, Colewoorts.
Cole-florey is called in Latine Brassica Cypria, and Cauliflora: in Italian, Caulifiore: it seemeth to agree with Brassica (...) of Pliny, whereof he writeth in his 19. booke, and 8. chapter.



 The Temperature.
All the Colewoorts haue a drying and binding facultie, with a certaine nitrous or salt quality, whereby they mightily cleanse, either in the iuice, or in the broth. The whole substance or body of the Colewoort is of a binding and drying faculty, because it leaueth in the decoction this salt quality; which lieth in the iuyce and watry part thereof: the water where in it is first boyled, draweth to it selfe all the quality; for which cause the decoction thereof looseth the belly, as doth also the iuyce of it, if it be drunke: but if the first broth in which it was boyled be cast away, then doth the Colewoort dry and binde the belly. But it yeeldeth to the body small nourishment, and doth not ingender good, but a grosse and Melancholicke bloud. The white Cabbage is best next vnto the Cole-florey; yet Cato doth chiefly commend the russet Cole: but he knew neither the white ones, nor the Cole-florey; for if he had, his censure had beene otherwise.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides teacheth, that the Colewoort being eaten is good for them that haue dim eyes, and that are troubled with the shaking palsie.
The same author affirmeth, that if it be boiled and eaten with vineger, it is a remedie for those  that be troubled with the spleene.
It is reported, that the raw Colewoort being eaten before meate, doth preserue a man from  drunkennesse: the reason is yeelded, for that there is a naturall enmity betweene it and the vine, which is such, as if it grow neere vnto it, forthwith the vine perisheth and withereth away: yea, if wine be poured vnto it while it is in boyling, it will not be any more boiled, and the colour thereof quite altered, as Cassius and Dionysius Vticensis doe write in their bookes of tillage: yet doth not Athenaeus ascribe that vertue of driuing away drunkennesse to the leaues, but to the seeds of Colewoort.
Moreouer, the leaues of Colewoorts are good against all inflammations, and hot swellings;  being stamped with barley and meale, and laid vpon them with salt: and also to breake carbuncles.
The iuyce of Colewoorts, as Dioscorides writeth, being taken with floure-deluce and niter, doth  make the belly soluble: aud being drunke with wine, it is a remedie against the bitings of venomous beasts.
The same being applyed with the powder of Fennugreeke, taketh away the paine of the gout, and also cureth old and foule vlcers.
Being conueied into the nosthrils, it purgeth the head: being put vp with barley meale it bringeth  downe the floures.
Pliny writeth, that the iuyce mixed with wine, and dropped into the eares, is a remedie against  deafenesse.
The seed, as Galen saith, driueth forth wormes, taketh away freckles of the face, sun-burning, and what thing soeuer that need to be gently scoured or clensed away.
They say that the broth where in the herbe hath beene sodden is maruellous good for the sinewes  and ioynts, and likewise for Cankers in the eies, claled in Greeke Carcinomata, which cannot be healed by any other meanes, if they be washed therewith.



CHAP. 41. Of Rape-Cole.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Rape Cole hath one single long root, garnished with many threddy strings: from which riseth vp a great thicke stalke, bigger than a great Cucumber or great Turnep: at the top whereof shooteth forth great broad leaues, like vnto those of Cabbage Cole. The floures grow at the top on slender stalkes, compact of foure small yellow floures: which being past the seed followeth inclosed in litle long cods, like the sed of Mustard.
2 The second hath a long fibrous root like vnto the precedent; the tuberous stalke is very great and long, thrusting forth in some few places here and there, small footstalkes; whereupon doe grow smooth leaues, sleightly indented about the edges: on the top of the long Turnep stalke grow leane stalkes and floures like the former. @ This second differs from the former onely in the length of the swolne stalke, whence they call it Caulorapum longum, or Long Rape Cole. @


 The Place.
They grow in Italy, Spaine, and some places of Germanie, from whence I haue receiued seedes for my garden, as also from an honest and curious friend of mine called master Goodman, at the Minories neere London.



1 Caulorapum rotundum. Round rape Cole.




 The Time.
They floure and flourish when the other Colewoorts doe, whereof no doubt they are kinds, and must be carefully set and sowne, as muske Melons and Cucumbers are.


 The Names.
They are called in Latine, Caulorapum, and Rapocaulis, bearing for their stalkes, as it were Rapes and Turneps, participating of two plants, the Colewort and Turnep; whereof they tooke their names.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is nothing set downe of the faculties of these plants, but are accounted for daintie meate, contending with the Cabbage Cole in goodnesse and pleasant taste.



CHAP. 42. Of Beets.

 The Description.
1 THe common white Beet hath great broad leaues, smooth, and plain: from which rise thicke crested or chamfered stalks: the floures grow along the stalks clustering together, in shape like little starres; which being past, there succeed round and vneuen (...) seed. The root is thicke, hard, and great.


1 Beta alba. White Beets.


2 Beta rubra. Red Beets.





@ 3 Beta rubra Romana. Red Roman Beet.


2 There is another sort like in shape and proportion to the former, sauing that the leaues of this be streaked with red here and there confusedly, which setteth forth the difference.
3 There is likewise another sort hereof, that was brought vnto me from beyond the seas, by that courteous merchant master Lete, before remembred, the which hath leaues very great, and red of colour, as is all the rest of the plant, as well root, as stalke, and floures, full of a perfect purple iuyce tending to rednesse: the middle rib of which leaues are for the most part very broad (...) thicke, like the middle part of the Cabbage leafe, which is equall in goodnesse with the leaues of Cabbage being boyled. It grew with me 1596. to the height of viijcubits, and did bring forth his rough and vneuen seed very plentifully: with which plant nature doth seeme to play and sport herselfe: for the seeds taken from that plant, which was altogether of one (...) and sowen, doth bring (...) plants of many and variable colours, as the worshipfull gentleman master Iohn Norden can very well testifie, vnto whom I gaue some of the seeds (...), which in his garden bruoght forth many other of beautifull colours.


 The Place.
The Beete is sowen in gardens: it loueth to grow in a (...) and fertile ground. @ The ordinary white Beet growes wilde vpon the sea-coast of Tenet and diuers other places by the Sea, for this is not a different kind as some would haue it. @


 The Time.
The fittest time to sow it is in the spring: it flourisheth and is greene all sommer long, and likewise in winter, and bringeth forth his seed the next yeare following.


 The Names.
The Grecians haue named it (...): the Latines, Beta: the Germanes, Maugolt: the Spaniards, Aselgas: the French, de la Poree, des (...), and Beets: Theophrastus saith, that the white Beete is surnamed (...), that is to say, (...), or of Sicilia: hereof (...) the name Sicla, by which the Barbarians, and some Apothecaries did call the Beet; the which word we in England doevse, taken for the same.


 The Nature.
The white Beets are in moisture and heate temperate, but the other kinds are drie, and all of them abstersiue: so that the white Beete is a cold and moist pot-herbe, which bath ioyned with it a certaine salt and nitrous quality, by reason whereof it (...) and draweth flegme out of the nosthrils.


 The Vertues.
Being eaten when it is boyled, it quickly descend eth, looseth the belly, and prouoketh to the  stcole, especially being taken with the broth wherein it is sodden: it nourisheth little or nothing, and is not so wholesome as (...).
The iuyce conueied vp into the nosthrils doth gently draw sorth flegme, and purgeth the head.
The great and beautifull Beet last described may be vsed in winter for a sallad herbe, with  vineger, oyle, and salt, and is not onely pleasant to the taste, but also delightfull to the eye.
The greater red Beet or Roman Beet, boyled and eaten with oyle, (...) and pepper, is a most  excellent and (...) sallad: but what might be made of the red and beautifull root (which is to be preferred before the leaues, as well in beauty as in goodnesse) I refer vnto the curious and cunning cooke, who no doubt when he hath had the view thereof, and is assured that it is both good and wholesome, will make thereof many and diuers dishes, both faire and good.




CHAP. 43. Of Blites.

 The Description.
1 THe great white Blite groweth three or foure foot high, with grayish or white round stalkes: the leaues are plaine and smooth, almost like to those of the white Orach, but not so soft nor mealy: the floures grow thrust together like those of Orach: after that commeth the seed inclosed in little round flat husky skinnes.
2 There is likewise another sort of Blites very smooth and flexible like the former, sauing that the leaues are reddish, mixed with a darke greene colour, as is the stalke and also the rest of the plant.
3 There is likewise found a third sort very like vnto the other, sauing that the stalkes, branches, leaues, and the plant is altogether of a greene colour. But this growes vpright, and creepes not at all.
4 There is likewise another in our gardens very like the former, sauing that the whole Plant traileth vpon the ground: the stalks, branches, and leaues are reddish: the seed is small, and clustering together, greene of colour, and like vnto those of Ruellius his Coronopus, or Bucks-horne.


@ 1 Blitum majus album. The great white Blite.


2 Blitum majus rubrum. The great red Blite.




 The Place.
The Blites grow in Gardens for the most part, although there be found of them wilde many times.


 The Time.
They flourish all the Summer long, and grow very greene in Winter likewise.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Blitum: in English, Blite, and Blites: in Fr ench, Blites, or Blitres.



@ 3 Blitum minus album. The small white Blite.


@ 4 Blitum minus rubrum. The small red Blite.




 The Nature.
The Blite (saith Galen in his sixth booke of the faculties of simple medicines) is a pot-hearbe which serueth for meate, being of a cold moist temperature, and that chiefely in the second degree. It yeeldeth to the body small nourishment, as in his second booke of the faculties of nourishments he plainly shewes; for it is one of the pot-herbes that be vnsauoury or without taste, whose substance is waterish.


 The Vertues.
The Blite doth nourish little, and yet is fit to make the belly soluble, though not vehemently, seeing it hath no nitrous or sharpe qualitie whereby the belly should be prouoked. I haue heard many old wiues say to their seruants, Gather no Blites to put into my pottage, for they are not good for the eye-sight: whence they had those words I know not, it may be of some Doctor that neuer went to schoole, for that I can finde no such thing vpon record, either among the old or later Writers.



CHAP. 44. Of Floure-Gentle.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of floure-Gentle, differing in many points very notably; as in greatnesse and smallnesse; some purple, and others of a skarlet colour; and one aboue the rest wherewith Nature hath seemed to delight her selfe, especially in the leaues, which in variable colours do striue with the Parats feathers for beautie.



1 Amaranthus purpureus. Purple Floure-Gentle.


2 Amaranthus (...). Scarlet Floure-Gentle.


3 Amaranthus tricolor. Floramor and (...).


4 Amaranthus Pannicula sparsa. Branched Floure-Gentle.





 The Description.
1 PVrple floure Gentle riseth vp with a stalke a cubit high, and sometime higher, streaked or chamfered alongst the same, often reddish toward the root, and very smooth: which diuideth it selfe toward the top into small branches, about which stand long leaues, broad, sharpe pointed, soft, slippery, of a greene colour, and sometimes tending to a reddish: in stead of floures, come vp eares or spokie tufts, very braue to looke vpon, but without smell; of a shining light purple, with a glosse like veluet, but far passing it: which when they are bruised, doe yeeld a iuyce almost of the same colour, and being gathered, doe keepe their beauty a long time after, insomuch that being set in water, it will reuiue againe as at the time of his gathering, and it remaineth so, many yeares, whereupon likewise it hath taken its name. The seed standeth in the ripe eares, of colour blacke, and much glittering: the root is short, and full of strings.


@ 5 Amaranthus pannicula incurua holoserica. Veluet Floures Gentle.


2 The second sort of floure Gentle hath leaues like vnto the former: the stalke is vpright with a few small slender leaues set vpon it: among which doe grow small clusters of scaly floures, of an ouerworne scarlet colour. The seed is like the former.
3 It far exceedeth my skill to describe the beauty and excellency of this rare plant called Floramor; and I thinke the pensill of the most curious painter wil be at a stay, when he shall come to set him downe in his liuely colours: but to colour it after my best manner this I say: Floramor hath a thicke knobby root, whereupon doe grow many threddy strings: from which riseth a thicke stalke, but tender and soft, which beginneth to deuide himselfe into sundry branches at the ground and so vpward, whereupon (...) grow many leaues, wherein doth consist his beauty: for in few words, euery leafe doth resemble in colours the most faire and beautifull feather of a Parrat, especially those feathers that are mixed with most sundry colours, as a stripe of red, and a line of yellow, a dash of white, and a rib of green colour, which I canot with words set forth, such are the sundry mixtures of colours that nature hath bestowedin her greatest iollitie vpon this floure: the floures doe grow betweene the foot-stalkes of those leaues and the body of the stalke or trunke, base, and of no moment in respect of the leaues, being as it were little chassie husks of an ouerworne (...) colour: the seed is blacke, and shining like burnished horne. @ I haue not seene this thus variegated as our Author mentions, but the leaues are commonly of three colours; the lower part, or that next to the stalke is greene; the middle red, and the end yellow; or else the end red; the middle yellow, and the bottome greene. @
4 This plant hath a great many of threds and strings, of which his roots doe consist. From which doe rise vp very thicke fat stalkes, crested and streaked, exceeding smooth, and of a shining red colour, which begin at the ground to diuide themselues into branches; whereupon doe grow many great and large leaues of a darke greene colour tending to rednesse, in shew like those of the red Beet, streaked and dasht here and there with red, mixed with greene. The floures grow alongst the stalkes, from the middest thereof euen to the top, in shape like Panicum, that is, a great number of chaffie confused eares thrust hard together, of a deepe purple colour. I can compare the shape thereof to nothing so (...) as to the veluet head of a Stag, compact of such soft matter as is the same: wherein is the seed, in colour white, (...), and bored through the middle.
@ 5 This in stalkes and leaues is much like the purple floure Gentle, but the heads are larger, bended round, and laced, or as it were wouen one with another looking very beautifully like to Crimson veluet: this is seldome to be found with vs; but for the beauties sake is kept in the Gardens of Italy, whereas the women esteemed it not only for the comelinesse and beautious aspect,

1 Atriplex satiua alba. White Orach.@ 2 Atriplex satiua (...). Purple Orach.3 Atriplex (...), siue Polyspermon. Wilde Orach, or All-seed.@ 4 Atriplex marina. Sea Orach. but also for the efficacy thereof against the bloudy issues, and sanious vlcers of the wombe and kidneyes, as the Authors of the Aduersaria affirme. @


 The Place and Time.
These pleasant floures are sowen in gardens, especially for their great beauty.
They floure in August, and continue flourishing till the frost ouertake them, at what time they perish. But the Floramor would be sowne in a bed of hot horse-dung, with some earth strewed thereon in the end of March, and ordered as we doe muske Melons, and the like.


 The Names.
This plant is called in Greeke (...), because it doth not wither and wax old: in Latin, Amaranthus purpureus: in Duch, Samatbluomen: in Italian, Fior velluto: in French, Passe velours: in English, floure Gentie, purple Veluet floure, Floramor; and of some floure Velure.


 The Temperature, and Vertues.
Most attribute to floure Gentle a binding faculty, with a cold and dry temperature.
It is reported they stop all kinds of bleeding; which is not manifest by any apparantquality  in them, except peraduenture by the colour only that the red eares haue: for some are of opinion, that all red things stanch bleeding in any part of the body: because some things, as Bole armoniacke, sanguis Draconis, terra Sigillata, and such like of red colour doe stop bloud: But Galen, lib. 2. and 4. de simp. facult. plainly sheweth, that there can be no certainty gathered from the colours, touching the vertues of simple and compound medicines: wherefore they are ill persuaded, that thinke the floure Gentle to stanch bleeding, to stop the laske or bloody flix, because of the colour only, if they had no other reason to induce them thereto.



CHAP. 45. Of Orach.

 The Description.
1 THe Garden white Orach hath an high and (...) stalke, with broad sharpe pointed leaues like those of Blite, yet (...) and softer. The floures are small and yellow, growing in clusters: the seed round, and like a leafe (...) with a thin skin, or filme, and groweth in clusters. The root is wooddy and fibrous: the leaues and stalkes at the first are of a glittering gray colour, and sprinkled as it were with a meale or floure.
2 This differs from the former, only in that it is of an ouerworne purple colour.
@ 3 This might more fitly haue beene placed amongst the Blites; yet finding the figure here (though a contrary discription) I haue let it inioy the place. It hath a white and slender root, and it is somewhat like, yet lesse then the Blite, with narrow leaues somewhat resembling Basill: it hath aboundance of small floures, which are succeeded by a numerous sort of seeds, which are blacke and shining. @
4 There is a wilde kinde growing neere the sea, which hath pretty broad leaues, cut deepely about the edges, sharpe pointed, and couered ouer with a certaine mealinesse, so that the whole plant as well leaues, as stalkes and floures, looke of an hoary or gray colour. The stalks lye spred, on the shore or Beach, whereas it vsually growes.
@ 5 The common wilde Orach hath leaues vnequally sinuated, or cut in somewhat after the manner of an oaken leafe, and commonly of an ouerworne grayish colour: the floures and seeds are much like those of the garden, but much lesse.
6 This is like the last described, but the leaues are lesser and not so much diuided, the seeds grow also in the same manner as those of the precedent.
7 This also in the face and manner of growing is like those already described, but the leaues are long and narrow, sometimes a little notched: and from the shape of the leafe Lobell called it Atriplex Syluestris polygoni, aut Helxines folio.
8 This elegant Orach hath a single and small root, putting forth a few fibers, the stalkes are some foot high, diuided into many branches, and lying along vpon the ground; and vpon these grow leaues at certaine spaces whitish and vnequally diuided, somewhat after the manner of the wilde Orach; about the stalke or setting on of the leaues grow as it were little berries, somewhat like a little mulberry, and when these come to ripenesse, they are of an elegant red colour, and make a fine shew. The seed is small round and ash coloured. @


 The Place.
The Garden Oraches grow in most gardens. The wilde Oraches grow neere paths-(...) and ditch sides; but most commonly about dung-hils and such fat places. Sea Orach I haue (...) at Queeneborough, as also at Margate in the Ile of Thanet: and most places about the sea side. @ The eighth groweth only in some choice gardens, I haue seen it diuers times with Mr. Parkinson. @



@ 5 Atriplex syluestris vulgaris. Common wilde Orach.


@ 6 Atriplex syluestris altera. The other wilde Orach.


@ 7 Atriplex syluestris angustifolia. Narrow leaued wilde Orach.


@ 8 Atriplex baccifera. Berry-bearing Orach.





 The Time.
They floure and seed from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Garden Orach is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Atriplex, and Aureum Olus: in Dutch, (...): in French, Arrouches ou bonnes dames: in English, Orach, and Orage: in the Bohemian tongue, Leboda: Pliny hath made some difference betweene Atriplex and Chrysolachanum, as though they differed one from another; for of Atriplex he writeth in his twentieth booke; and of Chrysolachanum in his twenty eighth booke, and eighth chapter: where hee writeth thus, Chrysolachanum, saith he, groweth in Pinetum like Lettuce: it healeth cut sinewes if it be forthwith applied.
3 This wilde Orach hath beene called of Lobel, Polyspermon Cassani Bassi, or All seed.


 The Temperature.
Orach, saith Galen, is of temperature moist in the second degree, and cold in the first.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, That the garden Orach is both moist and cold, and that it is eaten boyled  as other sallad herbes are, and that it softneth and looseth the belly.
It consumeth away the swellings of the throat, whether it be laid on raw or sodden.
The seed being drunke with meade or honied water, is a remedie against the yellow jaundice. Galen thinketh, that for that cause it hath a clensing qualitie, and may open the stoppings of the  siuer. 

The figure which was in the second place was of (...) (...) 2. of (...). The figure in the fourth place was of the wild Orach, that I haue described in the (...) place.




CHAP. 46. Of Stinking Orach.


Atriplex olida. Stinking Orach.



 The Description.
STinking Orach growes flat vpon the ground and is a base and low plant with many weak and feeble branches, whereupon doe grow small leaues of a grayish colour, sprinkled ouer with a certaine kinde of dusty mealinesse, in shape like the leaues of Basill: amongst which leaues here and there confusedly be the seeds dispersed, as it were nothing but dust or ashes. The whole plant is of a most loathsome sauour or smel; vpon which plant if any should chance to rest and sleepe, he might very well report to his friends, that he had reposed himselfe among the chiese of Scoggins heires.


 The Place.
It groweth vpon dunghills, and in the most filthy places that may be found, as also about the common pissing places of great princes and Noblemens houses. Sometime it is found in places neere bricke kilns and old walls, which doth somewhat alter his smell, which is like tosted cheese: but that which groweth in his naturall place smells like stinking salt-fish, whereof it tooke his name Garosmus.


 The Time.
It is an herbe for a yeare, which springeth vp, and when the seed is ripe it perisheth, and recouereth it selfe againe of his owne seed; so that if it be gotten into a ground, it cannot be destroyed.


 The Names.
Stinking Orach is called of Cordus, Garosmus, because it smelleth like stinking fish: it is likewise  called Tragium Germanicum, and Atriplex (...) olens, by Pena and Lobel: for it smelleth more stinking than the rammish male Goat: whereupon some by a figure haue called it Vulvaria: and it may be called in English, stinking Mother-wort.


 The Nature and Vertues.
There hath been little or nothing set down by the Antients, either of his nature or vertues, notwithstanding  it hath beene thought profitable, by reason of his stinking smell, for such as are troubled with the mother: for as Hyppocrates saith, when the mother doth stifle or strangle, such things are to be applied vnto the (...) as haue a ranke and stinking smell.



CHAP. 47. Of Goose-foot.

 The Description.
1 GOose-foot is a common herbe, and thought to be a kinde of Orach: it riseth vp with a stalke a cubit high or higher, somewhat chamfered and branched: the leaues be broad, smooth, sharpe pointed, shining, hauing certaine deepe cuts about the edges, and resembling the foot of a goose: the floures be small, something red: the seed standeth in clusters vpon the top of the branches, being very like the seed of wilde Orach, and the root is diuided into sundry strings.
@ 2 This differs from the last described, in that the leaues are sharper cut, and more diuided, the seed somewhat smaller, and the colour of the whole plant is a deeper or darker greene.


@ 1 Atriplex syluestris latifolia, siue Pes Anserinus. Goose-foot.


@ 2 Atriplex syluestris latifolia (...). The other Goose-foot.




 The Place.
It growes plentifully in obscure places neere old walls and high-waies, and in desart places.


 The Time.
It flourisheth when the Orach doth, whereof this is a wilde kinde.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists haue called it Pes anserinus, and Chenopodium, of the likenesse the leaues haue with the foot of a Goose: in English, Goose-foot, and wilde Orach.



 The Temperature.
This herbe is cold and moist, and that no lesser than Orach, but as it appeareth more cold


 The Vertues.
It is reported that it killeth swine if they do eate thereof: it is not vsed in Physicke: and (...) lesse as a sallade herbe.



CHAP. 48. Of English Mercurie.


Bonus Henricus. English Mercurie, or good Henrie.



 The Description.
GOod Henrie called Tota bona, so named of the later Herbarists, is accounted of them to be one of the Dockes, but not properly. This bringeth forth very many thicke stalkes, set with leaues two foot high; on the branches wherof towards the top stand greene floures in clusters, thicke thrust together. The seed is flat like that of the Orach, whereof this is a kinde. The leaues be fastened to long foote-stalkes, broad behinde, and sharpe pointed, fashioned like the leaues of Aron, or Wake-robin, white, or grayish of colour, and as it were couered ouer with a fine meale: in handling it is fat and olious, with a very thicke root, and parted into many diuisions, of a yellow colour within, like the sharpe pointed Docke.


 The Place.
It is commonly found in vntilled places, and among rubbish neere common waies, old walls, and by hedges in fields.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly especially.


 The Names.
It is called of some (...) Anserinus, and Tota bona: in English, All-Good, and Good Henrie: in Cambridgshire it is called Good king Harry: the Germanes call it Guter Heinrick, of a certaine good qualitie it hath, as they also name a certaine pernicious herbe, Malus Henricus, or bad Henry. It is taken for a kinde of Mercurie, but vnproperly, for that it hath no participation with Mercurie, either in forme or quality, except yee will call euery herbe Mercurie which hath power to loose the belly.


 The Temperature.
Bonus Henricus, or Good Henrie is moderately hot and dry, clensing and scouring withall.


 The Vertues.
The leaues boiled with other pot-herbes and eaten, maketh the body soluble.
The same brused and laid vpon greene wounds, or foale and old vlcers, doth scoure, mundisie  and heale them.




CHAP. 49. Of Spinach.


Spinacia. Spinach.



 The Description.
1 SPinach is a kinde of Blite, after (...) notwithstanding I rather take it (...) kinde of Orach. It bringeth (...) (...) and tender leaues of a darke greene colour, full (...) juice, sharpe pointed, and in the largest part (...) neather end square; parted oftentimes with a deepe gash on either side next to the (...) foot-stalke: the stalke is round, a foot high, (...) within: on the tops of the branches stand little floures in clusters, in whose places doth (...) (...) prickly seed. The root consisteth of many small threds.
2 There is another sort found in our (...) like vnto the former in goodnesse, as also in (...), sauing that the leaues are not so great, (...) (...) deepely gasht or indented: and the seed (...) prickles at all, for which cause it is called (...) Spinach.


 The Place.
It is sowne in gardens without any great (...): or industrie, and forsaketh not any ground being but indifferent fertill.


 The Time.
It may be sowne almost at any time of (...) yeere, but being sowne in the spring it quickly groweth vp, and commeth to perfection within two moneths: but that which is sowne in the fall of the leafe groweth not so soone to perfection, yet continueth all the win terand seedeth presently vpon the first spring.


 The Names.
It is called in these daies Spinachia: of some, Spinacheum olus: of others, Hispanicum olus: (...) nameth it (...): the Arabians and Serapio call it Hispane: the Germanes, Spinet: in (...), Spinage and Spinach: in French, Espinas.


 The Nature.
Spinach is euidently cold and moist almost in the second degree, but rather moist. It is (...) the pot-herbes whose substance is waterie, and almost without taste, and therefore quickly (...) deth and looseth the bellie.


 The Vertues.
It is eaten boiled, but it yeeldeth little or no nourishment at all: it is something windie, and  easily causeth a desire to vomit: it is vsed in sallades when it is young and tender.
This herbe of all other pot-herbes and sallade herbes maketh the greatest diuersitie of (...) and sallades.



CHAP. 50. Of Pellitorie of the wall.

 The Description.
PEllitorie of the wall hath round tender stalkes somewhat browne or reddish of colour and somewhat shining: the leaues be rough like to the leaues of Mercurie, nothing (...) about the edges. The floures be small, growing close to the (...): the seed is blacke and very small, couered with a rough huske which hangeth fast vpon garments: the root is somewhat reddish.



Parietaria. Pellitorie of the wall.




 The Place.
It groweth neere to old walls in the moist corners of Churches and stone buildings, among rubbish and such like places.


 The Time.
It commeth vp in May: it seedeth in (...) and August (...) the root onely continueth and (...) to be sound in Winter.


 The Names.
It (...) commonly called (...), or by a (...) word (...), because it groweth (...) to (...): and (...) the same cause it is named of (...) (...): also (...) of (...) and (...) of the (...) y. There is also another (...) (...) (...) (...): some call it (...), of (...) which somtimes seed hereon: (...), (...). and (...), because it serueth to scoure glasses, pipkins, and such like: it is called in high-(...), Tag vnd nacht: in Spanish, (...) del muro: in English, Pellitorie of the wall: in French, (...).


 The Temperature.
Pellitorie of the wall (as Galen saith) hath force to scoure, and is something cold and moist.


 The Vertues.
Pellitory of the wall boyled, and the (...) of it drunken, helpeth such as are vexed with an old cough, the grauell and stone, and is good against the difficultie of making water, and stopping of the same, not onely inwardly, but also (...) applied vpon the region of the bladder, in manner of a fomentation or warme bathing, with spunges or double clouts, or such like.
Dioscorides saith, That the iuyce tempered with Ceruse or white leade maketh a good ointment  against Saint Anthonies fire and the Shingles: and mixed with the Cerot of Alcanna, or with the male Goats tallow, it helpeth the gout in the feet: which (...) also (...), Lib. (...). cap. 17.
It is applied (saith he) to paines of the feet with Goats suet and wax of Cyprus; where in stead  of wax of Cyprus there must be put the (...) of Alcanna.
Dioscorides addeth, That the iuyce hereof is a remedy for old (...), and taketh away hot swellings  of the almonds in the throat, if it be vsed in a gargarisine, or otherwise applied: it mitigateth also the paines of the eares, being poured in with oile of Roses mixed therewith.
It is affirmed, That if three ounces of the iuyce be drunke it prouoketh vrine out of hand.
The leaues tempered with oyle of sweet almonds in manner of a pultesse, and laid to the pained parts, is a remedie for them that be troabled with the stone, and that can hardly make water.



CHAP. 51. Of French Mercurie.

 The Kindes.
THere be two kindes of Mercury reckoned for good, and yet both somtimes wilde; besides two wilde neuer found in gardens, vnlesse they be brought thither.


 The Description.
1 THe male garden Mercurie hath tender stalks full of (...) and branches, whereupon do grow greene leaues like Pellitorie of the wall, but snipt about the edges: (...) which come forth two hairy bullets round, and ioyned together like those of Goosegrasse or Cleuers, each containing in it selfe one small round seed the root is tender, and (...) of white hairy strings.
2 The female is like vnto the sormer in leaues, stalks, and manner of growing, differing but in  the floures and seed: for this kinde hath a greater quantitie of floures and seed growing together like little clusters of grapes, of a yellowish colour. The seed for the most part is lost before it can be gathered.


1 Mercurialis mas. Male Mercurie.


2 Mercurialis foemina. Female Mercurie.




 The Place.
French Mercurie is sowen in Kitchen gardens among pot-herbes; in Vineyards, and in moist shadowie places: I found it vnder the dropping of the Bishops house at Rochester; from whence I brought a plant or two into my garden, since which time I cannot rid my garden from it.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish all the Sommer long.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke, (...) and (...) or Mercurie his herbe; whereupon the Latines call it Mercurialis: it is called in Italian, Mercorella: in English, French Mercurie: in French, Mercuriale, Vignoble, and Foirelle, quia Fluidam laxamue alvum reddit, Gallobelgae enim foize and foizeus, ventris Fluorem vocant.


 The Temperature.
Mercury is hot and dry, yet not aboue the second degree: it hath a cleansing facultie, and (as Galen writerh) a digesting qualitie also.


 The Vertues.
It is vsed in our age in clisters, and thought very good to clense and scoure away the excrements  and other filth contained in the guts. It serueth to purge the belly, being eaten or otherwise taken, voiding out of the belly not only the excrements, but also phlegme and choler. Dioscorides reporteth, that the decoction hereof purgeth waterish humors.
The leaues stamped with butter, and applied to the fundament, prouoketh to the stoole; and the  herbe bruised and made vp in manner of a pessary, cleanseth the mother, and helpeth conception.
Costaeus in his booke of the nature of plants saith, that the iuyce of Mercurie, Hollihocks, and purslane  mixed together, and the hands bathed therein, defendeth them from burning, if they be thrust into boyling leade.




CHAP. 52. Of Wilde Mercurie.


@ 1 Cynocrambe. Dogs Mercury.


The figure of the (...) was omitted, and in stead thereof was put the figure of Phyllon (...).

 2 Phyllon arrhenogonon, siue (...), Male childrens Mercury.


3 Phyllon Thelygonon, siue Foeminificum. Childrens Mercurie, the female.



 The Description.
1 DOgs Mercurie is somewhat like vnto the garden Mercury, sauing the leaues hereof are greater, and the stalke not so tender, and yet very (...), growing to the height of a cubit, without any branches at all, with smal yellow floures. The seed is like the female Mercurie. @ It is also found like the male Mercurie, as you see them both exprest in the figure; and so there is both male and female of this Mercury also @
2 Male childrens Mercury hath three or foure stalkes, or moe: the leaues be somwhat long; not much vnlike the leaues of the oliue tree, couered ouer with a soft downe or (...) gray of colour; and the seed also like those of Spurge, growing two together, being first of an ash-colour, but after turne to a blew.
@ 3 This is much in shape like to the last described, but the stalkes are weaker, and haue more leaues vpon them; the (...) also are small and mossy, and they grow vpon long (...), whereas the seeds of the other are (...) to very short ones: the seed is (...) in round little heads, being sometimes (...), otherwhiles three or more in a cluster. @



 The Place.
They grow in woods and copses, in the borders of fields, and among bushes and hedges. (...) But the two last described are not in England, for any thing that I know. @
The Dogs Mercurie I haue found in many places about Green-hithe, Swaines-(...) (...), Grauesend, and South-fleet in Kent; in Hampsted wood, and all the villages thereabout, (...) miles from London.


 The Time.
These flourish all the Sommer long, vntill the extreame frost do pull them downe.


 The Names.
Dogs Mercurie is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Canina, and Brassica Canina, and (...) syluesiris: in English, Dogs Cole, and Dogs Mercury.
Childrens Mercury is called Phyllon thelygonon, and Phyllon Arrhenogonon.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These wilde kindes of Mercurie are not vsed in physicke; notwithstanding it is thought they agree as well in nature as qualitie with the other kindes of Mercury.
@ It is reported by the Antients, that the male Phyllon conduces to the generation of boyes, and  the female to girles.
At Salamantica they giue and much commend the decoction of either of these against the bitings  of a mad dog.
The Moores at Granado vse them frequently in womens diseases. @ 



CHAP. 53. Of Torne-sole.


1 Heliotropium maius. Great Torne-sole.


The second and third figures were formerly transposed: the fourth was the figure of the (...) Scorpion-(...) described in the fourth place, in the (...) (...) Chapter.

 2 Heliotropium minus. Small Torne-sole.



 The Kindes.
THere be foure sorts of Torne-sole, differing one from another in many notable points, as in greatnesse and smallnesse, in colour of floures, in forme and shape.



The description.
1 THe great Tornesole hath great straight stalks couered with a white hairy cotton, especially about the top; the leaues are soft and hairy in handling, in shape like the leaues of Basill: the floures grow at the top (...) the branches, in colour white, thicke (...) in rowes vpon one side of the stalke, which stalke doth bend or turne backward (...) (...) (...) of a scorpion: the root is small and hard.
2 The small Tornesole hath many little and weake branches trailing vpon the ground, where upon doe grow small leaues, like those of the lesser Basill. The floures doe grow without any certaine order, amongst the leaues and tender branches, gray of colour, with a little spot of (...) in the middest, the which turne into crooked tailes like those of the precedent, but not altogether so much.


The second and third figures were formerly transposed: the fourth was the figure of the (...) Scorpion-(...) described in the fourth place, in the (...) (...) Chapter.

 3 Heliotropium supinum Clusij and L'obelij. (...) Tornesole.


4 Heliotropium Tricoccum, Widowwaile Tornsole.


3 Hairy Tornesole hath many feeble and weake branches trailing vpon the ground, set with small leaues, lesser than the great (...), of which it is a kinde, hauing the seed in small (...) husks, which do turne back like the (...) of a scorpion, iust after the manner of the first described.
4 This kinde of Tornesole hath leaues very like to those of the great Tornsole, but of a blacker greene colour: the floures be yellow and vnprofitable; for they are not succeeded by the (...), but after them commeth out the fruit hanging vpon small (...)-stalks three square, and in euery corner there is a small seed like to (...) of the Tychimales; the root is (...) and threddy.


 The Place.
Tornsole, as Dioscorides saith, doth grow in fennie grounds and neere vnto pooles and lakes. They are strangers in England as yet: It doth grow about Montpelier in Languedock, where it is had in great vse to staine and die clouts withall, wherewith through Europe meat is coloured.


 The Time.
They flourish especially in the Sommer solstice, or about the time when the sun entreth into Cancer.


 The Names.
The Graecians call it Heliotropium: the Latines keepe these names, Heliotropium magnum,  and Scorpiurum: of Ruellius, Herba Cancri: it is named Heliotropium, not because is is turned about at the daily motion of the sun, but by reason it flowreth in the sommer solstice, at which time the sun being farthest gone from the Aequinoctiall circle, returneth to the same: and Scorpiurum of the twiggie tops, that bow backeward like a scorpions taile: of the Italians, Tornesole bobo; in French, Tournsol: some thinke it to be Herba Clytiae, into which the Poets feigne Clytia to be metamorphosed; whence one hath these verses:

Herba velut Clytiae semper petit obuia solem,
Sic pia mens Christum, quo prece spectet, habet.



 The Nature.
Tornsole, as Paulus Aegineta writeth, is hot and dry, and of a binding faculty.


 The Vertues.
A good handfull of great Tornsole boyled in wine, and drunke, doth gently purge the body  of hot cholericke humours and tough clammie or slimie flegme.
The same boyled in wine and drunke is good against the stingings of Scorpions, or other venomous  beasts, and is very good to be applyed outwardly vpon the griefe or wound.
The seed stamped and layd vpon warts and such like excrescences, or superfluous out-growings, causeth them to fall away.
The small Tornesole and his seed boyled with Hyssope, Cresses, and salt-peter and drunke, driueth  forth flat and round wormes.
With the small Tornsole they in France doe die linnen rags and clouts into a perfect purple  colour, wherewith cookes and confectioners doe colour iellies, wines, meates, and sundry confectures: which clouts in shops be called Tornsole, after the name of the herbe.



CHAP. 54. Of Scorpion Grasse.

 The Description.
1 SCorpion grasse hath many smooth, plaine, euen leaues, of a darke greene colour; stalks small, feeble and weake, trailing vpon the ground, and occupying a great circuit in respect of the plant. The floures grow vpon long and slender foot-stalks, of colour yellow, in shape like to the floures of broome; after which succeed long, crooked, rough cods, in shape and colour like vnto a Caterpiller; wherein is contained yellowish seed like vnto a kidney in forme. The roote is small and tender the whole plant perisheth when the seed is ripe.
2 There is another Scorpion grasse, found among (or rather resembling) pease and tares, and thereupon called Scorpioides Leguminosa, which hath small and tender roots like small threds; branches many, weake and tender, trailing vpon the ground, if there be nothing to take hold vpon with his clasping and crooked seed vessels; otherwise it rampeth vpon whatsoeuer is neere vnto it. The leaues be fewe and small: the floures very little and yellow of colour: the seed followeth, little and blackish, conteined in little cods, like vnto the taile of a Scorpion.
3 There is another sort almost in euery shallow grauelly running streame, hauing leaues like to Becabunga or Brooklime. The floures grow at the top of tender fat greene stalkes, blew of colour, and sometimes with a spot of yellow among the blew; the whole branch of floures doe turne themselues likewise round like the scorpions taile.
There is also another growing in watrie places, with leaues like innto Anagallis aquatica, or water Chickweed, hauing like slender stalkes and branches as the former, and the floures not vnlike, sauing that the floures of this are of a light blew or watched colour, somewhat bigger, and layd more open, whereby the yellow spot is better seene.
4 There is likewise another sort growing vpon most dry grauelly and barren ditch bankes, with leaues like those of or Mouse-(...): this is called Myosotis scorpioides; it hath rough and hairy leaues, of an ouerworne russet colour: the floures doe grow vpon weake, feeble, and rough branches, as is all the rest of the plant. They likewise grow for the mostpart vpon one side of the stalke, blew of colour, with a like little spot of yellow as the others, turning themselues backe againe like the taile of a Scorpion.

There is another of the land called Myosotis Scorpioides repens, like the former: but the floures are thicker thrust together, and doe not grow all vpon one side as the other, and part of the floures are blew, and part purple, confusedly mixt together.


 The Place.
1, 2 These Scorpion grasses grow not wilde in England, notwithstanding I haue receiued seed of the first from beyond the seas, and haue dispersed them through England, which are esteemed of gentlewomen for the beauty and strangenesse of the crooked cods resembling Caterpillers.
The others doe grow in waters and streames, as also on drie and barren bankes.


 The Time.
The first floureth from May to the end of August: the others I haue found all the sommer long.


 The Names.
@ 1 Fabius Columna iudges this to be the Clymenon of Dioscorides: others call it Scorpioides, and Scorpioides bupleuri folio.
2 This is the Scorpioides of Matthiolus, Dod. Lobell, and others; and I iudge it was this plant our Author in this place intended, and not the Scorpioides Leguminosa of the Aduersaria, for that hath not a few leaues, but many vpon one rib; and besides, Dodonaeus, whom in descriptions and history our Author chiefely followes, describes this immediatly after the other: Guillandinus, Caesalpinus, and Bauhine iudge it to be the Telephium of Dioscorides.
3 This and the next want no names, for almost euery writer hath giuen them seuerall ones: Brunfelsius called it Cynoglossa minor: Tragus, Tabernamontanus, and our Author (page 537. of the former edition) haue it vnder the name of Euphrasia Caerulea: Dodonaeus cals it Scorpioides foemina: Lonicerus, Leontopodium; Caesalpinus, Heliotropium minus in palustribus: Cordus and Thalius, Echium palustre.
4 This is Auricula muris minor tertia; Euphrasia quarta, and Pilosella sylvestris of Tragus: Scorpioides mas of Dodonaeus; Alsine Myosotis: and Myosotis hirsuta repens of Lobell; Heliotropium minus alterum of Caesalpinus; Echium minimum of (...); and Echium palustre alterum of Thalius our Authour had it thrise: first in the precedent chapter, by the name of Heliotropium rectum, with a figure: secondly in this present chapter; without a figure: and thirdly pag. 514. also with a figure vnder the name of Pilosella flore caeruleo. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
There is not any thing remembred of the temperature: yet Dioscorides saith, that the laeues of  Scorpion grasse applyed to the place, is a present remedy against the stinging of Scorpions: and likewise boyled in wine and drunke, preuaileth against the said bitings, as also of adders, snakes, and such venomous beasts: being made in an vnguent with oile, wax, and a little gum Elemni, is profitable against such hurts as require a healing medicine.



CHAP. 55. Of Nightshade.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers Nightshades, whereof some are of the garden; and some that loue the fields, and yet euery of them found wilde; whereof some cause sleepinesse euen vnto death: others cause sleepinesse, and yet Physicall: and others very profitable vnto the health of man, as shall be declared in their seuerall vertues.


 The Description.
1 GArden Nightshade hath round stalkes a foot high, and full of branches, whereon are set leaues of a blackish colour, soft and full of iuice, in shape like to leaues of Basill, but much greater: among which doe grow small white floures with yellow pointals in the middle; which being past, there succeed round berries, greene at the first, and blacke when they be ripe, like those of Iuy: the root is white, and full of hairy strings.
@ 2 The root of this is long; pretty thicke and hard, being couered with a brownish skin; from this root grow vp many smal stalks of the height of a cubit and better, somewhat thick withall: the leaues that grow alongst the stalke are like those of the Quince tree, thicke, white, soft and downye. The floures grow about the stalke at the setting on of the leafe, somewhat long and of a pale colour, diuided into soure parts, which are succeeded by seeds contained in hairy or woolly receptacles: which when they come to ripenesse are red, or of a reddish saffron colour. @


 The Place.
This Nightshade commeth vp in many places, and not only in gardens, of which not withstanding

1 Scorpioides Bupleuri folio, Penae and L'Obelij. Scorpion grasse, or Caterpillers.@ 2 Scorpioides (...). Matthiolus his Scorpion (...).@ 3 (...) scorpioides palustris. Water Scorpion grasse.@ 4 Myosotis scorpioides aruensis (...), Mouse-eare Scorpion grasse. it hath taken his surname, and in which it is often found growing with other herbes; but also neere common high waies, the borders of fields, by old walls and ruinous places.
@ 2 This growes not with vs, but in hotter Countries Clusius found it growing among rubbish at Malago in Spaine. @


1 Solanum Hortense. Garden Nightshade.


@ 2 Solanum (...). Sleepie Nightshade.




 The Time.
It flowreth in Sommer, and oftentimes till Autumne be well spent; and then the fruit commeth to ripenesse.
@ 2 This Clusius found in flower and with the seede ripe in Februarie; for it liueth many yeares in hot Countries, but in cold it is but an annuall. @


 The Names.
It is called of the Graecians (...): of the Latines, Solanum, and Solanum Hortense: in shops, Solatrum: of some, Morella, Vua Lupina, and Vua Vulpis: in Spanish likewise; Morella, and Yerua Mora: Marcellus an old Phisicke writer, and diuers others of his time called it Strumum: Plinie in his 27. booke chap. 8. sheweth that it is called Cucubalus: both these words are likewise extant in (...) among the confused names of Nightshade; who comprehending all the kindes of Nightshade together in one chapter; being so many, hath strangely and absurdly confounded their names, In English it is called Garden Nightshade, Morel, and Petie Morell: in French, Morelle, Gallobelgis: feu ardent: quiamedetur igni sacro.


 The Temperature.
Nightshade (as Galen saith in his booke of the faculties of simple medicines) is vsed for those infirmities that haue need of cooling and binding; for these two qualities it hath in the second degree: which thing also hee affirmeth in his booke of the faculties of nourishments, where hee saith that there is no pot-herbe which wee vse to eat that hath so great astriction or binding as Nightshade hath; and therefore Physitious do worthily vse it, and that seldome as a nourishment, but alwaies as a medicine.


 The Vertues.
1 Dioscorides writeth, that Nightshade is good against S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, paine  of the head, the heart burning or heat of the stomacke, and other like accidents proceeding of (...) and biting humours. Notwithstanding that it hath these vertues, yet it is not alwaies good that it should be applied vnto those (...), for that many times there hapneth more dangers by applying  of these remedies, than of the disease it selfe: for as (...) writeth in the 6. book of his Aphorismes, the 25. particular, that it is not good, that S. (...) fire should be driuen from the outward parts to the inward. And likewise in his Prognosticks he saith, that it is necessary that S. Anthonies sire should breake forth, and that it is death to haue it driuen in; which is to (...) (...) not onely of S. Anthonies fire, but also of other like burstings out procured by (...). For by vsing of these kindes of cooling and repelling medicines, the bad, corrupt, and sharpe (...) are driuen backe inwardly to the chiese and principall parts, which cannot be done without great danger and hazard of life. And therefore we must not vnaduisedly, lightly, or rashly (...) such kinde of medicines vpon the comming out of Saint Anthonies fire, the shingles, or such (...) pimples and blemishes of the skinne.
The iuice of the greene leaues of Garden Nightshade mixed with Barley meale, is very (...) applied vnto Saint Anthonies fire, and to all hot inflammations.
The iuice mixed with oile of Roses, Ceruse, and Littarge of gold, and applied, is more (...) and effectuall to the purposes before set downe.
The Figure in the second place was of the (...) (...), or (...) (...), treated of at large in the 61. Chap of this Booke, and (...) (...) (...) (...) here: and in stead thereof another put in the place.

 Neither the iuice heereof, nor any other part is vsually giuen inwardly, yet it may without  any danger.
The leaues stamped are profitably put into the ointment of Popler buds, called (...) (...), and it is good in all other ointments made for the same purpose.
@ 2 The barke of the root of Sleepie Nightshade, taken in the weight of 31. hath a (...) qualitie; yet is it milder then Opium, and the fruit thereof vehemently prouokes vrine. But (as Pliny saith) the remedies hereof are not of such esteeme that we should long insist vpon them, especially seeing wee are furnished with such store of medicines lesse harmefull, yet seruing (...) the same purpose. @



CHAP. 56. Of sleepy Nightshade.


Solanum Laethale. Dwale, or deadly Nightshade.



 The Description.
DWale or sleeping Nightshade (...) round blackish stalkes six foot high, wherupon do grow great broad (...) of a darke greene colour; among which doe grow small hollow flowers bel fashion, of an ouerworne purple colour; in the place wherof come forthgreatround berrios of the bignesse of the blacke cherry, greene at the (...), but when they be ripe of the color of (...) iette or burnished horne, soft and full of purple iuice: among which iuice lie the (...) like the berries of Iuy: the root is very great, thicke, and long lasting.


The Place.
It groweth in vntoiled places neere vnto high waies and the sea marshes, and such like places.
It groweth very plentifully in Holland in Lincolnshire, and in the Ile of Ely at a place called Walsoken, neere vnto Wisbitch
I found it growing without the gate of Highgate neere vnto a pound or pinsold on the left hand.


The Time.
This flourisheth all the Sommer and Spring, beareth his seed and flower in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
It is called of Dioscorides, (...): of Theophrastus, (...): of the Latines, (...)

somniferum, or sleeping Nightshade; and Solanum laethale, or deadly Nightshade; and Solanum (...), raging Nightshade: of some, Apollinaris minor vlticana, and Herba Opsago: in English, Dwale, or sleeping Nightshade: the Venetians and Italians call it Bella dona: the Germanes, Dollwurtz: the low Dutch, Dulle besien: in French, Morelle mortelle: it commeth very neere vnto (...) his Mandragoras, (which differeth from Dioscorides his Mandragoras.)


 The Nature.
It is cold euen in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
This kinde of Nightshade causeth sleep, troubleth the minde, bringeth madnesse if a few of the  berries be inwardly taken, but if moe be giuen they also kill and bring present death. (...) in his 6. booke doth likewise write of Mandrake in this manner; Mandrake causeth sleepe, and if also much of it be taken it bringeth death.
The greene leaues of deadly Nightshade may with great aduice be vsed in such cases at Pettimorrell: but if you will follow my counsell, deale not with the same in any case, and banish it from your gardens and the vse of it also, being a plant so furious and deadly: for it bringeth such as haue eaten thereof into a dead sleepe wherein many haue died, as hath been often seen and prooued by experience both in England and else where. But to giue you an example heereof it shall not be amisse: It came to passe that three boyes of Wisbich in the Ile of Ely did eate of the pleasant and beautifull fruite hereof, two whereof died in lesse than eight houres after that they had eaten of them. The third child had a quantitie of hony and water mixed together giuen him to drinke, causing him to vomit often: God blessed this meanes and the child recouered. Banish therefore these pernicious plants out of your gardens, and all places neere to your houses, where children or women with child do resort, which do oftentimes long and lust after things most vile and filthie; and much more after a berry of a bright shining blacke colour, and of such great beautie, as it were able to allure any such to eate thereof.
The leaues heereof laid vnto the temples cause sleepe, especially if they be imbibed or moistened  in wine vineger. Iteaseth the intollerable paines of the head-ache proceeding of heate in furious agues, causing rest being applied as aforesaid.



CHAP. 57. Of winter Cherries.

 The Description.
1 THe red winter Cherrie bringeth forth stalkes a cubit long, round, slender, smooth, and somewhat reddish, reeling this way and that way by reason of his weakenesse, not able to stand vpright without a supporter: whereupon do grow leaues not vnlike to those of common Nightshade, but greater; among which leaues come forth white floures, consisting of fiue small leaues: in the middle of which leaues standeth out a berry, greene at the first, and red when it is (...), in colour of our common Cherry and of the same bignesse, inclosed in a thinne huske or little bladder, it is of a pale reddish colour, in which berrie is conteined many small flat seeds of a pale colour. The rootes be long, not vnlike to the rootes of Couch-grasse, ramping and creeping within the vpper crust of the earth farre abroad, whereby it encreaseth greatly.
2 The blacke winter Cherrie hath weake and slender stalkes somewhat crested, and like vnto the tendrels of the vine, casting it selfe all about, and taketh hold of such things as are next vnto it: whereupon are set jagged leaues deepely indented or cut about the edges almost to the middle ribbe. The floures be very small and white standing vpon long foote-stalkes or stemmes. The skinnie bladders succeed the floures, parted into three sells or chambers, euery of the which conteineth one seed and no more, of the bignesse of a small pease, and blacke of colour, hauing a marke of white colour vpon each berrie, in proportion of an heart. The roote is very small and threddie.


 The Place.
The red winter Cherrie groweth vpon old broken walls, about the borders of fieldes, and in moist shadowie places, and in most gardens, where some cherish it for the beautie of the berries, and others for the great and worthy vertues thereof.
2 The blacke winter Cherrie is brought out of Spaine and Italy, or other hot regions, from whence I haue had of those blacke seeds marked with the shape of a mans hart, white, as aforesaid: and haueplanted them in my garden where they haue borne floures, but haue perished before the fruit could grow to maturitie, by reason of those vnseasonable yeeres, 1594. 95. 96.



 The Time.
The red winter Cherrie beareth his floures and fruite in August.
The blacke beareth them at the same time, where it doth naturally grow.


 The Names.
The red winter (...) is called in Greeke, (...) in Latine, Vesicaria, and Solanum Vesicarium: in shops, (...): Plinie in his 21. booke nameth it Halicacabus, and Vesicaria, of the little bladders: or as the same Author writeth, because it is good for the bladder and the stone: it is called in Spanish, Vexiga de porro: in French, Alquequenges, Bagenauldes, and Cerises d'outre mer: in English, red Nightshade, Winter Cherries, and Alkakengie.


1 (...) (...). Red winter Cherries.


2 Halicacabum Peregrinum. Blacke winter Cherries.


The blacke winter Cherrie is called Halacacabum Peregrinum, Vesicaria Peregrina, or strange (...) Cherrie: of Pena and Lobel it is called, Cor Indum, Cor Indicum: of others, Pisum (...). in English, the Indian heart, or heart pease: some haue taken it to be Dorycnion, but they are greatly deceiued, being in truth not any of the Nightshades; it rather seemeth to agree with the graine named of Serapio, Abrong, or Abrugi, of which he writeth in his 153. chapter in these words: It is a little graine spotted with blacke and white, round, and like the graine Maiz, with which notes this doth agree.


 The Temperature.
The red winter Cherrie is thought to be cold and drie, and of subtile parts.
The leaues differ not from the temperature of the garden Nightshade, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The fruite brused and put to infuse or steepe in white wine two or three houres, and (...) boiled  two or three bublings, straining it, and putting to the decoction a little sugar and cinnamon, and drunke, preuaileth very mightily against the stopping of vrine, the stone and grauell, the difficultie and sharpenes of making water, and such like diseases: if the griefe be old, the greater quantity must be taken; if new and not great, the lesse: it scoureth away the yellow jaundise also, as some write.




CHAP. 58. Of the Maruell of the World.


Mirabilia Peruuiana flore luteo. The maruell of Peru with yellowish floures.


@ Mirabilia Peruuiana flore albo. The maruell of Peru with white floures.



The description.
THis admirable plant called the maruell of Peru, or the maruell of the World, springeth forth of the ground like vnto Basill in leaues; amongst which it sendeth out a stalke two cubits and a halfe high, os the thickenesse of a finger; full of iuice, very firme, and of a yellowish greene colour, knotted or (...) with ioints somewhat bunching forth, of purplish color, as in the female Balsamina: which stalke diuideth it selfe into sundrie branches or boughes, and those also knottie like the stalke. His branches are decked with leaues growing by couples at the ioints like the leaues of wilde Peascods, greene, fleshie, and sull of ioints; which beeing rubbed doe yeeld the like vnpleasant smell as wilde Peascods doe, and are in taste also verie vnsauorie, yet in the latter end they leaue a taste and sharpe smacke of Tabaco. The stalkes towards the top are garnished with long hollow single flowers, folded, as it were, into fiue parts before they be opened; but being fully blowne doe resemble the flowers of Tabaco, not ending into sharpe corners, but blunt and round as the slowers of Bindeweede, and larger than the flowers of Tabaco, glittering oftentimes with a sine purple or Crimson colour; many times of an horse-flesh; sometime yellow; sometime pale, and sometime resembling an old red or yellow colour; sometime whitish, and most commonly two colours occupying halfe the flower, or intercoursing the whole flower with streakes and orderly streames, now yellow, now purple, diuided through the whole; hauing sometime great, sometime little spots of a purple colour, sprinkled and scattered in a most variable order, and braue mixture. The ground or field of the whole flower is either pale, red, yellow, or white, containing in the middle of the hollownesse a pricke or pointell set round about with sixe small strings or chiues. The flowers are verie sweet and pleasant, resembling the (...) or white Daffodill, and are very suddenly fading; for at night they are flowred wide open, and so continue vntill eight of the clocke the next morning: at which time they beginne to close or shut vp (after the manner of the Bindeweede) especially if the weather be very hot: but if the aire be more temperate they remaine open the whole day, and are closed onely at night, and so perish, one flower lasting

but onely one day, like the true Ephemerum or Hemerocailis. This maruellous varietie doth not without cause bring admiration to all that obserue it. For if the flowers be gathered and reserued in seuerall papers, and compared with those flowers that will spring and flourish the next day, you shall easily perceiue that one is not like another in colour, though you should compare one hundreth which slower one day, and another hundred which you gathered the next day; and so from day to day during the time of their (...). The cups and huskes which containe and embrace the flowers are diuided into fiue pointed sections, which are greene, and, as it were, consisting of skinnes, wherein is contained one seede and no more, couered with a blackish skinne, hauing a blunt point whereon the flower groweth; but on the end next the cup or huske it is (...) with a little fiue cornered crowne. The seed is as bigge as a pepper corne, which os it (...) (...) with any light motion. Within this seede is contained a white kernell, which being bruised, resolueth into a very white pulpe like starch. The root is thicke and like vnto a great (...), outwardly blacke, and within white, sharpe in taste, wherewith is mingled a superficiall sweetnes. It bringeth new floures from Iuly vnto October in infinite number, yea euen vntill the (...) (...) cause the whole plant to perish: notwithstanding it may be reserned in pots, and set in chambers and cellars that are warme, and so defended from the iniurie of our cold climate; prouided alwaies that there be not any water cast vpon the pot, or set forth to take any moisture in the aire vntill March following; at which time it must bee taken forth of the pot and replanted in the garden. By this meanes I haue preserued many (though to small purpose) because I haue sowne seeds that haue borne floures in as ample manner and in as good time as those reserued plants.
Of this wonderfull herbe there be other sorts, but not so amiable (...) so full of varietie, and (...) the most part their floures are ail of one color. But I haue since by practise found out another way to keepe the roots for the yeare following with very little difficultie, which neuer faileth. At the first frost I dig vp the rootes and put vp or rather hide the roots in a butter ferkin, or such like (...), filled with the sand of a riuer, the which I suffer still to stand in some corner of a house where it neuer receiueth moisture vntill Aprill or the midst of March, if the weather be warme; at which time I take it from the sand and plant it in the garden, where it doth flourish exceeding well and increaseth by roots; which that doth not which was either sowne of seed the same yeare, nor those plants that were preserued after the other manner.


 The Place.
The seed of this strange plant was brought first into Spaine, from Peru, whereof it tooke his name Mirabilia Peruana, or (...): and since dispersed into all the parts of Europe: the which my selfe haue planted many yeares, and haue in some temperate yeares receiued both floures and ripe seed.


 The Time.
It is sowne in the midst of Aprill, and bringeth forth his variable floures in September, and perisheth with the first frost, except it be kept as aforesaid.


 The Names.
It is called in Peru of those Indians there, Hachal. Of others after their name Hachal Indi: of the high and low Dutch, Solanum Odoriferum: of some, Iasminum mexicanum: and of Carolus (...), Admirabilia Peruuiana: in English rather the Maruell of the World, than of Peru alone.


 The Nature and Vertues.
We haue not as yet any instructions from the people of India concerning the nature or vertues of this plant: the which is esteemed as yet rather for his rarenesse, beautie, and sweetnesse of his floures, than for any vertues knowne; but it is a pleasant plant to decke the gardens of the curious. Howbeit Iacobus Antonius Cortusus of Padua hath by experience found out, that two (...) of the root thereof taken inwardly doth very notably purge waterish humours.



CHAP. 59. Of Madde Apples.

 The Description.
RAging Apples hath a round stalke of two foot high, diuided into sundry branches, set with broad leaues somewhat indented about the edges, not vnlike the leaues of white (...), of a darke browne greene colour, somewhat rough. Among the which come the floures

of a white colour, and some timeschanging into purple, made of six parts, wide open like a starre with certaine yellow chiues or thrums in the middle; which beeing past the fruit (...) in place, set in a cornered cup or huske after the manner of the great Nightshade, great and somewhat long, of the bignesse of a swans egge, and somtimes much greater, of a white color, sometimes yellow, and often browne, wherein is contained small flat seed of a yellow colour. The root (...) thicke, with many threds fastned thereto.


Malainsana. Madde or raging Apples.




 The Place.
This plant groweth in Egypt almost euery where in sandie fields euen of it selfe, bringing forth fruit of the bignesse of a great Cucumber, as Petrus Bellonius reporteth in the second booke of his singular obseruations.
Wee had the same in our London Gardens, where it hath borne floures; but the Winter approching before the time of ripening, it perished: notwithstanding it came to beare fruit of the bignesse of a goose egge one extraordinarie temperate yeare, as I did see in the garden of a worshipfull Merchant Mr. Haruie in Limestreet, but neuer to the full ripenesse.


 The Time.
This herbe must be sowne in Aprill in a bed of hot horse doung, as Muske-Melons are, and floureth in August.


 The Names.
Petrus Bellonius hath iudged it to bee Malinathalla (...). In the Dukedome of Millaine it is called Melongena: and of some, Melanzana: in Latine, Mala (...): and in English, Mad Apples in the Germaine tongue, Dollopffel: In Spanish, Verangenes.


 The Nature.
The hearbe is cold almost in the fourth degree.


 The vse and danger.
The people of Tolledo do eat them with great deuotion being boiled with fat flesh, putting  thereto some scraped cheese, which they do keepe in vineger, houie, or salt pickell all Winter to procure lust.
Petrus Bellonius, and Hermolaus (...), report that in Egypt and Barbary they vse to eat the  (...) of Mala insana boiled or rosted vnder ashes, with oile, vineger, and pepper, as people vse to eat Mushroms. But I rather wish English men to content themselues with the meat and sauce of our owne Countrey, than with fruit and sauce eaten with such perill: for doubtlesse these apples haue a mischienous qualitie, the vse whereof is vtterly to be forsaken. And as wee see and know many haue eaten and doe eat Mushroms more for wantonnesse than for need: for there are two kindes thereof (...) and deadly, which being in the handling of an vnskilful cooke, may procure vntimely death. Therefore it is better to esteeme this plant and haue him in the Garden for your pleasure and the rarenesse threof, than for any vertue or good qualities yet knowne.



CHAP. 60. Of Apples of Loue.

 The Description.
TThe Apple of Loue bringeth forth very long round stalkes or branches, fat and full of iuice, trailing vpon the ground, not able to sustaine himselfe vpright by reason of the tendernesse of the (...), and also the great weight of the leaues and fruit wherewith it is surcharged the leaues are great and deeply cut or iagged about the edges, not vnlike to the leaues of Agrimony, but greater, and of a whiter greene colour: among which come (...) yellow floures growing

short stems or foot stalks, clustering together in bunches: which being fallen, there do come in place faire and goodly apples, chamfered, vncuen, and bunched out in many places; of a bright shining red colour, and the bignesse of a goose egge or a large pippin. The pulpe or meat is verie full of moisture, soft, reddish, and of the substance of a wheat plumme. The seed is small, flat and rough: the root small and threddie: the whole Plant is of a ranke and stinking sauour.
There hath happened vnto my hands another sort, agreeing very notably with the former, as well in leaues and stalkes as also in floures and roots, onely the fruit hereof was yellow of colour, wherein consisted the difference.


Poma (...). Apples of Loue.




 The Place.
Apples of Loue grow in Spaine, Italie, and such hot Countrics, from whence my selfe haue receiued seeds for my garden, where they do increase and prosper.


 The Time.
It is sowne in the beginning of Aprill in a bed of hot horse dung, after the maner of (...) Melons and such like cold fruits.


 The Names.
The Apple of Loue is called in Latine (...) Aureum, Poma Amoris, and Lycopersicum: of some, (...): in English, Apples of Loue, and Golden Apples: in French, Pommes (...). Howbeit there be other golden Apples whereof the Poets doe fable, growing in the Gardens of the daughters of Hesperus, which a Dragon was appointed to keepe, who, as they fable, was killed by Hercules.


 The Temperature.
The Golden Apple, with the whole herbe it selfe is cold, yet not fully so cold as Mandrake, after the opinion of (...). But in my iudgement it is very cold, (...) perhaps in the highest degree of coldnesse: my reason is, because I haue in the hottest time of Sommer cut away the superfluous branches from the mother root, and cast them away carelesly in the allies of my garden, the which (notwithstanding the extreme heat of the Sun, the hardnesse of the trodden allies, and at that time when no raine at all did fall) haue growne as fresh where I cast them, as before I did cut them off; which argueth the great coldnesse contained therein. True it is, that it doth (...) also a great moisture wherewith the plant is possessed, but as I haue said, not without great cold, which I leaue to euery mans censure.


 The Vertues.
In Spaine and those hot Regions they vse to eat the Apples prepared and boiled with (...), salt, and oile: but they yeeld very little nourishment to the bodie, and the same nought and (...).
Likewise they doe eat the Apples with oile, vineger and pepper mixed together for sauce to  their meat, euen as we in these cold Countries doe Mustard.



CHAP. 61. Of the Aethiopian Apple.

 The Description.
THe Apple of Aethiopia hath large leaues of a whitish greene colour, deepely indented about the edges, almost to the middle rib; the which middle rib is armed with a few sharpe prickles. The floures be white, consisting of six small leaues, with a certain yellow pointel in the midst.

Mala Aethiopica. Apples of Aethiopia.
The fruit is round, and bunched with vneuen lobes or bankes lesser than the golden Apple, of colour red, and of a firme and sollid substance; wherein are contained small flat seeds. The root is small and threddy.


 The Place.
The seeds of this plant haue beene brought vnto vs out of Spaine, and also sent into (...) and Flanders: but to what perfection it hath come vnto in those parts I am ignorant, but mine perished at the first approch of Winter. His first original was from Aethiopia, whereof it tooke his name.


 The Time.
This Plant must be sowen as Muske-Melons, and at the same time. They floure in Iuly, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
In English (...) haue thought good to call it the Aethiopian Apple, for the reason before alledged: in Latine, Mala Aethiopica: of some it hath been thought to be Malinathalla. @ This is the Solanum pomiferum of Lobel and others; by which name our Author also formerly had it, in the fiftieth chapter of the former edition. @


 The Nature.
The temperature agreeth with the Apple of Loue.


 The Vertucs.
These Apples are not vsed in physicke that I can reade of; onely they are vsed for a sauce and seruice vnto rich mens tables to be eaten, being first boyled in the broth of fat flesh with pepper and salt, and haue a lesse hurtfull (...) than either mad apples or golden Apples.



CHAP. 62. Of Thornie-Apples.

 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of Thorny-apples are oftentimes aboue a cubit and a halfe high, seldome higher, an inch thicke, vpright and straight, hauing very few branches, sometimes none at all, but one vpright stemme; whereupon doe grow leaues smooth and euen, little or nothing indented about the edges, longer and broader than the leaues of Night-shade, (...) of the mad Apples. The floures come forth of long toothed cups, great, white of the forme of a bell, or like the floures of the great Withwinde that rampeth in hedges; but altogether greater and wider at the mouth, sharpe cornered at the brimmes, with certaine white chiues or threds in the middest, of a strong ponticke sauour, offending the head when it is smelled vnto: in the place of the floure commeth vp round fruit full of short and blunt prickles, of the bignesse of a greene Wall-nut when it is at the biggest, in which are the seeds of the bignesse of tares or of Mandrakes, and of the same forme. The herbe it selfe is of a strong sauor, and doth stuffe the head, and causeth drowsinesse. The root is small and threddy.
2 There is another kinde hereof altogether greater than the former, whose seeds I receiued of the right honorable the Lord Edward Zouch; which he brought from Constantinople, and of his liberalitie did bestow them vpon me, as also many other rare and strange seeds; and it is that Thornapple that I haue dispersed through this land, whereof at this present I haue great vse in Surgery, as well in burnings and scaldings, as also in virulent and maligne vlcers, apostumes, and such like. The which plant hath a very great stalke in fertile ground, bigger than a mans arme, smooth, and greene of colour, which a little aboue the ground diuideth it selfe into sundry branches or armes, in manner of an hedge tree; whereupon are placed many great leaues cut and indented deepely

about the edges, with many vneuen sharpe corners: among these leaues come white round floures made of one piece in manner of a bell, shutting it selfe vp close toward night, as do the floures of the great Binde-weed, whereunto it is very like, of a sweet smell, but so strong, that it offends the sences. The fruit followeth round, sometimes of the fashion of an egge, set about on euerie part with most sharpe prickles; wherein is contained very much seed of the bignesse of tares, and of the same fashion. The root is thicke, made of great and small strings: the whole plant is sowen, (...) his fruit, and perisheth the same yeare. @ There are are some varieties of this plant, in the colour and doublenesse of the floures. @


1 Stramonium Peregrinum. The Apple of Peru.


2 Stramonium spinosum. Thorny Apples of Peru.




 The Place.
1 This plant is rare and strange as yet in England: I receiued seeds thereof from Iohn Robin of Paris, an excellent Herbarist; which did grow and bare floures, but perished before the fruit came to ripenesse.
2 The Thorne-apple was brought in seed from Constantinople by the right honourable the Lord Edward Zouch, and giuen vnto me, and beareth fruit and ripe seed.


 The Time.
The first is to be sowen in a bed (...) horse-dung, as we do cucumbers and Muske-melons.
The other may be sowen in March or Aprill, as other seeds are.


 The Names.
The first of these Thorne-apples may be called in Latine, Stramonia, and Pomum, or Malum spinosum: of some, Corona regia, and Melospinum: The Grecians of our time name it (...), or rather (...); as though they should say, a nut stuffing, and causing drowsinesse and disquiet sleepe: the Italians, Paracoculi: it seemeth to Valerius Cordus to be Hyoscyamus Peruvianus, or Henbane of Peru: (...) (...) doubteth whether it should be inserted among the Night-shades as a kinde thereof: of (...) and others it is thought to be Nux methel: Serapio, cap. 375. saith, That Nux (...) is like vnto Nux vomica; the seed whereof is like that of Mandrake: the huske is rough or full of prickles; the taste pleasing and strong: the qualitie thereof is cold in the fourth degree. Which description agreeth herewith, except in the forme or shape it should haue with Nux vomica: Anguillara suspecteth it to be Hippomanes which Theocritus mentioneth, wherewith in his second Eclog

he sheweth that horses are made mad: for Crateuas, whom Theocritus his Scholiast doth cite, writeth, That the plant of Hippomanes hath a fruit full of prickles, as hath the fruit of wilde Cucumbers. In English it may be called Thorne-apple, or the Apple of Peru.
@ The words of Theocritus, Eidyll. 2. are these:
(...).
Which is thus in English:

Hippomanes'mongst the Arcadians springs, by which euen all
The Colts and agile Mares in mountaines mad do fall.

Now in the Greeke Scholia amongst the Expositions there is this: (...), etc. That is; (...) saith, That the plant hath a fruit like the wilde Cucumber, but blacker; the leaues are like a poppie, but thorny or prickly. Thus I expound these words of the Greeke Scholiast, being pag. (...) of the edition set forth by Dan. Heinsius, Ann. Dom. 1603. Iulius Scaliger blames Theocritus, because he calls Hippomanes (...) a Plant: but Heinsius, as you may see in his notes vpon Theocritus, pag. 120, probably iudges, that (...) in this place signifies nothing but (...) a Thing [growing.] Such as are curious may haue recourse to the places quoted, where they may finde it more largely handled than is fit for me in this place to insist vpon. There is no plant at this day knowne, in mine opinion, whereto Crateuas his description may be more fitly referred, than to the Papauer spinosum, or (...) infernalis, which we shall hereafter describe. @


 The Nature.
The whole plant is cold in the fourth degree, and of a drowsie and numming qualitie, not inferior to Mandrake.


 The Vertues.
The iuyce of Thorne-apples boiled with hogs grease to the forme of an vnguent or salue, cureth  all inflammations whatsoeuer, all manner of burnings or scaldings, as well of fire, water, boyling leade, gun-pouder, as that which comes by lightning, and that in very short time, as my self haue found by my dayly practise, to my great credit and profit. The first experience came from Colchester, where Mistresse Lobel a Merchants wise there being most grieuously burned with lightning, and not finding ease or cure in any other thing, by this found helpewhen all hope was past, by the report of Mr. William Ramme, publique Notarie of the said towne, was perfectly cured.
The leaues stamped small, and boiled with oyle Oliue vntill the herbes be as it were burnt, then  strained and set to the fire againe with some wax, rosin, and a little Turpentine, and made into a salue, doth most speedily cure old vlcers, new and fresh wounds, vlcers vpon the glandulous part of the yard, and other sores of hard curation.



CHAP. 63. Of Bitter-sweet, or Wooddy Nightshade.

 The Description.
BItter-sweet bringeth forth wooddy stalkes as doth the Vine, parted into many slender creeping branches, by which it climeth and taketh hold of hedges and shrubs next vnto it. The barke of the oldest stalkes are rough and whitish, of the colour of ashes, with the outward rinde of a bright greene colour, but the yonger branches are greene as are the leaues: the wood brittle, hauing in it a spongie pith; it is clad with long leaues, smooth, sharpe pointed, lesser than those of the Binde-weed. At the lower part of the same leaues doth grow on either side one small or lesser leafe like vnto two eares. The floures be small, and somewhat clustered together, consisting of fiue little leaues apiece, of a perfect blew colour, with a certaine pricke or yellow pointall in the middle: which being past, there do come in place faire berries, more long than round, at the first green, but very red when they be ripe; of a sweet taste at the first, but after very vnpleasant, of a strong sauour, growing together in clusters like burnished coral. The root is of a meane bignesse, and full (...) strings.
I haue found another sort which bringeth forth most pleasant white floures with yellow pointals in the middle, in other respects agreeing with the former.


 The Place.
Bitter-sweet doth grow in moist places about ditches, riuers, and hedges, almost euery where.



Amara-dulcis. Bitter-sweet.


The other sort with the white floures I found in a ditch side against the right honorable the Earle of Sussex his garden wall at his house in Bermonsey street by London, as you go from the court which is full of trees, (...) farme house neere thereunto.


 The Time.
The leaues come forth in the Spring, the floures in Iuly, the berries are (...) in August.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists haue named this plant Dulcamara, Amarodulcis, and Amaradulcis; that is in Greeke, (...): they call it also (...) lignosum, and Siliquastrum: Pliny calleth it Melortum: Theophrastus, Vit is syluestris: in English we call it Bitter-sweet, and Wooddy Nightshade. But euery Author must for his credit say somthing, although to small purpose; for Vit is syluestris is that which we call our Ladies Seale, which is no kinde of Nightshade: for Tamus and Vitu sylucstris are both one; as likewise Solanum lignosum or Fruticosum; and also Solanum rubrum: whereas indeed it is no such plant, nor any of the Nightshades, although I haue followed others in placing it here. Therfore those that vse to mixe the berries thereof in compositions of diuers cooling ointments, in stead of the berries of Nightshade haue committed the greater errour; for the fruit of this is not cold at all, but hot, as forthwith shall be shewed. Dioscorides saith it is (...) altera; describing it by the description of those with white floures aforesaid, whereunto it doth very well agree. @ Dioscorides (...) his Muscoso (...) with a mossy floure, that is, such an one as consists of small chiues or threds, which can by no meanes be agreeable to the floure of this plant. @


 The Temperature.
The leaues and fruit of Bitter-sweet are in temperature hot and dry, clensing and wasting away.


 The (...).
The (...) of the leaues is reported to remoue the stoppings of the liuer and gall; and (...) be drunke with good successe against the yellow jaundice.
The iuyce is good for those that haue fallen from high places, and haue beene thereby bruised, or dry beaten: for it is thought to dissolue bloud congealed or cluttered any where in the intrals, and to heale the hurt places.
Hieronymus Tragus teacheth to make a decoction of Wine with the wood finely sliced and cut  into small pieces; which he reporteth to purge gently both by vrine and siege those that (...) the dropsie or jaundice.
Dioscorides doth ascribe vnto Cyclaminus altcra, or Bitter-sweet with white floures as I conceiue  it, the like faculties.
The fruit (saith he) being drunke in the weight of one dram, with three ounces of white wine, for forty dayes together helpeth the spleene.
It is drunke against difficultie of breathing: it throughly cleanseth women that are newly  brought a bed.



CHAP. 64. Of Binde-weed Nightshade.

 The Description.
INchanters Night-shade hath leaues like to Peti-morel, sharpe at the point like vnto Spinage: the stalke is straight and vpright, very brittle, two foot high: the floures are white tending to carnation, with certaine small browne chiues in the midst: the seed is contained in small round

Circaea Lutctiana. Inchanters Night-shade.
bullets, rough and very hairy. The roots are tough, and many in number, (...) themselues deep into the ground, and (...) far abroad; whereby it doth greatly increase, insomuch that when it hath once taken fast rooting, it can hardly with great labour be rooted out or destroyed.


 The Place.
It groweth in obscure and darke places, about dung-hills, and in vntoiled grounds, by path-wayes and such like.


 The Time.
It flourisheth from Iune to the end of September.


 The Names.
It is called of Lobel, Circaea Lutctiana: in English, Inchanters Night-shade, or Binde-weed Nightshade.


 The Nature and Vertues.
There is no vse of this herbe either in physicke or Surgerie that I can reade of; which hath happened by the corruption of time and the errour of some who haue taken (...) for Circaea; in which errour they haue still persisted vnto this day, attributing vnto Circaea the vertues of Mandragoras; by which means there hath not any thing been said of the true Circaea, by reason, as I haue said, that Mandragoras hath been called Circaea: but doubtlesse it hath the vertue of Garden Night-shade, and may serue in stead thereof without error.



CHAP. 65. Of Mandrake.

 The Description.
THe male Mandrake hath great broad long smooth leaues of a darke greene colour, flat spred vpon the ground: among which come vp the floures of a pale whitish colour, standing euery one vpon a single small and weake foot-stalke of a whitish greene colour: in their places grow round Apples of a yellowish colour, smooth, soft, and glittering, of a strong smell; in which are contained flat and smooth seeds in fashion of a little kidney, like those of the Thorne-apple. The root is long, thicke, whitish, diuided many times into two or three parts resembling the legs of a man, with other parts of his body adioyning thereto, as the priuy part, as it hath beene reported; whereas in truth it is no otherwise than in the roots of carrots, parseneps, and such like, forked or diuided into two or more parts, which Nature taketh no account of. There hath been many ridiculous tales brought vp of this plant, whether of old wiues, or some runnagate Surgeons or physicke-mongers I know not, (a title bad enough for them) but sure some one or moe that sought to make themselues famous and skilfull aboue others, were the first brochers of that errour I speake of. They adde further, That it (...) neuer or very seldome to be found growing naturally but vnder a gallowes, where the matter that hath fallen from the dead body hath giuen it the shape of a man; and the matter of a woman, the substance of a female plant, with many other such doltish dreams. They fable further and affirme, That he who would take vp a plant thereof must tie a dog therunto to pull it vp, which will giue agreat shreeke at the digging vp; otherwise if a man should do it, he should surely die in short space after. Besides many fables of louing matters, too full of scurrilitie to set forth in print, which I forbeare to speake of. All which dreames and old wiues tales you shall from henceforth cast out of your books and memory; knowing this, that they are all and euerie part of them false and most vntrue: for I my selfe and my seruants also haue digged vp, planted, and replanted very many, and vet neuer could either perceiue shape of man or woman, but sometimes one straight root, sometimes two, and often six or seuen branches comming from the maine

great root, (...) as Nature list to bestow vpon it, as to other plants. But the idle drones that haue little or nothing to do but eate and drinke, haue bestowed some of their time in caruing the roots of Brionie, forming them to the shape of men and women: which falsifying practise hath confirmed the errour amongst the simple and vnlearned people, who haue taken them vpon their report to be the true Mandrakes.
The female Mandrake is like vnto the male, sauing that the leaues hereof be of a more (...) (...) darke greene colour; and the fruit is long like a peare, and the other is round like an apple.


Mandragoras mas and foemina. The male and female Mandrake.




 The Place.
Mandrake groweth in hot Regions (...) (...) woods and mountaines, as in mount Garganus in Apulia, and such like places; we (...) them onely planted in gardens, and are not elsewhere to be sound in England.


 The Time.
They spring vp with their leaues in March, and sloure in the end of Aprill: the fruit is ripe in August.


 The Names.
Mandrake is called of the Grecians (...): of diuers, (...), and Circaea, of (...) the witch, who by art could procure (...): for it hath beene thought that the (...) hereof serueth to win loue: of some, (...) (...), and (...): some of the Latines haue called it Terrae malum, and Terrestre malum, and Canina malus: Shops, and also other Nations doe receiue the Greeke name. Dioscorides saith, That the male is called of diuers (...): and describeth also another Mandrake by the name of (...), which, as much as can be gathered by the description, is like the male, but lesse in all parts: in English we cal it Mandrake, Mandrage, and Mandragon.


 The Temperature.
Mandrake hath a predominate cold facultie, as Galen saith, that is to say cold in the third degree: but the root is cold in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
(...) dath particularly set downe many faculties hereof; of which notwithstanding there  be none proper vnto it, sauing those that depend vpon the drowsie and sleeping power thereof: which qualitie consisteth more in the root than in any other part.
The Apples are milder, and are reported that they may be eaten, being boyled with pepper and  other hot spices.
Galen saith that the Apples are something cold and moist, and that the barke of the root is of  greatest strength, and doth not onely coole, but also dry.
The iuyce of the leaues is very profitably put into the ointment called Populeon, and all cooling  ointments.
The iuyce drawne forth of the roots dried, and taken in small quantitie, purgeth the belly exceedingly  from flegme and melancholike humors.
It is good to be put into medicines and colliries that do mitigate the paine of the eyes; and put  vnder a pessarie it draweth forth the dead childe and secondine.
The greene leaues stamped with barrowes grease and barley meale, coole all hot swellings and  inflammations; and they haue vertue to consume apostumes and hot vlcers, being bruised and applied thereon.
A suppositorie made with the same iuyce, and put into the (...) causeth sleepe.
The wine wherein the root hath beene boyled or infused prouoketh sleepe and asswageth paine.
The smell of the Apples moueth to sleepe likewise; but the iuyce worketh more effectually if  you take it in small quantitie.

Great and strange effects are supposed to be in the Mandrakes, to cause women to be fruitfull  and beare children, if they shall but carry the same neere vnto their bodies. Some doe from hence ground it, for that Rahel desired to haue her sisters Mandrakes (as the text is translated) but if we looke well into the circumstances which there we shall finde, we may rather deeme otherwise. Young (...) brought home amiable and sweet smelling floures (for so signifieth the Hebrew word, which is vsed Cantic. 7. 13. in the same sense:) and the lad brought them home, rather for their beauty and smell, than for their vertue. Now in the floures of Mandrake there is no such delectable or amiable smell as was in these amiable floures which (...) brought home. Besides, wee read not that Rahel conceiued hereupon, for Leah Iacobs wise had foure children before God granted that blessing of fruitfulnesse vnto Rahel. And last of all (which is my chiefest reason) Iacob was angry with Rahel when she said, Giue me children else I die: and demanded of her, whether he were in the stead of God or no, who had withheld from her the fruit of her body. And we know that the Prophet Dauid saith, Children and the fruit of the wombe are the inheritance, that commeth from the Lord, Psalm. 127.
Serapio, Auicen, and Paulus Aegineta doewrite, that the seed and fruit of Mandragoras taken  in drinke, doe clense the matrix or mother, and Dioscorides wrote the same long before them.
He that would know more hereof, may reade that chapter of doctor (...) his booke, concerning this matter, where he hath written largely and learnedly of this Simple.



CHAP. 66. Of Henbane.


1 Hyoscyamus Niger. Blacke Henbane.


2 Hyoscyamus Albus. White Henbane.



 The Description.
1 THe common blacke Henbane hath great and soft stalkes: leaues very broad, soft, and woolly, somewhat iagged, especially those that grow neere vnto the ground, and those that grow vpon the stalke, narrower, smaller, and sharper. The floures are bel fashion, of a faint yellowish white, and browne within towards the bottome; when the floures are

gone, there commeth hard knobby huskes, like small cups or boxes, wherein are small browne seeds.
2 The White Henbane is not much vnlike to the blacke, sauing that his leaues are smaller, whiter and more woolly, and the floures also whiter. The cods are like the other, but without pricks; it dieth in winter, and must likewise be sowne againe the next yeere.


@ 3 Hyoscyamus albus minor. The lesser White Henbane.


@ 4 Hyoscyamus albus Creticus. White Henbane of Candy


@ 3 This other white Henbane is much like the last described, but that it is lesser: the leaues smaller and rounder, hanging vpon pretty long stalkes, the floures and seed vessels are like those of the last mentioned.
4 This is softer and tenderer than the last described, the leaues also hang vpon long footstalkes, and are couered ouer with a soft downines: and they are somewhat broader, yet thinner and more sinuated than those of the white, and somewhat resemble the forme of a vine leafe, being snipt about the edges; the stalkes are also couered with a white downe. The floures are of a gold yellow, with a veluet coloured circle in their middles: the root is sufficiently thicke and large: Clusius had the figure and description of this from his friend Iaques Plateau, who had the plant growing of seed receiued from Candy.
5 The stalke of this growes some cubit high, being pretty stiffe, about the thickenesse of ones little finger, and couered ouer with a soft and white downe: the leaues grow dispersed vpon the stalk, not much vnlike those of the common kinde, but lesser and more diuided, and white (while they are young) couered with a slender and long downinesse: the top of the stalke is diuided into certaine branches that bend or hang downe their (...), which alternately amongst (...), lesser and vndiuided leaues carry cups like as the common one, ending in fiue pretty stiffe points, in which are contained floures at first somewhat like the common kinde, but afterwards, as they grow bigger, they change into an elegant red purplish colour, with deepe coloured veines: neither is the ring or middle part purple as in the common kinde, but whitish, hauing a purplish pointall, and fiue threds in the middle: the seeds and seed vessels are like those of the common kind. Clusius receiued the seed (...) from Paludanus returning from his trauailes into Syria and Egypt, wherefore he calls it Hyoscyamus Aegyptius, Egyptian Henbane. @



@ 5 Hyoscyamus slore rubello. Henbane with a reddish floure.




 The Place.
Blacke Henbane grows almost euerie where by high-wayes, in the borders of fields, about dung-hills and vntoiled places; the white Henbane is not found but in the gardens of those that loue physicall plants: the which groweth in my garden, and doth sow it selfe from yeare to yeare.


 The Time.
They spring out of the ground in May, bring forth their floures in August, and the seed is ripe in October.


 The Names.
Henbane is called of the Grecians, (...): of the Latines, Apollinaris, and (...) (...): of the Arabians, as Pliny saith, Altercum: of some, Faba (...), or Iupiters beame: of Pythagoras, Zoroastes, and (...) (...), Alterculum, (...), and Calicularis: of the Tuscanes, Fabulonia, and Faba lupina: of Matthaeus syluaticus, Dens Caballinus, Milimandrum, (...): of Iacobus a Manlijs, Herbapinnula: in shops it is called Iusquiamus, and Hyoscyamus: in English, Henbane in Italian, Hyosquiamo: in Spanish, Velenno: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Hannebane, Endormie: the other is called Hyoscyamus albus, or white Henbane.


 The Temperature.
These kindes of Henbane are cold in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
Henbane causeth drow sinesse, and mitigateth all kinde of paine: it is good against hot and  sharpe distillations of the eyes and other parts: it stayeth bleeding and the disease in women: it is applied to inflammations of the stones and other secret parts.
The leaues stamped with the ointment Populcon, made of poplar buds, asswageth the paine of the  gout, and the swellings of the stones, and the tumors of womens brests; and are good to be put into the same ointment, but in small quantitie
Towash the feet in th e (...) of Henbane causeth sleepe; or giuen in a clister it doth the  same; and also the often smelling to the floures.
The leaues, seed, and iuyce taken inwardly causeth an vnquiet sleepe like vnto the sleep of drunkennesse, which continueth long, and is deadly to the party.
The seed of white (...) is good against the cough, the falling of waterie humours into the  eyes or brest; against the inordinate flux (...) womens issues, and all other issues of bloud, taken in the weight of ten graines, with water wherein honey hath beene sodden.
The root boyled with vineger, and the same holden hot in the mouth, easeth the paine of the  teeth. The seed is vsed by Mountibanke Tooth-drawers which runne about the countrie, for to cause wormes come forth of mens teeth, by burning it in a chasing-dish with coles, the party holding his mouth ouer the fume thereof: but some crafty companions to gaine mony conuey small lute string into the water, persuading the patient that those small creeping beasts came out of his mouth or other parts which he intended to ease.




CHAP. 67. Of yellow Henbane, or English Tabaco.


Hyoscyamus luteus. Yellow Henbane.



 The Description.
YEllow Henbane groweth to the height of two cubits: the stalke is thicke, (...), and greene of colour, full of a spongeous pith, and is diuided into sundry branches set with smooth and euen leaues, thick, and ful of juice. The floures grow at the tops of the branches, orderly placed, of a pale yellow colour, something lesser than those of the blacke Henbane. The cups wherein the floures do stand are like, but lesser, tenderer, and without sharpe points, wherein is set the husk or cod somwhat (...), full of very small seed like the seed of Marjerome. The root is small and threddy.


 The Place.
Yellow Henbane is sowen in gardens, where it doth prosper exceedingly, insomuch that it cannot be destroyed where it hath once (...) it (...), and it is dispersed into the most parts of England.


 The Time.
It floureth in the Sommer moneths, and (...) till Autumne be farre spent, in which time the seed commeth to perfection.


 The Names.
Yellow Henbane is called Hyoscyamus (...): of some, Petum, and Petun: of others, (...), of Nicot a Frenchman that brought the seeds from the Indies, as also the seeds of the (...) Tabaco, whereof this hath beene taken for a kinde; insomuch that Lobel hath called it (...) Hyoscyamus, or doubtfull Henbane, as a plant participating of Henbane and Tabaco: and it is (...) of diuers in stead of Tabaco, and called by the same name, for that it hath beene brought from (...), a place so called in the Indies, as also from Virginia and Norembega, for Tabaco; which doubtlesse taken in (...) worketh the same kinde of drunkennesse that the right Tabaco doth. @ Some vse to call this (...), in English, being a name taken from the Latine. @


 The Nature.
This kinde of Henbane is thought of some to be cold and moist; but after Lobel it rather (...) than cooles at all, because of the biting taste, as also that rosenninesse or gummines it is (...) sessed of; which is euidently perceiued both in handling and chewing it in the mouth.


 The Vertues.
This herbe auaileth against all apostumes, tumors, inueterate vlcers, botches, and such like, (...) ing made into an vnguent or salue as followeth: Take of the greene leaues three pounds and an halfe, stampe them very small in a stone morter; of Oyle Oliue one quart; set them to boyle in (...) brasse pan or such like, vpon a gentle fire, continually stirring it vntill the herbes seem blacke, and will not boyle or bubble any more: then shall you haue an excellent greene oyle; which being strained from the (...) or drosse, put the cleare and strained oyle to the fire againe; adding thereto of wax halfe a pound, of rosen foure ounces, and of good Turpentine two ounces: melt them all together, and keepe it in pots for your vse, to cure inueterate vlcers, apostumes, burnings, greene wounds, and all cuts and hurts in the head; wherewith I haue gotten both crownes and credit.
It is vsed of some in stead of Tabaco, but to small purpose or profit, although it do stupifie and  dull the sences, and cause that kinde of giddinesse that Tabaco doth, and likewise spitting; which any other herbe of hot temperature will do, as Rosemary, Time, winter Sauorie, sweet Marjerome, and such like: any of the which I like better to be taken in smoke than this kinde of doubtfull henbane.




CHAP. 68. Of Tabaco, or Henbane of Peru.

 The Kindes.
THere be two sorts or kindes of Tabaco; one greater, the other lesser: the greater was brought into Europe out of the prouinces of America, which we call the West Indies; the other from Trinidada, an Island neere vnto the continent of the same Indies. Some haue added a third sort: and others make the yellow (...) a kinde thereof.


@ 1 Hyoscyamus Peruvianus. Tabaco or Henbane of Peru.


@ 2 Sana Sancta Indorum. Tabaco of Trinidada.




 The Description.
1 TAbaco, or Henbane of Peru hath very great stalkes of the bignesse of a childes (...), growing in fertile and well dunged ground of seuen or eight foot high, diuiding it selfe into sundry branches of great length; whereon are placed in most comely order very faire long leaues, broad, smooth, and sharpe pointed, (...), and of a light greene colour, so fastned about the stalke, that they seeme to embrace and compasse it about. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, in shape like a bell-floure, somewhat long and cornered, hollow within, of a light carnation (...), tending to whitenesse toward the brimmes. The seed is contained in long (...) pointed cods or seed-vessels like vnto the seed of yellow Henbane, but somewhat smaller and browner of colour. The root is great, thicke, and of a wooddy substance, with some (...) strings anexed thereunto.
2 Trinidada Tabaco hath a thicke tough and fibrous root, (...) which immediately rise vp long broad leaues and smooth, of a greenish colour, lesser than those of Peru: among which riseth vp a stalke diuiding it selfe at the ground into diuers branches, whereon are set confusedly the like leaues, but lesser: at the top of the stalks stand vp long necked hollow floures of a pale purple (...) to a blush colour: after which succeed the cods or seed-vessels, including many small seeds like vnto the seed of Marjerome. The whole plant perisheth at the first approch of Winter.



@ 3 Tabacum minimum. Dwarfe Tabaco.


@ 3 This third is an herbe some spanne or better long, not in face vnlike the precedent, neither defectiue in the hot and burning taste. The floures are much lesse than those of the yellow Henbane, and of a greenish yellow. The leaues are small, and narrower those of Sage of Ierusalem. The root is small and fibrous. @


 The Place.
These were first brought into Europe (...) of America, which is called the West Indies, in which is the prouince or countrey of Peru: but being now planted in the gardens of Europe it prospereth very well, and commeth from seed in one yeare to beare both floures and seed. The which I take to be better for the constitution of our bodies than that which is brought from India; and that growing in the Indies better for the people of the same Countrey: notwithstanding it is not so thought, nor receiued of our Tabaconists; for according to the English Prouerbe, Far fetcht and deare bought is best for Ladies.


 The Time.
Tabaco must be sowen in the most (...) (...) that may be found, carlesly cast abroad in the sowing, without raking it into the ground or any such paine or industrie taken as is requisite in the so ving of other seeds, as my self haue found by proofe, who haue experimented euery way to cause it quickly to grow: for I haue committed some to the earth in the end of March, some in Aprill, and some in the beginning of May, because I durst not hasard all my seed at one time, lest some vnkindely blast should happen after the sowing, which might be a great enemie thereunto.


 The Names.
The people of America call it Petun: Some, as Lobel and Pena, haue giuen it these Latine names, Sacra herba, Sancta herba, and Sana Sancta Indorum: and other, as Dodonaeus, call it Hyoscyamus (...), or Henbane of Peru: Nicolaus Monardus (...) it Tabacum. That it is Hyoscyami species, or a kind of Henbane, not onely the forme being like to yellow Henbane, but the qualitie also doth declare; for it bringeth drowsinesse, troubleth the sences, and maketh a man as it were drunke by taking of the fume onely; as Andrew Theuet testifieth, (and common experience sheweth:) of some it is called Nicotiana: the which I refer to the yellow Henbane, for distinctions sake.


 The Temperature.
It is hot and dry, and that in the second degree, as Monardis thinketh, and is withall of power to discusse or resolue, and to cleanse away filthy humors, hauing also a small astriction, and a stupifying or benumming qualitie, and it purgeth by the stoole: and Monardis writeth that it hath a certaine power to resist poyson. And to proue it to be of an hot temperatute, the biting qualitie of the leaues doth shew, which is easily perceiued by taste: also the greene leaues laid vpon vlcers in (...) parts may serue for a proofe of heate in this plant; because they do draw out filth and corrupted matter, which a cold Simple would neuer do. The leaues likewise being chewed draw forth flegme and water, as doth also the fume taken when the leaues are dried: which things declare that this is not a little (...); for what things soeuer, that being chewed or held in the mouth bring forth flegme and water, the same be all accounted hot; as the root of Pellitorie of Spaine, of Saxifrage, and other things of like power. Moreouer, the benumming qualitie hereof is not hard to be perceiued, for vpon the taking of the fume at the mouth there followeth an infirmitie like vnto drunkennesse, and many times sleepe; as after the taking of Opium: which also sheweth in the taste a biting qualitie, and therefore is not without heate; which when it is chewed

and inwardly taken, it doth forthwith shew, causing a certaine heat in the chest, and yet withall troubling the wits, as Petrus Bellonius in his third Booke of Singularities doth declare; where also hee sheweth, that the Turkes oftentimes doe vse Opium, and take one dramme and a halfe thereof at one time; without any other hurt following, sauing that they are thereupon (as it were) taken with a certaine light drunkennesse. So also this Tabaco being in taste biting, and in temperature hot, hath notwithstanding a benumming qualitie. Hereupon it seemeth to (...), that not onely this Henbane of Peru, but also the iuice of poppie otherwise called Opium, (...) of diuers parts; some biting and hot, and others extreame cold, that is to say, stupifying or benumming: if so bee that this benumming qualitie proceed of extreme cold (as Galen and all the old Physitions doe hold opinion) Then should this bee cold; but if the benumming facultie doth not depend of an extreme cold qualitie, but proceedeth of the effence of the substance; then Tabaco is not cold and benumming; but hot and benumming, and the latter not so much by reason of his temperature, as through the propertie of his substance; no otherwise than a purging medicine, which hath his sorce not from the temperature, but from the essence of the whole substance.


 The Vertues.
Nicolaus Monardis saith, that the (...) hereof are a remedy for the paine in the head called the  Megram or Migraime that hath beene of long continuance: and also for a cold stomacke; especially in children; and that it is good against the paines in the kidneies.
It is a present remedie for the fits of the Mother: it mitigateth the paine of the gout if it bee  rosted in hot embers and applied to the grieued part.
It is likewise a remedie for the tooth-ache, if the teeth and gums be rubbed with a linnen cloth  dipped in the iuice; and afterward a round ball of the leaues laid vnto the place.
The iuice boiled with Sugar in forme of a sirrup and inwardly taken, driueth forth wormes of  the bellie; if withall a leafe be laid to the Nauell.
The same doth likewise scoure and clense old and rotten vlcers, and bringeth them to perfect  digest ion as the same Author affirmeth.
In the Low Countreyes it is vsed against scabbes and filthinesse of the skinne, and for the cure  of wounds: but some hold opinion that it is to bee vsed but onely to hot and strong bodies: for they say that the vse is not safe in weake and old folkes: and for this cause, as it seemeth, the women in America (as Theuct sayth) abstayne from the hearbe Petun or Tabaco, and doe in no wise vse it.
The weight of foure ounces of the iuice heereof drunke purgeth both vpwards and downewards, and procureth after, a long and sound sleepe, as wee haue learned of a friend by obseruation, affirming that a strong Countreyman of a middle age, hauing a dropsie, tooke of it, and being wakened out of his sleepe, called for meat and drinke, and after that became perfectly whole.
Moreouer the same man reported, that he had cured many countriemen of agues with the distilled  water of the leaues drunke a little while besore the fit.
Likewise there is an oile to be taken out of the leaues that healeth merry-gals, kibed heels and  such like.
It is good against poison, and taketh away the malignitie thereof, if the iuice be giuen to drink  or the wounds made by venemous beasts be washed therewith.
The drie leaues are vsed to be taken in a pipe set on fire and suckt into the stomacke, and thrust  forth againe at the (...) against the pains of the head, rheumes, aches in any part of the body whereof soeuer the originall proceed, whether from France, Italy, Spaine, Indies, or from our familiar and best knowne diseases: those leaues doe palliate or ease for a time, but neuer performe any cure absolutely: for although they emptie the body of humours, yet the cause of the griefe cannot be so taken away. But some haue learned this principle, that repletion requireth euacuation; that is, (...) craueth emptinesse, and by euacuation assure themselues of health: But this doth not take away so much with it this day, but the next bringeth with it more: As for example, a Well doth neuer yeeld such store of water as when it is most drawne and emptied. My selfe speake by proofe, who haue cured of that infectious disease a great many; diuers of which had couered or kept vnder the sickenesse by the helpe of Tabaco as they thought, yet in the end haue beene constrained to haue vnto such an hard knot, a crabbed wedge, or else had vtterly perished.
Some vse to drinke it (as it is tearmed) for wantonnesse or rather custome, and cannot forbeare  it, no not in the midst of their dinner, which kind of taking is vnwholesome and very dangerous: although to take it seldome and that Physically is to be tolerated and may do some good: but I commend the syrrup aboue this (...) or smokie medicine.

It is taken of some physically in a pipe for that purpose once in a day at the most, and that in  the morning fasting against paines in the head, stomacke, and griefe in the brest and lungs: against catarrhes and rheumes, and such as haue gotten cold and hoarsenesse.
Some haue reported that it little preuaileth against an hot disease, and that it profiteth  an hot complexion nothing at all: but experience hath not shewed it to bee iniurious vnto either.
They that haue seene the proofe hereof haue credibly reported, that when the Moores and Indians  haue fainted either for want of food or rest, this hath beene a present remedie vnto them to supplie the one, and to helpe them to the other.
The priests and Inchanters of the hot countries do take the fume thereof vntill they be (...), that after they haue lien for dead three or foure houres, they may tell the people what wonders, visions, or illusions they haue seene, and so giue them a propheticall direction or foretelling ((...) we may trust the Diuell) of the successe of their businesse.
The (...) or distilled water of the first kind is very good against catarrhes, the dizzinesse of the  head, and rheumes that fall downe the eies, against the paine called the Megram, if either you applie it vnto the temples, or take one or two greene leaues, or a dry lease (...) ed in wine, and dried cunningly vpon the embers and laid thereto.
It cleereth the sight and taketh away the webs and (...) thereof, being annointed with the  iuice bloud warme.
The oile or iui ce dropped into the eares is good against deaseness; a cloth dipped in (...) same  and laid vpon the face, taketh away the lentils, rednesse, and spots thereof.
Many notable medicines are made hereof against the old and inueterate cough, against (...) or pectorall griefes, which if I should set downe at large, would require a peculiar Volume.
It is also giuen to such as are accustomed to swoune, and are troubled with the Collicke  and windinesse, against the Dropsie, the Wormes in children, the Piles and the Sciatica.
It is vsed in outward medicines either the herbe boiled with oile, waxe, rosin and turpentine, as  before is set downe in yellow Henbane, or the extraction thereof with salt, oile, balsame, the distilled water and such like, against tumours, apostumes, old vlcers, of hard curation, botches, scabbes, stinging with nettles, carbuncles, poisoned arrowes, and wounds made with gunnes or any other weapon.
It is excellent good in burnings and scaldings with fire, water, oile, lightning, or such like, boiled  with Hogges greace in forme of an Ointment, which I haue often prooued, and found most true, adding a little of the iuice of thorne apple leaues, spreading it vpon a cloth and so applying it.
I doe make hereof an excellent balsame to cure deepe wounds and punctures, made by some  narrow sharpe pointed weapon. Which balsame doth bring vp the flesh from the bottome verie speedily, and also heale simple cuts in the flesh according to the first intention, that is, to glew or soder the lips of the wound together, not procuring matter or corruption vnto it, as is commonly seene in the healing of wounds. The receit is this: Take oile of roses oile of S. Iohns (...), of either one pinte, the leaues of Tabaco stamped small in a stone morter two pounds, boile them together to the consumption of the iuice, straine it and put it to the fire againe, adding thereto of Venice Turpentine two ounces, of Olibanum and masticke of either halfe an ounce, in most fine and subtill pouder, the which you may at all times make an vnguent or salue by putting thereto wax and rosin to giue vnto it a stiffe body, which worketh exceeding well in maligne and virulent vlcers, as in wounds and punctures. I send this iewell vnto you women of all sorts, especially to such as cure and helpe the poore and impotent of your Countrey without reward. But vnto the beggerly rabble of witches, charmers, and such like couseners, that regard more to get money, than to helpe for charitie, I wish these few medicines far from their vnderstanding, and from those deceiuers whom I wish to be ignorant herein. But courteous gentlewomen, I may not for the malice that I doe beare vnto such, hide any thing from you of such importance: and therefore take one more that followeth, wherewith I haue done very many and good cures, although of small cost, but regard it not the lesse for that cause. Take the leaues of Tabaco two pound, hogges grease one  pound, stampe the herbe small in a stone morter, putting thereto a small cup full of red or claret wine, stir them well together, couer the morter from filth and so let it rest vntill morning; then put it to the fire and let it boile gently, continually stirring it vntill the consumption of the wine, straine it, and set it to the fire againe, putting thereto the (...) of the herbe one pound, of Venice turpentine foure ounces; boile them together to the consumption of the iuice, then adde therto of

the roots of round Aristolochia or Birthwoort in most fine pouder two ounces, sufficient waxe to giue it a body; the which keep for thy wounded poore neighbour, as also the old and filthy vlcers of the legs and other parts of such as haue need of helpe.
@ The figures were formerly transposed.



CHAP. 69. Of Tree Nightshade.


Amomum Plinij. Tree Nightshade.



 The Description.
THis rare and pleasant Plant, called tree Nightshade, is taken of some to be a kinde of Ginnie pepper, but not rightly; of others for a kinde of Nightshade, whose iudgement and censure I gladly admit; for that it doth more fitly answer it both in the forme and nature. It groweth vp like vnto a small shrubbe or wooddy hedge bush, two or three cubits high, couered with a greenish barke set with many small twiggie branches, and garnished with many long leaues very greene, like vnto those of the Peach tree. The floures are white, with a certaine yellow pricke or pointell in the middle, like vnto the floures of garden Nightshade. After which succeede small round berries verie red of colour, and of the same substance with Winter Cherries, wherein are contained little flat yellow seeds. The root is compact of many small (...) yellow strings.


 The Place.
It groweth not wilde in these cold regions, but we haue them in our gardens, rather for pleasure than profit, or any good qualitie as yet knowne.


 The Time.
It is kept in pots and tubs with earth and such like in houses during the extremity of Winter, because it cannot indure the coldnesse of our colde climate; and is set abroad into the Garden in March or Aprill: it floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Tree Nightshade is called in Latine Solanum Arborescens: of some, Strychnodendron: and some iudge it to be (...) of (...): it is Pseudocapsicum of Dodonaeus.


 The Nature and Vertues.
We haue not as yet any thing set downe as touching the temperature or vertues of this Plant, but it is referred of some to the kindes of Ginnie pepper, but without any reason at all; for Ginny pepper though it bring forth fruit very like in shape vnto this plant, yet in taste most vnlike, for that Capsicum or Ginny pepper is more sharpe in taste than our common pepper, and the other hath no taste of biting at all, but is like vnto the Berries of Garden Nightshade in taste, although they differ in colour: which hath moued some to call this plant red Nightshade, of the colour of the berries: and Tree Nightshade, of the wooddy substance which doth continue and grow from yeare to yeare: and Ginnie pepper dieth at the first approch of Winter.




CHAP. 70. Of Balme Apple, or Apple of Hierusalem.


1 Balsamina mas. The male Balsam Apple.


2 Balsamina foemina. The female Balsam Apple.



The Description.
1 THe male Balme Apple hath long, small, and tender branches, set with leaues like those of the vine; and the like small clasping tendrels wherewith it catcheth hold of such things as do grow neere vnto it, not able by reason of his weakenesse to stand vpright without some pole or other thing to support it. The floures consist of fiue small leaues of a meane bignesse, and are of a faint yellow colour: which being past, there doe come in place long Apples, something sharpe toward the point almost like an egge, rough all ouer as it were with small harmelesse prickles, red both within and without when they be ripe, and cleaue in sunder of themselues: in the Apple lieth great broad flat seeds, like those of Pompion or Citrull, but something blacke when they be withered. The root is threddie, and disperseth it selfe far abroad in the ground.
2 The female Balm Apple doth not a little differ from the former: it bringeth forth stalks not running or climing like the other, but a most thicke and fat truncke or stocke full of iuice, in substance like the stalks of Purslane, of a reddish color and somewhat shining. The leaues be long and narrow, in shape like those of Willow or the Peach tree, somewhat toothed or notched about the edges: among which grow the floures of an incarnate colour tending to blewnesse, hauing a small spur or taile annexed thereto as hath the Larks heele, of a faire light crimson colour: in their places come vp the fruit or Apples rough and hairy, but lesser than those of the former, yellow when they be ripe, which likewise cleaue asunder of themselues and cast abroad their seedes much (...) vnto Lentils, saith mine Author. But those which I haue from yeare to yeare in my Garden bring forth seed like the Cole-florey or Mustard seed; whether they be of two kindes, or the climate (...) alter the (...), it (...) disputable.



 The Place.
These plants do prosper best in hot Regions: they are strangers in England, and doe with great labour and industrie grow in these cold Countries.


 The Time.
They must be sowne in the beginning of Aprill in a bed of hot horse dung, euen as MuskeMelons, Cucumbers, and such like cold fruits are; and replanted abroad from the said bed into the most hot and fertile place of the Garden at such time as they haue gotten three leaues a (...).


 The Names.
Diuersly (...) this plant been named; some calling it by one name, and some by another, euery one as it seemed good to his fancie. Baptista Sardus calleth it Balsamina (...): others, Viticella, and Charantia, as also Pomum (...), or (...) of Hierusalem: in English, Balme (...) Italian, Caranza: in the Germane tongue, Balsam opffel: in French, Merueille some of the Latines haue called it Pomum mirabile, or maruellous Apples. It is thought to be named Balsamina, because the oile wherein the ripe Apples be steeped or infused, is taken to bee profitable for many things, as is Opobalsamum, or the liquour of the plant Balsamum.
The female Balsam Apple is likewise called (...), and oftentimes in the Neuter Gender Balsaminum: Gesner chooseth rather to name it Balsamina amygdaloides: (...) Cordus, Balsamella: others, Balsamina foemina: in English, the Female Balme Apples.


 The Nature.
The fruit or apples hereof, as also the leaues, doe notably drie, hauing withall a certaine moderate coldnesse very neere to a meane temperature, that is after some hot, in the first, and drie in the second degree.


 The (...).
The leaues are reported to heale greene wounds if they be bruised and laid thereon; and taken  with wine they are said to be a remedie sor the collicke; and an effectuall medicine for burstings and convulsions or crampes.
The leaues of the male Balsamina dried in the shadow, and beaten into pouder and giuen in  wine vnto those that are mortally wounded in the body, doth cure them inwardly, and helpeth also the Collicke.
The oile which is drawne forth of the fruit doth cure all greene and fresh wounds as the true  naturall Balsam: it helpeth the crampes and convulsions, and the shrinking of sinewes, being annointed therewith.
It profiteth women that are in great extremitie of childe-birth in taking away the paine of the  matrix, causing easie deliuerance beeing applied to the place, and annointed vpon their bellies, or cast into the matrix with a syring, and easeth the dolour of the inward parts.
It cureth the Hemorrhoides and all other paines of the fundament, being thereto applied with  lint of old clouts.
The leaues drunken in wine, heale ruptures.
I finde little or nothing written of the property or vertues of the female kinde, but that it is  thought to draw neere vnto the first in temperament and vertue.
Oile oliue in which the fruit (the seede taken forth) is either set in the Sun, as we dowhen wee  make oile of roses, or boiled in a double glasse set in hot water, or else buried in hot horse dung, taketh away inflammations that are in wounds. It doth also easily and in short time consolidate or glew them together, and perfectly cure them.
It cureth the vlcers of the dugs or paps, the head of the yard or matrix, as also the inflammation  thereof being iniected or conueied into the place with a syringe or mother pessarie.
This apple is with good successe applied vnto wounds, prickes and hurts of the sinewes. It hath  great force to cure scaldings and burnings: it taketh away scarres and blemishes, if in the meane time the pouder of the leaues be taken for certaine daies together.
It is reported that such as be barren are made fruitfull herewith, if the woman first be bathed in  a fit and conuenient bath for the purpose, and the parts (...) the share and matrix annointed herewith, and the woman presently haue the company of her husband.




CHAP. 71. Of Ginnie or Indian Pepper.


1 Capsicum longioribus siliquis. Long codded Ginnie Pepper.


@ 2 Capsicum rotundioribus siliquis. Round codded Ginnie Pepper.


3 Capsicum minimis siliquis. Small codded Ginnie Pepper.


@ (...) siliquae variae. Varieties of the cods of Ginnie Pepper.




 The Description.
1 THe first of these plants hath square stalkes a foot high or (...) more, set with many thicke and fat leaues, not vnlike to those of garden Nightshade, but narrower and sharper pointed, of a darke greene colour. The (...) grow alongst the stalkes, out of the wings of the leaues, of a white colour, hauing for the most part fiue small (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) a star, with a greene button in the middle. (...) them grow the cods, (...) at the first, and when they be ripe of a braue colour glittering like red corall, in which is contained little flat seed; of a light yellow colour, of a hot biting taste like common pepper, as is also the cod it selfe: which is song, and as big as a finger, and sharpe pointed.
@ 2 The difference that is betweene this and the last described is small, for it consists in nothing but that the cods are pretty large and round, after the fashion of cherries, and not so long as those of the former. @
3 The third kinde of Ginnie pepper is like vnto the precedent in leaues, floures, and stalkes. The cods hereof are small, round, and red, very like to the berries of Dulcamara or wooddy Nightshade, both in bignesse, colour, and substance, wherein consisteth the difference: notwithstanding the seed and cods are very sharpe and biting, as those of the first kinde.


@ Capsici siliquae variae. Varieties of the cods of Ginnie pepper.


@ There are many other varieties of Ginnie pepper, which chiefly consist in the shape and colour of the cods: wherefore I thought good (and that chiefely because it is a plant that will hardly brooke our climate) only to present you with the figures of their seuerall shapes, whereof the cods of (...) stand or grow vpright, and other some hang (...): such as desire further information of this plant, may be aboundantly satisfied in Clusius his Curaeposter. from pag. 95. to pag. 108. where they shall finde these treated of at large in a treatise written in Italian by Gregory de Regio, a Capuchine Fryer, and sent to Clusius, who translating it into Latine, left it to be set forth with other his obseruations, whith was (...) 2. yeares after his death, to wit Anno (...) 1611. The figures we here giue are the same which are in that tractate. @


 The Place.
These plants are brought from forrein countries, as Ginnie, India, and those parts, into Spaine

and Italy: from whence we haue receiued seed for our English gardens, where they come to (...): but the cod doth not come to that bright red colour which naturally it is (...) with, which hath happened by reason of these vnkindly yeeres that are past: but we expect better when God shall send vs a hot and temperate yeere.


 The Time.
The seeds hereof must be sowen in a bed of hot horse-dung, as muske-Melons are, and (...) into a pot when they haue gotten three or foure leaues, that it may the more conueniently (...) caried from place to place to receiue the heate of the sunne: and are toward Autumne to be caried into some house, to auoide the iniurie of the cold nights of that time of the yeere, when it is (...) beare his fruite.


 The Names.
(...) calleth it in Greeke (...): in Latine, Capsicum: and it is thought to be that which (...) nameth Zinziber caninum, or dogs Ginger: and Pliny, Siliquastrum, which is more like in taste to pepper than is Panax, and it is therefore called Piperitis, as he hath written in his 19. booke, 12. chap. (...) (saith he) hath the tast of pepper and Siliquastrum, for which cause it is called Piperitis. The later Herbarists do oftentimes call it Piper Indianum, or Indicum, sometimes Piper (...), or Piper Hispanicum: in English it is called Ginnie pepper, and Indian pepper: in the Germane tongue, (...) Pfeffer: in low Dutch, (...) Peper: in French, Poiure (...) well knowne in the shops at Billingsgate by the name of Ginnie pepper, where it is vsually to be bought.


 The Temperature.
Ginnie pepper is extreame hot and drie euen in the fourth degree: that is to say, far hotter (...) drier then (...) sheweth dogs ginger to be.


 The Vertues.
Ginnie pepper hath the taste of pepper, but not the power or vertue, notwithstanding in Spaine  and sundrie parts of the Indies they do vse to dresse their meate therewith, as we doe with Calecute pepper: but (saith my Authour) it hath in it a malicious qualitie, whereby it is an enemy to the liuer and other of the entrails. (...) writeth that it killeth dogs.
It is said to die or colour like Saffron; and being receiued in such sort as Saffron is vsually (...), it warmeth the stomacke, and helpeth greatly the digestion of meates.
It dissolueth the swellings about the throat called the Kings Euill, as kernels and cold swellings;  and taketh away spots and lentiles from the face, being applied thereto with honie.



CHAP. 72. Of horned Poppie.

 The Description.
1 THe yellow horned Poppie hath whitish leaues very much cut or jagged, somewhat like the leaues of garden Poppie, but rougher and more hairie. The stalks be long, round, and brittle. The floures be large and yellow, consisting of foure leaues; which being past, there come long huskes or cods, crooked like an horne or cornet, wherein is conteined small blacke seede. The roote is great, thicke, scalie, and rough, continuing long.
2 The second kinde of horned Poppie is much slenderer and lesser than the precedent, and hath leaues with like deepe cuts as Rocket hath, and something hairie. The stalks be very slender, brittle, and branched into diuers armes or wings; the floures small, made of foure little leaues, of a red colour, with a small strake of blacke toward the (...); after which commeth the seed, inclosed in slender, long, crooked cods full of blackish seed. The root is small and single, and dieth euery yeere.
@ 3 This is much like the last described, and according to Clusius, rather a variety than difference. It is distinguished from the last mentioned by the smoothnes of the leaues, and the colour of the floures, which are of a pale yellowish red, both which accidents Clusius affirmes happen to the (...), towards the later end of sommer. @
4 There is another sort of horned Poppie altogether lesser than the last described, hauing tenderer leaues, cut into fine little parcels: the floure is likewise lesser, of a blew purple colour like the double Violers



1 (...) (...) flore lut co. Yellow horned Poppie.


2 (...) (...) (...) rubro. Red horned Poppie.


@ 3 Papauer (...) (...) glabrum. Red horned Poppie (...) smooth leaues.


4 Papauer cornutum flore violaceo. Violet coloured horned Poppie.





 The Place.
The yellow horned Poppie groweth vpon the sands and banks of the sea: I haue found it growing neere vnto Rie in Kent, in the Iles of Shepey and Thanet, at Lee in Essex, at Harwich, at Whitestable, and many other places alongst the English coast.
The second groweth not wilde in England. Angelus Palea, and Bartholomaeus ab Vrbe-veterum, who haue commented vpon Mesue, write that they found this red horned Poppie in the kingdomes of Arragon and Castile in Spaine, and the fields neere vnto common paths. They doe grow in my Garden very plentifully.


 The Time.
They floure from May to the end of August.


 The Names.
Most Writers haue taken horned Poppie, especially that with red floures to be Glaucium: neither is this their opinion altogether vnprobable; for as (...) saith, Glaucium hath leaues like those of horned Poppey, but (...), that is to say fatter, (...), low, or lying on the ground, of a strong smell and of a bitter taste; the iuice also is much like in colour to Saffron. Now Lobel and Pena witnesse, that this horned Poppie hath the same kinde of iuice, as my selfe likewise can testifie. Dioscorides saith that Glaucium groweth about Hierapolis, a citie in Syria; but what hindereth that it should not bee found also somewhere else? (...) things shew it hath a great affinity with Glaucium, if it be not the true and legitimate Glaucium of D oscorides. Howbeit the first is the Mecon (...), or Papauer cor niculatum of the Antients, by the common consent of all late Writers: in English, Sea Poppie' and Horned Poppie: in Dutch, (...) and Horne Heule: in the Germane Tongue, (...): in French, Pauot (...): in Spanish, Dormider a marina.


 The Nature.
Horned Poppies are hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The root of horned Poppie boiled in water vnto the consumption of the one halfe, and drunke, prouok eth vrine, and openeth the stopping of the liuer.
The seed taken in the quantitie of a spoonefull looseth the belly gently.
The iuice mixed with meale and honie, mundifieth old rotten and filthievlcers.
The leaues and floures put into vnguents or salues appropriate for greene wounds, digest them  that is, bring them to white matter, with perfect quitture or sanies. 

The figure that formerly was in the (...) place of this chap. vnder the title of (...) (...) (...) (...), was of a (...) called by (...), (...) (...). (...). You shall finde it hereafter in the (...) place. The Description as far as I can iudge (...) of the (...) (...) which (...) pag. 909.




CHAP. 73. Of Garden Poppies.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of white Poppie are long, broad, smooth, longer than the leaues of (...), whiter, and cut in the edges: the stem or stalke is straight and brittle, oftentimes a yard and a halfe high: on the top whereof grow white floures, in which at the very beginning appeareth a small head, accompanied with a number of threds or chiues, which being full growne is round, and yet something long withall, and hath a couer or crownet vpon the top; it is with many filmes or thin skins diuided into coffers or seuerall partitions, in which is contained abundance of small round and whitish seed. The root groweth deepe, and is of no estimation nor continuance.
2 Like vnto this is the blacke garden Poppie, sauing that the floures are not so white and shining, but vsually red, or at least spotted or straked with some lines of purple. The leaues are greater, more iagged, and sharper pointed. The seed is likewise blacker, which maketh the difference.
@ 3 There is also another garden Poppie whose leaues are much more sinuated, or crested, and the floure also is all iagged or finely cut about the edges, and of this sort there is also both blacke and white. The floures of the blacke are red, and the seed blacke; and the other hath both the floures and seed white.
4 There are diuers varieties of double Poppies of both these kindes, and their colours are commonly either white, red, darke purple, scarlet, or mixt of some of these. They differ from the former onely in the doublenesse of their floures.



1 Papauer sativum album. White garden Poppie.


2 Papauer sativum nigrum. Blacke Garden Poppie.


@ 3 Papauer simbriatum album. White iagged Poppie.


4 Papauer flo. multipl. albo and nigro. The double white and blacke Poppie.



5 There is also another kinde of (...) which ost times is sound wilde; the slalles, (...) floures, and heads are like, but lesse than those of the (...): the (...) are of an (...) blewish purple color; after which sollow heads short and round, which vnder their couer or crownet haue little holes by which the seed may fall out; contrarie to the heads of the sormer, which are close and open not of themselues. There is also a double one of this kinde. @


 The Place.
These kinde of Poppies are sowne in gardens, and do afterward come of the fallings of their seed.


 The Time.
They floure most commonly in Iune. The seed is perfected in Iuly and August.


5 Papauer syluestre. Wilde Poppie.




 The Names.
Poppie is called of the Graecians (...): of the Latines, Papauer: the shops keepe the Latine name: it is called in high Dutch, Magsamen: in low Dutch (...) and Mancop: in English, Poppie and Cheesebowls: in French, Pauot, and Oliette, by the Wallons.
The garden Poppie which hath blacke seeds, is surnamed of Dioscorides (...), or wilde, and is as hee saith called (...), because Opium flowes from it: of Pliny and of the Latines, Papauer nigrum. whereof there be many variable colours, and of great beautie, although of euill smell, whereupon our gentlewomen doe call it Ione Siluer pin.


 The Temperature.
All the Poppies are cold, as Galen testifieth in his booke of the Faculties of simple medicines.


 The Vertues.
This seed, as Galen saith in his booke of the Faculties  of nourishments, is good to season bread with; but the white is better than the black. He also addeth, that the same is cold and causeth sleepe, and yeeldeth no commendable nourishment to the body; it is often vsed in comfits, serued at the table with other iunketting dishes.
The oile which is pressed out of it is pleasant and  delightsull to be eaten, and is taken with bread or any other waies in meat, without any sence of cooling.
A greater force is in the knobs or heads, which doe  specially preuaile to mooue sleepe, and to stay and represse distillations or rheums, and come (...) in force to Opium, but more gentle. Opium, or the condensed iuice of Poppie heads is strongest of all: (...) (which is the iuice of the heads and leaues) is weaker. Both of them any waies taken either inwardly, or outwardly applied to the head, prouoke sleepe. Opium somewhat too plentifully taken doth also (...) death, as Plinie truely writeth.
It mitigateth all kinde of paines: but it leaueth behinde it oftentimes a mischiefe worse than  the disease it selfe, and that hard to be cured, as a dead palsie and such like.
The vse of it, as Galen in his 11. booke of medicines according to the places affected, saith, is so  offensiue to the firme and solide parts of the body, as that they had need afterwards to be restored
So also colliries or eie medicines made with Opium haue beene hurtfull to many; insomuch  that they haue weakned the eies and dulled the sight of those that haue vsed it: what soeuer is compounded of Opium to mittigate the extreeme paines of the eares bringeth hardnesse of hearing. Wherefore all those medicines and compounds are to bee shunned that are to be made of Opium, and are not to be vsed but in extreme necessitie; and that it is, when no other mitigater or asswager of paine doth any thing preuaile, as Galen in his third booke of Medicines, according to the places affected, doth euidently declare.
The leaues of poppie boiled in water with a little sugar and drunke, causeth sleep: or if it be boiled  without sugar, and the head, feet, and temples bathed therewith, it doth effect the same.
The heads of Poppie boiled in water with sugar to a sirrup causeth sleepe, and is good against  (...) and catarrhes that distill and fal downe from the brain into the lungs, and easeth the cough.
The greene knops of Poppie stamped with barley meale, and a little barrowes grease, helpeth S. Anthonies fire, called Ignis sacer.

The leaues, knops and seed stamped with vineger, womans milke, and saffron, cureth an Erysipelas, (another kinde of S. Anthonies fire, and easeth the gout mightily, and put in the fundament as a clister causeth sleepe.
The seed of black Poppy drunke in wine stoppeth the flux of the belly, and the ouermuch flowing  of womens sicknesse.
A Caudle made of the seeds of white poppy, or made into Almond milk, and so giuen causeth  sleepe.
@ It is manifest that this wilde Poppy (which I haue described in the fifth place) is that of  which the composition Diacodium is to be made; as Galen hath at large treated in his seuenth booke of Medicines, according to the places affected. Crito also, and after him Themison and Democrates do appoint (...), or the wilde Poppy, to be in the same composition; and euen that same Democritus addeth, that it should be that which is not sowen: and such an one is this, which groweth without sowing. Dod.



CHAP. 74. Of Corne-Rose, or wilde Poppy.


1 Papauer Rhoeas. Red Poppy, or Corne-rose.


@ 4 Papauer spinosum. Prickly Poppy.



 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of red Poppy be blacke, tender, and brittle, somewhat hairy: the leaues are cut round about with deepe gashes like those of Succory or wilde Rocket: the floures grow forth at the tops of the stalks, being of a beautifull and gallant red colour, with blackish threds compassing about the middle part of the head: which being fully growne, is lesser than that of the garden Poppy: the seed is small and blacke.
@ 2 There is also a kinde hereof in all (...) agreeing with the former, sauing that the floures of this are very double and beautifull, and therein only consists the difference. @

@ 3 There is a small kinde of red Poppy growing commonly wilde together with the first described, which is lesser in all parts, and the floures are of a fainter or ouerworne red, inclining somewhat to orange.
@ 4 Besides these there is another rare plant, which all men, and that very fitly, haue referred to the kindes of Poppy. This hath a slender long and fibrous root, from which arises a stalke some cubit high, diuided into sundry branches, round, crested, prickly, and full of a white pith. The leaues are diuided after the maner of horned poppy, smooth, with white veins and prickly edges: the floure is yellow, and consists of foure or fiue leaues; after which succeeds a longish head, being either foure, fiue, or six cornered, hauing many yellow threds incompassing it: the head whilest it is tender is reddish at the top, but being ripe it is blacke, and it is set with many and stiffe pricks. The seed is round, blacke, and pointed, being six times as big as that of the ordinary Poppy. @


 The Place.
They grow in earable grounds, among wheat, spelt, rie, barley, otes, and other graine, and in the borders of fields. @ The double red, and prickly Poppy are not to be found in this kingdome, vnlesse in the gardens of some prime herbarists. @


 The Time.
The fields are garnished and ouerspred with these wilde poppies in Iune and August.


 The Names.
@ Wilde Poppy is called in Greeke of Dioscorides, (...): in Latine, Papauer erraticum: (...) according to the Greeke nameth it Papauer sluidum: as also Lobel, who cals it Pap. Rhoe as, because the floure thereof soone falleth away. Which name (...) as may for the same cause be common, not onely to these, but also to the others, if it be so called of the speedy falling of the floures: but if it be syrnamed Rhoe as of the falling away of the seed (as it appeareth) then shall it be proper to that which is described in the fifth place in the foregoing chapter, out of whose heads the seed easily and quickly falls; as it doth also out of this, yet lesse manifestly. They name it in French Cocquelicot, Confanons, Pauot sauvage: in Dutch, Collen bloemen; Coren rosen: in high Dutch, Klapper Rossen: in English, Red Poppy, and Corne-rose.
@ 4 Some haue called this Ficus infernalis, from the Italian name Figo del inferno. But Clusius and Bauhine haue termed it Papauer spinosum: and the later of them would haue it (and that not without good reason) to be Glaucium of Dioscorides, (...). 3. cap. 100. And I also probably coniecture it to be the Hippomanes of Crateuas, mentioned by the Greeke Scholiast of Theocritus, as I haue formerly briefely declared Chap. 62. @


 The Nature.
The facultie of the wilde poppies is like to that of the other poppies; that is to say cold, and causing sleepe.


 The Vertues.
Most men being led rather by false experiments than reason, commend the floures against the  Pleurisie, giuing to drinke as soone as the paine commeth, either the distilled water, or (...) made by often infusing the leaues. And yet many times it happeneth that the paine ceaseth by that meanes, though hardly sometimes, by reason that the spittle commeth vp hardly, and with more difficultie, especially in those that are weake, and haue not a strong constitution of body. Baptista Sardus might be counted the Author of this error; who hath written, That most men haue giuen the floures of this poppy against the paine of the sides, and that it is good against the spitting ofbloud.



CHAP. 75. Of Bastard wilde Poppy.

 The Description.
THe first of these bastard wilde Poppies hath slender weake stemmes a foot high, rough and hairy, set with leaues not vnlike to those of Rocket, made of many small leaues deeply cut or iagged about the edges. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a red colour, with some small blacknesse toward the bottome. The seed is small, contained in little round knobs. The seed is small and threddy.
2 The second is like the first, sauing that the cods hereof be long, and the other more round, wherein the difference doth consist.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in the corne fields in Somersetshire, and by the hedges and high-wayes, as yetrauell from London to Bathe. Lobel found it growing in the next field vnto a village in Kent

called Southfleet, my selfe being in his company, of purpose to discouer some strange plants not hitherto written of.
@ Mr. Robert Lorkin and I found both these growing in Chelsey fields, as also in those belonging to Hamersmith: but the shorter headed one is a floure of a more elegant colour, and not so plentifull as the other. @


1 Argemone capitulotorulo. Bastard wilde Poppy.


2 Argemone capitulo longiore. Long codded wilde Poppy.




 The Time.
They floure in the beginning of August, and their seed is ripe at the end thereof.


 The Names.
The bastard wilde Poppy is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Argemone, Argemonia, (...), Concordalis, and Herba liburnica: of some, Pergalium, Arsela, and Sacrocolla Herba: in English, Wind rose, and bastard wilde poppy.


 The Temperature.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The leaues stamped, and the iuyce dropped into the eyes easeth the inflammation thereof; and  cureth the disease of the eye called Argema, whereof it tooke his name: which disease when it hapneth on the blacke of the eye it appeares white; and contrariwise when it is in the white then it appeareth blacke of colour.
The leaues stamped and bound vnto the eyes or face that are blacke or blew by meanes of some  blow or stripe, doth perfectly take it away. The dry herbe steeped in warme water worketh the like effect.
The leaues and roots stamped, and the iuyce giuen in drinke, helpeth the wringings or gripings  of the belly. The dry herbe infused in warme water doth the same effectually.
The herbe stamped, cureth any wound, vlcer, canker, or fistula, being made vp into an vnguent  or salue, with oile, wax, and a little turpentine.
The iuyce taken in the weight of two drammes, with wine, mightily expelleth poyson or venome.

The iuyce taketh away warts if they be rubbed therewith; and being taken in meate it helpes  the milt or spleene if it be wasted.



CHAP. 76. Of Winde-floures.

 The Kindes.
THe stocke or kindred of the Anemones or Winde-floures, especially in their varieties of colours, are without number, or at the least not sufficiently knowne vnto any one that hathwritten of plants. For Dodonoeus hath set forth fiue sorts; Lobel eight; Tabernamontanus ten: My selfe haue in my garden twelue different sorts: and yet I do heare of diuers more differing very notably from any of these; which I haue briefely touched, though not figured, euery new yeare bringing with it new and strange kindes; and euery countrey his peculiar plants of this sort, which are sent vnto vs from far countries, in hope to receiue from vs such as our countrey yeeldeth.


1 Anemone tuberosa radice. Purple Winde-floure.


2 Anemone coccinea multiplex. Double Skarlet Winde-floure.




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Anemone or Winde-floure hath small leaues very much snipt or iagged almost like vnto Camomile, or Adonis floure: among which riseth vp a stalke bare or naked almost vnto the top; at which place is set two or three leaues like the other: and at the top of the stalke commeth forth a faire and beautifull floure compact of seuen leaues, and sometimes eight, of a violet colour tending to purple. It is impossible to describe the colour in his full perfection, considering the variable mixtures. The root is tuberous or knobby, (...) very brittle.



3 Anemone maxima Chalcedonica polyanthos. The great double Winde-floure of Bithynia.


4 Anemone Chalcedonica simplici flore. The single Winde-floure of Bithynia.


5 Anemone Bulbocastani radice. Chesnut Winde-floure.



2 The second kind of Anemone hath leaues like to the precedent, insomuch that it is hard to distinguish the one from the other but by the floures onely: for those of this plant are of a most bright and faire skarlet colour, and as double as the Marigold; and the other not so. The root is knobby and very brittle, as is the former.
3 The great Anemone hath double floures, vsually called the Anemone of Chalcedon (which is a city in Bithynia) and great broad leaues deeply cut in the edges, not vnlike to those of the field Crow-foot, of an ouerworne greene colour: amongst which riseth vp a naked bare stalke almost vnto the top, where there stand two or three leaues in shape like the others, but lesser; sometimes changed into reddish stripes, confusedly mixed here and there in the said leaues. On the top of the stalke standeth a most gallant floure very double, of a perfect red colour, the which is sometimes striped amongst the red with a little line or two of yellow in the middle; from which middle commeth forth many blackish thrums. The seed is not to be found that I could euer obserue, but is carried away with the winde. The root is thicke and knobby.
4 The fourth agreeth with the first kind of Anemone, in roots, leaues, stalks, and shape of floures, differing in that, that this plant bringeth forth faire single red floures, and the other of a violet colour, as aforesaid.
5 The fifth sort of Anemone hath many small iagged leaues like those of Coriander, proceeding from a knobby root resembling the root of Bulbocastanum or earth Chesnut. The stalke rises vp amongst the leaues of two hands high, bearing at the top a single floure, consisting of a pale or border of little purple leaues, somtimes red, and often of a white colour set about a blackish pointall, thrummed ouer with many small blackish haires.


6 Anemone latifolia Clusij. Broad leaued Winde-floure.


@ 7 Anemone latifolia (...) (...). The double yellow wind-floure.


6 The sixt hath very broad leaues in respect of all the rest of the Anemones, not vnlike to those of the common Mallow, but greene on the vpper part, and tending to rednesse vnderneath, like the leaues of Sow-bread. The stalke is like that of the last described, on the top whereof growes a faire yellow star-floure, with a head ingirt with yellow thrums. The root (saith my Author) is a finger long, thicke and knobby.
@ 7 There is also another whose lower leaues resemble those of the last described, yet those which grow next aboue them are more diuided or cut in: amongst these leaues riseth vp a stalke

8 Anemone Geranifolia. Storkes bill Winde-floure.9 Anemone Matthioli. Matthiolus white Winde-floure.10 Anemone trifolia. Three leaued Winde-floure.11 Anemone Papaueracea. Poppy Winde-floure.
some foot high, the top whereof is adorned with a floure consisting of two ranks of leaues, whereof those on the outside are larger, rounder pointed, and sometimes snipt in a little; the rest (...) narrower and sharper pointed: the colour of these leaues is yellow, deeper on the inside, and on the outside there are some small purple veines running alongst these leaues of the floure. The root is some two inches long, the thickenesse of ones little finger, with some tuberous knobs hanging thereat @
8 The eighth hath many large leaues deeply cut or iagged, in shape like those of the Storks bil or Pinke-needle; among which riseth vp a naked stalke, set about toward the top with the like leaues, but smaller and more finely cut, bearing at the top of the stalke a single floure consisting of many small blew leaues, which do change sometimes into purple, and oftentimes into white, set about a blackish pointall, with some small threds like vnto a pale or border. The root is thick and knobby.
9 The ninth sort of Anemone hath leaues like vnto the garden Crow-foot: the stalke riseth vp from amongst the leaues, of a foot high, bearing at the top faire white floures made of fiue small leaues; in the middle whereof are many little yellow chiues or threds. The root is made of many slender threds or strings, contrarie to all the rest of the Winde-floures.
10 The tenth sort of Anemone hath many (...) like vnto the common medow Trefoile, fleightly snipt about the edges like a saw: on the top of the slender stalkes standeth a single white floure tending to purple, consisting of eight small leaues, resembling in shape the floures of common field Crow-foot. The root is knobby, with certaine strings (...) thereto.
11 The eleuenth kinde of Anemone hath many iagged leaues cut euen to the middle rib, resembling the leaues of Geranium Columbinum, or Doues foot. The leaues that do embrace the tender weake stalkes are flat and sleightly cut: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a bright shining purple colour, set about a blackish pointall, with small thrums or chiues like a pale. The root is knobby, thicke, and very brittle, as are most of those of the Anemones.


 The Place.
All the sorts of Anemones are strangers, and not found growing wilde in England; notwithstanding all and euery sort of them do grow in my garden very plentifully.


 The Time.
They do floure from the beginning of Ianuarie to the end of Aprill, at what time the floures do fade, and the seed flieth away with the winde, if there be any seed at all; the which I could neuer as yet obserue.


 The Names.
Anemone, or Winde floure is so called, (...); that is to say, of the winde; for the floure doth neuer open it selfe but when the winde doth blow, as Pliny writeth: whereupon also it is named of diuers Herba venti: in English, Winde-floure.
Those with double floures are called in the Turky tongue Giul, and Gul Catamer: and those with small iagged leaues and double floures are called Lale benzede, and Galipoli lale. They do call those with small iagged leaues and single floures Binizate and binizade, and Binizante.


 The Temperature.
All the kindes of Anemones are sharpe, biting the tongue; and of a binding qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The leaues stamped, and the iuyce sniffed vp into the nose purgeth the head mightily.
The root champed or chewed procureth spitting, and causeth water and flegme to run forth out  of the mouth, as Pellitorie of Spaine doth.
It profiteth in collyries for the eyes, to cease the inflammation thereof.
The iuyce mundifieth and clenseth maligne, virulent, and corrosiue vlcers.
The leaues and stalkes boyled and eaten of Nurses cause them to haue much milke: it prouoketh  the termes, and easeth the leprosie, being bathed therewith.



@ CHAP. 77. Of diuers other Anemones, or Winde-floures.

 The Kindes.
@ THese floures which are in such esteeme for their beauty may well be diuided into two sorts, that is, the Latifolia, or broad leaued, and the Tenuifolia, or narrow leaued: now of each of these sorts there are infinite varieties, which consist in the singlenesse and doublenesse of the floures, and in their diuersitie of colours; which would aske a large discourse to handle exactly. Wherefore I onely intend (besides those set downe by our Authour) to giue you the

figures of some few others, with their description, briefly taken out of the Workes of the learned and diligent Herbarist Carolus Clusius; where such as desire further discourse vpon this subiect may be aboundantly satisfied: and such as do not vnderstand Latine may finde as large satisfaction in the late Worke of Mr. Iohn Parkinson; whereas they shall not onely haue their historie at large, but also learne the way to raise them of seed, which hath been a thing not long knowne (except to some few;) and thence hath risen this great varietie of these floures, wherewith some gardens so much abound.


 The Description.
1 THe root of this is like to that of the great double red Anemone described in the third place of the precedent chapter; and the leaues also are like, but lesser and deeper coloured. The stalke growes some foot high, slender and greene, at the top whereof groweth a single floure, consisting of eight leaues of a bright shining skarlet colour on the inside, with a paler coloured ring incompassing a hairy head set about with purple thrums: the outside of the floure is hairy or downie. This is Anem. latifol. simpl. slo. 16. of Clusius.


@ 1 Anemone latifolia slore coccineo. The broad leaued skarlet Anemone.


@ 2 Anemone latifolia slore magno coccineo. The skarlet Anemone with the large floure.


2 This in shape of roots and leaues is like the former, but the leaues are blacker, and more shining on their vpper sides: the stalke also is like to others of this kinde, and at the top carrieth a large (...) consisting of eight broad leaues, being on the inside of a bright skarlet colour, without any circle; and the thrums that ingirt the hairy head are of a sanguine colour. This head (as in others of this kindred) growes larger after the falling of the floure, and at length turnes into a downie substance, wherein a smooth blacke seed is inclosed like as in other Anemones; which sowen as soone as it is ripe vsually comes vp before winter. This is Anem. latifol. simpl. slore 17. of (...).
3 This differs not from the former but in floures, which are of an orange-tawny colour, like that of Come-rose, or red Poppy; and the bottomes of the leaues of the floures are of a paler colour, which make a ring or circle about the hairy head. This is the eighteenth of Clusius.
Besides these varieties here mentioned, there are many others, which in the colour of the leaues of the floure, or the nailes which make a circle at the bottome thereof, doe differ each from other. Now let vs come to the narrow leaued ones, which also differ little but in colour of their floures.



@ 3 Anemone latifolia Byzantina. The broad leaued Anemone of Constantinople.


@ 4 Anemone tenuifolia flore amplo sanguineo. Small leaued Anemone with the sanguine floure.


@ 5 Anemone tenuifolia flore coccineo. The small leaued skarlet Anemone.


@ 6 Anemone tenuifol. flo. dilute purpureo. The light purple small leaued Anemone.





@ 7 Anemone tenuifol. flo. exalbido. The whitish small leaued Anemone.


@ 8 Anemone teuuifolia flo. carneo striato. The striped flesh-coloured Anemone.


@ 9 Anemone tenuifol. flo. pleno coccin. The small leaued double crimson Anemone.


@ 10 Anemone tenuifol. flo. pleno atropurpurascente. The double darke purple Anemone.



4 The root of this is knotty and tuberous like those of other Anemones, and the leaues are much diuided and cut in like to those of the first described in the former Chapter: the stalke (which hath three or foure leaues ingirting it, as in all other Anemones) at the top sustaineth a faire sanguine floure consisting of six large leaues with great white nailes. The seeds are contained in downie heads like as those of the former. This is (...). tenuifol. simpl. flo. 6. of Clusius.
5 This differs from the former in the floure, which consists of six leaues made somwhat rounder than those of the precedent: their colour is betweene a skarlet and sanguine. And there is a varietie hereof also of a bricke colour. This is the eighth of Clusius.
6 This differs from the rest, in that the floure is composed of some fourteene or more leaues, and these of a light purple, or flesh-colour. This is the ninth of Clusius.
7 The floure of this is large, consisting of six leaues, being at the first of a whitish greene, and then tending to a flesh colour, with their nailes greene on the outside, and white within, and the threds in the middle of a flesh colour. There is a lesser of this kinde, with the floure of a flesh colour, and white on the outside, and wholly white within, with the nailes greenish. These are the tenth and eleuenth of Clusius.
8 This floure also consists of six leaues of a flesh colour, with whitish edges on the outside; the inside is whitish, with flesh coloured veines running to the middest thereof.
Besides these single kindes there are diuers double both of the broad and narrow leaued Anemones, whereof I will only describe and figure two, and refer you to the forementioned Authors for the rest, which differ from these onely in colour.
9 This broad leaued double Anemonie hath roots, stalkes, and leaues like those of the single ones of this kinde, and at the top of the stalke there stands a faire large floure composed of two or three rankes of leaues, small and long, being of a kinde of skarlet or orange-tawny colour; the bottomes of these leaues make a whitish circle, which giues a great beauty to the floure; and the downie head is ingirt with sanguine threds tipt with blew. This is the (...) major 1. of Clusius.
10 This in shape of roots, leaues, and stalkes resembles the formerly described narrow leaued Anemones, but the floure is much different from them; for it consists first of diuers broad leaues, which incompasse a great number of smaller narrow leaues, which together make a very faire and beautifull floure: the outer leaues hereof are red, and the inner leaues of a purple Veluet colour.
Of this kinde there are diuers varieties, as the double white, crimson, blush, purple, blew, carnation, rose-coloured, etc.


 The Place and Time.
These are onely to be found in gardens, and bring forth their floures in the Spring.


 Their Names.
I iudge it no waies pertinent to set downe more of the names than is already deliuered in their seuerall titles and descriptions.


 Their Temper and Vertues.
These are of a hot and biting facultie, and not (that I know of) at this day vsed in medicines, vnlesse in some one or two ointments: yet they were of more vse amongst the Greeke Physitions, who much commend the iuyce of them for taking away the scares and scales which grow on the eyes; and by them are called (...), and (...).
Trallianus also saith, That the floures beaten in oyle, and so anointed, cause haire to grow where  it is deficient.
The vertues set downe in the former Chapter do also belong to these here treated of, as these here deliuered are also proper to them. @



CHAP. 78. Of wilde Anemones, or Winde-floures.

 The Kindes.
LIke as there be many and diuers sorts of the garden Anemones, so are there of the wild kindes also, which do vary especially in their floures.



1 Anemone nemorum lutea. Yellow wilde Winde floure.


2 Anemone nemorum alba. White winde floure.


@ 3 Anemone nemorum flo. pleno albo. The double white wood Anemone.


@ 4 Anemone nemorum flo. pleno purpurascente. The double purplish wood Anemone.





 The Description.
1 THe first of these wilde Anemones hath iagged leaues deepely cut or indented, which do grow vpon the middle part of a weake and tender stalke: at the top whereof doth stand a prettie yellow floure made of six small leaues, and in the middle of the floure there is a (...) blackish pointell, and certaine slender chiues or threds. The root is small, som ewhat knottie and very brittle.
2 The second hath iagged leaues, not vnlike to water Crowfoot or mountaine Crowfoot. The flower groweth at the top of the stalke not vnlike to the precedent in shape, sauing that this is of a milke white colour, the root is like the other.
@ There is also of this single kinde two other varieties, the one with a purple floure, which (...) may therefore call Anemone nemorum purpurea, the wilde purple Winde-floure. And the (...) with a Scarlet (or rather a Blush) coloured floure, which we may terme Anemone (...) (...). The wilde Scarlet wind floure. These two differ not in other respects from the white wind (...).
3 There is in some choice gardens one of this kinde with white floures very double, (...) of the Scarlet Anemone, and I had one of them giuen mee by a worshipfull Merchant of (...), called Mr. Iohn Franqueuille, my very good friend.
@ 4 This in roots and stalkes is like the last described wood Anemones, or winde floures. But this and the last mentioned double one haue leaues on two places of their stalks; whereas the (...) ones haue them but in one, and that is about the middle of the stalkes. The floure of this (...) one consists of some fortie or more little leaues, whereof the outermost are the biggest; the (...) or nailes of these leaues are of a deepe purple, but the other parts of a lighter blush colour. @


 The Place.
All these wilde single Anemones grow in most woods and copses through England, except that with the yellow floure, which as yet I haue not seene: notwithstanding I haue one of the greater kindes which beareth yellow floures, whose figure is not expressed nor yet described, for that it doth very notably resemble those with single floures, but is of small moment, either in beautie of the floure, or otherwise. @ The double ones grow onely in some few gardens. @


 The Time.
They floure from the middest of Februarie vnto the end of Aprill, or the midst of May.


 The Names.
@ The first of these by most Writers is referred to the Ranunculi, or (...); and Lobel cals it fitly Ranunculus nemorosus luteus: only Dodonaeus, Caesalpinus, and our Authour haue made it an Anemone.
2 This with the varieties also, by Tragus, Fuchsius, Cordus, (...), Lobell, and others, is made a Ranunculus: yet Dodonaeus, Caesalpinus, and our Authour haue referred it to the Anemones. Clusius thinkes this to be Anemone, (...) of Theophrastus.
3 Clusius calls this Anemone Limonia, or Ranunculus syluarum flo. pleno albo.
4 And he stiles this Anem. limonia, or Ranunc. syl. (...) pleno purpurascente. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The faculties and temperature of these plants are referred to the garden sorts of Anemones.



CHAP. 79. Of Bastard Anemones, or Pasque floures.

 The Description.
1 THe first of these Pasque floures hath many small leaues finely cut or iagged, like those of Carrots: among which rise vp naked stalkes, rough and hairie; whereupon doe grow beautifull floures bell fashion, of a bright delaied purple colour: in the bottome whereof groweth a tuft of yellow thrums, and in the middle of the thrums it thrusteth forth a small purple pointell: when the whole floure is past there succeedeth an head or knop compact of many gray hairy lockes, and in the solide parts of the knops lieth the seed flat and hoarie, euery seed hauing his owne small haire hanging at it. The root is thicke and knobby, of a finger long, running right downe, and therefore not like vnto those of the Anemone, which it doth in all other parts very notably resemble, and whereof no doubt this is a kinde.
2 There is no difference at all in the leaues, roots, or seedes, betweene this red Pasque floure and the precedent, nor in any other point, but in the colour of the floures: for whereas the other

are of a purple colour, these are of a bright red, which setteth forth the difference.
3 The white Passe floures hath many fine iagged leaues, closely couched or thrust together, which resemble an Holi-water sprinckle, agreeing with the others in rootes, seedes, and shape of floures, sauing that these are of a white colour, wherein chiefely consisteth the difference.
@ 4 This also in shape of roots and leaues little differs from the precedent, but the floures are lesser, of a darker purple colour, and seldome open or shew themselues so much abroad as the other of the first described, to which in all other respects it is very like.
5 There is also another kinde with leaues lesse diuided, but in other parts like those already described, sauing that the floure is of a yellow colour something inclining to a red. @


1 Pulsatilla vulgaris. Purple Passe floure.


2 Pulsatilla rubra. Red Passe floure.




 The Place.
Ruellius writeth, that the Passe floure groweth in France in vntoiled places: in Germanie they grow in rough and stonie places, and oftentimes on rockes.
Those with purple floures doe grow verie plentifully in the pasture or close belonging to the parsonage house of a small village six miles from Cambridge, called Hildersham: the Parsons name that liued at the impression hereof was Mr. Fuller, a very kind and louing man, and willing to thew vnto any man the said close, who desired the same.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part about Easter, which hath mooued mee to name it Pasque Floure, or Easter floure: and often they doe floure againe in September. @ The yellow kinde floures in May. @


 The Names.
@ Passe floure is called commonly in Latine Pulsatilla: and of some, Apium risus, and herba venti. Daleschampius would haue it to be Anemone Limonia and Samolus of Pliny: in French, Coquelourdes: in Dutch, (...): in English, Pasque floure, or Passe floure, and after the Latine name Pulsatill, or Flaw floure: in Cambridge-shire where they grow, they are named Couentrie bels.



3 Pulsatilla flore albo. White Passe floure.


@ 4 Pulsatilla flore minore. The lesser purple Passe floure.




 The Temperature.
Passe floure doth extremely bite, and exulcerateth and eateth into the skinne if it be stamped and applied to any part of the body; whereupon it hath been taken of some to be a kinde of Crowfoot, and not without reason, for that it is not inferiour to the Crowfoots: and therefore it is hot and drie.


 The Vertues.
There is nothing extant in writing among Authours of any peculiar vertue, but they (...) onely for the adorning of gardens and garlands, being floures of great beautie.



CHAP. 80. Of Adonis floure.

 The Description.
1 THe first hath very many slender weake stalkes, trailing or leaning to the ground, set on (...) part with fine iagged leaues very deepely cut like those of Camomill, or rather those of May-weed: vpon which stalkes do grow small red floures, in shape like the field Crowfoot, with a blackish greene pointell in the middle, which being growne to (...) turneth into a small greenish bunch of seeds, in shape like a little bunch of grapes. The root is small and threddie.
2 The second differeth not from the precedent in any one point, but in the colour of the floures, which are of a perfect yellow colour, wherein (...) the difference.


 The Place.
The red floure of Adonis groweth wilde in the West parts of England among their (...), euen as May-weed doth in other parts, and is likewise an enemie to corne as May-weed is: from thence I brought the seed, and haue sowne it in my garden for the beautie of the floures sake. That with the yellow floure is a stranger in England.



1 Flos Adonis flore rubro. Adonis, with red floures.




 The Time.
They floure in the Sommer moreths, May, Iune, and Iuly, and sometimes later.


 The Names.
Adonis floure is called in Latine Flos Adonis, and Adonidis: of the Dutchmer, (...): in English wee may call it (...) Maythes, by which name it is called of them that dwell where it groweth naturally, and generally Red Camomill: in Greeke, (...), (...) Eranthemum: our London women (...) (...) (...) Rose-a-rubie.


 The Temperature.
There hath not beene any that hath (...) of the Temperature hereof; (...), so farre as the taste thereof (...) (...) is something hot, but not much.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Adonis flower is thought to  bee good against the stone: amongst the Ancients it was not knowne to haue any other facultie: albeit experience hath of late taught vs, that the seed stamped, and the pouder giuen in wine, ale, or beere to drinke, doth wonderfully and with great effect helpe the collicke.



CHAP. 81. Of Dockes.

 The Kindes.
DIoscorides setteth forth foure kindes of Dockes; wilde or sharpe pointed Docke; Garden Docke; round leafed Docke; and the Soure Docke called Sorrell: besides these the later Herbarists haue added certaine other Dockes also, which I purpose to make mention of.


 The Description.
1 THat which among the Latines signifieth to soften, case, or purge the bellie, the (...) signification hath (...), among the Graecians: whereof Lapathum and (...) (as (...) (...) do reade) tooke their names sor herbes which are vsed in pottage and medicine, very well (...) to haue the power of cleansing: of these there be many kindes and differences, great (...) (...) where growing, among whom is that which is now called sharpe pointed Docke, or (...) (...) Docke. It groweth in most medowes and by running streames, hauing long narrow leaues (...) and hard pointed: among the which commeth vp round hollow stalks of a browne colour, (...) ioynts like knees, garnished with such like leaues, but smaller: at the end whereof grow (...) floures of a pale colour, one aboue another; and after them commeth a brownish three (...) seede, lapped in browne chaffie huskes like Patience. The roote is great, long, and (...) within.
@ There is a varietie of this with crisped or (...) leaues whose figure was by our Authour giuen in the second place in the following chapter, vnder the Title of (...) minus. @
2 The second kind of sharpe pointed Docke is like the first, but much smaller, and doth (...) his seed in rundles about his branches in chaffie huskes, like Sorrell, not so much in vse as the former, called also sharpe pointed Docke.
@ 3 This in roots, stalkes, and seeds is like to the precedent; but the leaues are (...), and rounder than those of the first described, and therin consists the chiefe difference (...) this and (...). @


 The Place.
These kindes of Docks do grow, as is (...) said, in medowes (...) by riuers sides.



The first figure in the (...) edition was of (...) (...), (...) (...) first in the next chapter; (...) the figure of that we (...) (...) in the (...) (...) this chapt. was that in the first place (...) the (...) (...). (...) the (...) title.

 1 Lapathum acutum. Sharpe pointed Docke.


2 Lapathum acutum minimum. Small sharpe Docke.


@ 3 Lapathum syluestre (...). minus (...). The roundish leaued wilde Docke.




 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
They are called in Latine (...) (...) mex, Lapatium, and (...): of (...) (...) in English, Docke, and sharpe pointed (...), (...) greater and the lesser: of the Graecians, (...): in high Dutch, (...), (...): in Italian, Rombice: in Spanish, Romaza, (...), in Low Dutch, (...) (which word is (...) of Lapathum) and also (...): in French, (...).
@ The third is Lapathum folio (...), or minus (...) of (...); and (...) (...). of Tabern. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
These herbes are of a mixture betweene cold and heat, and almost drie in the third degree, especially the seed which is very astringent.
The pouder of any of the kinds of (...) drunk in (...), stoppeth the laske and bloudie (...), and caseth the pains of the stomacke.
The roots boiled til they be very soft, and stamped with barrowes grease, and made into an ointment helpeth the itch and all (...) (...) and mangines. And for the same purpose it shall (...) necessarie to boile them in water, as aforesaid, and the partie to be bathed and rubbed therewith.




CHAP. 82. Of Water Dockes.


Tha: figure that was in the first place was of the (...) fol (...) (...) described by me in the third place of the preceding chapter. The second was of (...) acutum crispum of (...). The third was of Hydrolapathum (...).

 1 (...) magnum. Great Water (...).


Tha: figure that was in the first place was of the (...) fol (...) (...) described by me in the third place of the preceding chapter. The second was of (...) acutum crispum of (...). The third was of Hydrolapathum (...).

 2 Hydrolapathum minus. Small Water Docke.


Tha: figure that was in the first place was of the (...) fol (...) (...) described by me in the third place of the preceding chapter. The second was of (...) acutum crispum of (...). The third was of Hydrolapathum (...).

 3 Hippolapathum sativum Patience, or Munkes Rubarb.


4 Hippolapathum rotundifolium. Bastard Rubarb.





@ 5 Lapathum sativum sanguineum. Bloudwoort.



The Description.
1 THe Great water Docke hath very long and great leaues, sti ffe, and hard, not vnlike to the Garden Patience, but much longer. The stalke riseth vp to a great height, often times to the height of fiue foot or more. The (...) groweth at the top of the stalke in spokie tusts, brown of colour. The seed is contained in chaffie huskes, three square, of a shining pale colour. The root is very great, thicke, (...) without, and yellowish within.
2 The small water Docke hath short narrow leaues, set vpon a stiffe stalke. The floures grow from the middle of the stalke vpward in spokie rundles, set in spaces by certaine distances round about the stalke, as are the floures of Horehound: Which Docke is of all the kindes most common and of lesse vse, and taketh no pleasure or delight in any one soile or dwellingplace, but is found almost euery where, as well vpon the land as in waterie places, but especially in gardens among good and holesome pot-herbes, being there better known than welcome or desired: wherefore I intend not to spend further time about his description.
3 The Garden Patience hath very strong stalks, furrowed or chamfered, of eight or nine foot high when it groweth in fertile ground, set about with great large leaues like to those of the water Docke, hauing alongst the stalkes toward the top floures of a light purple colour declining to brownenesse. The seed is three square, contained in thin chaffie huskes, like those of the common Docke. The root is verie great, browne without, and yellow within, in colour and taste like the true Rubarb.
4 Bastard Rubarb hath great broad round leaues, in shape like those of the great Bur-docke. The stalke and seeds are so like vnto the precedent, that the one cannot be knowne from the other, sauing that the seeds of this are somewhat lesser. The root is exceeding great and thicke, very like vnto the Rha of Barbarie, as well in proportion as in colour and taste; and purgeth after the same manner, but must be taken in greater quantitie, as witnesseth that famous learned Physition now liuing, Mr. Doctor Bright, and others, who haue experimented the same.
5 This fifth kinde of Docke is best knowne vnto all, of the stocke or kindred of Dockes; it hath long thin leaues, sometimes red in euery part thereof, and often stripped here and there with lines and strakes of a darke red colour; among which rise vp stiffe brittle stalkes of the same colour: on the top whereof come forth such floures and seed as the common wilde docke hath. The root is likewise red, or of a bloudie colour.


 The Place.
They do grow for the most part in ditches and water-courses, very common through England. The two last saue one do grow in gardens; my selfe and others in London and elswhere haue them growing for our vse in Physicke and chirurgerie. The last is sowne for a pot-herbe in most gardens.


 The Time.
Most of the dockes do rise vp in the Spring of the yeare, and their seed is ripe in Iune and August.


 The Names.
The docke is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Rumex, and Lapathum; yet Pliny in his 19 Booke, 12. Chapter, seemeth to attribute the name of Rumex onely to the garden docke.

The Monkes Rubarbe is called in Latine Rumex sativus, and Patientia, or Patience, which word is borrowed of the French, who call this herbe Patience: after whom the Dutch men name this pot herbe also Patientie: of some, Rhabarbarum Monachorum, or Monkes Rubarbe: because as it should seeme some Monke or other haue vsed the root hereof in stead of Rubarbe.
Bloudwoort, or bloudy Patience, is called in Latine Lapathum sanguineum: of some, Sanguis Draconis, of the bloudie colour wherewith the whole plant is possest, and is of pot-herbes the chiefe or principall, hauing the propertie of the bastard Rubarbe; but of lesse force in his purging quality.


 The Temperature.
Generally all the Dockes are cold, some little and moderately, and some more: they doe all of them drie, but not all after one manner: notwithstanding some are of opinion that they are dry almost in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of the Garden Docke or Patience may be eaten, and are somewhat colde, but more  moist, and haue withall a certaine clamminesse; by reason whereof they easily and quickely passe through the belly when they be eaten: and Dioscorides writeth, that all the Dockes beeing boiled doe mollifie the bellie: which thing also Horace hath noted in his second booke of Sermons, the fourth Satyre, writing thus,

-- Si dura morabitur alvus
Mugilus, and viles pellent obstantia conchae,
Et lapathi brcuis herba.

He calleth it a short herbe, being gathered before the stalke be growne vp; at which time it is fittest  to be eaten.
And being sodden, it is not so pleasant to bee eaten as either Beetes or Spinage: it ingendreth  moist bloud of a meane thicknesse, and which nourisheth little.
The leaues of the sharpe pointed Dockes are cold and drie: but the seed of Patience, and the  water Docke doe coole, with a certaine thinnesse of substance.
The decoction of the roots of Monkes Rubarbe is drunke against the bloudy flix, the laske, the  wambling of the stomacke which commeth of choler: and also against the (...) of serpents, as Dioscorides writeth.
It is also good against the spitting of bloud, being taken with Acacia (or his succedaneum, the  dried iuice of sloes) as Plinie writeth.
Monkes Rubarb or Patience is an excellent wholesome pot-herbe; for being put into the pottage  in some reasonable quantitie, it doth loosen the belly; helpeth the iaunders; the timpany and such like diseases, proceeding of cold causes.
If you take the roots of Monkes Rubarb, and red Madder, of each halfe a pound; Sena soure  ounces, annise seed and licorice, of each two ounces; Scabiouse and Agrimonie, of each one handfull; slice the roots of the Rubarb, bruise the annise seed and licorice, breake the herbes with your hands, and put them into a stone pot called a steane, with foure gallons of strong alc to steepe or infuse the space of three daies; and then drinke this liquour as your ordinarie drinke for three weekes together at the least, though the longer you take it, so much the better; prouiding in a readinesse another steane so prepared that you may haue one vnder another, being alwaies carefull to keepe a good dict: it cureth the dropsie, the yellow iaunders, all manner of itch, scabbes, breaking out, and manginesse of the whole body: it purifieth the bloud from all corruption; (...) against the greene sicknesse very greatly, and all oppilations or stoppings: maketh young wenches to looke faire and cherrie like, and bringeth downe their tearmes, the stopping whereof hath caused the same.
The seed of bastard Rubarb is of a manifest astringent nature, insomuch that it (...) the bloudy  flix, mixed with the seed of Sorrell, and giuen to drinke in red wine.
There haue not beene any other faculties attributed to this plant either of the antient or later  writers, but generally of all it hath beene referred to the other Docks or Monks Rubarb, of which number I assure my selfe this is the best, and doth approch neerest vnto the true Rubarb. Manie reasons induce me so to thinke and say, first this hath the shape and proportion of Rubarbe, the same colour, both within and without, without any difference. They agree as well in taste as smell: it coloureth the spittle of a yellow colour when it is chewed, as Rubarb doth; and lastly it purgeth the belly after the same gentle manner that the right Rubarb doth, onely herein it differeth, that this must be giuen in three times the quantitie of the other. Other distinctions and differences, with the temperature and euery other circumstance, I leaue to the learned Physitions of our London colledge (who are very well able to search this matter) as a thing farre aboue my reach, being

no graduate, but a Countrey Scholler, as the whole framing of this Historie doth well declare: but I hope my good meaning will be well taken, confidering I doe my best; not doubting but some of greater learning will perfect that which I haue begun according to my small skill, especially the ice being broken vnto him, and the wood rough hewed to his hands. Notwithstanding I thinke it good to say thus much more in mine owne defence, that although there bee many wants and defects in me, that were requisite to performe such a worke; yet may my long experience by chance happen vpon some one thing or other that may do the learned good: considering what a notable experiment I learned of one Iohn Bennet a Chirurgion of Maidstone in Kent, a man as slenderly learned as my selfe, which he practised vpon a Butchers boy of the same towne, as himselfe reported vnto me; his practise was this: Being desired to cure the foresaid lad of an ague, which did grieuously vex him, he promised him a medicine, and for want of one for the present (for a shift as himselfe confessed vnto me) he tooke out of his garden three or foure leaues of this plant of Rubarb, which my selfe had among other simples giuen him, which he stamped and strained with a draught of ale, and gaue it the lad in the morning to drinke: it wrought extremely downeward and vpward within one houre after, and neuer ceased vntill night. In the end the strength of the boy ouercame the force of the Physicke, it gaue ouer working, and the lad lost his ague; since which time (as hee saith) he hath cured with the same medicine many of the like maladie, hauing euer great regard vnto the quantitie, which was the cause of the violent working in the first cure. By reason of which accident, that thing hath been reuealed vnto posteritie, which heretofore was not so much as dreamed of. Whose blunt attempt may set an edge vpon some sharper wit, and greater iudgement in the faculties of plants, to seeke farther into their nature than any of the Antients haue done: and none fitter than the learned Physitions of the Colledge of London; where are many singularly wel learned and experienced in naturall things.
The roots sliced and boiled in the water of Carduus Benedictus to the consumption of the third  part, adding thereto a little honie, of the which decoction eight or ten spoonfuls drunke before the fit, cureth the ague in two or three times so taking it at the most: vnto robustous or strong bodies twelue spoonfuls may be giuen. This experiment was practised by a worshipfull Gentlewoman mistresse Anne Wylbraham, vpon diuers of her poore Neighbours with good successe.



CHAP. 83 Of Rubarb.
@ IT hath happened in this as in many other forreine medicines or simples, which though they be of great and frequent vse, as Hermodactyls, Muskc, Turbeth, etc. yet haue we no certaine knowledge of the very place which produces them, nor of their exact manner of growing, which hath giuen occasion to diuers to thinke diuersly, and some haue been so bold as to counterfeit figures out of their owne fancies, as Matthiolus: so that this saying of Pliny is found to be very true, Nulla medicinae pars (...) incerta, quam quae ab alio quam nostro orhe petitur. But we will endeauour to shew you more certaintie of this here treated of than was knowne vntill of very late yeres. @

 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Rubarb hath very great leaues, somewhat snipt or indented about the edges like the teeth of a Saw, not vnlike the leaues of Enula campana, called by the vulgat sort Elecampane, but greater: among which riseth vp a straight stalke of two cubits high, bearing at the top a scalie head like those of Knappe-weed, or Iaceamaior: in the middle of which knap or head thrusteth forth a faire floure consisting of many purple threds like those of the Artichoke; which being past, there followeth a great quantitie of downe, wherein is wrapped long seede like vnto the great Centorie, which the whole plant doth very well resemble. The root is long and thicke, blackish without, and of a pale colour within: which being chewed maketh the spittle very yellow, as doth the Rubarb of Barbarie.
@ 2 This other bastard Rha, which is also of Lobels description, hath a root like that of the last described: but the leaues are narrower almost like those of the common Docke, but hoarie on the other side: the stalke growes vp straight, and beareth such heads and floures as the precedent.
@ 3 I haue thought good here to omit the counterfeit figure of Matthiolus, giuen vs in this place by our Authour; as also the Historie, which was not much pertinent, and in lieu of them to present you with a perfect figure and description of the true Rha Ponticum of the Antients, which

1 Rha Capitatum L'obelij. Turkie Rubarbe.@ 2 Rha Capitatum angusti fulium. The other bastard Rubarbe.@ 3 Rha verum antiquorum. The true Rubarbe of the Antients.Rhabarbarum siccatum. The drie roots of Rubarbe.
was first of late discouered by the learned Prosper Alpinus, who writ a peculiar tract thereof, and it is also againe figured and described in his worke de Plant is exoticis. Our Countryman (...) Iohn (...) hath also set forth very well both the figure and description hereof, in his (...). This plant hath many large roots (...) spreading in the ground, of a yellow colour, from which grow vp many very great leaues like those of the Butter-burre, but of a fresh greene colour, with great and manifest veines dispersed ouer them. The stalke also is large and cre sted, sending forth sundry branches bearing many small white floures, which are succeeded by seeds three square and brownish, like as those of other Docks. (...). Lister one of his Maiesties Physitions was the first that enricht this kingdome with this elegant and vsefull plant, by sending the seedes thereof to (...). Parkinson. (...) Alpinus proues this to be the true Rha of the Antients, described by Dioscorides, Lib. 3. cap. 2. yet neither he nor any other (that I know of) haue obserued a sault, which I more than probably suspect to bee in the text of Dioscorides in that place, which is in the word (...), which I iudge should be (...), that is, yellow, and not blacke, as Ruellius and others haue translated it: now (...) is a word frequently vsed by Dioscorides, as may appeare by the Chapters of Hieracium magnum and parvum, Conyra, Peucedanum, Ranunculus, and diuers others, and I suspect the like fault may bee found in some other places of the same Authour. But I will no further insist vpon this, seeing the thing it selfe in all other respects, as also in yellownesse shewes it selfe to be that described by Dioscorides, and that my coniecture must therefore be true. And besides, the root wherto he compares it is (...), that is (...), or rather ex slauo rubescens, as any versed in reading Dioscorides may easily gather by diuers places in him. Now I here omit his words, because they are in the next description alledged by our Authour, as also the description of our ordinarily vsed Rubarb, for that it is sufficiently described vnder the following title of the choise thereof. Mr. Parkinson is of opinion that this is the true Rubarbe vsed in shops, onely lesse heauy, bitter, and strong in working, by reason of the diuersity of our climat from that whereas the dried Rubarb brought vs vsually grows. This his opinion is very probable, and if you compare the roots together, you may easily bee induced to be of the same beleefe. @
@ 4 The Ponticke Rubarbe is lesser and slenderer than that of Barbarie. Touching Pontick Rubarbe Dioscorides writeth thus: Rha that diuers call Rheon, which groweth in those places that are beyond Bosphorus, from whence it is brought, hath yellow roots like to the great Centorie, but lesser and redder, (...), that is to say, without smell (Dodonaeus thinkes it should bee (...), that is, well smelling) spongie, and something light. That is the best which is not worme-eaten, and tasted is somewhat viscide with a light astriction, and chewed becomes of a yellow or Saffron colour.


 The Place.
It is brought out of the Countrey of Sina (commonly called China) which is toward the East in the vpper part of India, and that India which is without the riuer Ganges: and not at all Ex Scenitarum prouincia, (as many do vnaduisedly thinke) which is in Arabia the Happie, and far from China: it groweth on the sides of the riuer Rha now called Volga, as Amianus Marcellus saith, which riuer springeth out of the Hyperborean mountaines, and running through Muscouia, falleth into the Caspian or Hircan sea.
@ The Rha of the Antients growes naturally, as Alpinus saith, vpon the hill Rhodope in Thrace, now called Romania. It growes also as I haue been informed vpon some mountaines in Hungarie. It is also to be found growing in some of our choice gardens. @


The choice of Rubarbe.
The best Rubarbe is that which is brought from China fresh and new, of a light purplish red, with certaine veines and branches, of an vncertaine varietie of colour, commonly whitish: but when it is old the colour becommeth ill fauored by turning yellowish or pale, but more, if it bee worme eaten: being chewed in the mouth it is somewhat gluie and clammie, and of a sassron colour, which being rubbed vpon paper or some white thing sheweth the colour more plainely: the substance thereof is neither hard or closely compacted, nor yet heauy; but something light, and as it were in a middle betweene hard and loose and something spungie: it hath also a pleasing smell. The second in goodnesse is that which commeth from Barbarie. The last and worst from Bosphorus and Pontus.


 The Names.
It is commonly called in Latine Rha Barbarum, or Rha Barbaricum: of diuers, Rheu Barbarum: the Moores and Arabians doe more truely name it Raued Seni, a Sinensi prouincia; from whence it is brought into Persia and Arabia, and afterwards into Europe: and likewise from Tanguth, through the land of Cataia into the land of the Persians, whereof the Sophie is the ruler, and from thence into Aegypt, and afterwards into Europe. It is called of the Arabians and the people of China, and the parts adiacent, Rauend Cini, Raued Seni, and Raued Sceni: in shops, Rhabarbarum: in English, Rubarb, and Rewbarbe.



4 Rha Ponticum Siccatum. Rubarb of Pontus dried.




 The Temperature.
Rubarb is of a mixt substance, temperature and faculties: some of the parts thereof are earthy, binding and drying: others thin, airious, hot, and purging.


 The Vertues.
Rubarb is commended by Dioscorides against  windinesse, weaknesse of the stomack, and all griefes thereof, convulsions, diseafes of the spleene, liuer, and kidnies, gripings and inward gnawings of the guts, insirmities of the bladder and chest, swelling about the heart, diseases of the matrix, paine in the huckle bones, spitting of bloud, shortnesse of breath, yexing, or the hicket, the bloudie flix, the laske proceeding of raw humors, fits in Agues, and against the bitings of venomous beasts.
Moreouer he saith, that it taketh away  blacke and blew spots, and tetters or Ringwormes, if it be mixed with vineger, and the place anointed therewith.
Galen affirmes it to be good for burstings, cramps, and convulsions, and for those that are short winded, and that spit bloud.
But touching the purging facultie neither  Dioscorides nor Galen hath written any thing, because it was not vsed in those daies to purge with. Galen held opinion, that the thinne airious parts doe make the binding qualitie of more force; not because it doth resist the cold and earthy substance, but by reason that it carrieth the same, and maketh it deeply to pierce, and thereby to worke the greater effect; the dry and thinne essence containing in it selfe a purging force and qualitie to open obstructions, but helped and made more facile by the subtil and airious parts. Paulus Aegineta seemeth to be the first that made triall of the purging facultie of Rubarb; for in his first booke, Chap. 43. he maketh mention thereof, where he reckoneth vp Turpentine among those medicines which make the bodies of such as are in health soluble: But when we purpose, saith he, to make the turpentine more strong, we adde vnto it a little Rubarb. The Arabians that followed him brought it to a further vse in physicke, as chiefely purging downward choler, and oftentimes flegme.
The purgation which is made with Rubarb is profitable and fit for all such as be troubled with  choler, and for those that are sicke of sharpe and tertian feuers, or haue the yellow jaundice, or bad liuers.
It is a good medicine against the pleurisie, inflammation of the lungs, the squinancie or Squincie, madnesse, frensie, inflammation of the kidnies, bladder, and all the inward parts, and especially against S. Anthonies fire, as well outwardly as inwardly taken.
Rubarb is vndoubtedly an especiall good medicine for the liuer and infirmities of the gall; for  besides that it purgeth forth cholericke and naughty humors, it remoueth stoppings out of the conduits.
It also mightily strengthneth the intrals themselues: insomuch as Rubarb is iustly termed of  diuers the life of the liuer; for Galen in his eleuenth booke of the method or manner of curing, affirmeth that such kinde of medicines are most fit and profitable for the liuer, as haue ioyned with a purging and opening qualitie an astringent or binding power. The quantitie that is to be giuen is from one dram to two; and the infusion from one and a halfe to three.
It is giuen or steeped, and that in hot diseases, with the infusion or distilled water of Succory, Endiue, or some other of the like nature; and likewise in Whay; and if there be no heate it may be giuen in Wine.

It is also oftentimes giuen being dried at the fire, but so, that the least or no part thereof at all  be burned; and being so vsed it is a remedie for the bloudy flix, and for all kindes of laskes: for it both purgeth away naughty and corrupt humors, and likewise withall stoppeth the belly.
The same being dried after the same manner doth also stay the ouermuch flowing of the monethly  sicknesse, and stoppeth bloud in any part of the body, especially that which commeth thorow the bladder; but it should be giuen in a little quantitie, and mixed with some other binding thing.
Mesues saith, That Rubarb is an harmelesse medicine, and good at all times, and for all ages, and  likewise for children and women with childe.
@ My friend Mr. Sampson Iohnson Fellow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford assures me, That the Physitions of Vienna in Austria vse scarce any other at this day than the Rubarb of the Antients, which grows in Hungary not far from thence: and they prefer it before the dried Rubarb brought out of Persia and the East Indies, because it hath not so strong a binding facultie as it, neither doth it heate so much; onely it must be vsed in somewhat a larger quantitie. @



CHAP. 84. Of Sorrell.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers kindes of Sorrell, differing in many points, some of the garden, others wilde; some great, and some lesser.


1 Oxalis, siue Acetosa. Sorrell.


2 Oxalis tuberosa. Knobbed Sorrell.




 The Description.
THough Dioscorides hath not expressed the Oxalides by that name, yet none ought to doubt but that they were taken and accounted as the fourth kinde of Lapathum. For though some

like it not well that the seed should be said to be Drimus; yet that is to be vnderstood according to the common phrase, when acride things are confounded with those which be sharpe and soure; else we might accuse him of such ignorance as is not amongst the simplest women. Moreouer, the word Oxys doth not onely signifie the leafe, but the sauour and tartnesse, which by a figure drawne from the sharpnesse of kniues edges is therefore called sharpe: for (...) signifieth a sharpe or sourc iuyce which pierceth the tongue like a sharpe knife: whereupon also Lapathum may be called Oxalis, as it is indeed. The leaues of this are thinner, tenderer, and more vnctuous than those of Lapatium acutum, broader next to the stem, horned and crested like Spinage and Atriplex. The stalke is much streaked, reddish, and full of iuyce: the root is yellow and (...); the seed sharpe, cornered and shining, growing in chaffie huskes like the other Docks.
2 The second kinde of Oxalis or Sorrell hath large leaues like Patience, confusedly growing together vpon a great tall stalke, at the top whereof grow tufts of a chaffie substance. The root is tuberous, much like the Peonie, or rather Filipendula, fastned to the lower part of the stem with small long strings and laces.
3 The third kinde of Sorrell groweth very small, branching hither and thither, taking hold (by new shoots) of the ground where it groweth, whereby it disperseth it selfe far abroad. The leaues are little and thin, hauing two small leaues like eares fastned thereto, in shew like the herbe Sagittaria: the seed in taste is like the other of his kinde.
4 The fourth kinde of Sorrell hath leaues somewhat round and cornered, of a whiter colour than the ordinarie, and hauing two short eares anexed vnto the same. The seed and root in taste is like the other Sorrels.


3 Oxalis tenuifolia. Sheepes Sorrell.


4 Oxalis Franca seu Romana. Round leaued, or French Sorrel.


5 This kinde of curled Sorrell is a stranger in England, and hath very long leaues, in shape like the garden Sorrell, but curled and crumpled about the edges as is the curled Colewort. The stalke riseth vp among the leaues, set here and there with the like leaues, but lesser. The floures, seeds, and roots are like the common Sorrell or soure Docke.
6 The small Sorrell that groweth vpon dry barren sandy ditch-banks, hath small grassy leaues somewhat forked or crossed ouer like the crosse hilt of a rapier. The stalkes rise vp amongst the leaues, small, weake, and tender, of the same soure taste that the leaues are of. The floure, seed, and root is like the other Sorrels, but altogether lesser.



6 Oxalis minor. Small Sorrell.


7 The smallest sort of Sorrell is like vnto the precedent, sauing that the lowest leaues that ly vpon the ground be somewhat round, and without the little eares that the other hath, which setteth forth the difference.
@ 8 There is also kept in some gardens a verie large sorrel, hauing leaues thicke, whitish, and as large as an ordinarie Docke, yet shaped like Sorrell, and of the same acide taste. The stalkes and seed are like those of the ordinary, yet whiter coloured. @


 The Place.
@ The common Sorrell groweth for the most part in moist medowes and gardens. The second by waters sides, but not in this kingdome that I know of. The fourth also is a garden plant with vs, as also the fifth: but the third and last grow vpon grauelly and sandie barren ground and ditch bankes. @


 The Time.
They flourish at that time when as the other kinds of Docks do floure.


 The Names.
Garden Sorrell is called in Greeke (...), and (...): of Galen, (...): that is to say, Acidum lapathum, or Acidus rumex, soure Docke: and in shops commonly Acetosa: in the Germane Tongue, (...): in low-Dutch, Surckele, and Surinck: the Spaniards, Azederas, Agrelles, and Azedas: in French, Ozeille, and Surelle, Aigrette: in English, Garden Sorrell.
The second is called of the later Herbarists Tuberosa acetosa, and Tuberosum lapathum: in English Bunched or Knobbed Sorrell.
The third is called in English Sheepes Sorrell: in Dutch, Schap Surkel.
The fourth, Romane Sorrell, or round leaued Sorrell.
The fifth, Curled Sorrell.
The sixth and seuenth, Barren Sorrell, or Dwarfe Sheepes Sorrell.
@ The eighth is called Oxalis, or Acetosa maxima latifolia, Great broad leaued Sorrell. @


 The Nature.
The Sorrels are moderately cold and dry.


 The Vertues.
Sorrell doth vndoutedly coole and mightily dry; but because it is soure it likewise cutteth  tough humors.
The iuyce hereof in Sommer time is a profitable sauce in many meats, and pleasant to the taste: it cooleth an hot stomacke, moueth appetite to meate, tempereth the heate of the liuer, and openeth the stoppings thereof.
The leaues are with good successe added to decoctions which are vsed in Agues.
The leaues of Sorrell taken in good quantitie, stamped and strained into some Ale, and a posset  made thereof, cooleth the sicke body, quencheth the thirst, and allayeth the heate of such as are troubled with a pestilent feuer, hot ague, or any great inflammation within.
The leaues sodden, and eaten in manner of a Spinach tart, or eaten as meate, sostneth and loosneth  the belly, and doth attemper and coole the bloud exceedingly,
The seed of Sorrell drunke in grosse red wine stoppeth the laske and bloudy flix.




CHAP. 85. Of Bistort or Snake-weed.

 The Description.
1 THe great Bistort hath long leaues much like Patience, but smaller, and more wrinkled or crumpled, on the vpper side of a darke greene, and vnderneath of a blewish greene colour, much like Woad. The stalke is long, smooth, and tender, hauing at the top a spiked knap or eare, set full of small whitish floures declining to carnation. The root is all in a lumpe, without fashion; within of a reddish colour like vnto flesh, in taste like the kernell of an Acorne.
2 The small Bistort hath leaues about three inches long, and of the bredth of a mans naile; the vpper side is of a greene colour, and vnderneath of an ouerworne greenish colour: amongst the which riseth vp a stalke of the height of a spanne, full of ioynts or knees, bearing at the top such floures as the great Bistort beareth; which being fallen, the seeds appeare of the bignes of a tare, reddish of colour, euery seed hauing one small greene leafe fastned thereunto, with many such leaues thrust in among the whole bunch of floures and seed. The root is tuberous like the other, but smaller, and not so much crooked.


1 Bistorta major. Snake-weed.


2 Bistorta minor. Small Snake-weed.


3 Broad leaued Snake-weed hath many large vneuen leaues, smooth and very greene; among which rise vp small brittle stalkes of two hands high, bearing at the top a faire spike of floures like vnto the great Bistort. The root is knobby or bunched, crookedly turned or wrythed this way and that way, whereof it tooke his name Bistorta. @ It differs from the first onely in that the root is somewhat more twined in, and the leaues broader and more crumpled. @


 The Place.
1 The great Bistort groweth in moist and waterie places, and in the darke shadowie Woods, and is very common in most gardens.

2 The small Bistort groweth in great aboundance in Westmerland, at Crosby, Rauenswaith, at the head of a Parke belonging to one Mr. Pickering: from whence it hath beene dispersed into many gardens; as also sent vnto me from thence for my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in May, and the seed is ripe in Iune.


 The Names.
Bistorta is called in English Snake-weed: in some places, Oisterloit: in Cheshire, Passions, and Snake-weed, and there vsed for an excellent Pot-herbe. It is called Bistorta of his wrythed roots, and also Colubrina, Serpentaria, Brittanica; Dracontion, Plinij; Dracunculus, Dodonaei; and Limonium (...).


 The Nature.
Bistort doth coole and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The iuyce of Bistort put into the nose preuaileth much against the Disease called Polypus, and  the biting of Serpents or any venomous beast, being drunke in Wine or the water of Angelica.
The root boyled in wine and drunke, stoppeth the laske and bloudy flix; it stayeth also the ouermuch  flowing of womens monethly sicknesses.
The root taken as aforesaid stayeth vomiting, and healeth the inflammation and sorenesse of  the mouth and throat: it likewise fastneth loose teeth, being holden in the mouth for a certaine space, and at sundry times.



CHAP. 86. Of Scuruy-Grasse, or Spoon-wort.

 The Description.
1 ROund leaued Scuruy-Grasse is a low or base herbe: it bringeth forth leaues vpon smal stems or foot-stalks of a meane length, comming immediately from the root, very many in number, of a shining greene colour, somewhat broad, thicke, hollow like a little spoone, but of no great depth, vneuen, or cornered about the edges: among which leaues spring vp small stalkes of a spanne high, whereon doe grow many little white floures: after which commeth the seed, small and reddish, contained in little round pouches or seed-vessels: the roots be small, white, and threddy. The whole plant is of a hot and spicie taste.
2 The common Scuruy-grasse or Spoone-wort hath leaues somewhat like a spoone, hollow in the middle, but altogether vnlike the former: the leaues hereof are bluntly toothed about the edges, sharpe pointed, and somewhat long: the stalkes rise vp among the leaues, of the length of halfe a foot; whereon do grow white floures with some yellownesse in the middle: which being past, there succeed small seed-vessels like vnto a pouch, not vnlike to those of Shepheards purse, greene at the first, next yellowish, and lastly when they be ripe, of a browne colour, or like a filberd nut. The root is small and tender, compact of a number of threddy strings very thicke thrust together in manner of a little turfe.


 The Place.
The first groweth by the sea side at Hull, at Boston, and Lynne, and in many other places of Lincolnshire neere vnto the sea, as in Whaploade and Holbecke Marshes in Holland in the same Country. It hath beene found of late growing many miles from the sea side, vpon a great hill in Lancashire called Ingleborough hill; which may seeme strange vnto those that do not know that it will be content with any soile, place, or clyme whatsoeuer: for proofe whereof, my selfe haue sowen the seeds of it in my garden, and giuen them vnto others, with whom they floure, flourish, and bring forth their seed, as naturally as by the sea side; and likewise retaine the same hot spicie taste: which proueth that they refuse no culture, contrary to many other sea-plants.
The second, which is our common scuruie grasse, groweth in diuers places vpon the brimmes of the famous riuer Thames, as at Woolwich, Erith, Greenhithe, Grauesend, as well on the Essex shore as the Kentish; at Portsmouth, Bristow, and many other places alongst the Western coast: but toward the North I haue not heard that any of this kinde hath growne.



 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in May. The seed is ripe in Iune.


2 Cochlearia rotundifolia. Round leafed Scuruie grasse.


2 Cochlearia Britannica. Common English Scuruie grasse.




 The Names.
@ We are not ignorant that in low Germany, this hath seemed to some of the best learned to be the true Britannica, and namely to those next the Ocean in Friesland and Holland. The Germanes call it (...): that is, Cochlearia or Spoonwort, by reason of the compassed roundnes and hollownes of the leaues, like a spoone; and haue thought it to be Plinie's Britannica, because they finde it in the same place growing, and endued with the same qualities. Which excellent plant Caesars soldiers (when they remooued their camps beyond the Rhene) found to preuaile (as the Frisians had taught it them) against that plague and hurtfull disease of the teeth, gums, and sinewes, called the Scuruie, being a depriuation of all good bloud and moisture, in the whole bodie, called Scorbutum; in English, the Scuruie, and Skyrby, a disease happening at the sea among Fishermen, and fresh-water souldiers, and such as delight to sit still without labour and exercise of their bodies; and especially aboue the rest of the causes, when they make not cleane their bisket bread from the floure or mealines that is vpon the same, which doth spoile many. But sith this agrees not with Plinies description, and that there be many other water plants; as Nasturtium, Sium, Cardamine, and such others, like in taste, and not vnlike in proportion and vertues, which are remedies against the diseases aforesaid, there can be no certaine argument drawne therefrom to prooue it to be Britannica. For the leaues at their first comming forth are somewhat long like Pyrola or Adders tongue, soone after somewhat thicker, and hollow like a nauell, after the manner of Sun-dew, but in greatnesse like Soldanella, in the compasse somewhat cornered, in fashion somewhat like a spoone: the floures white, and in shape like the Cuckow floures: the seed reddish, like the seed of Thlaspi, which is not to be seen in Britannica, which is rather holden to be Bistort or garden Patience, than Scuruie grasse. In English it is called Spoonewort, Scruby grasse, and Scuruie grasse.


 The Temperature.
Scuruie grasse is euidently hot and drie, very like in taste and qualitie to the garden Cresses, of an aromaticke or spicie taste.



 The Vertues.
The juice of Spoonewoort giuen to drinke in Ale or Beere, is a singular medicine against the  corrupt and rotten (...), and stench of the mouth: it perfectly cureth the disease called of Hippocrates, Voluulus Hematites: of Pliny, Stomacace: of Marcellus, Oscedo: and of the later writers, Scorbutum: of the Hollanders and Frisians, Scuerbuyck: in English, the Scuruie: either giuing the juice in drinke as aforesaid, or putting six great handfuls to steepe, with long pepper, graines, annise-seede, and liquorice, of each one ounce, the spices being braied, and the herbes brused with your hands, and so put into a pot, such as is before mentioned in the chapter of bastard Rubarbe, and vsed in like maner; or boiled in milke or wine and drunke for certaine daies together it worketh the like effect.
The juice drunke once in a day fasting in any liquor, ale, beere, or wine, doth cause the foresaid  medicine more speedily to worke his effect in curing this filthy, lothsome, heauy, and dull disease, which is very troublesome, and of long continuance. The gums are loosed, swolne, and exulcerate; the mouth greeuously stinking; the thighes and legs are withall very often full of blew spots, not much vnlike those that come of bruses: the face and the rest of the body is oftentimes of a pale colour: and the feet are swolne, as in a dropsie.
There is a disease (saith Olaus magnus in his historie of the Northerne regions) haunting the  campes, which vexe them that are besieged and pinned vp: and it seemeth to come by eating of salt meates, which is increased and cherished with the cold vapors of the stone walls. The Germanes call this disease (as we haue said) Scorbuck, the symptome or passion which hapneth to the mouth, is called of Pliny (...): Stomacace: and that which belongeth to the thighes (...): Marcellus an old writer nameth the infirmities of the mouth (...): which disease commeth of a grosse cold and tough bloud, such as malancholy juice is, not by adustion, but of such a bloud as is the feculent or drossie part thereof: which is gathered in the body by ill diet, slothfulnesse to worke, laisinesse (as we terme it) much sleepe and rest on ship-boord, and not looking to make cleane the bisquet from the mealinesse, and vncleane keeping their bodies, which are the causes of this disease called the scuruie or scyrby; which disease doth not onely touch the outward parts, but the inward also: for the liuer oftentimes, but most commonly the spleene, is filled with this kinde of thicke, cold and tough juice, and is swolne by reason that the substance thereof is slacke, spungie and porous, very apt to receiue such kinde of thick and cold humors. Which thing also Hippocrates hath written of in the second booke of his (...): (...) gums (saith he) are infected, and their mouthes stinke that haue great spleenes or milts: and whosoeuer haue great milts and vse not to bleed, can hardly be cured of this malladie, especially of the vlcers in the legs, and blacke spots. The same is affirmed by Paulus Aegineta in his third booke, 49. chapter, where you may easily see the difference between this disease and the black jaunders; which many times are so confounded together, that the distinction or difference is hard to be known, but by the expert chirurgion: who oftentimes seruing in the ships, as wel her Maiesties as merchants, are greatly pestered with the curing thereof: it shall be requisite to carrie with them the herbe dried: the water distilled, and the juice put into a bottle with a narrow mouth, full almost to the necke, and the rest filled vp with oile oliue, to keep it from putrifaction: the which preparations discreetly vsed, will stand them in great stead for the disease aforesaid.
The herbe stamped and laid vpon spots and blemishes of the face, will take them away within  six houres, but the place must be washed after with water wherein bran hath been sodden.



CHAP. 87. Of Twayblade, or herbe Bifoile.

 The Description.
1 HErbe Byfoile hath many small fibres or threddy strings, fastened vnto a small knot or root, from which riseth vp a slender stom or stalke, tender, fat, and full of juice; in the middle whereof are placed in comely order two broad leaues ribbed and chamfered, in shape like the leaues of Plantaine: vpon the top of the stalke groweth a slender greenish spike made of many small floures, each little floure resembling a gnat, or little gosling newly hatched, very like those of the third sort of Serapias stones.
2 Ophris Trifolia, or Trefoile Twaiblade, hath roots, tender stalkes, and a bush of flours like the precedent; but differeth in that, that this plant hath three leaues which do clip or embrace the

stalke about; and the other hath but two, and neuer more, wherein especially consisteth the difference: although in truth I thinke it a degenerate kinde, and hath gotten a third leafe per accidens, as doth sometimes chance vnto the Adders Tongue, as shall be declared in the Chapter that followeth.
@ 3 This kind of Twaiblade, first described in the last edition of Dodonaeus, hath leaues, floures, and stalkes like to the ordinarie; but at the bottome of the stalke aboue the fibrous roots it hath a bulbe greenish within, and couered with two or three skins: it growes in moist and (...) low places of Holland. @


1 Ophris (...). Twaiblade.


@ 3 Ophris bifolia bulbosa. Bulbous Twaiblade.




 The Place.
The first groweth in moist medowes, fenny grounds, and shadowie places. I haue fonnd it in many places, as at South fleet in Kent, in a Wood of Master Sidleys by Long-field Downes, in a Wood by London called Hampstead Wood, in the fields by High-gate, in the Woods by Ouenden neere to Clare in Essex, and in the Woods by Dunmow in Essex. The second sort is seldome seene.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists, Bifolium, and Ophris.


 The Nature and Vertues.
These are reported of the Herbarists of our time to be good for greene wounds, burstings, and  ruptures; whereof I haue in my vnguents and Balsams for greene wounds had great experience, and good successe.




CHAP. 88. Of Adders-Tongue.

 The Description.
1 OPhioglosson, or Lingua Serpentis (called in English Adders tongue; of some, Adders Grasse, though vnproperly) riseth forth of the ground, hauing one leafe and no more, fat or oleous in substance, of a finger long, and very like the yong and tender leaues of Marigolds: from the bottome of which leafe springeth out a small and tender stalke one finger and a halfe long, on the end whereof doth grow a long small tongue not vnlike the tongue of a serpent, whereof it tooke the name.
2 I haue seene another like the former in root, stalke, and leafe; and (...), in that this plant hath two, and sometimes more crooked tongues, yet of the same fashion, which if my iudgment faile not chanceth per accidens, euen as we see children borne with two thumbes vpon one hand: which moueth me so to thinke, for that in gathering twenty bushels of the leaues a man shall hardly finde one of this fashion.


1 Ophioglosson. Adders-Tongue.


@ 2 Ophioglosson abortivum. Mis-shapen Adders-Tongue.




 The Place.
Adders-Tongue groweth in moist medowes throughout most parts of England; as in a Meadow neere the preaching Spittle adioyning to London; in the Mantels by London, in the medowes by Cole-brooke, in the fields in Waltham Forrest, and many other places.


 The Time.
They are to be found in Aprill and May; but in Iune they are quite vanished and gone.


 The Names.
Ophioglossum is called in shops Lingua serpentis, Linguace, and Lingualace: it is also called Lancea Christi, Enephyllon, and Lingua vulneraria: in English, Adders tongue, or Serpents tongue: in Dutch, Natertonguen: of the Germanes, Nater zungelin.



 The Nature.
Adders-tongue is dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Adders tongue stamped in a stone morter, and boyled in Oile Oliue vnto the consumption  of the iuyce, and vntill the herbes be dry and partched, and then strained, will yeeld a most excellent greene oyle, or rather a balsam for greene wounds, comparable vnto oyle of S. Iohns wort, if it do not farre surpasse it by many degrees: whose beauty is such, that very many Artists haue thought the same to be mixed with Verdigrease.



CHAP. 89. Of One-berry, or Herbe True-loue, and Moone-wort.


1 Herba Paris. One-Berry, or Herbe True-loue.


2 Lunaria minor. Small Moone-wort.



 The Description.
1 HErbe Paris riseth vp with one small tender stalke two hands high; at the very top whereof come forth foure leaues directly set one against another in manner of a Burgundian Crosse or True-loue knot: for which cause among the Antients it hath bin called Herbe True-(...). In the midst of the said leafe comes forth a star-like floure of an herby or grassie colour; out of the middest whereof there ariseth vp a blackish browne berrie: the root is long and tender, creeping vnder the earth, and dispersing it selfe hither and thither.
2 The small Lunary springeth forth of the ground with one (...) like Adders-tongue, iagged or cut on both sides into fiue or six deepe cuts or notches, not much vnlike the leaues of Scolopendria, or (...), (...) a greene colour; whereupon doth grow a small naked stem of a finger long, bearing at the top many little seeds clustering together; which being gathered and laid in a platter or such like thing for the space of three weekes, there will fall from the same a fine dust or meale of a whitish colour, which is the seed if it bring forth any. The root is slender, and compact of many small threddy strings.

@ In England (saith Camerarius) there growes a certaine kinde of Lunaria, which hath many leaues, and sometimes also sundry branches; which therefore I haue caused to be delineated, that other Herbarists might also take notice hereof. Thus much Camerarius, Epit. Mat. p. 644. where he giues an elegant figure of a varietie hauing more leaues and branches than the ordinary, otherwise not differing from it.
3 Besides this varietie there is another kinde set forth by Clusius; whose figure and description I thinke good here to set downe. This hath a root consisting of many fibres somewhat thicker than those of the common kinde: from which arise one or two winged leaues, that is, many leaues set to one stalke; and these are like the leaues of the other Lunaria, but that they are longer, thicker, and more diuided, and of a yellowish greene colour. Amongst these leaues there comes vp a stalke fat and juycie, bearing a greater tuft of floures or seeds (for I know not whether to cal them) than the ordinarie, but otherwise very like thereto. It groweth in the mountaines of Silesia, and in some places of Austria. @


@ 3 Lunaria minor ramosa. Small branched Moon-wort.




 The Place.
Herba Paris groweth plentifully in all these places following; that is to say, in Chalkney wood neere to wakes (...), seuen miles from Colchester in Essex, and in the wood by Robinhoods well, neere to Nottingham; in the parsonage orchardat Radwinter in Essex, neere to Saffron Walden; in Blackburne at a place called Merton in Lancashire; in the Moore by Canturbury called the Clapper; in Dingley wood, six miles from Preston in Aundernesse; in Bocking parke by Braintree in Essex; at Hesset in Lancashire, and in Cotting wood in the North of England; as that excellent painefull and diligent Physition Mr. Doctor Turner of late memorie doth record in his Herbal.
Lunaria or small Moone-wort groweth vpon dry and barren mountaines and heaths. I haue found it growing in these places following; that is to say, about Bathe in Somersetshire in many places, especially at a place called Carey, two miles from Bruton, in the next Close vnto the Church-yard; on Cockes Heath betweene Lowse and Linton, three miles from Maidstone in Kent: it groweth also in the ruines of an old bricke-kilne by Colchester, in the ground of Mr. George Sayer, called Miles end: it groweth likewise vpon the side of Blacke-heath, neere vnto the stile that leadeth vnto Eltham house, about an hundred paces from the stile: also in Lancashire neere vnto a Wood called Fairest, by Latham: moreouer, in Nottinghamshire by the West wood at Gringley, and at Weston in the Ley field by the West side of the towne; and in the Bishops field at Yorke, neere vnto Wakefield, in the Close where Sir George Sauill his house standeth, called the Heath Hall, by the relation of a learned Doctor in Physicke called Mr. Iohn Mershe of Cambridge, and many other places.


 The Time.
Herba Paris floureth in Aprill, and the berry is ripe in the end of May.
Lunaria or small Moone-wort is to be seene in the moneth of May.


 The Names.
One-berry is also called Herbe True-loue, and Herbe Paris: in Latine, Herba Paris, and (...) tetraphyllum by Gesner and Lobel.
Lunaria minor is called in English Small Lunarie, and Moon-wort.


 The Nature.
Herbe Paris is exceeding cold; whereby it represses the rage and force of poison.
Lunaria minor is cold and dry of temperature.



 The Vertues.
The berries of Herbe Paris giuen by the space of twentie daies, are excellent good against  poison, or the pouder of the herbe drunke in like manner halfe a spoonfull at a time in the morning fasting.
The same is ministred with great successe vnto such as are become peeuish, or without vnderstanding, being ministred as is aforesaid, euery morning by the space of twentie daies, as Baptista Sardus, and Matthiolus haue recorded. Since which time there hath been further experience made thereof against poison, and put in practice in the citie of Paris, in Louaine, and at the baths in (...), by the right excellent Herbarists Matthias de L'obel, and Petrus Pena, who hauing often read, that it was one of the Aconites, called (...), and so by consequence of a poisoning quality, they gaue it vnto dogs and lambes, who receiued no hurt by the same: wherefore they further prosecuted the experience thereof, and gaue vnto two dogs fast bound or coupled together, a dram of Arsenicke, and one dram of Mercurie sublimate mixed with flesh (@ in the Aduersaria it is but of each halfe a dram, and there pag. 105. you may finde this Historie more largely set downe. @) which the dogs would not willingly eat, and therefore they had it crammed downe their throats: vnto one of these dogs they gaue this Antidote following in a little red wine, whereby he recouered his former health againe within a few houres: but the other dog which had none of the medicine, died incontinently.
This is the receit.
R. (...) Angelicae ((...)) domesticam, and syluestrem, Vicetoxici, Valerianae domesticae, Polipodij querni, radicum Altheae, and Vrticae, ana 3. iiij, Corticis Mezerei Germanici, 3. ij. granorum herbae Paridis, N. 24. foliorum eiusdem cumtoto, Num. 36. Ex maceratis in aceto radicibus, and siccatis fit omnium pulvis.
The people in Germany do vse the leaues of Herbe Paris in greene wounds, for the which it is  very good, as (...) Camerarius (...); who likewise saith, that the pouder of the roots giuen to drink, doth (...) cease the gripings and paine of the Collicke.
Small Moonewoort is singular to heale greene and fresh wounds: it staieth the bloudy flix. It  hath beene vsed among the Alchymistes and witches to doe wonders withall, who say, that it will loose lockes, and make them to fall from the feet of horses that grase where it doth grow, and hath beene called of them Martagon, whereas in truth they are all but drowsie dreames and illusions; but it is singular for wounds as aforesaid.



CHAP. 90. Of Winter-Greene.

 The Description.
1 PYrola hath many tender and verie greene leaues, almost like the leaues of Beete, but (...) in my opinion like to the leaues of a Peare-tree, whereof it tooke his name Pyrola, for that it is Pyriformis. Among these leaues commeth vp a stalke garnished with prettie white floures, of a verie pleasant sweet smell, like Lillium Conuallium, or the Lillie of the Valley. The root is small and threddie, creeping farre abroad vnder the ground.
@ 2 This differs from the last described in the slendernesse of the stalkes, and smalnesse of the leaues and floures: for the leaues of this are not so thicke and substantiall, but very thinne, sharpe pointed, and very finely snipt about the edges, blacker; and resembling a Peare-tree leafe. The floures are like those of the former, yet smaller and more in number: to which succeed fiue cornered seed vessels with a long pointell as in the precedent: the root also creepes no lesse than that of the former, and here and there puts vp new stalkes vnder the mosse. It growes vpon the Austrian and Styrian Alpes, and floures in Iune and Iuly.
3 This is an elegant plant, and sometimes becomes shrubbie, for the new and short branches growing vp each yeare, (...) remaine firme and greene for some yeares, and grow straight vp, vntill at length borne downe by their owne weight they fall downe and hide themselues in the mosse. It hath commonly at each place where new branches growe forth, two, three, or foure thicke verie greene and shining leaues, almost in forme and magnitude like to the leaues of Laureola, yet snipt about the edges, of a very drying taste, and then bitterish. From among these leaues at the Spring of the yeare new branches shoot vp, hauing small leaues like (...) vpon them, and at their toppes

1 Pyrola. Winter Greene.
@ 2 Pyrola 2 tenerior Clus. The smaller Winter-Greene.
@ 3 Pyrola 3. fruticans Clus. Shrubby Winter-Greene.
@ 4 Pyrola 4. minima Clus. Round leaued Winter Greene.

5 Monophyllon. One Blade.
grow floures like to those of the first described, yet somewhat larger, of a whitish purple colour; which fading, are succeeded by fiue cornered seed vessels containing a very small seed; the roots are long and creeping. It growes a little from Vienna in Austria in the woods of Entzestorf, and in diuers places of Bohemia and Silesia.
4 This from creeping roots sends vp short stalkes, set at certaine spaces with small, round, and thin leaues, also snipt about the edges, amongst which vpon a naked stem growes a floure of a pretty bignes, consisting of fiue white sharpish pointed leaues with ten threds, and a (...) pointell in the midst. The seed is contained in such heads as the former, and it is very small. This growes in the shadowie places of the Alpes of Sneberge, Hochbergerin, Durrenstaine, towards the roots of these great mountaines. Clus. @
5 Monophyllon, or Vnifolium, hath a leafe not much vnlike the greatest leafe of Iuie, with many ribs or sinewes like the Plantaine leafe; which single leafe doth alwaies spring forth of the earth alone, but when the stalke riseth vp, it bringeth vpon his sides two leaues, in fashion like the former; at the top of which slender stalke come forth fine small floures like Pyrola; which being vaded, there succeed small red berries. The roote is small, tender, and creeping farre abroad vnder the vpper face of the earth.


 The Place.
1 Pyrola groweth in Lansdale, and Crauen, in the North part of England, especially in a close called Crag-close.
2 Monophyllon groweth in Lancashire in Dingley wood, six miles from Preston in Aundernesse; and in Harwood, neere to Blackburne likewise.


 The Time.
1 Pyrola floureth in Iune and Iuly, and groweth winter and sommer.
2 Monophyllon floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
1 Pyrola is called in English Winter-greene: it hath beene called Limonium of diuers, but vntruly.
2 Monophyllon, according to the etymologie of the word, is called in Latine Vnifolium: in English, One-blade, or One-leafe.


 The Nature:
1 Pyrola is cold in the second degree, and drie in the third.
2 Monophyllon is hot and dry of complexion.


 The Vertues.
Pyrola is a most singular wound-hearbe, either giuen inwardly, or applied outwardly: the leaues  whereof stamped and strained, and the iuice made into an vnguent, or healing salue, with waxe, oile, and turpentine, doth cure wounds, vlcers, and fistulaes, that are mundified from the callous and tough matter, which keepeth the same from healing.
The decoction hereof made with wine, is commended to close vp and heale wounds of the entrailes, and inward parts: it is also good for vlcers of the kidneies, especially made with water, and the roots of Comfrey added thereto.
The leaues of Monophyllon, or Vnifolium, are of the same force in wounds with Pyrola, especially  in wounds among the nerues and sinewes. Moreouer, it is esteemed of some late writers a most perfect medicine against the pestilence, and all poisons, if a dram of the root be giuen in vineger mixed with wine or water, and the sicke go to bed and sweat vpon it.




CHAP. 91. Of Lilly in the valley, or May Lilly.


1 Lilium conuallium. Conuall Lillies.


2 Lilium conuallium floribus suaue-rubentibus. Red Conuall Lillies.



 The Description.
1 THe Conuall Lillie, or Lilly of the Vally, hath many leaues like the smallest leaues of Water Plantaine; among which riseth vp a naked stalke halfe a foot high, garnished with many white floures like little bels, with blunt and turned edges, of a strong sauour, yet pleasant enough; which being past, there come small red berries, much like the berries of Asparagus, wherein the seed is contained. The root is small and slender, creeping far abroad in the ground.
2 The second kinde of May Lillies, is like the former in euery respect; and herein varieth or differeth, in that this kinde hath reddish floures, and is thought to haue the sweeter smell.


 The Place.
1 The first groweth on Hampsted heath, foure miles from London, in great abundance: neere to Lee in Essex, and vpon Bushie heath, thirteene miles from London, and many other places.
2 That other kind with the red floure is a stranger in England: howbeit I haue the same growing in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in May, and their fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Latines haue named it Lilium Gonuallium: Gesner doth thinke it to be Callionymum: in the Germane tongue, Meyen blumlen: the low Dutch, Meyen bloemkens: in French, Muguet: yet there is likewise another herbe which they call Muguet, commonly named in English, Woodroof. It is called in English Lillie of the Valley, or the Conuall Lillie, and May Lillies, and in some places Liriconfancie.


 The Nature.
They are hot and drie of complexion.



 The Vertues.
The floures of the Valley Lillie distilled with wine, and drunke the quantitie of a spoonfull, restoreth  speech vnto those that haue the dum palsie and that are falne into the Apoplexie, and is good against the gout, and comforteth the heart.
The water aforesaid doth strengthen the memorie that is weakened and diminished, it helpeth  also the inflammation of the eies, being dropped thereinto.
The floures of May Lillies put into a glasse, and set in a hill of antes close stopped for the space  of a moneth and then taken out, therein you shall find a liquour, that appeaseth the paine and griefe of the gout, being outwardly applied; which is commended to be most excellent.



CHAP. 92. Of Sea Lauander.


1 Limonium. Sea Lauander.


2 Limonium parvum. Rocke Lauander.



 The Description.
1 THere hath beene among writers from time to time, great contention about this plant Limonium, no one authour agreeing with another: for some haue called this herbe Limonium; some another herb by this name; and some in remouing the rock, haue mired themselues in the mud, as Matthiolus, who described two kindes, but made no distinction of them, nor yet expressed which was the true Limonium; but as a man heerein ignorant, hee speakes not a word of them. Now then to leaue controuersies and cauilling, the true Limonium is that which hath faire leaues, like the Limon or Orenge tree, but of a darke greene colour, somewhat fatter, and a little crumpled: amongst which leaues riseth vp an hard and brittle naked stalke of a foot high, diuided at the top into sundry other small branches, which grow for the most part vpon the one side, full of little blewish floures, in shew like Lauander, with long red seed, and a thicke root like vnto the small Docke.
2 There is a kinde of Limonium like the first in each respect, but lesser, which groweth vpon rockes and chalkie cliffes.
@ 3 Besides these two here described, there is another elegant Plant by Clusius and others referred to this kindred: the description thereof is thus; from a long slender root come forth long greene leaues lying spred vpon the ground, being also deepely sinuated on both sides, and somewhat roughish. Amongst these leaues grow vp the stalkes welted with slender indented skinnes, and towards their tops they are diuided into sundry branches after the manner of the ordinarie one; but these branches are also winged, and at their tops they carry floures some foure or fiue

clustering together, consisting of one thin crispe or crumpled leafe of a light blew colour (which continues long, if you gather them in their perfect vigour, and so drie them) and in the middest of this blew comes vp little white floures, consisting of fiue little round leaues with some white threds in their middles. This plant was first obserued by (...) at Ioppa in Syria: but it growes also vpon the coasts of Barbarie, and at Malacca and Cadiz in Spaine: I haue seene it growing with many other rare plants, in the Garden of my kinde friend Mr. Iohn Tradescant at South Lambeth.
4 Clusius in the end of his fourth Booke Historiae Plantarum, sets forth this, and saith, hee receiued this figure with one dryed leafe of the plant sent him from Paris from Claude Gonier an Apothecarie of that citie, who receiued it (as you see it here exprest) from Lisbone. Now Clusius describes the leafe that it was hard, and as if it had been a piece of leather, open on the vpper side, and distinguished with many large purple veines on the inside, etc. for the rest of his description was onely taken from the figure (as he himselfe saith) which I hold impertinent to set downe, seeing I heere giue you the same figure, which by no meanes I could omit, for the strangenesse thereof, but hope that some or other that trauell into forraine parts may finde this elegant plant, and know it by this small expression, and bring it home with them, that so we may come to a perfecter knowledge thereos. @


@ 3 Limonium folio sinuato. Sea-Lauander with the indented leafe.


@ 4 Limonio congener, Clus. Hollow leaued Sea-Lauander:




 The Place.
1 The first groweth in great plentie vpon the walls of the fort against Grauesend: but abundantly on the bankes of the Riuer below the same towne, as also below the Kings Store-house at Chattam: and fast by the Kings Ferrey going into the Isle of Shepey: in the salt marshes by Lee in Essex: in the Marsh by Harwich, and many other places.

The small kinde I could neuer finde in any other place but vpon the chalky cliffe going from the towne of Margate downe to the sea side, vpon the left hand.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It shall be needlesse to trouble you with any other Latine name than is exprest in their titles: the people neere the sea side where it groweth do call it Marsh Lauander, and sea Lauander.
@ This cannot be the Limonium of Dioscorides, for the leaues are not longer than a (...), nor the stalke so tall as that of a Lillie, but you shall finde more hereafter concerning this in the Chapter of water Plantaine. I cannot better refer this to any plant described by the Antients than to Britannica described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 2. @


 The Nature.
The seed of Limonium is very astringent or binding.


 The Vertues.
The seed beaten into pouder, and drunke in wine, helpeth the collicke, strangurie, and Dysenteria.
The seed taken as aforesaid, staieth the ouermuch flowing of womens termes, and all other  fluxes of bloud.



CHAP. 93. Of Serapias Turbith, or Sea Starwort.


1 Tripolium vulgare (...). Great Sea Starwort.


@ 2 Tripolium vulgare minus. Small Sea Starwort.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Tripolium hath long and large leaues somewhat hollow or furrowed, of a shining greene colour deolining to blewnesse, like the leaues of Woade: among which riseth vp a stalke of two cubits high, and more, which toward the top is diuided iuto many small branches garnished with many floures like Camomill, yellow in the middle, set about

or (...) with small blewish (...), like a pale, as in (...) (...) (...) (...), which (...) (...) a whitish rough (...), that flieth away with the (...). The (...) is long and (...).
2 There is another kinde of Tripolium like the first, but much smaller, wherein (...) the difference.


 The Place.
These (...) grow plentifully alongst the (...) coasts in many places, as by (...) fort (...) Grauesend, in the Ile of Shepey in sundry places, in a marsh which is (...) the towne walls (...) Harwich, in the marsh by Lee in (...), in a (...) which is between the Ile of Shepey and (...), especially where it ebbeth and (...): being brought into gardens, it flourisheth a (...) time, but there it waxeth huge, great, and ranke; and changeth the great roots into strings.


 The Time.
These herbs do floure in May and Iune.


 The Names.
It is reported by men of great fame and learning, that this plant was called Tripolium, because it doth change the colour of his floures thrice in a day. This run: our we may beleeue, and it may be true, for that we see and perceiue things of as great and greater wonder to proceed out of the earth. This herbe I planted in my garden, whither (in his season) I did repaire to finde out the truth hereof, but I could not espie any such variablenesse herein; (...) thus much I may say, that as the heate of the sunne doth change the colour of oiuers floures, so it fell out with this, which in the morning was very faire, but afterward of a pale or wan colour. Which (...) that to be but a fable which Dioscorides saith is (...) by some, that in one day it changeth the colour of his floures thrice: that is to say, in the morning it is white, at noone purple, and in the euening (...): or crimson. But it is not (...), that there may be sound three colours of the floures in one day, by reason that the floures are not all (...) together (as before I (...) touched) but one after another by little and little. And there may easily be obserued three colours in them, which is to be vnderstood of them that are beginning to floure, that are perfectly floured, and those that are falling away. For they that are blowing and be not wide open and perfect, are of a purplish colour, and those that are (...) and wide open, of a whitish blew; and such as haue fallen away haue a white down: which changing hapneth (...) sundry other plants. This herbe is called of (...), Turbith: women that (...) by the sea side, call it in English, blew Daisies, or blew Camomill; and about (...) it is called Hogs beanes, sor that the swine do greatly desire to seed thereon: as also for that the knobs about the roots doe somewhat resemble the Garden Beane. It is called in Greeke (...): and diuers others (...): it may be fitly called Aster Marinus, or Amellus Marinus: in English, Sea (...), Serapio's Turbith: of some, Blew Daisies. The Arabian (...), doth call Sea (...), Turbith, and after (...), (...): yet Actuarius the Grecian doth thinke that Turbith is the root of Alypum: Mesues iudged it to be the root of an herbe like fennell. The Historie of Turbith of the shops shall be discoursed vpon in his proper place.


 The Nature.
Tripolium is hot in the third degree, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The root of Tripolium taken in wine by the quantitie of two drams, driueth forth by siege (...) and grosse humors, for which cause it is often giuen to them that haue the dropsie.
It is an excellent herbe against poison, and comparable with Pyrola, if not of greater efficacy in  healing of wounds either outward or inward.



CHAP. 94. Of Turbith of Antioch.

 The Description.
GArcias a Portugal Physition saith that Turbith is a plant hauing a root which is neither great nor long: the stalke is of two spans long, sometimes much longer, a finger thicke, which creepeth in the ground like Iuie, and bringeth sorth leaues like those of the marish Mallow. The floures be also like those of the Mallow, of a reddish white colour: the lower part of the stalke only, which is next to the root and gummie, is that which is profitable in medicine, and is the same that is vsed in shops: they chuse that for the best which is hollow, and round like a reed, brittle, and with a smooth barke, as also that whereunto doth cleaue a congealed gum, which is said to be gummosum, or gummy, and somewhat white. But, as Garcias saith, it is not alwaies

gummie of his owne nature, but the Indians because they see that our merchants note the best Turbith by the gumminesse, are wont before they gather the same, either to writhe or else lightly to bruse them, that the sap or liquor may issue out; which root being once hardned, they picke out from the rest to sell at a greater price. It is likewise made white, as the (...) Author sheweth, being dried in the sunne: for if it be dried in the shadow it waxeth blacke, which notwith standing may be as good as the white which is dried in the Sunne.


Turbith Alexandrinum officinarum. Turpetum, or Turbith of the shops.




 The Place.
It groweth by the sea side, but yet not so neere that the wash or water of the sea may come to it, but neere about, and that for two or three miles in vntilled grounds, rather moist than drie. It is found in Cambaya, Surrate, in the Ile Dion, (...), and in places hard adioining; also in Guzarate, where it groweth (...), from (...) great abundance of it is brought into Persia, Arabia, Asia the lesse, and also into Portingale and other parts of Europe: but that is preferred which groweth in Cambaya.


 The Names.
It is called of the Arabians, Persians, and Turkes Turbith: and in Guzarata (...): in the prouince Canara, in which is the city Goa, Tiguar: likewise in Europe the learned call it diuersly, according to their seuerall fancies, which hath bred sundry controuersies, as it hath fallen out aswell in Hermodactyls, as in Turbith; the vse and possession of which we cannot seeme to want: but which plant is the true Turbith, we haue great cause to doubt; Some haue thought (...) Tripolium marinum, described in the former chapter, to be Turbith: others haue supposed it to be one of the Tithymales, but which kinde they know not: Guillandinus saith, that the root of Tithymalus myrsinitis is the true Turbith; which caused Lobeltus and Pena to plucke vp by the roots all the kindes of Tithymales, and drie them very curiously; which when they had beheld, and throughly tried, they found it nothing so. The Arabians and halfe Moores that dwell in the East parts haue giuen diuers names vnto this plant: and as their words are diuers, so haue they diuers significatious; but this name Turbith they seeme to interpret to be any milky root which doth strongly purge flegme, as this plant doth. So that as men haue thought good, pleasing themselues, they haue made many and diuers constuctions which haue troubled many excellent learned men to know what root is the true (...). But briefly to set downe my opinion, not varying from the iudgment of men which are of great experience; I thinke assuredly that the root of Scammony of Antioch is the true and vndoubted Turbith, one reason especially that moueth me so to thinke is, for that I haue taken vp the roots of Scammony which grew in my garden, and compared them with the roots of Turbith, between which I found little (...) no difference at all
@ Through all Spain (as Clusius in his notes vpon Garcias testifies) they vse the roots of Thapsia for Turbith which also haue been brought hither, and I keepe some of them by me, but they purge little or nothing at all being drie, though it may be the green root or juice may haue some purging faculty. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Indian physitions vse it to purge flegme, to which if there be no feuer they adde ginger, otherwise they giue it without in the broth of a chicken, and sometimes in faire water.
Mesues writeth, that Turbith is hot in the third degree; and that it voideth thicke tough  flegme out of the stomacke, chest, sinewes, and out of the furthermost parts of the body: but (as he saith) it is slow in working, and troubleth and ouerturneth the stomacke: and therefore ginger, masticke, and other spices are to be mixed with it; also oile of sweet almondes, or almondes themselues, or sugar, least the body with the vse herof should pine and fall away. Others temper

it with Dates, sweet Almonds, and certaine other things, making thereof a composition (that the Apothecaries call an Electuarie) which is named (...): common in shops, and in (...) vse among expert Physitions.
There is giuen at one time of this Turbith one dram (more or lesse) two at the most: but in the  decoction, or in the infusion three or foure.



CHAP. 95. Of Arrow-head, or Water-archer.


1 Sagittaria maior. Great Arrow-head.


2 Sagittaria minor. Small Arrow-head.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Water-archer or Arrow-head, hath large and long leaues, in shape like the signe Sagittarius, or rather like a bearded broad Arrow head. Among which riseth vp a fat and thicke stalke, two or three foot long, hauing at the top many prettie white floures, declining to a light carnation, compact of three small leaues: which being past, there come after great rough knops or burres wherein is the seed. The root consisteth of many strings.
2 The second is like the first, and differeth in that this kinde hath smaller leaues and floures, and greater burres and roots.
3 The third kinde of Arrow-head hath leaues in shape like the broad Arrow-head, standing vpon the ends of tender foot stalkes a cubit (...): among which rise vp long naked smooth stalks of a greenish colour, from the middle whereof to the top doe grow floures like to the (...). The root is small and threddie.


 The Place.
These herbes doe grow in the watrie ditches by Saint George his field neere vnto London; in the Tower ditch at London; in the ditches neere the wals of Oxford; by Chelmesford in Essex, and many other places, as namely in the ditch neere the place of execution, called Saint Thomas Waterings not far from London.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune.



 The Names.
Sagittaria, may be called in English the Water-archer, or Arrow-head. @ Some would haue it the (...) of Theophrastus; and it is the Pistana Magonis, and Sagitta of (...) lib. 21. cap. 17.


 The Nature and Vertues.
I finde not any thing extant in writing either concerning their vertues or temperament, but doubtlesse they are cold and drie in qualitie, and are like Plantaine in facultie and temperament.



CHAP. 96. Of Water Plantaine.


1 Plantago aquatica maior. Great Water Plantaine.


2 Plantago aquatica minor stellata. Starry headed small Water (...).


3 Plantago aquatica humilis. Dwarfe water Plantaine.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of water Plantaine hath faire great large leaues like the land Plaintaine, but smoother, and full of ribs or sinewes: among which riseth vp a tall stemme foure foot high, diuiding it selfe into many slender branches, garnished with infinit small white floures,

which being past there appeare triangle huskes or buttons wherein is the seed. The root is as it were a great tuft of threds or thrums.
@ 2 This plant in his roots and leaues is like the last described, as also in the stalke, but much lesse in each of them, the stalke being about some foot high; at the top whereof stand many pretty starre-like skinny seed-vessels, containing a yellowish seed. @
3 The second kinde hath long, little, and narrow leaues, much like the Plantaine called Ribwoort: among which rise vp small and feeble stalks branched at the top, whereon are placed white floures, consisting of three slender leaues; which being fallen, there come to your view round knobs, or rough burs: the root is threddy.


 The Place.
1 This herbe growes about the brinkes of riuers, ponds and ditches almost euery where.
@ 2 3 These are more rare. I found the second a little beyond Ilford, in the way to Rumford, and Mr. Goodyer found it also growing vpon Hounslow heath. I found the third in the Company of Mr. William Broad, and Mr. Leonard Buckner, in a ditch on this side Margate in the Isle of Tenet. @


 The Time.
They floure from Iune till August.


 The Names.
The first kinde is called Plantago (...), that is, water Plantaine. @ The second Lobell calls Alismapusillum Angustifolium muricatum, and in the Hist. Lugd. it is called Damasonium stellatum. @ The third is named Plantago aquatical humilis, that is, the low water Plantaine.
@ I thinke it fit here to restore this plant to his antient dignitie, that is, his names and titles wherewith he was anciently (...) by Dioscorides and Pliny. The former whereof calls it by sundry names, and all very significant and proper, as (...): thus many are Greek, and therefore ought not to be reiected, as they haue been by some without either reason or authoritie. For the barbarous names we can say nothing; now it is said to be called Limonium, because (...): it growes in wet or ouerflowen medowes: it is called Neuroides, because the leafe is composed of diuers strings or fibres running from the one end thereof to the other, as in Plantain, which therfore by Dioscordies is termed by the same reason (...): Also it may be as fitly termed Lonchitis sor the similitude which the leafe hath to the top or head of a lance which (...) properly signifies, as that other plant described by Dios. lib. 3. cap. 161. for that the seed (a lesse eminent part) resembles the same thing. And for Potamogeiton which signifies a neighbour to the Riuer or water, I thinke it loues the water aswell, and is as neere a neighbour to it as that which takes it's name from thence, and is described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 101. Now to come to Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 8. he calls it, Beta silvestris, Limonion, and Neuroides: the two later namesare out of Dioscorides, and I shall shew you where also you shall finde the former in him. Thus much I thinke might serue for the vindication of my assertion, sor I dare boldly affirme that no late writer can fit all these names to any other plant, and that makes me more to wonder that all our late Herbarists as Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, (...), Caesalpinus, Daleschampius, but aboue all Pena and Lobell, who Aduers. pag. 126. call it to question, should not allow this plant to be Limonium, especially seing that Anguillara had before or in their time asserted it so to be; but whether he gaue any reasons or no for his assertion, I cannot tell, because I could neuer by any meanes get his Opinions, but only finde by Bauhine his Pinax that such was his opinion hereof. But to returne from whence I digrest, I will giue you Dioscorides his description, and a briefe explanation thereof, and so desist; it is thus: It hath leaues like a Beet, thinner and larger, 10. or more; a stalke slender, straight, and as tall as that of a Lilly, and full of seeds of an astringent taste. The leaues of this you see are larger than those of a Beet, and thin, and as I formerly told you in the names, neruous; which to be so may be plainely gathered by Dioscorides his words in the description of white Hellebore, whose leaues he compares to the leaues of Plantaine and the wilde Beet: now there is no wild Beet mentioned by any of the Antients, but only this by Pliny in the place (...) quoted, nor no leafe more fit to compare those of white Hellebore to, than those of water Plantaine, especially sor the nerues and fibres that run alongst the leaues; the stalke also of this is but slender considering the height, and it growes straight, and as high as that of a Lilly, with the top plentirifully stored with astringent seed; so that no one note is wanting in this, nor scarse any to be found in the other plants that many haue of late set forth for Limonium. @


 The Nature.
Water Plantaine is cold and dry of temperature.



 The Vertues.
The leaues of water Plantaine, as some Authors report, are good to be laid vpon the legs of such  as are troubled with the Dropsie, and hath the same propertie that the land Plantaine hath.
@ Dioscordies and Galen commend the seed hereof giuen in Wine, against (...), Dysenteries, the spitting of bloud, and ouermuch flowing of womens termes.
Pliny saith, the leaues are good against burnes. @ 



CHAP. 97. Of Land Plantaine.


1 Plantago latifolia. Broad leaued Plantaine.


2 Plantago incana. Hoarie Plantaine.



 The Description.
1 AS the Greekes haue called some kindes of Herbes Serpents tongue, Dogs tongue, and Oxe tongue; so haue they termed a kind of Plantaine Arnoglosson, which is as if you should say Lambes tongue, very well knowne vnto all, by reason of the great commoditie and plenty thereof growing euery where; and therefore it is needlesse to spend time about them. The greatnesse and fashion of the leaues hath been the cause of the varieties and diuersities of their names
2 The second is like the first kinde, and differeth in that, that this kinde of Plantaine hath greater, but shorter spikes or knaps: and the leaues are of an hoarie or ouerworne greene colour: the stalkes are likewise hoary and hairy.
3 The small Plantaine hath many tender leaues ribbed like vnto the great Plantaine, and is very like in each respect vnto it, sauing that it is altogether lesser.
4 The spiked Rose Plantaine hath very few leaues, narrower than the leaues of the second kinde of Plantaine, sharper at the ends, and further growing one from another. It beareth a very double floure vpon a short stem like a rose, of a greenish colour tending to yellownesse. The seed groweth vpon a spikie tuft aboue the highest part of the plant; notwithstanding it is but very low in respect of the other Plantaines aboue mentioned.



4 Plantago Rosea spicata. Spiked Rose Plantaine.


5 Plantago Rosea exotica. Strange Rose Plantaine.


@ 6 Plantago panniculis sparsis. Plantaine with spoky tufts.


5 The fifth kinde of Plantaine hath beene a stranger in England and elsewhere, vntill the impression hereof. The cause why I say so is, the want of consideration of the beauty which is in this plant, wherein it excelleth all the other. Moreouer, because that it hath not bin written of or recorded before this present time, though plants of lesser moment haue beene very curiously set forth. This plant hath leaues like vnto them of the former, and more orderly spred vpon the ground like a Rose: among which rise vp many small stalks like the other plantaines, hauing at the top of euery one a fine double Rose altogether vnlike the former, of an hoary or rusty greene colour.
@ I take this set forth by our Author to be the same with that which Clusius receiued from Iames Garret the yonger, from London; and therefore I giue you the figure thereof in this place, together with this addition to the historie out of Clusius: That some of the heads are like those of the former Rose Plantaine; other some are spike fashion, and some haue a spike growing as it were out of the midst of the Rose, and some heads are otherwise shaped: also the whole plant is more hoary than the common Rose Plantaine.
6 This plantain must not here be forgot, though it be somwhat hard to be found: his leaues, roots, and stalkes are like those of the ordinarie, but in stead of a compact spike it hath one much diuided after the manner as you see it here expressed in the figure, and the colour thereof is greenish. @



 The Place.
The greater Plantaines do grow almost euery where.
The lesser Plantaine is found on the sea coasts and bankes of great (...), which are sometimes washed with brackish water.
@ The Rose Plantaines grow with vs in gardens; and the sixth with spokie tufts groweth in some places in the Isle of Tenet, where I first found it, being in company with Mr. Thomas (...), Mr. Leonard Buckner, and other London Apothecaries, Anno 1632. @


 The Time.
They are to be seene from Aprill vnto September.


 The Names.
Plantaine is called in Latine Plantago, and in Greeke (...), and Arnoglossa; that is to say, Lambes tongue: the Apothecaries keepe the Latine name: in Italian, Plantagine, and Plantagine: in Spanish, (...): the Germanes, (...): in Low-Dutch, (...): in English, Plantain, and Weybred: in French, Plantain.


 The Temperature.
Plantaine (as Galen faith) is of a mixt temperature; for it hath in it a certaine waterie coldnesse, with a little harshnesse, earthy, dry, and cold: therefore they are cold and dry in the second degree. To be briefe, they are dry without biting, and cold without benumming. The root is of like temperature, but drier, and not so cold. The seed is of subtill parts, and of temperature lesse cold.


 The Vertues.
Plantaine is good for vlcers that are of hard curation, for fluxes, issues, rheumes, and rottennesse, and for the bloudy flix: it stayeth bleeding, it heales vp hollow sores and vlcers, as well old as new. Of all the Plantaines the greatest is the best, and excelleth the rest in facultie and vertue.
The iuyce or decoction of Plantaine drunken stoppeth the bloudy flix and all other fluxes of  the belly, stoppeth the pissing of bloud, spitting of bloud, and all other issues of bloud in man or woman, and the desire to vomit.
Plantaine leaues stamped and made into a Tansie, with the yelkes of egges, stayeth the inordinate  flux of the termes, although it haue continued many yeares.
The root of Plantaine with the seed boyled in white Wine and drunke, openeth the conduits  or passages of the liuer and kidnies, cures the jaundice, and vlcerations of the kidnies and (...).
The juyce dropped in the eyes doth coole the heat and inflammation thereof. I finde in ancient  Writers many good-morrowes, which I thinke not meet to bring into your memorie againe; as that three roots will cure one griefe, foure another disease, six hanged about the necke are good for another maladie, etc. all which are but ridiculous toyes.
The leaues are singular good to make a water to wash a sore throat or mouth, or the priuy parts  of a man or woman.
The leaues of Plantaine stamped and put into Oyle Oliue, and set in the hot Sun for a moneth  together, and after boyled in a kettle of seething water (which we doe call Balneum Mariae) and then strained, preuaileth against the paines in the eares, the yard, or matrix, (being dropped into the eares, or cast with a syringe into the other parts before rehearsed) or the paines of the fundament; proued by a learned Gentleman Mr. William Godowrus Sergeant Surgeon to the Queenes Maiestie.



CHAP. 98. Of Rib-wort.

 The Description.
1 RIb-wort or small Plantaine hath many leaues flat spred vpon the ground, narrow, sharp pointed, and ribbed for the most part with fiue nerues or sinewes, and therefore it was called Quinque-neruia; in the middle of which leaues riseth vp a crested or ribbed stalke, bearing at the top a darke or dusky knap, set with a few such white floures as are the floures of wheat. The root and other parts are like the other Plantaines.
@ There is another lesse kinde of this Rib-wort, which differs not from the last mentioned in any thing but the smallnesse thereof. @
2 Rose Rib-wort hath many broad and long leaues of a darke greene colour, sharpe pointed, and (...) with fiue nerues or sinewes like the common Rib-wort; amongst which rise vp naked (...) (...), chamfered, or crested with certaine sharpe edges: at the top whereof groweth a great and large tuft of such leaues as those are that grow next the ground, making one entire tuft

or vmbel, in shape resembling the rose (wherof I thought good to giue it his syrname Rose) which is from his floure.
@ This also I think differs not from that of Clusius; wherefore I giue his figure in the place of that set forth by our Author. @


1 Plantago quinqueneruia. Ribwort Plantaine.


2 Plantago quinqueneruiarosea. Rose Ribwort.




 The Place.
Ribwort groweth almost euery where in the borders of path-wayes and fertile fields.
Rose Ribwort is not very common in any place, notwithstanding it groweth in my garden, and wilde also in the North parts of England; and in a field neere London by a village called Hogsdon, found by a learned merchant of London Mr. Iames Cole, a louer of plants, and very skilfull in the knowledge of them.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish when the other Plantaines do.


 The Names.
Ribwort is called in Greeke, (...): and of some, (...): in Latine, Plantago minor, Quin queneruia, and Lanceola, or Lanceolata: in high Dutch, Spitziger Wegrich: in French, Lanceole: in Low-Dutch, Hondtsribbe; that is to say in Latine, Costa canina, or Dogs rib: in English, Ribwort, and Ribwort Plantaine.
The second I haue thought meet to cal Rose Ribwort in English, and Quinqueneruiarosea in Latine.


 The Temperature.
Ribwort is cold and dry in the second degree, as are the Plantains.


 The Vertues.
The vertues are referred to the kindes of Plantaines.




CHAP. 99. Of Sea Plantaines.


1 Holosteum Salamanticum. Flouring sea Plantaine.


2 Holosteum parvum. Small sea Plantaine.


3 Plantago marina. Sea Plantaine.



 The Description.
1 CArolus Clusius that excellent Herbarist hath referred these two sorts of Holosteum vnto the kindes of Sea Plantaine. The first hath long leaues like the common Rib-wort, but narrower, couered with some hairinesse or wollinesse: among which there riseth vp a stalke, bearing at the top a spike like the kindes of Plantaine, beset with many small floures of an herby colour, declining to whitenesse. The seed is like that of the Plantaine: the root is long and wooddy. This floures in Aprill or May.
2 The second is like the former, but smaller, and not so gray or hoary: the floures are like to Coronopus, or the lesser Ribwort. This floures at the same time as the former.



3 The third kinde, which is the sea Plantaine, hath small and narrow leaues like Bucks-horn, but without any manisest incisure, cuttings or notches vpon the one side: among which riseth vp a spikie stalke, like the common kinde, but smaller.


@ 4 Holosteum, siue Leontopodium Creticum. Candy Lyons foot.


@ 5 Holosteum, siue Leontopod. Cret. alterum. The other Candy Lyons foot.


@ 4 These two following Plants are by Clusius and Bauhine referred to this Tribe; (...) I thinke it fitting to place them here. The (...) of them from a reddish, and as it were sealy root growing lesse by little and little, and diuided into fibres, sends forth many leaues, narrow, hoary, an handfull long, and hauing three nerues or ribbes running alongst each of them: amongst these come sorth diuers foot-stalkes, couered with a soft reddish downe, and being some two or three inches long, hauing heads somewhat thicke and reddish: the floures are whitish, with a blackish middle, which makes it seeme as if it were persorated or holed. Now when the plant growes old, and withers, the stalkes becomming more thicke and stiffe, bend downe their heads towards the root, so that in some sort they resemble the foot of a (...).
5 This Plant which is figured in the vpper place (for I take the lower to be an exacter figure of the last described) hath leaues like to the small sea Plantaine, but tenderer, and standing vpright; and amongst these on little foot-stalkes grow heads like those of Psyllium, but prettier, and of a whitish red colour. @


 The Place.
The two first grow in most of the kingdomes of Spaine. Carolus Clusius writeth, that hee neuer saw greater or whiter than neere to Valentia a city of Spaine, by the high-waies. Since, they haue beene found at Bastable in the isle of Wight, and in the isles of Gernsey and Iarsey.
The third doth grow neere vnto the sea in all the places about England where I haue trauelled, especially by the sorts on both the sides of the water at Grauesend; at Erith neere London; at Lee in Essex; ar Rie in (...); at West-Chester, and at Bristow.
@ The fourth and fifth grow in Candy, from whence they haue been sent to Padua and diuers other places. @



 The Names.
Holosteum is also called by Dodonaeus, Plantago angustifolia albidu, or Plantago Hispaniensis: in English, Spanish hairy small Plantaine, or flouring sea Plantaine.
@ The fourth is called by Clusius, Leontopodium Creticum: by some it hath beene thought to be Catanance of Dioscorides: the which Honorius Bellus will not allow of: Bauhine calls it Holosteum, siue Leontopodium Creticum.
The fifth is Leontopodium Creticum alterum of Clusius; the Habbures of Camerarius; and the Holosteum Creticum alterum of Bauhine. @


 The Temperature and Vertues,
Galen saith, That Holosteum is of a binding and drying facultie.
Galen, Dioscorides, and Pliny haue proued it to be such an excellent wound herbe, that it presently  closeth or shutteth vp a wound, though it be very great and large: and by the same authority I speake it, that if it be put into a pot where many pieces of flesh are boyling, it will soder them together.
These herbes haue the same faculties and vertues that the other Plantains haue, and are thought to be the best of all the kindes. 

That which was formerly in the fourth place of this chapter, vnder the name of Holosteum (...), you shall finde hereafter vnder the title of (...) (...); for vnder that name out Author also gaue (...) sigure thereof, with a description; and I iudge it more sitly placed in that place, than here amongst the (...).




CHAP. 100. Of Sea Buck-horne Plantaines.


1 Coronopus. Sea Buck-horne.


2 Coronopus, siue Serpentina minor. Small Sea Buck-horne.



 The Description.
1 THe new Writers following as it were by tradition those that haue written long agone, haue beene content to heare themselues speake and set downe certainties by vncertaine speeches; which hath wrought such confusion and corruption of writings, that so many Writers, so many seuerall opinions; as may most euidently appeare in these plants and in others: And my selfe am content rather to suffer this (...) to passe, than by correcting the error, to renew the old wound. But for mine owne opinion thus I thinke, the plant which is reckoned for a kinde of Coronopus is doubtlesse a kinde of Holosteum: my reason is, because it hath grassie leaues, or rather leaues like Veronica (...) or wilde Pinks, a root like those of Garyophyllata or Auens, and the spikie eare of Holosteum or Sea Plantaine: which are certaine arguments that these writers haue neuer seene the Plant, but onely the picture thereof, and so haue set downe their opinions by heare-say.

This plant likewise hath beene altogether vnknowne vnto the old Writers. It groweth most plentifully vpon the cliffes and rocks and the tops of the barren mountains of Auergne in France, and in many places of Italy.
2 The second sort of wilde sea Plantaine or Serpentina differeth not from the former but onely in quantitie and slendernesse of his stalkes, and the smallnesse of his leaues, which exceed not the height of two inches. It groweth on the hills and rockes neere the washings of the sea at Massilia in great plenty almost euery where among the Tragacanthum, hauing a most thicke and spreading cluster of leaues after the manner of Sedum minimum saxeum montanum, somewhat like Pinaster, or the wilde Pine, as well in manner of growing, as stiffenesse, and great increase of his slender branches. It hath the small seed of Plantaine, or Serpentina vulgaris, contained within his spiky eares. The root is somewhat long, wooddy, and thicke, in taste somewhat hot and aromaticall.


3 Coronopus siue Serpentina minima. Small Buck-horne Plantaine.


4 Cauda Muris. Mouse-taile.


3 This small sea plant is likewise one of the kindes of sea Plantaine, participating as well of Buck-horne as of Holostium, being as it were a degenerate kinde of sea Plantaine. It hath many grassie leaues very like vnto the herbe Thrift, but much smaller; among which come sorth little tender foot-stalkes, whereon do grow small spikie knops like those of sea Plantaine. The root is tough and threddy.
4 Mouse-taile or Cauda muris resembleth the last kinde of wilde Coronopus or sea Plantaine, in small spikie knops, leaues, and stalkes, that I know no reason to the contrarie, but that I may as well place this small herbe among the kindes of Coronopus or Bucks horne, as other Writers haue placed kindes of Holostium in the same section: and if that be pardonable in them, I trust this may be tolerated in me, considering that without controuersie this little and base herbe is a kinde of Holostium, hauing many small short grassie leaues spred on the ground, an inch long or somewhat more: among which do rise small tender naked stalkes of two inches long, bearing at the top a little blackish torch or spikie knop in shape like that of the Plantaines, resembling very notably the taile of a Mouse, whereof it tooke his name. The root is small and threddy.


 The Place.
The first and second of these plants are strangers in England; notwithstanding I haue heard say that they grow vpon the rocks in Silley, Garnsey, and the Isle of man.
Mouse-taile groweth vpon a barren ditch banke neere vnto a gate leading into a pasture on the right hand of the way, as ye go from London to a village called Hampstead; in a field as you goe from Edmonton (a village neere London) vnto a house thereby called Pims, by the foot-paths sides; in Woodford Row in Waltham Forrest, and in the Orchard belonging to Mr. Francis (...) in Essex, and in other places.



 The Time.
They floure and flourish in May and Iune.


 The Names.
Matthiolus writeth, That the people of Goritia do commonly call these two former plants Serpentaria and Serpentina; but vnproperly, for that there be other plants which may better be called Serpentina than these two: we may cal them in English wild sea Plantaine, whereof doubtlesse they are kindes.
Mouse-taile is called in Latine Cauda muris, and Cauda murina: in Greeke, (...), or (...). Myosuros is called of the French-men Queue de souris: in English, Bloud-strange, and Mouse-taile.


 The Temperature.
Coronopus is cold and dry much like vnto the Plantaine. Mouse-taile is cold and somthing drying, with a kinde of astriction or binding qualitie.


 The Vertues.
Their faculties in working are referred vnto the Plantaines and Harts-horne.



CHAP. 101. Of Bucke-horne Plantaines, or Harts-horne.


1 Cornu Ceruinum. Harts-horne.


2 Coronopus Ruellij. Swines Cresses, or Bucks-horne.



 The Description.
1 BVcks-horne or Harts-horne hath long narrow hoary leaues, cut on both the sides with three or foure short starts or knags, resembling the branches of a harts horne, spreading it selfe on the ground like a star: from the middle whereof spring vp small round naked hairy stalks; at the top whereof do grow little knops or spikie torches like those of the smal Plantaines. The root is slender and threddy.

2 Ruellius Bucks-horne or Swines Cresses hath many smal and weake stragling branches, trailing here and there vpon the ground, set with many small cut or iagged leaues, somewhat like the former, but smaller, and nothing at all hairy as is the other. The floures grow among the leaues, in small rough clusters, of an (...) greenish colour: which being past, there come in place little flat pouches broad and rough, in which the seed is contained. The root is white, threddy, and in taste like the garden Cresses.


 The Place.
They grow in barren plaines, and vntilled places, and sandy grounds; as in Touthill field neere vnto Westminster, at Waltham twelue miles from London, and vpon Blacke-heath also neere London.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish when the Plantaines doe, whereof these haue beene taken to be kindes.


 The Names.
Bucks-horne is called in Latine (...) (...), or Harts-horne: diuers name it Herba stella, or (...), although there be another herbe so called: in low-Dutch, Hertzhooren: in Spanish, Guiabella: in French, Corne de Cerf: It is thought to Dioscorides his (...), which doth signifie (...) pedem, a Crowes foot. It is called also by certaine bastard names, as Harenarea, Sanguinaria, and of many, Herbe Iuy, or herbe Eue.


 The Temperature.
Bucks-horne is like in temperature to the common Plantaine, in that it bindeth, cooleth, and drieth.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Buckes-horne boyled in drinke, and giuen morning and euening for certaine  dayes together, helpeth most wonderfully those that haue sore eyes, waterie or blasted, and most of the griefes that happen vnto the eyes; experimented by a learned Physition of Colchester called Master Duke; and the like by an excellent Apothecarie of the same Towne called Mr. Buckstone.
The leaues and roots stamped with Bay salt, and tied to the wrests of the armes, take away  fits of the Ague: and it is reported to worke the like effect being hanged about the necke of the Patient in a certaine number; as vnto men nine plants, roots and all; and vnto women and children seuen.



CHAP. 102. Of Saracens Consound.

 The Description.
1 SAracens Consound hath many long narrow leaues cut or sleightly snipt about the edges: among which rise vp faire browne hollow stalkes of the height of foure cubits; along which euen from the bottome to the top it is set with long and prety large leaues like them of the Peach tree: at the top of the stalkes grow faire starre-like yellow floures, which turne into downe, and are carried away with the winde. The root is very fibrous or threddy.


 The Place.
Saracens Consound groweth by a wood as ye ride from great Dunmow in Essex, vnto a place called Clare in the said countrey; from whence I brought some plants into my garden.
@ I formerly in the twenty fourth Chapter of this second booke told you what plant our Author tooke for Saracens Consound, and (as I haue been credibly informed) kept in his garden for it. Now the true Solidago here described and figured was found Anno 1632, by my kinde Friends Mr. George Bowles and Mr. William Coot, in Shropshire in Wales, in a hedge in the way as one goeth from Dudson in the parish of Cherbery to Guarthlow. @


 The Time.
It floureth in Iuly, and the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
Saracens Consound is called in Latine Solidago Saracenica, or Saracens Comfrey, and (...) (...): in Dutch, (...) (...): of some, Herba fortis: in English, Saracens Consound, or Saracens Wound-wort.



The figure that was formerly in this place was of Consolida (...) of (...); and the true figure belonging to (...) (...) was in the next (...) saue one, vnder the title of (...) (...) (...).Solidago Saracenica. Saracens Consound.




 The Nature.
Saracens Consound is dry in the third degree, with some manifest heate.


 The Vertues.
Saracens Consound is not inferiour to  any of the wound-herbes whatsoeuer, being inwardly ministred, or outwardly applied in ointments or oyles. With it I cured Master Cartwright a Gentleman of Grayes Inne, who was grieuously wounded into the lungs, and that by Gods permission in short space.
The leaues boyled in water and drunke, doth restraine and stay the wasting of the liuer, taketh away the oppilation and stopping of the same, and profiteth against the laundice and Feuers of long continuance.
The decoction of the leaues made in  water is excellent against the sorenesse of the throat, if it be therewith gargarised: it increaseth also the vertue and force of lotion or washing waters, appropriate for priuy maimes, sore mouthes, and such like, if it be mixed (...).



CHAP. 103. Of Golden Rod.

 The Description.
1 GOlden Rod hath long broad leaues somwhat hoary and sharpe pointed; among which rise vp browne stalkes two foot high, diuiding themselues toward the top into sundry branches, charged or loden with small yellow floures; which when they be ripe turne into downe which is carried away with the winde. The root is threddy and browne of colour. @ Lobel makes this with vnsnipt leaues to be that of Arnoldus de villa noua. @
2 The second sort of Golden Rod hath small thin leaues broader than those of the first described, smooth, with some few cuts or nickes about the edges, and sharpe pointed, of a hot and harsh taste in the throat being chewed; which leaues are set vpon a faire reddish stalke. It tooke his name from the floures which grow at the top of a gold yellow colour: which floures turne into Downe, which is carried away with the winde, as is the former. The root is small, compact of many strings or threds.


 The Place.
They both grow plentifully in Hampstead Wood, neere vnto the gate that leadeth out of the wood vnto a Village called Kentish towne, not far from London; in a wood by Rayleigh in (...), hard by a Gentlemans house called Mr. Leonard, dwelling vpon Dawes heath; in Southfleet and in Swainescombe wood also, neere vnto Grauesend.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the end of August.


 The Names.
It is called in English Golden Rod: in Latine, (...) (...), because the branches are like a golden rod: in Dutch, Gulden roede: in French, verge d'or.



1 Virga aurea. Golden Rod.


2 Virga aurea Arnoldi Villanouani. Arnold of the new towne his Golden rod.




 The Temperature.
Golden Rod is hot and dry in the second degree: it clenseth, with a certaine astriction or binding qualitie.


 The Vertues.
Golden Rod prouoketh vrine, wasteth away the stones in the kidnies, and expelleth them, and  withall bringeth downe tough and raw flegmatick humors sticking in the vrine vessels, which now and then do hinder the comming away of the stones, and causeth the grauell or sand which is brittle to be gathered together into one stone. And therefore Arnoldus Villanouanus by good reason hath commended it against the stone and paine of the kidnies.
It is of the number of those plants that serue for wound-drinks, and is reported that it can fully  performe all those things that Saracens Consound can; and in my practise shall be placed in the formost ranke.
Arnoldus writeth, That the distilled water drunke with wine for some few dayes together, worketh  the same effect, that is, for the stone and grauell in the kidnies.
It is extolled aboue all other herbes for the stopping of bloud in sanguinolent vlcers and bleeding  wounds; and hath in times past beene had in greater estimation and regard than in these dayes: for in my remembrance I haue knowne the dry herbe which came from beyond the sea sold in Bucklers Bury in London for halfe a crowne an ounce. But since it was found in Hampstead wood, euen as it were at our townes end, no man will giue halfe a crowne for an hundred weight of it: which plainly setteth forth our inconstancie and sudden mutabilitie, esteeming no longer of any thing, how pretious soeuer it be, than whilest it is strange and rare. This verifieth our English prouerbe, Far fetcht and deare bought is best for Ladies. Yet it may be more truely said of phantasticall Physitions, who when they haue found an approued medicine and perfect (...) neere home against any disease; yet not content therewith, they wil seeke for a new farther off, and by that meanes many times hurt more than they helpe. Thus much I haue spoken to bring these new fangled (...) backe againe to esteeme better of this admirable plant than they haue done, which no (...) hath the same vertue now that then it had, although it growes so neere our owne homes in neuer so great quantitie.




CHAP. 103. Of Captaine Andreas Dorias his Wound-woort.


The figure that was here was of (...) (...).Herba Doria L'obelij. Dorias Woundwoort.



 The Description.
THis plant hath long and large thicke and fat leaues, sharp pointed, of a blewish greene like vnto Woad, which being broken with the hands hath a prettie spicie smell. Among these leaues riseth vp a stalk of the height of a tal man, diui led (...) the top into many other branches, whereupon grow small yellowish floures, which turneth into downe that flieth away with the wind. The root is thick almost like Helleborus albus.
Of which kinde there is another like the former, but that the leaues are rougher, somewhat bluntly indented at the edges, and not so fat and grosse.
@ Herba Doria altera.
This herbe growes vp with a green round brittle stalke, very much champhered, sinewed, or surrowed, about foure or fiue foot high, full of white pith like that of Elder, and sendeth forth small branches: the leaues grow on the stalk outof order, and are smooth, sharpe pointed, in shape like (...) of Herba Doria, but much shorter and narrower, the broadest and longest seldome being aboue ten or eleuen inches long, and scarce two inches broad, and are more finely and smally nickt or indented about the edges; their smell being nothing pleasant, but rather when together with the stalke they are broken and rubbed yeeld forth a smell hauing a small touch of the smell of Hemlocke. Out of the bosomes of these leaues spring other smaller leaues or branches. The floures are many, and grow on small branches at the tops of the stalkes like those of Herba Doria, but more like those of Iacobaea, of a yellow colour, as well the middle button, as the small leaues that stand round about, euery floure hauing commonly eight of those small leaues. Which beeing past the button turneth into downe and containeth very small long seedes which flie away with the winde. The root is nothing else but an infinite of small strings which most hurtfully spread in the ground, and by their infinite increasing destroyeth and starueth other herbes that grow neere it. Its naturall place of growing I know not; for I had it from Mr. Iohn Coys, and yet keep it growing in my garden. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
These plants grow naturally about the borders or brinkes of riuers neere to Narbone (...) France, from whence they were brought into England, and are contented to be made denizons in my garden, where they flourish to the height aforesaid.


 The Time.
They floured in my garden about the twelfth of Iune.


 The Nature.
The roots are sweet in smell, and hot in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Two drams of the roots of Herba Doria boiled in wine and giuen to drinke, draweth downe waterish  humors, and prouoketh vrine.
The same is with good successe vsed in medicines that expell poison.

@ All these Plants mentioned in the three last Chapters, to wit, Solidago, Virga aurea and this (...) Dorea, are by (...) fitly comprehended vnder the title of Virga aurea; because they are much alike in shape, and for that they are all of the same facultie in medicine. @



CHAP. 105. Of Felwoort, or Baldmoney.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Gentians or Felwoorts, whereof some be of our owne countrey; others more strange and brought further off: and also some not before this time remembred; either of the antient or later writers, as shall be set forth in this present chapter.


 The Description.
THe first kinde of Felwoort hath great large leaues, not vnlike to those of Plantaine, very well resembling the leaues of the white Hellebore: among which riseth vp a round hollow stalke as thicke as a mans thumbe, full of ioints or knees, with two leaues at each of them, and towards the top euery ioint or knot is set round about with small yellow starre-like floures, like a coronet or garland: at the bottome of the plant next the ground the leaues do spread themselues abroad, embracing or clipping the stalke in that place round about, set together by couples one opposite against another. The seede is small, browne, flat, and smooth like the seeds of the Stocke Gillo-floure. The roote is a finger thicke. The whole Plant is of a bitter taste.


1 Gentiana maior. Great Felwoort.


@ 2 Gentiana maior purpurea, 1. Clusij. Great Purple Felwoort.





3 Gentiana maior ij. (...) flore Clusij. Blew floured Felwoort.


4 Gentiana minor Cruciata. Crossewoort Gentian.


5 Gentiana Pennei minor. Spotted Gentian of Dr. Pennie.


@ 2 This described by Clusius, hath leaues and stalkes like the precedent; these stalkes are some cubite and halfe or two cubits high, and towards the toppes they are ingirt with two or three coronets of faire purple floures, which are not starfashioned, like those of the (...), but long and hollow, diuided as it were into some fiue or six parts or leaues, which towards the bottome on the inside are spotted with deepe purple spots: these floures are without smell, and haue so many chiues as they haue iagges, and these chiues compasse the head, which is parted into two cells, and containes store of a smooth, chaffie, reddish seed. The root is large, yellow on the outside; and white within, very bitter, and it sends forth euery yere new shoots. It growes in diuers places of the Alps; it floures in August, and the seeds are ripe in September. @
3 Carolus Clusius also setteth forth another sort of a great Gentian, rising forth of the ground with a stiffe, firme or solide stalke, set with leaues like vnto (...), by couples one opposite against another, euen from the bottome to the top in certaine distances: from the bosome of the

leaues there shoot forth set vpon slender foot-stalkes certaine long hollow floures like bels, the mouth whereof endeth in fiue sharpe corners. The whole floure changeth many times his colour according to the soile and climate; now and then purple or blew, sometimes whitish, and often of an ashe colour. The root and seed is like the precedent.
4 Crosse-woort Gentian hath many ribbed leaues spred vpon the ground, like vnto the leaues of Sopewoort, but of a blacker greene colour: among which rise vp weake iointed stalkes trailing or leaning toward the ground. The floures grow at the top in bundles thicke thrust together, like those of sweet Williams, of a light blew colour. The root is thicke, and creepeth in the ground far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.
5 Carolus Clusius hath set forth in his Pannonicke historie a kinde of Gentian, which he receiued from Mr. Thomas Pennie of London, Dr. in Phisicke, of famous memorie, and a second Dioscorides for his singular knowledge in Plants: which Tabernamontanus hath set forth in his Dutch booke for the seuenth of Clusius, wherein he greatly deceiued himselfe, and hath with a (...) description wronged others.
This twelfth sort or kinde of Gentian after Clusius, hath a round stiffe stalke, firme and solide, somewhat reddish at the bottome, iointed or kneed like vnto (...) Gentian. The (...) are broad, smooth, full of ribbes or sinewes, set about the stalkes by couples, (...) opposite against another. The floures grow vpon small tender stalkes, compact of fiue slender blewish leaues, spotted very curiously with many blacke spots and little lines; hauing in the middle fiue yellow chiues. The seed is small like sand: the root is little, garnished with a few strings of a yellowish colour.


 The Place.
Gentian groweth in shadowie woods, and the mountains of Italie, Sclauonia, Germany, France, and Burgundie; from whence Mr. Isaac de Laune a learned Phisition sent me plants for the increase of my garden. Crossewoort Gentian groweth in a pasture at the West end of little Rayne in Essex on the North side of the way leading from Braintree to Much-Dunmow; and in the horse way by the same close.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in August, and the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Gentius King of Illyria was the first finder of this herbe, and the first that vsed it in medicine, for which cause it was called Gentian after his owne name: in Greeke (...): which name also the Apothecaries retaine vnto this day, and call it Gentiana: it is named in English Felwoort Gentian; Bitterwoort; Baldmoyne, and Baldmoney.
1 This by most Writers is called Gentiana, and Gentiana maior Lutea.
2 Gesner calleth this Gentiana punicea; Clusius, Gentiana maior flore purpurco.
3 This is Gentiana folijs hirundinariae of Gesner: and Gentiana Asclepiadis folio of (...).
4 This, Cruciata, or Gentiana Cruciata, of Tragus, Fuchsius, Dodon. Gesner and others: it is the Gentiana minor of Matthiolus.
5 Clusius calls this Gentiana maior pallida punctis distincta.


 The Temperature.
The root of Felwoort is hot, as Dioscorides faith, clensing or scouring: diuers copies haue, that it is likewise binding, and of a bitter taste.


 The Vertues.
It is excellent good, as Galen saith, when there is need of attenuating, purging, clensing, and remouing  of obstructions, which qualitie it taketh of his extreme bitternesse.
It is reported to be good for those that are troubled with crampes and convulsions; for such  as are burst, or haue falne from some high place: for such as haue euill liuers and bad stomacks. It is put into Counterpoisons, as into the composition named Theriaca diatessaron: which Aetius calleth Mysterium, a mysterie or hid secret.
This is of such force and vertue, saith Pliny, that it helpeth cattell which are not onely troubled  with the cough, but are also broken winded.
The root of Gentian giuen in pouder the quantitie of a dramme, with a little pepper and herbe  Grace mixed therewith, is profitable for them that are bitten or stung with any manner of vonomous beast or mad dog: or for any that hath taken poison.
The decoction drunke is good against the stoppings of the liuer, and cruditie of the stomacke, helpeth digestion, dissolueth and scattereth congealed bloud, and is good against all cold diseases of the inward parts.




CHAP. 106. Of English Felwoort.

 The Description.
HOllow leafed Felwoort or English Gentian hath many long tough roots, dispersed hither and thither within the vpper crust of the earth; from which immediatly riseth a fat thicke stalke, iointed or kneed by certaine distances, set at euery knot with one leafe, and sometimes moe, keeping no certaine number: which leaues doe at the first inclose the stalkes round about, being one whole and entire leafe without any incisure at all, as it were a hollow trunke; which after it is growne to his fulnesse, breaketh in one side or other, and becommeth a flat ribbed leafe, like vnto the great Gentian or Plantaine. The floures come forth of the bosome of the vpper leaues, set vpon tender foot stalkes, in shape like those of the small Bindweed, or rather the floures of Sopewoort, of a whitish colour, washt about the brims with a little light carnation. Then followeth the seed, which as yet I haue not obserued.


Gentiana concaua. Hollow Felwoort.




 The Place.
I found this strange kind of Gentian in a small groue of a wood called the Spinie, neere vnto a small village in Northampton shire called Lichbarrow: elsewhere I haue not heard of it.


 The Time.
It springeth forth of the ground in Aprill, and bringeth forth his floures and seed in the end of August.


 The Names.
I haue thought good to giue vnto this plant, in English, the name Gentian, being doubtlesse a kinde therof. The which hath not been set forth, nor remembred by any that haue written of plants vntil this time. In Latine we may call it Gentiana concaua, of the hollow leaues. It may be called also hollow leaued Felwoort.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Of the faculties of this plant as yet I can say nothing, referring it vnto the other Gentians, vntill time shall disclose that which yet is secret and vnknowne.
@ Bauhine receiued this plant with the figure thereof from Doctor Lister one of his Maiesties Physitions, and he referres it vnto Saponaria, calling it Saponaria concaua Anglica; and (as farre as I can coniecture) hath a good description thereof in his Prodrom. pag. 103. Now both by our Authour and Bauhines Description, I gather, that the roote in this Figure is not rightly expressed, for that it should bee long, thicke, and creeping, with few fibers adhering thereunto; when as this figure expresseth an annuall wooddy root. But not hauing as yet seene the plant, I can assirme nothing of certaintie. @




@ CHAP. 107. Of Bastard Felwoort.

 The Description.
@ OVr Authour in this Chapter so confounded all, that I knew not well how, handsomely to set all right; for his descriptions they were so barren, that little might be gathered by them, and the figures agreed with their titles, but the place contradicts all; for the first figured is found in England; and the second is not that euer I could learne: also the second floures in the spring, according to Clusius and all others that haue written thereof, and also by our Authours owne title, truely put ouer the figure: yet he said they both floure and flourish from August to the end of September. These things considered, I thought it fitter both for the Readers benefit, and my owne credit to giue you this chapter wholly new with additions, rather than mangled and confused, as otherwise of necessitie it must haue beene. @
@ 1 This elegant Gentianella hath a small yellowish creeping root, from which arise many greene smooth thicke hard and sharpe pointed leaues like those of the broad leaued Myrtle, yet larger, and hauing the veines running alongst the leaues as in Plantaine. Amongst the leaues come vp short stalkes, bearing very large floures one vpon a stalke; and these floures are hollow like a Bel-floure, and end in fiue sharpe points with two little eares betweene each diuision, and their colour is an exquisite blew. After the floure is past there followes a sharpe pointed longish vessell, which opening it selfe into two equall parts, shewes a small crested darke coloured seede.


@ 1 Gentianella verna maior. Spring large floured Gentian.


2 Gentianella Alpina verna. Alpes Felwoort of the spring time.


2 This second rises vp with a single slender and purplish stalke, set at certaine spaces with six or eight little ribbed leaues, standing by couples one against another. At the top stands a cup, out whereof comes one long floure without smell, and as it were diuided at the top into fiue parts; and it is of so elegant a colour, that it seemes to exceed blewnesse it selfe; each of the foldes or little leaues of the floure hath a whitish line at the side, and other fiue as it were pointed leaues or appendices set betweene them: and in the middest of the floure are certaine pale coloured chiues: a longish sharpe pointed vessell succeeds the floure which contains a small hard round seed. The root is small, yellowish and creeping, putting vp here and there stalkes bearing floures, and in other places onely leaues lying orderly spred vpon the ground.



3 Gentianella fugax minor. Bastard or Dwarfe Felwoort.


3 Besides these two whose roots last long and increase euery yeare, there are diuers other Dwarfe or Bastard Gentians which are annuall, and wholly perish euery yeare assoone as they haue perfected their seed; and therefore by Clusius they are fitly called Gentianae fugaces. Of these I haue onely obserued two kindes (or rather varieties) in this Kingdome, which I wil here describe vnto you. The first of these, which is the lesser, and whose figure we here giue you, is a proper plant some two or three inches high, diuided immediatly from the root into three or foure or more branches, set at certaine spaces with little longish leaues, being broadest at the setting on, and so growing narrower or sharper pointed. The tops of these stalkes are beautified with long, hollow, and pretty large floures, considering the magnitude of the plant, and these floures are of a darke purplish colour, and at their tops diuided into fiue parts. The root is yellowish, small, and wooddy. The seede which is small and round is contained in longish vessels. The stalkes and leaues are commonly of a darke green, or else of a brownish colour.
4 This from a root like, yet a little larger than the former, sends vp a pretty stiffe round stalke of some span high; which at certaine spaces is set with such leaues as the last described, but larger: and out of the bosomes of these leaues from the bottome to the top of the stalke come forth little foot stalkes, which vsually carry three floures a piece; two set one against another, and the third vpon a stalke somewhat higher; and sometimes there comes forth a single floure at the root of these foot stalkes. The floures in their shape, magnitude and colour, are like those of the last mentioned, and also the seed and seed vessels. The manner of growing of this is very well presented by the figure of the third Gentian, formerly described in the Chapter last saue one aforegoing.


 The Place.
1 2 These grow not wilde in England that I know of, but the former is to bee found in most of our choice Gardens. As with Mr. Parkinson, Master Tradescant, and Master Tuggye, etc.
3 4 These are found in diuers places, as in the Chalke-dale at Dartford in Kent, and according to our Authour (for I know he meant these) in Waterdowne Forest in Sussex, in the way that leadeth from Charlwoods lodge, vnto the house of the Lord of Abergauenie, called Eridge house by a brooke side there, especially vpon a Heath by Colbrooke neere London: on the Plain of Salisburie, hard by the turning from the said Plaine, vnto the right Honourable the Lord of Pembrooks house at Wilton, and vpon a Chalkie banke in the high way betweene Saint Albons and Goramberrie.


 The Time.
1 2 These two floure in Aprill and May. The other from August vnto the end of October.


 The Names.
1 This is the Gentiana 4. of Tragus. The Gentianella Alpina of Gesner; Gentianella (...) flore and Heluetica of Lobel; the Gentiana 5. or (...) maior verna of (...).
2 Gesner called this Calathiana verna: Lobel, (...) Alpina: and (...), Gentiana 6. and Gentianella minor verna.
3 This is the Calathiana vera of Daleschampius: and the Gentiana fugax 5. or Gentiana 11. (...) of Clusius.
4 I take this to bee Clusius his Gentiana fugax 4. or Gentiana 10. We may call this in (...), Small Autumne Gentian.



 Their Temperature and Vertues.
These by their taste and forme should be much like to the greater Gentians in their operation and working, yet not altogether so effectuall. @



CHAP. 106. Of Calathian Violet, or Autumne Bel-floure.

 The Description.
AMong the number of the base Gentians there is a smal plant, which is late before it commeth vp, hauing stalks a span high, and sometimes higher, narrow leaues like vnto Time, set by couples about the stalkes by certaine distances: long hollow floures growing at the top of the stalks, like a cup called a Beaker, wide at the top, and narrower toward the bottome, of a deepe blew colour tending to purple, with certain white threds or chiues in the bottome: the (...) at the mouth or brim is fiue cornered before it be opened, but when it is opened it appeareth with fiue (...) or pleats. The whole plant is of a bitter taste, which plainly sheweth it to be a kinde of wilde Gentian. The root is small, and perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, and recouereth it selfe by (...) of the same.


Pneumonanthe. Calathian Violet.




 The Place.
It is found sometimes in Meadowes, oftentimes in vntilled places. It groweth vpon Long-field downes in Kent, neere vnto a village called Longfield by (...), vpon the chalkie cliffes neere Greene-Hythe and Cobham in Kent, and many other places. It likewise groweth as you ride from Sugar-loafe hill vnto Bathe, in the West countrey.
@ This plant I neuer found but once, and that was on a wet Moorish ground in Lincolnshire, 2. or 3. miles on this side Caster, and as I remember, the place is called Netleton Moore. Now I suspect that our Authour knew it not; first, because he describes it with leaues like vnto Time, when as this hath long narrow leaues more like to Hyssop or Rosemary. Secondly, for that he saith the root is small and perisheth when as it hath perfected the seed: whereas this hath a liuing, stringie and creeping root. Besides, this seldome or neuer growes on (...) cliffes, but on wet Moorish grounds and Heaths: wherefore I suspect our Authour tooke the small Autumne Gentian (described by me in the fourth place of the last Chapter) for this here treated of. @


 The Time.
The gallant floures hereof be in their brauerie about the end of August, and in September.


 The Names.
@ This is thought to be Viola Calathiana of Ruellius, yet not that of Pliny; and those that desire to know more of this may haue recourse to the (...) chapter of the first booke of the 2. Pempt. of Dodon. his Latine Herball, whence our Authour tooke those words that were formerly in this place, though he did not well vnderstand nor expresse them @. It is called Viola Autumnalis, or Autumne Violet, and seemeth to bee the same that (...) Cordus doth call Pneumonanthe, which he saith is named in the Germane tongue (...), or Lung-floure: in English, Autumne Bel-floures, Calathian Violets, and of some, Haruestbels.


 The Temperature.
This wilde Felwoort or Violet is in Temperature hot, somewhat like in facultie to Gentian, whereof it is a kinde, but far weaker in operation.


 The Vertues.
The latter Physitions hold it to be effectuall against pestilent diseases, and the bitings and stingings  of venomous beasts.




CHAP. 109. Of Venus Looking-glasse.

 The Description.
1 BEsides the former Bel-floures, there is likewise a certaine other, which is low and little; the stalkes whereof are tender, two spans long, diuided into many branches most commonly lying vpon the ground. The leaues about the stalks are little, sleightly nicked in the edges. The floures are small, of a bright purple colour tending to blewnes, very beautifull, with wide mouths like broad bels, hauing a white (...) or thred in the middle. The floures in the day time are wide open, and about the setting of the Sun are shut vp and closed fast together, in fiue corners, as they are before their first opening, and as the other Bel-floures are. The roots be (...) slender, and perish when they haue perfected their seed.
@ 2 There is another which from a small and wooddy root sendeth vp a straight stalk, sometimes but two or three inches, yet otherwhiles a foot high, when as it lights into good (...). This stalke is crested and hollow, hauing little longish leaues crumpled or sinuated about the edges set thereon: and out of the bosomes of those leaues towards the top of the stalke and sometimes lower, come little branches bearing little winged cods, at the tops of which in the middest of fiue little greene leaues stand small purple floures, of little or no beauty; which being past the cods become much larger, and containe in them a small yellowish seed, and they still retaine at their tops the fiue longish greene leaues that incompassed the floure. This plant is an annuall like as the former. @


1 Speculum Veneris. Venus Looking-glasse.


@ 2 Speculum Veneris minus. Codded corne violet.




 The Place.
It groweth in ploughed fields among the corne, in a plentifull and fruitfull soile. I found it in a field among the corne by Greene-hithe, as I went from thence toward Dartford in Kent, and in many other places thereabout, but not elswhere: from whence I brought of the seeds for my Garden, where they come vp of themselues from yeare to yeare by falling of the seed.
@ That which is here figured and described in the first place I neuer found growing in England,

I haue seene only some branches of it brought from Leiden by my friend Mr. William Parker. The other of my description I haue diuers times found growing among the corn in Chelsey field, and also haue had it brought me from other places by Mr. George Bowls, and Mr. Lconard Buckner. @


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
It is called (...) Aruensis, and of some O nobrychis, but vnproperly, of other Cariophyllus (...), or corne Gillofloure, or Corne pinke, and Speculum Veneris, or Ladies glasse The Brabanders in their tongue call it Urowen Spiegel.
@ Tabernamontamus hath two figures thereof, the one vnder the name of Viola aruensis, and the other by the title of Viola Pentagonia, because the floure hath fiue folds or corners. 2 This of my description is not mentioned by any Author; wherefore I am content to follow that name which is giuen to the former, and terme it in Latine Speculum Veneris minus: and from the colour of the floure and codded seed vessell, to call it in English, Codded Corne Violet.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
We haue not found any thing written either of his vertue or temperature, of the antient or late Writers.



CHAP. 110. Of Neesing root, or Neesewoort.


1 Helleborus albus. White Hellebor.


2 Helleborus albus praecox. Timely white Hellebor.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of white Hellebor hath leaues like vnto great Gentian, but much broader, and not vnlike the leaues of the great Plantaine, folded into pleats like a garment pleated to bee laied vp in a chest; amongst these leaues riseth vp a stalke a cubite long, (...)

towards the top full of little starre-like floures, of an herbie green colour tending to whitenesse, which being past there come small huskes containing the seed. The root is great and thicke, with many small threds hanging thereat.
2 The second kinde is very like the first, and differeth in that, that this hath blacke reddish floures, and commeth to flouring before the other kinde, and seldome in my garden commeth to seeding.


 The Place.
The white Hellebor groweth on the Alps, and such like mountains where Gentian doth grow. It was reported vnto me by the bishop of Norwich, that white Hellebor groweth in a wood of his owne neere to his house at Norwich. Some say likewise that it doth grow vpon the Mountaines of Wales. I speake this vpon report, yet I thinke not, but that it may be true. Howbeit I dare assure you, that they grow in my garden at London, where the first kinde floureth and seedeth very well.


 The Time.
The first floureth in Iune, and the second in May.


 The Names.
Neesewoort is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Veratrum Album, Helleborus albus, and Sanguis Herculeus. The Germans call it (...) nieswurt: the Dutchmen, (...): the Italians, Elleboro bianco: The Spaniards, Verde gambre blanco: the French, Ellebore blanche: and we of England call it white Hellebor, Nieswoort, Lingwoort, and the root Neesing pouder.


 The Temperature.
The root of white Hellebor, is hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The root of white Hellebor procureth vomite mightily, wherein consisteth his chiefe vertue, and by that means voideth all superfluous slime and naughtie humors. It is good against the falling sicknesse, phrensies, sciatica, dropsies, poison, and against all cold diseases that bee of hard curation, and will not yeeld to any gentle medicine.
This strong medicine made of white Hellebor, ought not to be giuen inwardly vnto delicate  bodies without great correction, but it may more safely be giuen vnto Country people which feed grossely, and haue hard, tough, and strong bodies.
The root of Hellebor cut in small pieces, such as may aptly and conueniently be conueied into  the Fistulaes doth mundifie them, and taketh away the callous matter which hindereth curation, and afterward they may be healed vp with some incarnatiue vnguent, fit for the purpose. @ This facultie by Dioscorides is attributed to the blacke Hellebor, and not to this. @
The pouder drawne vp into the nose causeth sneesing, and purgeth the braine from grosse and  slimic humours.
The root giuen to drinke in the weight of two pence, taketh away the fits of agues, killeth Mice  and rats being made vp with honie and floure of wheat: Pliny addeth that it is a medicine against the Lousie euill.



CHAP. 111. Of Wilde white Hellebor.

 The Description.
1 HElleborine is like vnto white Hellebor, and for that cause we haue giuen it the name of Helleborine. It hath a straight stalke of a foot high, set from the bottome to the tuft of floures, with faire leaues, ribbed and chamfered like those of white Hellebor, but nothing neere so large, of a darke greene colour. The floures bee orderly placed from the middle to the top of the stalke, hollow within, and white of colour, straked here and there with a dash of purple, in shape like the floures of Satyrion. The seed is small like dust or motes in the Sun. The root is small, full of iuice, and bitter in taste.
2 The second is like vnto the first, but altogether greater, and the floures white, without any mixture at all, wherein consisteth the difference.
3 The third kind of Helleborine, being the 6. after Clusius account, hath leaues like the first described,

but smaller and narrower. The stalke riseth vp to the height of two spans; at the top whereof grow faire shining purple coloured floures, consistiug of six little leaues, within or among which lieth hid things like small helmets. The plant in proportion is like the (...) of this kinde. The The root is small, and creepeth in the ground.


1 Helleborine. Wilde white Hellebore.


3 Helleborine (...). 6. Clusij. Narrow leafed wilde Neesewoort.




 The Place.
They bee found in dankish and shadowie places; the first was found growing in the woods by Digges well pastures, halfe a mile from Welwen in Hartfordshire: it groweth in a wood fiue miles from London, neere vnto a bridge called Lockbridge: by Nottingham neere Robinhoods well, where my friend Mr. Steuen Bredwell a learned Physition found the same: in the woods by Dunmowe in Essex: by Southfleet in Kent; in a little groue of Iuniper, and in a wood by Clare in Essex.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune, and perfect their seed in August.


 The Names.
The likenesse that it hath with white Hellebor, doth shew it may not vnproperly bee named Helleborine, or wilde white Hellebor, which is also called of Dioscorides and Pliny (...), or Epipactis; But from whence that name came it is not apparant: it is also named (...)


 The Temperature.
They are thought to be hot and drie of nature.


 The Vertues.
The faculties of these wilde Hellebors are referred vnto the white Neesewoort, whereof they  are kindes.
It is reported that the decoction of wilde Hellebor drunken, openeth the stoppings of the Liuer, and helpeth any imperfections of the same.




CHAP. 112. Of our Ladies Slipper.

 The Description.
1 OVr Ladies Shoo or Slipper hath a thicke knobbed root, with certaine marks or notes vpon the same, such as the roots of Solomons Seale haue, but much lesser, creeping within the vpper crust of the earth: from which riseth vp a stiffe and hairy stalke a foot high, set by certaine spaces with faire broad leaues, ribbed with the like sinewes or nerues as those of the Plantaine. At the top of the stalke groweth one single floure, seldome two, fashioned on the one side like an egge; on the other side it is open, empty, and hollow, and of the forme of a shoo or slipper, whereof it tooke his name; of a yellow colour on the outside, and of a shining deepe yellow on the inside. The middle part is compassed about with foure leaues of a bright purple colour, often of a light red or obscure crimson, and sometimes yellow as in the middle part, which in shape is like an egge, as aforesaid.
@ 2 This other differs not from the former, vnlesse in the colour of the floure; which in this hath the foure long leaues white, and the hollow leafe or slipper of a purple colour. @


1 Calceolus Mariae. Our Ladies Slipper.


@ 2 Calceolus Mariae alter. The other Ladies Slipper.




 The Place.
Ladies Slipper groweth vpon the mountains of Germany, Hungary, and Poland. I haue a plant thereof in my garden, which I receiued from Mr. Garret Apothecary, my very good friend.
@ It is also reported to grow in the North parts of this kingdome; and I saw it in floure with Mr. Tradescant the last Sommer. @


 The Time.
It floureth about the midst of Iune.


 The Names.
It is commonly called Calceolus D. Mariae, and Marianus: of some, Calceolus Sacerdotis: of some, Alisma, but vnproperly: in English, Our Ladies shoo or slipper: in the Germane tongue, (...) (...), (...): and of some, Damasonium not hum.



 The Temperature and Vertues.
Touching the faculties of our Ladies Shoo we haue nothing to write, it being not sufficiently knowne to the old Writers, no nor to the new.



CHAP. 113. Of Sope-wort.

 The Description.
THe stalkes of Sope-wort are slipperie, slender, round, ioynted, a cubit high or higher: the leaues are broad, set with veines very like broad leaued Plantaine, but yet lesser, standing out of euery ioynt by couples for the most part, and especially those that are the neerest the roots bowing backwards. The floures in the top of the stalkes and about the vppermost ioynts are many, well smelling, sometimes of a beautifull red colour like a Rose; other-while of a light purple or white, which grow out of long cups consisting of fiue leaues, in the middle of which are certaine little threds. The roots are thicke, long, creeping aslope, hauing certaine strings hanging out of them like to the roots of blacke Hellebor: and if they haue once taken good and sure rooting in any ground it is impossible to destroy them.
@ There is kept in some of our gardens a varietie of this, which differs from it in that the floures are double and somewhat larger: in other respects it is altogether like the precedent. @


1 Saponaria. Sope-wort, or Bruse-wort.




 The Place.
It is planted in gardens for the floures sake, to the decking vp of houses, for the which purpose it chiefely serueth. It groweth wild of it selfe neere to riuers and running brookes in sunny places.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is commonly called Saponaria, of the great scouring qualitie that the leaues haue: for they yeeld out of themselues a certaine iuyce when they are bruised, which scoureth almost as well as Sope: although Ruellius describe a certaine other Sopewort. Of some it is called Alisma, or Damasonium: of others, Saponaria Gentiana, whereof doubtlesse it is a kinde: in English it is called Sopewort, and of some Bruisewort.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It is hot and dry, and not a little scouring withall, hauing no vse in physicke set downe by any Author of credit.
@ Although our Authour and such as before  him haue written of Plants were ignorant of the facultie of this herbe, yet hath the industrie of some later men found out the vertue thereof: and Septalius reports that it was one Zapata a Spanish Empericke. Since whose time it hath beene written of by Rudius, lib. 5. de morbis occult. and venenat. cap. 18. And by Caesar Claudinus, de ingressu ad infirmos, pag. 411. and pag. 417. But principally by Ludouicus Septalius, Animaduers. med. lib. 7. num. 214. where treating of decoctions in vse against the French Poxes, he mentions the singular effect of this herb against that filthy disease. His words are these: I must not in this place omit the vse of another Alexipharmicall decoction, being very effectuall and vsefull for the poorer sort; namely that which is made of Sope-wort, an herbe common and knowne to all. Moreouer, I haue sometimes vsed it with happy successe in the most contumacious disease: but it is of somewhat an vngratefull taste,

and therefore it must be reserued for the poorer sort. The decoction is thus made: R. (...) virid. M. ij. infundantur per noctem in lib. viij, (...) mox excoquantur ad cocturam Saponariae: (...) libra vna cum dimidia aquae cum herbaiam cocta excoletur cum expressione, quae reseruetur pro potione matutina ad sudores proliciendos sumendo (...) vij, aut viij, quod vero (...) (...) cum passulis aut saccaro pro (...) cum cibis: aestate and biliosis naturis addi poterit aut Sonchi, aut Cymbalariae M. j. Valet and pro (...) ad (...) absumenda cum M. (...). Cymbalariae, and addito tantundem Philipendulae. Thus much Septalius, who saith that he had vsed it (...) ac saepius, often and often againe.
Some haue commended it to be very good to be applied to greene wounds, to hinder inflammation, and speedily to heale them. @



CHAP. 114. Of Arsmart or Water-Pepper.

 The Description.
1 ARsmart bringeth forth stalkes a cubit high, round, smooth, ioynted or kneed, diuiding themselues into sundry branches; whereon grow leaues like those of the Peach or of the Sallow tree. The floures grow in clusters vpon long stems, out of the bosome of the branches and leaues, and likewise vpon the stalkes themselues, of a white colour tending to a bright purple: after which commeth forth little seeds somewhat broad, of a reddish yellow, aud sometimes blackish, of an hot and biting taste, as is all the rest of the Plant, and like vnto pepper, whereof it tooke his name; yet hath it no smell at all.


1 Hydropiper. Arsmart.


2 Persicaria maculosa. Dead or spotted Arsmart.


2 Dead Arsmart is like vnto the precedent in stalkes, clustering floures, roots and seed, and differeth in that, that this plant hath certaine spots or marks vpon the leaues, in fashion of a halfe moone, of a darke blackish colour. The whole plant hath no sharpe or biting taste, as the other hath, but as it were a little soure smacke vpon the tongue. The root is likewise full of strings or threds, creeping vp and downe in the ground.

@ 3 This in roots, leaues, and manner of growing is very like the first described, but lesser by much in all these (...): the floures also are of a whitish, and sometimes of a purplish colour: it growes in barren grauelly and wet places.
4 I haue thought good to omit the impertinent description of our Author fitted to this plant, and to giue one somewhat more to the purpose: the stalkes of this are some two foot high, tender, greene, and sometimes purplish, hollow, smooth, succulent and transparent, with large and eminent ioynts, from whence proceed leaues like those of French Mercurie, a little bigger, and broader toward their stalkes, and thereabout also cut in with deeper notches: from the bosomes of each of these leaues come forth long stalkes hanging downewards, and diuided into three or foure branches; vpon which hang floures yellow, and much gaping, with crooked spurs or heeles, and spotted also with red or sanguine spots: after these are past succeed the cods, which containe the seed, and they are commonly two inches long, slender, knotted, and of a whitish greene colour, crested with greenish lines; and as soone as the seed begins to be ripe, they are so impatient that they will by no meanes be touched, but presently the seed will fly out of them into your face. And this is the cause that Lobel and others haue called this Plant Noli me tangere. As for the like reason some of late haue imposed the same name vpon the Sium minimum of Alpinus, formerly described by me in the seuenth place of the eighteenth chapter of this booke, pag. 260. @


@ 3 Persicaria pusilla repens. Small creeping Arsmart.


4 Persicaria siliquosa. Codded Arsmart.




 The Place and Time.
They grow very common almost euery where in moist and waterish plashes, and neere vnto the brims of riuers, ditches, and running brookes. They floure from Iune to August.
@ The codded or impatient Arsmart was first found to grow in this kingdome by the industrie of my good friend Mr. George Bowles, who found it at these places: first in Shropshire, on the bankes of the riuer Kemlet at Marington in the parish of Cherberry, vnder a Gentlemans house called Mr. LLoyd; but especially at Guerndee in the parish of Cherstocke, halfe a mile from the foresaid Riuer, amongst great Alder trees in the highway. @


 The Names.
1 Arsmart is called in Greeke (...): of the Latines, Hydropiper, or Piper aquaticum, or Aquatile, or water Pepper: in high-Dutch, (...) (...): in low-Dutch, (...) (...): in French,

Curage, or Culrage: in Spanish, Pimenta aqualica: in English, Water-Pepper, Culrage, and Arsesmart, according to the operation and effect when it is vsed in the abstersion of that part.
2 Dead Arsmart is called Persicaria, or Peach-wort, of the likenesse that the leaues (...) with those of the Peach tree. It hath beene called (...) of the leaden coloured markes which are seene vpon it: but Pliny would haue Plumbago not to be so called of the colour, but rather of the (...), by reason that it helpeth the infirmitie of the eyes called Plumbum. Yet there is another Plumbago which is rather thought to be that of Plinies description, as shal be shewed in his proper place. In English we may call it Peach-wort, and dead Arsmart, because it doth not bite those places as the other doth.
@ 3 This is by Lobel set forth, and called Persicaria pusilla repens: of Tabernamont anus, Persicaria pumila.
4 No plant I thinke hath found more varietie of names than this: for Tragus calls it Mercurialis syluestris altera; and he also calls it Esula: Leonicerus calls it Tithymalus syluestris: Gesner, Camerarius, and others, Nolime tangere: Dodonaeus, Impatiens herba: Caesalpinus, Catanance altera: in the Hist. Lugd. (where it is some three times ouer) it is called besides the names giuen it by others, Chrysaea: Lobel, Thalius, and others call it Persicaria siliquosa: yet none of these well pleasing Columna, he hath accurately described and figured it by the name of Balsamita altera: and since him Bauhine hath named it Balsamina lutea: yet both these and most of the other keepe the title of Noli me tangere. @


 The Temperature.
Arsmart is hot and dry, yet not so hot as Pepper, according to Galen.
Dead Arsmart is of temperature cold, and something dry.


 The Vertues.
The leaues and seed of Arsmart do waste and consume all cold swellings, dissolue and scatter  congealed bloud that commeth of bruisings or stripes.
The same bruised and bound vpon an impostume in the ioynts of the fingers (called among the  vulgar sort a fellon or vncome) for the space of an houre, taketh away the paine: but (saith the Author) it must be first buried vnder a stone before it be applied; which doth somewhat discredit the medicine.
The leaues rubbed vpon a tyred jades backe, and a good handfull or two laid vnder the saddle, and the same set on againe, wonderfully refresheth the wearied horse, and causeth him to trauell much the better.
It is reported that Dead Arsmart is good against inflammations and hot swellings, being applied  in the beginning: and for greene wounds, if it be stamped and boyled with oyle Oliue, waxe, and Turpentine.
@ The faculties of the fourth are not yet knowne. Lobel saith it hath a venenate qualitie: and  Tragus saith a vomitorie: yet neither of them seemes to affirme any thing of certaintie, but rather by heare-say. @



CHAP. 115. Of Bell-Floures.

 The Description.
1 COuentry-Bells haue broad leaues rough and hairy, not vnlike to those of the Garden Buglosse, of a swart greene colour: among which do rise vp stiffe hairie stalks the second yeare after the sowing of the seed: which stalkes diuide themselues into sundry branches, whereupon grow many faire and pleasant bell-floures, long, hollow, and cut on the brim with fiue sleight gashes, ending in fiue corners toward night, when the floure shutteth it selfe vp, as do most of the Bell-floures: in the middle of the floures be three or foure whitish chiues, as also much downy haire, such as is in the eares of a Dog or such like beast. The whole floure is of a blew purple colour: which being past, there succeed great square or cornered seed-vessels, diuided on the inside into diuers cels or chambers, wherein doe lie scatteringly many small browne flat seeds. The root is long and great like a Parsenep, garnished with many threddy strings, which perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, which is in the second yeare after his sowing, and recouereth it selfe againe by the falling of the seed.
2 The second agreeth with the first in each respect, as well in leaues, stalkes, or roots, and differeth in that, that this plant bringeth forth milke-white floures, and the other not so.



Viola Mariana. Blew Couentry-Bells.




 The Place and Time.
They grow in woods, mountaines, and (...) vallies, and vnder hedges among the bushes, (...) about Couentry, where they grow very plentifully abroad in the fields, and are there called Couentry-bels; and of some about London Canturbury-bels, but vnproperly, for that there is another kinde of Bell-floure growing in Kent about Canturbury, which may more fitly be called Canturbury-bells, because they (...) there more plentifully than in any other Country. These pleasant Bel-floures we haue in our London gardens especially sor the beauty of their floure, although they be kindes of Rampions, and the roots eaten as Rampions are.
They floure in Iune, Iuly, and August; the seed waxeth ripe in the meane time; for these plants bring not forth their floures all at once; but when one floureth another seedeth.


 The Names.
Couentry bels are called in Latine Viola Mariana: in English, Mercuries violets, or Couentry Rapes; and of some, Mariets. It hath bin taken to be Medium, but vnfitly: of some it is called Rapu^ syluestre: which the Greeks cal (...)


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root is cold and somewhat binding, and not vsed in physicke, but only for a sallet root boyled and eaten with oyle, vineger, and pepper.



CHAP. 116. Of Throat-wort, or Canturbury-Bells.


(...) Trachelium majus. Blew Canturbury-Bels.


3 Trachel. majus Belg. siue Giganteum. Gyant Throatwort.




 The Description.
1 THe first of the Canterbury bells hath rough and hairy brittle stalkes, crested into a certaine squarenesse, diuiding themselues into diuers branches, whereupon do grow very rough sharpe pointed leaues, cut about the edges like the teeth of a sawe; and so like the leaues of nettles, that it is hard to know the one from the other, but by touching them. The floures are hollow, hairy within, and of a perfect blew colour, bell fashion, not vnlike to the Couentry bells. The root is white, thicke, and long lasting. @ There is also in some Gardens kept a variety hereof hauing double floures. @
2 The white Canterbury bells are so like the precedent, that it is not possible to distinguish them, but by the colour of the floures; which of this plant is a milke white colour, and of the other a blew, which setteth forth the difference.


4 Trachelium minus. Small Canterbury bells.


@ 5 Trachelium majus petroeum. Great Stone Throtewort.


@ Our Author much mistaking in this place (as in many other) did againe figure and describe the third and fourth, and of them made a fift and sixt, calling the first Trachelium Giganteum; and the next Viola Calathiana; yet the figures were such as Bauhine could not coniecture what was meant by them, and therefore in his (...), he saith, Trachelium Giganteum, and Viola (...) apud Gerardum, quid? but the descriptions were better, wherefore I haue omitted the former description and here giuen you the later. @
3 Giants Throtewort hath very large leaues of an ouerworne greene colour, hollowed in the middle like the Moscouites spoone, and very rough, slightly intended about the edges. The stalke is two cubits high, whereon those leaues are set from the bottome to the top; from the bosome of each leafe commeth forth one slender footestalke, whereon doth grow a faire and large floure fashioned like a bell, of a whitish colour tending to purple. The pointed corners of each floure turne themselues backe like a scrole, or the Dalmatian cap; in the middle whereof commeth forth a sharpe stile or clapper of a yellow colour. The root is thicke, with certaine strings annexed thereto.
4 The smaller kinde of Throtewort hath stalkes and leaues very like vnto the great Throtewoort,

but altogether lesser, and not so hairy: from the bosome of which leaues shoot forth very beautifull floures bell fashion, of a bright purple colour, with a small pestle or clapper in the middle, and in other respects is like the precedent.
@ 5 This from a wooddy and wrinkled root of a pale purple colour sends forth many rough crested stalkes of some cubit high, which are vnorderly set with leaues, long, rough, and snipt lightly about their edges, being of a darke colour on the vpper side, and of a whitish on their vnder part. At the tops of the stalkes grow the floures, being many, and thicke thrust together, white of colour, and diuided into fiue or seuen parts, each floure hauing yellowish threds, and a pointall in their middles. It floures in August, and was first set forth and described by Pona in his description of Mount Baldus. @


 The Place.
The first described and sometimes the second growes very plentifully in the low woods and hedge-rowes of Kent, about Canterbury, Sittingborne, Grauesend, Southfleet, and Greenehyth, especially vnder Cobham Parke-pale in the way leading from Southfleet to Rochester, at Eltham about the parke there not farre from Greenwich; in most of the pastures about Watford and Bushey, fifteene miles from London.
@ 3 The third was kept by our Author in his Garden, as it is also at this day preserued in the garden of Mr. Parkinson: yet in the yeere 1626 I found it in great plenty growing wilde (...) (...) bankes of the Riuer Ouse in Yorkshire, as I went from Yorke to visite Selby the place (...) (...) was borne, being ten miles from thence. @
The fourth groweth in the medow next vnto Ditton ferrie as you goe to Windsore, vpon (...) chalky hills about Greenehithe in Kent; and in a field by the high way as you go from thence to Dartford; in Henningham parke in Essex; and in Sion medow neere to Brandford, eight miles from London.
The fifth growes on Mount Baldus in Italy.


 The Time.
All the kindes of bell floures do floure and flourish from May vntill the beginning of August, except the last, which is the plant that hath been taken generally for the Calathian violet, which floureth in the later end of September; notwithstanding the Calathian violet or Autumne violet is of a most bright and pleasant blew or azure colour, as those are of this kinde, although this plant sometimes changeth his colour from blew to whitenesse by some one accident or other.


 The Names.
1 2 Throtewoort is called in Latine Ceruicaria, and Ceruicaria major: in Greeke, (...): of most, Vuularia: of Fuchsius, Campanula: in Dutch, Halscruyt: in English, Canterburie bells, Haskewoorte, Throtewoort, or Vuula woort, of the vertue it hath against the paine and swelling thereof.
@ 3 This is the Trachelium majus Belgarum of Lobell, and the same (as I before noted) that our Author formetly set forth by the name of Trachelium Giganteum, so that I haue put them, as you may see, together in the title of the plant.
4 This is the Trachelium maius of Dodonoeus, Lobell, and others: the Ceruicaria minor of Tabernamontanus; and (...) of Tragus: Our Author gaue this also another figure and description by the name of Viola (...), not knowing that it was the last saue one which he had described by the name of Trachelium minus. @


 The Temperature.
These plants are cold and dry, as are most of the Bell floures.


 The Vertues.
The Antients for any thing that we know haue not mentioned, and therefore not set downe  any thing concerning the vertues of these Bell floures: notwithstanding we haue found in the later writers, as also of our owne experience, that they are excellent good against the inflammation of the throte and Vuula or almonds, and all manner of cankers and vlcerations in the mouth, if the mouth and throte be gargarized and washed with the decoction of them: and they are of all other herbes the chiefe and principall to be put into lotions, or washing waters, to iniect into the priuy parts of man or woman being boiled with hony and Allom in water, with some white wine.




CHAP. 117. Of Peach-bells and Steeple-bells.

 The Description.
1 THe Peach-leaued Bell-floure hath a great number of small and long leaues, rising in a great bush out of the ground, like the leaues of the Peach tree: among which riseth vp a stalke two cubits high: alongst the stalke grow many floures like bells, sometime white, and for the most part of a faire blew colour; but the bells are nothing so deepe as they of the other kindes; and these also are more dilated or spred abroad than any of the rest. The seed is small like Rampions, and the root a tuft of laces or small strings.
2 The second kinde of Bell-floure hath a great number of faire blewish or Watchet floures, like the other last before mentioned, growing vpon goodly tall stems two cubits and a halfe high, which are garnished from the top of the plant vnto the ground with leaues like Beets, disorderly placed. This whole plant is exceeding full of milke, insomuch as if you do but breake one leafe of the plant, many drops of a milky iuyce will fall vpon the ground. The root is very great, and full of milk also: likewise the knops wherein the seed should be are empty and void of seed, so that the whole plant is altogether barren, and must be increased with slipping of his root.


1 Campanula persicifolia. Peach-leaued Bell-floure.


2 Campanula lactescens pyramidalis. Steeple milky Bell-floure.


3 The small Bell-floure hath many round leaues very like those of the common field Violet, spred vpon the ground; among which rise vp small slender stems, disorderly set with many grassie narrow leaues like those of flax. The small stem is diuided at the top into sundry little branches, whereon do grow pretty blew floures bell-fashion. The root is small and threddy.
4 The yellow Bell-floure is a very beautifull plant of an handfull high, bearing at the top of his weake and tender stalkes most pleasant floures bel-fashion, of a faire and bright yellow colour. The leaues and roots are like the precedent, sauing that the leaues that grow next to the ground of this plant are not so round as the former. @Certainly our Author in this place meant to set forth the Campanula lutea linifolia store volubilis, described in the Aduers. pag. 177. and therefore I haue giuen you the figure thereof. @



3 Campanula rotundifolia. Round leaued Bell-floure.


The figure in the fourth place was of (...) (...) 3. of (...). whereof you shall (...) mention in the following chapter.

 4 Campanula lutea linifolia. Yellow Bell-floure.


5 Campanula minor alba, siue purpurea. Little white or purple Bel-floure.


5 The little white Bell-floure is a kinde of wilde Rampions, as is that which followeth, and also the last saue one before described. This small plant hath a slender root of the bignesse of a small straw, with some few strings anexed thereto. The leaues are somwhat long, smooth, and of a perfect greene colour, lying flat vpon the ground: from thence rise vp small tender stalkes, set heere and there with a few leaues. The floures grow at the top, of a milke white colour.
6 The other small Bell-floure or wilde Rampion differeth not from the precedent but onely in colour of the floures; for as the others are white, these are of a bright purple colour, which sets forth the difference.
@ 7 Besides these here described, there is another very small and rare Bellfloure, which hath not beene set forth by any but onely by Bauhine, in his Prodrom. vnder the title of Campanula Cymbalariae folijs, and that fitly; for it hath thinne and small cornered leaues much after the maner of Cymbalaria, and these are set without order on very small weake and tender stalkes some handfull long; and at the tops of the branches grow little small and tender Bell-floures of a blew colour. The root, like as the whole plant, is very small and threddy. This pretty plant was first discouered to grow in England by Master George Bowles, Anno 1632. who sound it in Montgomerie shire, on the dry bankes in the high-way as one rideth from Dolgeogg a Worshipfull Gentlemans house called Mr. Francis Herbert, vnto a market towne called Mahuntleth, and in all the way from thence to the sea side. It may be called in English, The tender Bellfloure. @



 The Place.
The two first grow in our London gardens, and not wilde in England.
The rest, except that small one with yellow floures, do grow wilde in most places of England, especially vpon barren sandy heaths and such like grounds.


 The Time.
These Bell-floures do flourish from May vnto August.


 The Names.
Their seuerall titles set forth their names in English and Latine, which is as much as hath been said of them.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These Bell-floures, especially the foure last mentioned, are cold and dry, and of the nature of Rampions, whereof they be kindes.



CHAP. 118. Of Rampions, or wilde Bell-floures.


1 Rapuntium majus. Great Rampion.


2 Rapuntium parvum. Small Rampion.



 The Description.
1 THe great Rampion being one of the Bell-floures, hath leaues which appeare or come forth at the beginning somewhat large and broad, smooth and plaine, not vnlike to the leaues of the smallest Beet. Among which rise vp stemmes one cubit high, set with such like leaues as those are of the first springing vp, but smaller, bearing at the top of the stalke a great thicke bushy (...) full of little long floures closely thrust together like a Fox-taile: which small floures before their opening are like little crooked hornes, and being wide opened they are small blew-bells, sometimes white, or sometimes purple. The root is white, and as thicke as a mans thumbe.

2 The second kind being likewise one of the bel-floures, and yet a wild kind of Rampion, hath leaues at his first comming vp like vnto the garden Bell-floure. The leaues which spring vp afterward for the decking vp of the stalke are somewhat longer and narrower. The floures grow at the top of tender and brittle stalkes like vnto little bells, of a bright blew colour, sometimes white or purple. The root is small, long, and somewhat thicke.
3 This is a wilde Rampion that growes in woods: it hath small leaues spred vpon the ground, bluntly indented about the edges: among which riseth vp a straight stem of the height of a cubit, set from the bottome to the top with longer and narrower leaues than those next the ground: at the top of the stalkes grow small Bell-floures of a watchet blewish colour. The root is thicke and tough, with some few strings anexed thereto.
@ There is another varietie of this, whose figure was formerly by our Author set forth in the fourth place of the last chapter: it differs from this last onely in that the floures and other parts of the plant are lesser a little than those of the last described. @


3 Rapunculus nemorosus. Wood Rampions.


@ 4 Rapunculus Alpinus (...). Horned Rampions of the Alpes.


@ 4 This which growes amongst the rockes in the highest Alpes hath a wooddy and verie wrinckled root an handfull and halfe long, from which arise many leaues set on pretty long stalks, somewhat round, and diuided with reasonable deepe gashes, hauing many veines, and being of a darke greene colour: amongst these grow vp little stalkes, hauing one leafe about their middles, and three or foure set about the floure, being narrower and longer than the bottome leaues. The floures grow as in an vmbell, and are shaped like that Chymicall vessell we vsually call a Retort, being big at their bottomes, and so becomming smaller towards their tops, and hauing many threds in them, whereof one is longer than the rest, and comes forth in the middle of the floure: it floures in August. Pona was the first that described this, vnder the name of Trachelium (...) minus.
5 The roots of this other kinde of horned Rampion grow after an vnusuall manner; for first or lowermost is a root like to that of a Rampion, but slenderer, and from the top of that commeth forth as it were another root or two, being smallest about that place whereas they are fastned to the vnder root; and all these haue small sibres comming from them. The leaues which first grow vp are smooth, and almost like those of a Rampion, yet rounder, and made somwhat after the maner of a violet leafe, but nothing so big: at the bottome of the stalk come forth 7 or eight long narrow

leaues snipt about the edges, and sharpe pointed, and vpon the rest of the stalke grow also three or (...) narrow sharp pointed leaues. The floures which are of a purple colour, at first (...) those of the last described; but afterwards parte themselues into fiue slender strings with threds in the middles; which decaying, they are succeeded by little cups ending in fiue little pointels, and containing a small yellow seed. This is described by Fabius Columna, vnder the name of (...) Corniculatum montanum: And I receiued seeds and roots hereof from Mr. Goodyer, who sound it growing plentifully wilde in the inclosed chalkie hilly grounds by Maple-Durham neere Petersfield in Hampshire.
6 This which is described in Clusius his Curae poster. by the name of Pyramidalis, and was first found and sent to him by Gregory de Reggio a Capuchine Frier, is also of this kindred; wherefore I will giue you a briefe description thereof. The root is white, and long lasting; from which come diuers round hairie and writhen stalkes, about a span long more or lesse. At the top of these stalks and all amongst the leaues, grow many elegant blew floures, which are succeeded by seed vessels like those of the lesser Trachelium, being full of a small seed. The whole plant yeelds milke like as the rest of this kinde, and the leaues as well in shape as hoarinesse on (...) vnder sides, well resemble those of the second French or Golden Lungwoort of my description. It was first found growing in the chinkes of hard rockes about the mouthes of Caues, in the mountaines of Brescia in Italy by the foresaid Frier. @


@ 5 Rapunculus Corniculatus montanus. Mountaine horned Rampions.


@ 6 Rapunculus saxatilis, sive (...) alter. Rocke Rampion.




 The Place.
The first is sowne and set in Gardens, especially because the rootes are eaten in Sallads. The second groweth in woods and shadowie places, in fat and clayie soiles.


 The Time.
They floure in May, Iune, and Iuly.


 The Names.
Rampions by a generall name are called Rapuntium and Rapunculus; and the first by reason of the long spokie tufte of floures is called Rapuntium maius Alopecuri comoso (...) by Lobell and Pena, Rapunculum syluestre: and Rapunculus syluestris spicatus by others. The second, which

is the ordinary Rampion is called Rapunculus, and Rapuntium minus; Lobell thinkes it the Pes (...) of Auicen; and Columna iudges it to be Erinus of Nicander and Dioscorides. The third is the Rapunculus nemor osus secundus of (...) anus; and the varietie of it is Rapunc. nemor. tertius. The names of the rest are shewen in their descriptions. @


 The Temperature.
The roots of these are of a cold temperature, and something binding.


 The Vertues.
The roots are especially vsed in sallads, being boiled and eaten with oile, vineger, and pepper.
Some affirme, that the decoction of the roots are good for all inflammations of the mouth, and  Almonds of the throte, and other diseases happening in the mouth and throte, as the other (...).



CHAP. 119. Of Wall-floures, or yellow Stocke-Gillo-floures.

 The Kindes.
@ THese plants which wee terme commonly in English, Wal-floures and Stocke Gillofloures are comprehended vnder one generall name of Leucoion, (i) Viola alba, White Violet, (...) signifying white, and (...) a Violet; which as some would haue it is not from the whitenesse of the floure, for that the most and most vsuall of them are of other colours, but from the whitenes or hoarinesse of the leaues, which is proper rather to the Stocke Gillouers than to the wal-floures, I therefore thinke it fit to distinguish them into Leucoia folijs viridibus, that is VVal-floures; and Leucoia foliis (...), Stocke Gillouers. Now these againe are distinguished into seuerall species, as you may finde by the following Chapters. Moreouer you must remember there is another Viola alba or Leucoion (which is thought to be that of Theophrastus and whereof we haue treated in the first booke) which is far different from this, and for distinction sake called Leucoium bulbosum. @


1 Viola Lutea. VVal-floure.


2 Violalutea multiplex. Double VVal-floure.





@ 4 Leucoium syluestre. Wilde wall floure.




 The Description.
1 THe stalks of the Wall floure are full of greene branches, the leaues are long, narrow, smooth, slippery, of a blackish greene colour, and lesser than the leaues of stocke (...). The floures are small, yellow, very sweete of smell, and made of foure little leaues; which being past, there succeed long slender cods, in which is contained flat reddish seed. The whole plant is shrubby, of a wooddie substance, and can easily endure the colde of winter.
2 The double Wall floure hath long leaues greene aud smooth, set vpon stiffe branches, of a wooddie substance: whereupon do grow most pleasant sweet yellow flours very double; which plant is so well knowne to all, that it shall be needlesse to spend much time about the description.
3 Of this double kinde we haue another sort that bringeth his floures open all at once, whereas the other doth floure by degrees, by meanes whereof it is long in flouring.
@ 4 This plant which was formerly seated in the fourth place of the following chapter, I haue brought to enjoy the same place in this, for that by reason of the greenesse of his leaues and other things he comes nearest to these here described, also I wil describe it anew, because the former was almost wholly false: It hath many greene leaues at the top of the root like to these of the wall floure, but narrower, and bitter of taste; among which rise vp one or more stalks of a foot or more in height, crested and set with carinated leaues. The floures grow at the tops of the stalkes many together, consisting of foure yellow leaues a piece, lesser than those of the ordinary wall floures; there floures are succeeded by long cods containing a flat seed. The root is long and whitish, with many fibres.
5 Besides these, there is in some gardens kept another wall-floure differing from the first in the bignesse of the whole plant, but especially of the floure, which is yellow and single, yet very large and beautifull.
6 Also there is another with very greene leaues, and pure white and well smelling floures. @


 The Place.
The first groweth vpon bricke and stone walls, in the corners of churches euery where, as also among rubbish and such other stony places.
The double Wall-floure groweth in most gardens of England.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part all the yeere long, but especially in winter, whereupon the people in Cheshire do call them Winter-Gillofloures.


 The Names.
The Wallfloure is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Viola lutea, and Leucoium luteum: in the Arabicke tongue, Keyri: in Spanish, Violettas Amarillas: in Dutch, Uiolieren: in French, Girofflees iaulnes, Violieres des murailles: in English, Wall-Gillofloure, Wall-floure, yellow stocke Gillofloure, and Winter-Gillofloure.


 The Temperature.
All the whole shrub of Wall-Gillofloures, as Galen saith, is of a clensing faculty, and of thinne parts.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth that the yellow Wall-floure is most vsed in physicke, and more than the rest  of stocke-Gillofloures, whereof this is holden to be a kinde: which hath mooued me to preferre it vnto the first place. He saith, that the juice mixed with some vnctious or oilie thing, and boiled to the forme of a lyniment, helpeth the chops or rifts of the fundament.

The herbe boiled with white wine, honie, and a little allom, doth cure hot vlcers, and cankers of  the mouth.
The leaues stamped with a little bay salt, and bound about the wrists of the hands, taketh away  the shaking fits of the Ague.
@ A decoction of the floures together with the leaues, is vsed with good successe to mollifie  Schirrous tumors.
The oile also made with these is good to be vsed to anoint a Paralyticke, as also a goutie part  to (...) paine.
Also a strong decoction of the floures drunke, moueth the Courses, and expelleth the dead  childe. @



CHAP. 120. Of Stocke Gillofloures.


1 Leucoium album, siue purpureum, siue violaceum. White, purple, or Violet coloured Stocke Gillofloure.


@ 2 Leucoium flore multiplici. Double Stocke Gillofloure.



 The Description.
1 THe stalke of the great stocke Gillofloure is two foot high or higher, round, and parted into diuers branches. The leaues are long, white, soft, and hauing vpon them as it were a downe like vnto the leaues of willowe, but softer: the floures consist of foure little leaues growing all along the vpper part of the branches, of a white colour, exceeding sweet of smell: in their places come vp long and narrow cods, in which is contained broad, flat, and round (...). The root is of a wooddy substance, as is the stalke also.
The purple stocke Gillofloure is like the precedent in each respect, sauing that the floures of this plant are of a pleasant purple colour, and the others white, which setteth forth the difference: of which kinde we haue some that beare double floures, which are of diuers colours, greatly esteemed for the beautie of their floures, and pleasant sweet smell.



3 Leucoium spinosum Creticum. Thornie Stocke Gillouers.


This kinde of Stocke (...) that beareth floures of the colour of a Violet, that is to say of a blew (...) to a purple colour, which setteth forth the difference betwixt this plant and the other stocke Gillofloures; in euery other respect is like the precedent.
2 @ There were formerly 3 figures of the single Stocks, which differ in nothing but the colour of their floures; wherefore we haue made them content with one, and haue giuen (which was formerly wanting) a figure of the double Stock, of which there are many and prettie varieties kept in the garden of my kinde friend Mr. Ralph Tuggye at VVestminster, and set forth in the bookes of such as purposely treat of floures and their varieties. @
@ 3 To these I thinke it not amisse to adde that plant which Clusius hath set forth vnder the name of Leucoium spinosum Creticum. It growes some foot or more high, bringing forth many stalkes which are of a grayish colour, and armed at the top with many and strong thorny prickles: the leaues which adorne these stalkes are like those of the stocke Gillouer, yet lesse and somewhat hoary; the floures are like those of Mulleine, of a whitish yellow colour, with some purple threds in their middles; the cods which succeede the floures are small and round, containing a little seed in them. They vse, saith Honorius Bellus to heat ovens therewith in Candy, where it plentifully growes; and by reason of the similitude which the prickles hereof haue with Stoebe and the white colour, they cal it Gala Stivida, or Galastivida, and not because it yeelds milke, which Gala signifies.


 The Place.
1. 2. These kindes of Stocke Gillofloures do grow in most Gardens throughout England.


 The Time.
They floure in the beginning of the Spring, and continue flouring all the Sommer long.


 The Names.
The Stocke Gillofloure is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Viola alba: in Italian, Viola bianca: in Spanish, (...) blanquas: in English, Stocke Gillofloure, Garnsey Violet, and Castle Gillofloure.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
They are referred vnto the VVal-floure, although in vertue much inferiour; yet are they not vsed  in Physicke, except amongst certaine Empericks and Quacksaluers, about loue and lust matters, which for modestie I omit.
Ioachimus Camerarius reporteth, that a conserue made of the floures of Stocke Gillofloure, and  often giuen with the distilled water thereof, preserueth from the Apoplexy, and helpeth the palsie.



CHAP. 121. Of Sea Stocke Gillofloures.

 The Kindes.
OF Stocke Gillofloures that grow neere vnto the Sea there bee diuers and sundrie (...), differing as well in leaues as floures, which shall bee comprehended in this Chapter next following.



1 Leucoium marinum flore candido L'obelij. White Sea Stocke Gillofloures.


2 Leucoium marinum purpureum L'obelij. Purple sea Stocke Gillofloures.


3 Leucoium marinum latifolium. Broad leafed sea stocke Gillofloure.




 The Description.
1 THe Sea stocke (...) hath a small wooddy root very threddie; from which riseth vp an (...) white stalke of two foot high, diuided into diuers, small branches, whereon are placed confusedly many narrow leaues of a (...) hoarie substance. The floures grow at the top of the branches, of a whitish colour, made of foure little leaues; which being past, there follow long coddes and seed, like vnto the garden stocke Gillofloure.
@ 2 The purple stocke Gillofloure hath a very long tough root, thrusting it selfe deepe into the ground; from which rise vp thicke, fat, soft, and hoarie stalkes. The leaues come forth of the stalkes next the ground, long, soft, thicke, full of (...), couered ouer with a certaine downie (...), and sinuated somewhat (...) on both sides, after the manner you may see exprest in the figure of the (...) described in this Chapter. The stalke is (...) here and there with the like leaues, but lesser. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, compact of soure small leaues, of a light purple colour. The seede is contained in long crooked cods like the garden stocke Gillofloure.
@ The figure of Lobels which here we giue you was taken of a dried plant, and therefore the leaues are not exprest so (...) as they should be. @
3 This sea stock Gillofloure hath many broad leaues spred vpon the ground, somwhat snipt or cut on the edges; amongst which rise vp small naked stalkes, bearing at the top many little floures of a (...) colour tending to a purple. The seede is in long cods like the others of his kinde.

4 The great Sea stock Gillofloure hath many broad leaues, growing in a great tuft, sleightly indented about the edges. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a gold yellow colour. The root is small and single.
5 The small yellow Sea stocke Gillofloure hath many smooth, hoary, and sost leaues, set vpon a branched stalke: on the top whereof grow pretty sweet smelling yellow floures, bringing his seed in little long cods. The root is small and threddy. @ The Floures of this are sometimes of a red, or purplish colour. @


4 Leucoium (...) (...) maius Clusij and L'obelij. The yellow Sea stocke Gillofloure.


5 Leucoium marinum minus L'obelij and Clus. Small yellow Sea stocke Gillofloure.




 The Place.
These plants do grow neere vnto the sea side, about Colchester, in the Isle of Man, neere Preston in Aundernesse, and about Westchester.
@ I haue not hard of any of these wilde on our coasts but onely the second, which it may bee growes in these places here set downe; for it was gathered by Mr. George Bowles vpon the Rocks at Aberdovye in Merioneth shire. @


 The Time.
They flourish from Aprill to the end of August.


 The Names.
There is little to bee said as touching the names, more than hath been touched in their seuerall titles.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is no vse of these in Physicke, but they are esteemed for the beauty of their floures.



CHAP. 122. Of Dames Violets, or Queenes Gillofloures.

 The Description.
1 DAmes Violets or Queenes Gillofloures, haue great large leaues of a darke greene colour, somewhat snipt about the edges: among which spring vp (...) of the height of

two cubits, set with such like leaues: the floures come forth at the tops of the branches, of a (...) purple colour, verie like those of the stocke Gillofloures, of a very (...) (...), after which come vp long cods, wherein is contained small long blackish seed. The root is slender and threddie.
The Queenes white Gillofloures are like the last before remembred, sauing that this (...) bringeth forth faire white floures, and the other purple.
@ 2 By the industrie of some of our Florists, within this two or three yeares hath (...) brought to our knowledge a very beautifull kinde of these Dame Violets, hauing very faire double white floures, the leaues, stalks and roots, are like to the other plants before described. @


1 Viola Matronalis (...) purpureo, sive albo. Purple, or white Dames Violets.


@ 3 Viola matronalis (...) (...). Russet Dames Violets.


@ 3 This plant hath a stalke a cubit high, and is diuided into many branches, vpon which in a confused order grow leaues like those of the Dame Violet, yet a little broader and thicker, being first of somewhat an acide, and afterwards of an acride taste; at the tops of the branches in long cups grow floures like those of the Dames violet, consisting of foure leaues, which stand not faire open, but are twined aside, and are of a ouerworn russet colour, composed as it were of a yellow and browne with a number of blacke purple veines diuaricated ouer them. Their smell on the day time is little or none, but in the euening very pleasing and sweet. The floures are succeeded by long, and here and there swolne cods, which are almost quadrangular and containe a reddish seed like that of the common kinde. The root is fibrous, and vsually liues not aboue two yeares, for after it hath borne seed it dies; yet if you cut it downe and keepe it from seeding, it sometimes puts forth shouts whereby it may bee increased. I very much suspect that this figure and description which I here giue you taken out of Clusius, is no other plant than that which is kept in some of our gardens, and set soorth in the (...) (...) by the name of Leucoium Melancholicum: now I iudge the occasion of this error to haue come from the figure of Clusius which we here present you with, for it is in many particulars different from the description: first in that it expresses not many branches. secondly, in that the leaues are not snipt and diuided: thirdly, in that the Floures are not exprest wrested or twined: fourthly, the veins are not rightly exprest in the floure; and lastly, the cods are omitted. Now the Leucoium melancholicum hath a hairy stalke diuided into sundry branches of the height formerly mentioned, and the leaues about the middle of the stalke are somewhat (...) or deepely or vnequally cut in; the shape and colour of the floure is the same with that now

@ 4 Leucoium melancholicum. The Melancholly floure.
described, and the seed vessels the same, as far as I remember: for I must consesse, I did not in writing take any particular note of them though I haue diuers times seene them, neither did I euer compare them with this description of Clusius; onely I tooke some (...) agone an exact figure of a branch with the vpper leaues and floures, whereof one is exprest as they vsually grow twining backe, and the rest faire open, the better to set forth the veines that are spred ouer it. There are also exprest a cod or seede vessell, and one of the leaues that grow about the middle of the stalke; all which are agreeable to Clusius description in mine opinion; wherefore I onely giue you the figure that I then drew, with he title that I had it by. @


 The Place.
They are sown in gardens for the beauty of their floures.


 The Time.
They especially floure in Maie and Iune, the second yeare after they are sowne.


 The Names.
Dames Violet is called in Latine Viola matronalis, and Viola Hyemalis, or Winter Violets, and Viola Damascena: It is thought to be the Hesperis of Pliny, lib. 21. cap. 7. so called, for that it smels more, and more pleasantly in the euening or night, than at any other time. They are called in French Violettes des Dames, and de domas, and Girofflees des dames, or Matrones Violettes. in English, Damaske Violets, winter Gillofloures, Rogues Gillofloures, and close Sciences.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of Dames Violets are in taste sharpe and hot, very like in taste and facultie to Eruca or Rocket, and seemeth to be a kinde thereof.


 The Vertues.
The distilled water of the floures hereof is counted to be a most effectuall thing to procure  sweat.



CHAP. 123. Of White Sattin floure.

 The Description.
1 Bolbonac or the Sattin floure hath hard and round stalkes, diuiding themselues into many other small branches, beset with leaues like Dames Violets, or Queenes Gillofloures, somewhat broad, and snipt about the edges, and in fashion almost like Sauce alone, or Iacke by the hedge, but that they are longer and sharper pointed. The stalkes are charged or loden with many floures like the common stocke (...), of a purple colour, which being (...), the

seed commeth forth contained in a flat thin cod, with a sharp point or prick at one end, in fashion of the Moone, and somewhat blackish. This cod is composed of three filmes or skins, whereof (...) two outmost are of an ouerworne ash colour, and the innermost, or that in the middle, whereon the seed doth hang or cleaue, is thin and cleere shining, like a shred of white Sattin newly cut from the peece. The whole plant dieth the same yeare that it hath borne seed, and must be sowne yearely. The root is compact of many tuberous parts like key clogs, or like the great Asphodill.
2 The second kind of Bolbonac or white Sattin hath many great and broad leaues, almost like those of the great burre Docke: among which riseth vp a very tall stem of the height of foure cubits, stiffe, and of a whitish greene colour, set with the like leaues, but smaller. The floures grow vpon the slender branches, of a purple colour, compact of foure small leaues like those of the stocke Gillofloure; after which come thin long cods of the same substance and colour of the former. The root is thicke, whereunto are fastened an infinite number of long threddie strings: which roote dieth not euery yeare as the other doth, but multiplieth it selfe as well by falling of the seede, as by new shoots of the root.


1 Viola Lunaris sive Bolbonac. White Sattin.


2 Viola Lunaris longioribus siliquis. Long codded white Sattin.




 The Place.
These plants are set and sowne in gardens; notwithstanding the first hath been found wilde in the woods about Pinner, and Harrow on the hill, twelue miles from London; and in Essex likewise about Horn-church.
The second groweth about Watford, fifteene miles from London.


 The Time.
They floure in Aprill the next yeare after they be sowne.


 The Names.
They are commonly called Bolbonac by a barbarous name: we had rather call it with (...) and Clusius, Viola latifolia, and Viola lunaris, or as it pleaseth most Herbarists, Viola peregrina: the Brabanders name it Penninck blocmen, of the fashion of the coddes, like after a sort to a groat or testerne, and Paesch bloemen, because it alwaies floureth neere about the Feast of Easter: most of the later Herbarists doe call it Lunaria: Others, Lunaria Graeca, either of the fashion of the seed, or of the siluer brightnesse that it hath, or of the middle skinne of the cods, when the two outtermost skinnes or huskes and seedes likewise are falne away. We call this herbe in English Penny floure, or Money floure, Siluer Plate, Pricke-songwoort; in Norfolke, Sattin, and White

Sattin, and among our women it is called Honestie: it seemeth to be the old Herbarists Thlaspi alterum, or second Treacle mustard, and that which Crateuas describeth, called of diuers Sinapi Persicum; for as Dioscorides saith, Crateuas maketh mention of a certaine Thlaspi or Treacle Mustard, with broad leaues and bigge roots, and such this Violet hath, which we surname Latifolia or broad leased: generally taken of all to be the great Lunaria, or Moonwoort.


 Their Temperature and Vertues.
The seed of Bolbonac is of Temperature hot and drie, and sharpe of taste, and is like in taste and  force to the seed of Treacle Mustard; the roots likewise are somewhat of a biting qualitie, but not much: they are eaten with sallads as certaine other roots are.
A certaine Chirurgian of the Heluetians composed a most singular vnguent for wounds of the  leaues of Bolbonac and Sanicle stamped together, adding thereto oile and wax. The seed is greatly commended against the falling sicknesse.



CHAP. 124. Of Galen and Dioscorides Moonwoorts or Madwoorts.


1 Alyssum Galeni. Galens Madwoort.


That which was formerly described in the second place, being a kinde of (...), I haue here omitted, that I may giue you it more (...) amongst the (...) of that name and kindred hereafter.

 2 Alyssum Dioscoridis. Dioscorides Moonwoort or Madwoort.



 The Description.
1 THis might be one of the number of the Horehounds, but that Galen vsed it not for a kind thereof, but for Alysson, or Madwoort: it is like in forme and shew vnto Horehound, and also in the number of the stalks, but the leaues thereof are lesser, more curled, more hoary, and whiter, without any manifest smell at all. The little coronets or spokie whurles that compasse the stalkes round about are full of sharpe prickles: out of which grow floures of a blewish purple colour like to those of Horehound. The root is hard, woody, and diuersly parted.
2 I haue one growing in my garden, which is thought to be the true and right Lunary or Moonwoort of Dioscorides description, hauing his first leaues somewhat round, and afterward more long, whitish, and (...), or somewhat woolly in handling: among which rise vp rough brittle stalkes, some cubite high, diuided into many branches, whereupon doe growe many little yellow

floures; the which being past, there follow flat and rough huskes, of a whitish colour, in shape like little targets or bucklers, wherein is contained flat seed, like to the seeds of stock Gillofloures, but bigger. The whole huske is of the same substance, fashion, and colour that those are of the white Sattin.


 The Place.
These Plants are sowne now and then in Gardens, especially for the rarenesse of the m; the seede beeing brought out of Spaine and Italy, from whence I receiued some for my Garden.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in May; the seede is ripe in August, the second yeare after their sowing.


 The Names.
Madwoort, or Moonwoort is called of the Graecians (...) or (...): of the Latines Alyssum: in English, Galens Madwoort: of some, Heale-dog: and it hath the name thereof, because it is a present remedy for them that are bitten of a mad dogge, as Galen writeth; who in his second booke Di Antidotis, in Antoninus Cous his composition describeth it in these words: Madwoort is an herbe very like to Horehound, but rougher, and more full of prick les about the floures: it beareth a floure tending to blew.
@ 2 The second by Dodonaeus, Lobell, Camerarius and others, is reputed to bee the Alysson of Dioscorides, Gesner mames it Lunarta (...); and Columna, Leucoium Montanum Lunatum. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen saith it is giuen vnto such as are inraged by the biting of a mad dogge, which thereby are perfectly cured, as is knowne by experience, without any artificiall application or method at all. The which experiment if any shall proue, he shall finde in the working thereof. It is of temperature meanly drie, digesteth and something scoureth withall: for this cause it taketh away the morphew and Sun-burning, as the same Authour affirmeth.



CHAP. 125. Of Rose Campion.


Lychnis Chalcedonica. Floure of Constantinople.



 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Rose Campions; some of the Garden, and others of the Field: the which shal be diuided into seuerall chapters: and first of the Campion of Constantinople.


 The Description.
THe Campion of Constantinople hath sundry vpright stalks, two cubits high and ful of ioynts, with a certaine roughnesse; and at euery ioynt two large leaues, of a browne greene colour. The floures grow at the top like Sweet-Williams, or rather like Dames violets, of the colour of red lead, or Orenge tawny. The root is somewhat sharpe in taste.
@ There are diuers varieties of this, as with white and blush coloured floures, as also a double kinde with very large, double and beautiful floures of a Vermelion colour like as the single one here described. @


 The Place.
The floure of Constantinople is planted in Gardens, and is very common almost euerie where.
@ The white and blush single, and the double one are more rare, and not to be found but in the Gardensof our prime Florists. @


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly, the second yeare after it is planted, and many yeares after; (...) it

consisteth of a root full of life; and endureth long, and can away with the cold of our clymate.


 The Names.
It is called Constantinopolitanus (...), and Lychnis Chalcedonica: of Aldrouandus, Flos Creticus, (...) Floure of Candy: of the Germans, (...) Hierosolymitanus, or Floure of Ierusalem: in English, Floure of Constantinople; of some, Floure of Bristow, or None-such.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Floure of Constantinople, besides that grace and beauty which it hath in gardens and garlands, is, for ought we know, of no vse, the vertues thereof being not as yet found out.



CHAP. 126. Of Rose-Campion.


1 Lychnis Coronaria rubra. Red Rose Campion.


2 Lychnis Coronaria alba. White Rose Campion.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Rose-Campion hath round stalks very knotty and woolly, and at (...) knot or ioynt there do stand two woolly soft leaues like Mulleine, but lesser, and much narrower. The floures grow at the top of the stalke, of a perfect red colour; which being past, there follow round cods full of blackish seed. The root is long and threddy.
2 The second Rose Campion differs not from the precedent in stalkes, leaues, or fashion of the floures: the onely difference consisteth in the colour; for the floures of this plant are of a milke white colour, and the other red.
@ 3 This also in stalks, roots, leaues, and manner of growing differs not from the former; but the floures are much more beautifull, being composed of some three or foure rankes or orders of leaues lying each aboue other. @



@ 3 Lychnis coronaria multiplex. Double Rose Campion.




 The Place.
The Rose Campion growes plentifully in most gardens.


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
The Rose Campion is called in Latine Dominarum Rosa, Mariana Rosa, (...) Rosa, Coeli flos: of Dioscorides, (...): that is, Lychnis Coronaria, or Satiua: Gaza translateth (...), Lucernula, because the leaues thereof be soft, and fit to make weekes for candles, according to the testimonie of Dioscorides: it was called Lychnis, or Lychnides, that is, a torch, or such like light, according to the signification of the word, cleere, bright, and light-giuing floures: and therefore they were called the Gardners Delight, or the Gardeners Eye: in Dutch, Christes eie: in French, Oeillers, and Oeilets Dieu: in high-Dutch, (...), and (...).


 The Temperature.
The seed of Rose-Campion, saith Galen, is hot and dry after a sort in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed drunken in wine is a remedie for them that are stung with a Scorpion, as Dioscorides testifieth.



CHAP. 127. Of wilde Rose-Campions.

 The Description.
1 THe wilde Rose-Campion hath many rough broad leaues somewhat hoary and woolly; among which rise vp long soft and hairy stalkes branched into many armes, set with the like leaues, but lesser. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, compact of fiue leaues of a reddish colour: the root is thicke and large, with some threds anexed thereto.
@ There also growes commonly wilde with vs another of this kinde, with white floures, as also another that hath them of a light blush colour. @
2 The sea Rose Campion is a small herbe, set about with many greene leaues from the lower part vpward; which leaues are thicke, somewhat lesser and narrower than the leaues of sea Purslane. It hath many crooked stalkes spred vpon the ground, a foot long; in the vpper part whereof there is a small white floure, in fashion and shape like a little cup or box, after the likenesse of Behen album, or Spatling Poppy, hauing within the said floure little threds of a blacke colour, in taste salt, yet not vnpleasant.
It is reported vnto me by a Gentleman one Mr. Tho. Hesket, that by the sea side in Lancashire, from whence this plant came, there is another sort hereof with red floures.
@ 3 This brings many stalkes from one root, round, long, and weaker than those of the first described, lying vsually vpon the ground: the leaues grow by couples at each ioynt, long, soft, and hairy; amongst which alternately grow the floures, about the bignesse of those of the first described, and of a blush colour; and they are also succeeded by such seed-vessels, containing a reddish seed. The root is thicke and fibrous, yet commonly outliues not the second yeare.



The figure that was in the first place, and was intended for our ordinary wilde (...), is that which you see here in the eighth place; and those that were in the sixth and eighth places you (...) hereafter finde with (...) or Catch-fly, whereto they are of (...). That figure which was in the ninth place, out of (...). vnder the title of (...) (...), as also the (...), I haue omitted as impertinent: For the figure Bauhine (...) (who corrected and againe set forth the Workes of (...)) could not tell what to make thereof; but (...) (...) sit? an Muscipula flore (...)? Which if it be, you shall finde that (...) hereafter described, vnder the (...) of (...) (...) (...): for our Authors description it is not worth the speaking of, being framed onely from (...).

 1 Lychnis syluestris rubello flore. Red wilde Campion.


2 Lychnis marina Anglica. English Sea Campion.


3 Lychnis syluestris hirta, 5. Clusij. Wilde hairy Campion.


4 Lychnis syluestris 8. (...). Hoary wilde Campion.





5 Lychnis hirta minima, 6. Clus. Small Hairy Campion.


The figure that was in the first place, and was intended for our ordinary wilde (...), is that which you see here in the eighth place; and those that were in the sixth and eighth places you (...) hereafter finde with (...) or Catch-fly, whereto they are of (...). That figure which was in the ninth place, out of (...). vnder the title of (...) (...), as also the (...), I haue omitted as impertinent: For the figure Bauhine (...) (who corrected and againe set forth the Workes of (...)) could not tell what to make thereof; but (...) (...) sit? an Muscipula flore (...)? Which if it be, you shall finde that (...) hereafter described, vnder the (...) of (...) (...) (...): for our Authors description it is not worth the speaking of, being framed onely from (...).

 6 Lychnis syluestris ineana, Lob. Ouerworne Campion.


7 Lychnis caliculis striatis 2. Clusij. Spatling Campion.


The figure that was in the first place, and was intended for our ordinary wilde (...), is that which you see here in the eighth place; and those that were in the sixth and eighth places you (...) hereafter finde with (...) or Catch-fly, whereto they are of (...). That figure which was in the ninth place, out of (...). vnder the title of (...) (...), as also the (...), I haue omitted as impertinent: For the figure Bauhine (...) (who corrected and againe set forth the Workes of (...)) could not tell what to make thereof; but (...) (...) sit? an Muscipula flore (...)? Which if it be, you shall finde that (...) hereafter described, vnder the (...) of (...) (...) (...): for our Authors description it is not worth the speaking of, being framed onely from (...).

 8 Lychnis syluestris alba 9. (...) Whitewilde Campion.



4 The fourth kinde of wilde Campions hath long and slender stems, diuiding themselues into sundry other branches, which are full of ioynts, hauing many small and narrow leaues proceeding from the said ioynts, and those of a whitish greene colour. The floures do grow at the top of the stalke, of a whitish colour on the inner side, and purplish on the outer side, consisting of fiue small leaues, euery leafe hauing a cut in the end, which maketh it of the shape of a forke: the seed is like the wilde Poppy; the root somewhat grosse and thicke, which also perisheth the second yeare.
5 The fifth kinde of wilde Campion hath three or foure soft leaues somewhat downy, lying flat vpon the ground; among which riseth vp an hairy ash-coloured stalke, diuided into diuers branches; whereupon do grow at certaine spaces, euen in the setting together of the stalke and branches, small and grasse-like leaues, hairy, and of an ouerworne dusky colour, as is all the rest of the Plant. The floures grow at the top of the branches, composed of fiue small forked leaues of a bright shining red colour. The root is small, and of a wooddy substance.
6 The sixth kinde of wilde Campion hath many long thicke (...) and hoary leaues spred vpon the ground, in shape and substance like those of the garden Campion, but of a very dusty ouerworne colour: among which rise vp small and tender stalkes set at certaine distances by couples, with such like leaues as the other, but smaller. The floures do grow at the top of the stalks in little tufts like those of sweet Williams, of a red colour. The root is small, with many threddy strings fastned to it.
@ 7 This growes some cubit high, with stalkes distinguished with sundry joynts, at each whereof are set two leaues, greene, sharpe pointed, and somewhat stiffe: the floures grow at the tops of the branches, like to those of Muscipula or Catch-fly, yet somewhat bigger, and of a darke red: which past, the seed (which is ash-coloured, and somewhat large) is contained in great cups or vessels couered with a hard and very much crested skin or filme; whence it is called Lychnis caliculis striatis, and not Cauliculis striatis, as it is falsly printed in Lobels Icones, which some as foolishly haue sollowed. The root is single, and not large, and dies euery yeare.
8 That which our Author figured in this place had greene leaues and red floures, which no way sorted with his description: wherefore I haue in lieu thereof giuen you one out of Clusius, which may fitly carry the title. This at the top of the large fibrous and liuing root sendeth forth many leaues somewhat greene, and of some fingers length, growing broader by degrees, and at last ending againe in a sharpe point. The stalkes are some cubit high, set at each ioynt with two leaues as it were embracing it with their foot-stalkes; which leaues are lesse and lesse as they are higher vp, and more sharpe pointed. At the tops of the branches grow the floures, consisting of fiue white leaues deepely cut in almost to the middle of the floure, and haue two sharpe pointed appendices at the bottome of each of them, and fiue chiues or threds come forth of their middles: these when they fade contract and twine themselues vp, and are succeeded by thicke and sharpe pointed seed-vessels, containing a small round Ash-coloured seed. I coniecture that the figure of the Lychnis plumaria, which was formerly here in the ninth place out of Tabern. might be of this plant, as well as of that which Bauhine refers it to, and which you shall finde mentioned in the end of the chapter. @


 The Place.
They grow of themselues neere to the borders of plowed fields, medowes, and ditch banks, common in many places. @ I haue obserued none of these, the (...) and second excepted, growing wilde with vs. @
The sea Campion groweth by the sea side in (...), at a place called Lytham, fiue miles from Wygan, from whence I had seeds sent me by Mr. Thomas Hesketh; who hath heard it reported, that in the same place doth grow of the same kinde some with red floures, which are very rare to be seene. @ This plant (in my last Kentish Simpling voyage, 1632, with Mr. Thomas Hickes, Mr. Broad, etc.) I found growing in great plenty in the low marish ground in Tenet that lieth directly opposite to the towne of Sandwich. @


 The Time.
They floure and flourish most part of the Sommer euen vnto Autumne.


 The Names.
The wilde Campion is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Lychnis syluestris: in English, wilde Rose Campion.


 The Temperature.
The temperature of these wilde Campions are referred vnto those of the garden.


 The Vertues.
Theweight of two drammes of the seed of Wilde Campion beaten to pouder and drunke,

doth purge choler by the stoole, and it is good for them that are stung or bitten of any venomous beast.



@ CHAP. 128. Of diuers other wilde Campions.

 The Description.
@ 1 THe first of these which we here giue you is like in leaues, stalkes, roots, and manner of growing vnto the ordinarie wilde Campion described in the first place of the precedent Chapter; but the floures are very double, composed of a great many red leaues thicke packt together, and they are commonly set in a short and broken huske or cod. Now the similitude that these floures haue to the iagged cloath buttons anciently worne in this kingdome gaue occasion to our Gentlewomen and other louers of floures in those times to call them Bachelours Buttons.
2 This differs not in shape from the last described, but only in the colour of the floures, which in this plant are white.


@ 1 Lychnis syl. multiplex purpurea. Red Bachelors Buttons.


@ 2 Lychnis syl. alba multiplex. White Bachelors Buttons.


3 Neither (...) roots, leaues, or stalkes is there any difference betweene this either degenerate or accidentall varietie of Bachelors buttons, from the two last mentioned; onely the floures hereof are of a greenish colour, and sometimes through the middest of them they send vp stalkes, bearing also tufts of the like double floures.
4 This (saith Clusius) hath fibrous roots like to those of Primroses; out of which come leaues

@ 3 Lychnis abortiua flore multiplici viridi. Degenerate Bachelors Buttons with greene floures.
@ 5 Lychnis syl. latifolia Clus. Broad leaued wilde (...).
@ 5 Lychnis mont anarepens. Creeping mountaine Campion.
of a sufficient magnitude, not much vnlike those of the great yellow Beares-eare, yet whiter, more downy, thicke, and iuycie. The next yeare after the sowing thereof it sends vp a stalke of two or three cubits high, here and there sending forth a viscous and glutinous iuyce, which detaines and holds fast flies and such insects as do chance to light thereon. At the top of the branches it yeeldeth many floures set as it were in an vmbel, euen sometimes an hundred; yet sufficiently small, considering the magnitude of the plant; and each of these consists of fiue little yellowish greene forked leaues.
5 The stalkes of this are slender, ioynted, and creeping like to those of the greater Chickweed, and at each ioynt grow two leaues like those of the myrtle, or of Knot-grasse yet somewhat broader. The floures grow in such long cups like as those of Saponaria, and are much (...), yet of the same colour. The root is small.


 The Place.
1. 2. These are kept in many Gardens of this kingdome for their beauty, especially the first, which is the more common.
The fourth growes naturally in Candy; and the fisth by riuelets in the mountainous places of (...).


 The Time.
These floure in Iune and Iuly with the other wild Campions.



 The Names.
1 The first of these is Lychnis agrestis multiflora of Lobel; and Ocymoides flore pleno of Camerarius.
2 The second is by Pena and Lobel also called Lychnis syluestris multiflora: it is the Ocymastrum multiflorum of Tabernamontanus; by which title our Author also had it in the former edition, p. 551.
3 Lobel hath this by the name of Lychnis agrestis abortiua multiplici viride flore.
4 Clusius calls this Lychnis syluestris latifolia; and he saith he had the seed from Ioseph de Casa Bona, by the name of Muscipula auriculae vrsi facie: Bauhine hath it by the name of Lychnis (...) vrsi facie.
5 This (according to Bauhine) was set forth by Matthiolus, by the name of Cneoron aliud Theophrasti: it is the Ocimoides repens polygonifolia flore Saponariae, in the Aduersaria: and Saponaria minor Daleschampij, in the Hist. Lugd. It is also Ocimoides Alpinum, of Gesner; and Ocymoides repens, of Cameraius.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The natures and vertues of these, as of many others, lie hid as yet, and so may continue, if chance, or a more curious generation than yet is in being do not finde them out. @



CHAP. 129. Of Willow-herbe, or Loose-strife.


1 Lysimachia lutea. Yellow Willow-(...).


@ 2 Lysimachia lutea minor. Small yellow Willow-herbe.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Willow-herbe hath long and narrow leaues of a grayish greene colour, in shape like the Willow or Sallow leaues, standing three or foure one against another at seuerall distances round about the stalke; which toward the top diuideth it selfe into many other branches, on the tops whereof grow tufts of faire yellow floures, consisting of fiue leaues apiece, without smell: which being past, there commeth forth seed like Coriander. The root is long and slender.

@ 2 This lesser of Clusius his description hath a stalke a cubit high, and sometimes higher sirme, hard, and downy; about which at certaine distances grow commonly foure leaues together, yet sometimes but three, and they are soft and somewhat downy, lesser than those of the former, being first of an acide taste, and then of an acride; and they are vsually marked on their lower sides with blacke spots. About the top of the stalke, out of the bosomes of each leafe come forth little branches bearing some few floures, or else foot-stalkes carrying single floures, which is more vsuall towards the top of the stalke. The floures are yellow, with somewhat a strong smell, consisting of fiue sharpe pointed yellow leaues, with so many yellow threds in their middle. The root is ioynted, or creeping here and there, putting vp new shouts.


@ 3 Lysimachia lutea flore globoso. Yellow Willow-herbe with bunched floures.


@ 4 Lysimachia lutea (...). Tree Primrose.


3 This also may fitly be referred to the former. The stalke is a cubit high, straight, and as it were ioynted, naked oft times below by the falling away of the leaues; but from the middle to the top set with two leaues at a ioynt, like those of the former; and out of their bosoms on short stalks grow round tufts of small yellow floures as in bunches: the root which creepes sends forth many small fibres at each ioynt. This was set forth by Lobel vnder the title of Lysimachia lutea altera, or Lysimachia (...): Dodonaeus hath it by the name of Lysimachium aquatile: and Clusius calls it Lysimachia lutea tertia, siue minor.
4 This Virginian hath beene described and figured onely by Prosper Alpinus, vnder the title of (...) Virginianus: and by Mr. Parkinson, by the name of Lysimachia lutea siliquosa Virginiana: Also (...) in the Appendix of his Pinax hath a large description thereof, by the name of (...) lutea corniculata. The root hereof is longish, white, about the thicknesse of ones thumbe, from (...) growes vp a tall stalke diuided into many branches of an ouerworne colour, and a little hairie: the leaues are like those of the former, but somewhat sinuated alongst their edges, and hauing (...) middle veine of a whitish colour: toward the tops of the branches amongst the leaues come (...) thicke cods, which growing smaller on their tops sustaine pretty large yellow floures (...) of foure leaues, with a pestill in the middle vpon which stand foure yellowish thrums

in fashion of a crosse; and there are also eight threds with their pointals in the middles of them. These floures haue somewhat the smell of a Primrose (whence Mr. Parkinson gaue it the English name, which I haue also here giuen you:) after the floures are fallen, the cods grow to be some two inches long, being thicker below, and sharper at the top, and somwhat twined, which in fine open themselues into foure parts to shatter their seed, which is blacke and small; and sowne, it growes not the first yeare into a stalke, but sends vp many large leaues lying handsomely one vpon another Rose-fashion. It floures in Iune, and ripens the seed in August. @
5 The second kinde of Willow-herbe in stalks and leaues is like the first, but that the leaues are longer, narrower, and greener. The floures grow along the stalke toward the top, spike-fashion, of a faire purple colour: which being withered turne into downe, which is carried away with the winde.


5 Lysimachia purpurea spicata. Spiked Willow-herbe.


6 Lysimachia siliquosa. Codded Willow-herbe.


6 This Lysimachia hath leaues and stalkes like vnto the former. The floure groweth at the top of the stalke, comming out of the end of a small long cod, of a purple colour, in shape like a stocke Gillofloure, and is called of many Filius ante Patrem (that is, The Sonne before the Father) because that the cod commeth forth first, hauing seeds therein, before the floure doth shew it selfe (...). @ The leaues of this are more soft, large, and hairy than any of the former: they are also snipt about the edges, and the floure is large, wherein it differs from the twelfth, hereafter described; and from the eleuenth in the hairinesse of the leaues, and largenesse of the floures also, as you shall finde hereafter. @
7 This being thought by some to be a bastard kinde, is (as I do esteeme it) of all the rest the most goodly and stately plant, hauing leaues like the greatest Willow or Ozier. The branches come out of the ground in great numbers, growing to the height of six foot, garnished with braue floures of great beauty, consisting of foure leaues a piece, of an orient purple colour, hauing some threds in the middle of a yellow colour. The cod is long like the last spoken of, and full of downy matter, which flieth away with the winde when the cod is opened.
@ 8 This also, which is the Chamaenerion of Gesner, as also his Epilobion, quasi (...), a Violet or floure vpon a cod, may iustly challenge the next place. Dodonaeus calls it Pseudolysimachium

@ 7 Chamaenerion. Rose bay Willow-herbe.
@ 8 (...) alterum angastifolium. Narrow leaued Willow-floure.
@ 9 Lysimachia coerulea. Blew Loose-strife.
@ 10 Lysimachiagalericulata. Hooded Loose-strife.

11 Lysimachia campestris. Wilde Willow-herbe.
purpureum minus: and it is in the Histor Lugdun. vnder the name of Linaria rubra. It groweth vp with stalkes some foot high, set with many narrow leaues like those of Toad-flax, of a grayish colour, and the stalke is parted into diuers branches, which at their tops vpon long cods carrie purple floures consisting of foure leaues apiece. The root is long, yellowish, and wooddy. @
9 There is another bastard Loose-strife or Willow-herbe hauing stalkes like the other of his kinde. whereon are placed long leaues snipt about the edges, in shape like the great Veronica or herbe Fluellen. The floures grow along the stalkes, spike-fashion, of a blew colour; after which succeed small cods or pouches. The root is small and fibrous: it may be called Lysimachia coerulea, or blew Willow-herbe.
10 We haue likewise another Willowherbe that groweth neere vnto the bankes of (...) and water-courses. This I found in a waterie lane leading from the Lord Treasurer his house called Theobalds, vnto the backeside of his slaughter-house, and in other places, as shall be declared hereafter. Which Lobel hath called Lysimachia galericulata, or hooded Willowherbe. It hath many small tender stalkes trailing vpon the ground, beset with diuers leaues somwhat snipt about the edges, of a deep green colour, like to the leaues of Scordium or water Germander: among which are placed sundrie small blew floures fashioned like a little hood; in shape resembling those of Ale-hoofe. The root is small and fibrous, dispersing it selfe vnder the earth farre abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.
11 The wilde Willow-Herbe hath fraile and very brittle stalkes, slender, commonly about the height of a cubit, and sometimes higher; whereupon doe grow sharpe pointed leaues somewhat snipt about the edges, and set together by couples. There come forth at the first long slender coddes, wherein is contained small seed, wrapped in a cottony or downy wooll, which is carried away with the winde when the seed is ripe: at the end of which commeth forth a small floure of a purplish colour; whereupon it was called Filius ante Patrem, because the floure doth not appeare vntill the cod be filled with his seed. But there is another Sonne before the Father, as hath beene declared in the Chapter of Medow-Saffron. The root is small and threddie. @ This differeth from the sixth onely in that the leaues are lesse, and lesse hairy, and the floure is smaller. @
12 The Wood VVillow-hearbe hath a slender stalke diuided into other smaller branches, whereon are set long leaues rough and sharpe pointed, of an ouerworne greene colour. The floures grow at the tops of the branches, consisting of foure or fiue small leaues, of a pale purplish colour tending to whitenesse: after which come long cods, wherein are little seeds wrapped in a certaine white Downe that is carried away with the winde. The root is threddie. @ This differs from the sixth in that it hath lesser floures. There is also a lesser sort of this hairie Lysimachia with small floures.
There are two more varieties of these codded Willow-herbes; the one of which is of a middle growth, somewhat like to that which is described in the eleuenth place, but lesse, with the leaues also snipped about the edges, smooth, and not hairie: and it may fitly be called Lysimachia siliquosa glabra media, or minor, The lesser smooth-leaued Willow-herbe. The other is also smooth leaued, but they are lesser and narrower: wherefore it may in Latine be termed, Lysimachia siliquosa glabra minor angustifolia: in English, The lesser smooth and narrow leaued Willow-herbe.
@ 13 This lesser purple Loose-strife of Clusius, hath stalkes seldome exceeding the height of a cubit, they are also slender, weake and quadrangular, towards the top, diuided into branches

growing one against another, the leaues are lesse and narrower than the common (...) kinde, and growing by couples, vnlesse at the top of the stalkes and branches, whereas they keepe no certaine order; and amongst these come here and there cornered cups containing floures composed of six little red leaues with threds in their middles. The root is hard, woody, and not creeping, as in others of this kinde, yet it endures all the yeere, and sends forth new shoots. It floures in lune and Iuly, and was found by Clusius in diuers wet medowes in Austria. @


 The Place.
The first yellow Lysimachia groweth plentifully in moist medewos, especially along the medowes as you go from Lambeth to Battersey neere London, and in many other places throughout England.


@ 13 Lysimachia purpurea minor Clus. Small purple Willow herbe.


@ The second and third I haue not yet seene.
The fourth groweth in many gardens. @
The fift groweth in places of greater moisture, yea almost in the running streames and standing waters, or hard by them. It groweth vnder the Bishops house wall at Lambeth, neere the water of Thames, and in moist ditches in most places of England.
The sixth groweth neere the waters (and in the waters) in all places for the most part.
The seuenth groweth in Yorkshire in a place called the Hooke, neer vnto a close called a Cow pasture, from whence I had these plants, which doe grow in my garden very goodly to behold, for the decking vp of houses and gardens.
@ The eighth I haue not yet found growing.
The ninth growes wild in some places of this kingdome, but I haue seene it only in Gardens.
The tenth growes by the ponds and waters sides in Saint Iames his Parke, in Tuthill fields and many other places. @
The eleuenth groweth hard by the Thames, as you goe from a place called the Diuels Neckerchiefe to Redreffe, neere vnto a stile that standeth in your way vpon the Thames banke, among the plankes that doe hold vp the same banke. It groweth also in a ditch side not farre from the place of execution, called Saint Thomas Waterings.
@ The other varieties of this grow in wet places, about ditches, and in woods and such like moist grounds. @


 The Time.
These herbes floure in Iune and Iuly, and oftentimes vntill August.


 The Names.
Lysimachia, as Dioscorides and Pliny write tooke his name of a speciall vertue that it hath in appeasing the strife and vnrulinesse which falleth out among oxen at the plough, if it bee put about their yokes: but it rather retaineth and keepeth the name Lysimachia, of King Lysimachus the sonne of Agathocles, the first finder out of the nature and vertues of this herb, as Pliny saith in his 25. book chap. 7. which retaineth the name of him vnto this day, and was made famous by Erasistratus. Ruellius writeth, that it is called in French Cornelle and Corneola: in Greeke, (...): of the Latines, Lysimachium: of Pliny, Lysimachia: of the later Writers, Salicaria: in high Dutch, (...): in English, Willow herbe, or herbe Willow, and Loose strife.
Chamaenerium is called of Gesner, Epilobton: in English, Bay Willow, or bay yellow herbe.

@ The names of such as I haue added haue been sufficiently set sorth in their titles and Histories. @


 The Nature.
The yellow Lysimachia, which is the chiefe and best for Physicke vses, is cold and drie, and very astringent.


 The Vertues.
The iuice, according to Dioscordies, is good against the bloudy flix, being taken either by potion  or Clister.
It is excellent good for greene wounds, and stancheth the bloud: being also put into the nosthrils, it stoppeth the bleeding at the nose.
The smoke of the burned herbe driueth away serpents, and killeth flies and gnats in a house;  which Pliny speaketh of in his 25. book, chap. 8. Snakes, saith he, craull a way at the smell of Loosstrife. The same Authour affirmeth in his 26 booke, last chap. that it dieth haire yellow, which is not very vnlike to be done by reason the floures are yellow.
The others haue not been experimented, wherefore vntill some matter worthy the (...) doth  offer it selfe vnto our consideration, I will omit further to discourse her (...).
The iuice of yellow Lysimachia taken inwardly, stoppeth all fluxe of bloud, and the Dysenteria  or bloudy flix.
The iuice put into the nose, stoppeth the bleeding of the same, and the bleeding of wounds, and  mightily closeth and healeth them, being made into an vnguent or salue.
The same taken in a mother suppositorie of wooll or cotton, bound vp with threds (as the manner  thereof is, well knowne to women) staieth the inordinate flux or ouermuch flowing of womens termes.
It is reported, that the fume or smoke of the herbe burned, doth driue away flies and gnats, and  all manner of venomous beasts.



CHAP. 130. Of Barren-woort.


Epimedium. Barren Woort.



 The Description.
THis rare and strange plant was sent to me from the French Kings Herbarist Robinus, dwelling in Paris at the signe of the blacke head, in the street called Du bout du Monde, in English, The end of the world. This herbe I planted in my garden, and in the beginning of May it came sorth of the ground, with small, hard and woodie crooked stalks: whereupon grow rough and sharpe pointed leaues, almost like Alliaria, that is to say, Sauce alone, or lacke by the hedge. Lobel and Dod. say, that the leaues are somewhat like Iuie; but in my indgement they are rather like Alliaria, somewhat snipt about the edges, and turning themselues flat vpright, as a man turneth his hand vpwards when hee receiueth money. Vpon the same stalkes come forth small floures, consisting of soure leaues, whose outsides are purple, the edges on the inner side red, the bottomeyellow, and the middle part of a bright red colour, and the whole floure somewhat hollow. The root is smal, and creepeth almost vpon the vppermost face of the earth. It beareth his seed in very small cods like Saracens Consound, (@ to wit that of our Author (...)

described, pag. 274. @) but shorter: which came not to ripenesse in my garden, by reason that it was dried away with the extreme and vnaccustomed heat of the Sun, which happened in the yeare 2590. since which time from yeare to yeare it bringeth seed to perfection. Further, Dioscorides and Pliny do report, that it is without floure or seed.


 The place.
@ It groweth in the moist medowes of Italie about Bononia and Vincentia: it groweth in the garden of my friend Mr. Iohn Milion in Old-street, and some other gardens about towne.


 The Time.
It floureth in Aprill and May, when it hath taken sast hold and setled it selfe in the earth a yeare before.


 The Names.
It is called Epimedium: I haue thought good to call it Barren woort in English; not because that Dioscorides saith it is barren both of floures and seeds, but because (as some authors affirme) being drunke it is an enemie to conception.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen affirmeth that it is moderately cold, with a waterie moisture: we haue as yet no vse hereof in Physicke.



@ CHAP. 131. Of Fleabane.


@ 1 Conyza maior. Great Fleawoort.


@ 2 Conyza minor vera. Small Fleabane.


@ THe smalnesse of the number of these plants here formerly mentioned, the confusion notwithstanding in the figures, their nominations and historie, not oneagreeing with another, hath caused me wholly too mit the descriptions of our Authour, and to giue you new, agreeable to the figures; together with an addition of diuers other plants (...) to this kindred. Besides there is one thing I must aduertise you of, which is, that our Authour in the first place described the Bacchar is Monspeliensium of Lobel, or Conyza maior of Matthiolus, and it is that which grows in Kent and Essex on chalkie hils; yet he gaue no figure of it, but as it were forgetting what he had don, allotted it a particular chap. afterwards, where also another figure was put for it, but there you shall now finde it, though I must confesse that this is as sit or a fitter place for it; but I will follow the course of my Authour, whose matter, not method I indeauour to amend.


 The Description.
1 This great Fleawoort or Fleabane, from a thick long liuing fibrous root sends forth many stalkes of some yard high or more; hard, wooddy, rough, fat, and of an ou erworne colour: the leaues are many, without order, and alternately embrace the stalkes, twice as big as those of the Oliue tree, rough and fat, being as it were besmeared with a gumminesse or fattinesse, and of a yellowish greene colour: the floures grow after a sort spoke fashion, standing at the ends of footstalkes comming out of the bosomes of the leaues, and they are yellow and round almost like to Groundswell, and flie away in downe like as they doe; the seed is small and ash coloured. (...) whole plant is fattie and glutinous, with a strong, yet not altogether vnpleasant smell. This growes not that I know of in these cold Countries, vnlesse sowne in gardens. Clusius sound it by Lisbone, and in diuers places of Spaine. He, as also Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others, call this Conyzamaior, and it is thought to be the Conyzamas of Theophrastus, and Conyzamaior of Dioscorides.
2 The lesser seldome sends vp more than one stalke, and that of a cubit high, yet vsually not so much: it is diuided into little branches, and also rough and glutionous as the precedent, but more greene. The leaues are three times lesse than those of the former, somewhat shaped like those of Toad-flax, yet hairy and vnctious; the tops of the branches as in the bigger, carrie lesse, and lesse shining and sightly floures, vanishing in like sort into downe. The root is single and annuall, and the whole plant more imelling than the former. This is iudged the Conyza foemina of (...); and Con. minor of Dioscorides; it is the Con. minor of Gesner, Lobel, Clusius and others. It growes in diuers of Spaine and Prouince in France, but not here, vnlesse in Gardens.


The (...) was (...) of Conyza media; the second was of (...) minima; and the third of Conyza (...) (...).

 3 Conyzamedia. Middle Fleawoort.


The (...) was (...) of Conyza media; the second was of (...) minima; and the third of Conyza (...) (...).

 4 Conyzaminima. Dwarfe Fleabane.


3 The root of this middle kinde is prettie large and fibrous, from whence ariseth a branched stalke of some cubite high, engirt at certaine spaces with thicke, rough, grayish greene leaues: at the tops of the branches grow pretty faire yellow floures of the bignes of a little Marigold; which fading turne to downe, and are carried away with the winde. This floures in Iuly and August, and may be found growing in most places about riuers and pond sides, as in S. Iames his Parke, Tuthill fields, etc. This is Conyzamedia of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, and others. Some haue referred it vnto the

Mints, as Fuchsius, who makes it Calaminthae 3. genus; and Lonicerus, who calls it Mentha Lutea. In Cheape-side the herbe-women call it Herbe Christopher, and sell it to Empericks, who with it (as they say) make Medicines for the eyes, but against what affect of them, or with what successe I know not.
4 In like places, or rather such as are plashy in winter this may be plentifully found growing. The roots are small and fibrous; from whence ariseth a branched stalke some foot high, set with small longish leaues somewhat roundish pointed, soft also and woolly, with a smell not altogether vnpleasant, like as the last described: the floures are composed of many yellowish threds like to the middle part of Camomill floures, or those of Tanscy: and as the former, turne into downe, and are carried away with the winde; it floures in Iuly and August. This is the Conyzaminor of Tragus, Mathiolus, and others: Lobel and Dodon. call it Conyzaminima.
5 This cut leaued Fleabane hath small fibrous roots, from which arise thicke, crested, and hollow stalks, diuided towards the tops into sundry branches: the leaues that incompasse the stalke are gashed, or else onely sinuated on the edges: the floures are star fashion and yellow, and also flie away in downe; the whole plant is couered ouer with a soft and tender downe, and hath somewhat the smell of Honie. This is a varietie of the third, and is called by Dodon. Conyzaemediae altera. Lobel names it Conyza helenit is folijs laciniatis.
6 The figure which you haue in this sixth place was formerly vnfitly giuen by our Authour for Solidago Saracenica; it hath a large root which sends foorth many fibres, and a crested hollow stalke some two cubites or more high, which is vnorderly set, with long, yet narrow snipt leaues somewhat hairie and sharpe pointed: the toppe is diuided into branches, which beare prettie large yellow floures, made after the manner of those of Ragwort, and like as they, are also carried away with the winde. This Thalius cals Conyzamaxima serratifolia. It is the Lingua maior of Daleschampius, and the Consolida palustris of Tabernamontanus. It groweth neere water sides, and floures towards the latter end of Sommer: I haue not yet heard that it doth grow wilde amongstvs.


@ 5 Conyza folijs laciniatis. Great iagged leaued Fleabane.


@ 6 Conyza palustris serratifolia. Water snipt Fleabanc.





@ 7 Conyza Austriaca Clusij. Austrian Fleabane.


@ 8 Conyza incana. Hoary Fleabane.


@ 9 Conyza Alpina pilosissima. Hairie Fleabane of the Alpes.


The (...) was (...) of Conyza media; the second was of (...) minima; and the third of Conyza (...) (...).

 10 Conyza Caerulea (...). Blew floured (...).



7 The stalkes of this are about a foot high, straight, stiffe, hard, and couered with a (...) downe: the leaues at the root grow vpon long stalkes, and are soft and (...); but those which are higher vp, haue a short, or else no stalke at all, and rubbed, they yeeld no vnpleasant smell, and tasted, they are somwhat bitter and acride. The floures that grow vpon the tops of the branches are large, and fashioned like those of Elecampane, and are of the same yellow color. The root is long, slender and blackish, creeping and putting vp new stalkes; it hath many white fibres and a resinous smell. Clusius sound it growing on dry hilly places in Austria, and calls it Conyza 3. (...).
8 This which Lobel sets forth vnder the title of Conyza helentis (...) incana, I take to be the same Plant that I last figured and described out of Clusius, onely the root is better exprest in Clusius his figure; otherwise by the (...) I cannot find any difference, though (...) reckon it vp in his Pinax, as differing therefrom.
9 This also seemes not much to differ from the last mentioned, but onely in the hairinesse of the leaues and stalkes, and that the floures are smaller. This (...) cals Conyza (...) (...) incana: Helenitis, because the floures and leaues haue some semblance of (...); and Mellita, (...) that they smell somewhat like Honie. These last grow vpon mountaines, but none of them with vs in England that I can yet heare of.
10 This hath a small fibrous and yellowish root, of a very hot and biting taste, which sends vp diuers longish leaues about the head thereof; the stalke is some foot and halfe high, and set alternately with twined, longish, narrow and somewhat rough leaues of an ouerworne greene colour; the top of the stalke and branches are (...) with (...) set in longish scaly heads like those of (...): the outer little leaues are of a (...) blew colour, and the inner threds are yellow. It (...) in August, and the floures quickly turne into downe, and are carried away with the wind. It grows in many Chalkie hils, and I first obserued it in the company of Mr. George (...), Mr. Iohn Bugs and others, close by Farmingham in Kent; and the last yeare Mr. William Broad found it growing at the Blockehouse at Grauesend. Tragus calls it Tinctorius flos alter: Dodonaeus because the floure quickly turns to downe makes it (...) quartum: and Gesner for that the root is hot, and drawes rheume like as Pellitorie of Spaine, which therefore is vsed against the Tooth-ache, names it Dentelaria, he also cals it Conyza muralis, and Conyzoides Caerulea: Tabernamontanus also calls it Conyza caerulea: and lastly, Fabius Columna hath it by the name of Amellus Montanus, to which kinde it may in mine opinion be as fitly referred, as to these Conyza's. Our Author had the figure hereof in the third place in this Chapter.


 The Place, Time, and Names.
All these haue beene sufficiently shewne in their particular Titles and Descriptions. @


 The Nature.
Conyza is hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The leaues and floures be good against the strangurie, the iaundise, and the gnawing or griping  of the bellie.
The same taken with Vineger, helpeth the Epilepsie or falling sicknesse.
If Women doe sit ouer the decoction thereof, it greatly (...) their paines of the Mother.
The Herbe burned, where (...), Gnats, fleas, or any venemous things are, doth driue them  away.



CHAP. 132. Of Starre-woort.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of (...) or Inguinalis, hath large broad leaues like Verbascum (...) or the great Conyza: among which riseth vp a stalke foure or fiue handfuls high, hard, rough and hairie, beset with leaues like Rose Campions, of a darke greene colour. At the top of the said stalkes come forth (...), of a shining and glistering golden colour; and vnderneath about these floures grow fiue or six long leaues, sharpe pointed and rough, not much in

shape vnlike the fish called Stella marina. The floures turne into downe, and are carried away with the winde. The root is fibrous, of a binding and sharpe taste.
@ 2 The second called Italian Starrewoort hath leaues not much vnlike Marigolds, but of a darke greene colour, and rough, and they are somewhat round at the vpper end: the stalkes are many, and grow some cubite high; and at their tops are diuided into sundry branches, which beare (...) blewish purple floures, yellow in their middles, and shaped like Marigolds, and almost of the same bignesse, whence some haue called them blew Marigolds. @
3 The third kinde hath leaues so like Italian Starwort, that a man can scarcely at the sudden distinguish the one from the other The single stalke is a cubit long, vpright and slender; on the top whereof grow faire yellow floures, like those of Enula Campana, and they fly away in downe: the root is small and threddie.
4 The fourth kinde in talnesse and floure is not much vnlike that last before specified, but in stalke and leaues more hairie, and longer, somewhat like our small Hounds-tongue; and the rootes are lesse fibrous or threddie than the former.
5 There is another sort that hath a browne stalke, with leaues like the small Coniza. The floures are of a darke yellow, which turne into downe that flieth away with the wind like Conyza. The root is full of threds or strings.
6 There is also another that hath leaues like the great Campion, somewhat hairie; amongst which come vp crooked crambling stalkes, leaning lamely many waies. Whereupon doe growe faire yellow floures, Starre-fashion; which past, the cups become so hard, that they will scarcely be broken with ones nailes to take forth the seed. The root is long and straight as a finger, with some few strings annexed vnto the vppermost part thereof. It groweth wilde in some parts of Spaine.


1 (...) (...). Starrewoort.


@ 2 (...) Italorum. Italian (...).


7 There groweth another kinde of Starrewoort, which hath many leaues like (...) but thinner, and of a more greene colour, couered with a woollie hairinesse, sharpe and bitter in taste; amongst which (...) vp a round stalke more than a cubite high; (...) growing vnto a (...)

colour; set with the like leaues, but smaller and sharper pointed, diuiding it selfe toward the top into some few branches; whereon doe grow large yellow floures like Doronicum or Sonchus. The root is thicke and crooked. @ This is (...) Pannonicus maior, sive (...) of Clus. and his (...) primus.
8 Wee haue seene growing vpon wilde Mountaines another sort, which hath leaues much lesser than the former, somewhat like to the leaues of Willow, of a faire greene colour, which doe adorne and decke vp the stalke euen to the top; whereupon doe grow yellow floures starre fashion, like vnto the former. The root is small and tender, creeping farre abroad, whereby it mightily increaseth. @ This is (...) Pannonicus salignis (...): sive (...) 4. Austriacus 2. of Clusius. It is (...) luteum of Tabern. And our Author gaue the Figure heereof for Aster Italorum. @
9 Clusius hath set forth a kinde that hath an vpright stalke, somewhat hairy, two cubits high, beser with leaues somewhat woollie like to those of the Sallow, hauing at the top of the stalke faire yellow floures like (...) Campana, which turne into down that is carried away with the wind. the root is thicke, with some (...) or threds fastened thereto. @ This is Aster lanuginoso folio, sive 5. of Clusius. Our Authour gaue the figure hereof vnder the title of Aster Hirsutus: it is Aster (...) (...) of Taber.
10 Hee hath likewise described another sort, that hath leaues, stalks, floures, and roots like the ninth, but neuer groweth to the height of one cubite. @ It bringeth forth many stalkes, and the leaues that grow disorderly vpon them are narrower, blacker, harder and sharper pointed than the former, not vnlike those of the common Ptarmica, yet not snipt about the edges: the floures are yellow and like those of the last described, but lesse. This is the Aster (...) sive sextus of Clusius. @
11 There is likewise set forth in his Pannonicke obseruation, a kind of Aster that hath many small hairie leaues like the common great Daisie: among which riseth vp an hairy stalke of a foot high, hauing at the top faire blew floures inclining to purple, with their middle yellow, which turn (in the time of seeding) into a (...) downe, that flieth away with the winde. The whole plant hath a drying, binding, and bitter taste. The root is threddie like the common Daisie, or that of Scabious. @ This is Asper Alpinus (...) flore, sive 7. of Clusius. @


3 Aster montanus flore amplo. Mountaine Starwoort.


4 Aster hirsutus. Hairie Srarwoort.


@ 5 Aster Conyzoides Gesneri. Fleabane Starrewoort.





@ 6 Aster Luteus supinus Clusij. Creeping Starwoort.


@ 7 Aster luteus foliis Succisae. Scabious leaued Starwoort.


@ 8 Aster Salicis folio. Willow leaued Starwoort.


@ 9 Aster Austriacus, 5 Clus. Sallow leaued Starwoort.



@ 12 There are kept in the (...) of Mr. Tradescant, Mr. (...), and others, two (...) different much from all these formerly mentioned: the first of them is to bee esteemed, for that it floures in October and Nouember when as few other floures are to be found: the root is large and liuing, which sends vp many small stalks some two cubits high, wooddy, slender, and not hollow, and towards the top they are diuided into aboundance of small twiggie branches: the (...) that grow alternately vpon the stalkes, are long, narrow, and sharpe pointed, hauing soure or sixe scarce discernable nicks on their edges: the floures which plentifully grow on small branches much after the manner of those of Virga aurea, consist of twelue white leaues set in a ring, with many threds in their middles; which being young are yellow, but becomming elder and larger they are of a reddish colour, and at length turne into downe. I haue thought fit to call this plant, not yet described by any that I know of, being reported to be a Virginian, by the name of Aster Viginianus fruticosus, Shrubbie Starwoort.
13 This which in gardens floures some moneth before the former, growes not so high, neither are the stalkes so straight, but often crooked, yet are they diuided into many branches which beare small blewish floures like those of the former: the leaues are longish and narrow. This also is said to haue come from Canada or Virginia; and it may be called Aster fruticosus minor, Small shrubby Starwoort. @


@ 10 Aster 6 Clusij. Narrow leaued Starwoort.


@ 11 Aster 7. Clusij. Dwarfe Dasie leaued Starwoort.




 The Place.
The kindes of Starwoort grow vpon mountaines and hillie places, and sometimes in woods and (...) lying by riuers sides.
The two first kindes doe grow vpon Hampstead heath foure miles from London, in Kent vpon Southfleet Downes, and in many other such downie places. @ I could neuer yet finde nor heare of any of these Starfloures to grow wilde in this kingdome, but haue often seene the Italian Starwort growing in gardens. These two kindes that our Authour mentions to grow on Hampstead heath and in Kent, are no other than two Hieracia, or Hauke-weedes, which are much differing from these. @


 The Time.
They floure from Iuly to the end of August.



 The Names.
This herbe is called in Greeke (...), and also (...): in Latine, Aster (...), (...), and Inguinalis: of some, Asterion, Asteriscon, and Hyophthalmon: in high Dutch, Megetkraut: in Spanish, Bobas: in French, Estrille, and Asper goutte menne: in English, Starwoort and Sharewoort.


 The Nature.
It is of a meane temperature in cooling and drying. Gaten saith it doth moderately waste and consume, especially while it is yet soft and new gathered.
That with the blew floure or purple, is thought to be that, which is of Virgil called (...) Amellus: of which he maketh mention in the fourth booke of his Georgickes.

Est etiam flos in pratis, cui nomen Amello
Fecere agricolae: facilis quaerentibus herba;
Namque vno ingentemtollit de cespite sylvam:
Aureus ipse, sed in solijs, quae plurima circum
Funduntur, violae sublucet purpura nigrae.


In English thus.
In Meades there is a floure Amello (...),
By him that seekes it easie to be found,
For that it seemes by many branches fram'd
Into a little Wood: like gold the ground
Thereof appeares, but leaues that it beset
Shine in the colour of the Violet.



 The Vertues.
The (...) of Aster or Inguinalis stamped, and applied vnto botches, imposthumes, and venereous  bubones (which for the most part happen in Inguine, that is, the flanke or share) doth mightily maturate and suppurate them, whereof this herbe Aster tooke the name (...).
It helpeth and preuaileth against the inflammation of the fundament, and the falling sorth of  the gut called Saccus ventris.
The floures are good to be giuen vnto children against the Squinancie, and the falling sicknes.
That figure which formerly was in the second place vnder the title of Aster Atticus, was of the eighth here described; also in the third place (...) (...) these two figures which we here giue you, whereof the former is of Aster (...), and the latter of (...) (...); and that which was vnder the title of (...) (...) in the fourth place, belongs to the ninth description.




CHAP. 133. Of Woade.

 The Description.
1 GLastum or Garden Woad hath long leaues of a blewish greene colour. The stalk groweth two cubits high, set about with a great number of such leaues as come vp first, but smaller, branching it selfe at the top into many little twigs, whereupon do grow many small yellow floures: which being past, the seed commeth forth like little blackish tongues: the root is white and single.
2 There is a wilde kinde of VVoad very like vnto the former in stalks, leaues, and fashion, sauing that the stalke is tenderer, smaller, and browner, and the leaues and little tongues narrower; otherwise there is no difference betwixt them.


 The Place.
The tame or garden VVoad groweth in fertile fields, where it is sowne: the wilde kind growes where the tame kinde hath been sowne.


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to September.


 The Names.
VVoad is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, (...), and Glastum: (...) in his fifth booke of the French wars saith, that all the Brittons do colour themselues with VVoad, which giueth a blew colour: the which thing also Pliny in his 22. booke, chap. 1. doth testifie: in France they call it Glastum which is like vnto Plantaine, wherewith the Brittish wiues and their daughters are coloured all ouer, and go naked in some kinde of sacrifices. It is likewise called of diuers Guadum: of the Italians, Guado; a word as it seemeth, wrung out of the word Glastum. in Spanish and French, (...): in Dutch, (...): in English, VVoad, and VVade.



1 Glastum sativum. Garden Woade.


@ 2 Glastum syluestre. Wilde (...).




 The Nature.
Garden Woade is dry without sharpenesse: the wilde Woade drieth more, and is more sharpe and biting.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of Woade drunken is good for such as haue any stopping or hardnesse in the  milt or spleene, and is also good for wounds or vlcers in bodies of a strong constitution, as of countrey people, and such as are accustomed to great labour and hard course fare.
It serueth well to dye and colour cloath, profitable to some few; and hurtfull to many.



CHAP. 134. Of Cow-Basill.

 The Description.
1 THis kinde of wilde Woade hath fat long leaues like Valeriana rubra (...), or (...) rubrum: the stalke is small and tender, hauing thereupon little purple floures consisting of foure leaues; which being past, there come square cornered huskes full of round blacke seed like Coleworts. The whole plant is couered ouer with a clammy substance like Bird-lime, so that in hot weather the leaues thereof will take flies by the wings (as (...) doth) in such manner that they cannot escape away.
2 Ephemerum Matthioli hath long fat and large leaues like vnto Woad, but much lesse; among which riseth vp a round stalke a cubit high, diuiding it selfe into many branches at the top, the which are set with many small white floures consisting of fiue leaues; which being past, there (...) little round bullets containing the seed. The root is small and full of fibres.


 The Place.
Cow-Basill groweth in my garden: but Ephemerum is a stranger as yet in England.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune.



1 Vaccaria. Cow-Basill.


2 Ephemerum Matthioli. Quicke-fading floure.




@  The Names.
1 Cow-Basill is by Cordus called Thamecnemon: by some, according to Gesner, Lychnis and Perfoliatarubra: Lobel termes it (...) syluestris, and Vaccaria: the last of which names is retained by most late Writers.
2 This by Lobel is said to be Ephemerum of Matthiolus; yet I thinke Matthiolus his figure, (which was in this place formerly) was but a counterfeit, and so also doe Columna and (...) iudge of it; and Bauhine thinkes this of (...) to be some kinde of Lysimachia. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
I finde not any thing extant concerning the Nature and Vertues of Vaccaria or Cow-Basill. (...) (as Dioscorides writeth) boyled in wine, and the mouth washed with the decoction thereof, taketh away the tooth-ache.



CHAP. 135. Of Sesamoides, or Bastard Weld or Woade.

 The Description.
1 THe great Sesamoides hath very long leaues and many, slender toward the stalk, and broader by degrees toward the end, placed confusedly vpon a thicke stiffe stalke: on the top whereof grow little foolish or idle white floures: which being past, there (...) small seeds like vnto Canarie seed that birds are fed withall. The root is thicke, and of a wooddy substance.
@ 2 This lesser (...) of Salamanca, from a long liuing, white, hard, and prettie thicke root sends vp manv little stalks set thicke with small leaues like those of Line; and from the middle to the top of the stalke grow many floures, at first of a geeenish purple, and then putting forth yellowish threds; out of (...) midst of which appeare as it were foure greene graines, which when the floure is fallen grow into little cods full of a small blackish seed. It growes in a stony soile vpon the hills neere Salamanca, where it floures in May, and shortly after perfects his seed. @



1 Sesamoides Salamanticum magnum. Great bastard Woade.


2 Sesamoides Salamanticum parvum. Small Bastard Woade.


3 Sesamoides parvum Matthioli. Bucks-horne Gum-Succorie


@ 3 Our Author formerly in the Chapter of Chondrilla spoke (in Dodonaeus his words) against the making of this plant a Sesamoides; for of this plant were the words of Dodonaeus; which are these: Diuers (saith he) haue taken the plant with blew floures to be Sesamoides parvum, but without any reason; for that Sesamoides hath borrowed his name from the likenesse it hath with Sesamum: but this herbe is not like to Sesamum in any one point, and therefore I thinke it better referred vnto the Gum Succories; for the floures haue the form and colour of Gum Succory, and it yeeldeth the like milky juyce. Our Authour it seemes was either forgetfull or ignorant of what he had said; for here hee made it one, and described it meerly by the figure and his fancie. Now I following his tract, haue (though vnfitly) put it here, because there was no historie nor figure of it formerly there, but both here, though false and vnperfect. This plant hath a root somewhat like that of Goats-beard; from which arise leaues rough and hairy, diuided or cut in on both sides after the manner of Bucks-horne, and larger than they. The stalke is some foot high, diuided into branches, which on their tops carry floures of a faire blew colour like those of Succorie, which stand in rough scaly heads like those of Knapweed. @



 The Place.
These do grow in rough and stony places, but are all strangers in England.


 The Time.
These floure in May and Iune, and shortly after ripen their seed.


@  The Names.
@ 1 (...) thinke none of these to be the Sesamoides of the Antients: The first is set forth by Clusius vnder the name we here giue you: it is the Muscipula altera muscoso flore of Lobel: Viscago maior of Camerarius.
2 This also Clusius and Lobel haue set forth by the same name as we giue you them.
3 Matthiolus, Camerarius, and others haue set this forth for Sesamoides parvum: in the Historia Lugd. it is called Catanance quorundam: but most fitly by Dodon. Chondrillae species tertia, The third kinde of Gum-Succory. @


 The Temperature.
Galen affirmeth that the seed containeth in it selfe a bitter qualitie, and saith that it heateth, breaketh, and scoureth.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides affirmeth, that the weight of an halfe-penny of the seed drunke with Meade or honied  water purgeth flegme and choler by the stoole.
The same being applied doth waste hard knots and swellings.
That which here formerly enjoyed the third place, by the title of Sesamoides (...) Scaligert, was no other than the plant that is hereafter described by the name of (...) (...), where you may (...) both the figure and description.




CHAP. 136. Of Dyers Weed.


Luteola. Dyers weed or yellow weed.



 The Description.
DYers weed hath long narrow and greenish yellow leaues, not much vnlike to woad, but a great deale smaller and narrower; from among which commeth vp a stalke two cubits high, beset with little narrow leaues: euen to the top of the stalke come forth small pale yellow floures, closely clustering together one aboue another, which doe turne into small buttons, cut as it were crosse-wise, wherein the seed is contained. The root is very long and single.


 The Place.
Dyers weed groweth of it selfe in moist, barren, and vntilled places, in and about Villages almost euery where.


 The Names.
Pliny, lib. 33. cap. 5. maketh mention by the way of this herbe, and calleth it Lutea: Vitruvius in his seuenth booke, Lutum: it is the Anticarhinum of Tragus: and Pseudostruthium of Mathiolus: Virgill, in his Bucolickes, Eglog 4. cals it also Lutum: in English, Welde, or Dyers weed.


 The Time.
This herbe flourisheth in Iune and Iuly.


 The Nature.
It is hot and dry of temperature.


@  The Vertues.
The root as also the whole herbe heates and dries in the third degree: it cuts, attenuates, resolueth, opens, digests. Some also commend it against the punctures and bites of venomous creatures,

not onely outwardly applied to the wound, but also taken inwardly in drinke.
Also it is commended against the infection of the Plague: some for these reasons terme it Theriacaria; Mat. @



CHAP. 137. Of Staues-acre.


Staphis-agria. Staues-acre.



 The Description.
STaues-acre hath straight stalkes of a (...) colour, with leaues clouen or cut into sundry sections, almost like the leaues of the wilde Vine. The floures do grow vpon short stems, fashioned somewhat like vnto our common Monks hood, of a perfect blew colour; which being past, there succeed welted huskes like those of Wolfsbane, wherein is contained triangular brownish rough seed. The root is of a wooddy substance, and perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.


 The Place.
It is with great difficultie preserued in our cold countries, albeit in some milde VVinters I haue kept it couered ouer with a little Ferne, to defend it from the iniury of the March winde, which doth more harme vnto plants that (...) forth of hot Countries, than doth the greatest frosts.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune, and the seed is ripe the second yeare of his sowing.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Herba Pedicularis, and Peduncularia, as Marcellus reporteth. Pliny in his 26 Booke, chap. 13. seemeth to name it Vua Taminia: of some, Pituitaria, and Passula montana: in shops, Staphis-agria: in Spanish, Yeruapiolente: in French, Herbe aux poulx: in high-Dutch, Lens Kraut: in low-Dutch, (...): in English, Staues-acre, Louse-wort, and Louse-pouder.


 The Temperature.
The seeds of Staues-acre are extreame hot, almost in the fourth degree, of a biting and burning qualitie


 The Vcrtues.
Fifteene seeds of Staues-acre taken with honied water, will cause one to vomit grosse flegme  and slimie matter, but with great violence, and therefore those that haue taken them ought to walke without staying, and to drinke honied water, because it bringeth danger of choking and burning the throat, as Dioscorides noteth. And for this cause they are reiected, and not vsed of the physitions, either in prouoking vomit, or else in mixing them with other inward medicines.
The seed mingled with oyle or grease, driueth away lice from the head, beard, and all other parts  of the body, and cureth all scuruy itch and manginesse.
The same boyled in Vineger, and holden in the mouth, asswageth the tooth-ache.
The same chewed in the mouth draweth forth much moisture from the head, and cleanseth the  braine, especially if a little of the root of Pellitorie of Spaine be added thereto.
The same tempered with vineger is good to be rubbed vpon lousie apparell, to destroy and driue  away Lice.
The seeds hereof are perillous to be taken inwardly without good aduice, and correction of the  same: and therefore I aduise the ignorant not to be ouer-bold to meddle with it, sith it is so dangerous that many times death ensueth vpon the taking of it.




CHAP. 138. Of Palma Christi.

 The Description.
1 (...), Palma Christi, or Kik hath a great round hollow stalke fiue cubits high, of a browne colour, died with a (...) purple vpon greene. The leaues are great and large, parted into sundry sections or diuisions, fashioned like the leaues of a fig-tree, but greater, spred or wide open like the hand of a man; and hath toward the top a bunch of floures clustering together like a bunch of grapes, whereof the lowest are of a pale yellow colour, and wither away without bearing any fruit; and the vppermost are reddish, bringing forth three cornered huskes which containe seed as big as a kidney beane, of the colour and shape of a certaine vermine which haunteth cattell, called a Tik.
2 This Palma Christi of America growes vp to the height and bignesse of a small tree or hedge shrub, of a wooddy substance, whose fruit is expressed by the figure, being of the bignes of a great beane, somewhat long, and of a blackish colour, rough and scaly.


1 Ricinus. Palma Christi.


2 Ricinus Americanus. Palma Christi of America.




 The Place.
The first kinde of Ricinus or Palma Christi groweth in my garden, and in many other gardens likewise.


 The Time.
Ricinus or Kik is sowne in Aprill, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Name, and canse thereof.
Ricinus (whereof mention is made in the fourth chapter and sixt verse of the prophecie of Ionas)

was called of the Talmudists, (...) Kik, for in the Talmud we reade thus, (...) Velo beschemen Kik: that is, in English, And not with the oile of Kik: which oile is called in the Arabian tongue, Alkerua, as Rabbi Samuel the sonne of (...) testifieth. Moreouer a certaine Rab bine moueth a question, saying, what is Kik? Hereunto (...) Lachish maketh answer in Ghemara, saying, Kik is nothing else but Ionas his Kikaijon. And that this is true, it appeareth by that name (...): which the ancient Greeke Physitions, and the Aegiptians vsed; which Greeke word commeth of the Hebrew word Kik. Hereby it appeareth, that the old writers long agoe called this plant by the true and proper name. But the old Latine writers knew it by the name Cucurbita, which euidently is manifested by an history which Saint Augustine recordeth in his Epistle to Saint Ierome, where in effect he writeth thus; That name (...) is of small moment, yet so small a matter caused a great tumult in Africa. For on a time a certaine Bishop hauing an occasion to intreat of this which is mentioned in the fourth chapter of Ionas his prophecie (in a collation or sermon, which he made in his cathedrall church or place of assembly) said, that this plant was called Cucurbita, a Gourde, because it encreased vnto so great a quantitie, in so short a space, or else (saith he) it is called Hedera. Vpon the nouelty and vntruth of this his doctrine, the people were greatly offended, and thereof suddenly arose a tumult and hurly burly; so that the Bishop was inforced to goe to the Iewes, to aske their iudgment as touching the name of this plant. And when he had receiued of them the true name, which was Kikaijon: he made his open recantation, and confessed his error, and was iustly accused for a falsifier of the holy scripture. @ The Greeks called this plant also (...): i. Ricinus, by reason of the similitude that the seed hath with that insect, to wit, a Tik. @


 The Nature.
The seed of Palma Christi, or rather Kik, is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
(...) his seed taken inwardly, openeth the belly, and causeth vomit, drawing slimy flegme  and choler from the places possessed therewith.
The broth of the meate supped vp, wherin the seed hath been sodden, is good for the collicke and  the gout, and against the paine in the hips called Sciatica: it preuaileth also against the jaundise and dropsie.
The oile that is made or drawne from the seed is called Oleum Cicinum: in shops it is called  (...) de Cherua. it heateth and drieth, as was said before, and is good to anoint and rub all rough hardnesse and scuruinesse gotten by itch.
This oile, as Rabbi Dauid Chimchi writeth, is good against extreme coldnesse of the body.



CHAP. 139. Of Spurge.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Sea Spurge riseth forth of the sands, or baich of the sea, with sundry reddish stems or stalkes growing vpon one single roote, of a wooddy substance: and the stalkes are beset with small, fat, and narrow leaues like vnto the leaues of Flaxe. The floures are yellowish, and grow out of little dishes or saucers like the common kinde of Spurge. After the floures come triangle seeds, as in the other Tithymales.
2 The second kinde (called Helioscopius, or Solisequius: and in English, according to his Greek name, Sunne Spurge, or time Tithymale, of turning or keeping time with the sunne) hath sundry reddish stalkes of a foot high: the leaues are like vnto Purslane, not so great nor thicke, but snipt about the edges: the floures are yellowish, and growing in little platters.
3 The third kinde hath thicke, fat, and slender branches trailing vpon the ground, beset with leaues like Knee-holme, or the great Myrtle tree. The seed and floures are like vnto the other of his kinde.
4 The fourth is like the last before mentioned, but it is altogether lesser, and the leaues are narrower; it groweth more vpright, otherwise alike.
5 Cypres Tithymale hath round reddish stalkes a foot high, long and narrow like those of Flaxe, and growing bushie, thicke together like as those of the Cypres tree. The floures, seed, and root, are like the former, sometimes yellow, oftentimes red.
6 The sixt is like the former, in floures, stalkes, rootes, and seedes, and differeth in that, this kinde hath leaues narrower, and much smaller, growing after the fashion of those of the Pine tree, otherwise it is like.
7 There is another kinde that groweth to the height of a man; the stalke is like the last



1 Tithymalus paralius. Sea Spurge.


2 Tithymalus Helioscopius. Sunne Spurge.


3 Tithymalus Myrtifolius latifolius. Broad leaued Myrtle Spurge.


4 Tithymalus Myrsinitis angustifolius. Narrow leaued myrtle Spurge.





5 Tithymalus Cupressinus. Cypresse Spurge.


6 Tithymalus Pineus. Pine Spurge.


The seuenth figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and 9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...) (...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.

 7 Tithymalus Myrsinitis arborescens. Tree Myrtle Spurge.


The seuenth figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and 9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...) (...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.

 8 Tithymalus Characias (...). Sweet wood Spurge.



The seuenth figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and 9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...) (...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.

 9 (...) Characias Amygdaloides. Vnsauorie Wood-spurge.@ 10 Tithymalus Characias angustisolius. Narrow leaued Wood-spurge.@ 11 Tithymalus Characias serratifolius, Cut leaued Wood-spurge.12 Tithymalus platyphyllos. Broad leaued Spurge.
mentioned, but diuided into sundry branches a finger thicke, and somewhat hairy, not red as the others, but white: the leaues be long and narrow, whitish, and a little downy: the floures are yellow, but in other points like to the rest of this kinde.
8 The eighth kinde riseth vp with one round reddish stalke two cubits high, set about with long thin and broad leaues like the leaues of the Almond tree: the floures come forth at the top like the others, and of a yellow colour. The seed and root resemble the other of his kinde.
9 The ninth (which is the common kinde growing in most woods) is like the former, but his leaues be shorter and (...), yet like to the leaues of an Almond tree: the floures are also yellow; and the seed contained in three cornered seed-vessels.
@ 10 This fourth kinde of Tithymalus Characias, or Valley Tithymale (for so the name imports) hath long, yet somewhat narrower leaues than the former, whitish also, yet not hoary; the vmbels or tufts of floures are of a greenish yellow, which before they be opened do represent the shape of a longish fruit, as an Almond, yet in colour it is like the rest of the leaues: the floures and seeds are like those of the former, and the root descends deepe into the ground.
11 The fifth Characias hath also long leaues sharpe pointed, and broader at their setting on, and of a light greene colour, and snipt or cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The vmbels are smaller, yet carry such floures and seeds as the former. @
12 This kinde hath great broad leaues like the yong leaues of Woad, set round about a stalk of a foot high, in good order: on the top whereof grow the floures in small platters like the common kinde, of a yellow colour declining to purple. The whole plant is full of milke, as are all the rest before specified.


@ 13 Tithymalus Dendroides ex Cod. (...). Great Tree Tithymal.


14 Esula maior Germanica. Quacksaluers Turbith.


13 There is another kinde of Tithymale, whose figure was taken forth of a Manuscript of the Emperors by Dodonaeus, that hath a stalke of the bignesse of a mans thigh, growing like a tree vnto the height of two tall men, diuiding it selfe into sundry armes or branches toward the top, of a red colour. The leaues are small and tender, much like vnto the leaues of Myrtus: the seed is like vnto that of wood Tithymale, or Characias, according to the authority of peter Bellone.
14 There is a kinde of Tithymale called Esula maior, which Martinus Rulandus had in great

(...), as by his extraction which he vsed for many infirmities may and doth appeare at large, in his bookes entituled Centuriae curationum Empiricarum, dedicated vnto the duke of Bauaria. This plant of Rulandus hath very great and many roots couered ouer with a thicke barke, plaited as it were with many surculous sprigs; from which arise sundry strong and large stemmes of a fingers thicknesse, in height two cubits, beset with many pretty large and long leaues like Lathyris, but that they are not so thicke: the seed and floure are not vnlike the other Tithymales.
15 This is like the fifth, saue that it hath smaller and more feeble branches; and the whole plant is altogether lesser, growing but some span or foot high; and the floures are of a red or else a greene colour.
16 There is another rare and strange kinde of Esula, in alliance and likenesse neere vnto (...) minor, that is the small Esula or (...) vsed among the Physitions and Apothecaries of Venice as a kind of Esula, in the Confection of their Benedicta and Catharticke pills, in stead of the true Esula: It yeeldeth a fungous, rough, and browne stalke two cubits high, diuiding it selfe into sundry branches, furnished with stiffe and fat leaues like Licorice, growing together by couples. The floures are pendulous, hanging downe their heads like small bells, of a purple colour, and within they are of a darke colour like Aristolochia rotunda.


The seuenth figure was formerly of (...) (...) 3. (...) of (...): The 8. and 9. were both of the (...) plant: the 12. was the figure of the (...) (...) (...), whose (...) I (...) you in the 17. place.

 15 Esula minor, sen Pityusa. Small Esula.


@ 16 Esula Veneta maritima. Venetian Sea-Spurge.


@ 17 There growes in many chalkie grounds and such dry hilly places, among corne, a small Spurge which seldome growes to two handfuls high; the root is small, and such also are the stalks and leaues, which grow pretty thicke thereon; which oft times are not sharpe, but flat pointed: the seed-vessels and floures are very small, yet fashioned like those of the other Tithymales. It is to be found in corne fields in Iuly and August. @
18 The bigger Cataputia or the common garden Spurge is best knowne of all the rest, and most vsed; wherefore I will not spend time about his description.
The small kinde of Cataputia is like vnto the former, but lesser, whereby it may easily be distinguished; being likewise so well knowne vnto all, that I shall not need to describe it.
@ These two (I meane the bigger and lesser Cataputia of our Author) differ not but by reason of their age, and the fertilenesse and barrennesse of the soile, whence the leaues are somtime broader, and otherwhiles narrower. @



@ 17 Esula exigua Tragi. Dwarfe Esula.


18 (...) seu Cataputia minor. Garden Spurge.


19 Peplus, five Esula rotunda. Pettie Spurge.


20 Peplis. Isope Spurge.





21 Chamaesyce. Spurge Time.


22 Apios vera. Knobbed Spurge.


@ 23 Apios radice oblonga. Long knottie rooted Spurge.


19 The fifteenth kinde called Peplus, hath a small, and fibrous root, bringing forth many fruitfull branches two handfuls long, but little and tender, with leaues like the Sun Tithymale, but rounder and much smaller: it hath also small yellow floures: which being past there appeareth a slender pouchet, three cornered like the other Tithymales, hauing within it a very medullous whitish seed like Poppie, the whole plant yeelding a milky iuice, which argueth it to be a kinde of Tithymale.
20 As in name so in shape this twentieth resembleth Peplus, and commeth in likelihood neerer the signification of Peplum, or Flammeolum than the other; therefore Dioscorides affirmeth it to be (...) amphilaphes, for that it bringeth foorth a greater plentie of branches, more closely knit and wound together, with shining twists and claspers an handfull and a halfe long. The leaues are lesser than those of Peplus, of an indifferent likenesse and resemblance betweene Chamaesyce and wilde Purslane. The seed is great, and likethat of Peplus: the root is small and single.
21 The one and twentieth kinde may be easily knowne from the two last before mentioned, although they be verie like. It

hath many branches and leaues creeping on the ground of a pale greene colour, not vnlike to Herniaria, but giuing milke as all the other Tithymales doe, bearing the like seed, pouch, and floures, but smaller in each respect.
22 The two and twentieth kinde of Tithymale hath a round root like a small Turnep, as euery Authour doth report: yet my selfe haue the same plant in my garden which doth greatly (...), of which I haue giuen diuers vnto my friends, whereby I haue often viewed the roots, which do appeare vnto me somewhat tuberous, and therein nothing answering the descriptions which (...), Pena, and others haue expressed and set sorth. This argueth, that either they were (...), and described the same by (...)-say, or else the plant doth degenerate being brought from his (...) soile. The leaues are (...) all alongst a small rib like (...), somewhat (...), greene aboue, and reddish (...). The seed groweth among the leaues like the seed of Peplus. The whole plant is full of milke like the other Tithymales.
@ Our Authour (...) (...) taxes other Writers of plants, and (...) and Pena by name, which (...) that he either neuer read, or else vnderstood not what they writ, for neither of them (nor any other that I know of) resembles the root of this to a Turnep, but say it hath a tuberous peare fashioned root, etc as you may see in Diosc. lib. 4. cap. 177. and in the (...) (...), pag. 204. The leaues also grow not by couples one against another, as in (...), but rather alternately, or else without any certaine order, as in other Tithymales. @
@ 23 This, saith (...), hath also a tuberous root, but not peare fashioned like as the former, but almost euery where of an equall thicknesse; beeing about an inch and sometimes two inches long, and the lower part thereof is diuided into soure other roots, or thicke sibers, growing smaller by little and little, and sending forth some few fibers: it is blacke without, and white within, and full of a milkie iuice: the (...) are short and weake, set with little leaues like those os the former: the floures are of a yellowish red colour, and the seede is contained in such vessels as the other Tithymales. This is (...) tuberosus, or Ischas (...) of Clusius. @


 The Place.
The first kinde of Spurge groweth by the Sea side vpon the rowling Sand and Baich, as at Lee in Essex, at Lang-tree point right against Harwich, at Whitstable in Kent, and in many other places.
The second groweth in grounds that lie waste, and in (...) earable soile, almost euery where.
The third and fourth, as also the foureteenth and eighteenth, grow in gardens, but not wilde in England.
The ninth Spurge called Characias groweth in most VVoods of England that are drie and warme.
The eighteenth and nineteenth grow in salt marshes (...) the sea, as in the isle of Thanet by the sea side, betwixt Reculvers and Margate in great (...).


 The Time.
These plants floure srom Iune to the end of Iuly.


 The Names.
(...) (...) is called in (...) (...) (...): in Spanish, (...) (...): in high Dutch, Dolfer milch, that is to say (...) (...), or Wolfes milke. Wood Spurge is called (...) (...). The first is called in English Sea Spurge, or Sea VVartwoort. The second, Sun Spurge; the third and sourth, Mirtle Spurge: the sisth Cypresse Spurge; or among women, VVelcome to our house; the sixth Pine Spurge; the seuenth shrub Spurge, and tree Mirtle Spurge; the eighth and ninth (...) Spurge; the (...) Broad leafed Spurge: the thirteenth Great Tree Spurge: the (...) and sisteenth Quack saluers Spurge; the sixteenth Venice Spurge, the seuenteenth Dwarfe Spurge; the eighteenth common Spurge; the nineteenth and twentieth Petie Spurge; the one and twentieth Spurge Time: The two and twentieth, True Apios or the knobbed (...).


 The Temperature.
All the kinds of Tithymales or Spurges are hot and drie almost in the fourth degree, of a sharp  and biting qualitie, sretting or consuming. First the milke and sap is in speciall vse, then the fruit and leaues, but the root is of least strength. The strongest kinde of Tithymale, and of greatest force is that of the sea.
Some write by report of others, that it inflameth exceedingly, but my selfe speak by experience;  for walking along the sea coast at Lee in Essex, with a Gentleman called Mr. Rich, dwelling in the same towne, I tooke but one drop of it into my mouth; which neuerthelesse did so inflame and swell in my throte that I hardly escaped with my life. And in like case was the gentleman, which caused vs to take our horses, and poste for our liues vnto the next farme house to drinke some milk to quench the extremitie of our heate, which then ceased.



 The Vertues.
The iuice of Tithymale, I do not meane sea Tithymale, is a strong medicine to open the bellie, and causing vomite, bringeth vp tough flegme and cholericke humours. Like vertue is in the seed and root, which is good for such as fall into the dropsie, being ministred with discretion and good aduice of some excellent Physition, and prepared with his Correctories by some honest Apothecarie.
The iuice mixed with honie, causeth haire to fall from that place which is anointed therewith, if it be done in the Sun.
The iuice or milke is good to stop hollow teeth, being put into them warily, so that you touch  neither the gums, nor any of the other teeth in the mouth with the said medicine.
The same cureth all roughnesse of the skin, manginesse, leprie, scurfe, and running scabs, and the  white scurfe of the head. It taketh away all manner of warts, knobs, and the hard callousnesse of (...), hot swellings and Carbuncles.
It killeth fish, being mixed with any thing that they will eat.
These herbes by mine aduise would not be receiued into the bodie, considering that there be so  many other good and wholesome potions to be made with other herbes, that may bee taken without perill.



CHAP. 140. Of Herbe Terrible.


1 Alypum montis (...). Herbe Terrible.


2 Tarton-Raire Gallo-Prouinciae. Gutwoort.



 The Description.
1 HErbe Terrible is a small shrub two or three cubits high, bran ched with many small twigges, hauing a thin rinde first browne, then purple, with many little and thinne leaues like Myrtle. The floures are rough like the middle of Scabious floures, of a blew purple colour. The root is two fingers thicke, browne of colour, and of a wooddie substance: the whole plant very bitter, and of an vnpleasant taste like Chamelaea, yea somewhat stronger.
2 Tartonraire, called in English Gutwoort, groweth by the sea, and is Catharticall, and a stranger with vs. In the mother tongue of the Massilians, it is called Tartonraire, of that abundant

and vnbridled (...) of purging, which many times doth cause (...), and such like immderate fluxes, especially when one not skilfull in the vse thereof shall administer the pouder (...) (...) leaues, mixed with any liquor. This plant groweth in manner of a shrub, like (...), and (...) geth forth many smal, tough, and pliant twigs, set about with a thin and cottony hairinesse, and (...) many leaues of a glistering siluer colour, growing from the lowest part euen to the top, (...) like Alypum before mentioned: and vpon these tough and thick branches (if my memory faile (...)) do grow small floures, first white, afterward of a pale yellow: the seed is of a russet colour: (...) hard and wooddy, not very hot in the mouth, leauing vpon the tongue some of his inbred heat and taste, somewhat resembling common Turbith, and altogether without milke.


 The Place.
These plants do grow vpon the mountains in France, and other places in the grauelly grounds, and are as yet strangers in England.


 The Time.
They flourish in August and September. @ The first Clusius found flouring in diuers parts of Spaine, in Februarie and March; and I coniecture the other floures about the same time, yet I can finde nothing said thereof in such as haue deliuered the historie of it. @


 The Names.
There are not any other names appropriate to these plants more than are set forth in the titles.
@ The first of these is the Alypum mont is Ceti, and Herba terribilis of Lobel; Clus. calls it Hippoglossum Valentinum; and in Hist. Lugd. it is named Alypum Penae, and Empetrum Phacoides. The second is the Tartonraire Galloprouinciae Massiliensium, in the Aduersaria; Sesamoides maius multorum of Dalesc. and the Sesamoides maius Scalegeri of Tabern. by which title our Author also gaue his figure, in the 397. pag. of the former Edition. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is nothing either of their nature or vertues, more than is set forth in the Descriptions.
@ Both these plants haue a strong purging faculty like as the Tithymales; but the latter is far more powerfull, and comes neere to the qualitie of Mezereon; wherefore the vse of it is dangerous, by reason of the violence and great heat thereof. @



CHAP. 141. Of Herbe Aloe, or Sea Housleeke.


@ 1 Aloe vulgaris, sive Semperviuum marinum. Common Aloe, or Sea-Housleeke.


2 Aloe folio mucronato. Prickly herbe Aloe, or Sea Housleeke.




 The Description.
1 HEarbe Alloebath leaues like those of sea Onion, very long, broad, smooth, thick, bending backewards, notched in the edges, set with certaine little blunt prickles, full of tough and clammie iuice like the leaues of Housleeke. The stalke, as (...) saith, is like to the stalke of Affodill: the floure is whitish; the seed like that of Affodill; the root is single, of the fashion of a thicke pile thrust into the ground. The whole herbe is extreme bitter, so is the iuice also that is gathered thereof.
@ 2 There is another herbe Aloe that groweth likewise in diuers prouinces of America; the leaues are two cubits long, also thicker, broader, greater, and sharper pointed than the former, and it hath on the edges far harder prickles. The stalke is three cubits high, and a finger thicke, the which in long cups beares violet coloured floures. @


 The Place.
This plant groweth very plentisully in India, and in Arabia, Coelosyria, and Egypt, from whence the iuice put into skins is brought into Europe. It groweth also, as Dioscorides writeth, in Asia, on the sea coasts, and in Andros, but not verie fit for iuice to be drawne out. It is likewise found in Apulia, and in diuers places of Granado and Andalusia, in Spaine, but not far from the sea: the iuice of this is also vnprofitable.


 The Time.
The herbe is alwaies greene, and likewise sendeth forth branches, though it remaine out of the earth, especially if the root be couered with lome, and now and then watered: for so being hanged on the seelings and vpper posts of dining roomes, it doth not onely continue a long time greene, but it also groweth and bringeth forth new leaues: for it must haue a warme place in winter time, by reason it pineth away if it be frozen.


 The Names.
The herbe is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, and in shops also, Aloe: and so is likewise the iuice. The plant also is named (...): but they are bastard words: it is called (...) because it liueth not onely in the earth, but also out of the earth. It is named in French, (...): in Spanish, Azeuar, and Yerua bauosa: in English, Aloes; herbe Aloes, Sea Houseleeke, Sea Aigrene.
The hearbe is called of the latter Herbarists oftentimes Semperviuum, and Semperviuum (...), because it lasteth long after the manner of House-leeke. It seemeth also that (...) in his tenth booke nameth it Sedum, where he setteth downe remedies against the canker-wormes in trees.

Profuit and plant is latices infundere amaros
Marrubij, multoque Sedi contingere succo.


In English thus:
Liquours of Horehound profit much b'ing pour'd on trees:
The same effect Sea Housleeke works as well as these.

For he reciteth the iuice of Sedum or Houseleeke among the bitter iuices, and there is none of the Housleekes bitter but this.


The Temperature.
Aloe, that is to say, the iuice which is vsed in Physicke, is good for many things. It is hot, and that in the first or second degree, but drie in the third, extreme bitter, yet without biting. It is also of an emplaisticke or clammie qualitie, and something binding, externally applied.


 The Vertues.
It purgeth the belly, and is withall a wholesome and conuenient medicine for the stomacke, if  any at all bee wholesome. For as Paulus Aegineta writeth, when all purging medicines are (...) to the stomacke, (...) onely is comfortable. And it purgeth more effectually if it be not washed: and if it be, it then strengtheneth the stomacke the more.
It bringeth forth choler, but especially it purgeth such excrements as be in the stomacke, the  first veines, and in the neerest passages. For it is of the number of those medicines, which the Graecians call (...), of the voiding away of the Ordure; and of such whose purging force passeth not far beyond the stomacke. Furthermore Aloes is an enemie to all kindes of (...); and defendeth the body from all manner of corruption. It also preserueth dead carkases from putrifying;

it killeth and purgeth away all manner of wormes of the belly. It is good against a stinking breath proceeding from the imperfection of the stomacke: it openeth the piles or hemorrhoides of the fundament; and being taken in a small quantity, it bringeth down the monthly course: it is thought to be good and profitable against obstructions and stoppings in the rest of the intrals. Yet some there be who thinke, that it is not conuenient for the liuer.
One dramme thereof giuen, is sufficient to purge. Now and then halfe a dramme or little more  is enough.
It healeth vp greene wounds and deepe sores, clenseth vlcers, and cureth such sores as are hardly  to bee helped, especially in the fundament and secret parts. It is with good successe mixed with (...), or medicines which stanch bleeding; and with plaisters that be applied to bloudy wounds; for it helpeth them by reason of his emplaisticke qualitie and substance. It is profitably put into medicines for the eies sorasmuch as it clenseth and drieth without biting.
Dioscorides saith, that it must be torrified or parched at the fire, in a cleane and red hot vessell, and continually stirred with a Spatula, or Iron Ladle, till it bee torrified in all the parts alike: and that it must also bee washed; to the end that the vnprofitable and sandie drosse may sinke downe vnto the bottome, and that which is smooth and most perfect bee taken and reserued.
The same Authour also teacheth, that mixed with honie it taketh away blacke and blew spots, which come of stripes: that it helpeth the inward ruggednesse of the eye-lids, and itching in the corners of the eies: it remedieth the head-ache, if the temples and forehead bee annointed therewith, being mixed with vineger and oile of Roses: being tempered with wine, it staieth the falling off of the haire, if the head be washed therewith: and mixed with wine and honie, it is a remedie for the swelling of the Vuula, and swelling of the Almonds of the throte, for the gums and all vlcers of the mouth.
The iuice of this herbe Aloe: (whereof is made that excellent and most familiar purger, called  Aloe Succotrina, the best is that which is cleere and shining, of a browne yellowish colour) it openeth the bellie, purging cold, flegmaticke, and cholericke humours, especially in those bodies that are surcharged with surfetting, either of meat or drinke, and whose bodies are fully repleat with humours, fairing daintily, and wanting exercise. This Aloes I say, taken in a small quantitie after supper (or rather before) in a stewed prune, or in water the quantitie of two drammes in the morning, is a most soueraigne medicine to comfort the stomacke, and to clense and driue foorth all superfluous humours. Some vse to mixe the same with Cinnamon, Ginger, and Mace, for the purpose aboue said; and for the Iaundies, spitting of bloud, and all extraordinarie issues of bloud.
The same vsed in vlcers, especially those of the secret parts or fundament, or made into pouder, and strawed on fresh wounds, staieth the bloud, and healeth the same, as those vlcers before spoken of.
The same taken inwardly causeth the Hemorrhoids to bleed, and being laid thereon it causeth  them to cease bleeding.



CHAP. 142. Of Housleeke or Sengreene.

 The Kindes.
SEngreene, as Dioscorides writeth, is of three sorts, the one is great, the other small, and the third is that which is called (...), biting Stone-crop, or VVall pepper.


 The Description.
1 THe great Sengreene, which in Latine is commonly called Iovis Barba, Iupiters beard, bringeth forth leaues hard adioyning to the ground and root, thicke, fat, full of tough iuice, sharpe pointed, growing close and hard together, set in a circle in fashion of an eye, and bringing forth very many such circles, spreading it selfe out all abroad: it oftentimes also sendeth forth small strings, by which it spreadeth farther, and maketh new circles; there riseth vp oftentimes in the middle of these an vpright stalke about a foot high, couered with leaues growing lesse and lesse toward the points, parted at the top into certaine wings or branches, about which are floures orderly placed, of a darke purplish colour: the root is all of strings.

2 There is also another great Housleek or Sengreen (syrnamed tree Housleeke) that bringeth sorth a stalke a cubit high, sometimes higher, and often two; which is thicke, hard, woody, tough, and that can hardly be broken, parted into diuers branches, and couered with a thicke grosse barke, which in the lower part reserueth certaine prints or impressed markes of the leaues that are fallen away. The leaues are fat, well bodied, full of juice, an inch long and somewhat more, like little tongues, very curiously minced in the edges, standing vpon the tops of the branches, hauing in them the shape of an eye. The floures grow out of the branches, which are diuided into many springs; which floures are slender, yellow, and spred like a star; in their places commeth vp very fine seed, the springs withering away: the root is parted into many off-springs. This plant is alwaies greene, neither is it hurt by the cold in winter, growing in his natiue soile; whereupon it is named (...), and Semperuivum, or Sengreene.


1 (...) maius. Great Housleeke.


@ 2 Sedum maius arborescens. Tree Housleeke.


3 There is also another of this kinde, the circles whereof are answerable in bignesse to those of the former, but with lesser leaues, moe in number, and closesly set, hauing standing on the edges very fine haires as it were like soft prickles. This is somewhat of a deeper greene: the stalke is shorter, and the floures are of a pale yellow. @ This is the third of Dodonaeus description, (...). 1. lib. 5. cap. 8. @
4 There is likewise a third to be referred hereunto: the leaues hereof be of a whitish greene, and are very curiously nicked round about. @ The floure is great, consisting of six white leaues; This is that described by Dodonaeus in the 4. place: and it is the Cotyledon altera secunda of Clusius. @
5 There is also a fourth, the circles whereof are lesser, the leaues sharpe pointed, very closely set, of a darke red colour on the top, and hairy in the edges: the floures on the sprigs are of a gallant purple colour. @ This is the fift of Dodonaeus; and the Cotyledon alterateria of Clusius. @


 The Place.
1 The great Sengreen is well knowne not onely in Italy, but also in France, Germany, Bohemia, and the Lowe-Countries. It groweth on stones in mountaines, vpon old walls, and ancient buildings, especially vpon the tops of houses. The forme hereof doth differ according to the nature of the soile; for in some places the leaues are narrower and lesser, but mo in number, and haue one onely circle; in some they are fewer, thicker, and broader: they are greene, and of a deeper

greene in some places; and in others of a lighter greene: for those which we haue described grow not in one place, but in diuers and sundry.


@ 5 Sedum maius angustifolium. Great narrow leaued Housleeke.


2 Great Sengreene is found growing of it selfe on the tops of houses, old walls, and such like places in very many prouinces of the East, and of Greece: and also in the (...) of the Mediterranian sea; as in Crete, which now is called Candy, Rhodes, Zant; and others; neither is Spainc without it: for (as (...) Clusius witnesseth) it groweth in many places of Portingale; otherwise it is cherished in earthen pots. In cold countries, and such as (...) Northward, as in both the Germanies, it neither groweth of it selfe, nor yet lasteth long, though it be carefully planted, and diligently looked vnto, but through the extremitie of the weather, and the ouermuch cold of winter it perisheth.


 The Time.
The stalke of the first doth at length flourc after the Summer Solstice, which is in (...) about Saint Barnabies day, and now and than in the moneth of August; but in Aprill, that is to say, after the aequinoctiall in the spring, which is about a moneth after the spring is begun, there grow out of this among the leaues small strings, which are the groundwork of the circles, by which being at length full growne, it spreadeth it selfe into very many circles.
2 Housleeke that groweth like a tree, doth floure in Portingale at the beginning of the yeere presently after the winter Solstice, which is December, about S. Lucies day.


 The Names.
The first is commonly called Iovis barba, or Iupiters beard, and also Sedum maius vulgare: the Germanes call it (...), (...) (...): they of the Low-countries, Donderbaert: the Hollanders, (...): the French-men, Ioubarbe: the Italians, (...) maggiore: the Spaniards, (...), yerua pentera: the English-men, Housleeke, and Sengreene, and Aygrcene: of some, Iupiters eie, Bullocks (...), and Iupiters beard: of the Bohemians, Netreske. Many take it to be (...) altera Disocoridis; but we had rather haue it one of the Sengreenes for it is continually greene, and alwaies flourisheth, and is hardly hurt by the extremity of winter.
The other without doubt is (...) his (...): that is, Semperuivum magnum, or Sedum majus, great Housleek, or Sengreen: Apulcius calleth it Vitalis, and Semperflorium: it is also named (...).


 The Temperature.
The great Housleeks are cold in the third degree: they are also dry, but not much, by reason of the watery essence that is in them.


 The Vertues.
They are good against Saint Anthonies fire, the shingles, and other creeping vlcers and inflammations, as Galen saith, that proceed of rheumes and fluxes: and as Dioscorides teacheth, against the inflammations (...) fiery heate in the eyes: the leaues, saith Pliny, being applied, or the juice laid on, are a remedy for rheumatike and watering eies.
They take away the fire in burnings and scaldings; and being applied with Barly meale dried, do take away the paine of the gout.
Dioscoridcs teacheth, that they are giuen to them that are troubled with a hot laske: that they  likewise driue forth wormes of the belly if they be drunke with wine.
The juice put vp in a pessary do stay the fluxes in women, proceeding of a hot cause: the leaues  held in the mouth do quench thirst in hot burning feauers.
The juice mixed with Barly meale and vineger preuaileth against S. Anthonies fire, all hot burning  and fretting (...), and against scaldings, burnings, and all inflammations, and also the gout comming of an hot cause.

The iuice of Housleeke, Garden Nightshade, and the buds of Poplar boiled in Axungia porci, or hogs grease, maketh the most singular Populeon that euer was vsed in Chirurgerie.
The iuice hereof taketh away cornes from the toes and feet, if they be washed and bathed (...), and euery day and night as it were implaistered with the skin of the same Housleeke, which certainly taketh them away without incision or such like, as hath beene experimented by my very good friend Mr. Nicholas Belson, a man painefull and curious in searching forth the secrets of Nature.
The decoction of Housleeke, or the iuice thereof drunke, is good against the bloudie flixe, and  cooleth the inflammation of the eies being dropped thereinto, and the bruised hearbe layed vpon them.



CHAP. 143. Of the Lesser Housleekes or Prickmadams.


1 Sedum minus haematoides. Pricke-madame.


2 Sedum minus Officinarum. White floured Prickmadam.



 The Description.
1 THe first of these is a very little herb, creeping vpon the ground with many slender stalks, which are compassed about with a great number of leaues, that are thicke, ful of ioints, little, long, sharpe pointed, inclining to a greene blew. There rise vp among these, little stalkes, a handful high, bringing forth at the top, as it were a shadowie tuft; and in these fine yellow floures: the root is full of strings.
2 The other little Sengreene is also a small herbe, bringing forth many slender stalkes, seldome aboue a span high; on the tops whereof stand little floures like those of the other, in small

@ 3 Sedum minus aectivum. Small Sommer Sengreene.
@ 4 Sedum minus (...) (...). Small large (...) (...).
@ 5 Sedum medium teretifolium. Small (...).
@ 6 (...) Scorpioides. Scorpion Sengreene.

@ 7 Sedum Portlandicum. Portland Sengreene.
@ 8 Sedum petraeum. Small rocke Sengreene.
loose tufts; but they are white and something lesser: the leaues about the stalkes are few and little, but long, blunt, and round, bigger than wheaten cornes, something lesser than the kernels of the Pine Apples, otherwise not vnlike; which oftentimes are something red, stalkes and all: the roote creepeth vpon the superficiall or vppermost part of the earth, sending downe slender threds.
3 There is a small kinde of Stonecrop, which hath little narrow leaues, thicke, sharpe pointed, and tender stalkes, full of fattie iuice; on the top whereof doe grow small yellowe floures, Starre fashion. The roote is small, and running by the ground.
4 There is likewise another Stonecrop called Frog Stonecrop, which hath little tufts of leaues rising from small and and threddie rootes, creeping vpon the ground like vnto Kali or Frog-grasse; from the which tufts of leaues riseth a slender stalke, set with a few such like leaues, hauing at the top prettie large yellow floures, the smalnesse of the plant beeing considered.
@ 5 This is like that which is described in the second place, but that the stalks are lesser, and not so tall, and the floures of this are star fashioned, and of a golden yellow colour. @
6 There is another Stonecrop, or Prickmadam called Aizoon Scorpioides, which is altogether like the great kinde of Stonecrop, and differeth in that, that this kinde of Stonecrop or Prickmadam hath his tuft of yellow floures turning again, not much vnlike the taile of a Scorpion, resembling Myositis Scorpioides, and the leaues somewhat thicker, and closer thrust together. The root is small and tender.
7 There is a plant called Sedum Portlandicu^, or Portland Stonecrop, of the English Island called Portland, lying in the South coast, which hath goodly branches and a rough rinde. The leaues imitate Laureola, growing among the Tithymales, but thicker, shorter, more fat and tender. The stalke is of a wooddy substance like Laurcola, participating of the kindes of Crassula, Semperviuum, and the Tithymales, whereof wee thinke it to bee a kinde; yet not daring to deliuer any vncertaine sentence, it shall be lesse preiudiciall to the truth, to account it as a (...), degenerating from both kindes.
@ Pena and Lobel, who first set this foorth knewe, not verie well what they should say thereof; nor any since them: wherefore I haue onely giuen you their figure put to our Authours description. @
8 There is a plant which hath receiued his name Sedum Petraeum; because it doth for the most part grow vpon the rocks, mountains, and such like stonie places, hauing very smal leaues, comming forth of the ground in tufts like Pseudo-Moly; that is, our common herbe called Thrift: amongst the leaues come forth slender stalkes an handfull high, loden with small yellow floures like vnto the common Prick-Madam: after which come little thicke sharpe pointed cods, which containe the seed, which is small, flat, and yellowish.



 The Place.
The former of these groweth in gardens in the Low-countries: in other places vpon stone wals and tops of houses in England almost euery where.
The other groweth about (...) in the borders of fields, and in other places that lye open to the Sunne.


 The Time.
They floure in the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
The lesser kinde is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Sedum, and Semperuivum minus: of the Germanes, Kleyn Donderbaer, and Kleyn Hauszwurtz: of the Italians, Semperuino minore: of the Frenchmen, Tricque-madame: of the English men, Pricke-Madam, Dwarfe House-leeke, and small Sengreene.
The second kinde is named in shops Crassula minor; and they syrname it minor, for difference betweene it and the other Crassula, which is a kinde of Orpin: it is also called Vermicularis: in Italian, Pignola, Granellosa, and Grasella: in low-Dutch, Blader loosen: in English, Wilde PrickeMadam, Great Stone-crop, or Worme-grasse. @ That which is vulgarly knowne and called by the name of Stone-crop is the Illecebra described in the following chapter, and such as grow commonly with vs of these small Houseleekes mentioned in this chapter are generally named PrickeMadames: but our Author hath confounded them in this and the next chapter; which I would not alter, thinking it sufficient to giue you notice thereof. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
All these small Sengreens are of a cooling nature like vnto the great ones, and are good for those things that the others be. The former of these is vsed in many places in sallads, in which it hath a fine relish, and a pleasant taste: it is good for the heart-burne.



@ CHAP. 144. Of diuers other small Sengreenes.

 The Description.
@ 1 THe stalke of this small water Sengreene is some spanne long, reddish, succulent, and weake: the leaues are longish, a little rough, and full of iuyce: the floures grow vpon the tops of the stalkes, consisting of six purple or else flesh-coloured leaues; which are succeeded by as many little cods containing a small seed: the root is small and threddy, and the whole plant hath an insipide or waterish taste. This was found by Clusius in some waterie places of Germany about the end of Iune; and he calls it Sedum minus 3 siue palustre.
2 This second from small fibrous and creeping roots sends vp sundry little stalkes set with leaues like those of the ordinary Pricke-Madam, yet lesse, thicke, and flatter, and of a more (...) taste: the floures, which are pretty large, grow at the tops of the branches, and consist of siue pale yellowish leaues. It growes in diuers places of the Alps, and floures about the end of Iuly, and in August. This is the Sedum minus 6. or Alpinum 1. of Clusius.
3 This hath small little and thicke leaues, lying bedded, or compact close together, and are of an Ash colour inclining to blew: the stalkes are some two inches long, slender, and almost naked; vpon which grow commonly some three floures consisting of fiue white leaues apiece, with some yellow threds in the middle. This mightily encreases, and will mat and couer the ground for a good space together. It floures in August, and growes vpon the craggy places of the Alpes. Clusius calls it (...) minus nonum, siue Alpinum 3.
4 The leaues of this are somewhat larger and longer, yet thicke, and somewhat hairy about their edges; at first also of an acide taste, but afterwards bitterish and hot: it also sendeth forth shoots, and in the middest of the leaues it puts forth stalkes some two inches high, which at the top as in an vmbel carry some six little floures consisting of (...) leaues apiece, hauing their bottomes of a yellowish colour. It is found in the like places, and floures at the same time as the former. Clusius makes it his Sedum minus 10. Alpinum 4. and in the (...). Lugd. It is called Iasme montana.



@ 1 Sedum minus palustre. Small water Sengreene.


@ 2 Sedum Alpinum 1. Clusij. Small Sengreene of the Alps.


@ Sedum Alpinum (...). (...). White Sengreene (...) the Alpes.


@ 4 Sedum Alpinum 4. Clusij. Hairy Sengreene of the Alpes.





@ 5 Sedum petraeum Bupleurifolio. Long leaued Rocke Sengreene.


5 For these foure last described we are beholden to Clusius; and for this fifth to (...), who thus describes it: It hath one (...) and large root with few or no fibres, but (...) (...) bunching out here and there: it (...) (...) with a thicke barke, and is of a (...) (...) colour on the outside: the (...) (...) (...), long and narrow, lying spred (...) (...) (...) the stalke grows some (...) high, and is round and naked, and at the top carries (...) (...) of 7 sharpe pointed pale yellow leaues; which are succeeded by seeds like (...) (...) (...), and of a strong smell. It (...) (...) the middle of Iuly, and the seed is (...) (...) the middle of August. (...), who (...) obserued this growing (...) (...) (...) in Italy, sets it forth by the (...) (...) (...) (...) Bupleurifolio. (...) hath it by (...) (...) (...) (...) Alpina Graminco folio, and (...) angustisolium Alpinum.


 The Temper and (...).
The three first described without doubt  are cold, and partake in vertues with the (...) small Sengreenes; but the two last (...) (...) of an hot and attenuating (...). (...) (...) them are commonly knowne or (...) in Physicke. @



CHAP. 145. Of Stone-crop, called Wall-pepper.


(...) siue Illecebra minor acris. Wall-Pepper, or Stone-crop.



 The Description.
THis is a low and little herbe: the stalks be slender and short: the leaues about these stand very thicke, and small in growth, full bodied, sharpe pointed, and (...) (...): the floures stand on the top, and (...) (...) little, of colour yellow, (...) of a (...) (...) taste: the root is nothing but (...).


 The Place.
It groweth (...) where in stony and dry places, and in chinks and crannies of (...) wals, and on the tops of houses: it is alwaies green, and therefore it is very fitly placed among the Sengreenes.


 The Time.
It floureth in the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
This is Tertium sempervivum Dioscoridis, (...) Dioscorides his third Sengreene, which he saith is called of the Grecians (...), and (...): and of the Romanes, Illecebra. Pliny also witnesseth, that the Latines name it (...). Yet there is another (...), and another (...), the Germanes call this (...) (...), and Katzen treuble: the French men, (...) (...):

the Low-countrey men, Muer Pepper: the English men, Stone-crop, and Stone hore, little Stone-crop, Pricket, Mouse-taile, Wall-Pepper, Countrey Pepper, and Iacke of the Butterie.


 The Temperature.
This little herbe is sharpe and biting, and very hot. Being outwardly applied it raiseth blisters, and at length exulcerateth.


 The Vertues.
It wasteth away hard kernels, and the Kings Euill, if it be layd vnto them, as Diosoorides writes.
The iuyce hereof extracted or drawne forth, and taken with vineger or other liquor, procureth  vomit, and bringeth vp grosse and flegmaticke humors, and also cholericke; and doth thereby oftentimes cure the Quartan (...) and other Agues of long continuance: and giuen in this manner it is a remedy against poysons inwardly taken.



CHAP. 146. Of Orpyne.

 The Description.
1 THe Spanish Orpyne sendeth forth round stalkes, thicke, slipperie, hauing as it were little ioynts, somewhat red now and then about the root: the leaues in like manner be thicke, smooth, grosse, full of tough iuyce, sometimes sleightly nicked in the edges, broader leafed, and greater than those of Purslane; otherwise not much vnlike; which by couples are set opposit one against another vpon euery joint, couering the stalke in order by two and two: the floures in the round tufts are of a pale yellow: the root groweth full of bumpes like vnto long kernels, waxing sharpe toward the point: these ketnels be white, and haue strings growing forth of them,


1 Crassula major Hispanica. Spanish Orpyne.


2 Crassula siue faba inuersa. Common Orpyne.


2 The second, which is our common Orpyne, doth likewise rise vp with very many round stalkes that are smooth, but not ioynted at all: the leaues are grosse or corpulent, thicke, broad,

and oftentimes somewhat nicked in the edges, lesser than those of the former, placed out of order. The floures be either red or yellow, or else whitish: the root is white, well bodied, and full of kernels. This plant is very full of life: the stalkes set onely in clay continue greene a long time; and if they be now and then watered they also grow. We haue a wilde kinde of Orpyne growing in corne fields and shadowy woods in most places of England, in each respect like that of the garden, sauing that it is altogether lesser.


 The Place.
They prosper best in shadowie and stony places, in old walls made of lome or stone. Oribasius saith, That they grow in Vineyards and tilled places. The first groweth in gardens; the other euerie where: the first is much found in Spaine and Hungarie; neither is Germanie without it; for it groweth vpon the bankes of the riuer of Rhene neere the Vineyards, in rough and stony places, nothing at all differing from that which is found in (...).
The second groweth plentifully both in Germany, France, Bohemia, England, and in other countries among vines, in old (...) daubed and stony walls.


 The Time.
The Orpynes floure about August or before.


 The Names.
The first is that which is called of the Grecians (...), and (...): of the Latines, Telephium, and Sempervivum syluestre, and Illecebra: but Illecebra by reason of his sharpe and biting qualitie doth much differ from it, as we haue declared in the former Chapter. Some there be (...) name it (...), or Portulaca syluestris: yet there is another Portulaca syluestris, or wilde Purslane, like to that which groweth in gardens, but lesser: we may call this in English, Spanish Orpyne, Orpyne of Hungarie, or ioynted Orpyne.
The second kinde of Orpyne is called in shops Crassula, and Crassula Fabaria, and Crassula maior, that it may differ from that which is described in the chapter of little Housleeke: it is named also Fabaria: in high-Dutch, Mundkraut, Knauenkraut, Fortzwang, and Fotzweyn: in Italian, Fabagrassa: in French, Ioubarbe des vignes, Feue espesse: in low-Dutch, Smer wortele, and Hemel Sluetel: in English, Orpyne; also Liblong, or Liue-long.


 The Temperature.
The Orpyns be cold and dry, and of thin or subtill parts.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, That being laid on with Vineger it taketh away the white morphew: Galen saith the blacke also; which thing it doth by reason of the scouring or cleansing qualitie that it hath. Whereupon Galen attributeth vnto it an hot facultie, though the taste sheweth the contrarie: which aforesaid scouring facultie declareth, That the other two also be likewise cold. But cold things may as well cleanse, if drinesse of temperature and thinnesse of essence be ioyned together in them.



CHAP. 147. Of the smaller Orpyns.

 The Description.
1 THe Orpyn with purple floures is lower and lesser than the common Orpyn: the stalkes be slenderer, and for the most part lie along vpon the ground. The leaues are also thinner and longer, and of a more blew greene, yet well bodied, standing thicker below than aboue, confusedly set together without order: the floures in the tufts at the tops of the stalks be of a pale blew tending to purple. The roots be not set with lumpes or knobbed kernels, but with a multitude of hairy strings.
2 This second Orpyn, as it is knowne to few, so hath it found no name, but that some Herbarists do call it Telephium sempervivum or virens: for the stalkes of the other do wither in winter, the root remaineth greene; but the stalkes and leaues of this endure also the sharpenesse of Winter; and therefore we may call it in English, Orpyn euerlasting, or Neuer-dying Orpyn. This hath lesser and rounder leaues than any of the former: the floures are red, and (...) root fibrous.
@ 3 Clusius receiued the seeds of this from Ferranto Imperato of Naples, vnder the name of

1 Telephium floribus purpureis. Purple Orpyn.
2 Telephium semper-virens. Neuer-dying Orpyn.
@ 2 Telephium legitimum Imperati. Creeping Orpyn.
Telephium legitimum; and he hath thus giuen vs the history thereof: It produces from the top of the root many branches spred vpon the ground, which are about a foot long, set with many leaues, especially such as are not come to floure; for the other haue fewer: these leaues are smaller, lesse thicke also and succulent than those of the former kindes, neither are they so brittle: their colour is green, inclining a little to blew: the tops of the branches are plentifully stored with little floures growing thicke together, and composed of fiue little white leaues apiece: which fading, there succeed cornered seed-vessels full of a brownish seed. The root is sometimes as thicke as ones little finger, tough, white, diuided into some branches, and liuing many yeares. @


 The Place, Time, Names, Temperature, and Vertues.
The first growes not in England. The second flourishes in my garden. @ The third is a stranger with vs @. They floure when the common Orpyn doth. Their names are specified in their seuerall descriptions: and their temperature and faculties in working are referred to the common Orpyn.




CHAP. 148. Of Purslane.

 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of the great Purslane be round, thicke, somewhat red, full of juice, smooth, glittering, and parted into certaine branches trailing vpon the ground: the leaues be an inch long, something broad, thicke, fat, glib, somewhat greene, whiter on the neither side: the floures are little, of a faint yellow, and grow out at the bottome of the leaues. After them springeth vp a little huske of a greene colour, of the bignesse almost of halfe a barly corne, in which is small blacke seed: the root hath many strings.


1 Portulaca (...). Garden Purslane.


2 Portulaca silvestris. Wilde Purslane.


2 The other is lesser and hath like stalkes, but smaller, and it spreadeth on the ground: the leaues be like the former in fashion, smoothnesse, and thicknesse, but farre lesser.


 The Place.
The former is fitly sowne in gardens, and in the waies and allies thereof being digged and dunged; it delighteth to grow in a fruitfull and fat soile not dry.
The other commeth vp of his owne accord in allies of gardens and vineyardes, and oftentimes vpon rocks: this also is delighted with watery places being once sowne, if it be let alone till the seed be ripe it doth easily spring vp afresh for certaine yeeres after.


 The Time.
It may be sowne in March or Aprill; it flourisheth and is greene in Iune, and afterwards euen vntill winter.


 The Names.
Purslane is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Portulaca: in high Dutch, Burkelkraut: in French, Poupier: in Italian, (...): in Spanish, Verdolagas: in English, Purslane, and Porcelane.



 The Temperature.
Purslane is cold, and that in the third degree, and moist in the second: but wilde Purslane is not so moist.


 The Vertues.
Rawe Purslane is much vsed in sallades, with oile, salt, and vineger: it cooleth an hot (...), and prouoketh appetite; but the nourishment which commeth thereof is little, bad, cold, grosse, and moist: being chewed it is good for teeth that are set on edge or astonied; the juice doth the same being held in the mouth, and also the distilled water.
Purslane is likewise commended against wormes in young children, and is singular good, especially  if they be feuerish withall, for it both allaies the ouermuch heate, and killeth the wormes: which thing is done through the saltnes mixed therewith, which is not only an enemy to wormes, but also to putrifaction.
The leaues of Purslane either rawe, or boiled, and eaten as sallades, are good for those that  haue great heate in their stomackes and inward parts, and doe coole and temper the inflamed bloud.
The same taken in like manner is good for the bladder and kidnies, and allaieth the out ragious  lust of the body: the juice also hath the same vertue.
The juice of Purslane stoppeth the bloudy fluxe, the fluxe of the hemorroides, monthly termes, spitting of bloud, and all other fluxes whatsoeuer.
The same thrown vp with a mother syringe, cureth the inflammations, frettings, and (...) of the matrix; and put into the fundament with a clister pipe, helpeth the vlcerations and (...) the guts.
The leaues eaten rawe, take away the paine of the teeth, and fasteneth them; and are good for  teeth that are set on edge with eating of sharpe or soure things.
The seed being taken, killeth and driueth forth wormes, and stoppeth the laske.



CHAP. 149. Of sea Purslane, and of the shrubby Sengreens.

 The Description.
1 SEa Purslane is not a herbe as garden Purslane, but a little shrub: the stalkes whereof be hard and wooddy: the leaues fat, full of substance, like in forme to common Purslane, but much whiter and harder: the mossie purple floures stand round about the vpper parts of the stalkes, as do almost those of Blyte, or of Orach: neither is the seed vnlike, being broad and flat: the root is wooddy, long lasting, as is also the plant, which beareth out the winter with the losse of a few leaues.
@ 2 There is another sea Purslane or Halimus, or after Dodonaus, Portulaca marina, which hath leaues like the former, but not altogether so white, yet are they somewhat longer and narrower, not much vnlike the leaues of the Oliue tree. The slender branches are not aboue a cubit or cubit and halfe long, and commonly lie spred vpon the ground, and the floures are of a deepe ouerworne herby colour, and after them follow seedes like those of the former, but smaller.
@ 3 Our ordinary Halimus or sea Purslane hath small branches some foot or better long, lying commonly spred vpon the ground, of an ouerworne grayish colour, and sometimes purple; the leaues are like those of the last mentioned, but more fat and thicke, yet lesse hoary. The floures grow on the tops of the branches, of an herby purple colour, which is succeeded by small seeds like to that of the second kinde. @
4 There is found another wilde sea Purslane, whereof I haue thought good to make mention; which doth resemble the kindes of Aizoons. The first kinde groweth vpright, with a trunke like a small tree or shrub, hauing many vpright wooddy branches, of an ashe colour, with many thicke, darke, greene leaues like the small Stone crop, called Vermicularis: the floures are of an herby yellowish greene colour: the root is very hard and fibrous: the whole plant is of a salt tang taste, and the juice like that of Kaly.
5 There is another kinde like the former, and differeth in that, this strange plant is greater, the leaues more sharpe and narrower, and the whole plant more wooddy, and commeth neere to the forme of a tree. The floures are of a greenish colour.



@ 1 Halimus latifolius. Tree Sea Purslane.


@ 2 Halimus angustifolius procumbens. Creeping Sea Purslane.


The figure that was formerly giuen by our Author by the title of Portulaca marina, and is set forth by (...). vnder the same name, is either of none of these plants, or else it is vnperfect. (...) knowes not what to make of it, but questions, (...)?

 3 Halimus vulgaris, siue Portulaca marina. Common Sea Purslane.


@ 4 Vermicular is frutex minor. The lesser shrubby Sengreen.





@ 5 Vermicularis frutex major. The greater Tree Stone-crop.




 The Place.
@ The first and second grow vpon the Sea coasts of Spaine and other hot countries @: and the third groweth in the salt marishes neere the sea side, as you passe ouer the Kings ferrey vnto the isle of Shepey, going to Sherland house (belonging sometime vnto the Lord Cheiny, and in the yeare 1590, vnto the Worshipfull Sr. Edward Hobby) fast by the ditches sides of the same marish: it groweth plentifully in the isle of Thanet as you go from Margate to Sandwich, and in many other places along the coast. The other sorts grow vpon bankes and heapes of sand on the Sea coasts of Zeeland, Flanders, Holland, and in like places in other countries, as besides the Isle of Purbecke in England; and on Rauen-spurne in Holdernesse, as I my selfe haue seene.


 The Time.
These flourish and floure especially in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Sea Purslane is called Portulaca Marina: In Greeke, (...): it is also called in Latine Halimus: in Dutch, Zee (...): in English, Sea Purslane.
The bastard ground Pines are called of some, Chamepitys virmiculata: in English, Sea ground Pine: @ or more fitly, Tree Ston-crop, or Pricket, or Shrubby Sengreene. @


 The Temperature.
Sea Purslane is (as Galen saith) of vnlike parts, but the greater part thereof is hot in a meane, with a moisture vnconcocted, and somewhat windie.


 The Vertues.
The leaues (saith Dioscorides) are boyled to be eaten: a dram weight of the root being drunke  with meade or honied water, is good against crampes and drawings awrie of sinewes, burstings, and gnawings of the belly: it also causeth Nurses to haue store of milke. The leaues be in the Lowcountries preserued in salt or pickle as capers are, and be serued and eaten at mens tables in stead of them, and that without any mislike of taste, to which it is pleasant. Galen doth also report, that the yong and tender buds are wont in Cilicia to be eaten, and also laid vp in store for vse.
@ Clusius saith, That the learned Portugal Knight Damianus a Goes assured him, That the leaues  of the first described boyled with bran, and so applied, mitigate the paines of the Gout proceeding of an hot cause. @



CHAP. 150. Of Herbe-Iuy, or Ground-Pine.

 The Description.
1 THe common kinde of Chamaepitys or Ground-Pine is a small herbe and very tender, creeping vpon the ground, hauing small and crooked branches trailing about. The leaues be small, narrow and hairy, in sauour like the Firre or Pine tree; but if my sence of smelling be perfect, me thinkes it is rather like vnto the smell of hempe. The floures be little, of a pale yellow colour, and sometimes white: the root is small and single, and of a wooddy substance.
@ 2 The second hath pretty strong foure square ioynted stalkes, (...) and hairy; from which grow pretty large hairy leaues much clouen or cut: the floures are of a purple colour, and grow about the stalks in roundles like the dead Nettle: the seed is black and round, and the whole plant sauoureth like the former: @ which sheweth this to be fitly referred to the Chamaepytis, and not to be well called Chamaedrys (...), or Iagged Germander, as some haue named it. @



1 Chamaepitys mas. The male ground Pine.


2 Chamaepitys foemina. The female ground-Pine.


3 Chamaepitys 3. Dodon. Small Ground-Pine.


4 (...) a muscata Monspeliaca. French Herbe-Iuy or Ground-Pine.



3 This kinde of Herb-Iuy, growing for the most part about Montpelier in France, is the least of all his kind, hauing smal white and yellow floures, in smell and proportion like vnto the others, but much smaller.
@ 4 There is a wilde or bastard kinde of Chamaepitys, or ground-Pine, that hath leaues somewhat like vnto the second kinde, but not iagged in that manner, but onely snipt about the edges. The root is somewhat bigger, wooddy, whitish, and bitter, and like vnto the root of Succorie. All this herbe is very rough, and hath a strong vnpleasant smell, not like that of the ground-Pines.


@ 5 Chamaepitys spuria altera Dodon. Bastard Ground-Pine.


@ 6 Chamaepitys Austriaca. Austrian Ground-Pine.


@ 5 There is another kind that hath many small and tender branches beset with little leaues for the most part three together, almost like the leaues of the ordinarie ground-Pine: at the top of which branches grow slender white floures; which being turned vpside downe, or the lower part vpward, do somewhat resemble the floures of Lamium: the seeds grow commonly foure together in a cup, and are somewhat big and round: the root is thicke, whitish, and long lasting.
6 There groweth in Austria a kinde of Chamaepitys, which is a most braue and rare plant, and of great beautie, yet not once remembred either of the ancient or new Writers, vntill of late that famous Carolus Clufius had set it forth in his Pannonicke Obseruations; who for his singular skil and industrie hath woon the garland from all that haue written before his time. This rare and strange plant I haue in my garden, growing with many square stalkes of halfe a foot high, beset euen from the bottome to the top with leaues so like our common Rosemary, that it is hard for him which doth not know it exactly to finde the difference; being greene aboue, and somwhat hairy and hoarie vnderneath: among which come forth round about the stalkes (after the manner of roundles or coronets) certain small cups or chalices of a reddish colour; out of which come the floures like vnto Archangell in shape, but of a most excellent and stately mixed colour, the outside purple declining to (...) and sometimes of a violet colour. The floure gapeth like the mouth of a beast, and hath as it were a white tongue; the lower and vpper iawes are white likewise, spotted with many bloudy spots: which being past, the seeds appeare very long, of a shining blacke colour, (...) in order in the small huskes as the Chamaepitys spuria. The root is blacke and hard, with manie hairy strings fastned thereto.



 The Place.
These kindes of Chamaepitys (except the two last) grow very plentifully in Kent, especially about Grauesend, Cobham, Southfleet, Horton, Dartford, and Sutton, and not in any other shire in England that euer I could finde.
@ None of these, except the first, for any thing I know, or can learne, grow wilde in England; the second I haue often seene in Gardens. @


 The Time.
They floure in Iune, and often in August.


 The Names.
Ground Pine is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Ibiga, Aiuga, and Abiga: in shops, Iua Arthritica and Iua moschata: in Italian, (...): in Spanish, Chamaepitoes: in High Dutch, Bergiss (...) nicht: in low Dutch, (...) (...): in French; Iue moschate: In English, Herbe Iuie, Forget me not, Ground Pine, and field Cypresse.
@ 1 The first of these is the Chamaepitys prima, of Matthiolus, Dodonaeus and others, and is that which is commonly vsed in shops and in Physicke.
2 This (...) cals Chamaedrys altera: Lobel, Chamaedrys Laciniatis folijs: (...), (...) vera; (...), Iva moschata; and Dodon. (whom in this Chapter we chiefely follow) (...) mapitys altera.
3 Thirdly, this is the Chamaepitys 1. of Fuchsius and others; the Chamaepitys (...) Dioscoridisodo atior of Lobel; and the Chamaepitys 3. of Matthiolus and Dodon.
4 Gesner cals this Chamaepitys species Monspellij: Clusius, Dodon. Anthyllis altera; and Lobel; Anthyllis Chamepityides minor; and Tabern. Iua Moschata (...).
5 This is Chamaepitys adulterina of Lobel: (...) and Aiuga adulterina of Clusius: and Chamaepitys spuria altera of Dondon.
6 This is Chamaepitys Austriaca of Clusius; and Chamaepitys caerulea of Camerarius. @


 The Nature.
These herbes are hot in the second degree, and drie in the third.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Chamaepytis tunned vp in Ale, or infused in wine or sodden with hony, and drunke  by the space of eight or ten daies, cureth the iaudies, the Sciatica, the stoppings of the liuer, the difficultie of making water, the stoppings of the spleene, and causeth women to haue their natural sicknesse.
Chamaepytis stamped greene with honie cureth wounds, malignant and rebellious vlcers, and dissolueth  the hardnesse of womens brests or paps, and profitably helpeth against poison, or biting of any venomous beast.
The decoction drunke, dissolueth congealed bloud, and drunke with vineger, driueth forth the  dead childe.
It clenseth the intrals: it helpeth the infirmities of the liuer and kidneies; it (...) the yellow  iaundies being drunke in wine: it bringeth downe the desired sicknesse, and prouoketh vrine: being boiled in Mead or honied water and drunke, it helpeth the (...) in fortie daies. The people of Heraclea in Pontus do vse it against Wolfes bane in stead of a counterpoison.
The pouder hereof taken in pils with a fig, mollifieth the bellie: it wasteth away the hardnesse  of the paps: it healeth wounds, it cureth putrified vlcers being applied with hony: and these things the first ground Pine doth performe, so doth the other two: but not so effectually, as (...) Dioscorides.
Clusius of whom mention was made, hath not said any thing of the Vertues of (...) Austriaca: but verily I thinke it better by many degrees (...) the purposes aforesaid: my coniecture I take from the taste, smell, and comely proportion of this Hearbe, which is more pleasing and familiar vnto the nature of man, than those which wee haue plentifully in our owne Countrey growing.




CHAP. 152. Of Nauelwoort, or Penniwoort of the Wall.


 The Description.
1 THe great Nauelwoort hath round and thicke leaues, somewhat bluntly indented about the edges, and somewhat hollow in the midst on the vpper part, hauing a short tender

stemme fastened to the middest of the leafe, on the lower side vnderneath the stalke, whereon the floures doe grow, is small and hollow, an handfull high and more, beset with many small floures of an ouerworne incarnate colour. The root is round like an oliue, of a white colour.
@ The root is not well exprest in the figure, for it should haue been more vnequall or tuberous, with the fibers not at the bottome but top thereof. @
2 The second kinde of Wall Penniwoort or Nauelwoort hath broad thicke leaues somewhat deepely indented about the edges: and are not so round as the leaues of the former, but somewhat long towards the setting on, spred vpon the ground in manner of a tuft, set about the tender stalke, like to Sengreene or Housleeke; among which riseth vp a tender stalke whereon do grow the like leaues. The floures stand on the top consisting of fiue small leaues of a white colour, with red spots in them. The root is small and threddie. @ This by some is called Sedum Serratum. @
@ 3. This third kinde hath long thicke narrow leaues, very finely snipt or nickt on the edges, which lie spred very orderly vpon the ground; and in the midst of them rises vp a stalke some foot high, which beares at the top thereof vpon three or foure little branches, diuers white floures consisting of fiue leaues apiece.
4 The leaues of this are long and thicke, yet not so finely snipt about the edges, nor so narrow as those of the former: the stalke is a foot high, set here and there with somewhat shorter and rounder leaues than those below; and towards the top thereof, out of the bossomes of these leaues come sundry little foot-stalkes, bearing on their tops pretty large floures of colour white, and spotted with red spots. The rootes are small, and here and there put vp new tufts of leaues, like as the common Housleeke. @
5 There is a kinde of Nauelwoort that groweth in waterie places, which is called of the husbandmen Sheeps bane, because it killeth sheepe that do eat thereof: it is not much vnlike the precedent, but the round edges of the leaues are not so euen as the other; and this creepeth vpon the ground, and the other vpon the stone walls.


1 Vmbilicus Veneris. Wall Penniwoort.


@ 2 Vmbilicus Ven. sive Cotyledon altera. Iagged or Rose Penniwoort.


@ 6 Because some in Italy haue vsed this for Vmbilicus Veneris, and othersome haue so called it, I thought it not amisse to follow Matthiolus, and giue you the history thereof in this place, rather than to omit it, or giue it in another which may be perhaps as vnfit, for indeed I cannot sitly ranke

it with any other plant. Bauhine sets it betweene Hedera Terrestris, and (...) (...): and Columna refers it to the Linaria's, but I must confesse I cannot referre it to any; wherefore I thinke it as proper to giue it here as in any other place. The branches of this are many, long, slender, and creeping, vpon which grow without any certaine order many little smooth thicke leaues fashioned like those of Ivie, and fastened to stalkes of some inch long: and together with these stalkes come sorth others of the same length, that carry spur-fashioned floures, of the shape and bignesse of those of the female Fluellen: their outside is purple, their inside blew, with a spot of yellow in the opening. The root is small, creeping, and threddie. It floures toward the end of Sommer, and growes wilde vpon walls in Italie, but in gardens with vs. (...) calls it Cymbalaria (to which Lobel addes) Italica Hederaceo folio: Lonicerus termes it Vmbilicus Veneris (...): and lastly Columna cals it Linaria hederae folio. @


 The Place.
The first kind of Penniwoort groweth plentifully in Northampton vpon euery stone wall about the towne, at Bristow, Bathe, Wells, and most places of the West Countrie vpon stone walls. It groweth vpon Westminster Abbey, ouer the doore that leadeth from Chaucers tombe to the old palace. @ In this last place it is not now to be found. @
The second, third, and fourth grow vpon the Alpes neere Piedmont, and Bauier, and vpon the mountaines of Germanie: I found the third growing vpon Bieston Castle in Cheshire.
@ The fifth growes vpon the Bogges vpon Hampstead Heath, and many such rotten grounds in other places. @


 The Time.
They are greene and flourish especially in VVinter: They floure also in the beginning of Sommer.


 The Names.
Nauelwoort is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Vmbilicus Veneris, and Acetabulum: of diuers, Herba Coxendicum: Iacobus Manlius nameth it Scatum Coeli, and Scatellum: in Dutch, (...): in Italian, Cupertoiule: in French, Escuelles: in Spanish, Capadella: of some, Hortus Veneris, or Venus garden, and Terrae vmbilicus, or the Nauel of the earth: in English, Penniwoort, Wall-penniwoort, Ladies nauell, Hipwoort and Kidney-woort.
VVater Penniwoort is called in Latine Cotyledon palustris: in English, Sheepe-killing Pennigrasse, Penny-rot, and in the North Countrey VVhite-rot: for there is also Red-rot, which is Rosa solis: in Northfolke it is called Flowkwoort. @ Columna and Bauhine fitly refer this to the Ranunculi, or Crowfeet; for it hath no affinitie at all with the Cotyledons (but onely in the roundnesse of the leafe) the former of them cals it Ranunculus aquaticus vmbilicatofolio, and the later, Ranunculus aquat. Cotyledonis folio.


 The Temperature.
Nauelwoort is of a moist substance and somewhat cold, and of a certaine obscure binding qualitie: it cooleth, repelleth, or driueth backe, scoureth, and consumeth, or wasteth away, as Galen testifieth.
@ The VVater Pennywoort is of an hot and vlcerating qualitie, like to the Crowfeet, whereof it is a kinde. The bastard Italian Nauelwoort seemes to partake with the true in cold and moisture. @


 The Vertues.
The iuice of VVall Pennywoort is a singular remedie against all inflammations and hot tumors, as Erysipelas, Saint Anthonies fire, and such like: and is good for kibed heeles, being bathed therwith, and one or more of the leaues laid vpon the heele.
The leaues and rootes eaten doe breake the stone, prouoke vrine, and preuaile much against the  dropsie.
The ignorant Apothecaries doe vse the VVater Pennywoort in stead of this of the wall, which  they cannot doe without great error, and much danger to the patient: for husbandmen know well, that it is noisome vnto Sheepe, and other cattell that feed thereon, and for the most part bringeth death vnto them, much more to men by a stronger reason.



3 Vmbilicus Veneris minor. Small Nauelwoort.


@ 4 Cotyledon minor montana altera. The other small mountaine Nauelwoort.


5 Cotyledon palustris. Water Penniwoort.


@ 6 Cymbalaria Italica. Italian Bastard Nauelwoort.






CHAP. 152. Of Sea Pennywoort.


1 Androsace Matthioli. Sea Nauel-woort.


2 Androsace annua spuria. One Sommers Nauell-woort.



 The Description.
1 THe Sea Nauel-woort hath many round thicke leaues like vnto little saucers, set vpon small and tender stalks, bright, shining, and smooth, of two inches long, for the most part growing vpon the furrowed shels of cockles or the like, euery small stem bearing vpon the end or point, one little buckler and no more, resembling a nauell; the stalke and leafe set together in the middle of the same. Whereupon the Herbarists of Montpelier haue called it (...) Marinus, or sea Nauel. The (...) and stalkes of this plant, whilest they are yet in the water, are of a pale ash colour, but being taken forth, (...) presently waxe white, as Sea Mosse, called (...), or the shel of a Cockle. It is thought to be barren of seed, and is in taste saltish.
2 The second Androsace hath little smooth leaues, spred vpon the ground like vnto the leaues of small Chickweed or Henbit, whereof doubtles it is a kind: among which riseth vp a slender stem, hauing at the top certaine little chaffie floures of a purplish colour. The seed is contained in small (...) husks, of a reddish colour, and a bitter taste. The whole plant perisheth when it hath perfected his seede, and must be sowne againe the next yeare: which plant was giuen to Mathiolus by Cortusus, who (as he (...)) receiued it from Syria; but I thinke hee said so to make Matthiolus more (...): but surely I surmise he picked it out of one old wal or other, where it doth grow euen as the small Chickweed, or Nailewoort of the wall do.
@ The figure that was here was that vnperfect one of (...); and the description of our Authour was framed by it, vnlesse the last part therof, which was taken out of the Aduersaria pag. 166. to amend both these, we here present you with the true figure and description, taken out of the workes of the iudicious and painfull Herbarist Carolus Clusius. It hath (saith he) many leaues lying flat vpon the ground, like to those of Plantaine, but lesser and of a pale greene colour, and (...) about the edges, soft also and iuicie, and of somewhat a biting taste. Amongst these leaues rise vp fiue or six stalkes of an handfull high, commonly of a green, vet sometimes of a purple colour, naked and somewhat hairy, which at their tops carry in a circle fiue roundish leaues also a little toothed and hairy; from the midst of which arise fiue or more (...), each bearing a greenish rough or hairie, cup and parted also into fiue little leaues or iags, in the

midst of which stands a little white floure parted also into fiue; after which succeed pretty large seed vessels which containe an vnequall red seed like that of (...), but bigger: the root is single and slender, and dies as soon as the seed is perfected. It growes naturally in diuers places of Austria, and amongst the corne about the Bathes of Baden; whereas it floures in Aprill, and ripens the seed in May and Iune. @


 The Place.
Androsace will not grow any where but in water: great store of it is about Frontignan by Montpellier in Languedoc, where euery fisher-man doth know it.
The second groweth vpon old stone and mud walls: notwithstanding I haue (the more to grace Matthiolus great iewell) planted it in my garden.


 The Time.
The bastard Androsace floureth in Iuly, and the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
Androsace is of some called Vmbilicus marinus, or sea Nauell.
@ The second is knowne and called by the name of Androsace altera (...). @


 The Temperature.
The sea Nauell is of a diureticke qualitie, and more drie than Galen thought it to be, and lesse hot than others haue deemed it: there can no moisture be found in it.


 The Vertues.
Sea Nauelwoort prouoketh vrine, and digesteth the filthinesse and sliminesse gathered in the  ioints.
Two drams of it, as Dioscorides saith, drunke in wine, bringeth downe great store of vrine out of  their bodies that haue the dropsie, and maketh a good plaister to cease the paine of the gout.



CHAP. 153. Of Rose-woort, or Roseroot.


Rhodia radix, Rose-root.



 The Description.
ROsewoort hath many small, thicke, and fat stems, growing from a thicke and knobby root: the vpper end of it for the most part standeth out of the ground, and is there of a purplish colour, bunched and knobbed like the root of Orpin, with many hairy strings hanging therat, of a pleasant smell when it is broken, like the damaske rose, whereof it tooke his name. The leaues are set round about the stalks, euen from the bottome to the top, like those of the field Orpin, but narrower, and more snipt about the edges. The floures grow at the top of a faint yellow colour.


 The Place.
It groweth very plentifully in the North part of England, especially in a place called Ingleborough Fels, neere vnto the brookes sides, and not elsewhere that I can as yet finde out, from whence I haue had plants for my garden.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in Iuly, and the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
Some haue thought it hath taken the name Rhodia of the Island in the Mediterranean sea, called Rhodes: but doubtlesse it took his name Rhodia radix, of the root which smelleth like a rose: in English, Rose-root, and Rose-woort.


 The Vertues.
There is little extant in writing of the faculties of Rosewoort: but this I haue found, that if the root be stamped with oile of Roses and laid to the temples of the head, it (...) the paine of the head.




CHAP. 144. Of Sampier.


1 Crithmum marinum. Rocke Sampier.


2 Crithmum Spinosum. Thornie Sampier.


3 (...) chrysanthemum. Golden Sampier.



 The Description.
1 ROcke Sampier hath many fat and thicke leaues, somewhat like those of the lesser (...), of a spicy taste with a certaine saltnesse; amongst which riseth vp a stalke, diuided into many smal spraies or sprigs; on the top wherof doe grow (...) tufts of whitefloures, like the tufts of Fenell or Dill; after that commeth the seed like the seed of Fenell, but greater. The root is thicke and knobbie, being of smell delightfull and pleasant
2 The second Sampier called (...) marina, or Sea Parsnep, hath long fat leaues, very much iagged or cut euen to the middle rib, sharpe or prickley pointed, which are set vpon large fat iointed stalks; on the top whereof do grow (...) of whitish, or els reddish floures. The seed is wrapped in thornie huskes. The root is thick and long, not vnlike to the Parsnep, very good and wholesome to be eaten.
3 Golden Sampier bringeth forth many stalks from one root, compassed about with a multitude of long fat leaues, set together by equall distances; at the top whereof come yellow floures. The seed is like those of the Rocke Sampier.



 The Place.
Rocke Sampier groweth on the rockie cliffes at Douer, VVinchelsey, by Rie, about Southhampton, the Isle of VVight, and most rockes about the West and North-west parts about England.
The second groweth neere the Sea vpon the sands, and Bayche between Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet, by Sandwich, and by the sea neere Westchester.
The third groweth in the myrie marsh in the Isle of Shepey, as you go from the Kings Ferrie, to Sherland house.


 The Time.
Rocke Sampier flourisheth in May and Iune, and must be gathered to be kept in pickle in the beginning of August.


 The Names.
Rocke Sampier is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Crithmum: and of diuers, Bati: in some shops, Creta marina: of Petrus Crescentius, Cretamum, and Rincum marinum: in high Dutch, (...): which is in Latine, Foeniculum marinum, or Sea Fenell: in Italian, Fenocchio marino, Herba di San Pietro; and hereupon diuers name it Sampetra: in Spanish, Perexil de la mer, Hinoio marino, Fenolmarin: in English, Sampier, and Rocke Sampier, and of some, Crestmarine; and these bee the names of the Sampier generally eaten in sallads.
The other two be also Crithma or Sampiers, but most of the later writers would draw them to some other plant: for one calleth the second Pastinaca marina, or (...) Parsnep, and the third Aster atticus marinus; and Lobel names it (...) Littoreum: but we had rather entertaine them as Matthiolus doth, among the kindes of Crithmum, or Sampier.


 The Temperature.
Sampier doth drie, warme, and scoure, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The leaues, seeds, and roots, as Dioscorides saith, boiled in wine and drunke, prouoke vrine, and  womens sicknesse, and preuaile against the iaundies.
The leaues kept in pickle, and eaten in sallads with oile and vineger, is a pleasant sauce for meat, wholesome for the stoppings of the liuer, milt, kidneies and bladder: it prouoketh vrine gently; it openeth the stoppings of the intrals, and stirreth vp an appetite to meat.
It is the pleasantest sauce, most familiar, and best agreeing with mans body, both for digestion  of meats, breaking of the stone, and voiding of grauell in the reines and bladder.



CHAP. 155. Of Glasse Saltwoort.

 The Description.
1 GLassewoort hath many grosse, thicke and round stalkes a foot high, full of fat and thicke sprigges, set with many knots or ioints, without any leaues at all, of a reddish greene colour. The whole Plant resembleth a branch of Corall. The root is very small and single.
2 There is another kinde of Saltwoort, which hath been taken among the antient Herbarists for a kinde of Sampier. It hath a little tender stalke a cubite high, diuided into many small branches, set full of little thicke leaues very narrow, somewhat long and sharpe pointed, yet not pricking; amongst which commeth forth small seed, wrapped in a crooked huske, turned round like a crooked perwinkle. The stalkes are of a reddish colour. The whole plant is of a salt and biting taste. The root is small and threddie.
@ 3 There is likewise another kinde of Kali, whereof Lobel maketh mention vnder the name of Kali minus, which is like to the last before remembred, but altogether lesser, @ hauing many slender weake branches lying commonly spred vpon the ground, and set with many small round long sharpe pointed leaues, of a whitish green colour: the seed is small and shining, not much vnlike that of Sorrell: the root is slender with many fibers; the whole plant hath a saltish taste like as the former. Dodon. cals this Kali album. @



1 Salicornia, sive Kali geniculatum. Glassewoort, Saltwoort, or Sea-grape.


@ 2 Kali maius semine (...). Snaile Glassewoort.


@ 3 Kali minus. Small Glassewoort.




 The Place.
These plants are (...) be found in salt marshes almost euery where.
@ The second excepted, which growes not here, but vpon the coasts of the Mediterranean sea. @


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
Saltwoort is called of the Arabians Kali, and Alkali. Auicen, chap. 724. describeth them vnder the name of Vsnen, which differeth from Vsnee: for Vsnee is that which the Graecians call (...): and the Latines, Muscus, or Mosse of some, as Baptista Montanus: it hath bin iudged to be Empetron.
The axen or ashes hereof are named of Matthaeus Siluaticus, Soda: of most, Sal Alkali: diuers call it Alumen catinum. Others make this kind of difference betweene Sal Kali, and (...) catinum, that Alumen catinum is the ashes it self: and that the salt that is made of the ashes is Sal Alkali.
Stones are beaten to pouder, and mixed with ashes, which beeing melted together become the matter wherof glasses are made. VVhich while it is made red hot in the furnace, and is melted, becomming liquide and fit to work vpon, doth yeeld as it were a fat floting aloft; which, when it is cold, (...) as hard as a (...), yet it is brittle, and quickely broken. This is commonly called Axungiavitri. In English, (...) in French, Suin de Voirre: in Italian, Fior de cristalo, (i) Floure of Christall. The Herbe is also called

of diuers Kali articulatum, or iointed Glasse-wo ort: and in English, Crabbe-grasse, and Froggegrasse.


 The Temperature.
Glasse-woort is hot and drie: the ashes are both drier and hotter, and that euen to the fourth degree: the ashes haue a causticke or burning qualitie.


 The Vertues.
A little quantitie of the herbe taken inwardly, doth not onely mightily prouoke vrine, but in  like sort casteth forth the dead childe. It draweth forth by siege waterish humours, and purgeth away the dropsie.
A great quantitie taken is mischieuous and deadly. The smell and smoke also of this hearbe  being burnt doth driue away serpents.
The ashes are likewise tempered with those medicines that serue to take away scabs and filth  off the skin: it easily consumeth proud and superfluous flesh that groweth in poisonsome vlcers, as Auicen and Serapio report.
Wee read in the copies of Serapio, that Glasse-woort is a tree so great, that a man may stand vnder  the shadow thereof: but it is very like, that this errour proceedeth rather from the interpreter, than from the Authour himselfe.
The floure of Christall, or (as they commonly terme it, Sandeuer) doth wonderfully drie. It easily  taketh away scabbes and manginesse, if the foule parts be washed and bathed with the water wherein it is boiled.



CHAP. 156. Of Thorow Waxe.


1 Perfoliata vulgaris. Common Thorow-waxe.


2 Perfoliata siliquosa. Codded Thorow-waxe




 The Description.
1 THorow-wax or Thorow-leafe, hath a round, slender, and brittle stalk, diuided into many small branches, which passe or goe thorow the leaues, as though they had beene drawne or thrust thorow, and to make it more plaine, euery branch doth grow thorow euery leafe, making them like hollow cups or saucers. The seed groweth in spokie tufts or rundles like Dill, long and blackish. The floures are of a faint yellow colour. The root is single, white and threddie.
2 Codded Thorow-wax reckoned by Dodonaeus among the Brassickes or Colewoorts, and making it a kinde thereof, and calling it Brassica syluestris perfoliata: though in mine opinion without reason, sith it hath neither shape, affinitie, nor likenesse with any of the Colewoorts, but altogether most vnlike, resembling very well the common Thorow-wax; whereunto I rather refer it. It hath small, tender, and brittle stalkes two foot high, bearing leaues, which wrap and inclose themselues round about, although they do not run thorow as the other do, yet they grow in such manner, that vpon the sudden view thereof, they seeme to passe thorow as the other: vpon the small branches do grow little white floures: which being past, there succeed slender and long cods like those of Turneps or Nauewes, whose leaues and cods do somewhat resemble the same, from whence it hath the name Napifolia, that is, Thorow-wax with leaues like vnto the Nauew. The root is long and single, and dieth when it hath brought forth his seed.
There is a wilde kinde hereof growing in Kent, in many places among the corne, like to the (...) in each respect, but altogether lesser: the which no doubt brought into the garden would proue the very same.


 The Place.
@ The first described growes plentifully in many places about Kent, and betweene Farningham and Ainsford it growes in such quantitie (as I haue been informed by Mr. Bowles) in the corne fields on the tops of the hils, that it may well be termed the infirmitie of them.
The later growes not wilde with vs that euer I could finde, though Lobell seemes to affirme the contrary. @
They grow in the gardens of Herbarists, and in my garden likewise.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune, and their seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
1 It hath beene called from the beginning Perfoliata, because the stalke doth passe thorow the leafe, following the signification of the same: wee call it in English, Thorow-waxe, or Thorowleafe.
@ 2 This by the most and best part of VVriters (though our Authour be of another opinion) is very fitly referred to the wilde Cole-woorts, and called Brassica campestris by Clusius and by Camerarius; Brassica agrestis by Tragus (...) yet Lobel calleth it Perfoliata Napifolia Anglorum siliquosa, @


The Temperature.
Thorow-waxe is of a dry complexion.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of Thorow-wax made of water or wine, healeth wounds. The iuice is excellent  sorwounds made either into an oile or vnguent.
The greene leaues stamped, boiled with wax, oile, rosine and turpentine, maketh an excellent vnguent  or salue to incarnate, or bring vp flesh in deepe wounds.



CHAP. 157. Of Honie-woort.

 The Description.
1 CErinthe or Honie-woort riseth forth of the ground after the sowing of his seed, with two small leaues like those of Basil; betweene the which leaues commeth forth a thick fat, smooth, tender, and brittle stalk full of iuice, that diuideth it selfe into many other branches; which also are diuided in sundry other armes or branches likewise, crambling or leaning toward the ground, being not able without props to sustaine it selfe, by reason of the great weight

1 Cerinthe maior. Great Honie-woort.
@ 2 Cerinthe asperior flore flavo. Rough Honie-woort.
3 (...) minor. Small (...)-woort.
of leaues, branches, and much iuice, the whole plant is surcharged with; vpon which branches are placed many thicke rough leaues, set with very sharpe prickles like the rough skinne ofa Thornebacke, of a blewish green colour, spotted very notably with white strakes and spots, like those leaues of the true Pulmonaria or Cowslips of Ierusalem, and in shape like those of the codded Thorow-waxe, which leaues do clip or embrace the stalkes round about: from the bosome whereof come forth small clusters of yellow floures, with a hoope or band of bright purple round about the middle of the yellow floure. The floure is hollow, fashioned like a little boxe, of the taste of honie when it is sucked, in the hollownesse whereof are many smal chiues or threds; which being past, ther succeed round blacke seed, contained in soft skinnie husks. The root perisheth at the first approch of Winter. @ This varies in the colour of the floures, which are yellow, or purple, and sometimes of both commixt. @
@ 2 The leaues of this other great Honiewort (of Clus. description) are shaped like those last described, but that they are narrower at their setting on, and rougher; the floures are also yellow of color, but in shape and magnitude like the former, as it is also in the seeds, and all the other parts thereof. @

3 This other Cerinth or Honywort hath small long and slender branches, reeling this (...) and that way, as not able to sustaine it selfe, very brittle, beset with leaues not much vnlike the precedent, but lesser, neither so rough nor spotted, of a blewish greene colour. The floures be small, hollow, and yellow. The seed is small, round, and as blacke as Iet: the root is white, with some (...), the which dieth as the former. There is a taste as it were of new wax in the floures or leaues chewed, as the name doth seeme to import.


 The Place.
These plants do not grow wilde in England, yet I haue them in my garden; the seeds wherof I receiued from the right honorable the Lord Zouch, my honorable good friend.


 The Time.
They floure from May to August, and perish at the first approch of Winter, and must be sowen againe the next Spring.


@  The Names.
@ 1 The first of these by Gesner is called Cynoglossa montana and Cerinthe: Dodonaeus calleth it Maru herba: and Lobel and others, Cerinthe major.
2 The second is Cerinthe quorundam major flauo flore of Clusius.
3 The third by Dodonaeus is called Maru herba minor: and by Clusius, Cerinthe quorundam minor flauo flore: Lobel also calls it Cerinthe minor. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
(...) and Auicen seeme to agree, that these herbes are of a cold complexion; notwithstanding there is not any experiment of their vertues worth the writing.



CHAP. 158. Of S. Iohns wort.


1 Hypericum. S. Iohns wort.


2 Hypericum Syriacum. Rew S. Iohns wort.




 The Description.
1 SAint Iohns wort hath brownish stalkes beset with many small and narrow leaues, which if you behold betwixt your eyes and the light do appeare as it were bored or thrust thorow in an infinite number of places with pinnes points. The branches diuide themselues into sundry small twigs, at the top whereof doe grow many yellow floures, which with the leaues bruised do yeeld a reddish iuyce of the colour of bloud. The seed is contained in little sharpe pointed huskes, blacke of colour, and smelling like Rosin. The root is long, yellow, and of a wooddy substance.
2 The second kinde of S. Iohns wort named Syriacum, of those that haue not seene the fruitfull and plentifull fields of England, wherein it groweth aboundantly, hauing small leaues almost like to Rew or Herbe-Grace: wherein Dodonaeus hath failed, entituling the true Androsaemum by the name of (...); whereas indeed it is no more like Rew than an Apple to an Oister. This plant is altogether like the precedent, but smaller, wherein consisteth the difference. @ It had beene sitter for our Author to haue giuen vs a better and perfecter description of this plant (which as he saith growes so aboundantly with vs) than so absurdly to cauill with Dodonaeus, for calling, as he saith, the true Androsaemum, Rutasyluestris: for if that be the true Androsaemum which Dodonaeus made mention of by the foresaid name, why did not our Author figure and describe it in the next chapter saue one, for Androsaemum, but followed Dodonaeus in figuring and describing Tutsan for it? See more hereof in the chapter of Tutsan. I cannot say I haue seene this plant; but Lobel the Author and setter forth thereof thus briefely describes it: the leaues are foure times lesser than those of ours, which grow thicke together as in rundles vpon stalkes, being a cubit high. The floures are yellow, and like those of our common kinde. @
3 Woolly S. Iohns wort hath many small weake branches trailing vpon the ground, beset with many little leaues, couered ouer with a certaine soft kinde of downinesse: among which (...) forth weake and tender branches charged with small pale yellow floures. The seeds and roots are like vnto the true S. Iohns wort.


@ 3 Hypericumtomentosum Lobelij. Lobels woolly S. Iohns wort.


@ The figure that our Author gaue was of that which I here giue you second in the third place, vnder the title of Hyper. (...). Clusij; for Clusius saith it was his, and blames Lobel for making it all one with that he found about Montpelier; whose figure also I giue you first in the third place, that you may see what difference you can obserue by them: for Clusius saith Lobels is but an handfull high; yet tells he not vs how high his growes, neither instances how they differ, neither can I gather it by Lobels description: but I coniecture it is thus; That of Clusius his description is taller, more white and hairy, and hath the floures growing along little foot-stalks, and not in manner of an vmbel, as in the other.
@ 4 Besides these two creeping hoary S. Iohns worts here described, there is another small kinde which is called by Dodonaeus, Hypericum minus; and by Lobel, Hypericum minimum supinum Septentrionale. It growes some handfull or more high, with weake and slender branches set with leaues like those of the ordinarie kinde, but lesse: the floures are also like those of the first described, but fewer in number, and lesse. It is to be found in dry and barren grounds, and floures at the same time as the the former.
5 I haue obserued growing in S. Iohns wood and other places, that kinde of S. Iohn Wort

which by Tragus is called Hypericum pulchrum; and both by him and Lonicerus is thought to be Dioscorides his Androsaemum; the which we in English may for distinctions sake call Vpright Saint Iohns wort. It hath roots like those of the ordinarie kinde; from which arise straight slender stalks some cubit high, set at equall spaces with pretty smooth leaues, broad, and almost incompassing the stalke at their setting on, and being sometimes of a green, and otherwhiles of a reddish colour: towards the top they are parted into some few branches, which beare such yellow floures as the common kinde, but somewhat smaller. It floures about the same time as the former, or a little after. @


3 Hypericum tomentosum Clusij. Woolly S. Iohns wort of Clusius.


@ 4 Hypericum supinum glabrum. Small creeping S. Iohns wort.




 The Place.
They grow very plentifully in the pastures in euery countrey.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish for the most part in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
S. Iohns wort is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Hypericum: in shops, Perforata: of diuers, Fugadaemonum: in Dutch, San Iohans kraut: in Italian, Hyperico: in Spanish, Caraconzillo: in French, Mille Pertuys: in English, S. Iohns wort, or S. Iohns (...).


 The Temperature.
S. Iohns wort (as Galen teacheth) is hot and dry, being of substance thinne.


 The Vertues.
S. Iohns wort with his floures and seed boyled and drunken, prouoketh vrine, and is right good  against the stone in the bladder, and stoppeth the laske. The leaues stamped are good to be layd vpon burnings, scaldings, and all wounds; and also for rotten and filthy vlcers.
The leaues, floures, and seeds stamped, and put into a glasse with oyle Oliue, and set in the hot  Sunne for certaine weekes together, and then strained from those herbes, and the like quantitie of new put in, and sunned in like manner, doth make an oyle of the colour of bloud, which is a most precious remedy for deepe wounds, and those that are thorow the body, for (...) that are prickt, or any wound (...) with a venomed weapon. I am accustomed to make a (...) oyle hereof; the making of which ye shall receiue at my hands, because that I know in the world there is not a better, no not naturall balsam it selfe; for I dare vndertake to cure any such wound as absolutely in each respect, if not sooner and better, as any man whatsoeuer shall or may with naturall balsam.
Take white wine two pintes, oyle oliue foure pounds, oile of Turpentine two pounds, the leaues, floures, and seeds of S. Iohns wort, of each two great handfulls gently bruised; put them all together into a great double glasse, and set it in the Sunne eight or ten dayes; then (...) them in the same glasse per balneum Mariae, that is, in a kettle of water with some (...) in the bottome, wherein the glasse must stand to boyle: which done, straine the (...) (...) the herbes, and do as you did before, putting in the like quantitie of herbes, floures, and seeds, but not any more wine. And so haue you a great secret for the purposes aforesaid,

Dioscorides saith, That the seed drunke for the space of fourty dayes together, cureth the (...), and all aches that happen in the hips.
The same Author saith, That being taken with Wine it taketh away Tertian and Quartane  Agues.



CHAP. 159. Of Saint Peters wort, or square S. Johns Grasse.


1 Ascyron. S. Peters wort.



 The Description.
1 SAint Peters wort groweth to the height of a (...) and a halfe, hauing a straight vpright stalke somewhat browne, set by couples at certaine distances, with leaues much like those of S. Iohns wort, but greater, rougher, and rounder pointed: from the bosome of which leaues come forth many smaller leaues, the which are not bored through, as those of S. Iohns wort are; yet sometime there be some few so bored through. The floures grow at the top of the branches of a yellow colour: the leaues and floures when they are bruised do yeeld forth a bloudy iuyce as doth S. Iohns wort, whereof this is a kinde. The root is tough, and of a wooddy substance.
@ 2 Vpon diuers boggy grounds of this kingdome is to be found growing that S. Peters Wort which Clusius describes in his Auctarium, by the name of Ascyrum supinum (...). This sends forth diuers, round hairy creeping stalkes, which heere and there put out new fibres or roots; and these are set at certaine spaces with very round and hairie leaues of a whitish colour, two at a ioynt, and on the tops of these stalkes grow a few small yellow floures which consist of fiue leaues a piece; these stalks seldome send forth branches, vnlesse it be one or two at the tops. It may well be called in English, Round leaued S. Peters wort. @


 The Place.
S. Peters wort, or S. Iohns Grasse groweth plentifully in the North part of England, especially in Landsdale and Crauen: I haue found it in many places of Kent, especially in a copse by Master Sidleys house neere Southfleet.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth when S. Iohns wort doth.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): the Latines haue no other name but this Greeke name Ascyron. It is called of some Androsaemum: Galen maketh it both a kinde of Tutsan, and S. Iohns Wort: and saith it is named Ascyron, and Ascyroides: in English, S. Peters wort, Square or great S. Iohns grasse: and of some, Hardhay. Few know it from S. Iohns wort.


 The Temperature.
This herbe is of temperature hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
It is endued with the same vertues that S. Iohns wort is endued withall. The seed, saith Dioscorides, being drunke in foure ounces and a halfe of Meade, doth plentifully purge by siege cholericke excrements. Galen doth likewise affirme the same.




CHAP. 160. Of Tutsan or Parke-leaues.

 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of Tutsan be straight, round, chamfered or crested, hard and wooddy, being for the most part two foot high. The leaues are three or foure times bigger than those of S. Iohns wort, which be at the first greene; afterwards, and in the end of Sommet of a dark red colour: out of which is pressed a iuyce not like blacke bloud, but Claret or Gascoigne wine. The floures are yellow, and greater than those of S. Peters wort; after which riseth vp a little round head or berry, first greene, afterwards red, last of all blacke, wherein is contained yellowish red seed. The root is hard, wooddy, and of long continuance.
@ 2 This (which Dodonaeus did not vnfitly call Ruta syluestris Hypericoides, and which others haue set forth for Androsaemum, and our Author the last chapter saue one affirmed to be the true (...), though here it seemes he had either altered his minde, or forgot what he formerly wrot) may fitly stand in competition with the last described, which may passe in the first place for the Androsaemum of the Antients; for adhuc sub judice lis est. I will not here insist vpon the point of controuersie, but giue you a description of the plant, which is this: It sends vp round slender reddish stalkes some two cubits high, set with fewer yet bigger leaues than the ordinarie S. Iohns Wort, and these also more hairy: the floures and seeds are like those of the common S. Iohns wort, but somewhat larger. It growes in some mountainous and wooddy places, and in the Aduersaria it is called Androsaemum excellentius, seu magnum: and by Dodonaeus (as we but now noted) Ruta syluestris Hypericoides, thinking it to be the Ruta syluestris which is described by Dioscorides, lib. (...). cap. 48. in the old Greeke edition of Manutius, (...). And in that of Marcellus Virgilius his Interpretation, in the chapter and booke but now mentioned; but reiected amongst the Notha in the Paris Edition Anno 1549. You may finde the description also in Dodonaeus, Pempt. primae, lib. 3. cap. 25, whither I refer the curious, being loath here to insist further vpon it. @


1 Clymenon Italorum. Tutsan, or Parke leaues.


@ 2 Androsaemum Hypericoides. Tutsan S. Iohns wort.





 The Place.
Tutsan groweth in woods and by hedges, especially in Hampsted wood, where the Golden rod doth grow; in a wood by Railie in Essex, and many other places.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iuly and August: the seed in the meane time waxeth ripe. The leaues becom (...) in (...); at that time is very easily pressed forth his winie iuyce.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): and the Latines also Androsaemon: it is likewise called (...), as (...) witnesseth. They are farre from the truth that take it to be Clymenum, and it is needlesse to finde fault with their error. It is also called Siciliana, and Herba Siciliana: in English, Tutsan, and Parke-leaues.


 The Temperature.
The faculties are such as S. Peters wort, which doth sufficiently declare it to be hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
The seed hereof beaten to pouder, and drunke to the weight of two drams, doth purge cholericke  excrements, as Dioscorides writeth; and is a singular remedie for the Sciatica, prouided that the Patient do drinke water for a day or two after purging.
The herbe cureth burnings, and applied vpon new wounds it stancheth the bloud, and healeth  them.
The leaues laid vpon broken shins and scabbed legs healeth them, and many other hurts and  griefes; whereof it tooke his name Tout-saine, or Tutsane, of healing all things.



@ CHAP. 161. Of Bastard S. Johns wort.


@ 1 Coris Matthioli. Matthiolus his bastard S. Iohns wort.


@ 2 Coris coerulea Monspeliaca. French bastard S. Iohns wort.


@ THe diligence of these later times hath beene such to finde out the Materia medica of the Antients, that there is scarse any plant described by them, but by some or other of late there haue been two or more seuerall plants referred thereto: and thus it hath happened vnto (...)

which Dioscorides lib. 3. cap. 174. hath set forth by the name of Coris; and presently describes after the kindes of Hypericon, and that with these words; (...). Some also call this Hypericon; to which Matthiolus and others haue fitted a plant, which is indeed a kinde of Hypericon, as you may perceiue by the figure and description which I giue you in the first place. Some (as (...)) referre it to Chamaepytis, (and indeed by Dioscorides it is placed betweene Androsaemon and Chamaepytis) and to this that which is described by Pena and Lobel in the Aduers. and by Clusius in his Historie, may fitly be referred: this I giue you in the second place.

 The Description.
1 THe first hath a wooddy thicke and long lasting root, which sendeth vp many branches some foot or more high, and it is set at certaine spaces with round leaues like those of the small Glasse-wort or Sea-Spurry, but shorter: the tops of the stalkes are diuided into (...) branches, which carry floures like those of S. Iohns wort, of a whitish red colour, with threds in their middles hauing little yellow pendants. It growes in Italy and other hot countries, in places not far from the sea side. This is thought to be the true Coris, by Matthiolus, Gesner, Lonicerus, Lacuna, Bellus, Pona, and others.
2 This from a thicke root red on the outside sendeth vp sundry stalkes, some but an handfull, other some a foot or more long, stiffe, round, purplish, set thicke with leaues like those of Heath, but thicker, more succulent and bitter, which so netimes grow orderly, and otherwhiles out of order. The spikes or heads grow on the tops of the branches, consisting of a number of little cups, diuided into fiue sharpe points, and marked with a blacke spot in each diuision: out of these cups comes a floure of a blew purple colour, of a most elegant and not fading colour; and it is composed of foure little biside leaues, whereof the two vppermost are the larger: the seed, which is round and blackish, is contained in seed-vessels hauing points somewhat sharpe or prickly. It floures in Aprill and May, and is to be found growing in many places of Spaine, as also about Mompelier in France; whence Pena and Lobel called it Coris Monspeliaca; and Clusius, Coris quorundam Gallorum and Hispanorum.


 The Temperature.
These Plants seeme to be hot in the second or third degree,


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, That the seed of Coris drunke moue the courses and vrine, are good against  the biring of the Spider Phalangium, the Sciatica; and drunke in Wine, against that kinde of Convulsion which the Greekes call Opisthotonos, (which is when the body is drawne backwards) as also against the cold fits in Agues. It is also good anointed with oyle, against the aforesaid Convulsion. @



CHAP. 162. Of the great Centorie.

 The Description.
1 THe great Centory bringeth forth round smooth stalkes three cubits high: the leaues are long, diuided as it were into many parcels like to those of the Walnut tree, and of an ouerworne grayish colour, somewhat snipt about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The floures grow at the top of the stalks in scaly knaps like the great Knapweed, the middle thrums whereof are of a light blew or sky colour: when the seed is ripe the whole knap or head turneth into a downy (...) like the head of an (...), wherein is found a long smooth seed, bearded at one end like those of (...) Sattron, called Cartamus, or the seed of Cardus Benedictus. The root is great, long, blacke on the outside, and of a sanguine colour on the inside, somewhat sweet in taste, and biting the tongue.
2 There is likewise another sort, hauing great and large leaues like those of the water Docke, somewhat snipt or toothed about the edges. The stalke is shorter than the other, but the root is more oleous or fuller of iuyce, otherwise like. The floure is of a pale yellow purplish colour, and the seed like that of the former.



1 Centaurium magnum. Great Centorie.


@ 2 Centaurium maius alterum. Whole leaued great Centorie.




 The Place.
The great Centorie ioyeth in a fat and fruitfull soile, and in Sunny bankes full of Grasse and herbes. It groweth very plentifully, saith Dioscorides, in Lycia, Peloponnesus, Arcadia, and Morea: and it is also to be found vpon Baldus a mountaine in the territories of Verona, and likewise in my garden.


 The Time.
It floureth in Sommer, and the roots may be gathered in Autumne.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): of Theophrastus also Centauris: in diuers shops falsly Rha Ponticum: for Rha Ponticum is Rha growing in the countries of Pontus; a plant differing from great Centorie. Theophrastus and Pliny set downe among the kindes of Panaces or All-heales, this great Centorie, and also the lesser, whereof we will write in the next chapter following. Pliny reciting the words of Theophrastus, doth in his twenty fifth booke and fourth chapter write, that they were found out by Chiron the Centaure, and syrnamed Centauria. Also affirming the same thing in his sixth chapter (where he more largely expoundeth both the Centauries) hee repeateth them to be found out by Chiron: and thereupon he addeth, that both of them are named Chironia. Of some it is reported, That the said Chiron was cured therewith of a wound in his foot, that was made with (...) arrow that fell vpon it when he was entertaining Hercules into his house; whereupon it was called Chironium: or of the curing of the wounds of his souldiers, for the which purpose it is most excellent.


 The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the third degree. Galen (...), by the taste of the root it sheweth contrarie qualities, so in the vse it performeth contrarie effects.


 The Vertues.
The root taken in the quantitie of two drams is good for them that be bursten, or spit bloud;  against the crampe and shrinking of sinewes, the shortnesse of wind or difficultie of breathing, the cough and gripings of the belly.
There is not any part of the herbe but it rather worketh miracles than ordinarie cures in greene  wounds; for it ioyneth together the lips of simple wounds in the flesh, according to the first intentention, that is, glewing the lips together, not drawing to the place any matter at all.

The root of this Plant (saith Dioscorides) is a remedie for ruptures, (...), and cramps, taken  in the weight of two drams, to be giuen with wine to those that are without a feuer, and vnto those that haue, with water.
Galen saith, that the iuyce of the leaues thereof performeth those things that the root doth;  which is also vsed in stead of Lycium, a kinde of hard iuyce of a sharpe taste.



CHAP. 163. Of Small Centorie.

 The Description.
1 THe lesser Centorie is a little herbe: it groweth vp with a cornered stalke halfe a foot high, with leaues in forme and bignesse of S. Iohns wort: the floures grow at the top in a spoky bush or rundle, of a red colour tending to purple; which in the day time and after the Sun is vp do open themselues, but towards euening shut vp againe: after them come forth small seed-vessels, of the shape of wheat cornes, in which are contained very little seeds. The root is slender, hard, and soone fading.
2 The yellow Centorie hath leaues, stalkes, and seed like the other, and is in each respect alike, sauing that the floures (...) are of a perfect yellow colour, which setteth forth the difference.
@ This is of two sorts; the one with broad leaues through which the stalkes passe; and the other hath narrow leaues like those of the common Centorie. @


1 Centaurium parvum. Small Centorie.


2 Centaurium parvum luteum Lobelij. Yellow Centorie.




 The Place.
1 The first is growing in great plenty throughout all England, in most pastures and grassie fields.
2 The yellow doth grow vpon the chalkie cliffes of Greenhithe in Kent, and such like places.



 The Time.
They are to be gathered in their flouring time, that is in Iuly and August: of some that gather them superstitiously they are gathered betweene the two Lady dayes.


 The Names.
The Greekes call this (...): in Latine it is called Centaurium minus; yet Pliny nameth it Libadion, and by reason of his great bitternesse, Fel terrae. The Italians in Hetruria call it Biondella: in Spanish, Centoria: in low-Dutch, (...): in English, Small, little, or common Centorie: in French, Centoire.


 The Temperature.
The small Centorie is of a bitter qualitie, and of temperature hot and dry in the second degree; and the yellow Centorie is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Being boyled in water and drunke it openeth the stoppings of the liuer, gall, and spleene, it helpeth  the yellow jaundice, and likewise long and lingering agues: it killeth the wormes in the bellie; to be briefe, it cleanseth, scoureth, and maketh thinne humors that are thicke, and doth effectually performe whatsoeuer bitter things can.
Dioscorides, and Galen after him report, that the decoction draweth downe by siege choler and  thicke humors, and helpeth the Sciatica; but though wee haue vsed this often and luckily, yet could we not perceiue euidently that it purges by the stoole any thing at all, and yet it hath performed the effects aforesaid.
This Centorie being stamped and laid on whilest it is fresh and greene, doth heale and closevp  greene wounds, cleanseth old vlcers, and perfectly cureth them.
The iuyce is good in medicines for the eyes; mixed with honey it cleanseth away such things  as hinder the sight; and being drunke it hath a peculiar vertue against the infirmities of the (...), as Dioscorides teacheth.
The Italian Physitions do giue the pouder of the leaues of yellow Centorie once in three daies  in the quantitie of a dram, with annise or caraway seeds, in wine or other liquor, which preuaileth against the dropsie and greene sicknesse. Of the red floured, Ioannes Postius hath thus written:

Flos mihi suaue rubet, sed inest quoque succus amarus,
Qui juvat obsessum bile, aperitque jecur.


My floure is sweet in smell, bitter my iuyce in taste,
Which purge choler, and helps liuer, that else would waste.




CHAP. 164. Of Calues snout, or Snapdragon.

 The Description.
1 THe purple Snapdragon hath great and brittle stalks, which diuideth it selfe into many fragile branches, whereupon do grow long leaues sharpe pointed, very greene, like vnto those of wilde flax, but much greater, set by couples one opposite against another. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a purple colour, fashioned like a frogs mouth, or rather a dragons mouth, from whence the women haue taken the name Snapdragon. The (...) is blacke, contained in round huskes fashioned like a calues snout, (whereupon some haue called it Calues snout) or in mine opinion it is more like vnto the bones of a sheeps head that hath beene long in the water, the flesh consumed cleane away.
2 The second agreeth with the precedent in euery part, except in the colour of the floures, for this plant bringeth forth white floures, and the other purple, wherein consists the difference.
3 The yellow Snapdragon hath a long thicke wooddy root, with certain strings fastned thereto; from which riseth vp a brittle stalke of two cubits and a halfe high, diuided from the bottome to the top into diuers branches, whereupon doe grow long greene leaues like those of the former, but greater and longer. The floures grow at the top of the maine branches, of a pleasant yellow colour, in shape like vnto the precedent.
4 The small or wilde Snapdragon differeth not from the others but in stature: the leaues are lesser and narrower: the floures purple, but altogether smaller: the heads or seed-vessels are also like those of the former.
@ 5 There is another kinde hereof which hath many slender branches lying oft times vpon the ground: the leaues are much smaller than these of the last described: the floures and seed-vessels are also like, but much lesser, and herein consists the onely difference. @



1. 2. (...) purpureum sinc album. Purple or white floured Snapdragon.


3 (...) (...). Yellow (...).


4 Antirrhinum minus. Small Snapdragon.


@ 5 Antirrhinum (...) repens. Small creeping Snapdragon.





 The Place.
The three first grow in most gardens; but the yellow kinde groweth not common, except in the gardens of curious Herbarists.
@ The fourth and fifth grow wilde amongst corne in diuers places. @


 The Time.
That which hath continued the whole Winter doth floure in May, and the rest of Sommer afterwards; and that which is planted later, and in the end of Sommer, floureth in the spring of the following yeare: they do hardly endure the iniurie of our cold Winter.


 The Names.
Snapdragon is called in Greeke (...): in Latine also Antirrhinum: of Apuleius, Canis cerebrum, Herba Simiana, Venustaminor, Opalis grata, and Orontium: it is thought to be Leo herba, which Columella, lib. 10. reckons among the floures: yet Gesner hath thought that this Leo is Columbine, which for the same cause he hath called (...): but this name seemeth to vs to agree better with Calues snout than with Columbine; for the gaping floure of Calues snout is more like to Lyons snap than the floure of Columbine: it is called in Dutch (...): in Spanish, Cabeza de ternera: in English, Calues snout, Snapdragon, and Lyons snap: in French, Teste de chien, and Teste de Veau.


 The Temperature.
They are hot and dry, and of subtill parts.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Snapdragon (as Galen saith) is good for nothing in the vse of physicke; and the herb  it selfe is of like facultie with Bubonium or Star-wort, but not so effectuall.
They report (saith Dioscorides) that the herbe being hanged about one preserueth a man from  being bewitched, and that it maketh a man gracious in the sight of people.
Apuleius writeth, that the distilled water, or the decoction of the herbe and root made in water, is  a speedy remedy for the watering of eyes proceeding of a hot cause, if they be bathed therewith.



CHAP. 165. Of Tode-Flax.


1 Linaria vulgaris lutea. Great Tode-flax.


2 Linaria purpurea odorata. Sweet purple Tode-flax.




 The Description.
1 LInaria being a kinde of Antyrrhinum, hath small, slender, blackish stalkes; from which do grow many long narrow leaues like flax. The floures be yellow, with a spur hanging at the same like vnto a Larkes spur, hauing a mouth like vnto a frogs mouth, euen such as is to bee seene in the common Snapdragon; the whole plant before it come to floure so much resembleth Esula minor, that the one is hardly knowne from the other, but by this old verse:

Esula lactescit, sine lacte Linaria crescit.
@ Esula with milke doth flow,
Toad-flax without milke doth grow. @

2 The second kinde of Tode-flax hath leaues like vnto Bellis maior, or the great Dasie, but not so broad, and somewhat iagged about the edges. The stalke is small and tender, of a cubit high, beset with many purple floures like vnto the former in shape. The root is long, with many threds hanging thereat, the floures are of a reasonable sweet sauour.
3 The third, being likewise a kinde of Tode-flax, hath small and narrow leaues like vnto the first kinde of Linaria: the stalke is a cubit high, beset with floures of a purple colour, in fashion like Linaria, but that it wanteth the taile or spurre at the end of the floure which the other hath. The root is small and threddie.
@ 4 Linaria Valentina hath leaues like the lesser Centorye, growing at the bottome of the stalke by three and three, but higher vp towards the top, without any certaine order: the stalkes are of a foot high; and it is called by Clusius, Valentina, for that it was found by himselfe in Agro Valentino, about Valentia in Spaine, where it beareth yellow floures about the top of the stalke like common Linaria, but the mouth of the floure is downie, or mossie, and the taile of a purple colour. It floureth at Valentia in March, and groweth in the medowes there, and hath not as yet been seene in these Northerne parts.
5 Osyris alba hath great, thick, and long roots, with some threds or strings hanging at the same, from which rise vp many branches very tough and pliant, beset towards the top with floures not much vnlike the common Toad-flaxe, but of a pale whitish colour, and the inner part of the mouth somewhat more wide and open, and the leaues like the common Tode-flax.


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 3 Linaria purpurea altera. Variable Tode-flax.


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 4 Linaria Valentia Clus. Tode-flax of Valentia.





The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 5 Osyris alba, Lob. White Tode-flax.


6 Osyris purpurocaerulea is a kinde of Todeflax that hath many small and weake branches, trailing vpon the ground, beset with many little leaues like flaxe. The floures grow at the top of the stalke like vnto the common kinde, but of a purple colour declining to blewnesse. The root is small and threddie.
@ 7 This hath many small creeping branches some handfull or better high, and hath such leaues, floures, and seed, as the common kinde, but all of them much lesse, and therein consisteth the difference. It growes naturally in the dry fields about Salamanca in Spaine, and floures all Sommer long. Lobel calls it Osyris flava syluestris; and Clusius, Linaria Hispanica.
8 The branches of this eight kind are spred vpon the ground, and of the length of those of the last described: the leaues are lesser than those of the common Tode-flax, thicke, iuicie, and of a whitish greene colour, and they grow not disorderly vpon the stalks, but at certaine spaces sometimes three, but most vsually foure together: the floures in shape are like those of the ordinarie kinde, but of a most perfect Violet colour, and the lower lip where it gapes of a golden yellow, the taste is bitter. After the floures are past come vessels round and thick, which contain a flat black seed in two partitions or cells: the root is slender, white, and long lasting, and it floures vnto the end of Autumne. It grows naturally vpon the highest Alps. Gesner cals it Linaria Alpina: and Clusius, Linariatertia Styriaca. @


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 6 Osyris (...). Purple Tode-flaxe.


@ 9 Forasmuch as this plant is stalked and leafed like common Flaxe, and thought by some to be Osyris; the new writers haue called it Linosyris: it hath stalkes very stiffe and wooddie, beset with leaues like the common Linaria, with floures at the top of the stalkes of a faint shining yellow colour, in forme and shape somewhat like vnto Conyza maior. The whole plant groweth to the height of two cubits, and is in taste sharpe and clammie, or glutinous, and somewhat bitter. The root is compact of many strings, intangled one within another.
@ 10 Guillandinus calleth this plant Hyssopus vmbellifera Dioscoridis, that is, Dioscorides his Hysope,

which beareth a tuft in all points like Linosyris, whereof it is a kinde, not differing from it in shew and leaues. The stalks are a cubit high, diuided aboue into many small branches, the (...) wherof are garnished with tufts of small floures, each little floure being parted into fiue parts with a little thred or pestell in the middle, so that it seemes full of many golden haires or thrums. The seed is long and blackish, and is carried away with the winde. @ Bauhine in his Pinax makes this all one with the former, but vnfitly, especially if you marke the descriptions of their floures which are far vnlike. Fabius Columna hath proued this to be the Chrysocome described by Diosc. lib. 4. cap. 55. @


@ 7 Osyris flavasyluestris. Creeping yellow Tode-flax.


@ 8 Linaria quadrifoliasupina. Foure leaued creeping Tode-flax.


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 9 Linosyris Nuperorum, Lob. Golden Star-floured Tode-slax.





10 Linaria aurea Tragi. Golden Tode-flax.


11 Scoparia sive Osyris Graecorum. Bushieor Besome Tode-(...).


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 12 Passerina linariae folio, Lob. Sparrowes Tode-flax.


The (...) in this chapter (...) most of them false placed, as thus: The third was of (...), (...). 1. of (...), being the (...) (...) of Lobel, described in the fifth place. The (...) was of the (...) (...) of Lobel, described here by me in the fifth place. The seuenth was of (...) 3, (...) of Clusius, which you may (...) described by me in the eighth place. The (...) was of (...) (...) of (...) being onely a varietie of the (...) set (...) in the (...) place. The (...) was of the (...) (...), whose (...) I haue giuen you in the fourteenth place. That which was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) is with a (...) (...) thereto in the thirteenth place.

 13 Passerina altera. Sparrow-tongue.





@ 14 Linaria adulterina. Bastard Tode-flax.


@ 11 Scoparia, or after Dodonaeus, Osyris, which the Italians cal (...), hath very many shoots or sprigs rising from one smal stalk, making the whole plant to resemble a Cypres tree, the branches grow so handsomely: now it growes some three foot high, and very thick and bushie, so that in some places where it naturally groweth they make besomes of it, whereof it tooke the name Scoparia. The leaues be small and narrow, almost like to the leaues of flax. The floures be small, and of an hearbie colour, growing among the leaues, which keep greene all the Winter. @ I neuer knew it here to ripen the seed, nor to out-(...) the first frost. @
12 This plant also for resemblance sake is referred to the Linaries, because his leaues be like Linaria. At the top of the small branched stalks do grow little yellowish floures, pale of colour, somewhat like the tops of Chrysocome. Iohn Mouton of Turnay taketh it to be Chrysocome altera. And because there hath bin no concordance among Writers, it's sufficient to set forth his description with his name Passerina. @ Bauhine refers it to the Gromills, and calls it (...) (...) folio Monspeliacum.
@ 13 This which Tabern. calls Lingua Passerina, and whose figure was giuen by our Authour for the former, hath a small single whitish root, from which it sends vp a slender stalke some cubit and halfe high, naked on the lower part, but diuided into little branches on the vpper, which branches are set thicke with little narrow leaues like those of Winter Sauorie or (...): amongst which grow many little longish seeds of the bignesse and taste of Millet, but somewhat hotter and bitterer. The floures consist of foure small yellow leaues. Tragus calls this (...); Dodonaeus makes it Lithospermum minus: and Columna hath set it forth by the name of Linaria altera (...) montana. @
@ 14 This which Clusius, hath set forth by the name of Anonymos, or Namelesse, is called in the Hist. Lugd. pag. 1150. Anthyllis montana; and by Tabern. Linaria adulterina. It hath many hard pale greene branches of some foot high; and vpon these without any order grow many hard narrow long leaues like those of flaxe, at first of a very tart, and afterwards of a bitterish taste: the tops of the stalkes are branched into sundry foot-stalkes, which carry little white floures consisting of fiue small leaues lying starre-fashion, with some threds in their middles: after which at length come single seeds fiue cornered, containing a white pith in a hard filme or skin. The root is white, diuided into sundry branches, and liues long, euery yeare sending vp many stalkes, and sometimes creeping like that of Tode-flax. It floures in May, and grows vpon mountainous places of Germany; Mr. Goodyer found it growing wilde on the side of a chalkie hill in an inclosure on the right (...) of the way, as you (...) from Droxford to Poppie hill in Hampshire. @


 The Place.
The kindes of Tode-flax grow wilde in many places, as vpon stone walls, grauelly grounds, barren medowes, and along by hedges.
@ I do not remember that I haue seene any of these growing wilde with vs, vnlesse the first ordinary kinde, which is euery where common. @


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
@ Tode-flax is called of the Herbarists of our time, Linaria, or Flax-weed, and Vrinalis: of some, (...), in high Dutch, (...), and (...) (...) (...): low Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Wild-flax, Tode-flax; and Flax-weed: the eleuenth is called in Italian, Bel-videre, or Faire in sight. The same plant is also called Scoparia, and Herba studiosorum, because it is a fit thing to make brooms

of, wherewith schollers and students may sweepe their owne studies and closets. The particular names are expressed both in Latine and English in their seuerall titles, whereby they may be distinguished. @ It is thought by most that this Belvidere, or Scoparia is the Osyris described by Dioscorides lib. 4. cap. 143. For besides the notes, it hath agreeing with the description: it is at this day by the Greeks called (...) @


 The Temperature.
The kindes of Tode-flax are of the same temperature with wilde Snap-dragons, whereof they are kindes.


 The Vertues.
The decoction os Tode-flax taketh away the yellownesse and deformitie of the skinne, beeing  washed and bathed therewith.
The same drunken, openeth the stoppings of the Liuer and spleene, and is singular good against  the iaundise which is of long continuance.
The same decoction doth also prouoke vrine, in those that pisse drop after drop, vnstoppeth the  kidneies and bladder.



CHAP. 166. Of Garden flaxe.


The figure that was formerly in this place for (...) (...) (...) was of (...) (...) (...) 3. of Clusius, which is described by me in the (...) place in the ensuing Chapter.

 1 Linum sativum. Garden flax.



The Description.
FLaxe riseth vp with slender and round stalks The leaues thereof bee long, narrow, and sharpe pointed: on the tops of the sprigs are faire blew floures, after which spring vp little round knops or buttons, in which is contained the seed, in forme somewhat long, smooth, glib or slipperie, of a dark colour. The roots be smal and threddie.


 The Place.
It prospereth best in a fat and fruitfull soile, in moist and not drie places; for it requireth as Columella saith a very fat ground, and somewhat moist. Some, saith Palladius, do sow it thicke in a leane ground, and by that means the flax groweth fine. Pliny saith that it is to be sowne in grauelly places, especially in furrowes: Nec magis festinare aliud: and that it burneth the ground, and maketh it worser: which thing also Virgil testifieth in his Georgickes.

Vrit lini campum seges, vrit Auena.
Vrunt lethaeo perfusa papauera somno.


In English thus:
Flaxe and Otes sowne consume
The moisture of a fertile field:
The same worketh Poppie, whose
Iuice a deadly sleepe doth yeeld.




 The Time.
Flaxe is sowne in the spring, it floureth in Iune and Iuly. After it is cut downe (as (...) in his 19. booke, first chapter saith) the stalkes are put into the water subject to the heate (...) (...) sunne, and some weight laid on them to be steeped therein; the loosenes of the rinde is a signe when it is well steeped: then is it taken vp and dried in the sunne, and after vsed as most huswiues can (...) better than my selfe.


 The Names.
It is called both in Greeke and Laine (...): Linum: in high Dutch, (...): in Italian and Spanish, Lino: in French, Dulin: in low Dutch, (...): in English, Flaxe, and Lyne.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen in his first booke of the faculties of nourishments saith, that diuers vse the seed hereof  parched as a sustenance with Garum, no otherwise than made salt.
They also vse it mixed with hony, some likewise put it among bread but it is hurtfull to the  stomacke, and hard of digestion, and yeeldeth to the body but little nourishment: but (...) the quality which maketh the belly soluble, neither will I praise or dispraise it; yet that it hath some force to prouoke (...), is more apparant when it is parched: but then it also stayeth the belly more.
The same author in his bookes of faculties of simple medicines saith, that Lineseed being eaten  is windy although it be parched, so full is it of super fluous moisture: and it is also after a (...) hot in the first degree, and in a meane betweene moist and dry. But how windy the seed is, and how full of superfluous moisture it is in euery part, might very well haue been perceiued a few yeeres since as at Middleborough in Zeland, where for want of graine and other corne, most of the Citizens were faine to eate bread and cakes made hereof with hony and oile, who were in short time after swolne in the belly below the short ribs, faces, and other parts of their (...) in such sort, that a great number were brought to their graues thereby: (...) these symptomes or accidents came no otherwise than by the superfluous moisture of the seed, which causeth windinesse.
Lineseed as Dioscorides hath written, hath the same properties that Fenugreeke hath: it wasteth  away and mollifieth all inflammations or hot swellings, as well inward as outward, if it be boiled with hony, oile, and a little faire water, and made vp with clarified hony; it taketh away blemishes of (...) face, and the sunne burning, being raw and vnboiled; and also foule (...), if it be mixed with salt-peter and figs: it causeth rugged and ill fauoured nailes to fall off, mixed with hony and water Cresses.
It draweth forth of the chest corrupted flegme and other filthy humors, if a composition with  hony be made thereof to licke on, and easeth the cough.
Being taken largely with pepper and hony made into a cake, it stirreth vp lust.
The oile which is pressed out of the seed, is profitable for many purposes in physicke and surgery;  and is vsed of painters, picture makers, and other artificers.
It softeneth all hard swellings; it stretcheth forth the sinewes that are shrunke and drawne together, mitigateth paine, being applied in maner of an ointment.
Some also giue it to drinke to such as are troubled with paine in the side and collicke; but it  must be (...) and newly drawne: for if it be old and (...), it causeth-aptnesse to vomit, and withall it (...) heateth.
Lineseed boiled in water with a little oile, and a quantity of Annise-seed impoudered and implaistered  vpon an angina, or any swelling in the throat, helpeth the same.
It is with good successe vsed plaisterwise, boiled in vineger, vpon the diseases called Coliaca and  Dysenteria, which are bloudy fluxes and paines of the belly.
The seeds stamped with the roots of wilde Cucumbers, draweth forth splinters, thornes, broken  bones, or any other thing fixed in any part of the body.
The decoction is an excellent bath for women to sit ouer for the inflammation of the secret  parts, because it softeneth the hardnesse thereof, and easeth paine and aking.
The seed of Line and Fenugreek made into powder, boiled with Mallowes, violet leaues, Smallage, and Chickweed, vntill the herbs be soft; then stamped in a stone morter with a little hogs grease to the forme of a cataplasme or pultesse, appeaseth all maner of paine, softneth all cold tumors or swellings, mollifieth and bringeth to suppuration all apostumes; defendeth wounded members from swellings and rankling, and when they be already rankled, it taketh the same away being applied very warme euening and morning.




CHAP. 167. Of Wilde Flaxe.

 The Description.
1 THis Wilde kinde of Line or Flaxe hath leaues like those of garden Flaxe, but narrower, growing vpon round bright and shining sprigs, a foot long, and floures like the manured flaxe, but of a white colour. The root is tough and small, with some fibres annexed thereto. @ This is sometimes found with deep blew floures, with violet coloured floures, and sometimes with white, streaked with white, streaked with purple lines. @


1 Linum sylvestre (...) albis. Wilde white flaxe.


2 Linum sylvestre (...). Thin leaued wilde flaxe.


2 The narrow and thinne leafed kinde of Line is very like to the common flaxe, but in all points (...) The floures consist of fiue leaues, which do soone fade and fall away, hauing many stalkes (...) from one root, of a cubit high, beset with small leaues, yea lesser than those of (...) (...).
@ Our Author in the former edition gaue two figures vnder this one title of Linum (...) (...), making them the second and third; but the description of the third was of the Rough broad leaued wilde flaxe, whose (...) therefore we haue put in that place. Now the two whose figures were formerly here are but varieties of one species, and differ thus; the former of them (whose figure we haue omitted as impertinent) hath fewer leaues, which therefore stand thinner vpon the stalke, and the floures are either blew or else white. The later, whose figure you may finde here set forth, hath more leaues, and these growing thicker together: the floure is of a light purple or flesh colour. @
3 There is a kinde of wilde flaxe which hath many hairy branches, rising vp from a very small root, which doth continue many yeeres without sowing, increasing by roots into many other plants, with stalkes amounting to the height of one cubite, beset with many rough and hairy broad leaues: at the top of the stalkes do grow many blew floures, compact of fiue leaues, much greater and fairer than (...) Line or flaxe; which being past, there succeed small sharpe pointed heads full of seeds, like Lineseed, but of a blackish shining colour.

4 Chamaelinum (of some called Linum (...) (...), and may be called in English very low or Dwarfe wilde flaxe; sor this word (...) ioined to any simple, doth signisie, that it is a low or dwarfe kinde thereof) beeing scarce an handsull high, hath pale yellow (...): but as it is in all things like vnto flaxe, so the floures, leaues, and stalkes, and all other parts thereof, are soure times lesser than Linum.
@ 5 There is also growing wilde in this kingdome a small kinde of wilde (...), which I take to be the Linocarpos described by Thalius, and mentioned by (...), by the name of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). Anno 1629, when as I (...) found it, in a Iournall (written of such plants as we gathered) I (...) downe this by the name of Linum (...) (...) (...) (...); which my friend Mr. Iohn Goodyer seeing, he told me he had long knowne the plant, and refer'd it to Lines. but there were some which called it in English, Mil-mountaine, and vsed it to purge, and of late he hath sent me this historie of it, which you shall haue as I receiued it from him.



Linum syluestre (...). Mil-mountaine.
It riseth vp from a small white threddy crooked root, (...) with one, but most commonly with fiue or six or more round stalks, about a foot or nine inches high, of a browne or reddish color, euery stalk diuiding it selfe neere the top, or from the middle vpward into many parts or branches of a greener colour than the lower part of the stalke: the leaues are small, smooth, of (...) (...), of the bignes of Lentill leaues, and haue in the middle one rib or sinew, and no more that may bee perceiued, and grow alongst the stalke in very good order by couples, one opposite against the other: at the tops of the small branches grow the floures, of a white colour, consisting of fiue small leaues apiece, the nailes whereof are yellow: in the inside are placed small short chiues also of a yellow colour, after which come vp little knobs or buttons, the top whereof when the seede is ripe diuideth it selfe into fiue parts; wherein is contained small, smooth, flat, slippery, yellow seed: when the seed is ripe the herbe perisheth: the whole herbe is of a bitter taste, and herby smell. It groweth plentifully in the vnmanured inclosures of Hampshire, on chalkie downs, and on Purfleet hils in Essex, and in many other places. It riseth forth of the ground at the beginning of the Spring, and floureth all the Sommer.


@ 3 Linum syluestre latifolium. Broad leaued Wilde flax.


4 (...) perpusillum. Dwarfe Wilde flax.





@ 5 Linum syl. catharticum. Mil-mountaine.


@ 6 Linum syl. latifolium 3. Clus. The third broad leaued Wilde flax.


@ 7 Linum marinum Luteum. Yellow floured Wilde flax.



I came to know this herbe by the name of Mil-mountaine, and his vertue by this meanes. On the second of October 1617-going by Mr. Colsons shop an Apothecary of VVinchester in Hampshire, I saw this herbe lying on his stall, which I had seene growing long before: I desired of him to know the name of it, he told me that it was called Mill-mountain, and he also told me that beeing at Doctour Lake his house at Saint Crosse a mile from VVinchester, seeing a man of his haue this hearbe in his hand, he desired the name; hee told him as before, and also the vse of it, which is this.
Take a handfull of Mill mountaine, the whole plant, leaues, seedes, floures and all, bruise it and put it in a small tunne or pipkin of a pinte filled with white VVine, and set in on the embers to infuse all night, and drinke that wine in the morning fasting, and hee said it would giue eight or tenne stooles. This Doctour Lake was afterward made Bishop of Bath and VVells, who alwaies vsed this hearbe for his purge, after the said manner, as his man affirmed, Iuly 20. 1619. Iohn Goodyer.
I haue not as yet made tryall hereof, but since in Gesn. de Lunarijs pag. 34. I haue found

I haue found the like or a more purging facultie attributed to this herbe, as I thinke (for I cannot referre it to any other) where hee would haue it to be Helleborine of the Antients: I thinke it not amisse here to set downe his words, because the booke is not commonly to be had, being set forth Anno 155 5. Ante annos 15. aut circiter cum Anglus quidam, ex Italia rediens, me (...) (Turnerus is fuerit, vir excellent is tum in re medica tum alijs plerisque disciplinis doctrinae, (...) (...) (...), vix sat is memini) inter alias rariorum stirpium icones quas (...) as commodabat, Elleborinem quoque (...) pictam, herbulam fruticosam, pluribus ab vna r adice cauliculis quinque fere dig itorum (...) ate (...), foliolis perexiguis, binis per intervalla (eiusmodi vt ex aspectu genus quoddam Alsinae exiguum (...)) (...) in summo exiguis, rotundis tanquam lini. Hanc ajebat crescere in pratis siccis, vel (...) (...), inutili radice, subamara, purgare vtrinque and in Anglia vulgo vsurpari a rusticis. Thus much for Gesner.
6 Clusius amongst other wilde Lines or Flaxes hath set forth this, which from a liuing, thicke, writhen root, sendeth vp many stalkes almost a cubite high, somewhat red and stiffe, set with prettie large and thicke leaues not rough and hairie, but smooth and hard; the floures grow plentifully on the tops of the stalkes, being large, and composed of fiue leaues of a faire yellow colour, with fiue threds comming forth of their middles, with as many smaller and shorter haires. The seed is contained in flatter heads than those of the first described, containing a blacke, but not shining seed. It floures in Iune and Iuly, and ripens the seed in August. It growes naturally vpon diuers hils in Germany.
7 Matthiolus and Dodonaeus haue vnder the name of Linum syluestre; and Lobel by the name of Linum marinum luteum Narbonense, set forth another yellow floured wilde flaxe. This growes with slender stalkes some cubite high, set with leaues like those of flaxe, but somewhat lesser, and fewer in number: at the tops of the stalkes grow floures smaller than those of the common Line, and yellow of colour. It growes naturally vpon the coasts of France that lie towards the Mediterranean sea, but not in England that I haue heard of. @


 The Place.
They grow generally in grauelly grounds. The first groweth in well mannured places, as in gardens and such like soiles. The second groweth by the sea side. The third and fourth grow vpon rockes and cliffes neere to the sea side. I haue seene them grow vpon the sea bankes by Lee in Essex, and in many places of the Isle of Shepey. They grow also betweene Quinborow and Sherland house.
@ I haue not seene any of these growing wilde, but onely the fifth of my description. @


 The Time.
They floure from May to the middest of August.


 The Names.
Their names are sufficiently exprest in their seuerall titles.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The faculties of these kindes of Wilde-flax are referred vnto the manured flax, but they are seldome vsed either in Physicke or chirurgerie.



CHAP. 168. Of Blacke Saltwoort.

 The Description.
IN old time, say the Authours of the Aduersaria, this plant was vsed for meat, and receiued among the (...). It was called Glaux, by reason of the colour of the leaues, which are of a blewish gray colour, called in Latine, Glaucus color, such as is in the Sallow leafe: of others it is called Galax or Glax; and Eugalacton, quasi lactea or lactisica, because it is good to increase milke in the brests of women, if it be much vsed. Ruellius and others haue set downe Galega, Securidica, Polygala, and many other plants for the true Glaux, which hath bred a confusion. The true Glaux of Dioscorides hath many small branches, some creeping on the ground, and some standing vpright, tender, and small, beset with many little fat leaues like Tribulus terrestris, or Herniaria, growing along the stalks by couples; betweene whom grow small purple floures; which being past, there succeed certaine little bullets or seed vessels. The root is very small and threddy, and taking hold of the vpper face of the earth, as it doth run abroad, by which meanes it doth mightily increase.



Glaux exigua maritima. Bla cke Saltwoort.




 The Place.
The true Glaux or Milkwoortgroweth very plentifully in salt places and marshes neere the sea, from whence I haue brought it into my garden, where it prospereth as well as in his natiue soile. I found it especially betweene Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet in Kent, and by Grauesend in the same countie, by Tilbery Block-house in Essex, and in the isle of Shepey, going from Kings ferry to Sherland house.


 The Time.
It floureth in May, and the seed is ripe in Iune.


 The Names.
The names haue beene sufficiently spoken of in the description. It shall suffice to call it in English, Sea Milkwoort.


 The Nature.
Paulus Acgineta saith, it is hot and moist of temperature.


 The Vertues.
This Milkwoort taken with milke, drinke, or pottage, ingendereth store of milke, and therefore it is good to be vsed by nurses that want the same.



CHAP. 169. Of Milke-woort.

 The Description.
1 THere haue beene many plants neerely resembling Polygala, and yet not the same indeed, which doth verifie the Latine saying, Nullum simile est idem. This neere resemblance doth rather hinder those that haue spent much time in the knowledge of simples, than increase their knowledge. And this also hath been an occasion that many haue imagined a sundry Polygala vnto themselues, and so of other plants. Of which number, this (whereof I speake) is one, obtaining this name of the best writers and herbarists of our time, describing it thus. It hath many thick spreading branches, creeping on the ground: bearing leaues like them of Herniaria, standing in rowes like the Sea Milkwoort; among which do grow small whorles, or crownets of white floures, the root being exceeding small and threddie.
2 The second kinde of Polygala is a small herbe with pliant slender stems, of a wooddie substance, an handfull (...), (...) by the ground; the leaues be small and narrow like to Lintels, or little Hyssope. The floures grow at the top, of a blew color, fashioned like a little bird, with wings, taile, and bodie, easie to be discerned by them that doe obserue the same: which being past, there succeed small (...), like those of (...) pastoris, but lesser. The root is small and wooddie
3 This third kinde of Polygala or Milkewoort, hath leaues and stalkes like the last (...) (...), and differeth from it herein, that this kinde hath smaller branches, and the leaues are not so thicke thrust together, and the floures are like the other, but that they bee of a red or purple colour.
4 The fourth kinde is like the last spoken of in (...) respect, but that it hath white floures; otherwise it is very like.
5 Purple Milkewoort differeth (...) the others in the colour of the floures; it bringeth soorth (...) branches than the precedent, and the sloures are of a purple colour; wherein especially consisteth the difference.



1 Polygala repens. Creeping Milke-wort.


2 Polygala flore coeruleo. Blew Milke-wort.


3 Polygalarubris floribus. Red Milkewort.


4 Polygala albis floribus. White Milkewort.



6 The sixth Milke-wort is like vnto the rest in each respect, sauing that the floures are of an ouerworne ill fauoured colour, which maketh it to differ from all the other of his kinde.


 The Place.


5 Polygala purpurea. Purple Milke-wort.


These plants or Milke-worts grow commonly in euery wood or fertil pasture wheresoeuer I haue trauelled.


 The Time.
They floure from May to August.


 The Names.
Milke-wort is called by Dodonaeus, Flos Ambarualis; so called because it doth especially flourish in the Crosse or Gang weeke, or Rogation weeke; of which floures the maidens which vse in the countries to walke the Procession doe make themselues garlands and nosegaies: in English we may call it Crosse-floure, Procession-floure, Gangfloure, Rogation-floure, and Milkewort, of their vertues in procuring milke in the brests of nurses. Hieronymus Tragus, as also Dioscorides calleth it Polygalon. @ Gesner calls this Crucis flos; and in his Epistles he nameth it Amarella: it is vulgarly knowne in Cheapside to the herbe-women by the name of Hedge-Hyssop; for they take it for Gratiola, or Hedge-Hyssop, and sell it to such as are ignorant for the same. @ 


 The Vertues.
Galen, Dioscorides, and Theophrastus doe account these for Milkeworts, and that they may without error be vsed for those purposes whereunto Glaux serueth.
@ I doubt that this is not the Polygalon of Dioscorides; for Gesner affirmes that an handful hereof steeped all night in wine, and drunke in the morning, will purge choler effectually by stoole without any danger, as he himselfe had tried. @



CHAP. 170. Of Knot-Grasse.

 The Description.
1 THe common male Knot-grasse creepes along vpon the ground, with long slender weake branches full of knots or ioynts, whereof it tooke his name. The leaues grow vpon the weake branches, like those of small S. Iohns wort, but longer and narrower. The floures are maruellous little, and grow out of the knots, of an herby colour; in their places come vp triangular seed. The root is long, slender, and full of strings.
2 The second differeth not from the former, but onely that it is altogether lesser, wherein especially consisteth the difference. @ Because the difference is no otherwise, I hane thought good to omit the figure.
3 The Authors of the Aduersaria mention another larger Knot-grasse which growes in diuers places of the coast of the Mediterranean sea, hauing longer and larger branches and leaues, and those of a white shining colour. The seeds grow at the ioynts in chaffie white huskes; and the whole plant is of a salt and astringent taste. They call it Polygonum marinum maximum. @


 The Place.
These Knot-grasses do grow in barren and stony places almost euery where.


 The Time.
They are in floure and seed all the Sommer long.



 The Names.


1 Polygonum mas vulgare. Common Knot-grasse.


Knot-grasse is called of the Grecians, (...): that is to say, Polygonum mas, or Male Knot-grasse: in Latine, (...), Sangui naria: of Columella, Sanguinalis: in shops, Centumnodia, and Corrigiola: of (...), Proserpinaca: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...) gras, and (...) knop: in Italian, Polygono: in Spanish, Corriola: in French, Renouce: in Wallon, Mariolaine de Cure: in English, Knot-grasse, and Swines grasse: In the North, Birds tongue.


 The Temperature.
Knot-grasse (as Galen teacheth) is of a binding qualitie, yet is it cold in the second, if not in the beginning of the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The iuyce of Knot-grasse is good against  the spitting of bloud, the pissing of bloud, and all other issues or fluxes of bloud, as Brasanolus reporteth: and Camerarius saith he hath cured many with the iuyce thereof, that haue vomited bloud, giuen in a little stipticke Wine. It greatly preuaileth against the Gonorrhaea, that is, the running of the reines, and the weaknesse of the backe comming by meanes thereof, being shred and made in tansie with egges and eaten.
The decoction of it cures the disease aforesaid  in as ample manner as the iuyce: or giuen in pouder in a reare egge it helpeth the backe very much.
The herbe boyled in wine and hony cureth the vleers and inflammations of the secret parts of  man or woman, adding thereto a little allom, and the parts washed therewith.
Dioscorides saith that it prouoketh vrine, and helpeth such as do pisse drop after drop, when the  vrine is hot and sharpe.
It is giuen vnto Swine with good successe, when they are sicke and will not (...) their meate;  whereupon the countrey people do call it Swines grasse and Swines skir.



CHAP. 171. Of sundry sorts of Knot-Grasses.

 The Description.
1 THe snowie white and least kinde of Polygonum or Knot-grasse, called of Clusius, Paronychia (...), is a strange and worthy plant to behold, handle, and consider, although it be but small. It is seldome aboue a foot long, hauing small branches, thicke, tough, hard, and full of ioynts; out of which the leaues come forth like small teeth, lesser than the leaues of Herniaria, or Thymum tenuifolium. At the top of the stalkes stand most delicate floures framed by nature as it were, with fine parchment leaues about them, standing in their singular whitenesse and snowie colour, resembling the perfect white silke, so many in number at the top, and so thicke, that they ouershadow the rest of the plant beneath. The root is slender, and of a wooddy substance. The seed is couered as it were with chaffe, as it were with chaffe, and is as small as dust, or the motes in the Sunne.
2 Anthyllis of Valentia, being likewise a kinde of Knot-grasse, hath small leaues like Glaux exigna, or rather like Chamaesyce, set orderly by couples at the ioynts: among which come floures consisting of foure little whitish purple leaues, and other small leaues like the first but altogether lesser. The root is small, blacke, and long, and of a wooddy substance.
@ Our Author, though he meant to haue giuen vs the figure of Knawell in the third place, as may be perceiued by the title, yet he described it in the fourth, and in the third place went (...)

1 Polygonum montanum. Mountaine Knot-grasse.The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be vsed in the like cases. @

 2 Anthyllis Valentina Clusij. Valentia Knot-grasse.The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be vsed in the like cases. @

 3 Polygonum serpillifolium. Small round leaued Knot-grasse.The figure that formerly was in the second place was of Knawell, and that in the third place of (...) (...) (...) of (...).

 4 Polygonum Selinoides, siue (...). Parsley Piert.
to describe Polygonum (...) of Pena; as may be gathered by the description which should haue (...), but that I opportunely receiued a better from my oft mentioned friend Mr. Goodyer; which therefore I thought good to impart vnto you.
Polygonum alterum pusillo vermiculato Scrpilli foliolo Penae.
This hath many small round smooth wooddy branches, somewhat reddish, trailing vpon the ground, nine inches or a foot long; whereon by small distances on short ioynts grow tufts of very small short blunt topped smooth greene leaues, in a maner round, like those of the smallest Time, but much smaller, and without smell, diuiding themselues at the bosomes of those leaues into small branches; at the tops of which branches grow small floures, one floure on a branch, and no more, consisting of (...) little round topped leaues apiece of a faint or pale purplish colour: I obserued no seed. The root is wooddy, blackish without, very bitter, with some taste of heare, and groweth deepe into the ground. The leaues are nothing so full of iuyce as Aizoon. I found it flouring the third day of September, 1621, on the ditch bankes at Burseldon ferrey by the sea side in Hampshire. (...). Goodyer. @
4 Among the Knot-grasses may well be suted this small plant, but lately written of, and not so commonly knowne as growing in England, being about an handfull high, and putting out from a fibrous root sundry slender stalkes full of little branches and ioynts: about which grow confusedly many narrow leaues, for the most part of an vnequall quantitie, yet here and there two longer than the rest, and much alike in greatnesse: at the outmost parts of the branches and stalks (where it hath thickest tufts) appeare out of the middest of the leaues little floures of an herby colour, which are succeeded by seed-vessels ending in fiue sharpe points: the whole plant is of a whitish colour. If my memorie faile me not, Pena means this herbewhere he speaketh of Saxisr. Angl. in his Aduer. p. 103. and also reporteth that he found this plant by the way side as he rode from London to Bristow, on a little hill not far from Chipnam: his picture doth very well resemble the kinde of Knot-grasse called among the Germanes (...): and calling it (...) Anglicana causeth me to thinke, that some in the West parts where he found it do call it Saxifrage, as we do call sundry other herbes, especially if they serue for the stone. My friend Mr. Stephen Bredwel, Practitioner of physicke in those parts, heard of a simple man who did much good with a medicine that he made with Parsley Piert against the stone, which he ministred vnto all sorts of people. This my friend requested the poore man to shew him the herbe called Parsley Piert; who frankly promised it him, and the next morning brought him an handfull of the herbe, and told him the compofition of his medicine withall, which you shall finde set downe in the vertues, and proued by sundry of good account to be a singular remedie for the same.


The figure that formerly was in the second place was of Knawell, and that in the third place of (...) (...) (...) of (...).

 5 Saxifraga Anglicana alsinefolia. Chick-weed Breake-stone.


The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be vsed in the like cases. @

 6 Saxifraga palustris alsinefolia. Small water Saxifrage.



@ 4 Our Author here in the fourth place described the Knawel, and he figured it in the second place, vnder the title of Anthyllis Valentina Clusij: for the figure which was in the third place we here giue you in the fifth; and I coniecture it is not of Knawel, but of (...) (...) of the Aduers. So that our Authors words are true, if he meant of the picture which he set forth by the name of Polygonum (...) siue Knawel; but false if of the plant which he described. But if the coniecture of (...) and Lobei be true, who iudge their Saxifraga Anglicana to be Synanchice (...), then it is neither of (...), as our Author would haue it, nor of this which I here giue, but of a small plant which you shall finde amongst the Rubia's. Now this plant that I take to be the Saxifraga (...) of (...) and Lobel, is a small little herbe growing thicke, with very many branches some two or three inches high, with some stalkes standing vpright, and other some creeping: at each ioynt grow two short narrow sharpe pointed greene leaues, out of whose bosomes come diuers lesser leaues: at the tops of the branches vpon pretty long stalkes grow vpon each stalke one round whitish scaly head, consisting commonly of foure vnder greenish leaues which make the cup, and foure grayish or whitish leaues which are the floure. Now after these come to some maturitie they appeare all of a whitish colour, and through the thinne filmes of these heads appeares the seed, which at the first view seems to be pretty large and blacke; for it lies all clustering together; but if you rub it out you shall finde it as small as sand, and of a darke reddish colour. The taste of this plant is very hot and piercing, like that of Golden rod or our common Saxifrage, and without doubt it is more effectuall to moue vrine than the former Knawel. I haue sound it growing in many places about (...) and stone walls, and vpon chalky barren grounds. I called this in my Iournall Anno (...). 2. (...) minor altera flosculis albis semine nigro; and questioned whether it were not Alsine (...) (...) minima montana of Columna. But now I thinke it rather (if the number of leaues in the floure did not disagree) the other which is described in the next place, of which I since that time haue receiued both the figure and description, as also a dry plant from Mr. Goodyer. He coniectures it may be this plant which I haue here described, that is set forth in the Historia Lugd. pag. 1235. by the name of Alsine muscosa.
Alsine palustris folijs (...): (...) Saxifraga palustris alsinefolia.
6 This hath a great number of very small grasse-like leaues, growing from the root, about an inch long, a great (...) smaller and slenderer than small pinnes; amongst which spring vp (...) small slender round smooth firme branches some handfull or handfull and halfe high, from which sometimes grow a few other smaller branches, whereon at certaine ioynts grow leaues like the former, and those set by couples with other shorter comming forth of their bosomes; and so by degrees they become shorter and shorter towards the top, so that toward the top this plant somwhat resembleth (...) (...). The (...) are great for the slendernesse of the plant, growing at the tops of the branches, each floure consisting of fiue smal blunt roundish topped white floures, with white chiues in the middest. The seed I obserued not. The root is small, growing in the myre with a few strings. This groweth plentifully on the boggy ground below the red Well of Wellingborough in Northampton shire. This hath not beene described that I finde. I obserued it at the (...) aforesaid, August 12. (...). Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
The figure that formerly was in the second place was of Knawell, and that in the third place of (...) (...) (...) of (...).

 The first and second are strangers in England: the rest grow in places mentioned in their descriptions.


 The Time.
These floure for the most part from May to September.


 The Names.
That which hath beene said of their names in their seuerall descriptions shall suffice.


 The Nature.
They are cold in the second degree, and dry in the third, astringent and making thicke.
@ These, especially the three last, are hot in the second or third degree, and of subtill parts; but the Parsley Piert seemes not to be so hot as the other two. @


 The Vertues.
Here according to my promise I haue thought good to insert this medicin made with Knawel;  which herbe is called (as I said before) Parsley Piert, but if I might without offence it should be called Petra pungens: for that barbarous word Parsley Piert was giuen by some simple man (@ as also the other, that sauors of as much simplicitie @) who had not wel learned the true terme. The composition which followeth must be giuen in warme white wine, halfe a dram, two scruples, or more, according to the constitution of the body which is to receiue it.

The leaues of Parsley Piert, Mous-eare, of each one ounce when the herbes be dried, bay berryes, Turmericke, Cloues, the seeds of the great Burre, the feeds in the berryes of Hippes, or (...), (...), of each one ounce, the stone in the oxe gall, the weight of 24. Barley cornes, or halfe a dram, made together into a most fine and subtill pouder, taken and drunke in maner aforesaid hath been proued most singular for the disease aforesaid.



CHAP. 172. Of Rupture woort.


1 Herniaria. Rupture woort.


@ 2 Millegranaminima. Dwarfe Allseed.



 The Description.
1 THere is also a kinde of Knot grasse commonly called in Latine Herniaria: in English, Rupture woort, or Rupture grasse. It is a base and low creeping herbe, hauing many small slender branches trailing vpon the ground, yet very tough, and full of little knots somewhat reddish, whereupon do grow very many small leaues like those of Time; among which come forth little yellowish floures which turne into very small seed, and great quantity thereof, considering the smallnesse of the plant, growing thicke clustering together by certaine spaces. The whole plant is of a yellowish greene colour. The root is very slender and single.
2 There is another kinde of Herniaria, called Mille grana or All-seed, that groweth vpright a handfull high, with many small and tender branches, set with leaues like the former, but few in number, hauing as it were two smal leaues and no more. The whole plant seemeth as it were couered ouer with seeds or graines, like the seed of Panicke, but much lesser. @ I haue not seen many plants of this, but all that euer I yet saw neuer attained to the height of two inches. @


 The Place.
1 It ioyeth in barren and sandy grounds, and is likewise found in dankish places that lie wide open to the sunne: it doth grow and prosper in my garden exceedingly. @ 2 I found this in Kent on a Heath not farre from Chiste-hurst, being in company with Mr. Bowles and diuers others, in Iuly, 1630.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in May, Iune, Iuly, and August.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Herniaria and Herniola; taken from the effect in curing the disease Hernia: of diuers, Herba Turca, and Empetron; in French, (...): in English, Rupture woort, and Burstwoort.



 The Temperature and Vertue.
Rupture woort doth notably drie, and throughly closeth vp together and fasteneth. It is reported  that being drunke it is singular good for Ruptures, and that very many that haue been bursten, were restored to health by the vse of this herbe; also the pouder hereof taken with wine, doth make a man to pisse that hath his water stopt; it also wasteth away the stones in the kidnies, and expelleth them.



CHAP. 173. Of wilde Time.


1 Serpillum vulgre. Wilde Time.


3 Serpillum majus flore purpurco. Great purple wilde Time.



 The Description.
1 BOth Dioscoridcs and Pliny make two kindes of Serpillum, that is, of creeping or wilde Time; whereof the first is our common creeping Time, which is sowell knowne, that it needeth no description; yet this ye shall vnderstand, that it beareth floures of a purple colour, as euery body knoweth. Of which kinde I found another sort, with floures as white as snow, and haue planted it in my garden, where it becommeth an herbe of great beauty:
2 This wilde Time that bringeth forth white floures differeth not from the other, but only in the colour of the floures, whence it may be called Serpillum vulgare flore albo. White floured Wilde Time.
There is another kinde of Serpillum, which groweth in gardens, in smell and sauour resembling Marjerome. It hath leaues like Organy, or wilde Marjerome, but somewhat whiter, putting forth many small stalkes, set full of leaues like Rue, but longer, narrower, and harder. The floures are of a biting taste, and pleasant smell. The whole plant groweth vpright, whereas the other creepeth along vpon the earth, catching hold where it growes, and spreading it selfe far abroad.
3 This great wilde Time creepeth not as the others doe, but standeth vpright, and bringeth forth little slender branches full of leaues like those of Rue; yet narrower, longer, and harder. The flours be of a purple colour, and of a twingging biting taste: it groweth vpon rocks, and is hotter than any of the others.
4 This other great one with white floures differeth not from the precedent, hauing many knaps or heads, of a milke white colour, which setteth forth the difference; and it may be called Serpillum maius flore albo. Great white floured wilde Time.
5 This wilde Time creepeth vpon the ground, set with many leaues by couples like those of Marjerom, but lesser, of the same smel: the flours are of a reddish color. The root is very threddy.
6 Wilde Time of Candy is like vnto the other wild Times, sauing that his leaues are narrower and longer and more in number at each joint. The smell is more aromaticall than any of the others, wherein is the difference.
7 There is a kinde of wilde Time growing vpon the mountaines of Italy, called Serpillum

5 Serpillum folijs amaraci. Marjerome Time.6 Serpillum Creticum. Wilde Time of Candy.@ 7 Serpillum citratum. Limon Time.@ 8 Serpillum hirsutum. Hoary wilde Time.Citratum, that is, hauing the smel of a Pome Citron, or a limon, which giueth it the difference from the other wilde times. @ It growes in many gardens also, and (as I haue been told) wilde in diuers places of Wales.
8 This (which is the Serpillum Pannonicum 3. of Clusius) runnes or spreds it selfe far vpon the ground. For though it haue a hard and wooddy root like as the former kindes, yet the branches which lie spred round about here and there take root, which in time become as hard and wooddy as the former. The leaues and stalkes are like those of the last described, but rough and hoarie: the floures also are not vnlike those of the common kind. The whole plant hath a kinde of resinous smell. It floures in Iune with the rest, and growes vpon the like mountainous places; (...) whether with vs in England or no I cannot yet affirme any thing of certaintie. @


 The Place.
The first groweth vpon barren hills and vntoiled places: the second groweth in gardens. The white kinde I found at (...) in Kent, in a barren field belonging to one Mr. William Swan.


 The Time.
They floure from May to the end of Sommer.


 The Names.
Wild Time is called in Latine Serpillum, a serpendo, of creeping: in high and low-Dutch, (...), and Wilden Thymus, and also (...) Urouwen (...): in Spanish, Serpoll: in Italian, Serpillo: in French, Pillolet: in English, Wilde Time, Puliall Mountaine, Pella mountaine, running Time, creeping Time, Mother of Time: in shops it is called Serpyllum; yet some call it Pulegium montanum: and it is euery where (saith Dodonaeus) thought to be the Serpyllum of the Antients. Notwithstanding it answereth not so wel to the wilde Times as to Dioscorides his Saxifranga; for if it be diligently compared with the description of both the Serpilla and the Saxifranga, it shal be found to be little like the wilde Times, but very much like the Saxifranga: for (saith Dioscorides) Saxifranga is an herbe like Time, growing on rockes, where our common wilde Time is ostentimes found.
Aelianus in his ninth booke of his sundry Histories seemeth to number wilde Time among the floures. Dionysius Iunior (saith he) comming into the city Locris in Italy, possessed most of the houses of the city, and did strew them with roses, wild Time, and other such kindes of floures. Yet Virgil in the second Eclog of his Bucolicks doth most manifestly testifie that wilde Time is an herbe, in these words:

Thestylis and rapido fessis messoribus (...)
Allia, serpillumque, herbas contundit olentes.


Thestilis for mowers tyr'd with parching heate,
Garlicke, wilde Time, strong smelling herbes doth beate.

Out of which place it may be gathered, that common wilde time is the true and right Serpillum, or wilde Time, which the Grecians call (...) Marcellus an old antient Author among the Frenchmen saith it is called Gilarum; as Plinius Valerianus saith it is called of the same, Laurio.


 The Temperature.
Wilde Time is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree: it is of thin and subtill parts, (...) and much biting.


 The Vertues.
It bringeth downe the desired sicknesse, prouoketh vrine, applied in bathes and fomentations it  procureth sweat: being boyled in wine, it helpeth the ague, it easeth the strangurie, it stayeth the hicket, it breaketh the stones in the bladder, it helpeth the Lethargie, frensie, and madnesse, and stayeth the vomiting of bloud.
Wilde Time boyled in wine and drunke, is good against the wambling and gripings of the bellie, ruptures, convulsions, and inflammations of the liuer.
It helpeth against the bitings of any venomous beast, either taken in drinke, or outwardly applied.
Aetius writeth, That Serpillum infused well in Vineger, and then sodden and mingled with rose  water, is a right singular remedie to cure them that haue had a long phrensie or lethargie.
Galen prescribeth one dram of the iuyce to be giuen in vineger against the vomiting of bloud, and helpeth such as are grieued with the spleene.




CHAP. 174. Of Garden Time.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Time is so well knowne that it needeth no description; because there is not any which are ignorant what Thymum durius is, I meane our common garden Time.
2 The second kinde of Time with broad leaues hath many wooddy branches rising from a threddy root, beset with leaues like Myrtus. The floures are set in rundles about the stalke like Horehound. The whole plant is like the common Time in taste and smell.


1 Thymum durius. Hard Time.


The secoud figure was (...) (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...) chapter; the third (...) of (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...).

 2 Thymum latifolium. Great or broad leaued Time.


3 Time of Candy is in all respects like vnto common Time, but differeth in that, that this kinde hath certaine knoppy tufts not much vnlike the spikes or knots of Stoecados, but much lesser, beset with slender floures of a purple colour. The whole plant is of a more gracious smell than any of the other Times, and of another kinde of taste, as it were sauouring like spice. The root is brittle, and of a wooddy substance.
4 Doubtlesse that kinde of Time whereon Epithymum doth grow, and is called for that cause Epithymum, and vsed in shops, is nothing else than Dodder that growes vpon Time; and is all one with ours, though Matthiolus makes a controuersie and difference thereof: for Pena trauelling ouer the hills in Narbone neere the sea, hath seene not onely the garden Time, but the wilde Time also loden and garnished with this Epithymum. So that by his sight and mine owne knowledge I am assured, that it is not another kinde of Time that beareth Epithymum, but is common Time: for I haue often found the same in England, not onely vpon our Time, but vpon Sauorie, and other herbes also: notwithstanding thus much I may coniecture, that the clymate of those Countries doth yeeld the same forth in greater aboundance than ours, by reason of the intemperance of cold, whereunto our countrey is subiect.



The secoud figure was (...) (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...) chapter; the third (...) of (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...).

 3 Thymum Creticum. Time of Candy.


4 Epithymum Graecorum. Laced Time.




 The Place.
These kindes of Time grow plentifully in England in most gardens euery where, except that with broad leaues, and Time of Candy, which I haue in my garden.


 The Time.
They flourish from May vnto September.


 The Names.
The first may be called hard Time, or common garden Time: the second, Broad leaued Time; the third, Time of Candy; our English women call it Muske Time: the last may be called Dodder Time.


 The Temperature.
These kindes of Time are hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Time boyled in water and hony drunken, is good against the cough and shortnes of the breath;  it prouoketh vrine, expelleth the secondine or after-birth, and the dead childe, and dissolues clotted or congealed bloud in the body.
The same drunke with vineger and salt purgeth flegme: and boyled in Mede or Methegline, it  cleanseth the breast, lungs, reines, and matrix, and killeth wormes.
Made into pouder, and taken in the weight of three drams with Mede or honied vineger, called  Oxymel, and a little salt, purgeth by stoole tough and clammie flegme, sharpe and cholericke humors, and all corruption of bloud.
The same (...) in like sort, is good against the Sciatica, the paine in the side and brest, against  the winde in the side and belly, and is profitable also for such as are fearefull, melancholike, and troubled in minde.
It is good to be giuen vnto those that haue the falling sicknesse to smell vnto.
(...), after Galen, is of more effectuall operation in physicke than Time, being hot and dry  in the third degree, more mightily cleansing, heating, drying, and opening than Cuscuta, (...) right good effect to eradicat melancholy, or any other humor in the spleen, or other disease, sprung by occasion of the spleene.

It helpeth the long continued paines of the head, and besides his singular effects about spleneticall  matters, it helpeth the lepry, or any disease of melancholy; all quart aine agues, and such like griefes proceeding from the spleene.
Dioscorides saith, Epithymum drunke with honied water, expelleth by siege, flegme, and melancholy.
Of his natiue propertie it relieueth them which be melancholieke, swolne in the face and other  parts, if you pound Epithymum, and take the fine pouder thereof in the quantity of foure scruples in the liquour which the Apothecaries call Passum, or with Oxymell and salt, which taketh away all flatuous humours and ventosities.



CHAP. 175. Of Sauorie.

 The Kindes.
THere be two kindes of Sauorie, the one that indureth VVinter, and is of long continuance: the other an annuall or yearely plant, that perisheth at the time when it hath perfected his seed, and must be sowne againe the next yeare; which we call Sommer Sauorie, or Sauorie of a yeare. There is likewise another, which is a stranger in England, called of Lobel Thymbra S. (...), denying it to be the right Satureia, or Sauorie: whether that of Lobel, or that we haue in our English gardens be the true winter Sauorie, is yet disputable; for we thinke that of S. Iulians rocke to be rather a wilde kinde than otherwise. @ Pena and Lobel do not denie, (...) affirme it in these words, Nullus non fatetur Satureiam veram; that is, which none can denie to be the true Satureia or Sauorie. Vid. (...). pag. 182. @


1 Satureia hortensis. VVinter Sauorie.


2 Satureia hortensis aestiva. Sommer Sauorie.





 The Description.
1 WInter Sauorie is a plant resembling Hyssope, but lower, more tender and brittle: it bringeth forth very many branches, compassed on euery side with narrow and sharpe pointed leaues, longer than those of Time; among which grow the floures from the bottome to the top, out of small husks, of colour white, tending to a light purple. The root is hard and wooddie, as is the rest of the plant.
2 Sommer Sauorie groweth vp with a slender brittle stalke of a foot high, diuided into little branches: the leaues are narrow, lesser than those of Hysope, like the leaues of winter Sauorie, (...) thinner set vpon the branches. The floures stand hard to the branches, of a light purple tending to whitenesse. The root is small, full of strings, and perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.


3 Satureia SanctiI uliani. Rocke Sauorie.


@ 4 Satureia Cretic. Candie Sauorie.


3 This small kinde of Sauorie, which Lobel hath set forth vnder the title of Thymbra S. Iuliani, because it groweth (...) vpon the rough cliffes of the (...) sea in Italie, called Saint Iulians rocke, hath tender twiggie branches an handfull high, of a wooddie substance, set ful of leaues from the bottome to the top, very thicke thrust together like vnto those of Time, sauing that they be (...) and narrower, bringing forth at the top of the sprigs a round spikie tuft (...) small purplish floures. The whole plant is whitish, tending to a bleake colour, and of a verie hot and sharpe taste, and also well smelling.
@ 4 This in the opinion of Honorius Bellus, Clusius, and Pona, is thought, and not without good reason, to be the true Thymbra, or Satureia of Dioscorides and the Antients, for (besides that it agrees with their description, it is to this day called in Candie (...) and (...).) Clusius describes it thus: It sends forth many branches immediately from the roote like as Tyme, and those quadrangular, rough, and of a purplish colour: vpon these growe alternately little roughish leaues much like those of the true Tyme; and out of their bosomes come little branches set with the like, but lesser leaues. The toppes of the branches are compassed with a rundle made of manie little leaues, whereout come floures of a fine purple colour, and like the floures of Tyme, beeing diuided into foure parts, whereof the lower is the broader, and hangs downe: The vpper is also broad but shorter, and the other two lesse. Out of the middle of the floure come fiue whitish threds, pointed with browne, and a forked stile. The seed is small and blacke like that of Tyme. The root hard and wooddie. It floured with Clusius (who receiued the seedes out of Candie from Honorius Bellus) in October and Nouember. @


 The Place.
They are sowne in Gardens, and bring foorth their floures the first yeare of their sowing.



 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Sauorie is called in Greeke (...), neither hath it any other true name in Latine than Thymbra. The Interpreters would haue it called Satureia, wherein they are repugnant to Columella a Latine Writer, who doth shew a manifest difference betweene Thymbra and Satureia, in his tenth booke; where hee writeth, that Sauorie hath the taste of Tyme, and of Thymbra or the Winter Sauorie.
Et Satureia Thymi referens Thymbraeque saporem.
@ Notwithstanding this assertion of Columella, Pliny lib. 19. cap: 8. makes Satureia, or Sauorie, to be that Thymbra which is called also Cunila. Sauorie in High Dutch is called Kunel Saturey, and Sadaney: in Low Dutch, Ceulen: which name, as it seemeth, is drawne out Cunila: in Italian, Sauoreggia in Spanish, Axedrea, and Sagorida: in French, Sarriette: in English, Sauorie, Winter Sauorie, and Sommer Sauorie.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Winter Sauorie is of temperature hot and drie in the third degree, it maketh thin, cutteth, it  clenseth the passages: to be briefe, it is altogether of like vertue with Time.
Sommer Sauorie is not full so hot as winter Sauorie, and therefore saith Dioscorides, more fit to  be vsed in medicine: it maketh thin, and doth maruellously preuaile against winde: therefore it is with good successe boiled and eaten with beanes, peason, and other windie pulses, yea if it be applied to the belly in a fomentation, it forthwith helpeth the affects of the mother proceeding from winde.



CHAP. 176. Of Dodder.


Cuscuta sivc Cassutha. Dodder.



 The Description.
CVscuta, or Dodder, is astrange herbe, altogether without leaues or root, like vnto threds very much snarled or wrapped together, confusedly winding it selfe about bushes and hedges, and sundry kindes of herbes. The threds are somewhat red: vpon which grow here and there little round heads or knops, bringing forth at the first slender white floures; afterward a small seed.


 The Place.
This herbe groweth vpon sundry kindes of herbes, as vpon Tyme, VVinter Sauorie, Germander, and such like, taking his name from the herbe whereupon it doth grow, as that vpon Tyme is called Epithymum, vpon Line or flaxe Epilinum: and so of others, as Dodonaeus setteth forth at large: yet hath he forgotten one among the rest, which groweth very (...) in Sommer setshire vpon nettles: neither is it the least among many, either in beautie or operation, but comparable to the best Epithymum: following therefore the example of Dioscorides, I haue thought good to call it Epiurtica, or rather (...), and so of the rest according to the herbes whereon they do grow.


 The Names.
The greatest is called in shops euery where Cuscuta: and of diuers because it groweth vpon

(...) or Lyne, Podagra Lini; the better learned do name it Cassutha, or Cassytha: and Gesnerus, (...): the Arabians, Kessuth and Chasuth: in Dutch, Schorfte, and Dranghe: in High Dutch, Filkraut: in French, Goute d'Lin, and Tigne de Lin: in English, Dodder.
The lesser and (...) which wrappeth it selfe vpon Time and Sauorie, is called of Dioscorides (...): the Apothecaries keep the name Epithymum: others, among whom is Actuarius, name that Epithymum which groweth vpon Tyme onely, and that which groweth on Sauorie Epithymbrum, and that also which hangeth vpon Stoebe, they terme Epistoebe, giuing a peculiar name to euery kind.


 The Nature.
The nature of this herb changeth and altereth, according to the nature and qualitie of the herbs whereupon it groweth: so that by searching of the nature of the plant you may easily finde out the temperament of the laces growing vpon the same. But more particularly: it is of temperature somewhat more drie than hot, and that in the second degree: it also clenseth with a certaine astrictiue or binding qualitie, and especially that which is found growing vpon the bramble: for it also receiueth a certaine nature from his parents o n which it groweth; for when it groweth vpon the hotter herbes, as Tyme and Sauory, it becommeth hotter and drier, and of thinner parts: that which commeth of Broome prouoketh vrine more forcibly, and maketh the belly more soluble: and that is moister which groweth vpon flaxe: that which is found vpon the bramble hath ioined with it as wee haue said a binding qualitie, which by reason of this facultie ioyned with it is good to cure the infirmities of the Liuer and Milt: for seeing that it hath both a purging and binding facultie vnited to it, it is most singular good for the entrals: for Galen in his thirteenth Booke of the Methode of curing, doth at large declare that such Medicines are fittest of all for the Liuer and Milt.


 The Vertues.
Dodder remooueth the stoppings of the liuer and of the milt or spleene, it disburdeneth the  veines of flegmaticke, cholericke, corrupt and superfluous humours: prouoketh vrine gently, and in a meane openeth the kidneies, cureth the yellow iaundise which are ioyned with the stopping of the liuer and gall: it is a remedie against lingring agues, bastard and long tertians, quartains also, and properly agues in infants and young children, as Mesues (...) in Scrapio; who also teacheth, that the nature of Dodder is to purge choler by the stoole, and that more effectually if it haue Wormewood ioined with it; but too much vsing of it is hurtfull to the stomacke: yet Auicen writeth that it doth not hurt it, but strengtheneth a weake or feeble stomacke; which opinion also we do better allow of.
(...), or the Dodder which groweth vpon Tyme, is hotter and drier than the Dodder that  groweth vpon flax, that is to say euen in the third degree, as Galen saith. It helpeth all the (...) of the milt: it is a remedy against obstructions and hard swellings. It taketh away old headaches, the salling sicknesse, madnesse that commeth of Melancholy, and especially that which proceedeth from the spleene and parts thereabout: it is good for those that haue the French disease, and such as be troubled with contagious vlcers, the leprosie, and the scabbie euill.
It purgeth downewards blacke and Melancholicke humours, as Aetius, Actuarius, and Mesue write, and also flegme, as Dioscorides noteth: that likewise purgeth by stoole which groweth vpon Sauorie and Scabious, but more weakly, as Actuarius saith.
(...), or Dodder that groweth vpon flax, boiled in water or wine and drunke, openeth the stoppings  of the liuer, the bladder, the gall, the milt, the kidneies and veines, and purgeth both by siege and vrine cholericke humours.
It is good against the ague which hath continued a long time, and against the iaundise, I meane  that Dodder especially that groweth vpon brambles.
Epiurtica or Dodder growing vpon nettles, is a most singular and effectuall medicine to prouoke  vrine, and to loose the obstructions of the body, and is proued oftentimes in the West parts with good successe against many maladies.



CHAP. 177. Of Hyssope.

 The Description.
1 DIoscorides that gaue so many rules for the knowledge of simples, hath left Hyssope altogether without description, as beeing a plant so well knowne that it needed none: whose example I follow not onely in this plant, but in many others which bee common, to auoid tediousnesse to the Reader.



1 (...) (...). Hyssope with blew floures.


2 Hyssopus Arabum slore rubro. Hyssope with reddish floures.


(...) figure in the third place was of the (...) (...). 2. of (...) (...).

 3 Hyssopus albis floribus. VVhite floured Hyssope.


4 Hyssopus tenuifolia. Thinne leafed Hyssope.





@ 5 Hyssopus parva angustis folijs. Dwarfe narrow leaued Hyssope.


2 The second kind of Hyssope is like the former, which is our common Hyssope, and differeth in that, that this Hyssope hath his small and slender branches decked with faire red floures.
3 The third kinde of Hyssop hath leaues stalkes, branches, seed, and root, like the common Hyssope, and differeth in the floures only, which are as white as snow.
4 This kinde of Hyssope of all the rest is of the greatest beauty; it hath a wooddie root tough, and full of strings, from which rise vp small, tough, and slender flexible stalkes, wherupon do grow infinite numbers of small Fennel-like leaues, much resembling those of the smallest grasse; of a pleasant sweet smel, and aromatick taste, like vnto the rest of the Hyssops but much sweeter; at the top of the stalks do grow amongst the leaues smal hollow floures, of a blewish colour tending to purple. The seeds as yet I could neuer obserue.
@ 5 This differs from the first described, in that the stalkes are weaker and shorter, the leaues also narrower, and of a darker colour: the floures grow after the same manner, and are of the same colour as those of the common kinde. @
We haue in England in our gardens another kinde, whose picture it shall be needlesse to expresse, considering that in few words it may be deliuered. It is like vnto the former, but the leaues are some of them white, some greene, as the other; and some green and white mixed and spotted, very goodly to behold.
Of which kinde we haue in our gardens moreouer another sort, whose leaues are wonderfully curled, rough, and hairie, growing thicke thrust together, making as it were a tuft of leaues; in taste and smell, and in all other things like vnto the common Hyssope.
I haue likewise in my garden another sort of Hyssope, growing to the forme of a small wooddie shrub, hauing very faire broad leaues like vnto those of Numularia, or Monywoort, but thicker, fuller of iuice, and of a darker greene colour; in taste and smell like the common Hyssope.


 The Place.
All these kindes of Hyssope do grow in my garden, and in some others also.


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Hyssope is called in Latine Hyssopus: the which name is likewise retained among the Germans, Brabanders, French-men, Italians, and Spaniards. Therefore that shall suffice which hath been set downe in their seuerall titles.
@ This is by most Writers iudged to be Hyssope vsed by the Arabian Physitions, but not that of the Greekes, which is neerer to Origanum and Maricorme, as this is to Satureia or Sauorie. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
A decoction of Hyssope made with figs, and gargled in the mouth and throte, ripeneth and breaketh  the tumors and imposthumes of the mouth and throte, and easeth the difficultie of swallowing, comming by cold (...).
The same made with figges, water, honie, and rue, and drunken, helpeth the inflammation of the  lungs, the old cough, and shortnesse of breath, and the obstructions or stoppings of the breast.
The sirrup or iuice of Hyssope taken with the sirrup of vineger, purgeth by stoole tough and  clammie flegme, and driueth forth wormes if it be eaten with figges.
The distilled water drunke, is good for those diseases before named, but not with that speed and  force.




CHAP. 178. Of Hedge Hyssope.

 The Description.
1 HEdge Hyssope is a low plant or herbe about a span long, very like vnto the common Hyssope, with many square stalkes or slender branches, beset with leaues somewhat larger than Hyssope, but very like. The floures grow betwixt the leaues vpon short stems, of a white colour declining to blewnesse. All the herbe is of a most bitter taste, like the small Centory. The root is little and threddy, dilating it selfe farre abroad; by which meanes it multiplieth greatly, and occupieth much ground where it groweth.


1 (...). Hedge Hyssope.


@ 2 Gratiola angustifolia. Grasse Poley.


3 Gratiola latifolia. Broad leaued Hedge Hyssope.


@ 2 Narrow leaued Hedge Hyssope from a small fibrous white root sends vp a reddish round crested stalke diuided into sundry branches, which are set with leaues like those of knot grasse of a pale greene colour, and without any stalkes: out of the bosome! of these come floures set in long cups composed of foure leaues of a pleasing blew colour, which are succeeded by longish seed-vessells conteyning a small dusky seed. The whole plant is without smell, neither hath it any bitternesse or other manifest taste. It varies in leaues, sometimes broader, and otherwhiles narrower, the plant growing sometimes but an handfull, and otherwhiles a foot high. Gesner called this Gratiola minor: and Camerarius, Hyssopoides: and Bauhine onely hath figured it, and that by the name of Hyssopifolia siue Gratiola minor Cordus first mentioned it, and that by the Dutch name of Grasse Poley, which name we may also very fitly retaine in English. @
3 Broad leaued (...) Hyssope hath many small and tender branches, foure square, and somewhat hollow or surrowed, beset with leaues by couples one opposite against another, like vnto the former, but somewhat shorter, and much broader: among which grow the floures of a purple

colour, spotted on the inside with white, and of a brighter purple than the rest of the floure, fashioned like the smallest Antirrhinum, or least Snapdragon; which being past there succeed little seed vessels, fashioned like the nut of a crossebow, which containe small yellowish seed, extreame bitter of taste. The whole plant is likewise bitter, as the common or well knowne Gratiola. The root is compact of a great number of whitish strings, entangled one within another, which mightily encreaseth and spreadeth abroad.
@ This plant is onely a lesser kinde of the Lysimachia galericulata of Lobell, which some haue called Gratiola Latifolia: our Authors figure was very ill, wherefore I haue endeauoured by the helpe of some dried plants and my memory to present you with a better expression thereof. @


 The Place.
The first groweth in low and moist places naturally, which I haue planted in my Garden. @ The second was found growing by my oft mentioned friend Mr. Bowles at Dorchester in Oxfordshire, at the backe side of the enclosed grounds on the left hand of the towne, if you would ride from thence to Oxford in the grassie places of the Champion corne fields. @ The third groweth likewise in moist places. I found it growing vpon the bog or marrish ground at the further end of Hampstead heath, and vpon the same heath towards London, neere vnto the head of the springs that were digged for water to be conueied to London, 1590. attempted by that carefull citizen Iohn Hart Knight, Lord Major of the City of London: at which time my selfe was in his Lordships company, and viewing for my pleasure the same goodly springs, I found the said plant, not heretofore remembred.


 The Time.
The first floureth in May: the second in Iune and Iuly: the third in August.


 The Names in generall.
Hedge Hyssope is called in Latine Gratiola, and Gratia Dei, or the Grace of God; notwithstanding there is a kind of Geranium, or Storkes bill, called by the later name. Of Cordus, Limnesium, and Centauroides: of Anguillaria it is thought to be Dioscorides his Papauer spumeum, or Spatling Poppy: but some think Papauer spumeum to be that which we call Behen album: in Dutch it is called (...) gratie: in Italian, Stanca cauallo, because that horses when they haue eaten thereof dowax leane, and languish thereupon: and in English, Gratia Dei, and Hedge Hyssope. The seed hereof is called Gelbenech, which name the Arabians retaine vnto this day.


@  Names in particular.
@ 1 Matthiolus, (...) and others haue called this Gratiola; Anguillara, Gratia Dei; Cordus, Limnesium, Centauroides; he also thought it but vnfitly to be the Eupatoreum of Mesue: Gesner thinks it may be Polemonium palustre amarum of Hippocrates, that write of the diseases of cattell. @
2 Cordus called this Grasse Poley; Gesner, Gratiola minor; Camerarius, Hyssopoides: and Bauhine, Hyssopifolia.
3 This is not set forth by any but our Author, and it may fitly be named Lysimachia galericulataminor, as I haue formerly noted. @


 The Temperature.
Hedge Hyssope is hot and dry of temperature. And the first is onely vsed in medicine.


 The Vertues.
Who so taketh but one scruple of Gratiola brused, shall perceiue euidently his effectuall operation  and vertue, in purging mightely, and that in great abundance, waterish, grosse, and slimy humors. Conradus Gesnerus experimented this, and found it to be true, and so haue I my selfe, and many others.
Gratiola boiled, and the decoction drunke or eaten with any kinde of meate, in manner of a sallade, openeth the belly, and causeth notable loosenes, and to scoure freely, and by that meanes purgeth grosse flegme and cholericke humors.
Gratiola or Hedge Hyssope boiled in wine and giuen to drinke, helpeth feuers of what sort soeuer, and is most excellent in dropsies, and such like diseases proceeding of cold and watery causes.
The extraction giuen with the powder of cinamon and a little of the juice of Calamint, preuaileth  against tertian and quotidian feuers, set downe for most certaine by the learned Ioachimus Camerarius.




CHAP. 179. Of Lauander Spike.

 The Description.
1 LAuander Spike hath many stiffe branches of a wooddie substance, growing vp in the manner of a shrubbe, set with many long hoarie leaues, by couples for the most part; of a strong smell, and yet pleasant enough to such as doe loue strong sauours. The floures grow at the top of the branches spike fashion, of a blew colour. The roote is hard and wooddie.
2 The second differeth not from the precedent, but in the colour of the floures: For this Plant bringeth milke white floures; and the other blew, wherein especially consisteth the difference.
3 Wee haue in our English gardens a small kinde of Lauander, which is altogether lesser than the other, @ and the floures are of a more purple colour and grow in much lesse and shorter heads, yet haue they a farre more gratefull smell: the leaues are also lesse and whiter than those of the ordinarie sort. This did, and I thinke yet doth grow in great plentie, in his Maiesties priuate Garden at White hall. And this is called Spike, without addition, and sometimes Lauander Spike: and of this by distillation is made that vulgarly known and vsed oile which is termed Oleumspicae, or oile of Spike. @


1 Lavandula flore caeruleo. Common Lauander.


2 Lavandula flore albo. VVhite floured Lauander.




 The Place.
In Spaine and Languedocke in France, most of the mountaines and desert fields, are as it were

3 Lavendula minor, sive Spica. Lauander Spike.
couered ouer with Lauander. In these cold countries they are planted in gardens.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Lauander Spike is called in Latine (...), and Spica: in Spanish, Spigo, and Languda. The first is the male, and the second the semale. It is thought of some to be that sweet herbe Casia, whereof Virgil maketh mention in the second Eclog of his Bucolicks:

Tum Casia at que alijs intexens suavibus (...),
Mollia luteola pingit vacinia Caltha.


And then shee'l Spike and such sweet herbs infold
And paint the Iacinth with the Marygold.

And likewise in the fourth of his Georgicks, where hee intreateth of choosing of seats and places for Bees, and for the ordering thereof, he saith thus:

Haec circum Casiae virides, and (...) late
Serpilla, and grauiter spirantis copia Thymbrae
Floreat; etc. -- --, -- -- --


About them let fresh Lauander and store
Of wild Time with strong Sauorie to floure.

Yet there is another Casia called in shops Casia Lignea, as also Casia nigra, which is named Casia (...); and another a small shrubbie plant extant among the shrubs or hedge bushes, which some thinke to be the Casia Poetica, mentioned in the precedent verses.


 The Temperature.
Lauander is hot and drie, and that in the third degree, and is of a thin substance, consisting of many airie and spirituall parts. Therefore it is good to be giuen any way against the cold diseases of the head, and especially those which haue their originall or beginning not of abundance of humours, but chiefely of a cold quality onely.


 The Vertues.
The distilled water of Lauander smelt vnto, or the temples and forehead bathed therewith, is a  refreshing to them that haue the Catalepsie, a light Migram, and to them that haue the falling sicknesse, and that vse to swoune much. But when there is abundance of humours, especially mixt with bloud, it is not then to be vsed safely, neither is the composition to be taken which is made of distilled wine: in which such kinde of herbes, floures, or seeds, and certaine spices are infused or steeped, though most men do rashly and at aduenture giue them without making any difference at all For by vsing such hot things that fill and stuffe the head, both the disease is made greater, and the sicke man also brought into danger, especially when letting of bloud, or purging haue not gone before. Thus much by way of admonition, because that euery where some vnlearned Physitions and diuers rash and ouerbold Apothecaries, and other foolish women, do by and by giue such compositions, and others of the like kinde, not only to those that haue the Apoplexy; but also to those that are taken, or haue the Catuche or Catalepsis with a Feuer; to whom they can giue nothing worse, seeing those things do very much hurt, and oftentimes bring death it selfe.
The floures of Lauander picked from the knaps, I meane the blew part and not the huske, mixed  with Cinamon, Nutmegs, and Cloues, made into pouder, and giuen to drinke in the distilled water thereof, doth helpe the panting and passion of the heart, preuaileth against giddinesse, turning, or swimming of the braine, and members subiect to the palsie.
Conserue made of the floures with sugar, profiteth much against the diseases aforesaid, if the  quantitie of a beane be taken thereof in the morning fasting.
It profiteth them much that haue the palsie, if they bee washed with the distilled water of the 

floures or annointed with the oile made of the floures, and oile oliue, in such manner as oile (...) roses is, which shall be expressed in the treatise of Roses.



CHAP. 180. Of French Lauander, or Stickeadoue.

 The Description.
1 FRench Lauander hath a bodie like Lauander, short, and of a wooddie substance, but slenderer, beset with long narrow leaues, of a whitish colour, lesser than those of Lauander: it hath in the top bushy or spikie heads, well compact or thrust together; out of the which grow forth small purple floures, of a pleasant smell. The seede is small and blackish: the roote is hard and wooddie.
2 This iagged Sticadoue hath many small stiffe stalks of a wooddy substance; whereupon do grow iagged leaues in shape like vnto the leaues of Dill, but of an hoarie colour: on the top of the stalkes do grow spike floures of a blewish colour; and like vnto the common Lauander Spike: the root is likewise wooddie. @ This by Clusius who first described it, as also by Lobel, is called Lavendula multisido folio, or Lauander with the diuided leafe; the plant more resembling Lauander than Sticadoue. @
3 There is also a certaine kind e hereof, differing in smalnesse of the leaues onely, which are round about the edges nicked or toothed like a saw, resembling those of Lauander cotton. The root is likewise wooddie.
@ 4 There is also another kinde of Stoechas which differs from the first or ordinarie kind, in that the tops of the stalkes are not set with leaues almost close to the head as in the common kinde, but are naked and wholly without leaues: also at the tops of the spike or floures (as it were to recompence their defect below) there growe larger and fairer leaues than in the other sorts. The other parts of the plant differ not from the common Stoechas. @


@ 1 Stoechas sive spica hortulana. Sticadoue and Sticados.


2 Stoechas multisida. Iagged Sticados.





3 Stoechas folio serrato. Toothed Sticadoue.


@ 4 Stoechas summis cauliculis nudis. Naked Sticadoue.




 The Place.
These herbes do grow wilde in Spaine, in Languedocke in France, and the Islands called Stoechades ouer against Massilia: we haue them in our gardens, and keepe them with great diligence from the iniurie of our cold clymate.


 The Time.
They are sowne of seed in the end of Aprill, and couered in the Winter from the cold, or els set in pots or tubs with earth, and carried into houses.


 The Names.
The Apothecaries call the floure Stoecados: Dioscorides, (...): Galen, (...), by the dipthong in the first syllable: in Latine, Stoechas: in High Dutch, Stichas kraut: in Spanish, Thomani, and Cantuesso: in English, French Lauander, Steckado, Stickadoue, Cassidonie, and some simple people imitating the same name do call it Cast me downe.


 The Temperature.
French Lauander saith Galen is of temperature compounded of a little cold earthie substance, by reason whereof it bindeth: it is of force to take away obstructions, to extenuate or make thinne, to scoure and clense, and to strengthen not onely all the entrails, but the whole bodie also.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides teacheth that the decoction hereof doth helpe the diseases of the chest, and is with  good successe mixed with counterpoisons.
The later Physitions affirme, that Stoechas, and especially the floures of it, are most effectuall against  paines of the head, and all diseases thereof proceeding of cold causes, and therefore they be mixed in all compositions almost which are made against head-ache of long continuance, the Apoplexie, the falling sicknesse, and such like diseases.
The decoction of the husks and floures drunke, openeth the stoppings of the liuer, the lungs, the  milt, the mother, the bladder, and in one word all other inward parts, clensing and driuing forth all cuill and corrupthumours, and procuring vrine.




CHAP. 181. Of Flea-wort.

 The Description.
1 PSyllium, or the common Flea-wort hath many round and tender branches, (...) full of long and narrow leaues somewhat hairy. The top of the stalkes are garnished with sundrie round chaffie knops, beset with small yellow floures: which being ripe containe many little shining seeds, in proportion, colour, and bignesse like vnto sleas.
2 The second kinde of Psyllium or Flea-wort hath long and tough branches, of a wooddy substance like the precedent, but longer and harder, with leaues resembling the former, but much longer and narrower. The chaffie tuft which containeth the seed is like the other, but more like the eare of Phalaris, which is the eare of Alpisti, the Canarie seed which is meate for birds that come from the Islands of Canarie. The root hereof lasteth all the Winter, and likewise keepeth his greene leaues, whereof it tooke this addition of Sempervirens.


1 Psyllium siue pulicaris herba. Flea-wort.


2 Psyllium sempervirens Lobelij. Neuer dying Flea-wort.




 The Place.
These plants are not growing in our fields of England, as they doe in France and Spaine yet I haue them growing in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Flea-wort is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Pulicaria, and Herba Pulicaris: in shops, Psyllium: in English, Flea-wort; not because it killeth fleas, but because the seeds are like fleas: of some, Flea-bane, but vnproperly: in Spanish, Zargatona: in French, L'herbe aus pulces: in Dutch, Duyls vloye-cruyt.


 The Temperature.
Galen and Serapio record, that the seed of Psyllium (which is chiefely vsed in (...)) is cold in the second degree, and temperate in moisture and drinesse.



 The Vertues.
The seed of Flea-wort boyled in water or infused, and the decoction or infusion drunke, purgeth  downewards adust and cholericke humors, cooleth the heate of the inward parts, hot (...), burning agues, and such like diseases proceeding of heate, and quencheth drought and (...).
The seed stamped, and boyled in water to the forme of a plaister, and applied, taketh away all  swellings of the ioynts, especially if you boyle the same with vineger and oyle of Roses, and apply it as aforesaid.
The same applied in manner aforesaid vnto any burning heate, called S. Anthonies fire, or any  hot and violent impostume, asswageth the same, and bringeth it to ripenesse.
Some hold that the herbe strowed in the chamber where many fleas be, will driue them away;  for which cause it tooke the name Flea-wort: but I thinke it is rather because the seed doth resemble a flea so much, that it is hard to discerne the one from the other.


 The Danger.
Too much Flea-wort seed taken inwardly is very hurtful to mans nature: so that I wish you not to follow the minde of Galen and Dioscorides in this point, being a medicine rather bringing a maladie, than taking away the griefe: remembring the old prouerbe, A man may buy gold too (...); and the hony is too deare that is lickt from thornes.
@ Dioscorides nor Galen mention no vse of this inwardly; but on the contrarie, (...) in his sixth booke, which treats wholly of the curing and preuenting of poysons, mentions this in the tenth chapter for a poyson, and there sets downe the symptomes which it causes, and (...) you to the foregoing chapter for the remedies. @



CHAP. 185. Of Gloue Gillofloures.


1 Caryophyllus maximus multiplex. The great double Carnation.


2 Caryophyllus multiplex. The double Cloue Gillofloure.



 The Kindes.
THere are at this day vnder the name of Caryophyllus comprehended diuers and sundry sorts of plants, of such various colours, and also seuerall shapes, that a great and large volume would

not suffice to write of euery one at large in particular; considering how insinite they are, and (...) euery yeare euery clymate and countrey bringeth forth new sorts, such as haue not (...) bin written of; some whereof are called Carnations, others Cloue Gillofloures, some Sops in wine, some Pagiants, or Pagion colour, Horse-flesh, blunket, purple, white, double and single Gillofloures, as also a Gillofloure with yellow floures: the which a worshipfull Merchant of London Mr. Nicolas (...) procured from Poland, and gaue me thereof for my garden, which before that time was neuer seene nor heard of in these countries. Likewise there be sundry sorts of Pinkes comprehended vnder the same title, which shall be described in a seuerall chapter. There be vnder the name of Gillofloures also those floures which wee call Sweet-Iohns and Sweet-Williams. And first of the great Carnation and Cloue Gillefloure.
@ There are very many kindes both of Gillofloures, Pinkes, and the like, which differ very little in their roots, leaues, seeds, or manner of growing, though much in the colour, shape, and magnitude of their floures; wherof some are of one colour, other some of more; and of them some are striped, others spotted, etc. Now I (holding it a thing not so fit for me to insist vpon these accidentall differences of plants, hauing specifique differences enough to treat of) refer such as are addicted to these commendable and harmelesse delights to suruey the late and ost mentioned Worke of my friend Mr. Iohn Parkinson, who hath accurately and plentifully treated of these varieties; and if they require further satisfaction, let them at the time of the yeare repaire to the garden of Mistresse Tuggy (the wife of my late deceased friend Mr. Ralph Tuggy) in Westminster, which in the excellencie and varietie of these delights exceedeth all that I haue seene: as also (...) himselfe whilest he liued exceeded most, if not all of his time, in his care, industry, and skill in raising, encreasing, and preseruing of these plants and some others; whose losse therefore is the more to be lamented by all those that are louers of plants. I will onely giue you the figures of some three or foure more, whereof one is of the single one, which therefore some (...) a Pinke, though in mine opinion vnfitly, for that it is produced by the seed of most of the double ones, and is of different colour and shape as they are, varying from them onely in the singlenesse of the floures. @


@ Caryophyllus maior and minor, rubro and albo variegati. The white Carnation, and Pageant.


@ Caryophyllus purpureus profunde laciniatus. The blew, or deep purple Gillofloure.





 The Description.
1 THe great Carnation Gillow-floure hath a thicke round wooddy root, from which riseth vp many strong ioynted stalkes set with long greene leaues by couples: on the top of the stalkes do grow very faire floures of an excellent sweet smell, and pleasant Carnation colour, whereof it tooke his name.
2 The Cloue Gillofloure differeth not from the Carnation but in greatnesse as well of the floures as leaues. The floure is exceeding well knowne, as also the Pinks and other Gillofloures; wherefore I will not stand long vpon the description.


 Caryophyllus simplex maior. The single Gillofloure or Pinke.




 The Place.
These Gillofloures, especially the Carnations, are kept in pots from the extremity of our cold Winters. The Cloue Gillofloure endureth better the cold, and therefore is planted in gardens.


 The Time.
They flourish and floure most part of the Sommer.


 The Names.
The Cloue Gillofloure is called of the later Herbarists (...) flos, of the smell of cloues wherewith it is possessed: in Italian, Garofoli: in Spanish, Clauel: in French, Oeilletz: in low-Dutch, Ginoffelbloemen: in Latine of most, Ocellus Damascenus, Ocellus Barbaricus, and Barbarica: in English, Carnations, and Cloue Gillofloures. Of some it is called Vetonica, and Herba Tunica. The which (...) Gordonius hath set downe for Dioscorides his Polemonium.
That worthy Herbarist and learned Physition of late memorie Mr. Doctor Turner maketh Caryophyllus to be Cantabrica; which Pliny, lib. 23. cap. 8. writeth to haue beene found out in Spaine about Augustus time, and that by those of Biscay.
Iohannes Ruellius saith, That the Gillofloure was vnknowne to the old writers: whose iudgment is very good, especially because this herbe is not like to that of Vetonica or Cantabrica. It is maruell, saith he, that such a famous floure, so pleasant and sweet, should lie hid, and not be made knowne by the old Writers: which may be thought not inferiour to the rose in beauty, smell, and varietie.


 The Temperature.
The Gillofloure with the leaues and roots for the most part are temperate in heate and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
The conserue made of the floures of the Cloue Gillofloure and sugar, is exceeding cordial, and  wonderfully aboue measure doth comfort the heart, being eaten now and then.
It preuaileth against hot pestilentiall feuers, expelleth the poyson and furie of the disease, and  greatly comforteth the sicke, as hath of late beene found out by a learned Gentleman of Lee in Essex, called Mr. Rich.



CHAP. 183. Of Pinks, or wilde Gillofloures.

 The Description.
1 THe double purple Pinke hath many grassie leaues set vpon small ioynted stalkes by couples, one opposite against another, whereupon doe grow pleasant double purple

1 Caryophyllus syluestris simplex. Single purple Pinks.2 Caryophyllus syluestris simplex, suaue rubens. Single red Pinks.3 Caryophyllus plumarius albus. White jagged Pinks.@ Caryophyllus plumarius albus odoratior. Large white jagged Pinks.
floures of a most fragrant smell, not inferiour to the Cloue Gillofloure. The root is small and wooddy.
@ There is also a single one of this kinde, whose figure I here giue you in stead of the double one of our Author. @
2 The single red Pinke hath likewise many small grassie leaues lesser than the former: The floures grow at the top of the small stalkes single, and of a sweet bright red colour.
3 The white iagged Pinke hath a tough wooddy root: from which rise immediately many grassie leaues, set vpon a small stalke full of ioynts or knees, at euery ioynt two one against another euen to the top; whereupon do grow faire double purple floures of a sweet and spicie smell, consisting of fiue leaues, sometimes more, cut or deepely iagged on the edges, resembling a feather: whereupon I gaue it the name Plumarius, or feathered Pinke. The seed is soft, blackish, and like vnto Onion seed.
@ There is another varietic of this, with the leaues somewhat larger and greener than the last mentioned: the floures also are somewhat bigger, more cut in or diuided, and of a much sweeter smell. @
4 This purple coloured Pinke is very like the precedent in stalkes, roots, and leaues. The floures grow at the top of the branches lesser than the last described, and not so deepely iagged; of a purple colour tending to blewnesse, wherein consisteth the difference.
There be diuers sorts of Pinks more, whereof to write particularly were to small purpose, considering they are all well knowne to the most, if not to all. Therefore these few shall serue at this time for those that we do keepe in our gardens: notwithstanding I thinke it conuenient to place these wilder sorts in this same chapter, considering their nature and vertues doe agree, and few or none of them be vsed in physicke, besides their neerenesse in kindred and neighbourhood.


4 Caryophyllus plumarius purpureus. Purple jagged Pinkes.


5 Cariophyllus plumarius syluestris albus. Whitewilde jagged Pinkes.


5 This wilde iagged Pinke hath leaues, stalkes, and floures like vnto the white iagged Pinke of the garden, but altogether lesser, wherein they especially differ.
6 The purple mountaine or wilde Pinke hath many small grassie leaues: among which rise vp slender stalks set with the like leaues, but lesser; on the top whereof do grow small purple floures, (...) finely with white or else yellowish spots, and much lesser than any of the others before described.



6 Caryophyllus montanus purpureus. Wilde Purple iagged Pinke.


7 Caryophyllus montanus Clusij. Clusius mountaine Pinke.


@ 8 Caryophyllus pumilio Alpinus. Dwarfe Mountaine Pinke.


9 Caryophyllus coeruleus siue Aphyllanthos. Leafeles Pinke, or rushy Pinke.


7 The mountaine Pinke of Clusius his description hath many leaues growing into a tuft like vnto those of Thrift, and of a bitter taste: amongst which rise vp small slender foot-stalkes, rather than stalkes or stems themselues, of the height of two inches; whereupon do grow such leaues as those that were next the ground, but lesser, set by couples one opposite to another: at the top of each small foot-stalke doth stand one red floure without smell, consisting of fiue little leaues set in a rough hairy huske or hose fiue cornered, of a greenish colour tending to purple. The root is tough and thicke, casting abroad many shoots, whereby it greatly encreaseth.
@ 8 This for his stature may iustly take the next place; for the stalke is some inch high, set with little sharpe pointed greene grassie leaues: the floures which grow vpon these stalks are composed of fiue little flesh-coloured leaues a little diuided in their vpper parts: the seed is contained in blacke shining heads, and it is small and reddish, and shaped somwhat like the fashion of a kidney, whereby it comes neerer to the Lychnides, than to the Caryophylli or Pinkes. The root is long, blacke, and much spreading, whereby this little plant couers the ground a good space together like as a mosse, and makes a curious shew when the floures are blowne, which is commonly in Iune. It



10 Caryophyllus montanus albus. White mountaine Pinke.


@ 11 Caryophyllus pratensis. Deptford Pinke.


12 Caryophyllus Virgineus. Maidenly Pinkes.


@ 13 Caryophyllus montanus humilis latifolius. Small mountaine broad leaued Pink.



@ 14 Caryophyllus montanus albus. White mountaine Pinke.15 Caryophyllus Holostius. Wilde Sea Pinke.16 (...) (...) (...). Broad leased wilde Pinke.@ 17 Caryophyl. humilis flor. cand (...). White Campion Pinke.
It growes naturally on diuers places of the Alpes. Gesner called it Muscus storidus: Pena, Ocimoides Muscosus: and Clusius, Caryophyllus pumilio Alpinus 9. @
9 This leafe-lesse Pinke (as the Greeke word doth seeme to import) hath many small rushy or benty leaues rising immediately from a tough rushy root: among which rise vp stalkes like vnto rushes, of a span high, without any ioynt at all, but smooth and plaine; on the top (...) of groweth a small floure of a blewish or sky colour, consisting of foure little leaues somewhat iagged in the edges, not vnlike those of wilde flax. The whole plant is very bitter, and of a hot taste.
10 The white mountaine Pinke hath a great thicke and wooddy root; from the which immediately rise vp very many small and narrow leaues, finer and lesser than grasse, not vnlike to the smallest rush: among which rise vp little tender stalkes, ioynted or kneed by certaine distances, set with the like leaues euen to the top by couples, one opposite against another: at the top whereof grow pretty sweet smelling floures composed of fiue little white leaues. The seed is small and blackish.
11 There is a wilde creeping Pinke which groweth in our pastures neere about London, and in other places, but especially in the great field next to Detford, by the path side as you goe from Redriffe to Greenwich; which hath many small tender leaues shorter than any of the other wilde Pinkes, set vpon little tender stalkes which lie flat vpon the ground, taking hold of the same in sundry places, whereby it greatly encreaseth; whereupon grow little reddish floures. The (...) is small, tough, and long lasting.
12 This Virgin-like Pinke is like vnto the rest of the garden Pinkes in stalkes, leaues, and roots. The floures are of a blush colour, whereof it tooke his name, which sheweth the difference from the other.
@ This whose figure I giue you for that small leaued one that was formerly in this place, hath slender stalkes some spanne high, set with two long narrow hard sharpe pointed leaues at each ioynt. The floures (which grow commonly but one on a stalke) consist of fiue little snipt leaues of a light purple colour, rough, and deeper coloured about their middles, with two little crooked threds or hornes: the seed is chaffie and blacke: the root long, and creeping: it floures in Aprill and May, and is the Flos caryophylleus syluestris:. of Clusius. @
13 Clusius mentions also another whose (...) are some three inches high: the leaues broader, softer, and greener than the former: the (...) also that grow vpon the top of the stalkes are larger than the former, and also consist of fiue leaues of a deeper purple than the former, with longer haires finely intermixt with purple and white.
@ 14 This from a hard wooddy root sends vp such stalks as the former, which are set at the ioynts with short narrower and darker greene leaues: the floures are white, sweet-smelling, consisting of fiue much diuided leaues, hauing two threds or hornes in their middle. It floures in May, and it is the Caryophyllus syluestr is quintus of Clusius. @
15 This wilde sea Pinke hath diuers small tender weake branches trailing vpon the ground, whereupon are set leaues like those of our smallest garden Pinke, but of an old hoary colour tending to whitenesse, as are most of the sea Plants. The floures grow at the top of the stalks in shape like those of Stitch-wort, and of a whitish colour. Neither the seeds nor seed-vessels haue I as yet obserued: the root is tough and single.
16 There is another of these wilde Pinkes which is found growing in ploughed fields, yet in such as are neere vnto the sea: it hath very many leaues spred vpon the ground of a fresh green colour; amongst which rise vp tender stalkes of the height of a foot, set with the like leaues by couples at certaine distances. The floures grow at the top many together, in manner of the SweetWilliam, of a white, or sometimes a light red colour. The root is small, tough, and long lasting. @ This is a kinde of Gramen Leucanthemum, or Holosteum (...), described in the 38. Chapter of the first booke.
17 Clusius makes this a Lychnis: and Lobel (whom I here follow) a Pinke, calling it Caryophyllus minimus humil is alter exoticus flore candido amaeno. This from creeping roots sendeth vp euery yeare many branches some handfull and better high, set with two long narrow greene leaues at each ioynt: the floures which grow on the tops of the branches are of a pleasing white colour, composed of fiue iagged leaues without smell. After the floures are gone there succeed round blunt pointed vessels, containing a small blackish flat seed like to that of the other Pinks. This hath a viscous or clammy iuyce like as that of the Muscipula's or Catch-flies. Clusius makes this his Lychnis syluestris decima. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Pinkes do grow for the most part in gardens, and likewise many other sorts, the which were ouer long to write of particularly. Those that be wilde doe grow vpon mountaines, stony rockes, and desart places. The rest are specified in their descriptions.



 The Time.
They floure with the Cloue Gillofloure, and often after.


 The Names.
The Pinke is called of Pliny and Turner, Cantabrica and Stactice: of Fuchsius and Dodonaeus, Vetonica altera, and Vetonica altilis: of Lobelius and Fuchsius, Superba: in French, Gyrofslees, Oeilletz, and Violettes herbues: in Italian, Garofoli, and Garoni: in Spanish, Clauis: in English, Pinkes, and Small Honesties.


 The Temperature.
The temperature of the Pinkes is referred vnto the Cloue Gillofloures.


 The Vertues.
These are not vsed in Physicke, but esteemed for their vse in Garlands and Nosegaies. They  are good to be put into Vineger, to giue it a pleasant taste and gallant colour, as Ruellius writeth. Fuchsius saith, that the roots are commended against the infection of the plague; and that the iuice thereof is profitable to waste away the stone, and to driue it forth: and likewise to cure them that haue the falling sicknesse.



CHAP. 184. Of Sweet Saint Johns and Sweet Williams.


1 Armeria alba. White Iohns.


2 Armeria alba and rubra multiplex. Double white and red Iohns.



 The Description.
1 SWeet Iohns haue round stalkes as haue the Gillofloures, (whereof they are a kinde) a cub it high, whereupon do grow long leaues broader than those of the Gillofloure, of a greene grassie colour: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes, very like vnto Pinks, of a perfect white colour.
2 The second differeth not from the other but in that, that this plant hath red floures, and the otherwhite.

We haue in our London gardens a kinde hereof bearing most fine and pleasant white floures, spotted very confusedly with reddish spots, which setteth forth the beauty thereof; and hath bin taken of some (but not rightly) to be the plant called of the later Writers Superba Austriaca, or the Pride of Austria. @ It is now commonly in most places called London-Pride. @
@ Wee haue likewise of the same kinde bringing forth most double floures, and these either very white, or else of a deepe purple colour.


3 Armeria rubra latifolia. Broad leaued Sweet-Williams.


4 Armeria suaue rubens. Narrow leaued Sweet-Williams.


3 The great Sweet-William hath round ioynted stalkes thicke and fat, somewhat reddish about the lower ioynts, a cub it high, with long broad and ribbed leaues like as those of the Plantaine, of a greene grassie colour. The floures at the top of the stalkes are very like to the small Pinkes, many ioyned together in one tuft or spoky vmbel, of a deepe red colour: the root is thick and wooddy.
4 The narrow leaued Sweet-William groweth vp to the height of two cubits, very wel resembling the former, but lesser, and the leaues narrower: the floures are of a bright red colour, with many small sharpe pointed grassie leaues standing vp amongst them, wherein especially consisteth the difference.
@ 5 This little fruitfull Pinke (whose figure our Author formerly gaue in the first place of the next chapter saue one) hath a small whitish wooddy root, which sends forth little stalks some handfull and better high; and these at each ioynt are set with two thinne narrow little leaues: at the top of each of these stalkes growes a single skinny smooth shining huske, out of which (as in other Pinkes) growes not one onely floure, but many, one still comming out as another withers; so that oft times out of one head come seuen, eight, or nine floures one after another, which as they fade leaue behinde them a little pod containing small blacke flattish seed. The floure is of a light red, and very small, standing with the head somewhat far out of the hose or huske. @


 The Place.
These plants are kept and maintained in gardens more for to please the eye, than either the nose or belly.



@ 5 Armeria prolifera, Lob. Childing sweet Williams.




 The Time.
They flourish and bring forth their floures in April and May, somewhat before the Gillofloures, and after beare their floures the whole Sommer.


 The Names.
The sweet Iohn, and also the sweet William are both comprehended vnder one title, that is to say, Armeria of some, Superba, and Caryophyllus syluestris: of some Herbarists, Vetonica agrestis, or Syluestris: of some, Herba tunica: but it doth no more agree herewith than the Cloue Gillofloure doth with Vetonica altera, or Polemonium. in French, Armoires: hereupon Ruellius nameth them (...) Flores: in Dutch, (...): as though you should say, a bundell or cluster, for in their vulgar tongue bundles of floures or nose gaies they call (...): doubt lesse they are wild kindes of Gillofloures: In English the first two are called Sweet Iohns; and the two last, Sweet Williams, Tolmeiners, and London Tufts.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These plants are not vsed either in meat or medicine, but esteemed for their beauty to decke vp gardens, the bosomes of the beautifull, garlands and crownes for pleasure.



CHAP. 185. Of Crow floures, or Wilde Williams.

 The Description.
1 BEsides these kindes of Pinkes before described, there is a certaine other kinde, either of the Gillofloures or else of the Sweete Williams, altogether and euery where wilde, which of some hath beene inserted amongst the wilde Campions; of others taken to be the true Flos Cuculi. Notwithstanding I am not of any of their mindes, but doe hold it for neither: but rather a degenerate kinde of wilde Gillofloure. The Cuckow floure I haue comprehended vnder the title of Sisimbrium: Englished, Ladies smocks; which plant hath been generally taken for Flos Cuculi. It hath stalks of a span or a foot high, wherupon the leaues do stand by couples out of euery ioint; they are small and bluntly pointed, very rough and hairy. The floures are placed on the tops of the stalkes, many in one tuft, finely and curiously snipt in the edges, lesser than those of Gillofloures, very well resembling the Sweet VVilliam (whereof no doubt it is a kinde) of a light red or Scarlet colour.
2 This female Crow-floure differeth not from the male, sauing that this plant is lesser, and the floures more finely iagged like the feathered Pinke, whereof it is a kinde.
3 Of these Crow-floures we haue in our gardens one that doth not differ from the former of the field, sauing that the plant of the garden hath many faire red double floures, and those of the field single.


 The Place.
These grow all about in Medowes and pastures, and dankish places.



1 Armoraria pratensis mas. The male Crow floure.


@ 3 Armoraria pratensis flore pleno. The double Crow-floure.




 The Time.
They begin to floure in May, and end in Iune.


 The Names.
The Crow floure is called in Latine Armoraria syluestris, and Armoracia: of some, Flos Cuculi, but not properly; it is also called Tunix: of some, Armeria, Armerius flos primus of Dodon. and likewise Caryophillus minor syluestris folijs latioribus: in Dutch, (...): that is to say, Cornicis flores: in French, Cuydrelles. In English, Crow floures, wilde Williams, marsh Gillofloures, and Cockow Gillofloures.


The Temperatures and Vertues.
These are not vsed either in medicine or in nourishment: but they serue for garlands and crowns, and to decke vp gardens.



CHAP. 186. Of Catch-Flie, or Limewoort.

 The Description.
1 THis plant, called Viscaria, or Lymewoort, is likewise of the stocke and kindred of the wilde Gillofloures: notwithstanding Clusius hath ioined it with the wilde Campions, making it a kinde thereof, but not (...). Lobel among the Sweet Williams, wherof doubtlesse it is a kinde. It hath many leaues rising immediately from the root like those of the Crow floure, or wilde sweet VVilliam: among which rise vp many reddish stalkes iointed or kneed at certaine spaces, set with leaues by couples one against another: at the top whereof come foorth prettie red floures which being past there commeth in place small blackish seed. The root is large with many fibres. The whole plant, as well leaues and stalkes, as also the floures, are here and there couered ouer with a most thick and clammie matter like vnto Bird-lime, which if you take in your

Our Authour certainly intended in this first place to figure and describe the Muscipula or Viscaria of Lobel, but the figure he here (...) in the first place (...) that plant which I haue giuen you in the last Chapter saue one by the name of (...) (...) (...). The figure which belonged to this place was in the (...) of wilde Campions, vnder the title of (...) (...) (...).

 1 Viscaria, siue Muscipula. Limewoort.
2 Muscipula Lobelij. Catch Flie.
@ 3 Muscipula angustifolia. Narrow leaued Catch-flie.
hands, the sliminesse is such, that your fingers will stick and cleaue together, as if your hand touched Bird-lime: and furthermore, if flies do light vpon the same, they will be so intangled with the liminesse, that they cannot flie away; insomuch that in some hot day or other you shal see many flies caught by that means. VVhereupon I haue called it Catch Flie, or Limewoort. @ This is Lychnissyl. 3. of Clusius; Viscago of Camerarius; and Muscipula siue Viscaria of Lobel. @
2 This plant hath many broad leaues like the great sweet VVilliam, but shorter (whereof it is likewise a kinde) set vpon a stiffe and brittle stalk; from the bosom of which leaues, spring forth smaller branches, clothed with the like leaues, but much lesser. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes many together tuft fashion, of a bright red colour. The whole plant is also possessed with the like liminesse as the other is, but lesse in quantitie. @ This is Lychissyl. 1. of Clusius; and Muscipula sive Armoraria altera of Lobel: Dodonaeus calls it Armerius flos 3. in his first Edition: but makes it his fourth in the last Edition in Folio. @
 @ 3. There is also belonging vnto this kindred another plant which Clusius makes his Lychnissyl. 4. It comes vp commonly with one stalke a foot or more high, of a green purplish

colour, with two long sharpe pointed thicke greene leaues, set at each ioint: from the middle to the top of the stalke grow little branches, which vpon pretty long stalkes carry floures consisting of fiue little round leaues, yet diuided at the tops; they are of a faire incarnate colour, with a deepe purple ring in their middles, without smell: after the floures are past succeede skinny and hard heads, smaller towards the stalkes, and thicker aboue; and in these are contained verie small darke red seeds. The root is thicke and blacke, with many fibers, putting vp new shootes and stalks after the first yeare, and not dying euery yeare like as the two last described.


 The Place.
These plants do grow wilde in the fields in the VVest parts of England, among the corne: wee haue them in our London gardens rather for toyes of pleasure, than any vertues they are possessed with, that hath as yet been knowne.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish most part of the Sommer.


 The Names.
Catch Flies hath beene taken for Behen, commonly so called, for the likenesse that it hath with Behen rubente flore: or with Behen that hath the red floure, called of some Valeriana rubra, or red Valerian; for it is something like vnto it in iointed stalkes and leaues, but more like in colour: of Lobel, Muscipula and Viscaria: of Dodon. Armerius flos tertius: of Clusius, Lychnis syluestris, Silene Theophrasti, and Behen rubrum Salamanticum: in English, Catch Flie, and Limewoort.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The nature and vertues of these wilde VVilliams are referred to the Wilde Pinkes and Gillofloures.



CHAP. 187. Of Thrift, or our Ladies Cushion.


1 Caryophyllus marinus minimus (...). Thrift or Sea Gillofloure.


2 Caryophyllus Mediterraneus. Leuant Thrift, or Sea Gillosloure.




 The Description.
1 THrift is also a kind of Gillofloure, by Dodonaeus reckoned among grasses, which brings forth leaues in great tufts, thick thrust together, smaller, slenderer, and shorter than grasse: among which rise vp small tender stalkes of a spanne high, naked and without leaues; on the tops wherupon stand little floures in a spokie tuft, of a white colour tending to purple. The root is long and threddie.
The other kinde of Thrift, found vpon the mountaines neere vnto the Leuant or Mediterrancan sea, differeth not from the precedent in leaues, stalkes, or floures, but yet is altogether greater, and the leaues are broader.


 The Place.
2 The first is found in the most salt marshes in England, as also in Gardens, for the bordering vp of beds and bankes, for the which it serueth very fitly. The other is a stranger in these Northerne Regions.


 The Time.
They floure from May, till Sommer be far spent.


 The Names:
Thrift is called in Latine Gramen Polyanthemum, of the multitude of the floures: of some, Gramen marinum: of Lobel, Caryophyllus Marinus: In English, Thrist, Sea-grasse, and our Ladies Cushion.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their vse in Physicke as yet is not knowne, neither doth any seeke into the Nature thereof, but esteeme them onely for their beautie and pleasure.



CHAP. 188. Of the Saxifrage of the Antients, and of that great one of Matthiolus, with that of Pena and Lobel.
@ THis name Saxifraga or Saxifrage, hath of late been imposed vpon sundry plants farre different in their shapes, places of growing, and temperature, but all agreeing in this one facultie of expelling or driuing the stone out of the Kidneies, though not all by one meane or manner of operation. But because almost all of them are described in their fit places by our Authour, I will not insist vpon them: yet I thinke it not amisse a little to enquire, whether any Saxifraga were knowne to the Antients; and if knowne, to what kinde it may probably be referred. Of the Antients, Dioscorides, Paulus (...), and Apuleius, seeme to mention one Saxifraga, but Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 21. by the way, shewes that some called Adianthum by the name of Saxifragum: but this is nothing to the former; wherefore I will not insist vpon it, but returne to examine that the other three haue written thereof. Diosc. lib. 4. betweene the Chapters of Tribulus and Limonium, to wit, in the seuenteenth place hath deliuered the Historie of this plant, both in the Greeke Edition of Aldus Manutius, as also in that of Marcellus (...), yet the whole Chapter in the Paris Edition, 1549, is reiected and put amongst the Notha. The beginning thereof (against which they chiefely except) is thus : (...) (i) Sarxiphagon, (...) vero Sarxifrangon, alij vero Empetron, Romani, Sarxifranga. The first exception of Marcellus Virgilius against this Chapter is Peregrina Graecis and aliena vox Saxifraga est, etc. The second is, Quod (...) feliciores in componendis ad certiorem rei (...) signisicationem vocibus Graeci, quam Latini, etc. The third is, Solam in toto hoc opere primam, and a principio propositam audiri Romanam vocem, tamque inopes in appellanda hac herba fuisse Graecos, vt nisi Romana voce eam indicassent, nulla sibi futura esset. These are the arguments which he vses against this Chapter; yet reiects it not, but by this means hath occasioned others without shewing any reason, to doe it: Now I will set downe what my opinion is concerning this matter, and so leaue it to the iudgement of the Learned. I grant Marcellus, that Saxifraga is a strange and no Greeke word; but the name in the title, and first in the Chapter both in his owne Edition and all the Greeke Editions that I haue yet seene is (...), which none, no not he himselfe can denie to haue a Greeke originall (...) of eating the flesh: yet because there is no such facultie as this denomination imports attributed thereto by the Authour, therefore hee will not allow it to be so. But you must note that many names are imposed by the vulgar, and the reason of the name not alwais explained by those that (...) written of them, as in this same Author (...) be

seene in the Chapters of Catanance, Cynosbatos, Hemerocallis, Crataeogonan, and diuers others, which are or seeme to be significant, and to import something by their name; yet he saith nothing thereof. It may be that which they would expresse by the name, was, that the hearbe had so piercing a facultie that it would eat into the very flesh. The second and third Argument both are answered, if this first word be Greeke, as I haue alreadie shewed it to be, and there are not many words in Greeke that more frequently enter into such composition than (...): as Pamphagos, Polyphagos, Opsiphagos, and many other may shew. Moreouer, it hath beene obsurd from Dioscorides, or any else how simple soeuer they were, if they had knowne the first word to haue beene Latine and Saxifraga, to say againe presently after that the Romanes called it Saxifranga, or Saxifraga, for so it should be, and not Sarxifranga: but I feare that the affinitie of sounds more than of signification hath caused this confusion, especially in the middle times betweene vs and Dioscorides, when learning was at a very low (...). The chiefe reasons that induce mee to thinke this Chapter worthie to keepe his former place in Dioscorides, are these: First, the generall consent of all both Greeke and Latine copies (as Marcellus saith) how antient soeuer they be. Secondly, the mention of this herbe for the same effect in some Greeke Authours of a reasonable good antiquitie; for Paulus Aegineta testifieth that (...). Then Trallianus amongst other things in a Conditum Nephriticum mentions (...): but Nonus a later Greeke calls it (...): so that it is euident they knew and vsed some simple medicine that had both the names of Sarxiphagon and Saxiphragos, which is the Latine Saxifraga. Now seeing they had, and knew such a simple medicine, it remaines we enquire after the shape and figure thereof. Dioscorides describes it to be a shrubby plant, growing vpon rockes and craggie places, like (...) Epithymum: boiled in wine and drunke, it hath the faculty to helpe the (...) and Hicket; it also breakes the stone in the bladder and prouokes vrine. This word Epithymum is not found in most copies, but a space left for some word or words that were wanting: But Marcellus saith, he found it exprest in a booke which was Omnium (...) and probatissimus: and Hermolaus Barbarus saith, Veterem in Dioscoride picturam huius (...) vidi, non plus folijs quam cirris minutis per ramos ex intervallo conditis, nec frequentibus, in cacumine surculorum flocci seu arentes potius quam flosculi, subrubida radice non sine fibris. A figure reasonable well agreeing with this description of Hermolaus, I lately receiued from my friend Mr. Goodyer, who writ to me that he had sought to know what Saxifraga (to wit, of the Antients) should be; and finding no antient Authour that had described it to any purpose, he sought (...); which word (...) (saith he) is the printed title: my Manuscript acknowledgeth no Authour but Apoliensis Plato; there is no description neither, but the Manuscript hath a figure which I haue drawne and sent you, and all that (...) that hee hath written of it, I should be glad to haue this figure cut and added to your worke, together with his words, because there hath beene so little written thereof by the Antients. This his request I thought fit to performe, and haue (for the better satisfaction of the Reader) as you see made a further enquirie thereof: wherefore I will onely adde this, that the plants here described, and the Alsine Saxifraga of Colum. together with the two Chickweed Saxifrages formerly described Chap. 171. come neerest of any that I know to the figure and deliniation of this of the Antients.


Nomen istius (...), Saxifraga.



Icon and descriptio ex Manuscripto vetutissimo.

Quidam dicunt eam Scolopendriam, alij Scoliomos, alij Vitis canum, quidam vero Brucos. Itali Saxifragam. Egyptij Peperem, alij Lamprocam eam nominant. Nascitur enim in Montibus and locis saxosis.



Vna cura ipsius ad calculos expellendos

Herbam istam Saxifragam contusam calculoso potum dabis in vino. Ipsevero si febricitauerit cum aqua calida, tam presens (...) ab expert is traditum, vt eodem die perfect is (...) calculis ad (...) vsque producit.

1 This first little herb, saith Camerarius, hath been called Saxifraga (...), not from the greatnesse of his growth, but of his faculties: The stalke is wooddie,

writhen, and below sometimes as thicke as ones little finger, from which grow many small and hard branches, and those slender ones; the leaues are little, long and sharpe pointed: the floures are white and small, and grow in cups, which are finely snipt at the top in manner of a coronet, wherein is contained a small red seed, the rootes grow so fast impact in the Rockes, that it cannot by any meanes be got out. It grows vpon diuers rocks in Italy and Germany; and it is the Saxifraga magna of Matthiolus, and the Italians.


@ 1 Saxifraga magna Matthioli. Matthiolus his great Saxifrage.


@ 2 Saxifraga Antiquorum, Lob. Saxifrage of the Antients, according to Lob.


2 Pena and Lobel say, this growes in great plenty in Italie, in Dolphonie in (...), and England, hauing many small slender branches a foot high, intricately wrapped within one another, where they are set with many grassie ioynts: the roote is small and white with some few fibers: the leaues stand by couples at the ioynts, beeing long and narrow; of the bignesse and similitude of those of the wilde Pinks, or Rocke Sauorie: vpon each wooddie, small, capillarie, straight, and creeping little branch, growes one little floure somewhat like a Pinke, beeing finely (...) about the edges: and in the head is contained (...) small reddish seed. The foresaid Authours call this Saxifragra, sive Saxifraga Antiquorum.


The Vertues.
1 Matthiolus saith, that Calceolarius of Verona mightily commended this plant to him, for the  singular qualitie it had to expell or driue forth the stone of the Kidneies, and that I might in verie deed beleeue it, (...) sent me abundance of stones, whereof diuers exceeded the bignesse of a beane, which were voided by drinking of this plant by one onely Citizen of Verona, called Hieronymo de Tortis; but this made me most to wonder, for that there were some stones amongst them, that seemed rather to come out of the Bladder, than forth of the Kidneies.
2 This (say the Authours of the Aduers.) as it is the latest receiued in vse and name for Saxifrage, so is it the better and truer, especially so thought by the Italians, both for the highly commended facultie, as also for the neere affinitie which it seemes to haue with Epithymum, etc. @




CHAP. 189. Of Sneesewoort.

 The Description.
1 THe small Sneese-woort hath many round and brittle branches, beset with long and narrow leaues, (...) about the edges like a saw; at the tops of the stalks do grow small single floures like the wilde field Daisie. The root is tender and full of strings, creeping far abroad in the earth, and in short time occupieth very much ground: the whole plant is sharpe, biting the tongue and mouth like Pellitorie of Spaine, for which cause some haue called it wilde Pellitorie. The smell of this plant procureth sneesing, whereof it tooke the name (...), that is the herbe which doth procure sneesing, or Neesewoort.
2 Double floured Sneesewoort, or Ptarmica, is like vnto the former in leaues, stalks, and roots, so that vnlesse you behold the floure, you cannot discerne the one from the other, and it is exceeding white, and double like vnto double Fetherfew. This plant is of great beautie, and if it be cut downe in the time of his flouring, there will come within a month after a supplie or crop of floures fairer than the rest.


1 Ptarmica. Sneesewoort.


2 Ptarmica duplici flore. Double floured Sneeswoort.


3 There is also another kind hereof, of exceeding great beauty, hauing long leaues somewhat narrow like those of (...) tree: the stalks are of a cubit high, on the top whereof doe growe verie beautifull floures of the bignes of a small single Marygold, consisting of fifteene or sixteene large leaues, of a bright shining red colour tending to purple; set about a ball of thrummie substance, such as is in the middle of the Daisie, in manner of a pale; which floures stand in scalie knops like those of Knapweed, or Matfellon. The root is straight, and thrusteth deepe into the ground.
@ (...) Imperati; an (...) (...) species Clus. Cur. post. p. 32.
4 This riseth vp with a small hard tough cornered whitish woolly stalke, diuided into many

branches, and those againe diuided into other branches like those of Cyanus about two foot high, wherein grow long narrow whitish Cottonie leaues out of order, of a bitter taste, whiter below than aboue, of the colour of the leaues of Wormwood, hauing but one rib or sinew and that in the middle of the leafe, and commonly turne downewards: on the top of each slender branch groweth one small scalie head or knap, like that of Cyanus, which bringeth forth a pale purple floure without smell, containing sixe, seuen, eight, or more, smal hard drie sharp pointed leaues: in the middle whereof groweth many stiffe chiues, their tops being of the colour of the floures: these floures fall not away till the whole hearbe perisheth, but change into a rustie colour: amongst those chiues grow long flat blackish seed, with a little beard at the top. The root is small, whitish, hard and threddie, and perisheth when the seed is ripe, and soone springeth vp by the fall of the seede, and remaineth greene all the Winter, and at the Spring sendeth foorth a stalke as aforesaid. The (...) touched or rubbed (...) forth a pleasant (...) smell. Iuly 26. 1620. Iohn Goodyer. @


3 Ptarmica Austriaca. Sneesewoort of Austrich.




 The Place.
The first kinde of Sneesewoort grows wilde in drie and barren pastures in many places, and in the three great fieldes next adioyning to a Village neere London called Kentish towne, and in sundry fields in Kent about Southfleet.
@ The rest grow onely in gardens.


 The Time.
They floure from May to the end of September.


 The Names.
Sneesewoort is called of some Ptarmica, and Pyrethrum syluestre, and also Draco syluestris, or Tarcon syluestris: of most, Sternutamentoria, taken from his effect, because it procureth sneesing: of Tragus and Tabern. Tanacetum acutum album: in English, wilde Pellitorie, taking that name from his sharp and biting taste; but it is altogether vnlike in proportion to the true Pellitorie of Spaine.


 The Nature.
They are hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The iuice mixed with Vineger and holden in the mouth (...) much the paine of the Toothache.
The herbe chewed and holden in the mouth, bringeth mightily from the braine slimie flegme, like Pellitorie of Spaine, and therefore from time to time it hath beene taken for a wilde kinde thereof.



CHAP. 190. Of Hares Eares.

 The Description.
1 NArrow leafed Hares Eares is called in Greeke (...), and is reputed of the (...) writers to be Bupleurum Plinij, from which the name or figure disagreeth not: it (...) the long narrow and grassie leaues of Lachryma Iob, or Gladiolus, streaked or balked as it were with sundry stiffe streakes or ribbes running along euery leafe, as (...) speaketh of

his Heptapleuram. The stalkes are a cubite and a halfe long, full of knots or knees, very rough or stiffe, spreading themselues into many branches: at the tops whereof grow yellow floures in round tusts or heads like Dill. The root is as big as a finger, and blacke like Peucedanum, whereunto it is like in taste, smell, and resemblance of seede, which doth the more persuade me that it is the true (...), whereof I now speake, and by the authoritie of Nicander and Pliny confirmed.


1 Bupleurum angustifolium Monspeliense. Narrow leafed Hares Eare.


2 Bupleurum latifolium Monspeliense. Broad leafed Hares Eare.


2 The second kinde called broad leafed Hares Eares, in figure, tuftes, and floures, is the very same with the former kinde, saue that the leaues are broader and stiffer, and more hollow in the midst: which hath caused me to call it Hares Eares, hauing in the middle of the leafe some hollownesse resembling the same. The root is greater and of a wooddie substance.


 The Place.
They grow among Oken woods in stony and hard grounds in Narbon. I haue found them growing naturally among the bushes vpon Bieston castle in Cheshire.


 The Time.
They floure and bring sorth their seed in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Hares Eare is called in Latine Bupleurum: in Greeke, (...): the Apothecaries of Montpelier in France do call it Auricula leporis, and therefore I terme it in English Hares-Eare: Valcrius Cordus nameth it Isophyllon, but whence he had that name, it is not knowne.


 The Temperature.
They are temperate in heat and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
Hippocrates hath commended it in meats; for sallads and Pot-hearbs: but by the authoritie of  Glaucon and (...), it is effectuall in medicine, hauing the taste and sauour of Hypericon, seruing in the place thereof for wounds, and is taken by Tragus for Panax Chironium, who doth reckon it inter Herbas vulnerarias.

The (...) stamped with salt and wine, and applied, doe consume and (...) away the swelling  of the (...), called the Kings euill, and are vsed against the stone and Grauell.



CHAP. 191. Of Gromell.

 The Description.
1 THe great Gromell hath long, slender and hairie stalkes, beset with long, browne and hoarie leaues; among which grow certaine bearded huskes, bearing at the first small blew floures; which being past, there succeedeth a gray stonie seed somewhat shining. The root is hard, and of a wooddie substance.
2 The second kinde of Gromell hath straight, round, wooddie stalks, full of branches: The leaues long, small, and sharpe, of a darke greene colour; smaller than the leaues of great Gromell: among which come forth little white floures; which being past, there doth follow such seed as the former hath, but smaller.
@ 3 There is another kinde of Gromell, which hath leaues and stalkes like the small kinde: the seed is not so white, neither so smooth and plaine, but somewhat shriueled or wrinckled. The leaues are somewhat rough like vnto the common Gromell, but the floures are of a purple colour, and in shape like those of that wilde kinde of Buglosse, called Anchusa, for which cause it carrieth that additament Anchusae facie.
4 There is also a degenerate kinde hereof called Anchusa degener, being either a kinde of wilde Buglosse, or a kinde of wilde Gromell, or else a kinde of neither of both, but a plant participating of both kindes: it hath the seeds and stalkes of Milium solis, or Gromell: the leaues and rootes of Anchusa, which is Alkanet, and is altogether of a red colour like the same.


1 Lithospermum maius. Great Gromell.


2 Lithospermum minus. Small Gromell.





@ 3 Lithospermum Anchusae facie. Purple floured Gromell.


@ 4 Anchusa degener facie Milij (...). Bastard Gromell.




 The Place.
The two first kindes do grow in vntoiled places, as by the high waies sides, and barren places, in the street at Southfleet in Kent, as you goe from the church vnto an house belonging to a (...) of worship, called Mr. William Swan, and in sundry other places.
The two last kindes grow vpon the sands and Bach of the Sea, in the isle of Thanet neere (...), among the kindes of wilde Buglosse there growing.


 The Time.
They floure from the Sommer Solstice, or from the twelfth day of Iune euen vnto (...) and in the meane season the seed is ripe.


 The Names.
Gromell is called in Greeke (...), of the hardnesse of the seed: of diuers, Gorgonium: of others, Aegonychon, Leontion, or Diosporon, or Diospyron, as Plinie readeth it, and also Heracleos of the Arabians, Milium soler: in shops, and among the Italians, Milium solis: in Spanish, Mijo (...) sol: in French, Gremill, and Herbe aux perles: in English, Gromell: of some, Pearle plant; and of others, Lichwale.


 The Temperature.
The seed of Gromell is hot and drie in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Gromell pound, and drunke in White wine, breaketh, dissolueth, and driueth forth  the stone, and prouoketh vrine, and especially breaketh the stone in the bladder.



CHAP. 192 Of Chickeweed.

 The Description.
1 THe great Chickeweede riseth vp with stalkes a cubit high, and sometime higher, a great many from one roote, long and (...), slender, full of ioints, with a couple of (...)

growing out of euery knot or ioynt aboue an inch broad, and longer than the leaues of (...) of the wall, whereunto they are very like in shape, but smooth without haires or downe, and of a light greene colour: the stalkes are somthing cleere, and as it were transparent or thorow-shining, and about the ioynts they be oftentimes of a very light red colour, as be (...) of (...) of the wall: the floures be whitish on the top of the branches, like the floures of (...), but yet (...): in whose places succeed long knops, but not great, wherein the seed is contained. The root (...) of fine little strings like haires.
2 The second Chickweed for the most part lyeth vpon the ground: the stalkes are small, slender, long, and round, and also ioynted: from which slender branches do spring leaues resembling the precedent, but much lesser, as is likewise the whole herbe, which in no respect attaineth to the greatnes of the same: the floures are in like sort little and white: the knops or seed-heads are like the former: the root is also full of little strings.


1 Alsine maior. Great Chickweed.


2 Alsine minor, siue media. Middle or small Chickweed.


3 The third is like the second, but farre lesser: the stalkes be most tender and fine: the leaues are very small, the floures very little, the root maruellous slender.
4 Also there is a fourth kinde which groweth by the sea: this is like to the second, but the stemmes are thicker, shorter, and fuller of ioynts: the leaues in like sort be thicker: the knops or seed-heads be not long and round, but somewhat broad, in which are three or foure seeds contained.
5 The vpright Chickweed hath a very small single threddy root, from which riseth vp a slender stemme, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches euen from the bottome to the top; whereon do grow small leaues, thicke and fat in respect of the others, in shape like those of Rue or HerbeGrace. The floures grow at the top of the branches, consisting of foure small leaues of a blew colour.
6 The stone Chickweed is one of the common Chickweeds, hauing very threddy branches couering the ground farre abroad where it groweth: the leaues be set together by couples: the floures be small and very white: the root is tough and very slender.



3 Alsine minima. Fine Chickweed.


4 Alsine marina. Sea Chickweed.


5 Alsine recta. Right Chickweed.


6 Alsine Petraea. Stone Chickweed.





7 Alsine folijs Veronicae. Speed-well Chickweed.


8 Alsine (...). Fountaine Chickweed.


9 Alsine (...). Riuer Chickweed.


10 Alsine (...). Marish Chickweed.



7 Speedwel Chickweed hath a little tender stalk, from which come diuers small armes or branches as it were wings, set together by couples; whereon do grow leaues set likewise by couples, like those of Veronica, or herbe Fluellen, whereof it tooke his name. The floures grow along the branches of a blew colour; after which come little pouches wherein is the seed: the root is small, and likewise threddy. This in the Hist. Lugd. is called Elatine polyschides: and Fabius Columna iudgeth it to be the Alysson of Dioscorides. @
8 There is a kind of Chickweed growing in the brinks and borders of Wels, Fountains, and shallow Springs, hauing many threddy roots from which rise vp diuers tender stalks, whereupon doe grow long narrow leaues; from the bosomes of which come forth diuers smaller leaues of a bright greene colour. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, small, and white of colour.
9 There is likewise another water Chickweed smaller than the last described, hauing for his root a thicke hassock or tuft of threddy strings: from which rise vp very many tender stems, strerching or trailing along the streame; (...) grow long leaues set vpon a middle rib, like those of Lentils or wilde Fetch: the floures and seeds are like the precedent, but much smaller.


@ 11 Alsine rotundifolia, siue Portulaca (...). Water Purslane.


@ 12 Alsine palustris serpillifolia. Creeping water Chickweed.


13 Alsine baccifera. Berry-bearing Chickweed.


10 There growes in the marish or waterish grounds another sort of Chickweed, not much (...) like the rest of the stocke or kindred of Chickweeds. It hath a long root of the bignesse of a (...) straw, with diuers strings hanging thereat, very like the root of Couch-grasse: from the which riseth vp diuers vprightslender stalkes, set with pretty large sharpe pointed leaues standing by couples at certaine distances: on the top of the stalkes grow small white floures like those of Stitchwort, but lesser, and of a white colour.
@ 11 To these water Chickweeds may fitly be added those two which I mentioned and figured in my last iournall: the former of which, that I haue there called Alsine aquatica (...)-dioribus, siue (...) (...), (that is) Round leaued Chickweed, or water Purslane, hath a small stringy root which sends forth diuers creeping square branches, which here and there at the (...)

put out small fibres, and take root againe: the leaues grow at the ioynts by couples, somwhat longish, and round at the points, resembling those of Purslane, but much smaller, and of a yellowish greene colour: at the bosomes of the leaues come forth little floures, which are succeeded by little round seed-vessels containing a small round seed. Bauhine hath set this forth by the name of Alsine (...) minor folijs (...).
12 The other water Chickweed, which Iohn Bauhine hath mentioned by the name of Serpillifolia; and Casper Bauhine by the title of Alsine palustris minor Serpillifolia, hath also weake and tender creeping branches lying spred vpon the ground; set with two narrow sharp pointed leaues at each ioynt, greene aboue, and of a whitish colour below: at the setting on of these leaues grow small vessels parted as it were into two, with a little crest on each side, and in these is contained a verie small seed. Both these may be found in waterie places in (...) and August, as betweene Clapham heath and Touting, and betweene Kentish towne and Hampstead.
13 This Plant that Clusius and others haue called Alsine repens major, and some haue thought the (...) altera of Dioscorides; and Cucubalus of Pliny, may fitly be put in this ranke; for it sendeth vp many long weake branches like the great Chickweed, set with two leaues at a ioynt, bigger than those of the greatest Chickweed, yet like them in shape and colour: at the tops of the branches, out of pretty large cups come whitish greene floures, which are succeeded by berries as big as those of (...), at first greene, but afterwards blacke: the seed is small and smooth: the root white, very fibrous, long and wooddy, and it endures for many yeares. It floures most part of Sommer, and growes wilde in sundry places of Spaine and Germany, as also in Flanders and England, according to Pena and Lobel: yet I haue not seene it growing but in the garden of my friend Mr. Pemble at Marribone. The Authors last mentioned affirme the berries hereof to haue a poysonous facultie like as those of Dwale or deadly Nightshade. @


 The Place.
Chickweeds, some grow among bushes and briers, old walls, gutters of houses, and shadowie places. The places where the rest grow are set forth in their seuerall descriptions.


 The Time.
The Chickweeds are greene in Winter, they floure and seed in the Spring.


 The Names.
Chickweed or Chickenweed is called in Greeke (...): in Latine it retaineth the same name Alsine: of some of the Antients it is called Hippia. The rest of the plants are distinguished in their seuerall titles, with proper names which likewise setteth forth the place of their growings.


 The Temperature.
Chickweed is cold and moist, and of a waterish substance; and therefore it cooleth without astriction or binding, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Chickweed boyled in water very soft, adding thereto some hogs grease, the pouder  of Fenugreeke and Lineseed, and a few roots of marsh Mallowes, and stamped to the (...) of cataplasme or pultesse, taketh away the swellings of the legs or any other part; bringeth to suppuration or matter hot apostumes; dissolueth swellings that wil not willingly yeeld to suppuration; easeth members that are shrunke vp; comforteth wounds in sinewie parts; defendeth foule maligne and virulent vlcers from inflammation during the cure: in a word, it comforteth, digesteth, defendeth, and suppurateth very notably.
The leaues boyled in Vineger and salt are good against mangines of the hands and legs, if they  be bathed therewith.
Little birds in cadges (especially Linnets) are refreshed with the lesser Chickweed when they  loath their meat; whereupon it was called of some Passerina.



CHAP. 193. Of the bastard Chickweeds.

 The Description.
1 GErmander Chickweed hath small tender branches trailing vpon the ground, beset with leaues like vnto those of Scordium, or VVater Germander. Among which comeforth little blew floures: which being saded, there appeare small flat husks or pouches, wherein lieth the seed.. The root is small and threddy; which being once gotten into a garden ground is hard to be destroyed, but naturally commeth vp from yeare to yeare as a noisome weed.



1 Asine folijs trissaginis. Germander Chickweed.


2 Alsine corniculata Clusij. Horned Chickweed.


3 Alsine (...). Iuy Chickweed.


4 Alsine Hederula altera. Great Henne-bit.



2 Clusius, a man singular in the knowledge of plants, hath set downe this herbe for one of the Chickweeds, which doth very well resemble the Storks bill, and might haue been there inserted. But the matter being of small moment I let it passe; for doubtlesse it participateth of both, that is, the head or beake of Storkes bill, and the leaues of Chickweed, which are long and hairy, like those of Scorpion Mouse-eare. The floures are small, and of an herby colour; after which come long horned cods or seed-vessels, like vnto those of the Storks bill. The root is small and single, with strings fastened thereto.
3 Iuie Chickeweed or small Henbit, hath thin hairy leaues somewhat broad, with two cuts or gashes in the sides, after the maner of those of ground Iuie, whereof it tooke his name, resembling the backe of a Bee when she flieth. The stalkes are small, tender, hairy, and lying flat vpon the ground. The floures are slender, and of a blew colour. The root is little and threddy.
4 The great Henbit hath feeble stalkes leaning toward the ground, whereupon doe grow at certaine distances leaues like those of the dead Nettell; from the bosome whereof come forth slender blew floures tending to purple; in shape like those of the small dead Nettle. The root is tough, single, and a few strings hanging thereat.


 The Place.
These (...) are sowne in gardens among potherbes, in darke shadowie places, and in the fields after the corne is reaped.


 The Time.
They flourish and are greene when the other Chickweedes are.


 The Names.
The first and third is called Morsus Gallinae, Hens bit, Alsine Hederula, and Hederacea: Lobell also calls the fourth Morsus Galinae folio (...) alter: in high Dutch Hunerbisz: in French, Morsgelin, and Morgeline: in low Dutch, Hoenderebeet: in English, Henbit the greater and the lesser.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These are thought also to be could and moist, and like to the other Chickweeds in vertue and operation.



CHAP. 194. Of Pimpernell.


1 Anagallis mas. Male Pimpernell.


2 Anagallis foemina. Female Pimpernell.




 The Description.
1 PImpernell is like vnto Chickeweed; the stalkes are foure square, trailing here and there vpon the ground, whereupon do grow broad leaues, and sharpe pointed, set together by couples: from the bosome whereof come forth slender tendrells, whereupon doe grow small purple floures tending to rednesse: which being past there succeed fine round bullets, like vnto the seed of Corianders, wherein is conteined small dustie seed. The root consisteth of slender strings.
2 The female Pimpernell differeth not from the male in any one point, but in the colour of the floures; for like as the former hath reddish floures, this plant bringeth forth floures of a most perfect blew colour, wherein is the difference.
@ 3 Of this there is another variety set forth by Clusius by the name of Anagallis tenuifolia Monelli, because he receiued the figure and History thereof from Iohn Monell of I ournay in France; it differs thus from the last mentioned, the leaues are longer and narrower, somewhat like those of Gratiola, and they now and then grow three at a joint, and out of the bosomes of the leaues come commonly as many little footstalkes as there are leaues, which carry floures of a blew colour with the middle purplish, and these are somewhat larger than them of the former, otherwise like. @


@ 3 Anagallis tenuifolia. Narrow leaued Pimpernell.


4 Anagallis lutea. Yellow Pimpernell.


4 The yellow Pimpernell hath many weake and seeble branches trailing vpon the ground, beset with leaues one against another like the great Chickweed, not vnlike to Nummularia, or Money woort; betweene which and the stalkes, come forth two single and small tender footestalkes, each bearing at their top one yellow floure and no more. The root is small and threddy.


 The Place.
They grow in plowed sields neere path waies, in gardens and vineyardes, almost euery where. I found the female with blew floures in a chalkie corne field in the way from Mr. William Swaines house of Southfleet to Long field downs, but neuer any where else. @ I also being in Essex in the company of my kind friend Mr. Nathaniel Wright found this among the corne at Wrightsbridge, being the seate of Mr. Iohn Wright his brother. @ The yellow Pimpernell growes in the woods betweene High-gate and Hampstead, and in many other woods.


 The Time.
They floure in Summer, and especially in the moneth of August, at what time the husbandmen hauing occasion to go vnto their haruest worke, will first behold the floures of Pimpernell, whereby they know the weather that shall follow the next day after: as for example, if the floures be shut close vp, it betokeneth raine and foule weather; contrariwise, if they be spread abroad, faire weather.



 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine also Anagallis: of diuers, (as Pliny reporteth) Corchorus, but vntruly: of Marcellus an old Writer, Macia; the word is extant in Dioscorides among the bastard names. That with the crimson floure, being the male, is named Phoenicion, and Corallion: of this is made the composition or receit called Diacorallion, that is vsed against the gout; which composition Paulus Aegineta setteth downe in his seuenth booke. Among the bastard names it hath beene called Aetitis, Aegitis, and Sauritis: in English, Red Pimpernell, and blew Pimpernel.


 The Temperature.
Both the sorts of Pimpernell are of a drying facultie without biting, and somewhat hot, with a certaine drawing quality, insomuch that it doth draw forth splinters and things fixed in the flesh, as Galen writeth.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writes, That they are of power to mitigate paine, to cure inflammations or hot swellings, to draw out of the body and flesh thornes, splinters, or shiuers of wood, and to helpe the Kings Euill.
The iuyce purgeth the head (...) gargarising or washing the throat therewith; it cures the toothache  being snist vp into the nosethrils, especially into the contrary nosethrill.
It helpeth those that be dim sighted: the iuyce mixed with honey cleanses the vleers of the eye  called in Latine (...).
Moreouer he affirmeth, That it is good against the stinging of Vipers, and other venomous  beasts.
It preuaileth against the infirmities of the liuer and kidneyes, if the iuyce be drunk with wine. He addeth further, how it is reported, That Pimpernel with the blew floure helpeth vp the fundament that is fallen downe; and that red Pimpernell applied, contrariwise bringeth it downe.



CHAP. 195. Of Brooke-lime, or water Pimpernell.

 The Description.
1 BRooke-lime or Brooklem hath fat thicke stalkes, round, and parted into diuers branches: the leaues be thicke, smooth, broad, and of a deepe greene colour. The floures grow vpon small tender foot-stalkes, which thrust forth of the bosome of the leaues, of a perfect blew colour, not vnlike to the floures of land Pimpernell: the root is white, low creeping, with fine strings fastned thereto: out of the root spring many other stalkes, whereby it greatly encreaseth.
@ There is a lesser varietie of this, which our Author set forth in the fourth place, differing not from this but onely in that it is lesse in all the parts thereof; wherefore I haue omitted the historie and figure, to make roome for more conspicuous differences. @
2 The great water Pimpernell is like vnto the precedent, sauing that this plant hath sharper pointed or larger leaues, and the floures are of a more whitish or a paler blew colour, wherein (...) the difference.
@ There is also a lesser varietie of this, whose figure and description our Authour gaue in the next place; but because the difference is in nothing but the magnitude I haue made bold to omit it also.
3 Now that I haue briefely giuen you the history of the foure formerly described by our Author, I will acquaint you with two or three more plants which may fitly be here inserted: The first of these Lobel calls Anagallis aquatica tertia; and therefore I haue thought fit to giue you it in the same place here. It hath a white and fibrous root; from which ariseth a round smooth stalke a foot and more high, (yet I haue sometimes found it not aboue three or foure inches high:) vpon the stalkes grow leaues round, greene, and shining, standing not by couples, but one aboue another on all sides of the stalkes. The leaues that (...) on the ground are longer than the rest, and are in shape somewhat like those of the common Daisie, but that they are not snipped about the edges: the floures are white, consisting of one leafe diuided into fiue parts; and they grow at the first as it were in an vmbel, but afterwards more spike fashioned. It floures in Iune and Iuly, and groweth in many waterie places, as in the marishes of Dartford in Kent, also betweene Sandwich and Sandowne castle, and in the ditches on this side Sandwich. (...) saith, That Guillandinus called it sometimes Alisma, and otherwhiles Cochlearia: and others would haue it to be Samolum of Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 11. Baubine himselfe fitly calls it Anagallis aquatica folio rot undo non crenato.



1 Anagallis seu Becabunga. Brooke-lime.


2 Anagallis aquatica maior. Great long leaued Brook-lime.


@ 3 Anagallis aquatica rotundifolia. Round leaued water Pimpernel.


4 I coniecture this figure which we here (...) you with the Authors title to be onely the lesser variety of that which our Author describes in the second place; but because I haue no certaintie hereof (for that Lobel hath giuen vs no description thereof in any of his Latine Workes, and also Bauhinus hath distinguished them) I am forced to giue you onely the figure thereof; not intending to deceiue my reader by giuing descriptions from my fancie and the figure, as our Author somtimes made bold to do.
5 This which is set forth by most writers for Cepoea, and which some may obiect to be more fit to be put next the Purslanes, I will here giue you, hauing forgot to doe it there; and I thinke this place not vnfit, because our Author in the Names in this Chapter takes occasion in Dodonoeus his words to make mention thereof. It hath a small vnprofitable root, sending vp a stalke some soot high, diuided into many weake branches, which are here and there set with thicke leaues like those of Purslane, but much lesse, and narrower, and sharper pointed: the floures which grow in good plenty vpon the tops of the branches are composed of fiue small white leaues; whereto (...) small heads, wherein is contained a seed like that of Orpine. This by Matthiolus and others is called Capoea: but Clusius doubts that it is not the true Cepoea of the Antients. @



@ 4 Anagallis aquatica quarta, Lob. Lobels fourth water Pimpernel.


@ 5 Cepoea. Garden Brook-lime.




 The Place.
They grow by riuers sides, small running brookes, and waterie ditches. The yellow Pimpernell I found growing in Hampsted wood neere London, and in many other woods and copses.


 The Time.
They bring forth their floures and seed in Iune, Iuly, and August.


 The Names.
Water Pimpernel is called Anagallis (...): of most, (...), which is borrowed of the Germane word Bachpunghen: in low-Dutch, Beeckpunghen: in French, Berle; whereupon some do call it Berula: notwithstanding Marcellus reporteth, That Berula is that which the Grecians call (...), or rather Cresses: it is thought to be (...); that is to say, of the garden; which Dioscorides writeth to be like vnto Purslane, whereunto this Brook-lime doth very well agree. But if it be therefore said to be (...), because it groweth either onely or for the most part in gardens, this Pimpernel or Brook-lime shall not be like vnto it, which groweth (...) where lesse than in gardens, being altogether of his owne nature wilde, desiring to grow in waterie places, and such as be continually ouerflowne: in English the first is called Brooklime, and the rest by no particular names; but we may call them water Pimpernels, or Brook-limes.


 The Temperature.
Brook-lime is of temperature hot and dry like water Cresses, yet not so much.


 The Vertues.
Brooke-lime is eaten in sallads as Water-Cresses are, and is good against that (...) malum of such as dwell neere the Germane seas, which they call Seuerbuycke: or as we terme it, the Scuruie, or Skirby, being vsed after the same manner that Water Cresses and Scuruy grasse is vsed, yet is it not of so great operation and vertue.
The herbe boyled maketh a good fomentation for swollen legs and the dropsie.
The leaues boyled, strained, and stamped in a stone morter with the pouder of (...), Lincseeds, the roots of marish (...), and some hogs grease, vnto the forme of a cataplasine or pultesse, taketh away any swelling in leg or arme; wounds also that are ready to fall into apostumation it mightily defendeth, that no humor or accident (...) happen thereunto.

The leaues of Brooke-lime stamped, strained, and giuen to drinke in wine, helpeth the strangurie, and griefes of the bladder.
The leaues of Brook-lime, and the tendrels of Asparagus, eaten with oyle, vineger, and Pepper, helpeth the strangurie and stone.



CHAP. 196. Of stinking Ground-Pine.

 The Kindes.
@ DIoscorides hath antiently mentioned two sorts of Anthyllis: one with leaues like to the Leatill, and the other like to Chamoepitys. To the first, some late writers haue referred diuers plants, as the two first described in this Chapter; The Anthyllis Leguminosa Belgarum hereafter to be described; the Anthyllis Valentina Clusij formerly set forth Chap. 171. To the second are (...) the Iua Moschata Monspeliaca, described in the fourth place of the 150. Chap. of this booke; the (...) described formerly chap. 165. in the 14. place, and that which is here described in the third place of this chapter, by the name of (...) altera Italorum. @


 The Description.
1 THere hath beene much adoe among Writers about the certaine knowledge of the true Anthyllis of Dioscorides: I will therefore set downe that plant which of all others is found most agreeable thereunto. It hath many small branches full ioynts, not aboue an handfull high, creeping sundry wayes, beset with small thicke leaues of a pale colour, resembling Lenticula, or rather Alsine minor, the lesser Chickweed. The floures grow at the top of the stalke, starre-fashion, of an herby colour like boxe, or Sedum minus: it fostereth his small seeds in a three cornered huske. The root is somewhat long, slender, ioynted, and deepely thrust into the ground like Soldanella: all the whole plant is saltish, bitter in taste, and somewhat (...).


@ 1 Anthyllis lentifolia, siue Alsine cruciata marina. Sea Pimpernell.


@ 2 Anthyllis Marina incana (...). Many floured Ground-Pine.


@ This description was taken out of the Aduersaria, pag. 195. where it is called (...) prior lentifolia Peplios (...) maritima: also Clusius hath described it by the name of Alsines genus pelagicum: I haue called it in my last iournall by the name of Alsine cruciata marina, because the leaues which grow thicke together by couples crosse each other, as it happens in most plants which haue square stalkes with two leaues at each ioynt. I haue Englished it Sea Pimpernell, because the leaues in shape are as like those of Pimpernel as of any other Plant; and also for that our Author hath called another plant by the name of Sea Chickeweed. The figure of the Aduersaria was not good, and Clusius hath none; which hath caused some to reck on this Anthyllis of Lobel, and Alsine of Clusius for two seuerall plants, which indeed are not so. I haue giuen you a figure hereof which I tooke from the growing plant, and which well expresseth the growing thereof. @



3 Anthyllis altera Italorum. Stinking ground (...).


2 There is likewise another sort of (...) or Sea Ground (...), but in truth nothing els than a kinde of Sea Chickeweed, hauing small branches trailing vpon the ground of two hands high, whereupon do grow little leaues like those of Chickweed, not vnlike those of (...), or Sea Lentils: on the top of the stalks stand many small mossie floures of a white colour. The whole plant is of a bitter and (...) taste. @ This is the Marina incana (...) Alsiae folia Narbonensium of Lobel: it is the Paronychia altera of Matthiolus. @
@ 3 To this sigure (which formerly was giuen for the first of these by our Authour) I will now giue you a briefe description. This in the branches, leaues, and whole face thereof is very like the French HerbeIuie, or Ground Pine, but that it is much lesse in all the parts thereof, but chiefely in the leaues which also are not snipt like those of the French Ground (...), but sharp pointed: the tops of the branches are downie or woolly, and set with little pale yellow floures. @


 The Place.
These do grow in the Soath Isles belonging to England, especially in Portland in the grauelly and sandy foords, which lie low and against the sea; and likewise in the (...) of Shepey neere the water side. @ I haue onely sound the first described, and that both in Shepey, as also in West-gate bay by Margate in the Isle of Thanet. @


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iune and (...).


 The Names.
Their titles and descriptions sufficiently set forth their seuerall names.


 The Temperature.
These sea herbes are of a temperate facultie betweene hot and cold.


The Vertues.
Halfe an ounce of the dried leaues drunke, preuaileth greatly against the hot pisse, the (...), or difficultie of making water, and pnrgeth the reines.
The same (...) with Oxymell or honied water is good for the falling sicknesse, giuen first at  morning, and last at night. 

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)




CHAP. 197. Of Whiteblow, or Whitelow Grasse.

 The (...).
1 THe first is a very slender plant hauing a fewe small leaues like the least Chickeweede, growing in little tufts, from the midst whereof riseth vp a small stalke, three or foure inches long; on whose top do grow very little white floures; which being past, there come in place small flat pouches composed of three filmes; which being ripe, the two outsides fall away, leauing the middle part standing long time after which is like white Sattin, as is that of (...), which our women call white Sattin, but much smaller: the taste is somewhat sharpe.
2 This kinde of (...), hath small thicke and fat leaues, (...) into three or more diuisions, much resembling the (...) of Rue, but a great deale smaller. The stalks are like the former, and (...)

leaues also; but the cases wherein the seede is contained, are like vnto the (...) (...) of Myositis Scorpioides, or Mouseare Scorpion grasse. The floures are small and white.
There is another sort of Whitlow grasse or (...), that is likewise a low or base herbe, hauing a small tough roote, with some threddie strings annexed thereto: (...) which rise vp diuers slender tough stalkes, set with little narrow leaues consusedly like those of the smallest Chickweed whereof doubtlesse these be kindes: alongst the stalks do grow very little white floures, asterwhich come the seeds in small buttons, of the bignesse of a pins head. @ Our Author seemes here to describe the Paronychia 2. of Tabern. @


1 Paronychia vulgaris. Common Whitlow grasse.


2 Paronychia Rutacco folio. Rew leased or iagged Whitlow grasse.




 The Place.
These small, base and low herbs grow vpon bricke and stone wals, vpon old tiled houses; which are growne to haue much mosse vpon them, and vpon some shadowie, and dry muddy wals. It groweth plentifully vpon the bricke wall in Chancerie Lane, belonging to the Earle of Southampton, in the Suburbs of London, and sundry other places.


 The Time.
These floure many times in Ianuary and February, and when hot weather approcheth, they are no more to be seen all the yeare after.


 The Names.
The Graecians haue called these plants (...) which Cicero calleth Reduvia: There be many kindes of plants, called by the said name of Paronychia, which hath caused many writers to doubt of the true kinde: but you may very boldly take these plants for the same, vntill time hath reuealed or raised vp some new plant, approching neerer vnto the truth: which I thinke will neuer be, so that we may call them in English, Naile-woort, and Whitelow grasse.


 The Tmperatures and Vertues.
As touching the qualitie hereof, we haue nothing to set downe: onely it hath beene taken to  heale the disease of the nailes called a Whitlow, whereof it took his name. 

Our Authour he elgaue vs two figures, and as many descriptions of both these plants, wherefore I haue emitted (...) of the figures, and the more (...) (...).





CHAP. 198. Of the female Fluellen, or Speedwell.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Elatine, beeing of Fuchsius and Matthiolus, called Veronica foemina, (...) the female Fluellen, shooteth from a small and fibrous root many flexible and tender branches, dispersed flat vpon the ground, ramping and creeping with leaues like Nummularia, but that the leaues of Elatine are of an hoarie, hairie, and ouerworne greene colour; among which come forth many small floures, of a yellow colour mixed with a little purple, like vnto the small Snapdragon, hauing a certaine taile or Spur fastened vnto euery such floure, like the herbe called Larkes spurre. The lower iaw or chap of the floure is of a purple colour, and the vpper iawe of a faire yellowe; which beeing past, there succeedes a small blacke seede contained in round husks.
2 The second kinde of Elatine hath stalkes, branches, floures, and roots, like the first: but the leaues are fashioned like the former, but that they haue two little ears at the lower end, somewhat resembling an arrow head, broad at the setting on: but the spur or taile of the floure is longer, and more purple mixed with the yellow in the floure.


1 Veronica foemina Fuchsij, sive Elatine. The Female Fluellen.


2 Elatine altera. Sharpe pointed Fluellen.




 The Place.
Both these plants I haue found in sundry places where corne hath growne, especially barley, as in the fields about Southfleet in Kent, where within six miles compasse there is not a field wherein it doth not grow.
Also it groweth in a field next vnto the house sometime belonging to that honourable gentleman Sir Frances Walsingham, at Barn-elmes, and in sundry places of Essex; and in the next field vnto the Churchyard at Chiswicke neere London, towards the midst of the field.


 The Time.
They floure in August and September.



 The Names.
Their seuerall titles set forth their names as well in Latine as English.


 The Nature and Vertues.
These plants are not onely of a singular astringent facultie, and thereby helpe them that bee  grieued with the Dysenterie and hot swelling; but of such singular efficacy to heale spreading and eating cankers, and corosiue vleers, that their vertue in a manner passeth all credit in these fretting sores, vpon sure proose done vnto sundry persons, and especially vpon a man whom Pena reporteth to haue his nose eaten most griouously with a canker or eating sore, who sent for the Physitions and Chirurgions that were famously knowne to be the best, and they with one consent concluded to cut the said nose off, to preserue the rest of his face: among these Surgeons and Physitions came a poore sorie Barbar, who had no more skill than he had learned by tradition, and yet vndertooke to cure the patient. This foresaid Barbar standing in the companie and hearing their determination, desired that he might make triall of an herbe which he had seene his master vse for the same purpose, which herbe Elatine, though he were ignorant of the name whereby it was called, yet hee knew where to fetch it. To be short, this herbe he stamped, and gaue the iuice of it vnto the patient to drinke, and outwardly applied the same plaisterwise, and in very short space perfectly cured the man, and staied the rest of his body from further corruption, which was ready to fall into a leprosie, Aduersar. pag. 197.
Elatine helpeth the inflammation of the eies, and defendeth humours flowing vnto them, beeing  boiled, and as a pultus applied thereto.
The leaues sodden in the broth of a hen, or Veale, staieth the dysenterie.
The new writers affirme, that the female Fluellen openeth the obstructions or stoppings of the  liuer and spleen, prouoketh vrine, driueth forth stones, and clenseth the kidneies and bladder, according to Paulus.
The weight of a dram or of a French crowne, of the pouder of the herbe, with the like waight of  treacle, is commended against pestilent Feuers.



CHAP. 192. Of Fluellen the male, or Paul's Betonie.


1 Veronica vera and maior. Fluellen, or Speedwell.


The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was formerly in the fifth.

 2 Veronica recta mas. The male Speedwell.




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Veronica is a small herbe, and creepeth by the ground, with little reddish and hairy branches. The leafe is something round and hairy, indented or snipped round about the edges. The floures are of a light blew colour, declining to purple: the seed is contained in little flat pouches: the root is fibrous and hairy.
The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was formerly in the fifth.

 2 The second doth also creepe vpon the ground, hauing long slender stemmes, some foot high, and somewhat large leaues a little hairy, and pleasantly soft. The floures be blew like as those of the former, but somewhat bigger, and of a brighter colour; and they are also succeeded by round seed vessels.
3 The third kinde of Veronica creepeth with branches and leaues like vnto Serpillum, for which cause it hath beene called Veronica Serpillifolia. The floures grow along the small and tender branches, of a whitish colour declining to blewnesse. The root is small and threddie, taking hold vpon the vpper face of the earth, where it spreadeth. The seed is contained in small pouches like the former.
4 The fourth hath a root somewhat wooddie, from the which rise vp leaues like vnto the former. The small vpright stalke is beset with the like leaues, but lesser; at the top whereof commeth forth a slender spike closely thrust together, and full of blewish floures, which are succeeded by many horned seed vessels.
@ 5 This hath many wooddie round smooth branches, some handfull and halfe high or better: the leaues are like those of wilde Tyme, but longer, and of a blacker colour, sometimes lightly snipt: at the tops of the branches grow floures of a whitish blew colour, consisting of foure, fiue, or else six e little leaues a piece; which falling, there follow round seede vessels, containing a round small and blacke seed. It floures in August, and growes vpon cold and high mountaines, as the Alpes. Pona calls this Veronica Alpina minima Serpillifolio: and Clusius hath it by the name of Veronica 3. fruticans. @


3 Veronica minor. Little Fluellen.


4 Veronica recta minima. The smallest Fluellen.





@ 5 Veronica fruticans Serpillifolia. Shrubbie Fluellen.


6 Veronica assurgens, sive Spicata. Tree Fluellen.


The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was formerly in the fifth.

 7 Veronica spicata latifolia. Vpright Fluellen.


@ 8 Veronica supina. Leaning Fluellen.



6 The sixt kinde of Veronica hath many vpright branches a foote high and sometimes more, diuiding themselues into sundry other small twigs; at the top whereof do grow faire spikie tusts, bearing bright and shining blew floures. The leaues are somewhat long, indented about the edges like a saw: the root is compact of many threds, or strings.
@ 7 This hath stalkes some cubit high and sometimes more, and these not very full of branches, yet hauing diuers joints, at each whereof do grow forth two leaues, two or three inches long, and one broad, and these leaues are also thicke, smooth, and shining, lightly snipt or (...) about the edges, and of a very astringent and drying taste, and at last somewhat biting. At the top of the stalkes grow spokie tufts or blew floures like those of the last mentioned, but of somewhat a lighter colour, and they begin first to floure or shew themselues below, and so go vpwards; the seed, which is small and blacke, is conteyned in flat seed vessels: the roote is thicke with many fibres, euery yeere thrusting vp new shoots. There is a variety of this with the leaues not so blacke and shining, but hauing more branches; and another which hath a longer spike or tuft of (...). Clusius calls this Veronica erectior latifolia. @
8 The eighth hauing his stalkes leaning vpon the ground looketh with his face vpright, hauing sundry flexible branches, set with leaues like vnto wilde Germander by couples, one right against another, deeply jagged about the edges, in respect of the other before mentioned. The floures are of a blew colour: the root is long, with some threds appendant thereto.


 The Place.
Veronica groweth vpon bankes, borders of fields, and grassie mole-hils, in sandy grounds, and in woods, almost euery where.
The fourth kinde, my good friend Mr. Stephen Bredwell, practitioner in physicke found and shewed it me in the close next adjoining to the house of Mr. Bele, chiefe of the clerkes of her Maiesties Counsell, dwelling at Barnes neere London. The sixth is a stranger in England, but I haue it growing in my garden.


 The Time.
These floure from May to September.


 The Names.
The second and third were both (...) of that described in the third place: and those that were (...) in the fifth and sixth places were also of the same plant, to wit that which is here described in the sixth place and which was formerly in the fifth.

 These plants are comprehended vnder this generall name Veronica; and Dodonaeus would haue the first of them to be the Betonica of Paulus Aegineta; and Turner and Gesner the third: we do call them in English, Pauls Betony, or Speedwell: in Welch it is called Fluellen, and the Welch people do attribute great vertues to the same: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...), that is to say, Honor and praise.


 The Nature.
These are of a meane temperature, betweene heate and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of Veronica drunke, sodereth and healeth all fresh and old wounds, clenseth the  bloud from all corruption, and is good to be drunke for the kidnies, and against scuruinesse and foule spredding tetters, and consuming and fretting sores, the small pox and measels.
The water of Veronica distilled with wine, and re-distilled so often vntill the liquor wax of a reddish  colour, preuaileth against the old cough, the drinesse of the lungs, and all vlcers and inflammation of the same.



CHAP. 198. Of herbe Two pence.

 The Description.
1 HErbe Two pence hath a small and tender root, spreding and dispersing it selfe farre within the ground; from which rise vp many little, tender, flexible stalkes trailing vpon the ground, set by couples at certaine spaces, with smooth greene leaues somewhat round, whereof it tooke his name: from the bosome of which leaues shoote forth small tender foot-stalkes, whereon do grow little yellow floures, like those of Cinkefoile or Tormentill.
2 There is a kinde of Money woort or herbe Two pence, like the other of his kinde in each respect, sauing it is altogether lesser, wherein they differ.
@ 3 There is another kinde of Money-woort which hath many very slender creeping branches which here and there put forth fibres, and take root againe: the leaues are small and round, standing by couples one against another; and out of the bosomes come slender foote-stalkes

bearing prety little whitish purple floures consisting of fiue little leaues standing together in manner of a little bell-floure, and seldome otherwise: the seed is small, and conteined in round heads. This growes in many wet rotten grounds and vpon bogges: I first found it Anno 1626, in the Bishopricke of Durham, and in two or three places of Yorkshire, and not thinking any had taken notice thereof, I drew a figure of it and called it Nummularia pusilla flore ex albo purpurascente; but since I haue found that Bauhine had formerly set it forth in his Prodromus by the name of Nummularia flore purpurascente. It growes also on the bogges vpon the heath, neare Burnt wood in Essex: it floures in Iuly and August. @


1 Nummularia. Herbe Two pence.


@ 3 Nummularia flore purpurascente. Purple floured Money-woort.




 The Place.
It groweth neere vnto ditches and streames, and other watery places, and is sometimes found in moist woods: I found it vpon the banke of the riuer of Thames, right against the Queenes pallace of White hall; and almost in euery countrey where I haue trauelled.


 The Time.
It floureth from May till Summer be well spent.


 The Names.
Herbe Two pence is called in Latine (...), and Centummorbiae: and of diuers Serpentaria. It is reported that if serpents be hurt or wounded, they do heale themselues with this herbe, whereupon came the name Serpentaria: it is thought to be called Centummorbia, of the wonderfull effect which it hath in curing diseases; and it is called Nummularia of the forme of money, whereunto the leaues are like: in Dutch, (...): in English, Money woort, Herbe Two pence, and Two penny grasse.


 The Temperature.
That this herbe is dry, the binding taste thereof doth shew: it is also moderate colde.


 The Vertues.
The floures and leaues stamped and laid vpon wounds and vlcers doth cure them: but it worketh  most effectually being stamped and boiled in oile oliue, with some rosen, wax, and turpentine added thereto.

The iuice drunke in wine, is good for the bloudie flix, and all other issues in bloud of man or  woman; the weakenesse and loosenesse of the belly and laske; it helpeth those that vomite (...), and the Whites in such ashaue them.
Boiled with wine and honie it cureth the wounds of the inward parts, and vlcers of the lungs, and  in a word, there is not a better wound herbe, no not Tabaco it selfe, nor any other what soeuer.
The herbe boiled in wine with a little honie, or meade, preuaileth much against the cough in  children, called the Chinne cough.



CHAP. 200. Of Bugle or Middle Comfrey.

 The Description.
1 BVgula spreadeth and creepeth alongst the ground like Monie woort; the leaues be long, fat, and oleous, and of a brown colour for the most part. The floures grow about the stalks in rundles, compassing the stalke, leauing betweene euery rundle bare or naked spaces; and are of a faire blew colour, and often white. I found many plants of it in a moist ground vpon Blacke Heath neere London, fast by a village called Charleton, but the leaues were green, and not browne at all like the other.


1 Bugula. Middle Consound.


2 Bugula flore (...), siue carneo. White or carnation floured Bugle.


2 Bugle with the white floure disfereth not from the precedent, in roots, leaues, and stalks the onely difference is, that this plant bringeth forth faire milk white floures, and the other those that are blew. @ It is also sound with a flesh coloured floure, and the leaues are lesse snipt than those of the former. Bauhine makes mention of one much lesse than those, with round suipt leaues and a yellow floure which he saith he had out of England, but I haue not as yet seene it; nor found any other mention thereof. @


 The Place.
Bugula groweth almost in euery wood and copse, and such like (...) and moist places, and is much planted in gardens: the other varieties are seldome to be met withall.



 The Time.
Bugula floureth in Aprill and May.


 The Names.
Bugle is reckoned among the Consounds or wound herbes: and it is called of some Consolida media, Bugula, and Buglum: in High Dutch, Guntzel: in Low Dutch Senegroen: of (...), Herba Laurentina: in English, Browne Bugle: of some, Sicklewoort, and herbe Carpenter, but not truly.


 The Nature.
Bugle is of a meane temperature, betweene heat and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
It is commended against inward burstings, and members torne, rent, and bruised: and therefore  it is put into potions that serue for nodes, in which it is of such vertue, that it can dissolue and waste away congealed and elotted bloud. Ruellius writeth that they commonly say in France, how he needeth neither Physition nor Surgeon that hath Bugle and Sanickle, for it doth not only cure rotten wounds being inwardly taken, but also applied to them outwardly; it is good for the infirmities of the Liuer; it taketh away the obstructions, and strengthneth it.
The decoction of Bugle drunken, dissolueth clotted or congealed bloud within the bodie, healeth  and maketh sound all wounds of the bodie, both inward and outward.
The same openeth the stoppings of the Liuer and gall, and is good against the iaundise and feuers  of long continuance.
The same decoction cureth the rotten vlcers and sores of the mouth and gums.
Bugula is excellent in curing wounds and scratches, and the iuice cureth the wounds, vlcers and  sores of the secret parts, or the herbe bruised and laid thereon.



CHAP. 201 Of Selfe-heale.


1 Prunella. Selfe-heale.


2 Prunella (...). The second Selfe-heale.





3 Prunella flore albo. White floured Selfe-(...).



 The (...).
1 PRunell or Brunel hath square hairy stalks of a foot high, beset with long, hairy and sharpe pointed leaues, and at the top of the stalks grow floures thicke set together, like an (...) or spiky knap, of a browne colour mixed with blew floures, and sometimes white, of which kinde I found some plants in Essex (...) Henningham castle. The root is small and very threddie.
@ 2 Prunella altera, or after Lobel and Pena, Symphytum (...), hath leaues like the last described, but somewhat narrower, and the leaues that grow commonly towards the tops of the stalks, are deeply diuided or cut in, after the manner of the leaues of the small Valerian, and sometimes the lower leaues are also diuided, but that is more seldom the heads and floures are like those of the former, and the colour of the floures is commonly purple yet somtimes it is found with flesh coloured, and otherwhiles with white or ashe coloured floures.
3 The third sort of Selfe-heale is like vnto the last described in root, stalke, and leaues, and in euery other point, sauing that the floures hereof are of a perfect white colour, and the others not so, which maketh the difference.
@ The figure which our Authour gaue in this third place, was of the Prunella secunda of Tabern. which I iudge to be all one with the Prunella 1. non vulgaris of Clusius, and that because the floures in that of Tabernamontanus are expressed Ventre laxiore, which Clusius complaines his drawer did not obserue; the other parts also agree: now this of Clusius hath much larger floures than the ordinary, and those commonly of a deeper purple colour, yet they are sometimes (...), and otherwhiles of an ashe colour: the leaues also are somewhat more hairie, long and sharpe pointed, than the ordinary, and herein consists the greatest difference. @


 The Place.
The first kinde of Prunell or Brunell groweth verie commonly in all our fieldes throughout England.
The second Brunel or Symphytum petraeum groweth naturally vpon rocks, (...) mountaines, and grauelly grounds.
@ The third for any thing that I know is a stranger with vs: but the (...) common kinde I haue found with white floures. @


 The Time.
These plants floure for the most part all Sommer long.


 The Names.
Brunel is called in English Prunell, Carpenters herbe, Selfe-heale, and Hooke-(...), and Sicklewoort. It is called of the later Herbarists Brunella: and Prunella, of Matthiolus, Consolida minor, and Solidago minor; but saith Ruellius, the Daisie is the right Consolida minor, and also the Solidago minor.


 The Nature.
These herbes are of the temperature of Bugula, that is to say, moderately hot and drie, and something binding.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of Prunell made with wine or water, doth ioine together and make whole and  sound all wounds, both inward and outward, euen as Bugle doth.
Prunell bruised with oile of Roses and Vineger, and laied to the forepart of the head, swageth  and helpeth the paine and aking thereof.
To bee short, it serueth for the same that Bugle doth, and in the world there are not two better  wound herbs, as hath been often proued.

It is commended against the infirmities of the mouth, and especially the ruggednesse, blackenesse, and drinesse of the tongue, with a kinde of swelling in the same. It is an infirmitie amongst souldiers that lie in campe. The Germans call it de Braun, which happeneth not without a continuall ague and frensie. The remedie hereof is the decoction of Selfe-heale, with common water, after bloud letting out of the veins of the tongue: and the mouth and tongue must be often washed with the same decoction, and sometimes a little vineger mixed therewith. This disease is thought to be vnknowne to the old writers: but notwithstanding if it be conferred with that which Paulus Aegineta calleth Erysipelas (...), an inflammation of the braine, then will it not be thought to bee much differing, if it be not the very same.



CHAP. 202. Of the great Daisie, or Maudelen woort.


1 Bellis maior. The great Daisie.



 The Description.
1 THe great Daisie hath very many broad leaues spred vpon the ground, somewhat indented about the edges, of the breadth of a finger, not vnlike those of groundswell: among which rise vp stalkes of the height of a cubit, set with the like leaues, but lesser, in the top whereof do grow large white floures with yellow thrums in the middle like those of the single field Daisy or Mayweed, without any smell at all. The root is full of strings.


 The Place.
It groweth in Medowes and in the borders of fields almost euery where.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in May and Iune.


 The Names.
It is called (as we haue said) Bellis maior, and also (...) media vulnerariorum, to make a difrence betweene it and Bugula, which is the true Consolida media: notwithstanding this is holden of all to bee Consolida medij generis, or a kinde of middle Consound: in High Dutch, as Fuchsius reporteth, (...): in English, the Great Daisie and Maudelen woort.


 The Temperature.
This great Daisie is moist in the end of the second degree, and cold in the beginning of the same.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of the great Maudleine woort are good against all burning vlcers and apostemes, against  the inflammation and running of the eies, being applied thereto.
The same made vp in an vnguent or salue with wax, oile, and turpentine, is most excellent for  wounds, especially those wherein is any inflammation, and will not come to digestion or maturation, as are those weeping (...) made in the knees, elbowes, and other ioints.
The iuice, decoction, or distilled water, is drunk to very good purpose against the rupture or any  inward burstings.
The herbe is good to be put into Vulnerarie drinks or potions, as one simple belonging thereto  most necessarie, to the which effect, the best practised do vse it, as a simple in such cases of great effect.
It likewise asswageth the cruell torments of the gout, vsed with a few Mallows and butter boiled  and made to the sorme of a pultis.
The same receipt aforesaid vsed in Clysters, profiteth much against the vehement heat in agues, and ceaseth the torments or wringing of the guts or bowels.




CHAP. 203. Of little Daisies.

 The Description.
1 THe Daisie bringeth forth many leaues from a threddy root, smooth, fat, long, and somwhat round withall, very sleightly indented about the edges, for the most part lying vpon the ground: among which rise vp the floures, euery one with his owne slender stem, almost like those of Camomill, but lesser, of a perfect white colour, and very double.
2 The double red Daisie is like vnto the precedent in euery respect, sauing in the colour of the floures: for this plant bringeth forth floures of a red colour, and the other white as aforesaid.
@ These double Daisies are of two sorts, that is either smaller or larger; and these againe either white or red, or of both mixed together: wherefore I haue giuen you in the first place the figure of the small, and in the second that of the larger.
3 Furthermore, there is another pretty double daisie which differs from the first described only in the floure, which at the sides thereof puts forth many foot-stalkes carrying also little double floures, being commonly of a red colour; so that each stalke carries as it were an old one and the brood thereof: whence they haue fitly termed it the childing Daisie. @


1 Bellis minor multiplex flore albo vel rubro. The lesser double red or white Daisie.


2 Bellis media multiplex flore albo vel rubro. The larger double white or red Daisie.


4 The wilde field Daisie hath many leaues spred vpon the ground like those of the garden Daisie: among which rise vp slender stems; on the top whereof do grow small single floures like those of Camomill, set about a bunch of yellow thrums, with a pale of white leaues, sometimes white, now and then red, and often of both mixed together. The root is threddy.
5 There doth likewise grow in the fields another sort of wilde Daisie, agreeing with the former in each respect, sauing that it is somewhat greater than the other, and the leaues are somwhat more cut in the edges, and larger.
6 The blew Italian Daisie hath many small threddy roots, from the which rise vp leaues like

@ 3 Bellis minor prolifera. Childing Daisie.
4 Bellis minor syluestris. The small wilde Daisie.
5 Bellis media syluestris. The middle wilde Daisie.
those of the common Daisie, of a darke greene colour: among which commeth vp a fat stemme set round about with the like leaues, but lesser. The floures grow at the top globe-fashion, that is, round like a ball, of a perfect blew colour, verie like vnto the floures of Mountaine Scabious.
7 The French blew Daisie is like vnto the other blew Daisies in each respect, sauing it is altogether lesser, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ There were formerly three figures and descriptions of this blew Daisie, but one of them might haue serued; for they differ but in the tallnesse of their growth, and in the bredth and narrownesse of their leaues. @


 The Place.
The double Daisies are planted in gardens: the others grow wilde euery where.

The blew Daisies are strangers in England; their naturall place of abode is set forth in their seuerall titles.


6 Bellis coerulea siue Globularia (...). The blew Italian Daisie.


7 Bellis coerulea Monspeliaca. Blew French Daisies.




 The Time.
The Daisies do floure most part of the Sommer.


 The Names.
The Daisie is called in high-Dutch Maszlieben: in low Dutch, Margrieten: in Latine, Bellis minor, and Consolida minor, or the middle Consound: of Tragus, Primula veris; but that name is more proper vnto Primrose: of some, Herba Margarita, or Margarites herbe: in French, Marguerites, and Cassaudes: in Italian, Fiori di prima veri gentili. In English, Daisies, and Bruisewort.
The blew Daisie is called Bellis coerulea: of some, Globularia, of the round forme of the floure: it is also called Aphyllanthes, and Frondislora: in Italian, Botanaria: in English, blew Daisies, and Globe Daisie.


 The Temperature.
The lesser Daisies are cold and moist, being moist in the end of the second degree, and cold in the beginning of the same.


 The Vertues.
The Daisies doe mitigate all kinde of paines, but especially of the ioynts, and gout proceeding  from an hot and dry humor, if they be stamped with new butter vnsalted, and applied vpon the pained place; but they worke more effectually if Mallowes be added thereto.
The leaues of Daisies vsed amongst other Pot-herbes doe make the belly soluble; and they  are also put into Clysters with good successe, in hot burning feuers, and against inflammations of the intestines.
The iuyce of the leaues and roots snift vp into the nosthrils, purgeth the head mightily of foule  and filthy slimie humors, and helpeth the megrim.
The same giuen to little dogs with milke keepeth them from growing great 
The leaues stamped taketh away bruises and swellings proceeding of some (...), if they be  stamped and laid thereon; whereupon it was called in old time Bruisewort.
The iuyce put into the eyes cleareth them, and taketh away the watering.
The decoction of the field Daisie (which is the best for physicks vse) made in water and drunke, is good against agues, inflammation of the liuer, and all other the inward parts.




CHAP. 204. Of Mouse-eare.

 The Description.
1 THe great Mouse-eare hath great and large leaues greater than our common (...), or Mouse-eare, thicke, and full of substance: the stalkes and leaues be hoarie and white, with a silken mossinesse in handling like silke, pleasant and faire in view: it beareth three or foure quadrangled stalkes, somewhat knotty, a foot long: the roots are hard, wooddy, and full of strings: the floures come forth at the top of the stalke, like vnto the small Pisseabed, or Dandelion, of a bright yellow colour.
2 The second kinde of Pylosella is that which we call Auricula muris, or Mouse-eare, being a very common herb, but few more worthy of consideration because of his good effect, and yet clean vnremembred of the old Writers. It is called Pylosella of the rough hairy and whitish substance growing on the leaues, which are somewhat long like the little Daisie, but that they haue a small hollownesse in them resembling the eare of a Mouse: vpon the which consideration some haue called it (...); wherein they were greatly deceiued, for it is nothing like vnto the (...) of (...): his small stalkes are likewise hairy, slender, and creeping vpon the ground; his floures are double, and of a pale yellow colour, much like vnto Sonchus, or Hieracium, or Hawkeweed.


1 (...) major. Great Mouse-eare.


2 Pylosella repens. Creeping Mouse-eare.


3 The small Mouse-eare with broad leaues hath a small tough root, from which rise vp many hairy and hoarie broad leaues spred vpon the ground; among which growes vp a slender stem, at the top whereof stand two or three small yellow floures, which being ripe turne vnto downe that is caried away with the winde.


 The Place.
These plants do grow vpon sandy bankes and vntoiled places that lie open to the aire.


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune.



 The Names.
Great Mouse-eare is called of the later herbarists Pylosella: the smaller likewise Pylosella, and Auricula muris: in Dutch, Nagelcruijt, and Muysoor: Lacuna thinkes it Holostium: in French, Oreille derat, ou souris: in Italian, Pelosella: in English, Mouse-eare.


 The Temperature.
They are hot and dry of temperature, of an excellent astringent facultie, with a certaine hot tenuitie admixed.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of Pylosella drunke doth cure and heale all wounds, both inward and outward: it  eureth hernies, ruptures, or burstings.
The leaues dried and made into pouder, do profit much in healing of wounds, being strewed  thereupon.
The decoction of the iuyce is of such excellencie, that if steele-edged tooles red hot be drenched  and cooled therein oftentimes, it maketh them so hard, that they will cut stone or iron, be they neuer so hard, without turning the edge or waxing dull.
This herbe being vsed in gargarismes cureth the loosenesse of the Vuula.
Being taken in drinke it healeth the fluxes of the wombe, as also the diseases called Dysenteria and Enterocele: it glueth and consoundeth wounds, stayeth the swelling of the spleene, and the bloudy excrements procured thereby.
The Apothecaries of the Low-countries make a syrrup of the iuyce of this herb, which they vse  for the cough, consumption, and ptisicke. 

I haue in this chapter omitted two figures and one description: the first of the two omitted figures, which should haue beene the third, differs little from the first but in the smallnesse of the stalke, and fewnesse of the floures at the top thereof: the other, which was in the fourth place, was figured and described by me formerly in the fourth place of the 54 chapter of this booke.




CHAP. 205. Of Cotton-weed or Cud-weed.


1 Gnaphalium Anglicum. English Cudweed.


2 Gnaphalium vulgare. Common Cudweed.




 The Description.
1 ENglish Cudweed hath sundry slender and vpright stalkes diuided into many branches, and groweth as high as common Wormwood, whose colour and shape it doth much resemble. The leaues shoot from the bottome of the turfe ful of haires, in shape somewhat like a Willow leafe below, but aboue they be narrower, and like the leaues of Psyllium or Flea-wort: among which do grow small pale coloured floures like those of the small Coniza or Flea-bane. The whole plant is of a bitter taste.
2 The second being our common Gnaphalium or Cudweed is a base or low herbe, nine or ten inches long, hauing many small stalks or tender branches, and little leaues, couered all ouer with a certain white cotton or fine wooll, and very thick: the floures be yellow, and grow like buttons at the top of the stalkes.
3 The third kinde of Cudweed or Cotton-weed, being of the sea, is like vnto the other Cudweed last described, but is altogether smaller and lower, seldome growing much aboue a handfull high: the leaues grow thicke vpon the stalkes, and are short, flat, and very white, soft and woolly. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes in small round buttons, of colour and fashion like the other Cudweed.
4 The fourth being the Cotton-weed of the hills and stony mountains, is so exceeding white and hoary, that one would thinke it to be a plant made of wooll, which may very easily be known by his picture, without other description.


3 Gnaphalium marinum. Sea Cudweed.


4. 5. Gnaphalium montanum purpureum and album. White and purple mountaine Cotton-weed.


5 The fifth kinde of Cotton-weed hath leaues and stalkes like the other of his kinde, and differeth in that, that this plant beareth a bush or tuft of purple floures, otherwise it is very like.
6 The sixth is like vnto the last recited, but greater: the floures are of an exceeding bright red colour, and of an aromaticall sweet smell.
7 The seuenth kinde of Gnaphalium or Cotton-weed of Clusius his description, growes nine or ten inches high, hauing little long leaues like the small Mous-eare, woolly within, and of a hoarie colour on the outside: the stalkes in like manner are very woolly, at the top whereof commeth forth a faire floure and a strange, hauing such woolly leaues bordering the floure about, that a man would thinke it to be nothing else but wooll it selfe: and in the middest of the floure come forth

6 Gnaphalium montanum (...) rubens. Bright red mountaine Cotton-weed.The figure that was formerly in the seuenth place should haue beene in the eleuenth; and that in the eleuenth in the (...).

 7 Gnaphalium Alpinum. Rocke Cotton-weed.@ 8 Gnaphalium Americanum. Liue for euer.9 Filago minor. Small Cud-weed.
sundry small heads of a pale yellow colour, like vnto the other of this kinde. The root is blacke and somewhat fibrous.
8 There is a kinde of Cotton-weed, being of greater beauty than the rest, that hath strait and vpright stalks 3 foot high or more, couered with a most soft and fine wooll, and in such plentifull manner, that a man may with his hands take it from the stalke in great quantitie: which stalke is beset with many small long and narrow leaues, greene vpon the inner side, and hoary on the other side, fashioned somewhat like the leaues of Rosemary, but greater. The floures do grow at the top of the stalkes in bundles or tufts, consisting of many small floures of a white colour, and very double, (...), or as it were consisting of little siluer scales thrust close together, which doe make the same very double. When the floure hath long flourished, and is waxen old, then comes there in the middest of the floure a certaine browne yellow thrumme, such as is in the midst of the Daisie: which floure being gathered when it is young, may be kept in such manner as it was gathered (I meane in such freshnesse and well liking) by the space of a whole yeare after, in your chest or elsewhere: wherefore our English women haue called it Liue-long, or Liue for euer, which name doth aptly answer his effects. @ Clusius receiued this plant out of England, and first set it forth by the name of Gnaphalium Americanum, or Argyrocome. @
9 This plant hath three or foure small grayish cottony or woolly stalkes, growing strait from the root, and commonly diuided into many little branches: the leaues be long, narrow, whitish, soft, and woolly, like the other of his kinde: the floures be round like buttons, growing very many together at the top of the stalkes, but nothing so yellow as Mouse-eare, which turne into downe, and are caried away with the winde.


10 (...), siue Herba impia. Herbe impious, or wicked Cudweed.


11 Leontopodium, siue Pes Leoninus. Lions Cudweed.


10 The tenth is like vnto the last before mentioned, in stalkes, leaues, and floures, but much larger, and for the most part those floures which appeare first are the lowest and basest, and they are ouertopt by other floures which come on younger branches, and grow higher, as children secking to ouergrow or ouertop their parents, (as many wicked children do) for which cause it hath beene called Herbaimpia, that is, the wicked Herbe, or Herbe Impious.
11 The eleuenth plant comprehended vnder the title of Gnaphalium, (being without doubt a kinde thereof, as may appeare by the shape of his floures and stalks, couered ouer with a soft wool like vnto the other kindes of Cotton-weed) is an handfull high or thereabouts, beset with leaues

The figure that was formerly in the seuenth place should haue beene in the eleuenth; and that in the eleuenth in the (...).

 12 Leontopodium (...). Small Lyons Cudweed.
@ 13 Gnaphalium oblongo (...). Long leaued Cudweed.
@ 14 Gnaphalium minus latiore (...). Small broad leaued Cudweed.
like Gnaphalium Anglicum, but somewhat broader. At the top of the stalke groweth a floure of a blackish brown violet colour, beset about with rough and woolly hairie leaues, which make the whole floure to resemble the rough haired foot of a Lyon, of a Hare, or a Beare, or rather in mine opinionof a rough footed Doue. The heads of these floures when they are spred abroad carry a greater circumference than is required in so small a plant; and when the floure is faded, the seed is wrapped in such a deale of wooll that it is scarsely to be found out.
12 This small kinde of (...) being likewise a kind of Cotton-weed, neither by Dioscorides or any other antient writer once remembred, hath one single stalke nine inches in height, and the leaues of Gnaphalium montanum; which leaues and stalkes are white, with a thicke hoary woollinesse, bearing at the top pale yellow floures like Gnaphalium montanum: the root is slender and wooddy.
@ 13 This, which Clusius calls Gnaphalium (...) 2. hath small stalkes so ne handfull high or somewhat more, of which

some stand vpright, others lie along vpon the ground, being round, hairy, and vnorderly set with soft hoary leaues ingirting their stalkes at their setting on, and sharpe pointed at their vpper ends. The tops of the stalkes carry many whitish heads full of a yellowish downe: the root is thicke and blackish, with some fibres.
14 This sends vp one stalke parted into seuerall branches set here and there with broad (...) and hoarie leaues, and at the diuision of the branches and amongst the leaues grow seuen or eight little heads thicke thrust together, being of a grayish yellow colour, and full of much downe: the root is vnprofitable, and perishes as soone as it hath perfected his seed. Clusius calls this (...) Plateau 3. he hauing as it seemes receiued them both from his friend Iaques Plateau. @


 The Place.
The first groweth in the darke woods of Hampsted, and in the woods neere vnto Deptford by London. The second groweth vpon dry sandy bankes. The third groweth at a place called Merezey, six miles from Colchester, neere vnto the sea side. @ I also had it sent me from my worshipfull friend Mr. Thomas Glynn, who gathered it vpon the sea coast of Wales. @
The rest grow vpon mountaines, hilly grounds, and barren pastures.
The kinde of Gnaphalium newly set forth (to wit Americanum) groweth naturally neere vnto the Mediterranean sea, from whence it hath beene brought and planted in our English gardens. @ If this be true which our Author here affirmes, it might haue haue had a fitter (at least a neerer) denomination than from America: yet Bauhine affirmes that it growes frequently in Brasill, and it is not improbable that both their assertions be true. @


 The Time.
They floure for the most part from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Cotton-weed is called in Greeke Gnaphalion; and it is called Gnaphalion, because men vse the tender leaues of it in stead of bombaste or Cotton, as Paulus Aegineta writeth. Pliny saith it is called Chamaexylon, as though he should say Dwarfe Cotton; for it hath a soft and white cotton like vnto bombaste: whereupon also it was called of diuers (...), and (...): of others, Centunculus, Centuncularis, and Albinum; which word is found among the bastard names: but the later word, by reason of the white colour, doth reasonably well agree with it. It is also called Bombax, Humilis filago, and Herba Impia, because the yonger, or those floures that spring vp later, are higher, and ouertop those that come first, as many wicked children do vnto their parents, as before touched in the description: in English, Cotton-weed, Cud-weed, Chaffe-weed, and petty Cotton.


 The Nature.
These herbes be of an astringent or binding and drying qualitie.


 The Vertues.
Gnaphalium boyled in strong lee cleanseth the haire from nits and lice: also the herbe being laid  in ward-robes and presses keepeth apparell from moths.
The same boyled in wine and drunken, killeth wormes and bringeth them forth, and preuaileth  against the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts.
The fume or smoke of the herbe dried, and taken with a funnell, being burned therein, and receiued  in such manner as we vse to take the fume of Tabaco, that is, with a crooked pipe made for the same purpose by the Potter, preuaileth against the cough of the lungs, the great ache or paine of the head, and clenseth the brest and inward parts.



CHAP. 206. Of Golden Moth-wort, or Cudweed.

 The Description.
1 GOlden Moth-wort bringeth forth slender stalkes somewhat hard and wooddy, diuided into diuers small branches; whereupon do grow leaues somewhat rough, and of a white colour, very much iagged like Southernwood. The floures stand on the tops of the stalkes, ioyned together in tufts, of a yellow colour glittering like gold, in forme resembling the scaly floures of Tansie, or the middle button of the floures of Camomil; which being gathred before they be ripe or withered, remaine beautifull long time after, as my selfe did see in the hands of Mr. Wade, one of the Clerks of her Maiesties Counsell, which were sent him among other things

from Padua in Italy. For which cause of long lasting, the images and carued gods were wont to weare garlands thereof: whereupon some haue called it Gods floure. For which purpose (...) King of Egypt did most diligently obserue them, as Pliny writeth.


1 Elyochryson, siue Coma aurea. Golden Moth-wort.




 The Place.
It growes in most vntilled places of Italy and Spaine, in medowes where the soile is barren, and about the banks of riuers; it is a stranger in England.


 The Time.
It floures in August and September: notwithstanding Theophrastus and Plmy reckon it among the floures of the Spring.


 The Names.
Golden Moth-wort is called of Dioscorides Elichryson: Pliny and Theophrastus call it (...): Gaza translates it Aurelia: in English, Gold-floure, Golden Moth-wort.


 The Temperature.
It is (saith Galen) of power to cut and make thinne.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides teacheth, that the tops thereof  drunke in wine are good for them that can hardly make water; against stingings of Serpents, paines of the huckle bones: and taken in sweet wine it dissolueth congealed bloud.
The branches and leaues laid amongst  cloathes keepeth them from moths, whereupon it hath beene called of some Moth-weed, or Mothwort. 

(...) formerly were two (...) and descriptions of the same Plant.




CHAP. 207. Of Golden Floure-Gentle.

 The Description.
1 THis yellow Euerlasting or Floure-Gentle, called of the later Herbarists Yellow Stoecas, is a plant that hath stalkes of a span long, and slender, whereupon do grow narrow leaues white and downie, as are also the stalks. The floures stand on the tops of the stalks, consisting of a scattered or disordered scaly tuft, of a reasonable good smell, of a bright yellow colour; which being gathered before they be ripe, do keep their colour and beauty a long time without withering, as do most of the Cottonweeds or Cudweeds, whereof this is a kinde. The root is blacke and slender. @ There is some varietie in the heads of this plant, for they are sometimes very large and longish, as Camerarius notes in his Epitome of (...); otherwhiles they are very compact and round, and of the bignesse of the ordinarie.
2 This growes to some soot or more high, and hath rough downie leaues like the former, but broader: the floures are longer, but of the same yellow colour and long continuance as those of the last described. This varies somthing in the bredth and length of the leaues, whence Tabernamontanus gaue three figures thereof, and therein was followed by our Author, as you shall finde more particularly specified at the end of the chapter. @
3 About Nemausium and Montpelier there growes another kinde of Chrysocome, or as Lobel termes it, Stoechas Citrina altera, but that as this plant is in all points like, so in all points it is lesser and slenderer, blacker, and not of such beauty as the former, growing more neere vnto an ash colour, consisting of many small twigs a foot long. The root is lesser, and hath fewer strings annexed thereto; and it is seldome found but in the cliffes and crags, among rubbish, and on walls of cities. This plant is browne, without sent or sauor like the other: euery branch hath his own bunch of floures comming forth of a scaly or round head, but not a number heaped together, as in the first kinde. It prospereth well in our London Gardens.



There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...) (...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which stil keeps the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were onely varieties of this, according to (...): but if they be not varieties, but made to expresse the 2. figures of the (...). which we here giue, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth haue beene put in the third place, and the fift in the fourth, and the third should haue been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.

 1 (...) Citrina, siue Amaranthus luteus. Golden Stoechas, or Goldilockes.


There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...) (...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which stil keeps the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were onely varieties of this, according to (...): but if they be not varieties, but made to expresse the 2. figures of the (...). which we here giue, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth haue beene put in the third place, and the fift in the fourth, and the third should haue been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.

 2 Amaranthus luteus latifolius. Broad leaued Goldilockes.


There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...) (...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which stil keeps the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were onely varieties of this, according to (...): but if they be not varieties, but made to expresse the 2. figures of the (...). which we here giue, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth haue beene put in the third place, and the fift in the fourth, and the third should haue been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.

 3 Chrysocome capitulis conglobatis. Round headed Goldilockes.


There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...) (...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which stil keeps the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were onely varieties of this, according to (...): but if they be not varieties, but made to expresse the 2. figures of the (...). which we here giue, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth haue beene put in the third place, and the fift in the fourth, and the third should haue been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.

 4 Amaranthus luteus floreoblongo. Golden Cudweed.


4 There is a kinde hereof beeing a very rare plant, and as rare to be found where it naturally groweth, which is in the woods among the Scarlet-Okes betweene Sommieres and Mountpellier. It is a fine and beautifull plant, in shew passing the last described Stoechas Citrina altera: but the leaues of this kinde are broad, and somewhat hoarie, as is all the rest of the whole plant; the stalke a foot long, and beareth the very floures of Stoechas Citrina altera, but bigger and longer, and somewhat like the floures of Lactuca agrestis: the root is like the former, without any manifest smel, little knowne, hard to finde, whose faculties be yet vnknowne.



There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...) (...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which stil keeps the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were onely varieties of this, according to (...): but if they be not varieties, but made to expresse the 2. figures of the (...). which we here giue, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth haue beene put in the third place, and the fift in the fourth, and the third should haue been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.

 5 Heliochrysos syluectris. Wilde Goldylockes.


There were formerly the same number of (...); as are now in this Chapter, but no (...) agreeing with the (...), the first was of (...) (...) being the (...) (...) of (...): The second was of the (...) (...) of Tragus, which stil keeps the 2 place: and the 4. and 5. were onely varieties of this, according to (...): but if they be not varieties, but made to expresse the 2. figures of the (...). which we here giue, as I con (...) they were, then should the fourth haue beene put in the third place, and the fift in the fourth, and the third should haue been put in the fifth, as you may see now it is.

 5 This is a wilde kinde (which Lobel setteth forth) that here may be inserted, called Eliochrysos (...). The woolly or flockey leafe of this plant resembleth Gnaphalium vulgare, but that it is somewhat broader in the middle: the floures grow clustering together vpon the tops of the branches, of a yellow colour, and almost like those of Maudline: the roots are blacke and wooddie.


 The Place.
The first mentioned growes in Italy, and other hot countries: and the second growes in rough and grauelly places almost euery where neere vnto the Rhene, especially between Spires and Wormes.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Golden floure is called in Latine Coma aurea, of his golden locks or beautifull bush, and also Tineraria: in shops, Stoechas citrina, Amaranthus luteus, (...), and Tragi: of some, Linaria aurea, but not truely: in Greeke, Chryscome: in Dutch, Reynbloemen, and Motten cruyt: in Italian, Amarantho Giallo: in English, Gold-floure, Gods floure, Goldilockes, and Golden Stoechas.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The floures of Golden Stoechados  boiled in wine and drunke, expell worms out of the bellie; and being boiled in Lee made of strong ashes doth kill lice and nits, if they bee bathed therewith. The other faculties are refered to the former plants mentioned in the last chapter.



CHAP. 208. Of Costmarie and Maudelein.

 The Description.
1 COstmary groweth vp with round hard stalkes two foot high, bearing long broad leaues finely nicked in the edges, of an ouerworn whitish green colour. The tuft or bundle is of a golden colour, consisting of many little floures like clusters, ioyned together in a rundle after the manner of golden Stoechados. The root is of a wooddy substance, by nature verie durable, not without a multitude of little strings hanging thereat. The whole plant is of a pleasant smell, sauour, or taste.
2 Maudleine is somewhat like to Costmary (whereof it is a kinde) in colour, smell, taste, and in the golden floures, set vpon the tops of the stalks in round clusters. It bringeth forth a number of stalkes, slender, and round. The leaues are narrow, long, indented, and deepely cut about the edges. The cluster of floures is lesser than that of Costmarie, but of a better smell, and yellower colour. The roots are long lasting and many.
@ 3 There is another kinde of Balsamita minor, or Ageratum, which hath leaues lesser and narrower than the former, and those not snipt about the edges: the vmbel or tuft of floures is

1 Balsamita mas. Costmarie.
2 Balsamita foemina, sive Ageratum. Maudelein.
@ 3 Ageratum folijs non serratis. Maudelein with vncut leaues.
4 Ageratum floribus albis. White floured Maudlein.
yellow like as the former, and you may call each of these last described at your pleasure, either Ageratum, or Balsamita: the Graecians call it (...), which is in Latine Ageratum, vel non (...), called in shops (though vntruly) Eupatorium Mesvae. The floures are of a beautifull and seemely shew, which will not lose their excellencie of grace in growing, vntill they bevery old, and therefore called Ageratum, or Non senescens, as before; and are like in tuft to Eliochryson, but of a white colour; and this is thought to be the true and right Ageratum of Dioscorides, although therehath been great, controuersie which should be the true plant.
@ 4 This differeth not from the common Maudelein, but in the colour of the floures, which are white, when as those of the ordinarie sort are yellow. @


 The Place.
They grow euery where in gardens, and are cherished for their sweet floures and leaues.


 The Time.
They bring forth their tufts of yellow floures in the Sommer moneths.



 The Names.
Costmarie is called in Latine Balsamita maior or mas: of some, Costus (...): it is also called Mentha Graeca: and Saracenica Officinarum: of Tragus, Alisma: of Matthiolus, (...) Graeca: of others, (...) (...) and Herbalassulata: of some, Herba D. Mariae: in English, Costmarie, and Ale-coast: in High Dutch, Frauwenkraut: in low Dutch, (...) windkraut: in French, Coq.
Maudlein is without doubt a kinde of Costmarie, called of the Italians Herba Giulia: of Valerius Cordus, Mentha Corymbifera minor: and Eupatorium Mesue: It is iudged to be Dioscorides his Ageratum, and it is the Costus minor hortensis of Gesner: we call it in English Maudlein.


 The Nature.
They are hot and drie in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
These plants are very effectuall, especially Maudlein, taken either inwardly or else outwardly  to prouoke vrine; and the fume thereof doth the same, and mollifieth the hardnesse of the Matrix.
Costmarie is put into Ale to steepe, as also into the barrels and Stands amongst those herbes  wherewith they doe make Sage Ale; which drinke is very profitable for the diseases before spoken of.
The leaues of Maudleine and Adders tongue stamped and boiled in Oile Oliue, adding thereto  a little wax, rosin, and a little turpentine, maketh an excellent healing vnguent, or incarnatiue salue to raise or bring vp flesh from a deepe and hollow wound or vlcer, whereof I haue had long experience.
The Conserue made with the leaues of Costmarie and Sugar, doth warme and drie the braine, and openeth the stoppings of the same: stoppeth all Catarrhes, rheumes and distillations, taken in the quantitie of a beane.
The leaues of Costmarie boiled in wine and drunken, cureth the griping paine of the bellie, the  guts and bowels, and cureth the bloudie flix.
(...) is good for them that haue the greene sicknesse, or the dropsie, especially in the beginning; and  it helpeth all that haue a weake and cold liuer.
The seed expelleth all manner of wormes out of the belly, as wormseed doth.



CHAP. 209. Of Tansie.

 The Description.
1 TAnsie groweth vp with many stalkes, bearing on the tops of them certaine clustered tufts, with floures like the round buttons of yellow Romane Cammomill, or Feuerfew (without any leaues paled about them) as yellow as gold. The leaues be long, made as it were of a great many set together vpon one stalke, like those of Agrimony, or rather wild Tansie, very like to the female Ferne, but softer and lesser, and euery one of them slashed in the edges as are the leaues of Ferne. The root is tough and of a wooddie substance. The whole plant is bitter in taste, and of a strong smell, but yet pleasant.
2 The double English Tansie hath leaues infinitly iagged and nicked, and curled withall, like vnto a plume of feathers: it is altogether like vnto the other, both in smell and taste, as also in floures, but more pleasantly smelling by many degrees, wherein especially consisteth the difference.
3 The third kinde of Tansie hath leaues, roots, stalkes, and branches like the other, and differeth from them, in that this hath no smell or sauour at all, and the floures are like the common single Fetherfew.
@ 4 Clusius hath described another bigger kind of vnsauorie Tansie, whose figure here we giue you; it grows some cubit and halfe high, with crested stalks, hauing leaues set vpon somwhat longer stalks than those of the last described, otherwise much like them: the floures are much larger, being of the bignesse of the great Daisie, and of the same colour: the seede is long and blacke: The root is of the thicknes of ones finger, running vpon the surface of the ground, and putting forth some fibres, and it lasts diuers yeares, so that the plant may be encreased thereby. This floures in May and Iune, and grows wilde vpon diuers hills in Hungary and Austria. @



1 Tanacetum. Tansie.


2 Tanacetum (...) Anglicum. Double English Tansie.


3 Tanacetum non odorum. Vnsauorie Tansie.


@ 4 Tanacetum in odorum (...). Great vnsauorie Tansie.





The figure that was formerly in the (...) place was onely the varietie of the ordinary Tansie, hauing a white floure, but (...) which agreed (...) the (...) was pag (...). vnder the title of (...). (...) (...) nobile.

 4 Tanacetum minus album. Small white Tansie.


5 The fifth kinde of Tansie (...) broad leaues, much iagged and wel cut, like the (...) of Fetherfew, but smaller, and more deeply cut. The stalke is small, a foot long, whereupon doe grow little tufts of little white floures, like the tuft of Milfoile or Yarrow. The herbe is in smell and sauour like the common (...), but not altogether so strong.


 The Place.
The first groweth wilde in fields as well as in gardens: the others grow in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The first is called (...); the second double Tansie, the third vnsauory Tansie, the last white Tansie: in Latine, Tanacetum, and Athanasia, as though it were immortall: because the floures do not speedily wither: of some, Artemisia, but vntruly.


 The Nature.
The Tansies which smel sweet are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third. That without smell is hot and drie, and of a meane temperature.


 The Vertues.
In the Spring time are made with the leaues  hereof newly sprung vp, and with egs, cakes or tansies, which be pleasant in taste, and good for the (...). For if any bad humours cleaue thereunto, it doth perfectly concoct them, and scowre them downewards. The root preserued with hony or sugar, is an especial thing against the gout, if euery day for a certaine space, a reasonable quantitie thereof be eaten fasting.
The seed of Tansie is a singular and approoued medicine against Wormes, for in what sort soeuer  it be taken, it killeth and driueth them forth.
The same pound, and mixed with oile Oliue, is very good against the paine and shrinking of the  sinewes.
Also being drunke with wine, it is good against the paine of the bladder, and when a man cannot  pisse but by drops.



CHAP. 210. Of Fetherfew.

 The Description.
1 FEuerfew bringeth forth many little round stalkes, diuided into certaine branches. The leaues are tender, diuersly torne and iagged, and nickt on the edges like the first and nethermost leaues of Coriander, but greater. The floures stand on the tops of the branches, with a small pale of white leaues, set round about a yellow ball or button, like the wilde field Daisie. The root is hard and tough: the whole plant is of a light whitish greene colour, of a strong smell and bitter taste
2 The second kinde of Feuerfew, Matricaria, or Parthenium, differeth from the former, in that it hath double floures; (...) in smell, leaues, and branches, it is all one with the common Feuerfew.
3 There is a third sort called Mountaine Feuerfew, of Carolus Clusius his description, that hath

1 Matricaria. Feuerfew.
2 Matricaria duplici flore. Double Feuerfew.
@ 3 Matricaria Alpina Clusij. Mountaine Feuerfew.
small and fibrous roots; from which proceed slender wooddie stalks, a foot high and somewhat more, beset or garnished about with leaues like Camomill, deepely iagged or cut, of the sauour or smell of Feuerfew, but not so strong; in taste hot, but not vnpleasant. At the top of the stalks there come forth smal white floures not like vnto the first, but rather like vnto Absynthium album, or White Wormewood.
4 I haue growing in my Garden another sort, like vnto the first kinde, but of a most pleasant sweet sauour, in respect of any of the rest. @ This seemes to be the Matricaria altera ex Ilua, mentioned by Camerarius in his Hortus medicus. @


 The Place.
The common single Feuerfew groweth in hedges, gardens, and about old wals; it ioyeth to grow among rubbish. There is oftentimes found when it is digged vp a little cole vnder the strings of the root, and neuer without it, whereof Cardane in his booke of Subtilties setteth down diuers vaine and trifling things.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part all the Sommer long.


 The Names.
Feuerfew is called in Greeke of Dioscorides (...): of Galen, and Paulus one of his sect, (...): in Latine, Parthenium, Matricaria, and

Febrifuga, of Fuchsius, (...) Tenuifolia: in Italian, Amarella: in Dutch, Moeder crupt: in French, Espargoute: in English, Fedderfew and Feuerfew, taken from his force of driuing away Agues.


 The Temperature.
Feuerfew doth manifestly heat, it is hot in the third degree, and drie in the second; it clenseth, purgeth, or scoureth, openeth and fully performeth all that bitter things can do.


 The Vertues.
It is a great remedie against the diseases of the matrix; it procureth womens sicknes with speed;  it bringeth forth the after birth and the dead childe, whether it bee drunke in a decoction, or boiled in a bath and the woman sit ouer it; or the herbes sodden and applied to the priuie part, in manner of a cataplasme or pultis.
Dioscorides also teacheth, that it is profitably applied to Saint Anthonies fire, to all hot inflammations, and hot swellings, if it be laid vnto, both leaues and floures.
The same Author affirmeth, that the pouder of Feuerfew drunke with Oxymell, or syrup of Vineger, or wine for want of the others, draweth away flegme and (...), and is good for them that are pursie, and haue their lungs stuffed with flegme; and is profitable likewise to be drunke a gainst the stone, as the same Author saith.
Feuerfew dried and made into pouder, and two drams of it taken with honie or sweet wine, purgeth  by siege melancholy and flegme; wherefore it is very good for them that are giddie in the head, or which haue the turning called Vertigo, that is a swimming and turning in the head. Also it is good for such as be melancholike, sad, pensiue, and without speech.
The herbe is good against the suffocation of the mother, that is, the hardnesse and stopping of  the same, being boiled in wine, and applied to the place.
The decoction of the same is good for women to sit ouer, for the purposes aforesaid.
It is vsed both in drinks, and bound to the wrests with bay salt, and the pouder of glasse stamped  together, as a most singular experiment against the ague.



CHAP. 211. Of Poley, or Pellamountaine.


1 Polium montanum album. White Poley mountaine.


2 Polium montanum (...). Yellow Poley mountaine.




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Polium; or in English Poley of the mountain, is a little tender and sweet smelling herbe, verie hoarie, whereupon it tooke his name: for it is not onely hoary in part, but his hoarie flockinesse possesseth the whole plant, tufts and all, being no lesse hoarie than Gnaphalium, especially where it groweth neere the Sea at the bending of the hils, or neere the sandie shores of the Mediterranean Sea: from his wooddie and somewhat threddie root shooteth forth straight from the earth a number of small round stalkes nine inches long, and by certaine distances from the stalke proceed somewhat long leaues like Gnaphalium, which haue light nickes about the edges, that stand one against another, inclosing the stalke: in the toppe of the stalkes stand spokie tufts of floures, white of colour like Serpillum. This plant is stronger of sent or sauour than any of the rest following, which sent is somewhat sharp, and affecting the nose with his sweetnesse.
2 The tuftes of the second kinde of Polium are longer than the tuftes or floures of the last before mentioned, and they are of a yellow colour; the leaues also are broader, otherwise they are very like.
3 From the wooddie rootes of this third kinde of Polium proceed a great number of shootes like vnto the last rehearsed, lying flat vpright vpon the ground, whose slender branches take hold vpon the vpper part of the earth where they creepe. The floures are like the other, but of a purple colour.
4 The last kinde of Polium, and of all the rest the smallest, is of an indifferent good smell, in all points like vnto the common Polium, but that it is foure times lesser, hauing the leaues not snipt, and the floures white.
@ 5 This sends vp many branches from one root like to those of the first described, but shorter and more shrubbie, lying partly vpon the ground; the leaues grow by couples at certain spaces, somewhat like, but lesser than those of Rosemarie or Lauander, greene aboue, and whitish beneath, not snipt about their edges; their taste is bitter, and smell somewhat pleasant: the floures grow plentifully vpon the tops of (...) branches, white of colour, and in shape not vnlike those of the other Poleyes: they grow on a bunch together, and not Spike fashion: the seed is blackish and contained in small vessels: the root is hard and wooddie, with many fibres. Clusius calls this Polium 7. albo flore. It is the Polium alterum of Matthiolius, and Polium recentiorum foemina Lavandulae folio of Lobel. I here giue you (as Clusius also hath done) two figures to make one good one: the former shews the floures and their manner of growing; the other, the seede vessels, and the leaues growing by couples, together with a little better expression of the root. @


3 Polium montanum purpureum. Purple Poley.




 The Place.
These plants do grow naturally vpon the mountaines of France, Italie, Spaine, and other hot regions. They are strangers in England, notwithstanding I haue plants of that Poley with yellow floures by the gift of Lobel.


 The Time.
They floure from the end of May, to the beginning of August.



4 Polium montanum minimum. Creeping Poley.


@ 5 Polium (...) folio, flore (...). Lavander leaued Poley.


Another figure of the Lauander leaued Poley.




 The Names.
Poley mountaine is called in Greeke (...), of his hoarinesse, and in Latine also Polium. Diuers suspect that Polium is (...), and that Dioscorides hath twise intreated of that herbe, vnder diuers names; the kindes, the occasion of the name, and likewise the faculties do agree. There bee two of the Leucades, one (...): that is of the mountaine: the other, (...), which is that with the broader leafe: it is called Leucas of the whitish colour, and Polion of the hoarinesse, because it seemeth like to a mans hoarie head; for whatsoeuer waxeth hoarie, is said to be white.


 The Temperature.
Poley is of (...) drie in the third degree, and hot in the end of the second.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, it is a remedie for them that  haue the dropsie, the yellow iaundice, and that are troubled with the spleene.
It prouoketh vrine, and is put into Mithridate, treacle, and counterpoisons.
It profiteth much against the bitings of venomous  beasts, and driueth away all venomous beasts from the place where it is strewed or burnt.
The same drunke with vineger, is good for 

the diseases of the milt and spleene; it troubleth the stomacke, and afflicteth the head, and prouoketh the loosenesse of the bellie.



CHAP. 212. Of Germander.

 The Kindes.
THe old writers haue set downe no certaine kinds of Germander, yet we haue thought it good, and not without cause, to intreat of mo sorts than haue been obserued of all, diuiding those vnder the title of Teucrium from (...): although they are both of one kind, but yet differing very notably.


 The Description.
3 THe first Germander groweth lowe, with very many branches lying vpon the ground, tough, hard, and wooddie, spreading it selfe here and there: whereupon are placed small leaues snipt about the edges like the teeth of a saw, resembling the shape of an oken leafe. The floures are of a purple colour, very small, standing close to the leaues toward the top of the branches. The seed is little and blacke. The root slender and full of strings, creeping, and alwaies spreading within the ground, whereby it greatly increaseth. @ This is sometimes found with bigger leaues, otherwhiles with lesse; also the floure is sometimes white, and otherwhiles red in the same plant, whence Tabernam. gaue two figures, and our Authour two figures and descriptions, whereof I haue omitted the later, and put the two titles into one. @
2 The second Germander riseth vp with a little straight stalk a span long, and sometimes longer, wooddie and hard like vnto a little shrub: it is afterwards diuided into very many little small branches. The leaues are indented and nicked about the edges, lesser than the leaues of the former, great creeping Germander: the floures likewise stand neere to the leaues, and on the vpper parts of the sprigs, of colour sometimes purple, and oftentimes tending to blewnesse: the roote is diuersly dispersed with many strings.


1 Chamaedrys maior latifolia. Great broad leaued Germander.


2 Chamaedrys minor. Small Germander.





3 Chamaedrys syluestris. Wilde Germander.


3 Wilde Germander hath little stalkes, weake and feeble, edged or cornered, somewhat hairie, and set as it were with ioints; about the which by certaine distances there come forth at each ioint two leaues something broad, nicked in the edges, and something greater than the leaues of creeping Germander, and softer. The floures be of a gallant blew colour, made of foure small leaues a peece, standing orderly on the tops of the tender spriggie spraies; after which come in place little huskes or seede vessels. The root is small and threddie.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in rocky and rough grounds, and in gardens they do easily prosper.
The wilde Germander groweth in manie places about London in Medowes and fertil fields, and in euery place wheresoeuer I haue trauelled in England.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from the end of May, to the later end of August.


 The Names.
Garden Germander is called in Greeke, (...), Chamaedrys: of some, Trissago, and Trixago, and likewise Quercula minor; notwithstanding most of these names do more properly belong to Scordium, or water Germander: in Italian, Querciuola: in English, Germander, or English Treacle: in French, Germandre. Before creeping Germander was knowne, this wilde kinde bare the name of Germander amongst the Apothecaries, and was vsed for the right Germander in the compositions of Medicines: but after the former were brought to light, this began to be named Syluestris, and Spuria Chamaedrys: that is wilde and bastard Germander: of some, Teucrium pratense, and without errour; because all the sorts of plants comprehended vnder the title of Teucrium, are doubtlesse kindes of Germander. Of some it hath been thought to be the plant that Dioscorides called (...), Hierabotane; that is to say, the Holie herbe, if so bee that the Holie herbe, and Verbenaca, or Veruaine, which is called in Greeke (...), be sundrie herbes. Dioscorides maketh them sundrie herbes, describing them apart, the one after the other: but other Authors, as Paulus, Aetius, and Oribasius, make no mention of Herba Sacra, the Holie herbe, but onely of Peristereon: and this same is found to be likewise called Hierabotane, or the Holie Herb, and therefore it is euident that it is one and the selse same plant, called by diuers names: the which things considered, if they say so, and say truely, this wilde Germander cannot be Hierabotane at all, as diuers haue written and said it to be.


 The Temperature.
Garden Germander is of thin parts, and hath a cutting facultie, it is hot and drie almost in the third degree, euen as (...) doth write of Teucrium, or wilde Germandet.
The wilde Germander is likewise hot and drie, and is not altogether without force or power to open and clense: it may be counted among the number of them that do open the liuer and spleen.


 The Vertues.
Germander boiled in water and drunk, deliuereth the bodie from all obstructions or stoppings, diuideth and cutteth tough and clammie humors: being receiued as aforesaid, it is good for them that haue the cough, and shortnesse of breath, the strangurie or stopping of vrine, and helpeth those which are entring into a dropsie.
The leaues stamped with honie and strained, and a drop at sundrie times put into the eies, takes  away the web and hawe in the same, or any dimnesse of sight.
It prouoketh mightily the termes, being boiled in wine, and the decoction drunk; with a fomentation  or bath made also thereof, and the secret parts bathed therewith.




CHAP. 213: Of Tree Germander.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Tree Germander riseth vp with a little straight stalke a cubite high, wooddie and hard like vnto a small wooddie shrubbe. The stalke diuideth it selfe from the bottome vnto the toppe into diuers branches, whereon are set indented leaues nicked about the edges, in shape not much vnlike the leafe of the common Germander. The floures grow among the leaues of a purple colour. The root is wooddie, as is all the rest of the plant.


1 Teucrium latifolium. Tree Germander with broad leaues.


2 Teucrium Pannonicum. Hungarie Germander.


2 The Tree Germander of Hungarie hath many tough threddie roots, from which rise vp diuers weake and feeble stalks, reeling this way and that way; whereupon are set together by couples, long leaues iagged in the edges, not vnlike those of the vpright Fluellen: on the tops of the stalks stand the floures Spike fashion, thicke thrust together, of a purple colour tending towards blewnesse.
@ 3 This (which is the fourth of Clusius description) hath diuers stalkes some cubite high, foure square, rough, and set at certaine spaces with leaues growing by couples like those of the wilde Germander: the tops of the stalkes are diuided into sundry branches, carrying long spokes of blew floures, consisting of foure leaues, whereof the vppermost leafe is the largest; and distinguished with veines: after the floures are past follow such (...) seed vessels as in Fluellen: the root is fibrous and liues long, sending forth euery yeare new branches. @



@ (...) (...) maius Pannonicum. Great Austrian Germander.


@ 4 Teucrium petraeum pumilum. Dwarfe Rocke Germander.


5 Teucrium Baeticum. Spanish Tree Germander.


6 Teucrium Alpinum Cisti flore. Rough headed Tree Germander.



4 This Dwarfe Germander sends vp stalkes some handfull high, round, not branched: the leaues grow vpon these stalkes by couples, thicke, shining, a little hairy and greene on their vpper sides, and whitish below: the tops of the stalkes carry spoky tufts of floures, consisting of foure or fiue blewish leaues; which falling, there followes a seed-vessell, as in the Veronica's. The root is knotty and fibrous, and growes so fast amongst the rockes that it cannot easily be got out. It floureth in Iuly. (...) describes this by the name of Teucrium 6. Pumilum: and Pona sets it forth by the name of Veronica petraea semper virens. @
5 This Spanish Germander riseth vp oft times to the height of a man, in manner of a hedge bush, with one stiffe stalke of the bignesse of a mans little finger, couered ouer with a whitish bark, diuided sometimes into other branches, which are alwayes placed by couples one right against another, of an ouerworne hoarie colour; and vpon them are placed leaues not much vnlike the common Germander; the vpper parts whereof are of a grayish hoarie colour, and the lower of a deepe greene; of a bitter taste, and somewhat crooked, turning and winding themselues after the manner of a welt. The floures come forth from the bosome of the leaues, standing vpon small tender footstalkes of a white colour, without any helmet or hood on their tops, hauing in the middle many threddy strings. The whole plant keepeth greene all the Winter long.
6 Among the rest of the Tree Germanders this is not of least beauty and account, hauing many weake and feeble branches trailing vpon the ground, of a darke reddish colour, hard and wood die; at the bottome of which stalks come forth many long broad iagged leaues not vnlike the (...), hoary vnderneath, and greene aboue, of a binding and drying taste. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, not vnlike to those of Cistus foemina, or Sage-rose, and are white of colour, consisting of eight or nine leaues, in the middle whereof do grow many threddy chiues without smell or sauour: which being past, there succeedeth a tuft of rough threddy or flocky matter, not vnlike to those of the great Auens or Pulsatill: the root is wooddy, and set with some few hairie strings fastned to the same.


 The Place.
These plants do ioy in stony and rough mountaines and dry places, and such as lie open to the Sunne and aire, and prosper well in gardens: and of the second sort I haue receiued one plant for my garden of Mr. Garret Apothecarie.


 The Time.
They floure, flourish, and seed when the other Germanders do.


 The Names.
Tree Germander is called in Greeke (...), retaining the name of the former Chamaedrys, and (...) according to the authoritie of Dioscorides and Pliny: in Latine (...): in English, Great Germander, vpright Germander, and Tree Germander.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their temperature and faculties are referred vnto the garden Germander, but they are not of such force and working, wherefore they be not much vsed in physicke.



CHAP. 214. Of Water Germander, or Garlicke Germander.

 The Description.
1 SCordium or water Germander hath square hairie stalkes creeping by the ground, beset with soft whitish crumpled leaues, nickt and snipt round about the edges like a Saw: among which grow small purple floures like the floures of dead Nettle. The root is small and threddy, creeping in the ground very deepely. The whole plant being bruised smelleth like Garlicke, whereof it tooke that name Scordium. @ This by reason of goodnesse of soile varieth in the largenesse thereof; whence Tabernamont anus and our Author made a bigger and a lesser thereof, but I haue omitted the later as superfluous. @


 The Place.
Water Germander groweth neere to Oxenford, by Ruley, on both sides of the water, and in a

medow by Abington called Nietford, by the relation of a learned Gentleman of S. (...) in the said towne of Oxenford, a diligent (...), my very good friend, called Mr. Richard Slater. Also it groweth in great plenty in the Isle of Elie, and in a medow by Harwood in Lancashire, and diuers other places.


1 Scordium. Water Germander.




 The Time.
The floures appeare in Iune and Iuly: it is best to gather the herbe in August: it perisheth not in Winter, but onely loseth the stalkes, which come vp againe in Sommer: the root remaineth fresh all the yeare.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latines do keepe that name (...): the Apothecaries haue no other name: It is called of some Trixago Palustris, Quercula, and also Mithridatium, of Mithridates the finder of it out. It tooke the name Scordium from the smel of Garlicke, which the Grecians call (...), and (...), of the rancknesse of the smell: in high-Dutch, (...) battenig: in French, Scordion: in Italian, Chalamandrina palustre: in English, Scordium, Water Germander, and Garlicke Germander.


 The Temperature.
Water Germander is hot and dry: it hath a certaine bitter taste, harsh and sharpe, as Galen witnesseth.


 The Vertues.
Water Germander cleanseth the intrals, and likewise old vlcers, being mixed with honey according  to art: it prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the monethly sickenesse: it draweth out of the chest thicke flegme and rotten matter: it is good for an old cough, paine in the sides which commeth of stopping and cold, and for burstings and inward ruptures.
The decoction made in wine and drunke, is good against the bitings of Serpents, and deadly  poysons; and is vsed in antidotes or counterpoysons with good successe.
It is reported to mitigate the paine of the gout, being stamped and applied with a little vineger  and water.
Some affirme, that raw flesh being laid among the leaues of Scordium, may be preserued a long  time from corruption.
Being drunke with wine it openeth the stoppings of the liuer, the milt, kidnies, bladder, and  matrix, prouoketh vrine, helpeth the strangurie, that is, when a man cannot pisse but by drops, and is a most singular cordiall to comfort and make merry the heart.
The pouder of Scordion taken in the quantitie of two drams in meade or honied water, cureth  and stoppeth the bloudy flix, and comforteth the stomacke. Of this Scordium is made a most singular medicine called Diascordium, which serueth very notably for all the purposes aforesaid.
The same medicine made with Scordium is giuen with very good successe vnto children and  aged people, that haue the small pockes, measles, or the Purples, or any other pestilent sicknesse whatsoeuer, euen the plague it selfe, giuen before the sicknes haue vniuersally possessed the whole body.




CHAP. 215. Of Wood Sage, or Garlicke Sage.

 The Description.
THat which is called Wilde Sage hath stalkes foure square, somewhat hairie, about which are leaues like those of Sage, but shorter, broader, and softer: the floures grow vp all vpon one side of the stalke, open and forked as those of dead Nettle, but lesser, of a pale white colour: then grow the seeds foure together in one huske: the root is full of strings. It is a plant that liueth but a yeare: it smelleth of garlicke when it is bruised, being a kinde of Garlicke Germander, as appeareth by the smell of garlicke wherewith it is possessed.


The figure which (...) formerly here was of (...) (...) (...) of (...).Scorodonia, siue Saluia agrestis. Wood Sage, or Garlicke Sage.




 The Place.
It groweth vpon heaths and barren places: it is also found in Woods, and neere vnto hedgerowes, and about the borders of fields: it somewhat delighteth in a leane soile, and yet not altogether barren and dry.


 The Time.
It floureth and seedeth in Iune, Iuly, and August, and it is then to be gathered and laid vp.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Saluia (...): of diuers also Ambrosia; but true (...) which is Oke of Cappadocia, differs from this. Valerius Cordus names it Scordonia, or Scorodonia, and Scordium alterum. (...) saith it is called Boscisaluia, or Saluia Bosci: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in English, wilde Sage, wood Sage, and Garlicke Sage.
It seemeth to be Theophrastus his (...), Sphacelus, which is also taken for the small Sage, but not rightly.


 The Temperature.
Wilde Sage is of temperature hot and drie, yet lesse than common Sage; therefore it is hot and dry in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
It is commended against burstings, dry beatings, and against wounds: the decoction thereof  is giuen to them that fall, and are inwardly bruised: it also prouoketh vrine.
Some likewise giue the decoction hereof to drinke, with good successe, to them that are infected  with the French Pox; for it causeth sweat, drieth vp vlcers, digesteth humors, wasteth away and consumeth swellings, if it be taken thirtie or forty dayes together, or put into the decoction of Guiacum, in stead of Epithymum and other adiutories belonging to the said decoction.



CHAP. 216. Of Eye-bright.

 The Description.
EVphrasia or Eye-bright is a small low herbe not aboue two handfuls high, full of branches, couered with little blackish leaues dented or snipt about the edges like a saw: the floures are

small and white, sprinkled and poudered on the inner side, with yellow and purple speeks mixed therewith. The root is small and hairie.


Euphrasia. Eye-bright.




 The Place.
This plant growes in dry medows, in green and grassie wayes and pastures standing against the Sunne.


 The Time.
Eye-bright beginneth to floure in August and continueth vnto September, and must be gathered while it floureth for physicks vse.


 The Names.
It is commonly called Euphrasia, as also Euphrosyne; notwithstanding there is another Euphrosyne, viz. Buglosse: it is called of some Ocularis, and Ophthalmica of the effect: in highDutch, (...) (...): in low-Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Spanish, and French, (...), after the Latine name: in English, Eyebright.


 The Nature.
This herbe is hot and dry, but yet more hot than dry.


 The Vertues.
It is very much commended for the eyes. Being taken it selfe alone, or any way else, it preserues the sight, and being feeble and lost it restores the same: it is giuen most fitly being beaten into pouder; oftentimes a like quantitie of Fennel seed is added thereto, and a little mace, to the which is put so much sugar as the weight of them all commeth to.
Eye-bright stamped and layd vpon the eyes, or the iuyce thereof mixed with white Wine, and  dropped into the eyes, or the distilled water, taketh away the darknesse and dimnesse of the eyes, and cleareth the sight.
Three parts of the pouder of Eye-bright, and one part of maces mixed therewith, taketh away  all hurts from the eyes, comforteth the memorie, and cleareth the sight, if halfe a spoonfull be taken euery morning fasting with a cup of white wine. 

That which was formerly here set forth in the second place vnder the title of (...) cartules (...). was described by our Authour amongst the (...) grasses, in the third place, Chap. 54. and the figure is pag. 338. vnder the title of Myosotis (...) (...).




CHAP. 217. Of Marierome.

 The Description.
1 SWeet Marjerome is a low and shrubby plant, of a whitish colour and maruellous sweet smell, a foot or somewhat more high. The stalkes are slender, and parted into diuers branches; about which grow forth little leaues soft and hoarie: the floures grow at the top in scaly or chaffie spiked eares, of a white colour like vnto those of Candy Organy. The root is compact of many small threds. The whole plant and euerie part thereof is of a most pleasant taste, and aromaticall smell, and perisheth at the first approch of Winter.
2 Pot Marierome or Winter Maierome hath many threddy tough roots, from which rise immediately diuers small branches, whereon are placed such leaues as the precedent, but not so hoarie, nor yet so sweet of smell, bearing at the top of the branches tufts of white floures tending to purple. The whole plant is of long continuance, and keepeth greene all the Winter; whereupon our English women haue called it, and that very properly, Winter Marierome.
3 Marierome Gentle hath many branches rising from a threddy root, whereupon do grow soft and sweet smelling leaues of an ouerworne russet colour. The floures stand at the top of the stalks,

1 Mariorana maior. Great sweet Marierome.
2 Mariorana maior Anglica. Pot Marierome.
3 (...) (...). Marierome gentle.
compact of diuers small chaffie scales, of a white colour tending to a blush. The whole plant is altogether like the great sweet Marierome, sauing that it is altogether lesser, and far sweeter, wherein especially consisteth the difference.
4 (...) is likewise a kind of Marierome, differing not from the last described, sauing in that, that this plant hath in his naturall country of Candy, and not elsewhere, some laces or threds fastned vnto his branches, such, and after the same manner as those are that doe grow vpon Sauorie, wherein is the difference.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in Spaine, Italy, Candy, and other Islands thereabout, wilde, and in the fields; from whence wee haue the seeds for the gardens of (...) cold countries.


 The Time.
They are sowne in May, and bring forth their scaly or chaffie huskes or eares in August. They are to be watered in the middle of the day, when the Sunne shineth hottest, euen as Basill should be, and not in the euening nor morning, as most Plants are.


 The Names.
Marierome is called Mariorana, and (...), and also Marum and Sampsychum of others: in highDutch, Mayoran: in Spanish, Mayorana, Moradux, and Almoradux: in French, Mariolaine: in English, Sweet Marierome, Fine Marierome, and Marierome

gentle; of the best sort Marjerane. The pot Marjerome is also called Winter Marjerome. Some haue made a doubt whether Maiorana and Sampsychum be all one; which doubt, as I take it, is because that Galen maketh a difference betweene them, intreating of them apart, and attribureth to either of them their operations. But Amaracus Galeni is Parthenium, or Feuerfew. Dioscorides likewise witnesseth, that some do call (...), Parthenium; and Galen in his booke of the faculties of simple medicines, doth in no place make mention of Parthenium, but by the name of Amaracus. Pliny in his 21 booke, chap. 2. witnesseth, that Diocles the physition, and they of Sicily did call that Amaracus, which the Aegyptians and the Syrians did call Sampsychum.
Virgill in the first booke of his Aencidos sheweth, that Amaracus is a shrub bearing floures, writing thus:
Vbi mollis Amaracus illum Floribus, and dulci aspirans (...) vmbra.
Likewise Catullus in his Epithalamium, or mariage song of Iulia and Mallius saith,

Cinge tempora floribus
(...) olcmis Amaraci.


Compasse the temples of the head with floures.
Of Amarac affording sweete sauours.

Notwithstanding it may not seeme strange, that Majorane is vsed in stead of Sampsychum, seeing that in Galens time also Marum was in the mixture of the ointment called Amaracinum vnguentum, in the place of Sampsychum, as he himselfe witnesseth in his first booke of counterpoisons.


 The Temperature.
They are hot and dry in the second degree; after some copies, hot and dry in the third.


 The (...).
Sweete Marjerome is a remedy against cold diseases of the braine and head, being taken any  way to your best liking; put vp into the nosthrils it prouoketh sneesing, and draweth forth much baggage (...): it easeth the tooth-ache being chewed in the mouth; being drunke it prouoketh vrine, and draweth away waterish humors, and is vsed in medicines against poison.
The leaues boiled in water, and the decoction drunke, helpeth them that are entering into the  dropsie: it easeth them that are troubled with difficultie of making water, and such as are giuen to ouermuch sighing, and easeth the paines of the belly.
The leaues dried and mingled with hony, and giuen, dissolueth congealed or clotted blood, and  putteth away blacke and blew markes after stripes and bruses, being applied thereto.
The leaues are excellent good to be put into all odoriferous ointments, waters, pouders, broths, and meates.
The dried leaues poudered, and finely searched, are good to be put into Cerotes, or Cere-cloths  and ointments, profitable against colde swellings, and members out of joint.
There is an excellent oile to be drawne forth of these herbes, good against the shrinking of  sinewes, crampes, convulsions, and all aches proceeding of a colde cause.



CHAP. 218. Of wilde Marjerome.

 The Description.
1 BAstard Marjerome groweth straight vp with little round stalkes of a reddish colour, full of branches, a foot high and sometimes higher. The leaues be broad, more long than round, of a whitish greene colour: on the top of the branches stand long spikie scaled eares, out of which shoot forth little white floures like the flouring of wheate. The whole plant is of a sweete smell, and sharpe biting taste.
2 The white Organy, or bastard Marjerome with white floures, differing little from the precedent, but in colour and stature. This plant hath whiter and broader leaues, and also much higher, wherein consisteth the difference.
3 Bastard Marjerome of Candy hath many threddy roots; from which rise vp diuers weake and feeble branches trailing vpon the ground, set with faire greene leaues, not vnlike those of Penny Royall, but broader and shorter: at the top of those branches stand scalie or chaffie eares of a purple colour. The whole plant is of a most pleasant sweet smell. The root endured in my garden

1 Origanum (...). Bastard Marjerome.The second and third figures were formerly (...).

 2 Origanum album, Tabern. White bastard Marjerome.The second and third figures were formerly (...).

 3 Origanum Creticum. Wilde Marjerome of Candy.4 Origanum Anglicum. English wilde Marjerome.
and the leaues also greene all this winter long, 1597. although it hath been said that it doth perish at the first frost, as sweete Marjerome doth.
4 English wilde Marjerome is exceedingly well knowne to all, to haue long, stiffe, and hard stalkes of two cubits high, set with leaues like those of sweet Marjerome, but broader and greater, of a russet greene colour, on the top of the branches stand tufts of purple floures, composed of many small ones set together very closely vmbell fashion. The root creepeth in the ground, and is long lasting.


 The Place.
These plants do grow wilde in the kingdome of Spaine, Italy, and other of those hot regions. The last of the foure doth grow wilde in the borders of fields, and low copses, in most places of England.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the Sommer moneths, afterward the seed is perfected.


 The Names.
Bastard Marjerome is called in Greeke, (...); and that which is surnamed Heracleoticum, (...) (...): of diuers it is called Cunila: in shops, Origanum Hispanicum, Spanish Organy: our Euglish wilde Marjerome is called in Greeke of Dioscoridcs, (...), and (...), Onitis, of some, Agrioriganum, or (...) Origanum: in Italian, Origano: in Spanish Oregano: in French, Mariolaine bastarde: in English, (...), bastard Marjerome: and that of ours, wilde Marjerome, and groue Marjerome.


 The Temperature.
All the Organies do cut, attenuate, or make thin, dry, and heate, and that in the third degree; and Galen teacheth that wilde Marjerome is more forceable and of greater strength; notwithstanding Organy of Candy which is brought dry out of Spaine (whereof I haue a plant in my garden) is more biting than any of the rest, and of greatest heate.


 The Vertues.
Organy giuen in wine is a remedy against the bitings, and stingings of venomous beasts, and cureth  them that haue drunke Opium, or the juice of blacke poppy, or hemlockes, especially if it be giuen with wine and raisons of the sunne.
The decoction of Organy prouoketh vrine, bringeth downe the monethly course, and is giuen  with good successe to those that haue the dropsie.
It is profitably vsed in a looch, or a medicine to be licked, against an old cough and the stuffing  of the lungs.
It healeth scabs, itches, and scuruinesse, being vsed in bathes, and it taketh away the bad colour  which commeth of the yellow jaundice.
The weight of a dram taken with meade or (...) water, draweth forth by stoole blacke and  filthy humors, as Dioscorides and Pliny write.
The juice mixed with a little milke, being poured into the (...), mitigateth the paines  thereof.
The same mixed with the oile of Ireos, or the rootes of the white Florentine floure de luce, and  drawne vp into the nosthrils, draweth downe water and flegme: the herbe strowed vpon the ground driueth away serpents.
The decoction looseth the belly, and voideth choler; and drunke with vineger helpeth the infirmities  of the splcene, and drunke in wine helpeth against all mortall poisons, and for that cause it is put into mithridate and treacles prepared for that purpose.
These plants are easie to be taken in potions, and therefore to good purpose they may be vsed  and ministred vnto such as cannot brooke their meate, and to such as haue a sowre and sqamish and watery stomacke, as also against the swouning of the heart.



CHAP. 219. Of Goates Marjerome, or Organy.

 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of Goates Organy are slender, hard and wooddy, of a blackish colour; whereon are set long leaues, greater than those of the wilde Time, sweete of smell, rough, and somewhat hairy. The floures be small, and grow out of little crownes or wharles round about the top of the stalkes, tending to a purple colour. The root is small and threddy.



There were (...) (...) (...) in this chapter; the first whereof was of that which is described in the second place: (...) second was of (...) of (...), whereof here is no (...) (...) (...). The figure of the (...) (...) of (...) (which as I haue formerly said, (...) would haue all one with that of (...)) was (...) (...) the name of (...) (...), pag. 459. of the former (...).

 1 Tragoriganum Dod. Goats Marierome.


There were (...) (...) (...) in this chapter; the first whereof was of that which is described in the second place: (...) second was of (...) of (...), whereof here is no (...) (...) (...). The figure of the (...) (...) of (...) (which as I haue formerly said, (...) would haue all one with that of (...)) was (...) (...) the name of (...) (...), pag. 459. of the former (...).Tragoriganum Lob. Goats Marierome.


There were (...) (...) (...) in this chapter; the first whereof was of that which is described in the second place: (...) second was of (...) of (...), whereof here is no (...) (...) (...). The figure of the (...) (...) of (...) (which as I haue formerly said, (...) would haue all one with that of (...)) was (...) (...) the name of (...) (...), pag. 459. of the former (...).

 2 Tragoriganum Clusij. Clusius his Goats Marierome.


@ 3 Tragoriganum Cretense. Candy Goats Marierome.



2 Carolus Clusius hath set forth in his Spanish Obseruations another sort of Goats Marierome growing vp like a small shrub: the leaues are longer and more hoarie than wilde Marierome, and also narrower, of a hot biting taste, but of a sweet smell, (...) not very pleasant. The floures do stand at the top of the stalkes in spokie rundles, of a white colour. The root is thicke and wooddy.
@ 3 This differs little in forme and magnitude (...) the last described, but the branches are of a blacker colour, with rougher and darker coloured leaues: the floures also are lesser, and of a purple colour. Both this and the last described continue alwaies greene, but this last is of a much more fragrant smell. This floures in March, and was found growing wilde by Clusius in the fields of Valentia: he calls it Tragoriganum Hispanicum tertium. Pena and Lobel call it Tragoriganum Cretense apud Venetas; that is, the Candy Goats Marierome of the Venetians. @


 The Place.
These plants grow wilde in Spaine, Italy, and other hot countries. The first of these I found growing in diuers barren and chalky fields and high-wayes neere vnto Sittingburne and Rochester in Kent, and also neere vnto Cobham house and Southfleet in the same county.
@ I doubt our Author was mistaken, for I haue not heard of this growing wilde with vs. @


 The Time.
They floure in the moneth of August. I remember (saith Dodonaeus) that I haue seene Tragoriganum in the Low-countries, in the gardens of those that apply their whole study to the knowledge of plants; or as we may say, in the gardens of cunning Herbarists.


 The Names.
Goats Organie is called in Greeke (...): in Latine likewise Tragoriganum: in English, goats Organie, and Goats Marierome.


 The Temperature.
Goats Organies are hot and dry in the third degree: They are (saith Galen) of a binding qualitie.


 The Vertues.
Tragoriganum or Goats Marierome is very good against the wamblings of the stomacke, and the  (...) belchings of the same, and stayeth the desire to vomit, especially at sea.
(...) bastard kindes of Organie or wilde Marieromes haue the (...) force and faculties that  the other (...) haue for the diseases mentioned in the same chapter.



CHAP. 220. Of Herbe Masticke.

 The Description.
1 THe English and French herbarists at this day do in their vulgar tongues call this herb Masticke or Mastich, taking this name Marum of Maro King of Thrace; though some rather suppose the name corruptly to be deriued from this word Amaracus, the one plant being so like the other, that many learned haue taken them to be one and the selfe same plant: others haue taken (...) for Sampsuchus, which doubtlesse is a kinde of Marierome. Some (as Dodonaeus) haue called this our Marum by the name of Clinopodium; which name rather belongs to another plant than to Masticke. @ This growes some foot high, with little longish leaues set by couples: at the tops of the stalkes amongst white downie heads come little white floures: the whole plant is of a very sweet and pleasing smell. @
2 If any be desirous to search for the true Marum, let them be assured that the plant last mentioned is the same: but if any do doubt thereof, for nouelties sake here is presented vnto your view a plant of the same kinde (which cannot be (...)) for a speciall kind thereof, which hath a most pleasant sent or smell, and in shew resembleth Marierome and Origanum, consisting of smal twigs a foot and more long; the heads (...) like the common Marierome; but the leaues are lesse, and like Myrtus: the root is of a (...) substance, with many strings hanging thereat.
3 There is another kinde hereof set forth by Lobel, which I haue not as yet seen, nor himselfe hath well described, which I leaue to a better consideration. @ Though our Authour knew not how to describe this creeping Marum of Lobel, yet no question, if he had knowne so much, he would haue giuen vs the figure thereof as wel in this place, as in the third place of the next chapter

1 Marum. Herbe Masticke.
2 Marum Syriacum. Assyrian Masticke.
That we here giue you in the third place was formerly vnfitly figured in the third place of the ensuing Chapter by the name of (...) (...)

 3 Marum supinum Lobelij. Creeping Masticke.
for a Penny-Royall; and might as well here as there, and much more fitly haue ventured at a description. But that which is defectiue in him and Lobel, I will endeauour to supply out of Caesalpinus. This plant hath many creeping branches like to those of wilde Time, but set with whiter and shorter leaues like to those of the smaller (...), but somewhat narrower: the floures grow in rundles amongst the leaues, as in Calamint, and are of a purple colour: the whole plant is of a strong and sweet smell, and of an hot and bitter taste. Caesalpinus thinkes this to be the Sampsuchum of Dioscorides: and so also do the Authors of the Aduersaria. Tabernamontanus calls it Marum repens. @


 The Place.
These plants are set and sowne in the gardens of England, and there maintained with great care and diligence from the iniurie of our cold clymate.



 The Time.
They floure about August, and somewhat later in cold Sommers.


 The Names.
@ Masticke is called of the new writers Marum: and some, as Lobel and Anguillara thinke it the (...) odorum of Theophrastus. Dodonaeus iudges it to be the Clinopodium of (...). Clusius makes it his Tragoriganum 1. and saith he receiued the seeds thereof by the name of Ambra dulcis. @


 The Nature.
These plants are hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that the herbe is drunke, and likewise the decoction thereof, against the bitings  of venomous beasts, crampes and convulsions, burstings and the strangurie.
The decoction boiled in wine till the third part be consumed, and drunke, stoppeth the laske (...) them that haue an ague, and vnto others in water.



CHAP. 221. Of Pennie Royall, or pudding grasse.


It is apparant by the titles and descriptions that our (...) in this chapter followed (...) but the figures were not agreeable to the historie, for the two (...) figures were of the (...) (...) described in the third place; and the third figure was of the (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...) Chapter.

 1 Pulegium regium. Pennie Royall.


It is apparant by the titles and descriptions that our (...) in this chapter followed (...) but the figures were not agreeable to the historie, for the two (...) figures were of the (...) (...) described in the third place; and the third figure was of the (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...) Chapter.

 2 Pulegium mas. Vpright Pennie Royall.



 The Description.
1 PVlegium regium vulgatum is so exceedingly well knowne to all our English (...), (...) it needeth no description, being our common Pennie Royall.
2 The second being the male Pennie Royall is like vnto the former, in (...), (...) and smell, and differeth in that this male kinde groweth vpright of himselfe without (...), much like in shew vnto wilde Marierome.



It is apparant by the titles and descriptions that our (...) in this chapter followed (...) but the figures were not agreeable to the historie, for the two (...) figures were of the (...) (...) described in the third place; and the third figure was of the (...) (...) described in the (...) place of the (...) Chapter.

 3 Pulegium angustifolium. Narrow leafed Pennie Royall.


3 The third kinde of Pennie Royall growes like vnto Tyme, and is of a wooddie substance, somewhat like vnto the thinne leased Hyssope, of the sauour of common Pennie Royall, @ but much stronger and more pleasant: the longish narrow leaues stand vpon the stalkes by couples, with little leaues comming forth of their bosomes: and towards the tops of the branches grow rundles of small purple floures. This grows plentifully about Montpellier and by the Authors of the Aduersaria, who first set it forth, it is stiled Pulegium, angustifol. sive ceruinum Monspeliensium. @


 The Place.
The first and common Pennie Royall groweth naturally wilde in moist and ouerflown places, as in the Common neere London called Miles end, about the holes and ponds thereof in sundry places, from whence poore women bring plentie to sell in London markets; and it groweth in sundrie other Commons neere London likewise.
The second groweth in my garden: the third I haue not as yet seene.


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Pennie Royall is called in Greeke (...), and oftentimes (...): in Latine, Pulegium, and Pulegium regale, for difference sake betweene it and wilde Tyme, which of some is called Pulegium (...): in Italian, Pulegio: in Spanish, Poleo: in Dutch, Poley: in French, Pouliot: in English, Pennie Roy. all, Pudding grasse, Puliall Royall, and of some Organie.


 The Nature.
Pennie Royall is hot and drie in the third degree, and of subtill parts, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
Pennie Royall boiled in wine and drunken, prouoketh the monthly termes, bringeth forth the secondine, the dead childe and vnnaturall birth: it prouoketh vrine, and breaketh the stone, especially of the kidneies.
Pennie Royall taken with honie clenseth the lungs, and cleereth the breast from all grosse and  thicke humours.
The same taken with honie and Aloes, purgeth by stoole melancholie humours; helpeth the  crampe and drawing together of (...).
The same taken with water and Vineger asswageth the inordinate desire to vomite, and the pains  of the stomacke.
If you haue when you are at the sea Pennie Royal in great quantitie drie, and cast it into corrupt  water, it helpeth it much, neither will it hurt them that drinke thereof.
A Garland of Pennie royall made and worne about the head is of great force against the swimming  in the head, the paines and giddinesse thereof.
The decoction of Pennie Royall is very good against ventositie, windinesse, or such like, and against  the hardnes and stopping of the mother being vsed in a bath or stew for the woman to sit ouer.



CHAP. 222. Of Basill.

 The Description.
1 GArden Basill is of two sorts, differing one from another in bignesse. The first hath broad, thicke, and fat leaues, of a pleasant sweet smell, and of which some one here and there are of a black reddish colour, somewhat snipped about the edges, not vnlike the leaues of French Mercurie. The stalke groweth to the height of halfe a cubite, diuiding itself into diuers branches, whereupon doe stand small and base floures sometimes whitish, and often tending to a darke purple. The root is threddie, and dieth at the approch of Winter.



1 Ocimum (...). Great Basill.


2 Ocimum medium citratum. Citron Basill.


3 Ocimum minus Gariophyllatum. Bush Basill.


@ 4 Ocimum Indicum. Indian Basill.



2 The middle Basill is very like vnto the former, but it is altogether lesser. The whole plant is of a most odoriferous smell, not vnlike the smell of a Limon, or Citron, whereof it tooke his surname.
3 Bush Basill, or fine Basill, is a low and base plant, hauing a threddie root, from which rise vp many small and tender stalks, branched into diuers armes or boughes; whereupon are placed many little leaues, lesser than those of Pennie Royall. The whole plant is of a most pleasing sweete smell.
@ 4 This which some call Ocimum Indicum, or rather (as Camerarius saith) Hispanicum, sends vp a stalk a foot or more high, foure square, and of a purple colour, set at each ioint with two leaues, and out of their bosomes come little branches: the largest leaues are some two inches broad, and some three long; growing vpon long stalks, and deepely cut in about their edges, being also thicke, fat and iuicie, and either of a darke purple colour, or else spotted with more or lesse such coloured spots. The tops of the branches end in spokie tufts of white floures with purple veines running alongst them. The seede is contained in such seed vessels as that of the other Basils, and is round, blacke and large. The plant perishes euery yeare as soone as it hath perfected the seed. Clusius calls this Ocimum Indicum. @


 The Place.
Basil is sowne in gardens, and in earthen pots. It commeth vp quickly, and loueth little moisture except in the middle of the day; otherwise if it be sowne in rainie weather, the seed will putrifie, and grow into a iellie or slime, and come to nothing.


 The Time.
Basill floureth in Iune and Iuly, and that by little and little, whereby it is long a flouring, beginning first at the top.


 The Names.
Basill is called in Greeke (...), and more commonly with (...) in the first syllable (...): in Latine, Ocimum. It differeth from Ocymum which some haue called Cereale as we (saith Dodonaeus) haue shewed in the Historie of Graine. The later Graecians haue called it (...): in shops likewise Basilicum, and Regium: in Spanish, Albabaca: in French, Basilic: in English, Basill, garden Basill, the greater Basill Royall, the lesser Basill gentle, and bush Basill: of some, Basilicum Gariophyllatum, or Cloue Basill.


 The Temperature.
Basill, as Galen teacheth, is hot in the second degree, but it hath adioined with it a superfluous moisture, by reason whereof he doth not like that it should be taken inwardly; but being applied outwardly, it is good to digest or distribute, and to concoct.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith that if Basil be much eaten, it dulleth the sight, it mollifieth the belly, breedeth  winde, prouoketh vrine, drieth vp milke, and is of a hard digestion.
The iuice mixed with fine meale of parched Barly, oile of roses and Vineger, is good against inflammations, and the stinging of venomous beasts.
The iuice drunke in wine of Chios or strong Sacke, is good against head ache.
The iuice clenseth away the dimmenesse of the eyes, and drieth vp the humour that falleth into  them.
The seede drunke is a remedie for melancholicke people; for those that are short winded, and  them that can hardly make water.
If the same be snift vp in the nose, it causeth often neesing: also the herbe it selfe doth the same.
There be that shunne Basill and will not eat thereof, because that if it be chewed and laid in the  Sun, it ingendreth wormes.
They of Africke do also affirme, that they who are stung of the Scorpion and haue eaten of it, shall feele no paine at all.
The Later writers, among whom Simeon Zethy is one, doe teach, that the smell of Basill is good  for the heart and for the head. That the seede cureth the infirmities of the heart, taketh away sorrowfulnesse which commeth of melancholy, and maketh a man merry and glad.




CHAP. 223. Of wilde Basill.

 The Description.
1 THe wilde Basil or Acynos, called of Pena, Clinopodium vulgarc, hath square hairie stems, beset with little leaues like vnto the small Basil, but much smaller, and more hairie, sharp pointed, and a little snipt towards the end of the leafe, with small floures of a purple colour, fashioned like vnto the garden Basill. The root is full of hairie threds, and creepeth along the ground, and springeth vp yearely anew of it selfe without sowing. @ This is the Clinopodium alterum of Matthiolus. @
2 This kinde of wilde Basill called amongst the Graecians (...), which by interpretation is Sine semine, or Sterilis, hath caused sundry opinions and great doubts concerning the words of Plinie and Theophrastus, affirming that this herbe hath no floures nor seeds; which opinions I am sure of mine owne knowledge to be without reason: but to omit controuersies, this plant beareth purple floures, wharled about square stalkes, rough leaues and hairie, verie like in shape vnto Basil: @ The stalkes are some cubite and more high, parted into few branches, and set at certaine spaces with leaues growing by couples. This is the Clinopodium vulgare of Matthiolus, and that of Cordus, Gesner, and others; it is the Acinos of Lobel. @
3 Scrapio and others haue set forth another wilde Basill vnder the title of Molochia; and Lobel after the minde of Iohn Brancion, calleth it Corcoros, which we haue Englished, Fish Basill, the seeds whereof the said Brancion receiued from Spaine, saying that Corcoros (...) hath the leaues of Basil: the stalkes are two handfuls high, the floures yellow, growing close to the stalkes, bearing his seed in smal long cods. The root is compact and made of an innumerable companie of strings, creeping far abroad like running Time. @ This figure of Lobels which here we giue you is (as Camerarius hath obserued) vnperfect, for it expresses not the long cods wherein the seed is contained, neither the two little strings or beards that come forth at the setting on of each leafe to the stalke. @


1 Ocymum syluestre. Wilde Basill.


2 Acynos. Stone Basill.





@ 3 Corchoros. Fish Basill.


@ 5 Clinopodium Austriacum. Austrian field Basill.


@ 6 Clinopodium Alpinum. Wilde Basill of the Alpes.


@ 4 It may be our Authour would haue described this in the first place, as I coniecture by those words which he vsed in mentioning the place of their growing; and [Clinopodium (...) groweth in great plentie vpon Longfield downs in Kent;] but to this neither figure nor description did agree, wherefore I will giue you the Historie therof. It sends vp many little square stalks some handful and an halfe high, seldome diuided into branches: at each ioint stand two smal greenish leaues, little hairy, and not diuided or snipt about the edges, and much like those of the next described, as you see them exprest in the figure: the little hollow and somewhat hooded floures grow in roundles towards the tops of the stalkes, as in the first described, and they are of a blewish violet colour. The seeds I haue not yet obserued: the root is fibrous and wooddie, and lasts for many yeares. The whole plant hath a pretty pleasing but weake smell. It floures in Iuly and August. I first obserued it Anno 1626, a little on this side Pomfret in Yorkshire, and since by Datford in Kent, and in the Ile of Tenet. I haue sometimes seene it brought to Cheapside market, where the herbe women called it Poley mountaine, some it may bee that haue taken it for Polium montanum misinforming them; Clusius first tooke notice of this plant, and called it Acinos Anglicum, finding it growing in Kent, Anno, 1581. and he thinkes it to

be the Acinos of Dioscorides: now the vertues attributed by Dioscorides to his Acinos are set downe at the end of the chapter vnder the letter B.
5 This which Clusius hath also set forth by the name of (...), or Acinos Austriacum, doth not much differ from the last described, for it hath tender square hard stalkes like those of the last described, set also with two leaues at each joint, heere and there a little snipt (which is omitted in the figure) the floures grow onely at the tops of the stalkes, and these pretty large, and of a violet colour (yet they are sometimes found white:) they hang commonly forward, and at is were with there vpper parts turned downe. The seed vessels are like those of the first described, and containe each of them foure little blacke seeds: This floures in May, and the seed is ripe in Iune: It growes about the bathes of Badon and in diuers places of Austria.
6 Pena also hath giuen vs knowledge of another, that from a sibrous root sends vp many quadrangular rough branches, of the height of the two former, set also with two leaues at each joint, and these rough and lightly snipt about the edges; the floures grow thicke together at the tops of the stalkes of a darke red colour, and in shape like those of the mountaine Calaminte. It floures in the beginning of Iuly, and growes vpon mount Baldus in Italy; Pona sets it forth by the name of Clinopodium Alpinum.
7 To these I thinke fit to adde another, whose description was sent me by Mr. Goodyer, and I question whether it may not be the plant which Fabius Columna (...), (...). (...). sets forth by the name of Acinos Dioscoridis; for he makes his to be endued odore (...) (...): but to the purpose.
Acinos odoratissimum.
This herbe hath foure, fiue, or more, foure square hard wooddy stalkes growing from one root, diuided into many branches, couered with a soft white hairinesse, two or three foot long or longer, not growing vpright, but trailing vpon the ground; the leaues grow on little-short footstalkes by couples of a light greene colour, somewhat like the leaues of Basill, very like the leaues of Acinos Lobelij, but smaller, about three quarters of an inch broad, and not fully an inch long, somewhat sharpe pointed, lightly notched about the edges, also couered with a light soft hoary hairinesse, of a very sweete smell, little inferiour to Garden Marjerome, of a hot biting taste: out of their bosomes grow other smaller leaues, or else branches; the floures also grow forth of the bosomes of the leaues toward the tops of the stalkes and branches, not in whorles like the said Acinos, but hauing one little short footstalke growing forth of the bosome of each leafe, on which is placed three, foure, or more small floures, gaping open, and diuided into foure vnequall parts at the top, like the floures of Basill, and very neare of the likenesse and bignesse of the floures of Garden Marjerome, but of a pale blewish colour tending towards a purple. The seed I neuer obserued by reason it floured late. This plant I first found growing in the Garden of Mr. William Yalden in Sheete neere Petersfield in Hampshire, (...) 1620. amongst sweete Marjerome, and which by chance they bought with the seedes thereof. It is to be considered whether the seedes of sweete Marjerome degenerate and send forth this herbe or not. 11. October, 1621. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
The wilde kindes doe grow vpon grauelly grounds by water sides, and especially I found the three last in the barren plaine by an house in Kent two miles from Dartford, called Saint Iones, in a village called Sutton; and Clinopodium vulg are groweth in great plentie vpon Long field downes in Kent. @ One of the three last of our Authors description is omitted, as you may finde noted at the end of the chapter: yet I cannot be persuaded that euer he found any of the foure he described euer wilde in this kingdome, vnlesse the secoad, which growes plentifully in Autumne almost by euery hedge: also the fourth being of my description growes neere Dartford and in many such dry barren places in sundry parts of the kingdome. @


 The Time.
These herbes floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Vnprofitable Basil, or wilde Basill is called by some Clinopodium.


 The Nature.
The seed of these herbes are of complexion hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
Wilde Basill pound with wine appeaseth the paine of the eyes, and the juice doth mundifie the  same, and putteth away all obscurity and dimnesse, all catarrhes and flowing humors that fall into the eies, being often dropped into the same.

@ The stone Basill howsoeuer it be taken stoppeth the laske, and courses; and outwardly applied  it helpes hot Tumors and inflammations.
@ These plants are good for all such effects as require moderate heate and astriction. @ 

The figure that was formerly in the third place of this chapter was of the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), and (...) (...) (...) by (...) (...) in the fourth place of the next chapter saue one, and there you (...) finde it: the (...) seemes (...) be of the (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...), formerly described by me in the fifth p ace of the 128. chapter (...) this (...); if that the place and floures in the (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to vary: howeuer I iudge it the same and therefore haue heere excluded it.




CHAP. 224. Of Basill Valerian.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Ocymastrum, called of Dodonaeus, Valerianarubra, bringeth forth long and brittle stalkes two cubits high, sull os knots or joints, in which place is joined long leaues much like vnto great Basill, but greater, broader, and larger, or rather like the leaues of Woade. At the top of the stalkes do grow very pleasant and long red floures, of the fashion of the floures of Valerian, which hath caused Dodonaeus to call this plant red Valerian; which being past, the seedes are caried away with the winde being, few in number, and little in quantity, so that without great diligence the seed is not to be gathered or preserued: for my selfe haue often indeuoured to see it, and yet haue lost my labour. The roote is very thicke, and of an excellent sweete sauour.


1 Valeriana rubra Dodonaei. Red Valerian.


2 Behen album. Spatling poppy.


2 The second is taken for Spumeum papauer, in respect of that kinde of frothy spattle, or spume, which we call Cuckow spittle, that more aboundeth in the bosomes of the leaues of these plants, than in any other plant that is knowne: for which cause Pena calleth it Papaver spumeum, that is, frothy, or spatling Poppy: his floure doth very little resemble any kinde of Poppy, but onely the seede and cod, or bowle wherein the seede is contained, otherwise it is like the other Ocymastrum;

the floures grow at the top of the stalkes hanging downewards, of a white colour, and it is taken generally for Behen album: the roote is white, plaine, and long, and very tough and hard to breake.


 The Place.
The first groweth plentifully in my garden, being a great ornament to the same, and not common in England.
The second groweth almost in euery pasture.


 The Time.
These plants do floure from May to the end of August.


 The Names.
Red Valerian hath beene so called of the likenesse of the floures and spoked rundles with Valerian; by which name we had rather haue it called, than rashly to lay vpon itan vnproper name. There are some also who would haue it to be a kinde of Behen of the later Herbarists, naming the same (...) rubrum, for difference between it and the other Behenalbum, that of some is called Ocymastrum, and Papauer spumeum: which I haue Englished, Spatling Poppie; and is in truth another plant, much differing from Behen of the Arabians: it is also called Valerianthon, Saponaria altera, Struthium Aldroandi, and Condurdum: in English, red Valerian, and red Cow Basill.
Spatling Poppie is called Behen album, Ocymastrum alterum; of some, Polemonium, and Papauer spumeum: in English, Spatling Poppie, frothie Poppie, and white Ben.


 The Nature.
These plants are drie in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The root of Behen Album drunke in wine, is good against the bloudie fluxe: and beeing pound  leaues and floures, and laid to, cureth the stingings of Scorpions and such like venomous beasts; insomuch that who so doth hold the same in his hand, can receiue no damage or hurt by any venomous beast.
The decoction of the root made in water and drunke, prouoketh vrine, it helpeth the strangurie, and paines about the backe and Huckle bone. 

That which was formerly here set sorth in the third place by the name of Ocymastrum (...), is nothing else but the (...) (...) multiplex, which I haue described amongst the rest of the same kinde in the 128. Chapter of this booke.




CHAP. 225. Of Mints.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Mints; some of the garden; other wilde, or of the field; and also some of the water.


 The Description.
1 THe first tame or garden Mint commeth vp with stalkes foure square, of an obscure red colour somewhat hairie, which are couered with round leaues nicked in the edges like a saw, of a deepe greene colour: the floures are little and red, and grow about the stalkes circle-wise, as those of Pennie Royall: the roote creepeth aslope in the ground, hauing some strings on it, and now and then in sundry places it buddeth out afresh: the whole herbe is of a pleasant smell, and it rather lieth downe than standeth vp.
2 The second is like to the first in hairie stalkes something round, in blackish leaues, in creeping roots, and also in smell, but the floures do not at all compasse the stalke about, but stand vp in the tops of the branches being orderly placed in little eares, or rather catkines or aglets.
3 The leaues of Speare-Mint are long like those of the Willow tree, but whiter, softer, and more bairie: the floures are orderly placed in the tops of the stalks, and in ears like those of the second. The root hereof doth also creepe no otherwise than doth that of the first, vnto which it is like.
4 There is another sort of Mint which hath long leaues like to the third in stalks, yet in leaues and in roots lesser; but the floures hereof stand not in the tops of the branches, but compasse the stalks about circle-wise as do those of the first, which be of a light purple colour.
@ 5 This hath round leaues broader than the common Mint, rounder also, and as crisp or curled as those described in the second place (of which it seemes but a larger varietie:) the stakes are

The figures which were formerly in this Chapter were no way agreeable to the descriptions and names taken forth of (...). The first was of the (...) (...) (...) of Lobel and Tab. The 2. was of that which is described in the third place, the third was of the (...) Cattaria (...) described in the third place of the next Chapter. The figure agreeing to the 4. description was in the chapter next saue one asore by the title of (...) (...).

 1 Mentha sativarubra. Red Garden Mints.
The figures which were formerly in this Chapter were no way agreeable to the descriptions and names taken forth of (...). The first was of the (...) (...) (...) of Lobel and Tab. The 2. was of that which is described in the third place, the third was of the (...) Cattaria (...) described in the third place of the next Chapter. The figure agreeing to the 4. description was in the chapter next saue one asore by the title of (...) (...).

 2 Mentha cruciata, sive crispa. Crosse Mint, or curled Mint.
The figures which were formerly in this Chapter were no way agreeable to the descriptions and names taken forth of (...). The first was of the (...) (...) (...) of Lobel and Tab. The 2. was of that which is described in the third place, the third was of the (...) Cattaria (...) described in the third place of the next Chapter. The figure agreeing to the 4. description was in the chapter next saue one asore by the title of (...) (...).

 3 Mentha Romana. Speare Mint.
@ 4 Mentha Cardiaca. Heart Mint.

@ 5 Mentha spicata (...) Balsam Mint.
foure square, and the floures grow in eares or spokie tufts, like those of the second. @


 The Place.
Most vse to set Mints in Gardens almost euery where.


 The Time.
Mints do floure and flourish in Sommer, in Winter the roots onely remaine: being once set they continue long, and remaine (...) and fast in the ground.


 The Names.
Mint is called in Greeke (...) and (...): the sweet smell saith Pliny in his 19. booke cap. 8. hath changed the name among the Graecians when as otherwise it should be called Mintha, from whence our old writers haue deriued the name: for (...) signifieth sweet, and (...) smel: The Apothecaries, Italians, and French men, do keepe the Latine name Mentha. the Spaniards do call it Yerua buena, and Ortelana: in High Dutch, Muntz: in Low Dutch, Munte: in English, Mint.
The first Mint is called in High Dutch, Diement: in Low Dutch, Bruyn heylighe: he that would translate it into Latin, must call it Sacranigricans, or the holy blackish mint: in English, browne Mint; or red Mint.
The second is also called in High Dutch Krausz diement, Krausz muntz, and Krausz balsam: that is to say, Mentha cruciata: in French, Beaume crespu: in English, CrosseMint, or curled Mint.
The third is called of diuers Mentha Sarracenica, Mentha Romana: it is called in High Dutch Balsam muntz, Onser frawen muntz, Spitzer muntz, Spitzer balsam: it may be called Mentha angustifolia: that is to say, Mint with the narrow leafe: and in English, Speare Mint, common garden Mint, our Ladies Mint, browne Mint, and Macrell Mint.
The fourth is called in High Dutch Hertzkraut, as though it were to bee named Cardiaca, or Cardiaca Mentha: in English, Hart-woort, or Heart-mint @ This is the Sisymbrium sativum of Matthiolus, and Mentha hortensis altera of Gesner: the Italians call it Sisembrio domestico, and Balsamita; the Germanes, Kakenbalsam. @


 The Temperature.
Mint is hot and drie in the third degree. It is saith Galen, somewhat bitter and harsh, and it is inferiour to Calamint. The smell of Mint, saith Pliny doth stir vp the minde, and the taste to a greedy desire to meat.


 The Vertues.
Mint is maruellous wholesome for the stomacke, it staieth the Hicket, parbraking, vomiting and  scowring in the Cholerike passion, if it be taken with the iuice of a soure pomegranate.
It stoppeth the casting vp of bloud, being giuen with water and vineger, as Galen teacheth.
And in broth saith Pliny, it staieth the floures, and is singular good against the whites, that is to  say, that Mint which is described in the first place. For it is found by experience, that many haue had this kinde of flux staied by the continuall vse of this onely Mint: the same being applied to the forehead, or to the temples, as Pliny teacheth, doth take away the headache.
It is good against watering eies, and all manner of breakings out in the head, and against the infirmities  of the fundament, it is a sure remedie for childrens sore heads.
It is poured into the eares with honie water. It is taken inwardly against Scolopenders, Bearewormes, Sea-scorpions and serpents.
It is applied with salt to the bitings of mad dogs. It will not suffer milke to cruddle in the stomacke  (Pliny addeth to wax soure.) therefore it is put in Milke that is drunke for feare that those who haue drunke thereof should be strangled.
It is thought, that by the same vertue it is an enemy to generation, by ouerthickning the seed.

Dioscorides teacheth, that being applied to the secret part of a woman before the act, it hindreth  conception.
Garden Mint taken in meat or drinke warmeth and strengtheneth the stomacke, and drieth vp  all superfluous humours gathered in the same, and causeth good digestion.
Mints mingled with the leaues of parched Barly, consumeth tumors and hard swellings.
The water of Mints is of like operation in diuers medicines, it cureth the trenching and griping  paines of the belly and bowels, it appeaseth headach, staieth yexing and vomiting.
It is singular against the grauell and stone in the kidneies, and against the strangurie, being boiled  in wine and drunke.
They lay it to the stinging of waspes and bees with good successe.



CHAP. 226. Of Nep, or Cat Mint.

 The Description.
1 CAt Mint or Nep groweth high; it bringeth forth stalks aboue a cubit long, cornered, chamfered, and full of branches: the leaues are broad, nicked in the edges like (...) of Bawme, or of Horehound, but longer. The floures are of a whitish colour, they partly compasse about the vppermost sprigs, and partly grow on the very top, they are set in a manner like an eare or catkin: the root is diuersly parted, and ful of strings, and (...) a long time. The whole herbe together with the leaues and stalks is soft, and couered with a white downe, but lesser than Horse-mint; it is of a sharpe smel, and pearceth into the head: it hath a hot taste with a certaine (...) nesse.
@ 2 Our Authour figured this and described the next in the second place of this Chapter. This hath pretty large square stalks, set at each ioint with two leaues like those of Costmary, but of a gray or ouerworn colour: the floures grow at the tops of the stalks in long spokie tufts like those of the last described, and of a whitish colour, the smel is pleasanter than that of the last described. @


1 Mentha Felina, seu Cattaria. Nep or Cat-mint.


2 Mentha Cattaria altera. Great Cat-mint.



3 There is also another kind hereof that hath a longer and narrower lease, and not (...) so white a colour: the stalkes hereof are foure square: the floures be more plentifull, of a red light purple colour inclining to blew, sprinkled with little fine purple specks: the smell hereof is stronger, but the taste is more biting. @ The figure of this was formerly in the third place of the last chapter. @


@ 3 Mentha Cattaria angustifolia. Small Cat-Mint.




 The Place.
The first growes about the borders of gardens and fields, neere to rough bankes, ditches, and common wayes: it is delighted with moist and waterie places: it is brought into gardens.
@ The other two commonly grow in gardens with vs. @


 The Time.
The Cat-Mints flourish by and by after the Spring: they floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists do cal it Herba Cattaria, and Herba Catti, because the Cats are very much delighted herewith; for the smel of it is so pleasant to them, that they rub themselues vpon it, and wallow or tumble in it, and also feed on the branches and leaues very greedily. It is named of the Apothecaries Nepcta: but Nepeta is properly called (as we haue said) wilde Penny-royall: in high-Dutch, Katzen Muntz: in LowDutch, Catte cruijt: in Italian, Gattaria, or herba Gatta: in Spanish, Yerua Gatera: in English, Cat Mint and Nep. @ The true Nepeta is Calamintha Pulegij odore. @


 The Temperature.
Nep is of temperature hot and dry, and hath the faculties of the Calamints.


 The Vertues.
It is commended against cold paines of the  head, stomacke, and matrix, and those diseases that grow of flegme and raw humors, and of winde. It is a present helpe for them that be bursten inwardly by meanes of some fall receiued from an high place, and that are very much bruised, if the iuyce be giuen with wine or mede.
It is vsed in baths and decoctions for women to sit ouer, to bring downe their sicknesse, and to  make them fruitfull.
@ It is also good against those diseases for which the ordinarie Mints do serue and are vsed. @ 



CHAP. 227. Of Horse-Mint or Water-Mint.

 The Description.
1 WAter Mint is a kinde of wilde Mint, it is like to the first Garden M int; the leaues thereof are round, the stalkes cornered, both the leaues and stalkes are of a darke red colour: the roots creepe far abroad, but euery part is greater, and the herbe it selfe is of a stronger smell: the floures in the tops of the branches are gathered together into a round eare, of a purple colour.
@ 2 The second kinde of water Mint in each respect is like the others, sauing that the same hath a more odoriferous sauor being lightly touched with the hand: otherwise being hardly touched, the sauour is ouer hot to smell vnto: it beareth his floures in sundry tufts or roundles ingirting the stalkes in many places; and they are of a light purple colour: the leaues are also lesse than those of the former, and of an hoary gray colour.
@ 3 This common Horse-Mint hath creeping roots like as the other Mints, from which proceed stalkes partly leaning, and partly growing vpright: the leaues are pretty large, thicke,

The figure that was in the first place was of the Horse-Mint, and that in the second place should haue beene in the first, as now it is.

 1 Mentha aquatica, siue Sisymbrium. Water Mint.
The figure that was in the first place was of the Horse-Mint, and that in the second place should haue beene in the first, as now it is.

 2 Calamintha aquatica. Water Calamint.
@ 3 Mentastrum. Horse-Mint.
@ 4 (...) niueum Anglicum. Party coloured Horse-Mint.

@ 5 Mentastrum minus. Small Horse-Mint.
@ 6 Mentastrum montanum 1. (...). Mountaine Horse-Mint.
@ 7 Mentastrum (...) radice (...). Turnep-rooted Horse-Mint.
wrinkled, hoary and rough both aboue and be low, and lightly snipped about the edges; the floures grow in thicke compact eares at the tops of the stalks, and are like those of common Mint. The whole plant is of a more vnpleasant sent than any of the other Mints. It growes in diuers wet and moist grounds, and floures in Iune and Iuly. This by most writers is called only Mentastrum, without any other attribute.
4 In some of our English gardens (as (...) and Lobel obserued) growes another Horse-mint, much lesse, and better smelling than the last mentioned, hauing the leaues partly greene, and partly milke white; yet sometimes the leaues are some of them wholly white, but more, and more commonly all greene: the stalkes, floures, and other parts are like those of the former, but lesse. This is the Mentastrum (...) Anglicum, of Lobel; and Mentastrum alterum of Dodonaeus.
5 This growes in waterie places, hauing a stalke of a cubit or cubit and halfe high, set with longish hoary leaues like those of Horse-mint: the floures grow in spokie tufts at the tops of the stalkes, of a duskie purple colour, and in shape like those of the common Mint: the smell of this comes neere to that of the water Mint. This is the Mentastrifolia aquatica hirsuta, siue (...) 3. Dioscoridis, of Lobel: in the hist, Lugd, it is called Mentastrum minus spicatum.

6 The stalke of this is some cubit and halfe high, square, and full of pith: the leaues are like in shape to those of Cat-Mint, but not hoarie, but rather greene: the tops of the branches are set with roundles of such white floures as those of the Cats-mint: the smell of this plant is like to that of the Horse-Mint; whence Clusius calls it Mentastrum montanum primum. It floures in August, and growes in the mountainous places of Austria.
7 The same Author hath also set forth another by the name of Mentastrum tuberosa radice. It hath roughish stalkes like the former, and longish crumpled leaues somewhat snipt about the edges like those of the last described: the floures grow in roundles alongst the tops of the branches, and are white of colour, and like those of Cat-Mint. The root of this (which, as also the leaues, is not well exprest in the figure) is like a Radish, and blackish on the out side, sending sorth many succours like to little Turneps, and also diuers fibres: these succours taken from the maine root will also take root and grow. It floures in Iune. Clusius receiued the seed of it from Spaine. @


 The Place.
They grow in moist and waterie places, as in medowes neere vnto ditches that haue water in them, and by riuers.


 The Time.
They floure when the other Mints do, and reuiue in the Spring.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Sisymbrium: in high-Dutch, Roszmuntz, Massermuntz: in French, Menthe (...): in English, Water Mint, Fish-Mint, Brooke-Mint, and Horsemint.


 The Temperature.
Water Mint is hot and dry as is the Garden Mint, and is of a stronger smell and operation.


 The Vertues.
It is commended to haue the like vertues that the garden Mint hath; and also to be good against  the stinging of Bees and Waspes, if the place be rubbed therewith.
The sauour or smell of the Water-Mint reioyceth the heart of man; for which cause they vse  to strew it in chambers and places of recreation, pleasure, and repose, and where feasts and banquets are made.
There is no vse hereof in physicke whilest we haue the garden Mint, which is sweeter, and more  agreeing to the nature of man.



CHAP. 228. Of Mountaine Mint or Calamint.

 The Description.
1 MOuntaine Calamint is a low herbe, seldome aboue a foot high, parted into many branches: the stalkes are foure square, and haue ioynts as it were, out of euery one whereof grow forth leaues something round, lesser than those of Basill, couered with a very thinne hairy downe, as are also the stalkes, somwhat whitish, and of a sweet smell: the tops of the branches are gallantly deckt with (...), somewhat of a purple colour; then groweth the seed which is blacke: the roots are full of strings, and continue.
2 This most excellent kinde of Calamint hath vpright stalkes a cubit high, couered ouer with a woolly mossinesse, beset with rough leaues like a Nettle, somewhat notched about the edges; among the leaues come forth blewish or sky-coloured floures: the root is wooddy, and the whole plant is of a very good smell.
3 There is another kinde of Calamint which hath hard square stalks, couered in like manner as the other with a certaine hoary or fine cotton. The leaues be in shape like Basill, but that they are rough; and the floures grow in roundles toward the tops of the branches, sometimes three or foure vpon a stemme, of a purplish colour. The root is threddy, and long lasting.
@ 4 There is a kinde of strong smelling Calamint that hath also square stalks couered with soft cotton, and almost creeping by the ground, hauing euermore two leaues standing one against another, small and soft, not much vnlike the leaues of Penny-Royall, sauing that they are (...) and whiter: the floures grow about the stalks like wharles or garlands, of a blewish purple colour; the root is small and threddy: the whole plant hath the smell of Penny-Royal; whence it hath the addition of (...) odore.



1 (...) montana vulgaris. Calamint, or Mountaine Mint.


The figure which formerly (...) in the second place belonged to the fourth description; and the figure that belonged (...) was before falsly put for the (...) or Wood-Sage. As also that which should haue beene put in the fourth place was put in the first place of the last chapter saue (...), for the Red Garden (...).

 2 Calamintha montana praestantior. The more excellent Calamint.


The figure which formerly (...) in the second place belonged to the fourth description; and the figure that belonged (...) was before falsly put for the (...) or Wood-Sage. As also that which should haue beene put in the fourth place was put in the first place of the last chapter saue (...), for the Red Garden (...).

 3 (...) (...) (...) Common Calamint.


The figure which formerly (...) in the second place belonged to the fourth description; and the figure that belonged (...) was before falsly put for the (...) or Wood-Sage. As also that which should haue beene put in the fourth place was put in the first place of the last chapter saue (...), for the Red Garden (...).

 3 Calamintha odore (...). Field Calamint.





 The Place.
It delighteth to grow in mountaines, and in the shadowy and grauelly sides thereof: it is found in many places of Italy and France, and in other countries: it is brought into gardens, where it prospereth maruellous well, and very easily soweth it selfe. I haue found these plants growing vpon the chalkie grounds and highwayes leading from Grauesend vnto Canturbury, in most places, or almost euery where. @ I haue onely obserued the third and fourth to grow wilde with vs in England. @


 The Time.
It flourisheth in Sommer, and almost all the yeare thorow: it bringeth forth floures and seed from Iune to Autumne.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...), (...), as though you should say, Elegans aut vtilis Mentha, a gallant or profitable Mint: the Latines keepe the name Calamintha: Apuleius also nameth it amisse, Mentastrum, and confoundeth the names one with another: the Apothecaries call it Montana Calamintha, Calamentum, and sometime Calamentum montanum: in French, Calament: in English, Mountain Calamint. @ The fourth is certainly the second Calamint of Dioscorides, and the true (...) of the Antients. @


 The Temperature.
This Calamint which groweth in mountaines is of a feruent taste, and biting, hot, and of a thin substance, and dry after a sort in the third degree, as Galen saith: it digesteth or wasteth away thin humors, it cutteth, and maketh thicke humors thin.


 The Vertues.
Therefore being inwardly taken by it selfe, and also with meade, or honied water, it doth manifestly  heate, prouoketh sweat, and consumeth superfluous humors of the body; it taketh away the shiuerings of Agues that come by fits.
The same also is performed by the sallet oyle in which it is boyled, if the body be anointed and  well rubbed and chafed therewith.
The decoction thereof drunke prouoketh vrine, bringeth downe the monethly sicknesse, and expelleth  the childe, which also it doth being but onely applied.
It helpeth those that are bruised, such as are troubled with crampes and convulsions, and that  cannot breathe vnlesse they hold their necks vpright (that haue the wheesing of the lungs, saith (...)) and it is a remedie saith (...) for a cholericke passion, otherwise called the Felony.
It is good for them that haue the yellow jaundice, for that it remoueth the stoppings of the liuer  and gall, and withall clenseth: being taken afore-hand in Wine, it keepeth a man from being poysoned: being inwardly taken, or outwardly applied it cureth them that are bitten of Serpents: being burned or strewed it driues serpents away: it takes away black and blew spots that come by blowes or dry beatings, making the skin faire and white; but for such things (saith Galen) it is better to be laid to greene than dry.
It killeth all manner of wormes of the belly, if it be drunk with salt and honey: the iuyee dropped  into the eares doth in like manner kill the wormes thereof.
Pliny saith, that if the iuyce be conueyed vp into the nosthrils it stancheth the bleeding at the  nose; and the root (which (...) writeth to be good for nothing) helpeth the Squincie, if it be gargarised, or the throat washed therewith, being vsed in Cute, and Myrtle seed withall.
It is applied to those that haue the Sciatica or ache in the huckle bone, for it drawes the humor  from the very bottome, and bringeth a comfortable heat to the whole ioynt: Paulus Aegineta saith, that for the paine of the haunches or huckle bones it is to be vsed in Clysters.
Being much eaten it is good for them that haue the leprosie, so that the patient drinke whay (...) it, as Dioscorides witnesseth.
Apuleius affirmeth, that if the leaues be often eaten, they are a sure and certaine remedy against  (...) leprosie.
There is made of this an Antidote or composition, which Galen in his fourth booke of the Gouernment of health describes by the name of Diacalaminthos, that doth not onely notably digest or waste away crudities, but also is maruellous good for young maidens that want their courses, if their bodies be first well purged; for in continuance of time it bringeth them downe very gently without force.




CHAP. 229. Of Bawme.

 The Description.
1 A Piastrum, or Melissa, is our common best knowne Balme or Bawme, hauing many square stalkes and blackish leaues like to Ballote, or blacke Hore-hound, but larger, of a pleasant smell, drawing neere in smell and sauour vnto a Citron: the floures are of a Carnation colour; the root of a wooddy substance.
2 The second kinde of Bawme was brought into my garden and others, by his seed from the parts of Turky, wherefore we haue called it Turky Balme: it excelleth the rest of the kinds, if you respect the sweet sauour and goodly beauty thereof, and deserueth a more liuely description than my rude pen can deliuer. This rare plant hath sundry small weake and brittle square stalkes and branches, mounting to the height of a cubit and somewhat more, beset with leaues like to Germander or (...), indented or toothed very bluntly about the edges, but somewhat sharpe pointed at the top. The floures grow in small coronets, of a purplish blew colour: the root is small and threddy, and dieth at the first approch of Winter, and must be sowne anew in the beginning of May, in good and fertill ground.


1 Melissa. Bawme.


2 Melissa Turcica. Turky Bawme.


3 Fuchsius setteth forth a kinde of Bawme hauing a square stalke, with leaues like vnto common Bawme, but larger and blacker, and of an euill sauour; the floures white, and much greater than those of the common Bawme; the root hard, and of a wooddy substance. @ This varies with the leaues sometimes broader and otherwhiles narrower: also the floures are commonly purple, yet sometimes white, and otherwhiles of diuers colours: the leaues are also sometimes broader, otherwhiles narrower: wherefore I haue giuen you one of the figures of Clusius, and that of Lobel, that you may see the seuerall expressions of this plant. Clusius, and after him (...), referre it to the Lamium, or Arch-angell: and the former calls it (...) (...): and the later, Lamium (...) Melissae folio. @
4 There is a kinde of Bawme called Herba Iudaica, which Lobel calles Tetrahit, that hath many

@ 3 Melissa (...) (...) albo. Bastard Bawme with white floures.
@ 3 Melissa Fuchsij flore purpureo. Bastard Bawme with purple floures.
@ 4 Herba Iudaica (...). Smiths Bawme, or Iewes All-heale.
weake and tender square hairie branches; some leaning backward, and others turning inward, diuiding themselues into sundry other small armes or twigs, which are beset with long rough leaues dented about, and smaller than the leaues of Sage. And growing in another soile or clymat, you shal see the leaues like the oken leaf; in other places like Marrubium Creticum, very hoary, which caused Dioscorides to describe it with so many shapes, and also the floures, which are sometimes blew and purple, and oftentimes white: the root is small and crooked, with some hairie strings fastned thereto. All the whole plant draweth to the fauour of Balme, called Melissa. @ This might much more fitly haue beene put to the rest of the (...), but that our Authour had thrust it as by force into this Chapter. @
5 There be also two other plants comprehended vnder the kindes of Balme, the one very like vnto the other, although not knowne to many Herbarists, and haue been of some called by the title of (...): the first kinde (...) calleth Cardiaca Melica, or Molucca Syriaca, so called for that it was first brought out of Syria: it groweth three

cubits high, and yeeldeth many shoots from a wooddy (...), full of many whitish strings; the stalkes be round, somewhat thicke, and of a reddish colour, which are hollow within, with certain obscure prints or small furrowes along the stalkes, with equall spaces halfe kneed or knotted, and at euery such knee or ioynt stand two leaues one against another, tufted like (...), but more rough and deeply indented, yet not so deepely as our common (...), called Mother-wort, not so sharpe pointed: about the knees there come forth small little prickles, with (...) or eight (...) open wide bells, hauing many corners thinne like parchment, and of the same colour, somewhat stiffe and long; and at the top of the edge of the bell it is cornered and pointed with sharpe prickles; and out of the middle of this prickly bell riseth a floure somewhat purple tending to whitenesse, not vnlike our (...) or Cardiaca, which bringeth forth a cornered seed, the bottome flat, and smaller toward the top like a steeple: the sauour of the plant draweth toward the sent of Lamium.
6 The other kinde of (...), otherwise called (...) (...) (whereof Pena writeth) (...) from the last (...) mentioned, in that the cups or bells wherein the floures grow are more prickly than the first, and much sharper, longer, and more in number: the stalke of this is soure square, lightly hollowed or furrowed; the seed three cornered, sharpe vpward like a wedge; the tunnels of the floures brownish, and not so white as the first.


5 Melissa molucca laeuis. Smooth Molucca Bawme.


6 Molucca spinosa. Thorny Molucca Bawme.




 The Place.
Bawme is much sowen and set in gardens, and oftentimes it groweth of it selfe in Woods and mountaines, and other wilde places: it is profitably planted in gardens, as Pliny writeth, lib. 21. cap. 12. about places where Bees are kept, because they are delighted with this herbe aboue others, whereupon it hath beene called Apiastrum: for, saith he, when they are strayed away, they do finde their way home againe by it, as Virgil writeth in his Georgicks:

Huctu (...) asperge liquores,
Trita Meliphylla, and (...) he nobile gramen.


Vse here such helpe as husbandry doth vsually prescribe.
Bawme bruised in a mortar, and base Hony-wort beside.
All these I haue in my garden from yeare to yeare.




 The Time.
Bawme floureth in Iune, Iuly, and August: it withereth in the Winter; but the root remaineth, which in the beginning of the Spring bringeth forth fresh leaues and stalkes.
The other sorts do likewise flourish in Iune, Iuly, and August; but they doe perish when they haue perfected their seed.


 The Names.
Bawme is called in Greeke (...): by Pliny, Melitis: in Latine, Melissa, Apiastrum, and Citrago: of some, Melissophyllon, and Meliphyllon: in Dutch, Consille de greyn: in French, Poucyrade, ou Melisse: in Italian, Cedronella, and Arantiata: in Spanish, Torongil: in English, Balme, or Bawme.


 The Temperature.
Bawme is of temperature hot and dry in the second degree, as Auicen saith: Galen saith it is like Horehound in facultie.


 The Vertues.
Bawme drunke in wine is good against the bitings of venomous beasts, comforts the heart, and  driueth away all melancholy and sadnesse.
Common Bawme is good for women which haue the strangling of the mother, either being eaten  or smelled vnto.
The iuyce thereof glueth together greene wounds, being put into oyle, vnguent, or Balme, for  that purpose, and maketh it of greater efficacie.
The herbe stamped, and infused in Aquavitae, may be vsed vnto the purposes aforesaid (I meane  the liquour and not the herbe) and is a most cordiall liquour against all the diseases before spoken of.
The hiues of Bees being rubbed with the leaues of Bawme, causeth the Bees to keep together, and causeth others to come vnto them.
The later age, together with the Arabians and Mauritanians, affirme Balme to be singular good  for the heart, and to be a remedie against the infirmities thereof; for Auicen in his booke written of the infirmities of the heart, teacheth that Bawme makes the heart merry and ioyfull, and strengtheneth the vitall spirits.
Serapio affirmeth it to be comfortable for a moist and cold stomacke, to stir vp concoction, to  open the stopping of the braine, and to driue away sorrow and care of the minde.
Dioscorides writeth, That the leaues drunke with wine, or applied outwardly, are good against  the stingings of venomous beasts, and the bitings of mad dogs: also it helpeth the tooth-ache, the mouth being washed with the decoction, and is likewise good for those that canot take breath vnlesse they hold their necks vpright.
The leaues being mixed with salt (saith the same Author) helpeth the Kings Euil, or any other  hard swellings and kernels, and mitigateth the paine of the Gout.
Smiths Bawme or Carpenters Bawme is most singular to heale vp greene wounds that are cut  with iron; it cureth the rupture in short time; it stayeth the whites. Dioscorides and Pliny haue attributed like vertues vnto this kinde of Bawme, which they call Iron-wort. The leaues (say they) being applied, close vp wounds without any perill of inflammation. Pliny saith that it is of so great vertue, that though it be but tied to his sword that hath giuen the wound, it stancheth the bloud.



CHAP. 230. Of Horehound.

 The Description.
1 WHite Horehound bringeth forth very many stalkes foure square, a cubit high, couered ouer with a thin whitish (...): whereupon are placed by couples at certaine distances, thicke whitish leaues somewhat round, wrinkled and nicked on the edges, and couered ouer with the like downinesse; from the bosomes of which leaues come forth small floures of a feint purplish colour, set round about the stalke in round wharles, which turne into sharpe prickly husks after the (...) be past. The whole plant is of a strong sauor, but not vnpleasant: the root is threddy.
2 The second kinde of Horehound hath sundry crooked slender stalkes, diuided into many small branches couered ouer with a white hoarinesse or cottony downe. The leaues are likewise hoarie and (...), longer and narrower than the precedent, lightly indented about the edges, and sharply pointed like the Turky Bawme, and of the same bignesse, hauing small wharles of white

1 Marrubium album. White Horehound.2 Marrubium (...). Snow white Horehound:3 Marrubium Hispanicum. Spanish Horehound.4 Marrubium Creticum. Candy Horehound.
floures, and prickly rundles or seed-vessels set about the stalks by certaine distances. The root is likewise threddy.
3 Spanish Horehound hath a stiffe hoarie and hairy stalke, diuiding it selfe at the bottome into two wings or more armes, and likewise toward the top into two others; whereupon are placed by couples at certaine spaces faire broad leaues, more round than any of the rest, and likewise more woolly and hairy. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, spike fashion, composed of small gaping floures of a purple colour. The whole plant hath the sauor of Stoechados.
4 Candy Horehound hath a thicke and hard root, with many hairy threds fastned thereunto; from which rise vp immediately rough square stalkes, set confusedly with long leaues of a hoarie colour, of a most pleasant strong smell. The floures grow toward the top of the stalkes in (...) rundles, of a whitish colour.


 The Place.
The first of these Horehounds, being the common kinde, groweth plentifully in all places of England, neere vnto old walls, highwayes, and beaten paths, in vntilled places. It groweth in all other countries likewise, where it altereth according to the scituation and nature of the countries; for commonly that which growes in Candy and in Hungary is much whiter, and of a sweeter smel, and the leaues oftentimes narrower and lesser than that which groweth in England and these Northerne Regions.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August, and that in the second yeare after the sowing of them.


 The Names.
Horehound is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Marrubium: in shops, Parassium, and also Marrubium. There be certaine bastard names found in Apuleius; as Melittena, Labeonia, and Vlceraria: in Italian, Marrubio: in Spanish, Marruuio: in Dutch, Malroue: in French, Marubin: in English, Horehound. @ Clusius calls the third Ocimastrum Valentinum. @


 The Temperature.
Horehound (as Galen teacheth) is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, and of a bitter taste.


 The Vertues.
Common Horehound boyled in water and drunke, openeth the liuer and spleene, cleanseth the  brest and lungs, and preuailes greatly against an old cough, the paine of the side, spitting of bloud, the ptysicke, and vlcerations of the lungs.
The same boyled in wine and drunke, bringeth downe the termes, expelleth the secondine, after  birth, or dead childe, and also easeth those that haue sore and hard labour in childe-bearing.
Syrrup made of the greene fresh leaues and sugar, is a most singular remedie against the cough  and wheesing of the lungs.
The same syrrup doth wonderfully and aboue credit ease such as haue lien long sicke of any  consumption of the lungs, as hath beene often proued by the learned Physitions of our London Colledge.
It is likewise good for them that haue drunke poyson, or that haue beene bitten of Serpents. The leaues are applied with honey to cleanse foule and filthy vlcers. It stayeth and keepeth back the pearle or web in the eyes.
The iuyce pressed forth of the leaues, and hardned in the Sun, is very good for the same things, especially if it be mixed with a little wine and honey; and dropped into the eyes, it helps them, and cleereth the sight.
Being drawne vp into the nosthrils it cleanseth the yellownesse of the eyes, and stayeth the running  and watering of them.



CHAP. 231. Of wilde Horehound.

 The Description.
1 WIld Horehound is also like to common Horehound: there riseth from the root hereof a great number of stalkes high and ioynted, and out of euery ioynt a couple of leaues opposite, or set one against another, somewhat hard, a little longer than those of common Horehound, and whiter, as also the stalkes are set with soft haires, and of a sweet smell: the floures do compasse the stalke about as those doe of common Horehound, but they are yellow, and the wharles be narrower: the root is wooddy and durable.



1 (...). Wilde Hore-hound.


2 Stachys (...). Wilde (...) Horehound.


@ 3 Stachys spinosa Cretica. Thorny Horehound.


@ 4 Stachys Lusitanica. Portugall Wilde Horehound.





@ 5 Sideritis Scordioides. Germander Ironwoort.


@ 6 Sideritis Alpina Hyssopifolia. Hyssop-leaued Iron-wort.


2 Besides this there is also another described by Fuchsius: the stalkes hereof are thicke, foure square, now and then two or three foot long: the leaues be broad, long, hoarie, nicked in the edges, hairie as are also the stalks, and much broader than those of the common Horehound: the floures in the whorles which compasse the stalke about, are of a purple colour; the seede is round and blackish: the root hard and somthing yellow.
@ 3 This thorny Stachys hath leaues before it comes to send forth the stalk, like those of the lesser Sage, but more white and hairie, those that grow vpon the stalkes are much narrower: the stalks are square some foot high: and at the parting of them into branches grow alwaies two leaues one opposit against another: the tops of the branches end in long sharpe thornie prickles: the floures grow about the toppes of the branches like those of Sage, but of somewhat a lighter colour. This grows naturally in Candy, about a Towne called Larda, where Honorius Bellus first obserued it, there it is called Guidarothymo, or Asses Tyme, though it agree with Tyme in nothing but the place of growth. Clusius sets it forth by the name of Stachys spinosa.
4 Lobel hath giuen vs the figure and first description of this by the name of Stachys Lusitanica. It hath creeping and downie stalkes some handfull and halfe high, set with little leaues: amongst which in rundles grow smal floures like those of the other wilde Horehounds; the whole plant is of somewhat a gratefull smell. @
5 There is another wilde Horehound of Mountpelier, called Sideritis Monspelliaca Scordioides, siue Scordij folio: being that kind of Sideritis or wilde (...) which is like vnto Scordium, or water Germander, which groweth to the height of a handfull and a halfe, with many small branches rising vpright, of a wooddie substance, hauing the tops and spokie coronets of Hyssop, but the leaues do resemble Dioscorides his Scordium, saue that they be somewhat lesser, stiffer, more wrinckled (...) curled and hairie, than (...), or the Iudaicall herb: the floures do (...) those of the common Sauorie, in taste bitter, and of an aromaticall smell.
6 Mountaine Sideritis beeing also of the kindes of Horehound, was first found by Valerandus (...), in the mountains of Sauoy, resembling very wel the last described, but the leaues are much narrower, and like those of Hyssope: the floures grow in small rough rundlets or tusts, pale of (...) like Marrubium or Tetrahit; the root long and bending, of a wooddie substance, and purple colour, bitter in taste, but not vnpleasant, whose vertue is yet vnknowne.


 The Place.
These herbes are (...), they grow in rough and barren places, notwithstanding I haue them growing in my garden. @ My kinde friend Mr. Buckner an Apothecary of London the last yeare,

being 1632, found the second of these growing wilde in Oxfordshire in the field ioyning to (...) Parke a mile from the Towne. @


 The Time.
They floure in the Sommer moneths, and wither towards winter: the root remaineth aliue a certaine time.


 The Names.
The former is taken for the right Stachys, which is called in Greeke (...): it is knowne in shoppes and euery where: we name it in English yellow Horehound, and wilde Horehoond. @ Lobel calls it Stachys Lychnites spuria Flandrorum. @
The other wilde Horehound, seeing it hath no name, is to be called Stachys spuria: for it is not the right, neither is it Sphacelus (as most haue suspected) of which Theophrastus hath made mention it is called in English purple Horehound, bastard wild Horehound, and Fuchsius his wild Horehound. @ Fabius Columna proues the second to be the Sideritis Heraclia of Dioscorides and the Antients. @


 The Temperature.
These herbes are of a biting and bitter taste, and are hot in the third degree according to (...).
@ The Stachys Fuchsij and Sideritides seem to be hot and drie in the first degree. @


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the leaues drunk doth draw downe the menses and the secondine, as Dioscorides teacheth.
@ 2 This is of singular vse (as most of the herbes of this kinde are) to keep wounds from inflammation, and speedily to heale them vp, as also to stay all fluxes and defluctions, hauing a drying and moderate astrictiue facultie.
Aetius and Aegineta commend the vse of it in medicines vsed in the cure of the biting of a mad  Dog. @



@ CHAP. 232. Of the Fronwoorts or Alheales.


@ 1 Sideritis vulgaris. Ironwoort, or Alheale.


@ 2 Sideritis Angustifolia. Narrow leaued Alheale.




 The Kindes.
@ THere are many plants that belong to this kindred of the (...), or Ironwoorts, and some of them are already treated of, though in seuerall places, and that not verie fitly by our Authour; and one of them is also set forth hereafter by the name of Clownes Alheale: these that are (...) handled, and properly belong to this Chapter, are first the (...) (...) (...), being in the fourth place of the 229. Chapter. Secondly, the Stachys Fuchsij (being the first (...) of (...)) described in the second place of the last chapter. Thirdly, the (...) Scordioides set forth in the fift place and fourthly the Sideritis Alpina Hyssopisolia set forth in the (...) place of the last chapter. Now besides all these, I will in this Chapter giue you the Descriptions (...) some others like to them in face and Vertues, and all of them may be referred to the first S. (...) (...) Dioscorides his description.


 The Description.
1 THis hath square stalkes some cubite high, rough, and iointed with two leaues at (...) ioint which are wrinkled and hairie, of an indifferent bignesse, snipt about (...) (...) of a strong smell, and of a bitterish and somewhat hottish taste: almost (...) (...) (...) ioint grow branches, set with lesser leaues: the floures which in roundles incompasse (...) (...) the stalks end in a spike, being somewhat hooded, whitish; well smelling, and marked on the (...) with sanguine spots. The seed is rough and blacke, being contained in fiue cornered seed (...) The root is hard and wooddie, sending forth many stalkes. This is the Sideritis (...) of (...) Cordus, (...), and others; it hath a very great affinitie with the Panax Coloni, or Clownes A of our Authour, and the difference betweene them certainly is very small.


@ 3 Siderit is procumbens (...). Creeping branched Ironwoort.


@ 3 Sideritis procumbens (...) (...). Not branched Creeping (...).


2 The foure square stalke of this plant is not aboue a foot high, and it is presently from the root diuided into diuers branches; the leaues are long and narrow with some nerues or veines running

@ 6 Sideritis latifolia glabra. Smooth broad leaued Alheale.
alongst them, being also very hairie, but not snipt about the edges: the floures grow alongst the branches, and vpon the main stalk in roundles like those of the first mentioned, but lesser, and of a darke colour, with a yellowish spot on their insides: the seed is also contained in fiue cornered vessels like as the former. It floures in Iune and Iuly, and growes amongst the corne in Hungarie and Austria. This is onely set forth by Clusius, and that vnder the name of Sideritis 6. Pannonica.
3 This hath some branches lying along vpon the ground, slender, quadrangular and hairie, which at certain spaces are set with leaues growing by couples, almost like those of the first, but much lesse, and snipt onely from the middle to the end: the floures grow after the manner of the former, and (as Clusius thinkes) are like them, as is also the seed. Clusius hath this by the name of Sideritis 4.
4 The same Authour hath also giuen vs another, which from the top of the root sends soorth many branches, partly lying spred on the ground, and partly standing vpright, being hairy, iointed, and square like those of the former, and such also are the leaues, but that they are lesse snipt about the edges: and in their bosomes from the bottome of the stalkes to the top grow roundles of whitish floures shaped like others of this kinde. Clusius calls this Sideritis 5. He had onely the figures of these elegantly drawne by the hand of Iaques Plateau, and so sent him.
5 This from a small wooddie root sends forth a square hairie stalke some halfe foot high, and sometimes higher, and this stalke most commonly sends forth some foure branches, which subdiuide themselues into smaller ones, all of them sometimes lying vpon the ground, and the stalke standing vpright; the leaues grow by couples at each ioint, from a broader bottome, ending in an obtuse point, the lower leaues being some inch long, and not much lesse in breadth: the floures are whitish, or light purple, small and hooded, (...) the stalkes in roundles, which falling, (...) longish blacke seeds are contained in fiue cornered vessels, I first found it August 1626 in floure and seed amongst the corne in a field ioining to a wood side not far from Greene-hiue in Kent, and I at that time, not finding it to be written of by any, called it Sideritis humilis (...) (...) folio; but since I finde that (...) hath set it forth in his Prodromus by the name of Sideritis Alsine Trissaginis folio.
6 This (which Tabernamontanus calls Alyssum (...), and whose figure was formerly giuen with the same title by our Authour in the 118 Chapter of the former Edition, with a Description no waies agreeing therewith) grows vp with square stalkes some cubite high, set with pretty large and greene smooth leaues snipt about the edges: the floures grow in roundles at the tops of the branches, being hooded, and of a pale yellow colour. This grows in the Corne sields in some places of Germany and Italy: and it is the Sideritis 2. of Matthiolus in (...) opinion, who cals it Sideritis aruensis latifolia glabra.
7 There is another plant that growes frequently in the Corne fields of Kent, and by Purfleet in Essex which may fitly be ioined to these, for (...) calls it Sideritis arvensis flore rubro, and in the Historia Lugd. it is named Tetrahit angustifolium, and thought to be Ladanum (...) of Pliny, mentioned lib. 29. cap. 8. and lib. 26. cap. 11. It hath a stalke some (...) or better high, set with sharp pointed longish leaues, hauing two or three nickes on their sides, and growing by couples; at the top of the branches, and also the maine stalke it selfe, stand in one or two roundles faire red hooded floures: the root is small and fibrous, dying euery yeare when it hath (...) the seed. It floures in Iuly and August. This is also sometimes found with a white floure.


 The Time, Place, etc.
All these are sufficiently deliuered in the descriptions.



 The Temperatures and Vertues.
These plants are drie with little or no heat, and are endued with an astrictiue faculty. They conduce  much to the healing of greene wounds being beaten and applied, or put in vnguents or plaisters made for that purpose.
They are also good for those things that are mentioned in the last chapter, in B, and C.
Clusius saith, the first and second are vsed in Stiria in fomentations, to bathe the head against the  paines or aches thereof, as also against the stiffenesse and wearinesse of the limbs or ioints.
And the same Author affirmes that he hath knowne the decoction vsed with very good successe  in curing the inflammations and vlcerations of the legs. @



CHAP. 233. Of Water Horehound.


@ 1 Marubium aquaticum. Water Horehound.



 The Description.
1 WAter Horehound is very like to blacke and stinking Horehound in stalke and floured cups, which are rough, pricking, and compassing the stalks round about like garlands: the leaues thereof be also blacke, but longer, harder, more deeply gashed in the edges than those of stinking Horehound, yet not hairie at all, but wrinkled: the floures be small and whitish: the root is fastened with many blacke strings.


 The Place.
It growes in Brooks on the brinks of water ditches and neere vnto motes, for it requireth store of water, and groweth not in drie places.


 The Time.
It flourishes and floures in the Sommer moneths, in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
It is called Aquatile, and Palustre Marubium: In English, water Horehound. Matthiolus taketh it to be Species prima Sideritidis; or a kind of Ironwoort, which Dioscorides hath described in the first place; but with this doth better agree that which is called Herba Iudaica, or Glid woort; it much lesse agreeth with Sideritis secunda, or the second Ironwoort, which opinion also hath his fauourers, for it is like in leafe to none of the Fernes. Some also thinke good to cal it Herba Aegyptia, because they that feine themselues Egyptians (such as many times wander like vagabonds from citie to citie in Germanie and other places) do vse with this herbe to giue themselues a swart colour, such as the Egyptians and the people of Africke are of; for the iuice of this herbe doth die euery thing with this kinde of colour, which also holdeth so fast, as that it cannot be wiped or washed away: insomuch as linnen cloth being died herewith, doth alwaies keepe that colour.


 The Temperature.
It seemeth to be cold, and withall very astringent or binding.


 The Vertues.
There is little vse of the water Horehound in Physicke. 

The figure that (...) was in the (...) place was of the (...) (...) described in the next chapter; and the figure and description that were in the second place by the name of (...) (...) (...), were of the so much (...) (...) (...) (...) Clowns (...)-heale of our Author, and therefore (...) (...) to (...) (...).





CHAP. 234. Of blacke or stinking Horehound.

 The Description.
1 BLacke Horehound is somewhat like vnto the white kinde. The stalkes be also square and hairie. The leaues somewhat larger, of a darke swart or blackish colour, somewhat like the leaues of Nettles, snipt about the edges, of an vnpleasant and stinking sauour. The floures grow about the stalks in certain spaces, of a purple colour, in shape like those of Archangell or dead Nettle. The roote is small and threddie. @ I haue found this also with white floures.
@ 2 To this may fitly be referred that plant which some haue called Parietaria, Sideritis, and Herbaventi, with the additament of Monspeliensium to each of these denominations: but Bauhine, who I herein follow, calls it Marrubium nigrum longifolium. It is thus described: the root is thicke and very fibrous, sending vp many square rough stalkes some cubite high, set at certaine spaces with leaues longer and broader than Sage, rough also and snipt about the edges: and out of their bosomes come sloures, hooded, and purple of colour, engirting the stalkes as in other plants of this kinde. Some haue thought this to be Othonna of the Antients, because the leaues not falling (...) in Winter, are either eaten by the Wormes, or wasted by the iniurie of the weather to the very nerues or veines that runne ouer them; so that by this meanes they are all perforated, and easily blowne thorow by each blast of winde: which caused some to giue it also the name of Herba (...). It grows in the corne fields about Montpelier. @


The figure was of (...) album, or Archangell with the white floure; and the figure that should haue beene here was in the former Chapter.

 1 Marrubium nigrum. Stinking Horehound.


@ 2 Marrubium nigrum Longifolium. Long leaued Horehound.




 The Place.
It is found in gardens amongst pot herbes, and oftentimes amongst stones and rubbish in drie soiles.



 The Time.
It floureth and flou risheth when the others do.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...) and (...) as Pliny testifieth in his 27. booke, 8. chapter: of some, Marrubiastrum, or Marrubium spurium, or bastard Horehound: in shops, Prasium foetidum, and Ballote: in Italian, Marrubiastro: in Spanish, Marrauio negro: in French, Marubin noir and putant: in English stinking Horehound.


 The Temperature.
Stinking Horehound is hot and dry, and as Paulus Aegineta teacheth, of a sharpe and clensing faculty.


 The Vertues.
Being stamped with salt and applied, it cureth the biting of a mad dogge, against which it is of great efficacy, as Dioscorides writeth.
The leaues rosted in hot embers do waste and consume away hard lumpes or knots in or about the fundament. It also clenseth foule and filthy vlcers, as the same Author teacheth.



CHAP. 235. Of Archangell, or dead Nettle.


The (...) (...) that was formerly in this Chapter, was of the (...) (...). of (...) being a kinde of dead Nettle that hath the leaues (...) (...) (...), and somewhat (...) than the ordinary one: the (...) that (...) haue been here was in the last Chapter; the third was the same with the first (that (...) haue bin) (...) onely in colour of floures, and that which (...) haue beene in the third place was in the fourth,

 1 (...) album. Whitc Archangell.


2 Lamium luteum. Yellow Archangell.



 The Description.
1 WHite Archangell hath foure square stalkes, a cubit high, leaning this way and that way, by reason of the great weight of his ponderous leaues, which are in shape like those of Nettles, nicked round about the edges, yet not stinging at all,

but soft, and as it were downy. The floures compasse the stalkes round about at certaine distances, euen as those of Horehound doe, whereof doubtlesse this is a kinde, and not of Nettles; as hath been generally holden: which floures are white of colour, fashioned like to little gaping hoods (...) helmets. The root is very threddy. @ There is also a variety of this hauing red or purple floures. @
2 Yellow Archangell hath square stalkes rising from a threddy root, set with leaues by couples, very mnch cut or backt about the edges, and sharpe pointed. The vppermost whereof are oftentimes of a faire purple colour. The floures grow among the same leaues, of a gold yellow colour, fashioned like those of the white Archangell, but greater, and more wider gaping open.
3 Red Archangell being called (...) non mordax, (...) (...) Nettle, hath many leaues spred vpon the ground, among which rise vp stalkes hollow, and square, whereupon do grow rough leaues of an ouer worne colour, among which come forth purple floures, set about in round wharles, or (...). The root is small, and perisheth at the first approach of winter.


The (...) (...) that was formerly in this Chapter, was of the (...) (...). of (...) being a kinde of dead Nettle that hath the leaues (...) (...) (...), and somewhat (...) than the ordinary one: the (...) that (...) haue been here was in the last Chapter; the third was the same with the first (that (...) haue bin) (...) onely in colour of floures, and that which (...) haue beene in the third place was in the fourth,

 3 Lamium rubrum. Red Archangell.


@ 4 Lamium Pannonicum, siue (...). Hungary dead Nettle.


4 Dead Nettle of Hungary hath many large rough leaues very much curled or crumpled like those of the stinging nettle, of a darke greene colour, snipt about the edges like the (...) of a sawe, ser vpon a foure square stalke by couples; from the bosome of which leaues come forth the floures close to the stalkes, of a perfect purple colour, in shape like those of the white (...), gaping like a dragons mouth, the lower chap whereof is of a bright purple spotted with white, which being past, there doth follow seed inclosed in rough huskes, with fine sharpe points sticking out. The root is thicke, tough, consisting of many threds and long strings.
@ 5 To this of Clusius, we may sitly refer 2. other plants: the first of which Tragus and others call Vrtica Heraclea, or Herculea, and Clusius iudges it to be the true Galeopsis of Dioscorides, as Tragus also thought before him. The root hereof is fibrous and creeping, sending sorth many foure square stalkes, vpon which at each joint grow two leaues vpon (...) stalkes very like those of Nettles, but more soft and hairy, not stinging: the (...) of the branches end (...) it were in a spikemade of seuerall roundles of floures like those of (...) but lesse, and of a purple colour spotted with white on their insides; the seedes are (...) (...) in a vessell, and are blacke when they come to be ripe; It growes about hedges in very many (...) and (...) in Iune and Iuly.

@ 6 This hath roots like those of the last described, sending vp also square stalkes a foot high, set at each ioint with leaues growing vpon long stalkes like those of the small dead Nettle, or rather like those of Alehoofe: out of the bosoms of those come three or foure stalks carrying floures like those of Alehoof, gaping, but without a hood, but with a lip turned vp, which is variegated with blew, white, and purple. This historie Clusius (who did not see the plant, but an exact figure thereof in colours) giues vs, and he names it as you finde exprest in the title. @


@ 5 Galeopsis vera. Hedge Nettle.


6 Lamium Pannonicum 3. Clusij. Hungary Nettle with the variegated floure.




 The Place.
These plants are found vnder hedges, old wals, common waies, among rubbish, in the borders of fieldes, and in earable grounds, oftentimes in gardens ill husbanded.
That with the yellow floure groweth not so common as the others. I haue found it vnder the hedge on the left hand as you go from the village of Hampsted neere London to the Church, and in the wood thereby, as also in many other copses about Lee in Essex, neere Watsord and Bushie in Middlesex, and in the woods belonging to the Lord Cobham in Kent.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part all Sommer long, but chiefely in the beginning of May.


 The Names.
Archangell is called of some Vrtica iners, and Mortua: of some, Lamium: in English, Archangell, blinde Nettle, and dead Nettle.


 The Temperature.
They are hotter and drier than Nettle, approching to the temperature of Horehound.


 The Vertues.
Archangel [or rather the hedge Nettle] stamped with vineger, and applied in manner of a pultis  taketh away Wens and hard swellings, the Kings euill, inflammation of the kernels vnder the eares and iawes, and also hot fierie inflammations of the kernels of the necke, arme-holes and flanks.
It is good to bathe those parts with the decoction of it, as Dioscorides and Pliny say.
The later Physitions thinke that the white floures of Archangell doe staie the whites, and for  the same purpose diuers do make of them a Conserue, as they call it of the floures and sugar, which they appoint to be taken for certaine daies together.

The floures are baked with sugar as roses are, which is called sugar Roset: as also the distilled  water of them, which is vsed to make the heart merry; to make a good colour in the face, and to make the vitall spirits more (...) and liuely.



CHAP. 236. Of Mother woort.


Cardiaca. Mother-woort.



 The Description.
MOther woortbringeth forth stalks foure square, thick, hard, two cubites high, of an obscure or ouerworn red colour: the leaues are somewhat black, like those of Nettles, but greater and broader than the leaues of Horehound, deeply indented or cut on the edges. The husks are hard and pricking, which do compasse the stalks about like wharles, or little crownets, out of which do grow purplish floures, not vnlike to those of dead Nettle, but lesser: The roote is compact of many small strings, the whole plant is of a very ranke smel and bitter taste.


 The Place.
It ioieth among rubbish, in stony and other barren and rough places, especially about Oxford; it profiteth well in gardens.


 The Time.
It flourisheth, floureth, and seedeth from Iune to September: the leaues and stalks perish in winter, but the root indureth.


 The Names.
It is called in our age Cardiaca: in High Dutch, Nertzgesport: in Low Dutch, Nertegespan: in French, Agripauline: in English, Motherwoort. Some there be that make it a kinde of Bawme, it seemes that it may be also referred to (...) is Herculana, or Hercules Ironwoort.


 The Temperature.
Motherwoort is hot and dry in the second degree, by reason of the clensing aud binding quality that it hath.


 The Vertues.
Diuers commend it against the infirmities of the heart: it is iudged to be so forceable, that it  is thought it tooke his name Cardiaca of the effect.
It is also reported to cure convulsions and cramps, and likewise the palsie: to open the obstructions  or stoppings of the intrails: to kill all kindes of Wormes of the bellie.
The pouder of the herbe giuen in wine, prouoketh not onely vrine, or the monthly course, but  also is good for them that are in hard trauell with childe.
Moreouer, the same is commended for greene wounds: it is also a remedie against certain diseases  in cattell, as the cough and murreine, and for that cause diuers husbandmen oftentimes much desire it.






CHAP. 237. Of stinging Nettle.

 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of the first be now and then halfe a yard high, round, and hollow within: the leaues are broad, sharp pointed, cut round about like a saw, they be rough on both sides, and couered with a stinging downe, which with a light touch onely causeth a great burning, and raiseth hard knots in the skin like blisters, and sometimes maketh it red. The seed commeth from the roots of the leaues in round pellets bigger than Pease; it is slippery, glittering like Line-seed, but yet lesser and rounder. The roote is set with strings.


1 Vrtica Romana. Romane Nettle.


2 Vrtica vrens. Common stinging Nettle.


2 The second Nettle beeing our common Nettle is like to the former in leaues and stalkes, but yet now and then higher and more full of branches: it is also couered with a downe that stingeth and burneth as well as the other: the seed hereof is small, and groweth not in round bullets, but on long slender strings, as it were in clusters, as those of the female Mercury, which grow along the stalkes and branches aboue the leaues, very many. The root is full of strings; of colour something yellow, and creepeth all about. @ This hath the stalkes and rootes sometimes a little reddish, whence Tabernamontanus and our Authour gaue another figure thereof by the name of Vrtica rubra, Red Nettle. @
3 The third is like to the second in stalkes, leaues and seed, that groweth by clusters, but lesser, and commonly more full of branches; of a light greene, more burning and stinging; the root is small and not without strings.



3 Vrtica minor. Small Nettle.




 The Place.
Nettles grow in vntilled places, and the first in thicke woods, and is a stranger in England, notwithstanding it groweth in my garden.
The second is more common, and groweth of it selfe neere vnto hedges, bushes, brambles, and old walls, almost euery where.
The third also commeth vp in the same places, which notwithstanding groweth in gardens and moist earable grounds.


 The Time.
They all flourish in Sommer: the second suffereth the winters cold: the seed is ripe, and may be gathered in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Vrtica, ab vrendo, of his burning and stinging qualitie: whereupon Macer saith,

-- nec (...) nomen (...) videtur,
Tacta quod exurat digitos vrtica tenentis.


Neither without desert his name hee seemes togit,
As that which quickly burnes the fingers touching it.

And of diuers also (...), because it stingeth with hurtfull downe: in high-Dutch, Nessel: in Italian, Ortica: in Spanish, Hortiga: in French, Ortie: in English, Nettle. The first is called in low Dutch Roomsche Netelen, that is, (...) vrtica, or Roman Nettle: and likewise in high-Dutch (...) Nesselen, that is, Italica vrtica, Italian Nettle, because it is rare, and groweth but in few places, and the seed is sent from other countries, and sowne in gardens for his vertues: it is also called of diuers Vrticamas: and of Dioscorides, Vrtica syluestris, or wilde Nettle, which he saith is more rough, with broader and longer leaues, and with the seed of Flax, but lesser. Pliny maketh the wilde Nettle the male, and in his 21 booke, chap. 15. saith that it is milder and gentler: it is called in English Romane Nettle, Greeke Nettle, Male Nettle. The second is called Vrtica foemina, and oftentimes Vrtica maior, that it may differ from the third Nettle: in English, Female Nettle, Great Nettle, or common Nettle. The third is named in high-Dutch Heyter Nessel: in the Brabanders speech, Heijte Netelen, so called of the stinging qualitie: in English, Small Nettle, Small burning Nettle: but whether this be that or no which Pliny calleth Cania, or rather the first, let the Students consider. There is in the wilde Nettle a more stinging qualitie, which, saith he, is called Cania, with a stalke more stinging, hauing nicked leaues.


 The Temperature.
Nettle is of temperature dry, a little hot, scarse in the first degree: it is of thin and subtil parts; for it doth not therefore burne and sting by reason it is extreme hot, but because the downe of it is stiffe and hard, piercing like fine little prickles or stings, and entring into the skin: for if it be withered or boyled it stingeth not at all, by reason that the stiffenesse of the downe is fallen away.


 The Vertues.
Being eaten, as Dioscorides saith, boyled with Perywinkles, it maketh the body soluble, doing it  by a kinde of cleansing qualitie: it also prouoketh vrine, and expelleth stones out of the kidneyes: being boyled with barley creame it bringeth vp tough humours that sticke in the chest, as it is thought.
Being stamped, and the iuyce put vp into the nosthrils, it stoppeth the bleeding of the nose: the  iuyce is good against the inflammation of the Vuula.
The seed of Nettle stirreth vp lust, especially drunke with Cute: for (as Galen saith) it hath in it  a certaine windinesse.



It concocteth and draweth out of the chest raw humors.
It is good for them that cannot breathe vnlesse they hold their necks vpright, and for those that  haue the pleurisie, and for such as be sick of the inflammation of the lungs, if it be taken in a looch or licking medicine, and also against the troublesome cough that children haue, called the Chincough.
Nicander affirmeth that it is a remedie against the venomous qualitie of Hemlocke, Mushroms, and Quick-siluer.
And Apollodoris saith that it is a counterpoyson for Henbane, Serpents, and Scorpions.
As Pliny witnesseth, the same Author writeth, that the oyle of it takes away the stinging which  the Nettle it selfe maketh.
The same grossely powned, and drunke in white wine, is a most singular medicine against the  stone either in the bladder or in the reines, as hath beene often proued, to the great ease and comfort of those that haue been grieuously tormented with that maladie.
It expelleth grauell, and causeth to make water.
The leaues of any kinde of Nettle, or the seeds, do worke the like effect, but not with that good  speed and so assuredly as the Romane Nettle.



CHAP. 238. Of Hempe.


1 Cannabis mas. Male or Steele Hempe.


@ 2 Cannabis foemina. Femeline, or Female Hempe.



 The Description.
1 HEmpe bringeth forth round stalkes, straight, hollow, fiue or six foot high, full of branches when it groweth wilde of it selfe; but when it is sowne in fields it hath very few or no branches at all. The leaues thereof be hard, tough, somewhat blacke, and if they be bruised they be of a ranke smell, made vp of diuers little leaues ioyned together, euery particular leafe whereof is narrow, long, sharpe pointed, and nicked in the edges: the seeds come forth from the bottomes of the wings and leaues, being round, somewhat hard, full of white substance. The roots haue many strings.
2 There is another, being the female Hempe, yet barren and without seed, contrarie vnto the

nature of that sex; which is very like to the other being the male, and one must be gathered before the other be ripe, else it will wither away, and come to no good purpose.


 The Place.
Hempe, as Columella writeth, delighteth to grow in a fat dunged and waterie soile, or plaine and moist, and deepely digged.


 The Time.
Hempe is sowne in March and Aprill; the first is ripe in the end of August, the other in Iuly.


 The Names.
This is named of the Grecians (...): also of the Latines Cannabis: the Apothecaries keep that name: in high-Dutch, (...) hanff: of the Italians Canape: of the Spaniards, Canamo: in French, Chanure: of the Brabanders, Kemp: in English, Hempe. The male is called Charle Hempe, and Winter Hempe: the female, Barren Hempe, and Sommer Hempe.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The seed of Hempe, as Galen writeth in his bookes of the faculties of simple medicines, is hard  of digestion, hurtfull to the stomacke and head, and containeth in it an ill iuyce: notwithstanding some do vse to eate the same (...), cum alijs tragematis, with other junkets.
It consumeth winde, as the said Author saith in his booke of the faculties of medicines, and is  so great a drier, as that it drieth vp the seed if too much be eaten of it.
Dioscorides saith, That the iuyce of the herbe dropped into the eares asswageth the paine thereof  proceeding (as I take it) of obstruction or stopping, as Galen addeth.
The inner substance or pulpe of the seed pressed out in some kinde of liquor, is giuen to those  that haue the yellow jaundice, when the disease first appeares, and oftentimes with good successe, if the disease come of obstruction without an ague; for it openeth the passage of the gall, and disperseth and concocteth the choler through the whole body.
Matthiolus saith, that the seed giuen to hens causeth them to lay egges more plentifully.



CHAP. 239. Of wilde Hempe.


1 Cannabis Spuria. Wilde Hempe.


@ 2 Cannabis Spuria altera. Bastard Hempe.







@ 3 Cannabis Spuria tertia. Small Bastard Hempe.



 The Description.
1 THis wilde Hempe, called Cannabis Spuria; (...) Bastard Hempe, hath smal slender hoary and hairie stalkes a foot high, beset at euery ioynt with two leaues, smally indented about the edges somewhat like a Nettle. The floures grow in rundles about the stalkes, of a purple colour, and sometimes also white: the root is little and threddy.
2 There is likewise another kind of wild Hempe which hath (...) stalkes and leaues like the former, but the floures are greater, gaping wide open like the floures of Lamium, or dead Nettle, whereof this hath been taken for a kinde: but hee that knoweth any thing may easily discerne the sauor of hempe from the smell of dead Nettle. The floures are of a cleare and light carnation colour, declining to purple.
3 There is also another kinde of wilde Hempe like vnto the last before mentioned, sauing that it is smaller in each respect, and not so hairy. The lease is somewhat rounder: the root small and threddy: the (...) is larger, being purple or white, with a yellow spot in the inside.


 The Place.
These kinds of wild or bastard Hempe do grow vpon hills and mountaines, and barren hilly grounds, especially in earable land, as I haue often seene in the corne fields of Kent, as about Grauesend, (...), and in all the tract from thence to Canturbury, and in many places about London.


 The Time.
These herbes do floure from Iuly to the end of August.


 The Names.
It shall suffice what hath been set downe in the titles (...) the Latine names: in English, Wilde Hempe, Nettle Hempe, and Bastard Hempe.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and faculties are referred to the (...) Hempe, notwithstanding they are not vsed in physicke where the other may be had.



CHAP. 240. Of Water-Hempe.

 The Description.
1 WAter-Hempe or Water-Agrimony is seldome found in (...) regions, for which cause it is called Eupatorium Cannabinum foemina Septentrionalium, and groweth in the cold Northerne countries in moist places, and in the midst of ponds, slow running riuers, and ditches. The root continueth long, hauing many long and slender strings, after the nature of water herbes: the stalkes grow a cubit and a halfe high, of a darke purple colour, with many branches standing by distances one from another. The leaues are more indented and lesse hairy than the male kind: the floures grow at the top, of a browne yellow colour, (...) with blacke spots like Aster atticus; which consisteth of such a substance as is in the midst of the Daisie, or the Tansie floure, and is set about with small and sharpe leaues, such as are about the Rose, which causeth the whole floure to resemble (...) (...), and it sauoreth like gum Elemni, Rosine, or Cedar wood when it is burned. The seed is long (...) Pyrethrum, closely thrust together, and lightly cleaueth to any woollen garment, that it

toucheth by reason of his roughnesse. @ This is found with the leaues whole, and also with them parted into three parts: the first varietie was exprest by our Authors figure; and the second is exprest by this we giue you in the place thereof. @
2 There is another wilde Hempe growing in the water, whereof there be two sorts more, delighting to grow in the like ground, in shew differing very little. This springs vp with long round stalkes, and somewhat reddish, about two cubits high, or something higher: they are beset with long greene leaues indented about the edges, whereof you shal see commonly fiue or seuen of those leaues hanging vpon one stem like the leaues of Hempe, but yet softer. The floures are little, of a pale reddish colour, consisting of soft round tufts, and stand perting vpon the top of the sprigges, which at length vanish away into downe: the root vnderneath is full of threddy strings of a mean bignesse.


1 Eupatorium Cannabinum foemina. Water Hempe, or Water Agrimony.


@ 2 Eupatorium Cannabinum mas. Common Dutch (...).




 The Place.
They grow about the brinks of ditches, running waters, and standing pooles, and in watery places almost euery where.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iuly and August: the root continues, but the stalkes and leaues wither away in Winter.


 The Names.
The bastard or wilde Hempes, especially those of the water, are commonly called Hepatorium Cannabinum: of diuers also Eupatorium, Leonhar. Fuchsius nameth it Eupatorium Adulterinum: of most, Cannabina, of the likenesse it hath with the leaues of Cannabis, Hempe, and Eupatorium Auicennae. It is thought also to be that which Baptista Sardus doth terme Terzola in high-Dutch, S. (...) kraut; that is to say in Latine, Sanctae Cunigundae herba, S. Cunigunds herbe: in LowDutch, Boelkens kruit: in English, Water Hempe, Bastard and water Agrimonie. It is called Hepatorium, of the (...), being good for Hepar, the liuer. @ I haue named the second Common Dutch Agrimonie, because it is commonly vsed for Agrimonie in the shops of that countrey. @


 The Temperature.
The leaues and roots of these herbes are bitter, also hot and dry in the second degree: they haue vertue to scoure and open, to attenuate or make thinne thicke and grosse humours, and to expell or driue them forth by vrine: they clense and purifie the bloud.



 The Vertues, which chiefely belong to the last described.
The decoction hereof is profitably giuen to those that be scabbed and haue filthy skinnes; and  likewise to such as haue their spleen and liuer stopped or swolne: for it taketh away the stoppings of both those intrals, and also of the gall: wherefore it is good for them that haue the jaundice, especially somewhat after the beginning.
The herbe boyled in wine or water is singular good against tertian Feuers.
The decoction drunke, and the leaues outwardly applied, do heale all wounds both inward and  outward.
@ Fuchsius saith that the second is very effectuall against poyson. And Gesner in his Epistles  affirmeth, that he boyled about a pugil of the fibres of the root of this plant in wine, and drunke it, which an houre after gaue him one stoole, and afterwards twelue vomits, whereby he cast vp much flegme: so that it workes (saith he) like white Hellebor, but much more easily and safely, and it did me very much good. @



CHAP. 241. Of Egrimonie.


Agrimonia. Agrimonie.



 The Description.
THe leaues of Agrimonie are long and hairie, greene aboue, and somewhat grayish vnderneath, parted into diuers other small leaues snipt round about the edges, almost like the leaues of hempe: the stalke is two foot and a halfe long, rough and hairy, whereupon grow many small yellow floures one aboue another vpwards toward the top: after the floures come the seeds somewhat long and rough, like to small burs hanging downwards; which when they be ripe doe catch hold vpon peoples garments that passe by it. The root is great, long, and blacke.


 The Place.
It growes in barren places by highwayes, inclosures of medowes, and of corne fields, and oftentimes in woods and copses, and almost (...) where.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and somwhat later, and seedeth (...) that a great part of Sommer.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): and the Latines also Eupatorium: Pliny, Eupatoria: yet there is another Eupatorium in Apuleius, and that is Marrubium, Horehound. In like maner the Apothecaries of Germany haue another Hepatorium that is there commonly vsed, being described in the last chapter, and may be named Hepatorium adulterinum. Agrimonie is named Lappa inuersa: and it is so called, because the seeds which are rough like burres do hang downwards: of some, Philanthropos, of the cleauing qualitie of the seeds hanging to mens garments: the Italians and Spaniards call it Agramonia: in high Dutch, (...), Bruckwurtz: in low-Dutch, in French, and in English, Agrimonie, and Egrimonie: Eupatorium taketh the name of Eupator, the finder of it out: and (saith Pliny) it hath a royall and princely authoritie.


 The Temperature.
It is hot, and doth moderately binde, and is of a temperate drinesse. Galen saith that Agrimonie is of fine and subtill parts, that it cutteth and scoureth; therefore, saith he, it remoues obstructions or stoppings out of the liuer, and doth likewise strengthen it by reason of the binding quality that is in it.



 The Vertues.
The decoction of the leaues of Egrimony is good for them that haue naughty liuers; and for  such as pisse bloud vpon the diseases of the kidnies.
The seed being drunke in wine (as Pliny affirmeth) doth helpe the bloudy flixe.
Dioscorides addeth, that it is a remedy for them that haue bad liuers, and for such as are bitten  with (...).
The leaues being stamped with old swines grease, and applied, closeth vp (...) that be hardly  healed, as Dioscorides saith.
@ Agrimony boiled in wine and drunke, helpes inueterate hepaticke fluxes in old people. @ 



CHAP. 242. Of Sawewoort.


1. 2. Serratula purpurea, siue alba. Saw-woort with purple, or white floures.



 The Description.
1 THe plant which the new writers haue called Serratula differeth from Betonica, although the Antients haue so called Betony; It hath large leaues somewhat snipt about the edges like a saw (whereof it tooke his name) rising immediately from the root: among which come vp stalkes of a cubite high, beset with leaues very deepely cut or jagged euen to the middle of the rib, not much vnlike the male Scabious. The stalkes towards the top diuide themselues into other small branches, at the top (...) of they beare floures somewhat scaly, like the Knapweed, but not so great nor hard: at the top of the knap commeth forth a bushie or thrummy floure, of a purple colour. The root is threddy, and thereby increaseth and becommeth of a great quantity.
2 Sawewoort with white floures differeth not from the precedent, but in the colour of the floures: for as the other bringeth forth a bush of purple floures; in a manner this plant bringeth forth floures of the same fashion, but of a snow white colour, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ Our Authour out of (...) us gaue three figures, with as many descriptions of this plant, yet made it onely to vary in the colour of the floures, being either purple, white, or red; but he did not touch the difference which Tabernamontanus by his figures exprest, which was, the first had all the leaues whole, being only snipt about the edges; the lower leaues of the second were most of them whole, and those vpon the stalkes deepely cut in, or diuided, and the third had the leaues both below and aboue all cut in or deepely diuided. The figure which we here giue you expresses the first and third varieties, and if you please, the one may be with white, and the other with red or purple floures. @


 The Place.
Sawe-woort groweth in woods and shadowie places, and sometimes in medowes. They grow in Hampsted wood: likewise I haue seene it growing in great abundance in the wood adjoining to Islington, within halfe a mile from the further end of the towne, and in sundry places of Essex and Suffolke.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.



 The Names.
The later age doe call them Serratula, and Serratula tinctoria, it differeth as we haue said from Betony, which is also called Serratula: other names if it haue any we know not: it is called in English Sawewoort. @ Coesalpinus calls it Cerretta and Serretta; and Thalius, (...), or Centaurium maius sylvestre Germanicum. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Serratula is wonderfully commended to be most singular for wounds, ruptures, burstings, and  such like: and is referred vnto the temperature of Sanicle.



CHAP. 243. Of Betony.

 The Description.
1 BEtony groweth vp with long leaues and broad, of a darke greene colour, slightly indented about the edges like a saw. The stalke is flender, foure square, somewhat rough, a foote high more or lesse. It beareth eared floures, of a purplish colour, and (...) reddish; after the floures, commeth in place long cornered seed. The root consisteth of many strings.


1 Betonica. Betony.


2 Betony with white floures is like the precedent in each respect, sauing that the flours of this plant are white, and of greater beautie, and the others purple or red, as aforesaid.


 The Place.
Betony loues shadowie woods, hedge-rowes, and copses, the borders of pastures, and such like places.
Betony with white floures is seldome seene. I found it in a wood by a village called Hampstead, neere vnto a worshipfull Gentlemans house, one of the Clerkes of the Queenes counsell called Mr. Wade, from whence I brought plants for my garden, where they flourish as in their naturall place of growing.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish for the most part in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Betony is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Betonica: of diuers Vetonica: but vnproperly. There is likewise another Betonica, which Paulus Aegineta described; and Galen in his first booke of the gouernment of health sheweth that it is called (...), that is to say, Betonica, Betonie, and also Sarxiphagon: Dioscorides notwithstanding doth describe another Sarxiphagon.


 The Temperature.
Betony is hot and dry in the second degree: it hath force to cut, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
Betony is good for them that be subject to the falling sickenesse, and for those also that haue  ill heads vpon a cold cause.
It clenseth the lungs and chest, it taketh away obstructions or stoppings of the liuer, milt, and  gall: it is good against the yellow jaundise.
It maketh a man to haue a good stomack and appetite to his meate: it preuaileth against sower 

belchings: it maketh a man to pisse well: it mitigateth paine in the kidnies and bladder: it breaketh stones in the kidnies, and driueth them forth.
It is also good for ruptures, cramps, and convulsions: it is a remedie against the bitings of mad  dogs and venomous serpents, being drunke, and also applied to the hurts, and is most singular against poyson.
It is commended against the paine of the Sciatica, or ache of the huckle bone.
There is a Conserue made of the floures and sugar good for many things, and especially for the  head-ache. A dram weight of the root of Betonie dried, and taken with meade or honied water, procureth vomit, and bringeth forth grosse and tough humors, as diuers of our age do report.
The pouder of the dried leaues drunke in wine is good for them that spit or pisse bloud, and cureth  all inward wounds, especially the greene leaues boyled in wine and giuen.
The pouder taken with meate looseth the belly very gently, and helpeth them that haue the falling  sicknesse with madnesse and head-ache.
It is singular against all paines of the head: it killeth wormes in the belly; helpeth the Ague: it cleanseth the mother, and hath great vertue to heale the body, being hurt within by bruising or such like.



CHAP. 244. Of Water-Betony.

 The Description.
WAter Betony hath great square hollow and brown stalks, whereon are set very broad leaues notched about the edges like vnto those of Nettles, of a swart greene colour, growing for the most part by two and two as it were from one ioynt, opposite, or standing one right against an other. The floures grow at the top of the branches, of a darke purple colour, in shape like to little helmets. The seed is small, contained in round bullets or buttons. The root is compact of many and infinite strings.


Betonica aquatica. Water Betony.




 The Place.
It groweth by brookes and running waters, by ditch sides, and by the brinks of riuers, and is seldome found in dry places.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iuly and August, and from that time the seed waxeth ripe.


 The Names.
Water Betonie is called in Latine Betonica aquatica: some haue thought it Dioscorides his Clymenum: others, his Galeopsis: it is Scrophularia altera of Dodonoeus: of Turner, Clymenon: of some, Sesamoides minus, but not properly: of others, Serpentaria: in Dutch, S. Antonies cruyd: in English, Water Betonie: and by some, Browne-wort: in Yorke-shire, Bishops leaues.


 The Temperature.
Water Betony is hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Water Betony are of a scouring  or cleansing qualitie, and is very good to mundifie foule and stinking vlcers, especially the iuyce boyled with honey.
It is reported, if the face be washed with  the iuyce thereof, it taketh away the rednesse and deformitie of it.




CHAP. 245. Of Great Figge-wort, or Brownewort.

 The Description.
1 THe great Fig-wort springeth vp with stalkes foure square, two cubits high, of a darke purple colour, and hollow within: the leaues grow alwayes by couples, as it were from one ioynt, opposite, or standing one right against another, broad, sharpe pointed, snipped round about the edges like the leaues of the greater Nettle, but bigger, blacker, and nothing at all stinging when they be touched: the floures in the tops of the (...) are of a darke purple colour, very like in forme to little helmets: then commeth vp little smal seed in pretty round buttons, but sharpe at the end: the root is whitish, beset with little knobs and bunches as it were knots and kernels.
2 There is another Figge-wort called Scrophularia Indica, that hath many and great branches trailing here and there vpon the ground, full of leaues, in fashion like the wilde or common Thistle, but altogether without prickes: among the leaues appeare the floures in fashion like a hood, on the out side of a feint colour, and within intermixt with purple; which being fallen and withered, there come in place small knops very hard to breake, and sharpe at the point as a bodkin: which containeth a small seed like vnto Time. The whole plant perisheth at the first approch of Winter, and must be sowen againe in Aprill, in good and fertile ground. @ This is the Scrophularia Cretica 1. of Clusius. @


1 Scrophularia maior. Great Fig-wort.


@ 2 Scrophularia Indica. Indian Fig-wort.


@ 3 The stalke of this is also square, and some yard high, set with leaues like those of the hedge Nettle, but somewhat larger and thicker, and a little deeper cut in: out of the besomes of these leaues come little rough foot-stalkes some inch or two long, carrying some foure or fiue hollow round floures of a greenish yellow colour, with some threds in them, being open at the top, and cut in with fiue little gashes: the seeds are blacke, and contained in vessels like those of the

first described: the root is like that of the Nettle, and liues many yeares: it floures in May, and the seeds are ripe in Iune. I haue not found nor heard of this wilde with vs, but seen it flourishing in the garden of my kinde friend Mr. Iohn Parkinson. Clusius calls it Lamium 2. Pannonicum exoticum: and Bauhine hath set it forth by the name of Scrophularia slore luteo: whom in this I follow. @


@ 3 Scrophularia flore luteo. Yellow floured Fig-wort.




 The Place.
The great Scrophularia groweth plentifully in shadowie Woods, and sometimes in moist medowes, especially in greatest aboundance in a wood as you go from London to Harnesey, and also in Stow wood and Shotouer neere Oxford.
The strange Indian figure was sent me from Paris by Iohn Robin the Kings Herbarist, and it now groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Fig-wort or Kernel-wort is called in Latine Scrophularia maior, that it might differ from the lesser Celandine, which is likewise called Scrophularia, with this addition minor, the lesser: it is called of some Millemorbia, and Castrangula: in English, great Fig-wort, or Kernel-wort, but (...) vsually Brown-wort.


 The Vertues.
Fig-wort is good against the hard kernells  which the Grecians call (...): the Latines, Strumas, and commonly Scrophulas, that is, the Kings Euill: and it is reported to be a remedy against those diseases whereof it tooke his name, as also the painefull piles and swelling of the haemorrhoides.
Diuers do rashly teach, that if it be hanged  about the necke, or else carried about one, it keepeth a man in health.
Some do stampe the root with butter, and set it in a moist shadowie place fifteene dayes together: then they do boyle it, straine it, and keepe it, wherewith they anoint the hard kernels, and the haemorrhoide veines, or the piles which are in the fundament, and that with good successe.



CHAP. 246. Of Veruaine.

 The Description.
1 THe stalke of vpright Veruaine riseth from the root single, cornered, a foot high, seldome aboue a cubite, and afterwards diuided into many branches. The leaues are long, greater than those of the Oke, but with bigger cuts and deeper: the floures along the sprigs are little, blew, or white, orderly placed: the root is long, with strings growing on it.
2 Creeping Veruaine sendeth forth stalkes like vnto the former, now and then a cubit long, cornered, more slender, for the most part lying vpon the ground. The leaues are like the former, but with deeper cuts, and more in number. The floures at the tops of the sprigs are blew, and purple withall, very small as those of the last described, and placed after the same manner and order. The root groweth straight downe, being slender and long, as is also the root of the former.



1 Verbena communis. Common Veruaine.


2 Verbena sacra. Common Veruaine.




 The Place.
Both of them grow in vntilled places neere vnto hedges, high-wayes, and commonly by ditches almost euery where. @ I haue not seene the second, and doubt it is not to be found wilde in England. @


 The Time.
The Veruaines floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Veruaine is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Verbena, and Verbenaca, Herculania, Ferraria, and Exupera: of some, Matricalis, and Hiera botane: of others, Veruena, and Sacra herba: Verbenae are herbes that were taken from the Altar, or from some holy place, which because the Consull or Pretor did cut vp, they were likewise called Sagmind, which oftentiwes are mentioned in Liuy to be grassie herbes cut vp in the Capitoll. Pliny also in his two and twentieth booke, and eleuenth Chapter witnesseth, That Verbenae and Sagmina be all one: and this is manifest by that which wee reade in Andraea in Terence: Ex ara verbenas hinc sume; Take herbes here from the Altar: in which place Terence did not meane Veruaine to be taken from the Altar, but some certaine herbes: for in Menander, out of whom this Comedie was translated, is read (...) or Myrtle, as Donatus saith. In Spanish it is called Vrgebaom: in Italian, Verminacula: in Dutch, Jser cruijt: in French, Veruaine: in English, Iuno's teares, Mercuries moist bloud, Holy-herbe; and of some, Pigeons grasse, or Columbine, because Pigeons are delighted to be amongst it, as also to eat thereof, as Apuleius writeth.


 The Temperature.
Both the Veruaines are of temperature very dry, and do meanly binde and coole.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Veruaine pownd with oile of Roses or hogs grease, doth mitigate and appease the  paines of the mother, being applied thereto.
The leaues of Veruaine and Roses stamped with a little new hogs grease, and emplaistered after  the manner of a pultesse, doth cease the inflammation and grieuous paines of wounds, and suffereth them not to come to corruption: and the greene leaues stamped with hogs grease takes away the swelling and paine of hot impostumes and tumors, and cleanseth corrupt and rotten vlcers.
It is reported to be of singular force against the Tertian and Quartane Feuers: but you must 

obserue mother Bombies rules, to take iust so many (...) or sprigs, and no more, lest it fall out so that it do you no good, if you catch no harm by it. Many odde old wiues fables are written of (...) tending to witchcraft and sorcerie, which you may read elsewhere, for I am not willing to trouble your eares with reporting such trifles, as honest eares abhorre to heare.
Archigenes maketh a garland of Veruaine for the head-ache, when the cause of the infirmitie  proceedeth of heat.
The herbe stamped with oile of roses and Vineger, or the decoction of it made in oile of roses, keepeth the haires from falling, being bathed or annointed therewith.
It is a remedie against putrified vlcers, it healeth vp wounds, and perfectly cureth Fistulaes, it  wasteth away old swellings, and taketh away the heat of inflammations.
The decoction of the roots and leaues swageth the tooth-ache, and fasteneth them, and healeth  the vlcers of the mouth.
They report saith Pliny, that if the dining roome be sprinckled with water in which the herbe  hath beene steeped, the guests will be the merrier, which also Dioscorides mentioneth.
Most of the latter Physitions do giue the iuice or decoction hereof to them that hath the plague  but these men are deceiued, not only in that they looke for some truth from the father of falshood and leasings, but also because in stead of a good and sure remedie they minister no remedy at all for it is reported, that the Diuell did reueale it as a secret and diuine medicine.



CHAP. 247. Of Scabious.


(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) onely in the more or lesse (...) or diuiding of the leaues: I haue of these onely reserued the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to the titles. The figure that was in the sixt place was of the ordinary first (...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) beene there was in the eighth place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in the (...) place.

 1 Scabiosa maior vulgaris. Common Scabious.


(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) onely in the more or lesse (...) or diuiding of the leaues: I haue of these onely reserued the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to the titles. The figure that was in the sixt place was of the ordinary first (...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) beene there was in the eighth place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in the (...) place.

 2 Scabiosa minor, siue Columbaria. The small common Scabious.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Scabious being the most common and best known, hath leaues long and broad, of a grayish, hoary, and hairy colour, spred abroad vpon the ground, among which rise vp round and rough stems, beset with hairy iagged leaues, in fashion like

great Valerian, which we call Setwall. At the top of the stalks grow blew floures in thicke (...) or buttons. The root is white and single.
2 The second is like vnto the former, sauing that his leaues are much cut or iagged, and the whole plant is altogether lesser, scarcely growing to the height of a foot.
3 The third kinde of Scabious is in all things like vnto the second, sauing that the knap or head doth not dilate it selfe so abroad, and is not so thicke or closely thrust together, and the lowest leaues are not so deepely cut or iagged, but the vpper are much smaller, and also the more diuided.
@ 4 The fourth groweth with large stalkes, hauing two leaues one set right against another, very much iagged, almost like vnto common Ferne, or rather Ash: and at the top of the stalks there grow larger floures, like vnto the first, but greater, and the roote is also like it, and it differs no waie from the first described, but onely by reason of the soile.
5 Purple floured Scabious hath a rough hairie stalke, whereon doe grow broad leaues deepely cut in the edges, in forme like those of Sowthistle, rough likewise and hairie; the floures grow at the top of the stalks, composed of an innumerable sort of purple thrums: after which come scaly knaps like those of Iacea, or Knapweed, wherein is the seed. The root is small and threddie.
@ 6 The sixth sort of Scabious hath stalks some cubite high, round, and set with leaues not cut and iagged almost to the middle rib; as in the former, yet somewhat rough and hairie, snipt about the edges, and of a light greene colour; amongst which rise vp rough stalkes, on the top whereof do grow faire red floures consisting of a bundle of thrummes. The root is long, tough, and fibrous. @
7 The seuenth kinde of Scabious hath sundrie great, rough and round stemmes, as high as a tall man, beset with leaues like the first Scabious, but far greater. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes like vnto the others, but of a faint yellow colour, which fall as soone as it is touched with the hand, whereby it mightily increaseth, notwithstanding the roote endureth for many yeares, and groweth to be wonderfull great: and in my garden it did grow to the bignesse of a mans body.


(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) onely in the more or lesse (...) or diuiding of the leaues: I haue of these onely reserued the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to the titles. The figure that was in the sixt place was of the ordinary first (...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) beene there was in the eighth place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in the (...) place.

 3 Scabiosa media. Middle Scabious.


4 Scabiosa campestris, sive (...). Corne Scabious.





5 Scabiosa flore purpurco. Purple floured Scabious.


(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) onely in the more or lesse (...) or diuiding of the leaues: I haue of these onely reserued the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to the titles. The figure that was in the sixt place was of the ordinary first (...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) beene there was in the eighth place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in the (...) place.

 6 Scabiosa rubra Austriaca. Red Scabious of Austrich.


(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) onely in the more or lesse (...) or diuiding of the leaues: I haue of these onely reserued the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to the titles. The figure that was in the sixt place was of the ordinary first (...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) beene there was in the eighth place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in the (...) place.

 7 Scabiosa montana maxima. Mountaine Scabious.


@ 8 Scabiosa mont an a alba. White mountaine Scabious.





6 Scabiosamaior Hispanica. Spanish Scabious.


10 Scabiosa peregrina. Strange Scabious.


(...) the 1. 2. 3. (...). figures were all nothing else than the varieties of one Plant, being of the 1. 2. 3. 4. (...) (...) of (...). they (...) onely in the more or lesse (...) or diuiding of the leaues: I haue of these onely reserued the third, and in other places put such figures as are agreeable to the titles. The figure that was in the sixt place was of the ordinary first (...) Scabious; and the figure that should (...) beene there was in the eighth place; and that which was in the (...) (...) (...) to the plant (...) by me in the (...) place.

 11 Scabiosa omnium minima. Sheepes Scabious.


@ 8 The white mountaine Scabious hath broad leaues spred vpon the ground, like those of the field Primrose, but greater. Amongst which riseth vp a great stiffe stalke smooth and plain, garnished with leaues not like those next the ground, but lesser, much more diuided, and of a greener colour and harder. The floures are like those of the common Scabious, but white of colour: the root of this perishes euery yeare after the perfecting of the seed. @
9 The ninth kinde of Scabious is like vnto the mountaine Scabious, but lower and smaller, hauing sundry large and broad leaues next the ground, snipt confusedly and out of order at the edges like the Oken leafe, among which riseth vp a stem two cubites high, diuiding it selfe into sundry other branche. The floures are set at the top of the naked stalkes, of a whitish colour; which being past, the seed appeareth like a tuft of small bucklers, round, and somewhat hollow within, and made as it were of parchment, very strange to behold: and within the bucklers there are sundry small crosses of blacke fastened to the bottome, as it were the needle in a diall, running vpon the point of a needle. The plant dieth at the beginning of winter, and must be sowne in Aprill in good and fertile ground.
10 The tenth is like vnto the last before mentioned, in stalkes, root, and floures, and differeth that this plant hath leaues altogether without any cuts or iagges about the edges, but is smooth and plaine like the leaues of Marigolds, or Diuels bit, and the floures are like vnto those of the last described.
11 Sheeps Scabious hath small and tender branches trailing vpon the ground, whereupon do grow small leaues very finely iagged or minced euen almost to the middle ribbe, of an ouerworne colour. The floures grow at the top of a blewish colour, consisting of much thrummie matter, hard thrust together like a button: the root is small, and creepeth in the ground.



12 Scabiosa minima hirsuta. Hairie Sheepes Scabious


@ 13 Scabiosa minima Bellidis folio. Daisie leaued Scabious.


@ 14 Scabiosa flore pallido. Yellow Scabious.


@ 15 Scabiosa prolifera. Childing Scabious.



@ 12 The other Sheeps Scabious of our Author (according to the figure) is greater than the last described, growing some foot or better high, with slender rough branches set with leaues not so much diuided, but onely nicked about the edges: the floures are in colour and shape like those of the last described, or of the blew daisie; the root is single, and like that of a Rampion, whence Fabius Columna (the seed and milkie juice inducing him) hath refer'd this to the Rampions, calling it Rapuntium montanum capitatum leptophyllon. Lobell calls it Scabiosamedia: and Dodonaeus, Scabiosa minor.
13 To these little plants we may fitly adde another small one refer'd by (...) to this Classis, and called Scabiosa. 10. siue repens: yet Bauhine refers it to the Daisies, and termes it Bellis caerulea montana frutescens; but it matters not to which we referre it: the description is thus; The root is hard, blacke, and creeping, so that it spreds much vpon the surface of the ground, sending sorth many thicke, smooth, greene leaues, like those of the blew Daisie, not sharpe pointed, but ending as we vulgarly figure an heart, hauing a certaine grassie but not vnpleasant smell, and somewhat a bitter and hot taste: out of the middest of these leaues grow slender naked stalks some hand high, hauing round floures on their tops, like those of Diuells bit, and of the same colour, yet sometimes of a lighter blew. It growes in the mountaines of Hungary and Austria. It floures in Aprill and May, and ripens the seed in Iuly and August.


@ 16 Scabiosarubra Indica. Red Indian Scabious.


@ 17 Scabiosa aestivalis (...). Sommer Scabious.


14 This (which is the seuenth Scabious of Clusius, and which he termes (...) of the whitish yellow colour of the floure) hath round, slender, stiffe, and greene stalkes set at each joint with two large and much diuided leaues of a whitish greene colour: those leaues that come from the root before the stalke grow vp are broader, and lesse diuided; vpon the tops of the branches and stalkes grow floures like those of the common Scabious, being white or rather (before they be throughly open) of a whitish yellow colour; which fading, there follow seedes like as in the ordinary kinde. This floures in Iune and Iuly, and growes very plentifully in all the hilly grounds and dry Meades of Austria and Morauia.
15 There is also a kinde of Scabious hauing the leaues much cut and diuided, and the stalkes and floures like to the common sort, of a blewish purple colour, but differing in this, that at

the sides of the floure it puts forth little stalkes, bearing smaller floures, as is seene in some other plants, as in Daisies and Marigolds, which therefore are fitly termed in Latine (...) or Childing. This growes onely in Gardens, and floures at the same time with the former.
16 The stalkes of the red Scabious grow some cubit or more in height, and are diuided into many very slender branches, which at the tops carry floures composed after the manner of the other sorts of Scabious, that is, of many little floures diuided into fiue parts at the top, and these are of a perfect red colour, and haue small threds with pendants at them comming forth of the midle of each of these little floures, which are of a whitish colour, and make a pretty show. The leaues are greene, and very much diuided or cut in. The starry seeds grow in long round hairy heads hand somely set together. This is an annuall, and perishes as soone as it hath perfected the seed. Clusius makes it his sixt Scabious, and calls it Scabiosa Indica. It floures in Iuly, and growes in the Gardens of our prime Herbarists.
17 The same Authour hath also giuen vs the figure and description of (...) Scabious, which sends vp a stalke some three cubits or more high, set at certaine spaces with leaues large, and snipt about their edges, and a little (...) in neere their stalkes. The stalkes are diuided into others, which at there tops carry blewish floures in long scaly heads, which are succeeded by long whitish seed. The roote is whitish and fibrous, and dyes euery (...). This is the Scabiosa 9, siuc aestivalis of Clusius. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Scabious do grow in pastures, medowes, corne fields, and barren sandy grounds almost euery where.
The strange sorts do grow in my garden, yet are they strangers in England.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
Scabious is commonly called Scabiosa; diuers thinke it is named (...), which signifieth a scabbe, and a certaine herbe so called by Aetius: I do not know, saith Hermolaus Barbarus, whether it be Scabious which Aetius doth call psora, the smoake of which being burnt doth kill cankers or little wormes. The Author of the Pandects doth interpret Scabiosa to be Dioscorides his (...) Dioscorides describeth Stoebe by no markes at all, being commonly knowne in his time; and Galen in his first booke of Antidotes saith thus: There is found amongst vs a certaine shrubby herbe, hot, very sharpe and biting, hauing a little kind of aromaticall or spicy smell, which the inhabitants do call Colymbade, and Stoebe singular good to keepe and preserue winc: but it seemeth that this Stoebe doth differ from that of which he hath made mention in his booke of the faculties of medicines, which agreeth with that of (...): for he writeth that this is of a binding quality without biting; so that it cannot be very sharpe.


 The Temperature.
Scabious is hot and dry in the later end of the second degree, or neere hand in the third, and of thin and subtile parts: it cuttcth, attenuateth, or maketh thin, and throughly concocteth tough and grosse humours.


 The Vertues.
Scabious scoureth the chest and lungs; it is good against an old cough, shortnesse of breath, paine in the sides, and such like infirmities of the chest.
The same prouoketh vrine, and purgeth now and then rotten matter by the bladder, which happeneth  when an impostume hath somewhere lien within the body.
It is reported that it cureth scabs, if the decoction thereof be drunke certain daics, and the juice  vsed in ointments.
The later Herbarists doe also affirme that it is a remedy against the bitings of Serpents and  stingings of venomous beasts, being outwardly applied or inwardly taken.
The juice being drunke procureth sweat, especially with Treacle; and it speedily consumeth  plague sores, if it be giuen in time, and forthwith at the beginning: but it must be vsed often.
It is thought to be forceable, and that against all pestilent feuers.




CHAP. 248. Of Diuels bit.


Morsus Diaboli. Diuels bit.



 The Description.
DIuels bit hath small vpright round stalks of a cubite high, beset with long leaues somewhat broad, very little or nothing snipt about the edges, somewhat hairie and euen. The floures also are of a darke purple colour, fashioned like the floures of Scabious, which being ripe are carried away with the winde. The root is blacke, thicke, hard and short, with many (...) strings fastened thereto. The great part of the root seemeth to be bitten away: old (...) charmers report, that the diuell did bite it for enuie, because it is an herbe that hath so many good vertues, and is so beneficiall to mankinde.


 The Place.
Diuels bit groweth in drie medows and woods, and about waies sides. I haue found great store of it growing in (...) wood neere London at Lee in Essex, and at (...) in Essex, in a wood called Hammerell, and sundrie other places.


 The Time.
It floureth in August, and is hard to be knowne from Scabious, sauing when it floureth.


 The Names.
It is commonly called Morsus Diaboli, or Diuels bit, of the root (as it seemeth) that is bitten off: for the superstitious people hold opinion, that the diuell for enuie that he beareth to mankinde bit it off, because it would be otherwise good for many vses: it is called of Fuchsius, Succisa: in High Dutch Teuffels abbisz: in Low Dutch, Duyuelles beet in French Mors du Diable: in English, Diuels bit, and Forebit. @ Fabius Columna iudgeth it to bee the Pycnocomon of Dioscorides, described by him lib. 4. cap. 176. @


 The Temperature.
Diuels bit is something bitter, and of a hot and drie temperature, and that in the later end of the second degree.


 The Vertues.
There is no better thing against old swellings of the Almonds, and vpper parts of the throat that  be hardly ripened.
It clenseth away slimie flegme that sticketh in the iawes, it digesteth and consumeth it: and it  quickely taketh away the swellings in those parts, if the decoction thereof be often held in the mouth and gargarized, especially if a little quantitie of (...) Rosarum, or honie of Roses be put into it.
It is reported to be good for the infirmities that Scabious serueth for, and to be of no lesse force  against the stingings of venomous beasts, poisons, and pestilent diseases, and to consume and waste away plague sores, being stamped and laid vpon them.
And also to mitigate the paines of the matrix or mother, and to driue forth winde, if the decoction  thereof be drunke.




CHAP. 249. Of Matfellon or Knapweed.

 The Description.
1 MAtfellon or blacke Knapweed is doubtlesse a kinde of Scabious, as all the others are, intituled with the name of Iacea; yet for distinction I haue thought good to set them downe in a seuerall Chapter, beginning with that kinde which is called in English Knapweed and Matfellon, or Matersilon. It hath long and narrow leaues, of a blackish green colour, in shape like Diuels bit, but longer, set vpon stalks two cubits high, somewhat bluntly cut or snipt about the edges: the floures do grow at the top of the stalks, being first small scaly knops, like to the knops of Corne floure, or blew bottles, but greater; out of the midst thereof groweth a purple thrummie or threddie floure. The root is thicke and short.
2 The great Knapweed is very like vnto the former, but that the whole plant is much greater, the leaues bigger, and more deeply cut, euen to the middle rib: the floures come forth of such like scaly heads, of an excellent faire purple colour, and much greater.
3 The third kinde of Matfellon, or Knapweed is very like vnto the former great Knapweed last before mentioned, sauing that the floures of this plant are of an excellent faire yellow colour, proceeding forth of a scaly head or knop, beset with most sharppricks, not to be touched without hurt: the floure is of a pleasing smel, and very sweet; the root is long and lasting, and creepeth far abroad, by means whereof it greatly increaseth.


1 Iaceanigra. Blacke Matfellon.


The figure that was formerly in the second place was of the (...) (...) of (...). which differs from that our Author meant and described, whose figure we haue giuen you in the place thereof.

 2 Iacea maior. Great Matfellon.


4 The mountaine Knapweede of Narbone in France, hath a strong stem of two cubits high, and is very plentifull about Couentrie among the hedges and bushes: the leaues are very much iagged, in sorme of Lonchitus, or Spleenewoort; the floures are like the rest of the Knapweeds, of a purple colour.





3 Iacea maior lutea. Yellow Knapweed.


4 Iacea montana. Mountaine Knapweed.


5 Iacea flore albo. White floured Knapweed.


6 Iacea tuberosa. Knobbed Knapweed.





@ 7 Iacea Austriaca villosa. Rough headed Knapweed.


@ 5 The white floured Knapweed hath creeping roots, which send vp pretty large whitish greene leaues, much diuided or cut in almost to the middle rib; from the midst of which rises vp a stalke some two foot high, set also with the like diuided leaues, but lesser: the floures are like those of the common sort, but of a pleasing white colour. I first found this growing wilde in a field nigh Martine Abbey in Surrey, and since in the Isle Tenet. @
6 The tuberous or knobbie Knapweed being set forth by Tabernam. which and is a stranger in these parts, hath many leaues (...) vpon the ground, rough, deeply gasht or hackt about the edges, like those of Sowthistle: among which riseth vp a straight stalke, diuiding it selfe into other branches, whereon do grow the like leaues, but smaller: the knappie floures stand on the top of the branches, of a bright red (...), in shape like the other Knapweeds. The root is great, thicke and tuberous, consisting of many cloggie parcels, like those of the Asphodill.
@ 7 This (saith Clusius) is a comely plant, hauing broad and long leaues white, soft, and lightly snipt about the edges: the taste is gummy, and not a little bitter: it sends vp many crested stalks from one root, some cubit high or more: at the toppes of them grow the heads some two or three together, consisting of many scales, whose ends are hairy, and they are set so orderly, that by this meanes the heads seeme as they were inclosed in little nets: the floures are purple, and like those of the first described; the seede is small and long, and of an ash colour. This Clusius calls Iacea 4. Austriaca villoso capite.
(...) capitulis hirsut is Boelij.
8 This hath many small cornered straked hairie trailing branches growing from the root, and those again diuided into many other branches, trailing or spreading vpon the ground three or foure foot long, imploying or couering a good plot of ground, whereon grow hairy leaues diuided or iagged into many parts, like the leaues of Iacea maior, or Rocket, of a very bitter taste: at the top of each branch groweth one scaly head, each scale ending with fiue, six, or seuen little weake prickles growing orderly like halfe the rowell of a spurre, but farre lesser: the floures grow forth of the heads of a light purple colour, consisting of many small floures, like those of the common Iacea, the bordering floures, being bigger and larger than those of the middle of the floure, each small floure being diuided into fiue small parts or leaues, not much vnlike those of Cyanus: the seed is small, and inclosed in downe. The root perisheth when the seed is ripe.
This plant hath not been hitherto written of that I can find. Seeds of it I receiued from Mr. William Coys, with whom also I obserued the plant, October 10. 1621. he receiued it from Boclius a Low countrey man. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
The two first grow commonly in euery fertile pasture: the rest grow in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
The later age doth call it Iacea nigra, putting nigra for a difference betweene it and the Heartsease or Pancie, which is likewise called Iacea: it is called also Materfillon, and Matrefillen: in English, Matfellon, Bulweed, and Knapweed.





 The Temperature and Vertues.
These plants are of the nature of Scabious, whereof they be kindes, therefore their faculties are  like, although not so proper to Physickes vse.
They be commended against the swellings of the Vvula, as is Diuels bit, but of lesse force and  vertue.



CHAP. 250. Of Siluer Knapweed.

 The Description.
1 THe great Siluer Knapweed hath at his first comming vp diuers leaues spred vpon the ground, of a deepe greene colour, cut and iagged as are the other Knapweeds, (...) here and there with some siluer lines downe the same, whereof it tooke his surname, Argentea: among which leaues riseth vp a straight stalke, of the height of two or three cubits, somwhat rough and brittle, diuiding it selfe toward the top into other twiggie branches: on the tops whereof do grow floures set in scaly heads or knaps like the other Matfellons, of a gallant purple colour, consisting of a number of threds or thrums thicke thrust together: after which the seedes appeare, slipperie, smooth at one end, and bear ded with blacke haires at the other end, which maketh it to leap and skip away when a man doth but lightly touch it. The root is small, single, and perisheth when the seed is ripe. @ This is not streaked with any lines, as our Author imagined, nor called Argentea by any but himselfe, and that very vnfitly. @


The figures were (...) transposed.

 1 Stoebe argentea maior. Great Siluer Knapweed.


The figures were (...) transposed.

 2 Stoebe argentea minor. Little. siluer Knapweed.


2 The second agreeth with the first in each respect, sauing that the leaues hereofare more iagged, and the siluer lines or strakes are greater, and more in number, wherein consisteth the difference.

@ 4 Stoebe Rosmarini folio. Narrow leafed Knapweed.
@ 5 Stoebe ex Codice Caesareo. Thornie Knapweed:
@ The leaues of this are very much diuided and hoarie, the stalkes some two cubites high, set also with much diuided leaues, that end in soft harmlesse prickles: at the tops of the branches stand the heads composed as it were of siluer scales (whence Lobel and others (...) called this plant Stoebe argentea) and out of these siluer heads come floures like those of the blew bottles, but of a light purple colour, the seed is small, blackish, and hairy at the tops. @
@ 3 There is another like this in each respect, but that the heads haue not so white a shining siluer colour: and this I haue also seene growing with Master Iohn Tradescant at South Lambeth. @
@ 4 To these may be added that plant which Pona hath set forth by the name of Stoebe capitata Rosmarini folio. It hath a whitish wooddy root, from whence arise diuers branches set with long narrow leaues somewhat like those of Rosemary, but liker those of the Pine, of a greenish colour aboue, and whitish below: at the tops of the branches grow such heads as in the first described Stoebe, with floures of somewhat a deeper purple colour: the seed is like that of Carthamus, but blackish. The root is not annuall, but lasts many yeares. @
@ 5 Though these plants haue of late been vulgarly set forth by the name of Stoebe's, yet are they not iudged to bee the true Stoebe of Dioscorides and the Antients, but rather another, whose figure which we here giue was by Dodonaeus taken forth of a manuscript in the Emperours Library, and he saith; Paludanus brought home some of the same out of Cyprus and Morea, as he returned from his journey out of Syria: the bottome leaues are said to be much diuided; those on the stalkes long, and onely snipt about the edges, and white: the floures white, and contained in scaly heads like the Blew-bottles, and the tops of the branches end in sharpe prickles. @


 The Place.
These doe grow of themselues in fields neere common high waies, and in vntilled places, but they are strangers in England, neuerthelesse I haue them in my garden.





 The Time.
They spring vp in April, they floure in August, and the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Siluer Knapweed is called of Lobel, Staebe Salamantica: of Dodonaeus, Aphyllanthes, that is, without leaues, for the floures consist onely of a number of threds without any leaues at all: in English, Siluer Knapweed, or Siluer Scabious, whereof doubtlesse they be kindes.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The faculties of these Matfellons are not as yet found out, neither are they vsed for meat or medicine.
@ The faculties of Staebe out of Dioscorides.
The seed and leaues are a stringent, wherefore the decoction of them is cast vp in Dysenteries, and into purulent eares, and the leaues applied in manner of a pultis are good to hinder the blacknesse of the eies occasioned by a blow, and stop the flowing of bloud. @



CHAP. 251. Of Blew Bottle, or Corne Floure.


1 Cyanus maior. Great blew Bottle.


2 Cyanus vulgaris. Common blew Bottle.



 The Description.
1 THe great blew Bottle hath long leaues, smooth, soft, downie, and sharpe pointed: among the leaues rise vp crooked, and prettie thicke branches, chamfered, furrowed, and garnished with such leaues as are next the ground: on the toppes whereof stand faire blew floures tending to purple, consisting of diuers little floures, set in a scaly huske or knap like those of the Knapweeds: the seed is rough or bearded at one end, smooth at the other, and shining. The root is tough, and long lasting (contrary to the rest of the Corne floures) and groweth yearely into new shoots and springs, whereby it greatly increaseth.



7 Cyanus coeruleus multiflorus. Double Blew-Bottles.


8 Cyanus purpurens multiflorus. Double Purple-Bottles.


@ 9 Cyanus repens latifolius. Broad leafed creeping Blew-Bottle.


@ 10 Cyanus repens angustifolius. Small creeping Blew-Bottle.





2 The common Corne-floure hath leaues spred vpon the ground, of a whitish greene colour, somewhat hackt or cut in the edges like those of Corne Scabious: among which riseth vp a stalke diuided into diuers small branches, whereon do grow long leaues of an ouerworne greene colour, with few cuts or none at all. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a blew colour, consisting of many small floures set in a scaly or chaffie head like those of the Knapweeds: the seed is smooth, bright shining, and wrapped in a woolly or flocky matter. The root is small and single, and perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.
3 This Bottle is like the last described in each respect, sauing in the colour of the floures, which are purple, wherein consisteth the difference.
4 The fourth Bottle is also like the precedent, not differing in any point but in the floures; for as the last before mentioned are of a purple colour, contrariwise these are of a milke white colour, which setteth forth the difference.
5 The Violet-coloured Bottle or Corne-floure is like the precedent, in stalkes, leaues, seeds, and roots: the onely difference is, that this bringeth floures of a violet colour, and the others not so.
6 Variable Corne-floure is so like the others in stalks, leaues, and proportion, that it cannot be distinguished with words; onely the floures hereof are of two colours mixed together, that is, purple and white, wherein it differeth from the rest.
7 There is no difference to be found in the leaues, stalkes, seed, or rootes of this Cornefloure from the other, but onely that the floures hereof are of a faire blew colour, and very double.
8 The eighth Corne-floure is like vnto the precedent, without any difference at all, sauing in the colour of the floures, the which are of a bright purple colour, that setteth (...) the difference.
@ 9 This from a small root sends vp diuers creeping branches some foot long, set with long hoary narrow leaues: at the tops of the stalkes stand the floures in scaly heads, like as the other Blew-Bottles, but of a darke purple colour. The whole plant is very bitter and vngratefull to the taste. Lobel calls this Cyanus repens.
10 This is like the last described, but that the leaues are much smaller or narrower, also the scaly heads of this are of a finer white siluer colour: and this plant is not possessed with such bitternesse as the former. Lobel calls this Cyanus minimus repens. @


 The Place.
The first groweth in my garden, and in the gardens of Herbarists, but not wilde that I know of. The others grow in corne fields among wheat, Rie, Barley, and other graine: it is sowne in gardens, which by cunning looking to doth oft times become of other colours, and some also double, which hath beene touched in their seuerall descriptions. @ The two last grow wilde about Montpellier in France. @


 The Time.
They bring sorth their floures from the beginning of May vnto the end of haruest.


 The Names.
The old Herbarists called it (...) flos, of the blew colour which it naturally hath: most of the later sort following the common (...) (...), call it Flos frumentorum; for the Germans name it (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in French, Blaueole, and Bluet: in Italian, Fior campese, and Bladiseris, i. Seris (...), and (...), or (...), as though it should be called Blaptisecula, because it hindereth and annoyeth the Reapers, by dulling and turning the edges of their sickles in reaping of corne: in English it is called Blew-Bottle, Blew-Blow, Corne-floure, and hurtSickle. @ Fabius Columna would haue it to be the Papauer spumeum, or Heracleum of the Antients. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The faculties of these floures are not yet sufficiently knowne. Sith there is no vse of them in  physicke, we will leaue the rest that might be said to a further consideration: notwithstanding some haue thought the common Blew-Bottle to be of temperature something cold, and therefore good against the inflammation of the eyes, as some thinke.




CHAP. 252. Of Goats Beard, or Go to bed at noone.

 The Description.
1 GOats-beard, or Go to bed at noone hoth hollow stalks, smooth, and of a whitish green colour, whereupon do grow long leaues crested downe the middle with a swelling rib, sharpe pointed, yeelding a milky iuyce when it is broken, in shape like those of Garlick; from the bosome of which leaues thrust forth small render stalks set with the like leaues but lesser: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes, consisting of a number of purple leaues, dasht ouer as it were with a little yellow dust, set about with nine or ten sharpe pointed greene leaues: the whole floure resembles a starre when it is spred abroad; for it shutteth it selfe at twelue of the clocke, and sheweth not his face open vntill the next dayes Sun doth make it floure anew, whereupon it was called Go to bed at noon: when these floures be come to their full maturitie and ripenesse, they grow into a downy Blow-ball like those of Dandelion, which is carried away with the winde. The seed is long, hauing at the end one piece of that downie matter hanging at it. The root is long and single, with some few threds thereto anexed, which perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, yeelding much quantitie of a milky (...) when it is cut or broken, as doth all the rest of the plant.
2 The yellow Goats beard hath the like leaues, stalkes, root, seed, and downie blow-balls that the other hath, and also yeeldeth the like quantitie of milke, insomuch that if the pilling while it is greene be pulled from the stalkes, the milky iuyce followeth: but when it hath there remained a little while it waxeth yellow. The floures hereof are of a gold yellow colour, and haue not such long (...) leaues to garnish it withall, wherein consisteth the difference.


1 Tragopogon purpureum. Purple Goats-beard.


2 Tragopogon (...). Yellow Goats-beard.


3 There is another small sort of Goats-beard or Go to bed at noone, which hath a thicke root full of a milky sap, from which rise vp many leaues spred vpon the ground, very long, narrow, thin, and like vnto those of grasse, but thicker and grosser: among which rise vp tender stalkes, on the tops whereof do stand faire double yellow floures like the precedent, but lesser. The whole plant

yeeldeth a milkie sap or iuyce as the others do: it perisheth like as the other when it hath perfected his seed. This may be called Tragopogon minus angustifolium, Little narrow leaued Goatsbeard.


 The Place.
The first growes not wild in England that I could euer see or heare of, except in Lancashire vpon the banks of the riuer Chalder, neere to my Lady Heskiths house, two miles from Whawley: it is sowen in gardens for the beauty of the floures almost euery where. The others grow in medows and fertil pastures in most places of England. It growes plentifully in most of the fields about London, as at Islington, in the medowes by Redriffe, (...), and Putney, and in diuers other places.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from the beginning of Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Goats-beard is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Barbahirci, and also Coma: in high-Dutch, Bocxbaert: in low-Dutch, Josephes (...): in French, Barbe de (...), and Sassify: in Italian, Sassefrica: in Spanish, Barba Cabruna: in English, Goats-(...), Iosephs floure, Star of Ierusalem, Noone-tide, and Go to bed at noone.


 The Temperature.
These herbes are temperate betweene heate and moisture.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Goats-beard boyled in wine and drunke, asswageth the paine and pricking stitches  of the sides.
The same boyled in water vntill they be tender, and buttered as parseneps and carrots, are a most  pleasant and wholsome meate, in delicate taste farre surpassing either Parsenep (...) Carrot: which meate procures appetite, warmeth the stomacke, preuaileth greatly in consumptions, and strengthneth those that haue been sicke of a long lingring disease.



CHAP. 253. Of Vipers-Grasse.


1 (...), siue Scorzonera Hispanica. Common Vipers Grasse.


2 Viperaria humilis. Dwarfe Vipers Grasse.





(...) there were six (...) in this chapter, whereof the (...) and fourth were both of one plant, (...) the fifth which was of (...) (...) (...) of (...) did (...) much differ from them; if it differ at all. In the (...) and (...) of the third there should haue been put (...) in stead of (...); (...) now (...): (...).

 3 Viperaria Pannonica. Austrian Vipers grasse.


@ 4 Viperaria angustifolia (...). Hungary Vipers grasse.


5 Viperaria Pannonica angustifolia. Narrow leafed Vipers grasse.



 The Description.
1 THe first of the Viper grasses hath long broad leaues, fat, or ful bodied, vneuen about the edges, sharpe pointed, with a high swolne ribbe downe the middle, and of an ouerworne colour, tending to the colour of Woade: among which riseth vp a stiffe stalke, smooth and plaine, of two cubits high, whereon do grow such leaues as those next the ground. The flours stand on the top of the stalkes, consisting of many small yellow leaues thicke thrust together, very double, as are those of Goates beard, whereof it is a kinde, as are all the rest that (...) follow in this present chapter: the root is long, thicke, very brittle, continuing many yeeres, yeelding great increase of roots, blacke without, white within, and yeelding a milkie juice, as (...) the leaues also, like vnto the Goates beard.
2 The dwarfe Vipers grasse differeth not from the precedent, sauing that it is altogether lesser, wherein especially consisteth the difference.
@ 3 The broad leafed Austrian Vipers-grasse hath broad leaues sharpe pointed, vneuen about the edges, of a blewish greene colour: the stalke riseth vp to the height of a foot or better; on the top whereof do stand faire yellow (...), very double, greater and broader than any of the rest

of a resonable good smell. The seed followeth, long and sharpe, like vnto those of Goates-beard. The root is thicke, long, and full of a milkie juice, as are the leaues also.
4 The narrow leaued Hungary Vipers-grasse hath long leaues like to those of Goates-beard, but longer and narrower, among which riseth vp a slender hollow stalke, stiffe and smooth, on the top whereof do stand faire double floures of a faire blew colour tending to purple, in shape like the other of his kinde, of a pleasant sweet smell, like the smell of sweet balls made of Benzoin. The seed is conteined in small cups like those of Goates beard, wrapped in a downie matter, that is caried away with the winde. The root is not so thicke nor long as the others, very single, bearded at the top, with certain hairy thrums yeelding a milkie juice of a resinous taste, and somewhat sharpe withall. It endureth the winter euen as the others do.
@ 5 This (whose figure was by our Authour put to the last description) hath leaues like those of Goates-beard, but stiffer and shorter, amongst which there growes vp a short hollow stalke some handfull high, set with a few short leaues, bearing a yellow floure at the top, almost like that of the last saue one, but lesse, the seed is conteined in such cups as the common Vipers-grasse, and being ripe is caried away with the leastwinde. The root is blacke, with a wrinkled barke, and full of milke, hauing the head hairy, as also the last described hath. This by Clusius is called Scorsonera humilis angustifolia Pannonica. @


 The Place and Time.
Most of these are strangers in England. The two first described do grow in my garden. The rest are touched in their seuerall titles.
They floure and flourish from May to the end of Iuly.


 The Names.
Vipers-grasse is called of the Spaniards Scorzonera, which soundeth in Latine Viperaria, or Viperina, or Serpentaria, so called because it is accounted to be of force and efficacy against the poisons of Vipers and serpents, for Vipera or a viper is called in Spanish Scurzo: it hath no name either in the high or low Dutch, nor in any other, more than hath been said, that I can reade: in English we may call it Scorzoner, after the Spanish name, or Vipers-grasse.


 The Temperature.
They are hot and moist as are the Goates-beards.


 The Vertues.
It is reported by those of great iudgement, that Vipers-grasse is most excellent against the infections  of the plague, and all poisons of venomous beasts, and especially to cure the bitings of vipers, (of which there be very many in Spaine and other hot countries, yet haue I heard that they haue been seen in England) if the juice or herbe be drunke.
It helpeth the infirmities of the heart, and such as vse to swoune much: it cureth also them that  haue the falling sickenesse, and such as are troubled with giddinesse in the head.
The root being eaten, either rosted in embers, sodden, or raw, doth make a man merry, and remoueth  all sorrow.
The root condited with sugar, as are the roots of Eringos and such like, worke the like effects: but more familiarly, being thus dressed.



CHAP. 254. Of Marigolds.

 The Description.
1 THe greatest double Marigold hath many large, fat, broad leaues, springing immediately from a fibrous or threddy root; the vpper sides of the leaues are of a deepe greene, and the lower side of a more light and shining greene: among which rise vp stalkes somewhat hairie, and also somewhat jointed, and full of a spungious pith. The floures in the top are beautifull, round, very large and double, something sweet, with a certaine strong smell, of a light saffron colour, or like pure gold: from the which follow a number of long crooked seeds, especially the (...), or those that stand about the edges of the floure; which being sowne commonly bring forth single floures, whereas contrariwise those seeds in the middle are lesser, and for the most part bring forth such floures as that was from whence it was taken.
2 The common double Marigold hath many (...), thicke, crumpled leaues set vpon a grosse and spungious stalke: whereupon do grow faire double (...) floures, hauing for the most part in the middle a bunch of threddes thicke thrust together: which being past there succeed such crooked seeds as the first described. The root is thicke and hard, with some threds annexed thereto.



1. 2. Calendula maior polyanthos. The greater double Marigold.


4 Calendula multiflora (...). Double globe Marigold.


6 Calendula simplici (...). Single Marigold.


7 Calendula (...). Fruitfull Marigold.



3 The smaller or finer leafed double Marigold groweth vpright, hauing for the most part one stem or fat spongeous stalke, garnished with smooth and fat leaues confusedly. The floures grow at the top of the small branches, very double, but lesser than the other, consisting of more fine iaggednesse, and of a faire yellow gold colour. The root is like the precedent.
4 The Globe-flouring Marigold hath many large broad leaues rising immediately forth of the ground; among which riseth vp a stalke of the height of a cubit, diuiding it selfe toward the top into other smaller branches, set or garnished with the like leaues, but confusedly, or without order. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, very double; the small leaues whereof are set in comely order by certaine rankes or rowes, as sundry lines are in a Globe, trauersing the whole compasse of the same; whereupon it tooke the name Orbiculata.
5 The fifth sort of double Marigold differeth not from the last described, sauing in the colour of the floures; for this plant bringeth forth floures of a straw or light yellow colour, and the others not so, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ All these fiue here described, and which formerly had so many figures, differ nothing but in the bignesse and littlenesse of the plants and floures, and in the intensenesse and remisnesse of their colour, which is either orange, yellow, or of a straw colour. @
6 The Marigold with single floures differeth not from those with double floures, but in that it consisteth of fewer leaues, which we therefore terme Single, in comparison of the rest, and that maketh the difference.
7 This fruitfull or much bearing Marigold is likewise called of the vulgar sort of women, Iacke-an-apes on horsebacke: it hath leaues, stalkes, and roots like the common sort of Marigold, differing in the shape of his floures, for this plant doth bring forth at the top of the stalke one floure like the other Marigolds; from the which start forth sundry other smal floures, yellow likewise, and of the same fashion as the first, which if I be not deceiued commeth to passe per accidens, or by chance, as Nature oftentimes liketh to play with other floures, or as children are borne with two thumbes on one hand, and such like, which liuing to be men, do get children like vnto others; euen so is the seed of this Marigold, which if it be sowen, it brings forth not one floure in a thousand like the plant from whence it was taken.
8 The other fruitfull Marigold is doubtlesse a degenerate kind, comming by chance from the seed of the double Marigold, whereas for the most part the other commeth of the seed of the single floures, wherein consisteth the difference. @ The floure of this (wherein the onely difference consists) you shall finde exprest at the bottome of the fourth figure. @


9 Calendula Alpina. Mountaine Marigold.


9 The Alpish or mountaine Marigold, which Lobelius setteth downe for Nardus Celtica, or Plantago Alpina, is called by Tabernamontanus, Caltha, or Calendula Alpina: and because I see it rather resembles a Marigold, than any other plant, I haue not thought it amisse to insert it in this place, leauing the consideration thereof vnto the friendly Reader, or to a further consideration, because it is a plant that I am not well acquainted withall; yet I doe reade that it hath a thicke root, growing aslope vnder the vpper crust of the earth, of an aromaticall or spicie taste, and somewhat biting, with many threddy strings annexed thereto: from which rise vp broad thicke and rough leaues of an ouerworn green colour, not vnlike to those of Plantaine: among which there riseth vp a rough and tender stalke set with the like leaues; on the top wherof commeth forth a single yellow floure, paled about the edges with small leaues of a light yellow, (...) to a straw colour; the middle of the floure is composed of a bundle of threds, thicke thrust together, such as is in the middle of the field Daisie, of a deepe yellow colour.
@ This Plant is all one with the two described in the next Chapter: they vary onely

thus; the stalkes and leaues are sometimes hairy, otherwhiles smooth; the floure is yellow, or else blew. I hauing three figures ready cut, thinke it not amisse to giue you one to expresse each varietie. @
10 The wilde Marigold is like vnto the single garden Marigold, but altogether lesser, and the whole plant perisheth at the first approch of Winter, and recouereth it selfe againe by falling of the seed.


 The Place.
These Marigolds, with double floures especially, are set and sowen in gardens: the rest, their titles do set forth their naturall being.


 The Time.
The Marigold floureth from Aprill or May euen vntill Winter, and in Winter also, if it be warme.


 The Names.
The Marigold is called Calendula: it is to be seene in floure in the Calends almost of euerie moneth: it is also called Chrysanthemum, of his golden colour: of some, Caltha, and Caltha Poetarum: whereof Columella and (...) doe write, saying, That Caltha is a floure of a yellow colour; whereof Virgil in his Bucolickes, the second Ecloge, writeth thus;

Tum Casia atgue alijs intexens suauibus herbis
Mollia Luteola ping it vaccinia Caltha.


And then (...) Spike and such sweet herbes infold,
And paint the Iacinth with the Marigold.

Columella also in his tenth booke of Gardens hath these words;
Candida Leucoia and flauentia Lumina Calthae.
Stock-Gillofloures exceeding white, And Marigolds most yellow bright.
It is thought to be Gromphena Plinij: in low-Dutch it is called Goudt bloemen: in high-Dutch, Kingleblumen: in French, Sousij and Goude: in Italian, Fior d'ogni mese: in English, (...), and Ruddes.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The floure of the Marigold is of temperature hot, almost in the second degree, especially when  it is dry: it is thought to strengthen and comfort the heart very much, and also to withstand poyson, as also to be good against pestilent Agues, being taken any way. Fuchsius hath written, That being drunke with wine it bringeth downe the termes, and that the fume thereof expelleth the secondine or after-birth
But the leaues of the herbe are hotter; for there is in them a certain biting, but by reason of the  moisture ioyned with it, it doth not by and by shew it selfe; by meanes of which moisture they mollifie the belly, and procure solublenesse if it be vsed as a pot-herbe.
Fuchsius writeth, That if the mouth be washed with the iuyce it helpeth the tooth-ache.
The floures and leaues of Marigolds being distilled, and the water dropped into red and watery  eyes, ceaseth the inflammation, and taketh away the paine.
Conserue made of the floures and sugar taken in the morning fasting, cureth the trembling of  the heart, and is also giuen in time of plague or pestilence, or corruption of the aire.
The yellow leaues of the floures are dried and kept throughout Dutchland against Winter, to  put into broths, in physicall potions, and for diuers other purposes, in such quantity, that in some Grocers or Spice-sellers houses are to be found barrels filled with them, and retailed by the penny more or lesse, insomuch that no broths are well made without dried Marigolds.



CHAP. 255. Of Germane Marigolds.

 The Description.
1 GOlden Marigold with the broad leafe doth forthwith bring from the root long leaues spred vpon the ground, broad, greene, something rough in the vpper part, vnderneath smooth, and of a light greene colour: among which spring vp slender stalks a cubit

high, something hoarie, hauing three or foure ioynts, out of euery one whereof grow two (...), set one right against another, and oftentimes little slender stems; on the tops whereof (...) broad round floures like those of Ox-(...), or the corne Marigold, hauing a round ball in the middle (such as is in the middle of those of (...)) bordered about with a pale of bright yellow leaues. The whole floure (...) into downe that is carried away with the winde; among which down is found long blackish seed. The root consisteth of threddy strings.
@ 2 The lesser sort hath foure or fiue leaues spred vpon the ground like vnto those of the last described, but altogether lesser and shorter: among which riseth vp a slender stalke two hands high; on the top whereof stand such floures as the precedent, but not so large, and of a blew colour.
@ These two here described, and that described in the ninth place of the foregoing Chapter, are all but the varieties of one and the same plant, differing as I haue shewed in the foregoing Chapter. @


1 Chrysanthemum latifolium. Golden Marigold with the broad leafe.


2 Chrysanthemum latisolium minus. The lesser Dutch Marigold.




 The Place.
They be found euery where in vntilled places of Germanie, and in woods, but are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They are to be seene with their floures in Iune, in the gardens of the Low-countries.


 The Names.
Golden Marigold is called in high-Dutch (...). There are that would haue it to be Alisma Dioscoridis; which is also called Damasonium, but vnproperly; therefore we must rather call it Chrysanthemum latifolium, than rashly attribute vnto it the name of Alisma. @ This plant indeed is a Doronicum; and the figure in the precedent chapter by Clusius is set forth by the name of Doronicum 6. Pannonicum: Matthiolus calls this plant Alisma: Gesner, Caltha Alpina: Dodonaeus, Chrysanthemum latifolium: Pena and (...), Nardus Celtica altera. Now in the Historia Lugd. it is set forth in in foure seuerall places by three of the former names; and pag. 1169. by the name of Ptarmicamontana Daleschampij.


 The Temperature.
It is hot and dry in the second degree being greene, but in the third being dry.



 The Vertues.
The women that liue about the Alps wonderfully (...) the root of this (...) suffocation of the mother, the stoppings of the courses, and (...) (...) (...) and (...) like (...) in maids. Histor. Lugd. @



CHAP. 256. Of Corne-Marigold.

 The Description.
1 COrne Marigold or golden Corne floure hath a soft stalke, hollow, and of a greene colour, wherupon do grow great leaues, much hackt and cut into diuers sections, and placed confusedly or out of order: vpon the top of the branches stand faire starlike floures, yellow in the middle, and such likewise is the pale or border of leaues that compasseth the soft bal in the middle, like that in the middle of Camomill floures, of a reasonable pleasant smel. The roots are full of strings.


The figure that was in the first place was of the Chrysanthemum of (...), which is a stranger with (...), and the (...) of it are much like those of (...), or (...), the floure is somewhat like, but larger than that of (...), and wholly yellow.

 1 (...) segetum. Corne Marigold.


2 Chrysanthemum Valentinum. Corne Marigold of Valentia.


2 The (...) floure of Valentia hath a thicke fat stalk, rough, vneuen, and somewhat (...), whereupon do grow long leaues, consisting of a long middle rib, with diuers little fetherlike leaues set thereon without order. The floures grow at the top of the (...), composed of a yellow thrummie matter, such as in the middle of the Camomill floures, and is (...) like the Corne Marygold last described, sauing it doth want that border or pale of little (...) that do (...) the ball or head: the root is thicke, tough, and disperseth it (...) (...) abroad.
@ 3 To these may be added diuers other, as the (...) Alpina, of Clusius, and his (...) Creticum, and others. The first of these smal mountain Marigolds of Clusius (...) description hath leaues like those of white Wormewood, but greener and thicker: the stalks grow some handfull (...), set with few and much diuided leaues; and at the tops, as in an vmbell, they carry some dozen

floures more or lesse, not much vnlike in shape, colour, and smell, to those of the common Iacobaea, or Ragwoort. The root is somewhat thicke, and puts forth many long white fibres. It floures in Iuly and August, and growes vpon the Alpes of Stiria. Clusius calls it Chrysanthemum Alpinum. 1.
4 The second of his description hath many leaues at the root, like to the leaues of the male Sothernwood, but of a lighter and brighter greene, and of no vnpleasant smell, though the taste be bitterish and vngratefull: in the middest of the leaues grow vp stalkes some foot high, diuided at their tops into sundry branches, which carry each of them two or three floures bigger than, yet like those of the common Cammomill, but without smel, and wholly yellow: the root is fibrous, blackish, and much spreading. It floures in August, and growes in the like places as the former. Bauhine iudges this to be the (...) montana Artemissiae tenuifoliae facie of the (...). and the Ageratum ferulaceum in the Hist. Lugd. But I cannot be of that opinion; yet I iudge the Achillaea montana, and Ageratum ferulaceum to be but of the same plant. But different from this, and that chiefely in that it hath many more, and those much lesse floures than those of the plant here figured and described.
5 Now should I haue giuen you the historie of the Chrysanthemum Creticum of the same Authour, but that my friend Mr. Goodyer hath saued me the labour, by sending an exact description thereof, together with one or two others of this kinde, which I thinke fit here to giue you.


@ 3 Chrysanthemum Alpinum 1. Clus. Small mountaine Marigold.


@ 4 Chrysanthemum Alpimum 2. Clus. The other Alpine Marigold.


Chrysanthemum Creticum primum Clusij, pag. 334.
The stalkes are round, straked, branched, hard, of a whitish greene, with a very little pith within; neere three foot high: the leaues grow out of order, diuided into many parts, and those again snipt or diuided, of the colour of the stalkes: at the tops of the stalkes and branches grow great floures, bigger than any of the rest of the Corne-floures, forth of scaly heads, consisting of twelue or more broad leaues apeece, notched at the top, of a shining golden colour at the first, which after turne to a pale, whitish, or very light yellow, and grow round about a large yellow ball, of smell somewhat sweet. The floures past, there commeth abundance of seed closely compact or thrust together, and it is short, blunt at both ends, straked, of a salue colour, somwhat flat, and of a reasonable bignes. The

@ 5 Chrysanthemum Creticum. Candy Corne Marigold.
root is whitish, neere a fingers bignesse, short, with many threds hanging thereat, and perisheth when the seede is ripe; and at the Spring groweth vp againe by the falling of the seed.
Chrysanthemum Baeticum Boelij, inscriptum.
The stalks are round, straked, reddish brown, diuided into branches, containing a spungious white pith within, a cubite high: the leaues grow out of order, without footstalkes, about three inches long, and an inch broad, notched about the edges, not at all diuided, of a darke greene colour: the floures grow at the tops of the stalkes and branches, forth of great scaly heads, containing twentie leaues a piece or more, notched at the top, of a shining yellow colour, growing about a round yellow ball, of a reasonable good smell, very like those of the common Chrysanthemum segetum: the seede groweth like the other, and is very small, long, round, crooked and whitish: the root is small, whitish, threddie, and perisheth also when the seed is ripe.
Chrysanthemum tenuifolium Baeticum Boelij.
The stalks are round, small, straked, reddish, somewhat hairie, branched, a cubit high, or higher: the leaues are small, much diuided, iagged, and very like the leaues of Cotulafaetida: the floures are yellow, shining like gold, composed of thirteene or fourteene leaues a piece, notched at the top, set about a yellow ball, also like the common Chrysanthemum segetum: the seed groweth amongst white flattish scales, which are closely compacted in a round head together, and are small, flat, grayish, and broad at the top: the root is small, whitish, with a few threds, and dyeth when the seed is ripe. Iuly 28. 1621. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
The first groweth among corne, and where corne hath been growing: it is found in some places with leaues more iagged, and in others lesse.
The second is a stranger in England.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
These plants are called by one name in Greeke, of the golden glittering colour, (...): in High Dutch, Sant Johans blum: in Low Dutch, Uokelaer: in English, Corne Marigold, yellow Corne floure, and golden Corne floure.
There be diuers other floures called Chrysanthemum also, as Batrachion, a kinde of yellow Crowfoot, Heliochryson, but these golden floures differ from them.


 The Temperature.
They are thought to be of a meane temperature betweene heat and moisture.


 The Vertues.
The stalks and leaues of Corne Marigold, as Dioscorides saith, are eaten as other pot-herbes are.
The floures mixed with wax, oile, rosine, and frankinsence, and made vp into a seare-cloth, wasteth  away cold and hard swellings.
The herbe it selfe drunke, after the comming forth of the bath, of them that haue the yellow  iaundise, doth in short time make them well coloured.




CHAP. 257. Of Oxe-Eie.

 The Description.
1 THe plant which wee haue called Buphthalmum, or Oxe-eie, hath slender stalks growing from the roots, three, foure, or more, a foot high, or higher, about which be green leaues finely iagged like to the leaues of Fenell, but much lesser: the floures in the tops of the stalks are great, much like to Marigolds, of a light yellow colour, with yellow threds in the middle, after which commeth vp a little head or knap like to that of red Mathes before described, called Adonis, consisting of many seeds set together. The roots are slender, and nothing but strings, like to the roots of blacke Ellebor, whereof it hath beene taken to be a kinde.
2 The Oxe-eie which is generally holden to be the true Buphthalmum hath many leaues spredvpon the ground, of a light greene colour, laied far abroad like wings, consisting of very many fine iags, set vpon a tender middle rib: among which spring vp diuers stalks, stiffe and brittle, vpon the top whereof do grow faire yellow leaues, set about a head or ball of thrummie matter, such as in the middle of Cammomill, like a border or pale. The root is tough and thicke, with certaine strings fastned thereto.
3 The white Oxe-eie hath small vpright stalks of a foot high, whereon do grow long leaues, composed of diuers smal leaues, and those snipt about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The floures grow on the tops of the stalks, in shape like those of the other Oxe-eie; the middle part whereof is likewise made of a yellow substance, but the pale or border of little leaues, are exceeding white, like those of great Dasie, called Consolida media vulnerariorum. The root is long, creeping alongst vnder the vpper crust of the earth, whereby it greatly increaseth. @ This by the common consent of all writers that haue deliuered the historie thereof, hath not the pale or out leaues of the floure white, as our Author affirmes, but of a bright and perfect yellow colour. And this is the Buphthalmum, of Tragus, Matthiolus, Lobel, Clusius and others. @


1 Buphthalmum sive Helleborus niger ferulaceus. Oxe-eie.


2 Buphthalmum verum. The right Oxe-eie.





3 (...) vulgare. White Oxe-eie.




 The Place.
The two first growe of themselues in Germany, Bohemia, and in the Gardens of the Low-countries; of the first I haue a plant in my garden. The last groweth in barren pastures and fields almost euery where.
@ The last is also a stranger with vs, for any thing that I know or can learne; neither (...) I coniecture what our Authour (...) here: first in that he said the floures of this were white, and secondly in that it grew in barren pastures and fields almost euery where. @


 The Time.
They floure in May and Iune. The last in August.


 The Names.
Touching the naming of the first of those plants the late writers are of diuers opinions: some would haue it to be a kind of Veratrum nigrum, blacke Hellebor: other some Consiligo, or Bearefoot; and againe, others, Sesamoides; and some, Elleborastrum: But there be found two kindes of blacke Ellebor among the old writers, one with a leafe like vnto Laurel, with the fruit of Sesamum: the other with a leafe like that of the Plane tree, with the seed of Carthamus or Bastard Saffron. But it is most euident, that this (...), in English, Oxe-eie, which in this Chapter we in the first place haue described, doth agree with neither of these: what form Consiligo is of, we finde not among the old writers. Pliny 26 cap. 7. saith, That in his time it was found amongst the Marsi, and was a present remedy for the infirmitie of the lungs of swine, and of all kinde of cattell, though it were but drawne thorow the eare. Columella in his 6. booke, Chap. 5. doth also say, that in the mountaines called Marsi there is very great store thereof, and that it is very helpfull to all kind of cattel, and he telleth how and in what manner it must be put into the eare; the roots also of our Oxe-eie are said to cure certain infirmities of cattel, if they be put into the (...) or bored eare: but it followeth not that for the same reason it should be Consiligo; and it is an ordinary thing to find out plants that are of a like force and qualitie: for Pliny doth (...) in his 25 booke, 5 chapter, That the roots also of blacke Ellebor can do the same: it cureth (saith he) the cough in cattel, if it be drawn thorow the eare, and taken out again the next day at the same houre: which is likewise most certaine by experiments of the countrey men of our age; who do cure the diseases of their cattell with the roots of common black Ellebor. The roots of white Ellebor also do the like, as (...), and after him Hierocles doth write: who notwithstanding do not thrust the roots of white Ellebor into the (...), but vnder the skin of the brest called the dewlap: after which manner also Vegetius Renatus doth vse Consiligo, in his first booke of the curing of cattell, chapter 12. intituled, Of the cure of the infirmities vnder the skin: although in his 3. booke, 2. Chapter, de Malleo, he writeth, that they also must be fastned (...) the eare: which things do sufficiently declare, that sundry plants haue oftentimes like faculties: and that it doth not at all follow by the same rea son, that our Oxe eie is Consiligo, because it doth cure diseases in Cattel as wel as Consiligo doih. But if we must coniecture by the faculties, Consiligo then should bee White Ellebor: for (...) vseth Consiligo in the very same maner that Absyrtus and Hierocles do vse white Ellebor. This suspition is made the greater, because it is thought that Vegetius hath taken this manner of curing (...) the Grecians; for which cause also most doe take Consiligo to be nothing else but white Ellebor: the which if it be so then shall this present Oxe-eie much differ from Consiligo; for it is nothing at all like to white Ellebor.
And that the same is not Sesamoides, either the first or the second, it is better knowne, than needfull to be confuted.

This same also is vnproperly called Helleborastrum; for that may aptly bee called Helleborastrum which hath the forme and likenesse of Hellebor: and this Oxe eie is nothing at all like to Ellebore. For all which causes it seemeth that none of these names agree with this plant, but only the name Buphthalmum, with whose description which is extant in Dioscorides this plant doth most aptly agree. We take it to be the right Oxe eie; for Oxe eie bringeth sorth slender soft stalks, and hath leaues of the likenesse or similitude of Fennell leaues: the (...) is yellow, bigger than that of Cammomill, euen such an one is this present plant, which doth so exquisitly (...) that form or likenesse of Fennell leaues, both in slendernesse and manifold iaggednesse of the leaues, as no other little leafed herb can do better; so that without all doubt this plant seemeth to be the true and right Oxe eie. Oxe eie is called Cachla, or rather Caliha; but Caliha is Calendula, or Marigold, which we said that our Oxe eie in floure did neerest represent. There are some that would haue Buphthalmum or Oxe eie to be Chrysanthemum, yellow Cammomil, and say that Dioscorides hath in sundry places, and by diuers names intreated of this herbe; but if those men had somewhat more diligently weighed Dioscorides his words, they would haue bin of another minde: for although descriptions of either of them do in many things agree, yet there is no property wanting that may shew the plants to differ. The leaues of Chrysanthemum are said to be diuided and cut into many fine iags: and the leaues of Buphthalmum to be like the leaues of Fennell: for all things that be finely iagged and cut into many parts haue not the likenesse of the leaues of Fennell. Moreouer, Dioscorides saith, that Chrysanthemum doth bring forth a floure much glittering, but (...) telleth not that the floure of Buphthalmum, or Oxe eie is much glittering, neither doth the floure of that which we haue set downe glitter, so that it can or ought not to be said to glitter much. Do not these things declare a (...) difference (...) Buphthalmum and Chrysanthemum, and confirme that which we haue set down to be the true and right Oxe eie? We are of that minde, let others thinke as they will: and they that would haue Chrysanthemum to be Buphthalmum, let them seeke out another, if they denie this to bee Oxe eie: for that which we and others haue described for Chrysanthemum cannot be the true Buphthalmum or Oxe eie: for the leaues of it are not like Fennell, such as those of the true Buphthalmum ought to be.


 The Temperature.
But concerning the faculties Matthiolus saith, that all the Physitions and Apothecaries in (...) mia, vse the roots of this Oxe eie in stead of those of blacke Ellebor, namely for diseases in (...). but he doth not affirme that the roots hereof in medicines are substitutes, or quid pro quo; for, (...) he; I do remember that I once saw the roots hereof in a sufficient big quantitie put by certain Physitions into decoctions which were made to purge by siege, but they purged no more than if they had not been put in at all: which thing maketh it most plaine, that it cannot be any of the Ellebors, although it hath been vsed to be fastned through the eares of cattell for certaine diseases, and doth cure them as Ellebor doth. The roots of Gentian do mightily open the orifices of Fistulaes, which be too narrow, so do the roots of Aristolochia, or Birthwoort, or Brionie, or pieces of spunges, which notwithstanding do much differ one from another in other operations: wherefore though the roots of Oxe eie can do something like vnto blacke Ellebor, yet for al that they cannot perform all those things that the same can. We know that thornes, stings, splinters of wood, and such like, bring pain, cause inflammations, draw vnto them humors from the parts neere adioining, if they be fastned in any part of the bodie; no part of the bodie is hurt without pain; the which is increased if any thing be thrust through, or put into the wound: peraduenture also if any other thing beside be put into the slit or bored eare, the same effect would follow which hapned by the root of this plant thrust in; notwithstanding we here affirme nothing, we onely make way for curious men to make more diligent search touching the operations hereof. @ Clusius affirmes that when hee came to Vienna in Austria, this was vulgarly bought, sold, and vsed for the true blacke Ellebor, the ignorance of the Physitions and Apothecaries in the knowledge of simples was such to make vse of this so far diffe rent plant, when as they had the true blacke Hellebor growing plentifully wilde within seuen miles of the citie, the which afterward vpon his admonition, they made vse of. @


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the floures of Oxe eie made vp in a seare-cloth doe asswage and waste away cold hard swellings; and it is reported that if they be drunk by and by after bathing, they make  them in short time well coloured that haue been troubled with the yellow iaundice.




CHAP. 258. Of French Marigold, or African Marigold.

 The Description.
1 THe great double African Marigold hath a great long browne reddish stalke, crested, furrowed and somewhat knobby, diuiding it selfe toward the top into other branches; whereupon do grow leaues composed of many small leaues set vpon a middle rib by couples, much like vnto the leaues of wilde Valerian, bearing at the top very faire and beautifull double yellow floures, greater and more double than the greatest Damaske Rose, of a strong smell, but not vnpleasant. The floures being past, there succeedeth long blacke flat seed: the whole plant perisheth at the first approach of winter.
2 There is little difference betweene this and the precedent, or last described, sauing that this plant is much lesser, and bringeth forth more store of floures, which maketh the difference. @ And we may therefore call it Flos Aphricanus minor multiflorus; The small double Africane Marigold. @


1 Flos Aphricanus maior Polyanthos. The great African double Marigold.


3 Flos Aphricanus maior simplici flore. The great single French Marigold.


3 The single great Africane Marigold hath a thicke root, with some fibres annexed thereto; from which riseth vp a thicke stalke chamfered and furrowed, of the height of two cubits, diuided into other small branches; whereupon are set long leaues, compact or composed of many little leaues like those or the Ash tree, of a strong smell, yet not very vnpleasant: on the top of the branches do grow yellow single floures, composed in the middle of a bundle of yellow thrummes hard thrust together, paled about the edges with a border of yellow leaues. after which (...) long blacke seed. The whole plant perisheth with the first frost, and must be sowne (...) as the other sorts must be.
4 The common Africane or as they vulgarly terme it French Marigold hath small weake and tender branches trailing vpon the ground, reeling and leaning this way and that way, beset with leaues consisting of many particular leaues, indented about the edges, which being held vp against the sunne, or to the light, are seene to be full of holes like a sieue, euen as those of Saint Iohns

woort: The floures stand at the top of the springie branches forth of long cups or huskes, consisting of eight or ten small leaues, yellow vnderneath, on the vpper side of a deeper yellow tending to the colour of a darke crimson veluet, as also soft in handling: but to describe the colour in words, it is not possible, but this way; lay vpon paper with a pensill a yellow colour called Masticot, which being dry, lay the same ouer with a little saffron steeped in water or wine, which setteth forth most liuely the colour. The whole plant is of a most ranke and vnwholesome smell, and perisheth at the first frost.


4 Flos Aphricanus minor simplici flore. The small French Marigold.




 The Place.
They are cherished and sowne in gardens euery yeere: they grow euery where almost in Africke of themselues, from whence we first had them, and that was when Charles the fisth Emperour of Rome made a famous conquest of Tunis; whereupon it was called Flos Aphricanus, or Flos Tunetanus.


 The Time.
They are to be sowne in the beginning of Aprill, if the season fall out to be warme, otherwise they must be sowne in a bed of dung, as shall be shewed in the chapter of Cucumbers. They bring forth their pleasant floures very late, and therefore there is the more diligence to be vsed to sow them very earely, because they shall not be ouertaken with the frost before their seed be ripe.


 The Names.
The Africane or French Marigold is called in Dutch, (...) (...): in high Dutch, (...) (...), that is, the floure or Gillofloure of India: in Latine, Cariophillus (...); whereupon the French men call it (...) d'Inde. Cordus calleth it Tanacetum (...), of the likenesse the leaues haue with Tansie, and of Peru a Prouince of America, from whence hee thought, it may be, it was first brought into Europe. Gesner calleth it Caltha Aphricana, and saith that it is called in the Carthagenian tongue, Pedua: some would haue it to be Petilius flos Plinij, but not properly: for Petilius slos is an Autumne floure growing among (...) and brambles. Andreas Lacuna calleth it Othonna, which is a certaine herbe of the Troglodyres, growing in that part of Arabia which lieth toward Aegypt, hauing leaues full of holes as though they were eaten with mothes. Galen in his first booke of the faculties of Simple medicines, maketh mention of an herbe called (...), the juice whereof a certain Centurion did (...) out of Barbarie all Aegypt ouer with so rancke a smell, and so lothsome, as Galen himselfe durst not so much as taste of it, but conjectured it to be deadly; yet that Centurion did vse it against the extreme paines of the joints, and it seemeth to the patients themselues, to be of a very cold temperature; but doubtlesse of a poisonsome quality, very neere to that of hemlockes.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The vnpleasant smell, especiall that common sort with single floures (that stuffeth the head  like to that of Hemlocke, such as the juice of Lycopersium had) doth shew that is of a poisonsome and cooling qualitie; and also the same is manifested by diuers experiments: for I remember, saith (...), that I did see a boy whose lippes and mouth when he began to chew the floures did swell extremely; as it hath often happened vnto them, that playing or piping with quils or kexes of Hemlockes, do hold them a while between their lippes: likewise he saith, we gaue to a cat the floures with their cups, tempered with fresh cheese, she forthwith mightely swelled, and a little while after died: also mice that haue eaten of the seed thereof haue been found dead. All which things do declare that this herbe is of a venomous and poisonsome facultie, and that they are

not to be hearkned vnto, that suppose this herbe to be an harmles plant: so to conclude, these plants are most venomous and full of poison, and therefore not to be touched or smelled vnto, much lesse vsed in meat or medicine.



CHAP. 259. Of the floure of the Sun, or the Marigold of Peru.

 The Description.
1 THe Indian Sun or the golden floure of Peru is a plant of such stature and talnesse that in one Sommer being sowne of a seede in Aprill, it hath risen vp to the height of fourteene soot in my garden, where one floure was in (...) three pound and two ounces, and crosse ouerthwart the floure by measure sixteene inches broad. The stalkes are vpright and straight, of the bignesse of a strong mans arme, beset with large leaues euen to the top, like vnto the great Clot Bur: at the top of the stalke commeth (...) for the most part one floure yet many times there spring out sucking buds, which come to no perfection: this great floure is in shape like to the Cammomil floure, beset round about with a pale or border of goodly yellow leaues, in shape like the leaues of the floures of white Lillies: the middle part whereof is made as it were of vnshorn veluet, or some curious cloth wrought with the needle, which braue worke; if you do thorowly view and marke well, it seemeth to be an innumerable sort of small floures, resembling the nose or nozell of a candlesticke, broken from the foot thereof: from which small nozell sweateth forth excellent fine and cleere Turpentine, in sight, substance, sauour and taste. The whole plant in like manner being broken, smelleth of Turpentine: when the plant groweth to maturitie, the floures fal away, in place whereof appeareth the seed, blacke, and large, much like the seed of Gourds, set as though a cunning workeman had of purpose placed them in very good order, much like the honiecombes of Bees: the root is white, compact of many strings, which perish at the first approch of winter, and must be set in most perfect dunged ground: the manner how, shall be shewed when vpon the like occasion I shall speake of Cucumbers and Melons.


1 Flos Solis maior. The greater Sun floure.


2 Flos Solis minor. The lesser Sunne floure.



2 The other golden floure of Peru is like the former, sauing that it is altogether lower, and the leaues more iagged, and very few in number.
3 The male floure of the Sun of the smaller sort hath a thicke root, hard, and of a wooddy substance, with many threddie strings annexed thereto, from which riseth vp a gray or russet stalke, to the height of fiue or six cubits, of the bignesse of ones arme, whereupon are set great broad leaues with long foot-stalkes, very fragill or easie to breake, of an ouerworne greene colour, sharp pointed, and somewhat cut or hackt about the edges like a saw: the floure groweth at the top of the stalks, bordered about with a pale of yellow leaues: the thrummed middle part is blacker than that of the last described. The whole floure is compassed about likewise with diuers such russet leaues as those are that do grow lower vpon the stalks, but lesser and narrower. The plant and euery part therof doth smell of Turpentine, and the floure yeeldeth forth most cleere Turpentine, as my selfe haue noted diuers yeares. The seed is also long and blacke, with certaine lines or strakes of white running alongst the same. The roote and euery part thereof perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.
4 The female or Marigold Sun floure hath a thicke and wooddie root, from which riseth vp a straight stem, diuiding it selfe into one or more branches, set with smooth leaues sharpe pointed, sleightly indented about the edges. The floures grow at the top of the branches, of a faint yellow colour, the middle part is of a deeper yellow tending to blacknesse, of the forme and shape of a single Marigold, whereupon I haue named it the Sunne Marigold. The seed as yet I haue not obserued.


 The Place.
These plants do grow of themselues without setting or sowing, in Peru, and in diuers other prouinces of America, from whence the seeds haue beene brought into these parts of Europe. There hath been seen in Spaine and other hot regions a plant sowne and nourished vp from seed, to attain to the height of 24. foot in one yeare.


 The Time.
The seed must be set or sowne in the beginning of Aprill if the weather be temperate, in the most fertile ground that may be, and where the Sun hath most power the whole day.


 The Names.
The floure of the Sun is called in Latine Flos Solis, taking that name from those that haue reported it to turne with the Sun, the which I could neuer obserue, although I haue endeuored to finde out the truth of it; but I rather thinke it was so called because it doth resemble the radiant beames of the Sun, whereupon some haue called it Corona Solis, and Sol Indianus, the Indian Sunne floure: others haue called it Chrysanthemum (...), or the golden floure of Peru: in English, the floure of the Sun, or the Sun floure.


 The Temperature.
They are thought to be hot and dry of complexion.


 The Vertues.
There hath not any thing been set downe either of the antient or later writers concerning the  vertues of these plants, notwithstanding we haue found by triall, that the buds before they be floured, boiled and eaten with butter, vineger, and pepper, after the manner of Artichokes, are exceeding pleasant meat, surpassing the Artichoke far in procuring bodily lust.
The same buds with the stalks neere vnto the top (the hairinesse being taken away) broiled vpon  a gridiron, and afterward eaten with oile, vineger, and pepper, haue the like property.



CHAP. 260. Of Jerusalem Artichoke.
ONe may wel by the English name of this plant perceiue that those that vulgarly impose names vpon plants haue little either iudgement or knowledge of them. For this plant hath no similitude in leafe, stalke, root or manner of growing with an Artichoke, but onely a little similitude of taste in the dressed root; neither came it from Ierusalem or out of Afia, but out of America, whence Fabius Columna one of the first setters of it forth fitly uames it Aster Peruuianus tuberosus, and Flos solis Farnesianus, because it so much resembles the Flos solis, and for that he first obserued it growing in the garden of Cardinall Farnesius, who had procured roots thereof from the West Indies. Pelliterius calls this (...) Indicum tuberosum; and (...) in his Prodromus sets this forth by the name of (...) latifolium Brasilianum; but in his Pinax he hath it by the name

of Helianthemum Indicum tuberosum. Also our Countreyman Mr. Parkinson hath exactly deliuered the history of this by the name of Battatas de Canada, Englishing it Potatoes of Canada: now all these that haue written and mentioned it, bring it from America, but from far different places, as from Peru, Brasil, and Canada: but this is not much material, seeing it now grows so wel and plentifully in so many places of England. I will now deliuer you the Historie, as I haue receiued it from my oft mentioned friend Mr. Goodyer, who, as you may see by the date, took it presently vpon the first (...) into England.


@ Flos Solis Pyramidalis. Ierusalem Artichoke.



 The Description.

Flos solis Pyramidalis, parvo flore, tuberosa radice. (...) Indicum quorundam.

1 THis wonderfull increasing plant hath growing vp from one root, one, sometimes two, three or more round green rough hairy straked stalks, commonly about twelue foot high, sometimes sixteene foot high or higher, as big as a childs arme, full of white spungious pith within. The leaues grow all alongst the stalkes out of order, of a light green color, rough, sharp pointed, about eight inches broad, and ten oreleuen inches long, deeply notched or indented about the edges, very like the leaues of the common flos solis Peruanus, but nothing crompled, and not so broad. The stalkes diuide themselues into many long branches euen from the roots to their very tops, bearing leaues smaller and smaller toward the tops, making the herbe appeare like a little tree, narrower and slenderer toward the top, in fashion of a steeple or Pyramide. The floures with vs grow onely at the toppes of the stalkes and branches, like those of the said flos solis, but no bigger than our common single Marigold, consisting of twelue or thirteene straked sharpe pointed bright yellow bordering leaues, growing foorth of a scaly small hairie head, with a small yellow thrummie matter within. These floures by reason of their late (...), which is commonly two or three weeks after Michaelmas, neuer bring their seed to perfection, and it maketh shew of abundance of small heads neere the tops of the stalkes and branches forth of the bosomes of the leaues, which neuer open and floure with vs, by reason they are destroyed with the frosts, which otherwise it seemes would be a goodly spectacle. The stalke sendes foorth many small creeping roots, whereby it is fed or nourished, full of hairie threddes euen from the vpper part of the earth, spreading farre abroad: amongst which from the maine root grow forth many tuberous roots, clustering together, sometimes fastened to the great root it selfe, sometimes growing on long strings a foot or more from the root, raising or heauing vp the earth aboue them, and sometimes appearing aboue the earth, producing from the increase of one root, thirty, forty, or fifty in number, or more, making in all vsually aboue a pecke, many times neere halfe a bushell, if the soile be good. These tuberous roots are of a reddish colour without, of a soft white substance within, bunched or bumped out many waies, sometimes as big as a mans fist, or not so big, with white noses or peaks where they will sprout or grow the next yeare. The stalkes bowed downe, and some part of them couered ouer with earth, send forth smal creeping threddie roots, and also tuberous roots like the (...), which I haue found by experience. These tuberous roots will abide (...) in the earth all winter,

though the stalkes and rootes by the which they were nourished vtterly rot and perish away, and will beginne to spring vp againe at the beginning of May, seldome sooner.


 The Place.
Where this plant groweth naturally I know not, in Anno 1617 I receiued two small roots thereof from Master Franqueuill of London, no bigger than hens egges: the one I planted, and the other I gaue to a friend, mine brought mee a pecke of roots, wherewith I stored Hampshire.


 The Vertues.
These rootes are dressed diuers waies; some boile them in water, and after stew them with sacke  and butter, adding a little Ginger: others bake them in pies, putting Marrow, Dates, Ginger, Raisons of the Sun, Sacke, etc. Others some other way, as they are led by their skill in Cookerie. But in my iudgement, which way soeuer they be drest and eaten they stirre and cause a filthie loathsome stinking winde within the bodie, thereby causing the belly to bee pained and tormented, and are a meat more fit for swine, than men: yet some say they haue vsually eaten them, and haue found no such windie qualitie in them. 17. Octob. 1621. Iohn Goodyer. @



CHAP. 261. Of Cammomill.


1 Chamaemelum. Cammomill.


2 Chamaemelum nudum odoratum. Sweet naked Cammomill.




 The Description.
1 TO distinguish the kindes of Cammomils with sundry descriptions would be but to enlarge the volume, and small profit would thereby redound to the Reader, considering they are so well knowne to all: notwithstanding it shall not be amisse to say something of them, to keepe the order and method of the booke, hitherto obserued. The common Cammomill hath many weake and feeble branches trailing vpon the ground, taking hold vpon the top of the earth, as it runneth, whereby it greatly encreaseth. The leaues are very sine, and much iagged or deepely cut, of a strong sweet smell: among which come forth the floures like vnto the field Daisie, bordered about the edge with a pale of white leaues: the middle part is yellow, composed of such thrums close thrust together, as is that of the Daisie. The root is very small and threddy.
2 The second kinde of Cammomill hath leaues, roots, stalks, and creeping branches like the precedent: the floures grow at the tops of small tender stems, which are nothing else but such yellow thrummie matter as is in the midst of the rest of the Cammomils, without any pale or border of white floures, as the others haue: the whole plant is of a pleasing sweet smell; whereupon some haue giuen it this addition, Odoratum.
3 This third Cammomil differeth not from the former, sauing that the leaues hereof are very much doubled with white leaues, insomuch that the yellow thrum in the middle is but little seen, and the other very single, wherein consisteth the difference.


3 Chamaemelum Anglicum flore multiplici. Double floured Cammomill.


4 Chamaemelum Romanum. Romane Cammomil.


4 Romane Cammomill hath many slender stalkes, yet stiffer and stronger than any of the others, by reason whereof it standeth more vpright, and doth not creepe vpon the earth as the others doe. The leaues are of a more whitish colour, tending to the colour of the leaues of Woad. The floures be likewise yellow in the middle, and paled about with a border of small white floures.


 The Place.
These plants are set in gardens both for pleasure and also profit.


 The Time.
They floure most part of all the Sommer.



 The Names.
Cammomill is called (...): of some, Anthemis, and (...), and also Leucanthemon, especially that double floured Cammomill: which Greeke name is taken from the whitenes of his floure: in English, Cammomill: it is called Cammomil, because the floures haue the smel of (...), an apple, which is plainly perceiued in common Cammomill.


 The Temperature.
Cammomill, saith Galen, is hot and dry in the first degree, and is of thinne parts: it is of force to digest, slacken, and rarifie; also it is thought to be like the Rose in thinnesse of parts, comming to the operation of oyle in heate, which are to man familiar and temperate: wherefore it is a speciall helpe against wearisomenesse; it easeth and mitigateth paine, it mollifieth and suppleth, and all these operations are in our vulgar Cammomill, as common experience teacheth, for it (...) moderately, and drieth little.


 The Vertues.
Cammomill is good against the collicke and stone; it prouoketh vrine, and is most singular in  Clysters which are made against the foresaid diseases.
Oile of Cammomill is exceeding good against all manner of ache and paine, bruisings, shrinking  of sinewes, hardnesse, and cold swellings.
The decoction of Cammomill made in wine and drunke, is good against coldnesse in the stomacke, soure belchings, voideth winde, and mightily bringeth downe the monethly courses.
The Egyptians haue vsed it for a remedie against all cold agues; and they did therefore consecrate  it (as Galen saith) to their Deities.
The decoction made in white wine and drunk, expelleth the dead child, and secondine or afterbirth, speedily, and clenseth those parts.
The herbe boyled in posset Ale, and giuen to drinke, easeth the paine of the chest comming  of winde, and expelleth tough and clammy flegme, and helpeth children of the Ague.
The herbe vsed in baths prouoketh sweat, rarifieth the skinne, and openeth the pores: briefely, it mitigateth gripings and gnawings of the belly; it alayeth the paines of the sides, mollifies hard swellings, and wasteth away raw and vndigested humors.
The oyle compounded of the floures performeth the same, and is a remedie against all wearisomenesse, and is with good successe mixed with all those things that are applied to mitigate paine.



CHAP. 262. Of May-weed, or wilde Cammomill.

 The Kindes.
THere be three kindes of wilde Cammomill, which are generally called in Latine Cotulae; one stinking, and two other not stinking: the one hath his floure all white throughout the compasse, and also in the middle; and the other yellow. Besides these there is another with verie faire double floures voyd of smell, which a Kentish Gentleman called Mr. Bartholmew Lane found growing wilde in a field in the Isle of Thanet, neere vnto a house called Queakes, sometime the house of Sir Henry Crispe. Likewise Mr. Hesketh, before remembred, found it in the garden of his Inne at Barnet, if my memorie faile me not, at the signe of the red Lyon, or neere vnto it, and in a poore womans garden as he was riding into Lancashire.
@ The double floured May-weed, the last yeare, being 1632. I (being in company with Mr. William Broad, Mr. Iames Clarke, and some other London Apothecaries in the Isle of Thanet) found it growing wild vpon the cliffe side, close by the towne of Margate, and in some other places of the Island. @


 The Description.
1 MAy-weed bringeth forth round stalkes, greene, brittle, and full of iuyce, parted into many branches thicker and higher than those of Cammomil; the leaues in like maner are broader, and of a blackish greene colour. The floures are like in forme and colour, yet commonly larger, and of a ranke and naughty smell: the root is wooddy, and perisheth when the seed is ripe. The whole plant stinketh, and giueth a ranke smell.

@ This herbe varies, in that it is found sometimes with narrower, and otherwhiles with broader leaues; as also with a strong vnpleasant smell, or without any smell at all: the floures also are single, or else (which is seldome found) very double. @
2 The yellow May-weed hath a small and tender root, from which riseth vp a feeble stalke diuiding it (...) into many other branches, whereupon do grow leaues not vnlike to Cammomill, but thinner, and fewer in number. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a gold yellow colour, @ This I take to be no other than the Buphthalmum verum of our Author, formerly described in the second place of the 257. chapter.
3 This mountaine Cammomill hath leaues somewhat deepely cut in almost to the middle rib, thicke also and iuycie, of a bitterish taste, and of no pleasant smell: the stalkes are weake, and some foot high, carrying at their tops single floures, bigger, yet like those of Cammomill, yellow in the middle, with a border of twenty or more long white leaues, encompassing it. It increaseth much, as Cammomill doth, and hath creeping roots. It is found vpon the Stirian Alpes, and floureth in Iuly and August. Clusius hath set this forth by the name of Leucanthemum Alpinum. @


1 (...) (...). May-weed.


@ 3 Leucanthemum Alpinum Clusij. Wilde Mountaine Cammomill.




 The Place.
They grow in Corne fields neere vnto path wayes, and in the borders of fields.


 The Time.
Thee floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
May-weed is called in shops Cotula foetida: of Leonhartus Fuchsius, Parthenium, and Virginea, but not truly: of others, (...): in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in French, Espargoutte: in English, May-weed, wilde Cammomill, and stinking Mathes.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
May-weed is not vsed for meate nor medicine, and therefore the faculties are vnknowne; yet all  of them are thought to be hot and dry, and like after a sort in operation to Cammomill, but nothing at all agreeing with mans nature; notwithstanding it is commended against the infirmities of the mother, seeing all stinking things are good against those diseases.

It is an vnprofitable weed among corne, and raiseth blisters vpon the hands of the weeders and reapers.



CHAP. 263. Of Pellitorie of Spaine.

 The Description.
1 PYrethrum, in English, Pellitorie of Spaine (by the name whereof some doe vnproperly call another plant, which is indeed the true Imperatoria, or Master-wort, and not Pellitorie) hath great and fat leaues like vnto Fennell, trailing vpon the ground: amongst which, immediately from the root riseth vp a fat great stem, bearing at the top a goodly floure, fashioned like the great single white Daisie, whose bunch or knob in the midst is yellow like that of the Daisie, and bordered about with a pale of small leaues, exceeding white on the vpper side, and vnder of a (...) purple colour: the root is long, of the bignesse of a finger, very hot, and of a burning taste.
2 The wilde Pellitorie groweth vp like vnto wilde Cheruile, resembling the leaues of Caucalis, of a quicke and nipping taste, like the leaues of Dittander, or Pepper-wort: the floures grow at the top of slender stalkes, in small tufts or spoky vmbels, of a white colour: the root is tough, and of the bignesse of a little finger, with some threds thereto belonging, and of a quicke biting taste.


1 Pyrethrum officinarum. Pellitorie of Spaine.


2 Pyrethrum syluestre. Wilde Pellitorie.




 The Place.
It groweth in my garden very plentifully.


 The Time.
It floureth and seedeth in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Pellitorie of Spaine is called in Greeke (...), by reason of his hot and fierie taste: in shops also Pyrethrum: in Latine, Saliuaris: in Italian, Pyrethro: in Spanish, Pelitre: in French, Pied d' Alexandre,

that is to say, Pes Alexandrinus, or Alexanders foot: in high and low Dutch, (...): in English, Pellitorie of Spaine; and of some, Bertram, after the Dutch name: and this is the right (...), or Pellitorie of Spaine; for that which diuers here in England take to be the right, is not so, as I haue before noted.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root of Pellitorie of Spaine is very hot and burning, by reason whereof it taketh away the  cold shiuering of Agues, that haue been of long continuance, and is good for those that are taken with a dead palsie, as Dioscorides writeth.
The same is with good successe mixed with Antidotes or counterpoysons which serue against  the megrim or continuall paine of the head, the dizzinesse called (...), the apoplexie, the falling sicknesse, the trembling of the sinewes, and palsies, for it is a singular good and effectuall remedy for all cold and continuall infirmities of the head and sinewes.
(...) taken with honey is good against all cold diseases of the braine.
The root chewed in the mouth draweth forth great store of rheume, slime, and filthy waterish  humors, and easeth the paine of the teeth, especially if it be stamped with a little Staues-acre, and tied in a small bag, and put into the mouth, and there suffered to remaine a certaine space.
If it be boyled in Vineger, and kept warme in the mouth it hath the same effect.
The oyle wherein Pellitorie hath been boyled is good to anoint the body to procure sweating, and is excellent good to anoint any part that is bruised and blacke, although the member be declining to mortification: it is good also for such as are stricken with the palsie.
It is most singular for the Surgeons of the Hospitals to put into their vnctions contra (...) morbum, and such other diseases that be cousin germanes thereunto.



CHAP. 264. Of Leopards bane.


Formerly the figure that was in the first place should haue beene in the second, and the first and second were confounded in the description.

 1 Doronicum minus officinarum. Small Leopards bane.


Formerly the figure that was in the first place should haue beene in the second, and the first and second were confounded in the description.

 2 Doronicum maius Officinarum. Great Leopards bane.



 The Description.
1 OF this Plant Doronicum there be sundry kindes, whereof I will onely touch foure: Dodonaeus vnproperly calleth it Aconitum pardalianches, which hath hapned through the

negligence of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, who in describing Doronicum, haue not onely omitted the floures thereof, but haue committed that negligence in many and diuers other plants, leauing out in many plants which they haue described, the special accidents; which hath not a little troubled the study and determination of the best herbarists of late yeares, not knowing certainely what to determine and set downe in so ambiguous a matter, some taking it one way, and some another, and some esteeming it to be Aconitum. But for the better vnderstanding hereof, know that this word Aconitum, as it is a name attributed to diuers plants, so it is to be considered, that all plants called by this name are malignant and venomous, as with the iuyce and root whereof such as hunted after wilde and noysome beasts were wont to embrue and dip their arrowes, the sooner and more surely to dispatch and slay the beast in chase. But for the proofe of the goodnesse of this Doronicum and the rest of his kind, know also, That Lobel writeth of one called Iohn de Vroede, who ate very many of the roots at sundry times, and found them very pleasant in tast, and very comfortable. But to leaue controuersies, circumstances, and obiections which here might be brought in and alledged, assure your selues that this plant Doronicum minus Officinarum (whose roots Pena reporteth to haue found plentifully growing vpon the Pede-mountaine hills and certaine high places in France) hath many leaues spred vpon the ground, somewhat like Plantaine: among which rise vp many tender hairy stalks some handfull and an halfe high, bearing at the top certain single yellow floures, which when they fade change into downe, and are caried away with the winde. The roots are thicke and many, very crookedly crossing and tangling one within another, resembling a Scorpion, and in some yeares do grow in our English gardens into infinite numbers.


3 Doronicum radice repente. Cray-fish Wolfes bane.


4 Doronicum brachiata radice. Winged Wolfes bane.


2 The second kinde of Dorouicum hath larger leaues than the former, but round, and broader, almost like the small leaues of the Clot or Burre; among which riseth vp a stalke scarse a cubit high: the floures are like the former: the root is longer and bigger than the former, barred ouer with many scaly barks, in colour white, and shining like white marble, hauing on each side one arme or finne, not vnlike to the sea Shrimpe called Squilla marina, or rather like the ribbes or scales of a Scorpions body, and is sweet in taste.
3 The third kinde of Doronicum, growing naturally in great aboundance in the mountaines

of France, is also brought into and acquainted with our English grounds, bearing very large leaues of a light yellowish greene, and hairy like Pilosella, or Cucumis agrestis. The stalkes are a cubit high, hauing at the top yellow floures like Buphthalmum, or Consolida media vulnerariorum: all the root is barred and welted ouer with scales like the taile of a Scorpion, white of colour, and in (...) sweet, with some bitternesse, yeelding forth much clamminesse, which is very astringent.
4 The fourth kinde hereof is found in the wooddy mountaines about Turin and Sauoy, very like vnto the former, sauing that the leaues are somwhat rougher, the floures greater, and the stalks higher. But to be short, each of these kindes are so like one another, that in shew, taste, smell, and manner of growing they seeme to be as it were all one: therefore it were superfluous to stand vpon their varietie of names, Pardalianches, Myoctonum, Thelyphonum, (...), and such like, of Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Pliny, or any of the new Writers, which names they haue giuen vnto Doronicum; for by the opinion of the most skilfull in plants, they are but Synonimies of one kinde of plant. And though these old writers speake of the hurtfull qualities of these plants; yet experience teacheth vs that they haue written what they haue heard and read, and not what they haue knowne and proued; for it is apparant, that Doronicum (by the consent of the old and new writers) is vsed as an antidote or certaine treacle, as well in the confections de Gemmis Mesuae, as in Electuario Aromatum. And though Matthiolus disclaimeth against the vse thereof, and calleth it Pardalianches, that is, Wolfes bane; yet let the Learned know, that quantitas, non (...) as, nocet: for though Saffron be comfortable to the heart, yet if you giue thereof, or of muske, or any such cordial thing, too great a quantitie, it killeth the party which receiueth it.


@ 5 Doronicum angustifolium Austriacum. Narrow leaued Wolfes bane.


@ 6 Doronicum Stiriacum flore amplo; Large floured Wolfes bane.


@ 5 To these foure formerly intended by our Author, may we fitly adde some others out of Clusius. The first of these hath a stalke some foot high, soft, rough, and crested: the (...) are few, thicke, narrow, long, very greene and shining, yet hairy on their vpper sides, but smooth on the lower sides, and of a lighter greene; yet those that adorne the stalke are narrower: there groweth commonly at the top of the stalke one single floure of the shape and bignesse of the common Doronicum described in the second place, but of a brighter yellow: the seed is little and blackish, and is carried away with the winde: the root is small, blackish, and ioynted, hauing somewhat thicke

white fibres, and an aromaticke taste. This (...) in Iuly and August, and growes in rockie places vpon the highest Alpes. Clusius (the first and onely describer thereof) calls it Doronicum 2. siue Austriacum 1.
6 This growes somewhat higher than the last described, and hath much broader and rounder leaues, and those full of veines, and snipt about the edges. The knots and osf-sets of the roots descend not down, but run on the (...) of the ground, and so send forth fibres on each side, to (...) then and attract nourishment. The floure is like that of the former, but much larger. This groweth in the high mountainous places of Stiria, and floures at the same time as the former. Clusius calls this Doronicum 4. Stiriacum.
7 This is the largest of all the rest, and hath a stalke two cubits or more high, of the thicknesse of ones little finger, crested, rough, and towards the top diuided into sundry branches. The leaues next to the root are round, wrinkled, hairy, and fastned to a long stalke: those towards the top of the stalke are longer and narrower, and ingirt the stalke at their setting on. The floures are large and yellow, like to the other plants of this kinde: the seed also is carried away with the winde, and is longish, and of a greenish colour: the root is knotty or ioynted like to a little Shrimpe, and of a whitish greene colour. This floures in Iune or Iuly, and growes vpon the like places as the former. Clusius calls this Doronicum 7. Austriacum 3. @


@ 7 Doronicum maximum. The greatest Wolfe-bane.




 The Place.
The place is sufficiently set forth in the description; yet you shall vnderstand, that I haue the two first in my (...); the second hath beene found (...) gathered in the cold mountaines of Northumberland, by Dr. Penny lately of London deceased, a man of much experience and knowledge in Simples, whose death my selfe and many others do greatly bewaile.


 The Time.
They floure in the months of Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Concerning their names I haue already spoken; yet sith I would be glad that our English (...) may know how to call it, they may terme Doronicum by this name, Cray-fish Pisse-a-bed, because the floure is like Dandelion, which is called Pisse-a-bed.
@ Our Author certainly at the beginning of this chapter did not well vnderstand what he said, when he affirmes, That the reason of the not wel knowing the Doronicum of the Antients was, [through the negligence of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, who in describing Doronicum, etc.] Now it is manifest, that neither of these Authors, nor any of the antient Greekes euer so much as named Doronicum: but that which he should haue said, was, That the want of exact describing the Aconitum thelyphonon in Theophrastus, and Aconitum Pardalianches in Dioscorides, (which are iudged to be the same plant and all one with our Doronicum) hath beene the cause, that the controuersie which Matthiolus and others haue of late raised cannot be fully determined; which is, Whether that the vulgar Doronicum, vsed in shops, and described in this chapter, be the Aconitum (...)? Matthiolus affirmes it is, and much and vehemently exclaimes against the vse thereof in cordiall Electuaries, as that which is of a most pernitious and deadly qualitie, because that (as he affirmes) it will kill dogs: now Dodonaeus also seems to incline to his opinion: but others (and not without good reason) deny it; as Gesner in his Epistles, who made often (...) of it vpon himselfe: part of his words are set downe hereafter by our Author (being translated out of Dodonaeus) and some part also (...) shall finde added in the end of the vertues: and these are other some; Plura alia nunc omitto, quibus ostendere liquido possem, nec Doronicum nostrum, (...)

Aconitum vllo modo esse venenatum homini. Canibus autem letiferum essescio, non solum si drachmarum 4. sed (...) si vnius pondere sumant. And before he said, quasi non (...) multa canibus sint venena, quae homini (...) sunt; vt de asparago fertur. Of the same opinion with Gesner is Pena and Lobel, who, (...). p. 290, and 291. do largely handle this matter, and exceedingly deride and scoffe at Matthiolus, (...) his vehement declaiming against the vse thereof. Now briefely my opinion is this, That the Doronicum here mentioned is not that mentioned and written of by (...) and the Arabians; neither is it the Aconitum Pardalianches of (...), nor of so malignant a qualitie as (...) would haue it; for I my selfe also haue often eaten of it, and that in a pretty quantitie, without the (...) offence. @


 The Nature and Vertues.
I haue sufficiently spoken of that for which I haue warrant to write, both touching their natures  and vertues; for the matter hath continued so ambiguous and so doubtfull, yea, and so ful of controuersies, that I dare not commit that to the world which I haue read: these few lines therefore shall suffice for this present; the rest which might be said I referre to the great and learned Doctors, and to your owne consideration.
These herbes are mixed with compound medicines that mitigate the paine of the eyes, and by  reason of his cold qualitie, being fresh and greene, it helpeth the inflammation or fierie heate of the eyes.
It is reported and asfirmed, that it killeth Panthers, Swine, Wolues, and all kindes of wilde  beasts, being giuen them with flesh. Theophrastus saith, That it killeth Cattell, Sheepe, Oxen, and all foure-footed beasts, within the compasse of one day, not by taking it inwardly onely, but if the herbe or root be tied vnto their priuy parts. Yet he writeth further, That the root being drunke is a remedie against the stinging of Scorpions; which sheweth, that this herbe or the root thereof is not deadly to man, but to diuers beasts onely: which thing also is found out by trial and manifest experience; for Conrade Gesner (a man in our time singularly learned, and a most diligent searcher of many things) in a certaine Epistle written to Adolphus Occo, sheweth, That he himselfe hath oftentimes inwardly taken the root hereof greene, dry, whole, preserued with honey, and also beaten to pouder; and that euen the very same day in which hee wrote these things, hee had drunke with warme water two drams of the roots made into fine pouder, neither felt he any hurt thereby: and that he oftentimes also had giuen the same to his sicke Patients, both by it selfe, and also mixed with other things, and that very luckily. Moreouer, the (...) in stead of Doronicum doe vse (though amisse) the roots thereof without any manifest danger.
That this (...) killeth dogs, it is very certaine, and found out by triall: which thing Matthiolus could hardly beleeue, but that at length he found it out to be true by a manifest example, as he confesseth in his Commentaries.
@ I haue (saith Gesner) oft with very good successe prescribed it to my Patients, both alone, as  also mixed with other medicines, especially in the Vertigo and falling sicknesse: sometimes also I mix therewith Gentian, the pouder of Misle-toe, and (...): thus it workes admirable effects in the Epilepsie, if the vse thereof be continued for some time. @



CHAP. 265. Of Sage.

 The Description.
1 THe great Sage is very full of stalkes, foure square, of a wooddy substance, parted into branches, about the which grow broad leaues, long, wrinckled, rough, whitish, verie like to the leaues of wilde Mullein, but rougher, and not so white, like in roughnesse to woollen cloath thread-bare: the floures stand forked in the tops of the branches like those of dead Nettle, or of Clarie, of a purple blew colour; in the place of which doth grow little blackish seeds, in small huskes. The root is hard and wooddy sending forth a number of little strings.
2 The lesser Sage is also a shrubby plant, spred into branches like to the former, but lesser: the stalkes hereof are tenderer: the leaues be long, lesser, narrower, but not lesse rough; to which there do grow in the place wherein they are fixed to the stalke, two little leaues standing on either side one right against another, somewhat after the manner of (...) or little (...): the floures are

eared blew like those of the former: the root also is wooddy: both of them are of a certaine strong smell, but nothing at all offensiue; and that which is the lesser is the better.
3 This Indian Sage hath diuers branches of a wooddy substance, whereon doe grow small leaues, long, rough, and narrow, of an ouerworne colour, and of a most sweet and fragrant smell. The floures grow alongst the top of the branches, of a white colour, in forme like the precedent. The root is tough and wooddy.


1 Saluia maior. Great Sage.


2 Saluia minor. Small Sage.


4 The Mountaine Sage hath an vpright stalke smooth and plaine, whereupon do grow (...) rough and rugged leaues, sleightly nicked, and vneuenly indented about the edges, (...) an (...) colour, sharpe pointed, and of a ranke smell: the floures grow alongst the top of the stalke, (...) shape like those of Rosemarie, of a whitish red colour. The root is likewise wooddy.
5 We haue in our gardens a kinde of Sage, the leaues whereof are reddish; part of those red leaues are striped with white, others mixed with white, greene, and red, euen as Nature list to play with such plants. This is an elegant varietie, and is called Saluia variegata elegans, Variegated or painted Sage.
6 We haue also another, the leaues whereof are for the most part white, somewhat mixed with greene, often one leafe white, and another greene, euen as Nature list, as we haue said. This is not so rare as the former, nor neere so beautifull, wherefore it may be termed Saluia variegata vulgaris, Common painted Sage.
@ 7 There is kept in some of our chiefe gardens a fine Sage, which in shape and manner of growing resembles the smaller Sage, but in smell and taste hath some affinity with Wormwood; whence it may be termed Saluia Absint hites, or Wormewood Sage. Bauhine onely hath mentioned this, and that in the fourth place in his Pinax, pag. 237. by the name of Saluiaminor altera: and hee addes, Haec odore and sapore est (...), floreque rubente: That is, This hath the smell and taste of Wormewood, and a red floure: but ours (if my memorie faile me not) hath a whitish floure; it is a tender plant, and must be carefully preserued from the extremitie of Winter. I first saw this Sage with Mr. Cannon, and by him it was communicated to some others.



3 Saluia Indica. Indian Sage.


4 Saluia Alpina. Mountaine Sage.


@ 8 Saluia Cretica (...). Apple-bearing Sage of Candy.


@ 8 Saluia Cretica non (...). Candy Sage without Apples.



8 This which we here giue you hath pretty large leaues, and those also very hairy on the vnder side, but rough on the vpper side like as the ordinarie Sage. The stalkes are rough and hairie, foure square below, and round at their tops. The floures in their growing and shape are like those of the ordinarie, but of a whitish purple colour; and fading, they are each of them succeeded by three or (...) seeds, which are larger than in other Sages, and so fill their seed-vessels, that they shew like berries. The smell of the whole plant is somewhat more vehement than that of the ordinarie: the Jeaues also haue sometimes little eares or appendices, as in the smaller or Pig-Sage: and in Candy (the naturall place of the growth) it beares excrescences, or Apples (if we may so terme them) of the bignesse of large (...), or Oke-Apples: whence Clusius hath giuen you two figures by the same titles as I here present the same to your view. Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, and others also haue made mention hereof. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Sage grow not wilde in England: I haue them all in my garden: most of them are very common.
@ The fine or elegant painted Sage was first found in a countrey garden, by Mr. Iohn Tradescant, and by him imparted to other louers of plants. @


 The Time.
These Sages floure in Iune and Iuly, or later: they are fitly remoued and planted in March.


 The Names.
Sage is called in Greeke (...): the Apothecaries, the Italians, and the Spaniards keepe the Latine name Saluia: in high-Dutch, Salben: in French, Sauge: in low-Dutch, Sauie: in English, Sage.


 The Temperature.
Sage is manifestly hot and dry in the beginning (...) the third degree, or in the later end of the second; it hath adioyned no little astriction or binding.


 The Vertues.
Agrippa and likewise Aetius haue called it the Holy-herbe, because women with childe if they  be like to come before their time, and are troubled with abortments, do eate thereof to their great good; for it closeth the matrix, and maketh them fruitfull, it retaineth the birth, and giuerh it life, and if the woman about the fourth day (...) going abroad after her childing, shal drink nine ounces of the iuyce of Sage with a (...) salt, and then vse the companie of her husband, she shall without doubt conceiue and bring forth store (...) children, which are the blessing of God. Thus far Agrippa.
Sage is singular good for the head and braine; it quickneth the sences and memory, strengthneth  the sinewes, restoreth health to those that haue the palsie vpon a moist cause, takes away shaking or trembling of the members; and being put vp into the nosthrils, it draweth thin flegme out (...) the head.
It is likewise commended against the spitting of bloud, the cough, and paines of the sides, and  bitings of Serpents.
The iuyce of Sage drunke with honey is good for those that spit and vomit bloud, and stoppeth  the flux thereof incontinently, expelleth winde, drieth the dropsie, helpeth the palsie, strengthneth the sinewes, and cleanseth the bloud.
The leaues sodden in water, with Wood-binde leaues, Plantaine, Rosemary, Honey, Allome, and some white wine, make an excellent water to wash the secret parts of man or woman, and for cankers or other sorenesse in the mouth, especially if you boyle in the same a faire bright shining Sea-cole, which maketh it of greater efficacie.
No man needs to doubt of the wholesomnesse of Sage Ale, being brewed as it should be, with  Sage, (...), Betony, Spikenard, Squinanth, and Fennell seeds.
The leaues of red Sage put into a woodden dish, wherein is put very quicke coles, with some  ashes in the bottome of the dish to keepe the same from burning, and a little vineger sprinkled vpon the leaues lying vpon the coles, and so wrapped in a linnen cloath, and holden very hot vnto the side of those that are troubled with a grieuous stitch, taketh away the paine presently: The same helpeth greatly the extremitie of the pleurisie.




CHAP. 266. Of French Sage or wooddie Mullein.


1 Verbascum Matthioli. French Sage.


@ 2 Verbascum angustis Saluiae folijs, The lesser French Sage.


@ 3 Phlomos Lychnites Syriaca. Syrian Sage-leaued Mullein.



 The Description.
1 WIld Mullein, wooddie Mullein, Matthiolus his Mullein, or French Sage groweth vp like a small wooddie shrub, hauing many wooddie branches of a woollie and hoarie colour, soft and downie: whereupon are placed thicke hoarie leaues, of a strong ponticke (...), in shape like the leaues of Sage, whereupon the vulgar people call it French Sage: toward the top of the branches are placed roundles or crownets of yellow gaping floures like those of dead Nettle, but much greater. The root is thicke, tough, and of a wooddie substance, as is all the rest of the plant.
@ 2 There is another sort hereof that is very like the other, sauing that the leaues and euery other part of this plant, hath a most sweet and pleasant smell, and the other more strong and offensiue: the leaues also are much lesser and narrower, somewhat resembling those of the lesser Sage.
@ 3 I thinke it not amisse here to insert this no lesse rare than beautifull plant, which differs from the last described in the manner of growing and shape of the floures, which resemble those of the (...) Chalcedonica, or None-such, but are of a yellow colour. The leaues are hairy, narrow, and sharp pointed; the stalkes square, and root wooddie. Lobel

(to whom we are beholden for this figure and description) calls this, Phlomos (...) altera Syriaca. @


 The Place.
These wilde Mulleins do grow wilde in diuers Prouinces of Spaine, and also in (...), vpon drie bankes, and stony places: I haue them both in my garden, and many others likewise.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
They are called of the learned men of our time, Verbasca Syluestria: the first is called of the Grecians (...), or (...): in Latine, Elychnium, or after others, Elychinium, because of the Cottonie substance thereof, matches, or weeks were made to keep light in lamps: Verbascum Lychnitis, as Dioscorides himselfe testifieth, is named also Thryallis or Rose Campion; but the floure of Thryallis is red of colour, as Nicander in his Counterpoisons doth shew, but the floures of these are yellow: therefore they are neither Thryallis nor Lychnitis, but Syluestre Verbascum, or wilde Mullein, as we haue already taught in the Chapter of Rose Campion, that Thryallis is Lychnitis satiua, or Rose Campion. There is nothing to the contrary, but that there may be many plants with soft downie leaues fit to make Candle weeke of: in English it is generally called French Sage: wee may call it Sage Mulleine.


 The Temperature.
As these be like in vertues to the others going before, so they be likewise dric in temperature.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the leaues are stamped and laied in manner of a pultis vpon burnings and  scaldings.



CHAP. 267. Of Clarie.


1 Gallitricum, (...) Horminum. Common Clarie.


2 Gallitricum alterum. Small Clarie.





@ 3 Horminum syluestre, Fuchsij. Fuchsius his wilde Clarie.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Clarie which is the right, bringeth forth thick stalks foure square, two foot long, diuided into branches: it hath many leaues growing both from the rootes, and along the stalkes and branches by distances, one against another by two and two, great, a handfull broad or broader, somewhat rough, vnequall, whitish and hairie, as be also the stalkes. The floures are like those of Sage, or of dead Nettle, of colour white, out of a light blew: after which grow vp long toothed huskes in stead of cods, in which is blacke seed. The root is full of strings: the whole herbe yeeldeth forth a rank and strong smell that stuffeth the head: it perisheth after the seed is ripe, which is in the second yeare after it is sowne.
2 The second kinde of Clarie hath likewise stalkes foure square, a foot and a halfe high: the leaues also be rough and rugged, lesser, and not so white. The floures be alike, of colour purple or blew: the rootes bee as those of the former are. This hath not so strong a sent by a great deale.
3 There is a kinde of Clarie which Fuchsius pictureth for wilde Clarie, that hath shorter stalkes, hairie, and also foure square: the leaues lesser, long, deeper indented: the floures blew of colour, sweet of smell, but not so sweet as those of
The figure which formerly was vnder the title of (...) (...), was of the (...) (...) of (...), which is described immediatly before it.

 4 Colus Iouis. Iupiters (...).

the right Clarie: the husks or cods when they are ripe bend downwards: the seed is blackish; the roots in like manner are blacke and full of strings.
4 The fourth kind of Horminum, called Iovis Colus, representeth in the highest top of the stalke a distaffe, wrapped about with yellow flax, whereof it tooke his name, hauing knobbie roots, with certaine strings annexed thereto like Galcopsis, or like vnto the roots of Clarie, which doe yeeld forth sundry foure square rough stalks, two cubits high; whereon do grow leaues like tl ose of the Nettle, rough, sharpe pointed, and of an ouerworne greene colour: the floures do grow alongst the top of the stalks, by certaine spaces, set round about in smal coronets, or wharles, like those of Sage in forme, but of a yellow colour.


 The Place.
These doe grow wilde in some places, notwithstanding they are manured and planted in Gardens, almost euery where, except Iupiters distaffe, beeing a kinde thereof, which I haue in my Garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune, Iuly, and August.


 The Names.
Clarie is called of the Apothecaries Gallitricum; it is likewise named Oruala: of some, Tota bona, but not properly: of others, Scarlea, Sclarea, Centrum Galli, and Matrisaluia. in Iralian, Sciaria: in French, Oruale: in High Dutch, Scharlach: in Low Dutch, Scharleye: in English, Clarie, or Cleere eie.
Iupiters distaffe is called Colus Iovis: of some, Galeopsis lutea, but not properly: of diuers, Horminum luteum, or yellow Clarie, and Horminum Tridentinum, or Clarie of Trent.


 The Temperature.
Clarie is hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Clarie poudered, finely searced and mixed with hony, taketh away the dimnesse of  the eies, and clecreth the sight.
The same stamped, infused, or laied to steepe in warme water, the mussilag or slimie substance  taken and applied plaisterwise, draweth forth splinters of wood, thornes, or any other thing fixed in the bodie: it also scattereth and dissolueth all kindes of swellings, especially in the ioints.
The seed poudered and drunke with wine, stirreth vp bodily lust.
The leaues of Clarie taken any manner of way, helpeth the weaknesse of the backe proceeding  of the ouermuch flowing of the whites, but most effectually if they be fried with egges in manner of a Tansie, either the leaues whole or stamped.



CHAP. 268. Of wilde Clarie, or Oculus Christi.

 The Description.
1 OCulus Christi is also a kinde of Clarie, but lesser: the stalkes are many, a cubite high, squared, and somewhat hairie: the leaues be broad, rough, and of a blackish green colour. The floures grow alongst the stalkes, of a blewish colour. The seed is round and blackish, the root is thicke and tough, with some threds annexed thereto. @ This is Hormini syluestris 4. quinta species of Clusius. @
2 The purple Clarie hath leaues somewhat round, layd ouer with a hoarie cottony substance, not much vnlike Horehound: among which rise vp small hairie square stalks, set toward the top with little leaues of a purple colour, which appeare at the first view to be floures, and yet are nothing else but leaues, turned into an excellent purple colour: and among these beautifull leaues come forth small floures of a blewish or watchet colour, in fashion like vnto the floures of Rosemarie, which being withered, the husks wherein they did grow containe certaine blacke seed, that falleth forth vpon the ground very quickely, because that euery such huske doth turne and hang downe his head toward the ground. The root dieth at the first approch of Winter.
@ 3 Broad leaued Clarie hath a square stalke some cubite high, hairy, firme, and iointed, the leaues are large, rough, and sharpe pointed, snipt about the edges, wrinckled, and standing by couples at each iont: vpon the branches in roundles grow purple floures, lesse than those (...) Clarie, and scarce any bigger than those of Lauander: the seed is smal and blacke: the root is large, hard,

The figure that formerly was in the first place, (...) of that which you may (...) finde (...) and (...) be (...) the (...).

 1 Horminum syluestre. Wilde Clarie, or Oculus Christi.
2 Horminum syluestre folijs purpurcis. Clarie with purple leaues.
@ 3 Horminum syluestre latifolium. Broad leaued wilde Clarie.
@ 4 Horminum syluestre flore albo. White floured wilde Clarie.

@ 5 Horminum syluestre flore rub ro. Red floured wilde Clarie.
blacke, and liues many yeares. It floures in Iune and Iuly, and growes wilde in many mountainous places of Germany. Clusius calls it Horminum syluestre tertium.
4 This hath long leaues next vnto the ground, growing vpon prettie long stalkes, broad at their setting on, and so ending by little and little in sharpe points, they are not deeply cut in, but onely lightly snipt about the edges: they are also wrinckled on the vpper side, and whitish, but hairie on the vnder side. The square (...) are some cubite high, iointed, and set with two leaues at each ioint. The floures grow alongst the tops of the branches, and are of a snow white colour. There is a varietie of this with the leaues greener, and the floures of an elegant deepe purple colour. This is the Horminum syluestris quarti species prima of Clusius, and the varietie with the white floures is his Hormini syluestris quarti (...) prima; and the figure that our Authour gaue in the first place was of (...).
5 There is another variety of the last described, which also hath square stalks set with rough snipt leaues, which end in sharp points, but are narrower at the lower end than the former, and they are greene of colour: vpon the tops of the stalkes grow red hooded floures, and those not very large: the seed is small and blacke, and the root liues many yeares. This floures in Iuly. Clusius makes this his Hormini syluestris quarti (...) quarta. @


 The Place.
The first groweth wilde in diuers barren places, almost in euery Country, especially in the fields of Holborne neere vnto Grayes Inne, in the high way by the end of a bricke wall: at the end of Chelsey next to London, in the high way as you go from the Queenes pallace of Richmond to the waters side, and in diuers other places.
The other is a stranger in England: it groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Wilde Clarie is called after the Latine name Oculus Christi, of his effect in helping the diseases of the eies: in Greeke (...) and likewise in Latine, Horminum: of some, Geminalis: in English, wild Clarie, and Oculus Christi.
The second is thought of some to be the right Clarie, and they haue called it Horminum verum, but with greater errour: it may be called in Latine Horminum syluestre folijs and floribus (...), Clarie with leaues and floures of a purple colour.
@ Our Authour should haue shewn his reasons why this is not the Horminum verum, to haue conuincted the errour of Anguillara, Matthiolus, Gesner, (...), Lobel and others, who haue accounted it so, as I my selfe must needs do, vntill some reason be shewne to the contrarie, the which I thinke cannot be done, @


 The Temperature and (...).
The temperature and faculties are referred vnto the garden Claries: yet Paulus Aegineta saith it  is hot and moderately drie, and it also clenseth.
The seed of wilde Clarie, as Dioscorides writeth, being drunke with wine, stirreth vp lust, it clenseth  the eies from filmes and other imperfections, being mixed with honie.
The seede put whole into the eies, clenseth and purgeth them exceedingly from waterish humours, tednesse, inflammation, and diuers other maladies, or all that happen vnto the eies, and takes away the paine and smarting thereof, especially being put into the eies one seed at one time, and

no more, which is a generall medicine in Cheshire and other Countries thereabout, (...) of all, and vsed with good successe.
The leaues are good to be put into pottage or brothes among other (...), for (...) (...) congealed bloud, warme the stomacke, and helpe the (...) of the eies.



CHAP. 269. Of Mullein.

 The Description.
1 THe male Mullein or Higtaper hath broad leaues, (...) soft, whitish and downie; in the midst of which riseth vp a stalke, straight, single, and (...) same also whitish all ouer, with a hoarie downe, and couered with the like leaues, but lesser and (...) euen to the top: among which taperwise are set a multitude of yellow floures, consisting (...) fiue leaues apeece: in the places whereof come vp little round vessels, in which is contained very small seed. The root is long, a (...) thicke, blacke without, and full of strings.


1 Tapsus Barbatus. Mullein or Higtaper.


2 Tapsus Barbatus flore albo. White (...) Mullein.


2 The female Mullein hath likewise many white woolley leaues, set vpon an hoarie cottonie vpright stalke, of the height of foure or fiue cubits: the top of the stalks resembleth a torch decked with infinite white floures, which is the speciall marke to know it from the male kinde, being like in euery other respect.


 The Place.
These plants do grow of themselues neere the borders of pastures, and plowed fields, or causies, and drie sandie ditch banks, and in other vntilled places. They grow in great plentie neere vnto a lyme kill vpon the end of black Heath next to London, as also about the (...) house at Eltham neere vnto Dartford in Kent: in the high waies about Highgate neere London, and in most countries of England that are of a sandie soile.



 The Time.
They are found with their floure from Iuly to September, and bring forth their seed the second yeare after the seed is sowne.


 The Names.
Mullein is called in Greeke (...) in shops, Tapsus Barbatus: of diuers, Candela Regia, Candelaria, and Lanaria: Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen, do call it Verbascum: in Italian, Verbasco, and Tasso Barbasso: in Spanish, (...): in High Dutch, (...): in French, Bouillon: in English, Mullein, or rather Woollen, Higtaper, Torches, Long-woort, and Bullockes Long-woort; and of some Haresbeard.


 The Temperature.
Mullein is of temperature drie: the leaues haue also a digesting and clensing qualitie, as Galen affirmeth.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Mullein being boiled in water, and laid vpon hard swellings and inflammations  of the eies, cureth and ceaseth the paine.
The root boiled in red wine and drunke, stoppeth the laske and bloudy flix:
The same boiled in water and drunke, is good for them that are broken and hurt inwardly, and  preuaileth much against the old cough.
A little fine treacle spred vpon a leafe of (...), and laied to the piles or Hemorhoides, cureth  the same: an ointment also made with the leaues thereof and old hogs grease worketh the same effect.
The leaues worne vnder the feet day and night, in manner of a shooe sole or sock, bringeth down  in yong maidens their desired sicknesse, being kept vnder their feet with some socks or other thing for falling away.
The Countrey people, especially the husbandmen in Kent, doe giue their cattell the leaues to  drinke against the cough of the lungs, being an excellent approued medicine for the same, whereupon they doe call it Bullocks Lung-woort.
Frankensence and Masticke burned in a (...) dish of coles, and set within a close stoole; and  the fume thereof taken vnderneath, doth perfectly cure the piles, hemorrhoids, and all diseases happening in those lower parts, if also there be at euery such fuming (which must bee twice euerie day) a leafe of the herbe bound to the place, and there kept vntill the next dressing.
There be some who thinke that this herbe being but carried about one, doth helpe the falling  sicknesse, especially the leaues of that plant which hath not as yet borne floures, and that is gathered when the Sun is in Virgo, and the Moone in Aries; which thing notwithstanding is vaine and superstitious.
The later Physitions commend the yellow floures, beeing steeped in Oile and (...) in warme  doung vntill they bee wasted into the Oile and consumed away, to bee a remedie against the piles.
The report goeth, saith Pliny, that figges do not putrifie at all that are wrapped in the leaues of  Mullein: which thing Dioscorides also maketh mention of.



CHAP. 270. Of base Mullein.

 The Description.
1 THe base white Mullein hath a thicke wooddie root, from which riseth vp a stiffe and hairie stalke, of the height of foure cubites, garnished with faire grayish leaues like those of Elecampane, but lesser: the floures grow round about the stalks taper or torch fashion, of a white colour, with certaine golden thrums in the middle: the seed followeth, smal, and of the colour of dust.
2 Blacke Mullein hath long leaues, not downie at all, large and sharp pointed, of an ouerworne blackish green colour, somewhat rough, and strongly smelling: the floures grow at the top of the stalks, of a golden yellow colour, with certaine threds in the middle thereof. The root differeth not from the precedent.
3 Candle weeke Mullein hath large, broad, and woollie leaues, like vnto those of the common Mullein: among which riseth vp a stalke couered with the like leaues, euen to the branches wheron the floures do grow, but lesser and lesser by degrees. The stalke diuideth it selfe toward the top into diuerse branches, whereon is set round about many yellow floures, which oftentimes doe change into white, varying according vnto the soile and clymate. The root is thick and wooddy.



1 Verbascum album. Base white Mullein.


2 Verbascum nigrum. Base blacke Mullein.


3 Verbascum Lychnite Matthioli. Candle-weeke Mullein.


4 Verbascum Lychnite minus. Small Candle-weeke Mullein.



4 The small Candle-weeke Mullein differeth little from the last rehearsed, sauing that the whole plant of this is of a better (...), wherein especially consisteth the difference. @ The floure also is much larger, and of a straw, or pale yellow colour. @


 The Place.
These plants do grow where the other Mulleins do, and in the like soile.


 The Time.
The time likewise answereth their flouring and seeding.


 The Names.
Their capitall names expressed in the titles shal serue for these base Mulleins, considering they are all and euery of them kindes of Mulleins.


 The Temperature.
These Mulleins are drie without any manifest heat, yet doubtlesse hotter and drier than the common Mullein or Hygtaper.


 The Vertues.
The blacke Mullein, with his pleasant yellow floures, boiled in water or wine and drunken, is  good against the diseases of the brest and lungs, and against all spitting of corrupt rotten matter.
The leaues boiled in water, stamped and applied pultis wise vpon cold swellings (called Oedemata) and also vpon the vlcers and inflammations of the eies, cureth the same.
The floures of blacke Mullein are put into lie, which causeth the haire of the head to wax yellow, if it be washed and combed therewith.
The leaues are put into cold ointments with good successe, against scaldings and burnings with  fire or water.
Apuleius reporteth a tale of Vlysses, Mercurie, and the inchantresse Circe, and theirvse of (...) herbes in their in cantations and witchcrafts.



CHAP. 271. Of Moth Mullein.


1 Blattaria Plinij. Plinies Moth Mullein.


2 Blattaria flore purpureo. Purple Moth Mullein.




 The Description.
1 PLinie hath set forth a kinde of Blattaria, which hath long and smooth leaues, somewhat iagged or snipt about the edges: the stalke riseth vp tothe height of three cubits; diuiding it selfe toward the top into sundry armes or branches, beset with yellow floures like vnto blacke Mullein.
2 Blattaria with purple floures hath broad blacke leaues, without any manifest snips or notches by the sides, growing flat vpon the ground: among which riseth vp a stalke two cubits high, garnished with floures like vnto the common Blattaria, but that they are of a purple colour, and those few threds or chiues in the middle of a golden colour: the root is as thick as a mans thumb, with some threds hanging thereat, and it indureth from yeare to yeare.
3 There is another kinde like vnto the blacke Mullein, in stalks, roots, and leaues, and other respects, sauing that his small floures are of a greene colour.
4 There is another like vnto the last before written, sauing that his leaues are not so deepely cut about the edges, and that the small floures haue some purple colour mixed with the greennesse.


@ 3 Blattaria flore viridi. Greene Moth Mullein.


@ 4 Blattaria flore ex viridi purpurascente. Moth Mullein with the greenish purple coloured floure.


@ 5 This is somewhat like the first described in leaues and stalks, but much lesse, the floures also are of a whitish or grayish colour, and therein consists the chiefest difference.
6 There is also another varietie of this kinde, which hath very faire and large floures, and these either of a bright yellow, or else of a purple colour.
7 This hath long narrow leaues like those of the second, snipt about the edges, and of a darke greene colour: the stalkes grow some two cubits high, and seldome send forth any branches; the floures are large and yellow, with rough threddes in their middles (...) with red, and these grow in such an order that they somewhat resemble a flie: the seed is small, and contained in round buttons. This is an annuall, and perisheth when the seed is ripe. @



@ 5 Blattaria flore albo. White floured Moth Mullein.


@ 6 Blattaria flore amplo. Moth Mullein with the great floure.


@ 7 Blattaria flore Luteo. Yellow Moth Mullein.




 The Place.
@ The first and fift of these grow wilde in sundrie places, and the rest onely in gardens with vs.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists call Moth Mullein by the name of Blattaria, and doe truly take it to bee that which Plinie describeth in his 22. booke, cap. 9. in these words. [There is an herbe like Mullein, or Verbascum nigrum, which oftentimes deceiueth, being taken for the same, with leaues not so white, moe stalks, and with yellow floures (as wee haue written) which do agree with blacke Mullein, but we haue not as yet learned by obseruation that they do gather mothes and flies vnto them, as wee haue said.] Valerius Cordus names it Verbascum Leptophyllon, or narrow leafed Mullein: their seueral titles sufficiently set forth their English names.


 The Nature and Vertues.
Concerning the plants comprehended vnder the  titles of Blattaria, or Moth Mulleins, I find nothing written of them, sauing that moths, butterflies, and all manner of small flies and bats do resort to the place where these herbs are laied or strewed.
@ The decoctio^ of the floures or leaues of the first  described opens the obstructions of the bowels, as also of the Meseraicke veins, as Camerar. affirmes. @




CHAP. 272. Of Mullein of Aethiopia.


(...). Aethiopian Mullein.



 The Description.
MVllein of Aethiopia hath many very broad hoary leaues spred vpon the ground, very soft and downy, or rather woolly, like to those of Hygtaper, but farre whiter, softer, thicker, and fuller of woollinesse; which wooll is so long, that one may with his fingers pull the same from the leaues, euen as wooll is pulled from a Sheeps skinne: among which leaues riseth vp a foure square downy stalke, set with the like leaues, but smaller; which stalke is diuided at the top into other branches, set about and orderly placed by certaine distances, hauing many floures like those of Archangell, of a white colour tending to blewnesse: which being past, there succeedeth a three square browne seed: the root is blacke, hard, and of a wooddy substance.


 The Place.
It groweth naturally in Ethiopia, and in Ida, a hill hard by Troy, and in Messenia a prouince of Morea, as Pliny sheweth in his twenty seuenth booke, chap. 4. it also groweth in Meroe, an Island in the riuer Nilus: it likewise groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in Iune, and perfecteth his seed toward the end of August.


 The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): and in Latine Aethiopis, of the countrey; and for that cause it is likewise called Meroides, of Meroe, as Pliny writeth: of some because the Greeke word (...), signisieth in Latine Fauilla adusta, or Cinere aspersa, or couered with ashes: in English we may cal it Mullein of Aethiopia, or woolly Mullein.


 The Nature.
Aethiopis is dry without any manifest heate.


 The Vertues.
Aethiopis is good for those that haue the Pleurisie, and for those that haue their brests charged  with corrupt and rotten matter, and for such as are grieued with the asperitie and roughnesse in the throat, and against the Sciatica, if one drinke the decoction of the root thereof.
For the diseases of the brest and lungs it is good to licke oftentimes of a confection made with  the root hereof and honey, and so are the roots condited with sugar, in such manner as they condite the roots of Eringos.



CHAP. 273. Of Cowslips.

 The Description.
1 THose herbes which at this day are called Primroses, Cowslips, and Oxlips, are reckoned among the kindes of Mulleins; notwithstanding for distinctions sake I haue marshalled them in a chapter, comming in the rereward as next neighbors to the Mullens, for that the Antients haue named them Verbasculi, that is to say, Small Mullens. The first, which is called in English the field Cowslip, is as common as the rest, therefore I shall not need to spend much time about the description.
2 The second is likewise well knowne by the name of Oxlip, and differeth not from the other,

saue that the floures are not so thicke thrust together as the former, and they are fairer, and fewer in number, and do not smell so pleasantly as the other: of which kinde wee haue one lately come into our gardens, whose floures are curled and wrinkled after a most strange manner, which our women haue named Iack-an-apes on horsebacke.


1 Primula veris maior. Field Cowslips.


2 Primula pratensis inodor a lutea. Field Oxlips.


3 Double Paigle, called of Pena, Primula hortensis Anglica omnium maxima, and serotina floribus plenis; that is, The greatest English garden Cowslip with double yellow floures, is so commonly knowne that it needeth no description.
4 The fourth is likewise known by the name of double Cowslips, hauing but one floure within another, which maketh the same once double, where the other is many times double, called by Pena, Geminata; for the likenesse of the floures, which are brought forth as things against nature, or twinnes.
5 The fifth being the common white field Primrose, needeth no description.
6 The sixth, which is our garden double Primrose, of all the rest is of greatest beauty, the description whereof I refer vnto your owne consideration.
7 The seuenth kinde is also very well knowne, being a Primrose with greenish floures somewhat welted about the edges: for which cause Pena hath called it Siluarum primula, floribus obscure virentibus fimbriatis.
8 There is a strange Primrose found in a wood in Yorkshire growing wilde, by the trauell and industrie of a learned gentleman of Lancashire called Mr. Thomas Hesketh, a diligent searcher of Simples, who hath not onely brought to light this amiable and pleasant kinde of Primrose, but many others likewise, neuer before his time remembred or found out. This kinde of Primrose hath leaues and roots like the wilde field Primrose in each respect: it bringeth forth amongst the leaues a naked stalke of a grayish or ouerworne greenish colour: at the top whereof doth grow in the Winter time one floure and no more, like vnto that single one of the field: but in the Sommer time it bringeth forth a soft russet huske or hose, wherein are contained many small floures, sometimes foure or fiue, and oftentimes more, very thicke thrust together, which maketh one entire floure, seeming to be one of the common double Primroses, whereas indeed it is one double floure made of a number of small single floures, neuer ceasing to beare floures Winter nor Sommer, as before is specified.



3 Primula hortensis Anglica. Double Paigles.


4 Primula veris flore geminato. Cowslips two in a hose.


5 Primula veris minor. Field Primrose.


6 Primula veris slore pleno. Double white Primrose.


@ Besides these, there are kept in our gardens, and set forth by Mr. Parkinson (to whose Worke I referre the curious Reader) two or three more varieties; one a double Cowslip hose in hose, naked, without any huske: the other two beare many greene leaues on the tops of the stalkes, the one of them hauing yellowish floures amongst the leaues, and the other onely longish narrow greene leaues. The first of these he calls Paralysis inodora flore geminato, Double Oxlips hose in hose. The second, Paralysis fatua, The foolish Cowslip. And the last, Paralysis flore viridi roseo calamistrato, The double greene feathered Cowslip. @



7 Primula flore viridi. Greene Primrose.


@ 8 Primula veris Heskethi. Mr. Heskeths Primrose.




 The Place.
Cowslips and Primroses ioy in moist and dankish places, but not altogether couered with water; they are found in woods and the borders of fields: the Primrose found by Mr. Hesketh growes in a wood called Clap-dale, three miles from a towne in Yorkeshire called Settle.


 The Time.
They flourish from Aprill to the end of May, and some one or other of them do floure all the Winter long.


 The Names.
They are commonly called Primula veris, because they are the first among those plants that doe floure in the Spring, or because they do floure with the first. They are also named Arthriticae, and Herbae paralysis, for they are thought to be good against the paines of the ioynts and sinewes. They are called in Italian, Brache cuculi: in English, Petty Mulleins, or Palsie-worts: of most, Cowslips.
The greater sort, called for the most part Oxlips or Paigles, are named of diuers Herba S. Petri. In English, Oxlip, and Paigle.
The common Primrose is vsually called Primula veris: most Herbarists do refer the Primroses to the (...), called in Latine Verbascula, or Petty Mulleins; but seeing the leaues be neither woollie nor round, they are hardly drawn vnto them: for Phlomides are described by leaues, as Pliny hath interpreted it, Hirsutis and Rotundis, Hairy and round; which Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 10. translateth thus: Sunt and Phlomides duae Hirsutae, rotundis folijs, (...): which is as much to say in English as, There be also two pretty Mulleins, hairy, round leafed, low, or short. @ Fabius Columna refers these to the Alisma of Dioscor and calls the Cowslip Alisma pratorum: and the Primrose, Alisma syluarum. @


 The Temperature.
The Cowslips and Primroses are in temperature dry, and a little hot.


 The Vertues.
The Cowslips are commended against the paine of the ioynts called the Gout, and slackenesse  of the sinewes, which is the palsie. The decoction of the roots is thought to be profitably (...) against the stone in the kidneyes and bladder; and the iuyce of the leaues for members that are loose and out of ioynt, or inward parts that are hurt, rent, or broken.
A dramme and a halfe of the pouder of the dried roots of field Primrose gathered in Autumne,

giuen to drinke in Ale or Wine purgeth by vomit very forcibly (but safely) waterish humours, choler, and flegme, in such manner as Azarum doth, experimented by a learned and skilfull Apothecarie of Colchester Mr. Thomas Buckstone, a man singular in the knowledge of Simples.
A conserue made with the floures of Cowslips and sugar preuaileth wonderfully against the  palsie, convulsions, cramps, and all the diseases of the sinewes.
Cowslips or Paigles do greatly restraine or stop the belly in the time of a great laske or bloudy  flix, if the decoction thereof be drunke warme.
A practitioner in London, who was famous for curing the frensie, after that hee had performed  his cure by the due obseruation of physicke, accustomed euery yeare in the moneth of May to diet his patients after this manner: Take the leaues and floures of Primrose, boyle them a little in fountaine water, and in some Rose and Betony waters, adding thereto sugar, pepper, salt, and butter, which being strained, he gaue them to drinke thereof first and last.
The roots of Primrose stamped and strained, and the iuyce sniffed into the nose with a quill or  such like, purgeth the braine, and qualifieth the paine of the megrim.
An (...) made with the iuyce of Cowslips and oyle of Linseed cureth all scaldings or burnings  with fire, water, or otherwise.
The floures of Primroses sodden in vineger and applied, do heale the Kings Euill, as also the  almonds of the throat and uvula, if you gargarise the part with the decoction thereof.
The leaues and floures of Primroses boyled in wine and drunke, is good against all diseases of  the brest and lungs, and draweth forth of the flesh any thorne or splinter, or bone fixed therein.



CHAP. 274. Of Birds-eine.


1 Primulaveris flore rubro. Red Bird-eyne.


2 Primula veris flore albo. White Bird-eyne.



 The Description.
1 SOme Herbarists call this plant by the name of Sanicula angustifolia, making thereof two kinds, and distinguishing them by these termes, maior and minor, siue media: others cal them Paralytica alpina, which without controuersie are kindes of Cowslips, agreeing with them as well in shape, as in their nature and vertues, hauing leaues much like vnto Cowslips, but smaller,

growing flat vpon the ground, of a faint greenish colour on the vpper side, and vnderneath of a white or (...) colour: among which rise vp small and tender stalkes of a foot high, hauing at the top of euery stalke a bush (...) small floures in shape like the common Oxlip, sauing that they are of a faire stammell colour tending to purple: in the middle of euery small floure appeareth a little yellow spot, resembling the eye of a bird; which hath moued the people of the North parts (where it aboundeth) to call it Birds eyne. The seed is small like dust, and the root white and threddy.
2 The second is like the first, sauing that the whole plant is greater in each respect, and that the floures are of a whitish colour.


 The Place.
These plants grow very plentifully in moist and squally grounds in the North parts of England, as in Harwood neere to Blackburne in Lancashire, and ten miles from Preston in Aundernesse; also at Crosby, Rauenswaith, and Crag-Close in Westmerland.
They likewise grow in the medowes belonging to a village in Lancashire neere Maudsley, called Harwood, and at Hesketh not far from thence, and in many other places of Lancashire, but not on this side Trent, that I could euer haue any certaine knowledge of. Lobel reporteth, That doctor Penny (a famous Physition of our London Colledge) did finde them in these Southerne parts.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from Aprill to the end of May.


 The Names.
The first is called Primrose with the red floure: the second, Primrose with the white floure, and Birds eyne.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The nature and vertues of these red and white Primroses must be sought out amongst those aboue named.



CHAP: 275. Of Beares eares, or Mountaine Cowslips.


1 Auricula vrsiflore luteo. Yellow Beares-eare.


2 Auricula vrsiflore purpurco. Purple Beares-eare.




 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Mountaine Cowslips, or Beares-eares, differing especially in the colour of their floures, as shall be declared, notwithstanding it may appeare to the curious, that there is great difference in the roots also, considering some of them haue knobby roots, and others threddy: notwithstanding there is no difference in the roots at all.
@ There are diuers (...) of these (...), and the chiefe differences arise, either from the leaues or floures; from their leaues, which are either smooth and greene, or else gray and hoary, againe they are smooth about the edges, or snipt more or lesse; The floures some are fairer then othersome, and their colours are so various, that it is hard to finde words to expresse them, but they may be refer'd to whites, reds, yellowes, and purples; for of all the varieties and mixtures of these they chiefely consist. The gardens of Mr. Tradescant and Mr. (...) are at this present furnished with very great varieties of these floures. @


3 Auricula Vrsi ij. Clusij: Red Beares eare.


4 Auricula Vrsi iiij. Clusij. Scarlet Beares eare.




 The Description.
1 AVricula Vrsi was called of Matthiolus, Pena, and other Herbarists, Sanicula Alpina, by reason of his singular facultie in healing of wounds, both inward and outward. They do all call it Paralityca, because of his vertues in curing the palsies, cramps, and convulsions, and is numbred among the kindes of Cowslips, whereof no doubt they are kinds, as others are which do hereafter follow vnder the same title, although there be some difference in the colour of the floures. This beautifull and braue plant hath thicke, greene, and fat leaues, somewhat finely snipt about the edges, not altogether vnlike those of Cowslips, but smoother, greener, and nothing rough or crumpled: among which riseth vp a slender round stem a handfull high, bearing a tuft of floures at the top, of a faire yellow colour, not much vnlike to the floures of Oxe-lips, but more open and consisting of one only leafe like Cotiledon: the root is very threddy, and like vnto the Oxe-lip.
2 The leaues of this kinde which beareth the purple floures are not so much sinipt about the edges: these said purple floures haue also some yellownesse in the middle, but the floures are not so much laid open as the former, otherwise in all respects they are like.

3 Carolus Clusius setteth forth in the booke of his Pannonicke trauels two kindes more, which he hath found in his trauell ouer the Alpes and other mountaines of Germanie and Heluetia, being the third in number, according to my computation: it hath leaues like the former, but longer, smaller, and narrower toward the bottome, greene aboue, and of a pale colour vnderneath. The floures are in fashion like to the former, but of a most shining red colour within, and on the outside of the colour of a mulberry: the middle or eye of the floure is of a whitish pale colour: the root is like the former.
4 The fourth is a smaller plant than any of the foresaid, whose leaues are thicke and fat, nothing at all snipt about the edges, greene aboue, and grayish vnderneath. The floures are like the former, shining about the edges, of an ouerworne colour toward the middle, and in the (...) commeth a forke couered with an hairinesse: the root is blacke and threddy.


5 Auricula Vrsierubescens. Blush coloured Beares eare.


6 Auricula Vrsi suane rubens. Bright red Beares eare.


7 Auricula Vrsi minima. Stamell Beares eare.


5 The blush-coloured Beares (...) hath (...) thicke fat leaues spred vpon the ground, of a whitish green colour, sleightly or not at all indented in the edges: among which riseth vp a naked stalke likewise hairy or whitish, on the top whereof stand very faire floures, in shape like those of the common Cowslip, but of a whitish colour tending to purple, which wee terme blush-colour. The root is tough and threddy, as are all the rest.
6 The bright shining red Beares eare of Matthiolus description seemes to late Herbarists to be rather a figure made by conceit or imagination, than by the sight of the plant it self; for doubtlesse we are persuaded that there is no such plant, but onely a figure foisted for ostentations sake, the description whereof we leaue to a further consideration, because we haue not seene any such plant, neither do we beleeue there is any such. @ Our Author is here without cause iniurious to Matthiolus; for he figures and describes onely the common first described yellow Beares eare: yet if he had said the floures were of a light shining red, he had not erred; for I haue seen these floures of all the reds both bright and darke that one may imagine. @

7 Pena setteth forth a kinde of Beares eare vnder the name of Sanicula Alpina, hauing his vppermost leaues an inch long, somewhat iagged and hem'd at the ends, and broad before like a shouel; the lower leaues next the ground are somewhat shorter, but of the same forme; among which riseth a small slender foot-stalke of an inch long, whereon doth stand a small floure, consisting of fiue little leaues of a bright red or stammell colour.
8 The snow white Beares eare differeth not from the last described but in the colour of the floure, for as the others are red; contrarie these are very white, and the whole plant is lesser, wherein consisteth the difference. The root is long, tough, with some fibres thereto belonging. Neither of these two last described will be content to grow in gardens.


 The Place.
They grow naturally vpon the Alpish and Heluetian mountaines: most of them do grow in our London gardens.


 The Time.
These herbes do floure in Aprill and May.


 The Names.
Either the antient writers knew not these plants, or else the names of them were not by them or their successors diligently committed vnto posteritie. Matthiolus and other later writers haue giuen names according to the similitude, or of the shape that they beare vnto other plants, according to the likenesse of the qualities and operations: you may call it in English, Beares eare: they that dwell about the Alps doe call it Orastkrawt, and Schwindlekrawt, by reason of the effects thereof; for the root is amongst them in great request for the strengthning of the head, that when they are on the tops of places that are high, giddinesse and (...) swimming of the braine may not afflict them: it is there called the Rocke-rose, for that it groweth vpon the rockes, and resembleth the braue colour of the Rose. @ Fabius Columna proues this to be the Alisma or Damasonium of (...) and the Antients.


 The Nature.
These herbes are dry and very astringent.


 The Vertues.
It healeth all outward and inward wounds of the brest, and the enterocele also, if for some reasonable  space of time it be put in drinkes, or boyled by itselfe.
These plants are of the nature and temperature of Primula veris, and are (...) amongst the  Sanicles by reason of their vertue.
Those that hunt in the Alps and high mountaines after Goats and Bucks, do as highly esteeme  hereof as of Doronicum, by reason of the singular effects that it hath, but (as I said before) one especially, euen in that it preuenteth the losse of their best ioynts (I meane their neckes) if they take the roots hereof before they ascend the rocks or other high places.
@ The root of Damasonium (according to Dioscorides) taken in the weight of one or two drams, helpeth such as haue deuoured the (...) marinus or sea Hare, or haue been bitten by a Toad, or taken too great a quantitie of Opium.
It is also profitably drunke, either by it selfe, or with the like quantitie of Daucus seeds, against  gripings in the belly, and the bloudy flux.
Also it is good against convulsions and the affects of the wombe.
The herbe stayes the fluxes of the belly, moues the courses, and applied in forme of a pultis asswageth  oedematous tumors. @



CHAP. 276. Of Mountaine Sanicle.

 The Kindes.
THere be sundry sorts of herbes contained vnder the name of Sanicle, and yet not one of them agreeing with our common Sanicle, called Diapensia, in any one respect, except in the vertues, whereof no doubt they tooke that name; which number doth dayly increase, by reason that the later writers haue put downe more new plants, not written of before by the Antients, which shall be distinguished in this chapter by seuerall titles.


 The Description.
1 SPotted Sanicle of the mountaine hath small (...) and round leaues, bluntly indented about the edges, and fashioned like vnto the leaues of Saxifragia aurea, or rather Cyclamen folio hederae, of a darke greene colour, and somewhat hairy vnderneath: amongst which rise

1 Sanicula guttata. Spotted Sanicle.
2 Pinguicula siue Sanicula (...). Butterwort, or Yorkshire Sanicle.
3 Sanicula Alpina Clusij, siue Cortusa Matthioli. Beares eare Sanicle.
vp sundry stalkes, beset with like leaues, but smaller, and of a cubit high, diuiding themselues into many small armes or branches, bearing diuers little white floures, spotted most curiously with bloudy specks or prickes, insomuch that if you marke the admirable workemanship of the same wrought in such glorious manner, it must needs put euery creature in minde of his Creator: the floures are in smell like the May floures or Hawthorne: the seed is small and blacke, contained in small pointals like vnto white (...): the root is scaly an d full of strings.
2 The second kind of Sanicle, which Clusius calleth Pinguicula, not before his time remembred, hath small thicke leaues, fat and ful of iuyce, being broad towards the root, and (...) towards the point, of a faint greene colour, and bitter in taste: out of the middest wherof sprouteth or shooteth vp a naked slender stalke, nine inches long, euery stalke bearing one floure and no more, sometimes white, and commonly of a blewish purple colour, fashioned like vnto the common Consolida regalis, hauing the like spur or Larks heele anexed thereto.
3 The third kinde of mountaine. Sanicle

some Herbarists haue called Sanicula alpina store (...): the leaues shoot forth in the beginning of the Spring, very thicke and fat, and are like a purse or round lumpe at their first comming out of the ground; and when it is spred abroad, the vpper part thereof is full of veines or sinewes, and houen vp or curled like Ranunculus Lusitanicus, or like the crumpling of a cabbage leafe; and are not onely indented about the edges, but each leafe is diuided into six or more (...) or cuts, deepely hacked, greenish aboue, and of an ouerworne (...) colour (...), hot in taste; from the middle whereof shooteth forth a bar or naked stalke, six inches long, somewhat purple in colour, bearing at the top a (...) of small hollow floures, looking or (...) downewards like little bells, not vnlike in forme to the common Cowslips, but of a sine deepe red colour (...) to purple, hauing in the middle a certaine ring or circle of white, and also certaine pointals or strings, which turne into an head wherein is contained seed. The whole plant is couered as it were with a rough woollinesse: the root is fibrous and threddy.


 The Place.
These plants are strangers in England; their naturall countrey is the Alpish mountains of Heluetia: they grow in my garden, where they flourish exceedingly, except Butterwort, which groweth in our English squally wet grounds, and will not yeeld to any culturing or transplanting: it groweth especially in a field called Crag-Close, and at Crosby, Rauenswaith, in Westmerland, vpon Ingleborow fels twelue miles from Lancaster, and in Harwood in the same countie neere to Blackburne, ten miles from Preston in Aundernesse vpon the bogs and marish grounds, and in the boggie medowes about Bishops Hatfield; and also in the fens in the way to Wittles meare from London, in Huntingdonshire. @ It groweth also in Hampshire, and aboundantly in many places of Wales. @


 The Time.
They floureand flourish from May to the end of Iuly.


 The Names.
The first is called Sanicula guttata, taken from the spots wherewith the floures are marked: of Lobel, Geum Alpinum, (...) it a kind of Auens: in English, spotted Sanicle: of our London dames, Pratling Parnell.
The second is called Pinguicula, of the fatnesse or (...) of the leafe, or of fatning: in Yorkeshire, where it doth especially grow, and in greatest aboundance, it is called Butterworts, Butterroot, and whiteroot; but the last name belongeth more properly to Solomons Seale.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.
The husbandmens wiues of Yorkshire do vse to anoint the dugs of their kine with the fat and  oilous iuyce of the herbe Butterwort, when they are bitten with any venomous worme, or chapped, rifted, and hurt by any other meanes.
They say it rots their sheepe, when for want of other food they eat (...).



CHAP. 277. Of Fox-Gloues.

 The Description.
1 FOx-gloue with the purple floure is most common; the leaues whereof are long, nicked in the edges, of a light greene, in manner like those of Mullein, but lesser, and not so downie: the stalke is straight, from the middle whereof to the top stand the floures, set in a course one by another vpon one side of the stalke, hanging downwards with the bottome vpward, in forme long, like almost to finger stalks, whereof it tooke his name Digitalis, of a red purple colour, with certaine white spots dasht within the floure; after which come vp round heads, in which lies the seed, somewhat browne, and as small as that of Time. The roots are many slender strings.
2 The Fox-gloue with white floures differs not from the precedent but in the colour of the floures; for as the others were purple, these contrariwise are of a milke-white colour.
3 We haue in our gardens another sort hereof, which bringeth forth most pleasant yellow floures and somewhat lesse than the common kinde, wherein they differ. @ This also differs from the common kind in that the leaues are much smoother, narrower, and greener, hauing the nerues or vrines running alongst it, neither are the nerues snipt, nor sinuated on their edges. @
4 We haue also another sort, which we call Digitalis ferruginea, whose floures are of the colour of rusty iron; whereof it tooke his name, and likewise maketh the difference. @ Of this sort there is a bigger and a lesser; the bigger hath the lower leaues some foot long, of a darke green colour, with veines running along them; the stalks are some yard and halfe high: the floures large;

1 Digitalis purpurea. (...) Fox-gloues.2 (...) alba. White Fox-gloues.@ 3 Digitalis lutea. Yellow Fox-gloues.@ 4 Digitalis (...). Dusky Fox-gloues.
and ending in a sharpe turned vp end as you see in the figure, and they are of a rustie colour, mixed of a yellow and red.
5 The lesser duskie Fox-gloue hath much lesse leaues and those narrow, smooth, and exceeding greene: amongst which comes vp a stalke some foot high, hauing small floures of the colour of the last described. This I obserued the last yeare 1632, in floure with Mr. Iohn Tradescant in the middle of Iuly. It may fitly be called Digitalis ferruginea minor, Small duskie Fox-gloues. @


 The Place.
Fox-gloue groweth in barren sandie grounds, and vnder hedges almost euery where.
Those with white floures do grow naturally in Landesdale, and Crauen, in a field called Cragge close, in the North of England: likewise by Colchester in Essex; neere Excester in the West parts, and in some few other places. The other two are strangers in England, (...) thelesse they do grow with the others in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Fox-gloues some call in Greeke (...), and make it to be Verbasci speciem, or a kinde of Mullein: in Latine, Digitalis: in High Dutch, (...), and fingher (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Gantes nostre dame: in English, Fox-gloues. @ Fabius Columna thinks it to be that Ephemerum of Dioscorides described in his fourth booke, and cap. 75. @


 The Temperature.
The Fox-gloues in that they are bitter, are hot and drie, with a certaine kinde of clensing qualitie ioined therewith; yet are they of no vse, neither haue they any place amongst medicines, according to the Antients.


 The Vertues.
Fox-gloue boiled in water or wine, and drunken, doth cut and consume the thicke toughnesse of  grosse and slimie flegme and naughtie humours; it openeth also the stopping of the liuer, spleene, and milt, and of other inward parts.
The same taken in like manner, or boiled with honied water or sugar, doth scoure and clense the  brest, ripeneth and bringeth forth tough and clammie flegme.
They serue for the same purposes whereunto Gentian doth tend, and hath beene vsed in stead  thereof, as Galen saith.
@ Where or by what name Galen either mentions, or (...) this which our Authour cites  him for, I must confesse I am ignorant. But I probably coniecture that our Authour would haue said Fuchsius: for I onely finde him to haue these words set downe by our Authour, in the end of his Chapter of Digitalis. @



CHAP. 278. Of Baccharis out of Dioscorides.

 The Description.
1 ABout this plant Baccharis there hath beene great contention amongst the old and new writers; Matthioius and Dodonaeus haue mistaken this plant, for Conizamaior, or Coniza Helenitis Cordi; Virgil and Athenaeus haue confounded Baccharis, and Azarum together: but following the antient writers, it hath many blackish rough leaues, somewhat bigger than the leaues of Primrose: amongst which riseth vp a stalke two cubits high, bearing at the top little chasfie or scalie floures in small bunches, of a darke yellowish or purple colour, which turne into downe, and are carried away with the winde, like vnto the kindes of thistles: the root is thick, grosse, and fat, spteading about in the earth, full of strings: the fragrant smell that the root of this plant yeeldeth, may well be compared vnto the sauour of Cinnamon, Helenium, or Enula Campana, beeing a plant knowne vnto very many or most sorts of people, I meane in most parts of England.


 The Place.
Baccharis delighteth to grow in rough and craggy places, and in a leane soile where no moisture

Baccharis (...) sium. Plowmans Spikenard.
is: it groweth very plentifully about Montpellier in France, and diuers places in the West parts of England.


 The Time.
It springeth vp in April, it floureth in Iune, and perfecteth his seed in August.


 The Names.
The learned Herbarists of Montpellier haue called this plant Baccharis: the Grecians, (...), or after others, (...), by reason of that sweet and aromaticall sauour which his root containeth and yeeldeth: in English it may be called the Cinamom root, or Plowmans Spiknard: Virgill in his (...) Ecloge of his Bucolicks maketh mention of Baccharis, and doth not onely shew that it is a Garland plant, but also such a one as preuaileth against inchantments, saying,

-- Bacchare frontem
Cingite, ne (...) malalingua futuro.


With Plowmans Nard my forehead girt,
Lest euill tongue thy Poet hurt.

Baccharis is likewise an ointment in Athenaeus, in his 15 booke, which may take his name of the sweet herbe Baccharis: for as Pliny writeth, Aristophanes of old, being an antient comical Poet witnesseth, that ointments were wont to bee made of the root thereof: to bee briefe, Crateuas his Asarum is the same that Dioscorides his Baccharis is. @ This plant here described is the Conizamaior of Matthiolus, Tragus, and others. @


 The Temperature.
Baccharis cr Plowmans Spiknard is of temperature very astringent or binding.


 The Vertues.
Baccharis, or the decoction of the root, as Paulus Aegineta briefely setteth downe, doth open the  pipes and passages that are stopped, prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the desired sicknesse: the leaues thereof for that they are astringent or binding, stop the course of sluxes and rheumes.
Baccharis is a singular remedie to heale inflammations and Saint Anthonies fire, called Ignis sacer; and the smell thereof prouoketh sleepe.
The decoction of the roots of Baccharis helpeth ruptures and convulsions, those also that haue  falne from an high place, and those that are troubled with the shortnesse of breath.
It helpeth also the old cough, and difficultie to make water.
When it is boiled in wine it is giuen with great profit against the bitings of Scorpions, or any  venomous beast, being implaistered and applied thereto.
A bath made thereof and put into a close stoole, and receiued hot, mightily voideth the birth, and furthereth those that haue extreame labour in their childing, causing them to haue easie deliuerance.



CHAP. 279: Of Elecampane.

 The Description.
ELecampane bringeth forth presently from the root great white leaues, sharpe pointed, almost like those of great Comfrey, but soft, and couered with a hairie downe, of a whitish greene colour,

(...): Elecampane.
and are more white vnderneath, sleightly nicked in the edges: the stalke is a yard and a halfe long, about a finger thicke, not without downe, diuided at the top into diuers branches, vpon the top of euery sprig stand great floures broad and round, of which not only the long smal leaues that compasse round about are yellow, but also the middle ball or circle, which is filled vp with an infinit number of threds, and at length is turned into fine downe; vnder which is slender and long seed: the root is vneuen, thicke, and as much as a man may gripe, not long, oftentimes blackish without, white within, and full of substance, sweet of smell, and bitter of taste.


 The Place.
It groweth in medowes that are fat and fruitfull: it is also oftentimes found vpon mountains, shadowie places, that be not altogether drie: it groweth plentifully in the fields on the left hand as you go from Dunstable to Puddle hill: also in an orchard as you go from Colbrook to Ditton ferry, which is the way to Windsor, and in sundry other places, as at Lidde, and Folkestone, neere to Douer by the sea fide.


 The Time.
The floures are in their brauerie in Iune and Iuly: the roots be gathered in Autumne, and oftentimes in Aprill and May.


 The Names.
That which the Graecians name (...), the Latines call Inula and Enula: in shops Enula campana: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Enoa, and Enola: in Spanish, Raiz del alla: in French, Enula Campane: in English, Elecampane, and Scab-woort, and Horse-heale: some report that this plant tooke the name Helenium of (...) wise to Menelaus, who had her hands ful of it when Paris stole her away into Phrygia.


 The Temperature.
The root of this Elecampane, is maruellous good for many things, being of nature hot and drie in the third degree, especially when it is drie: for beeing greene and as yet full of iuice, it is full of superfluous moisture, which somewhat abateth the hot and drie qualitie thereof.


 The Vertues.
It is good for shortnesse of breath, and an old cough, and for such as cannot breathe vnlesse they  hold their necks vpright.
It is of great vertue both giuen in a looch, which is a medicine to be licked on, and likewise preserued, as also otherwise giuen to purge and void out thicke, tough, and clammie humours, which sticke in the chest and lungs.
The root preserued is good and wholesome for the stomack: being taken after supper it doth not  onely helpe digestion, but also keepeth the belly soluble.
The iuice of the same boiled, driueth forth all kinde of wormes of the belly, as Pliny teacheth: who also writeth in his twentie booke, and fift chapter, the same being chewed fasting, doth (...) the teeth.
The root of Elecampane is with good successe mixed with counterpoisons: it is a remedie against  the bitings of serpents, it resisteth poison: it is good for them that are bursten, and troubled with cramps and convulsions.
Some also affirme, that the decoction thereof, and likewise the same beaten into powder and  mixed with honie in manner of an ointment, doth clense and heale vp old vlcers.
Galen saith, that herewith the parts are to be made red, which be vexed with long and cold griefs: as are diuers passions of the huckle bones, called the Sciatica, and little and continual bunnies and loosenesse of certaine ioints, by reason of ouermuch moisture.

The decoction of Enula drunken, prouoketh vrine, and is good for them that are grieued with inward  burstings, or haue any member out of ioint.
The root taken with honie or sugar, made in an electuarie, clenseth the brest, ripeneth tough  flegme, and maketh it easie to be spet forth, and preuaileth mightily against the cough and shortnesse of breath, comforteth the stomacke also, and helpeth digestion.
The roots condited after the manner of Eringos serueth for the purposes aforesaid.
The root of Enula boiled very soft, and mixed in a morter with fresh butter and the pouder of  Ginger, maketh an excellent ointment against the itch, scabs, manginesse, and such like.
The roots are to be gathered in the end of September, and kept for sundrie vses, but it is especially  preserued by those that make Succade and such like.



CHAP. 280. Of Sauce alone, or (...) by the hedge.


Alliaria. Sauce alone.



 The Description.
SAuce alone hath affinitie with Garlicke in name, not because it is like it in forme, but in smell: for if it be bruised or stamped it smelleth altogether like Garlicke: the leaues hereof are broad, of a light green colour, nicked round about, and sharpe pointed: the stalke is slender, about a cubit high, about the branches whereof grow little white floures; after which come vp slender smal and long cods, and in these black seed: the root is long, slender, and something hard.


 The Place.
It groweth of it selfe by garden hedges, by old wals, by highwaies sides, or oftentimes in the borders of fields.


 The Time.
It floureth chiefely in Iune and Iuly, the seed waxeth ripe in the meane season. The leaues are vsed for a sauce in March or Aprill.


 The Names.
The later writers call it Alliaria, and Alliaris: of some, Rima Maria: it is not Scordium, or water Germander, which the apothecaries in times past mistooke for this herbe: neither is it (...) species, or a kinde of water Germander, whereof wee haue written: it is named of some, Pes Asininus: it is called in High Dutch, (...) (...) (...), and (...): and in Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...): you may name it in Latine, (...) non bulbosum: in French, Alliayre: in English, Sauce alone, and Iacke of the hedge.


 The Temperature.
Iacke of the hedge is hot and drie, but much lesse than Garlicke, that is to say, in the end of the second degree, or in the beginning of the third.


 The Vertues.
We know not what vse it hath in medicine: diuers eat the stamped leaues hereof with Salt-fish, for a sauce, as they do those of Ramsons.
Some also boile the leaues in clisters which are vsed against the paine of the collicke and stone, in which not only winde is notably wasted, but the pain also of the stone mitigated and very much eased.




CHAP. 281. Of Dittany.

 The Description.
1 DIttanie of Crete now called Candie (as Dioscorides saith) is a hot and sharpe hearbe, much like vnto Penni-roiall, sauing that his leaues be greater and somewhat hoary, couered ouer with a soft downe or white woollie cotton: at the top of the branches grow small spikie eares or scaly aglets, hanging by little small stemmes, resembling the spiky tufts of Marierome, of a white colour: amongst which scales there doe come forth small floures like the flouring of wheat, of a red purple colour; which being past, the knop is found full of small seed, contrarie to the saying of Dioscorides, who saith, it neither beareth floure nor seed, but my selfe haue seene it beare both in my Garden: the whole plant perished in the next VVinter following.


1 Dictamnum Creticum. Dittanie of Candie.


2 Pseudodictamnum. Bastard Dittanie.


2 The second kind called Pseudodictamnum, that is, Bastard Dittanie, is much like vnto the first sauing that it is not sweet of smell, neither doth it bite the tongue, hauing round soft woolly stalks with knots and ioints, and at euery knot two leaues somewhat round, soft, woolly, and somewhat bitter: the floures be of a light purple color, compassing the stalks by certain spaces like garlands or wharles, and like the floures of Peni-roiall. The root is of a wooddie substance: the whole plant groweth to the height of a cubite and an halfe, and lasteth long.


 The Place.
The first Dittanie commeth from Crete, an Iland which we call Candie, where it growes naturally: I haue sowne it in my garden, where it hath floured and borne seed; but it perished by reason of the iniurie of our extraordinarie cold winter that then happened: neuerthelesse Dioscorides writeth

against all truth, that it neither beareth floures nor seed: after Theophrastus, Virgil witnesseth that it doth beare floures in the twelfth of his Aeneidos.
Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida, Puberibus caulem (...), and flore comantem (...). --
In English thus:
His mother from the Cretaean Ida crops Dictamnus hauing soft and tender leaues, And purple floures vpon the bending tops, etc.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the Sommer moneths, their seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Dictamnus and Dictamnum: of some, Pulegium syluestre, or wilde Pennie-roiall: the Apothecaries of Germanie for Dictamnum with c, in the first syllable, doe read Diptamnum with p: but (saith Dodonaeus) this errour might haue beene of small importance, if in stead of the leaues of Dittanie, they did not vse the rootes of Fraxinella for Dittany, which they falsely call Dictamnum: in English, Dittanie, and Dittanie of Candie.
The other is called Pseudodictamnum, or bastard Dittanie, of the likenesse it hath with Dittanie, it skilleth not, though the shoppes know it not: the reason why let the Reader guesse.


 The Temperature.
These plants are hot and drie of nature.


 The Vertues.
Dittanie beeing taken in drinke, or put vp in a pessarie, or vsed in a fume, bringeth away  dead children: it procureth the monethly termes, and driueth foorth the secondine or the afterbirth.
The iuice taken with wine is a remedie against the stinging of serpents.
The same is thought to be of so strong an operation, that with the very smell also it driueth (...) venomous beasts, and doth astonish them.
It is reported likewise that the wilde Goats and Deere in Candie when they be wounded with  arrowes, do shake them out by eating of this plant, and heale their wounds.
It preuaileth much against all wounds, and especially those made with invenomed weapons, arrowes  shot out of guns, or such like, and is very profitable for Chirurgians that vse the sea and land wars, to carry with them and haue in readinesse: it draweth forth also splinters of wood, bones, or such like.
The bastard Dittanie, or Pseudodictamnum, is somewhat like in vertues to the first, but not of so  great force, yet it serueth exceeding well for the purposes aforesaid.



CHAP. 282. Of Borage.

 The Description.
1 BOrage hath broad leaues, rough, lying flat vpon the ground, of a blacke or swart green colour: among which riseth vp a stalke two cubits high, diuided into diuers branches, whereupon do grow gallant blew floures, composed of fiue leaues apiece; out of the middle of which grow forth blacke threds ioined in the top, and pointed like a broch or pyramide: the root is threddie, and cannot away with the cold of winter.
2 Borage with white floures is like vnto the precedent, but differeth in the floures, for those of this plant are white, and the others of a perfect blew colour, wherein is the difference.
@ 3 Neuer dying Borage hath manie verie broad leaues, rough and hairie, of a blacke darke greene colour: among which rise vp stiffe hairie stalkes, whereupon doe grow faire (...) floures, somewhat rounder pointed than the former: the root is blacke and lasting, hauing leaues both winter and Sommer, and hereupon it was called Semper virens, and that very properly, to distinguish it from the rest of this kinde, which are but annuall. @



1 Borago hortensis. Garden Borage.


2 Borago flore albo. White floured Borage.


3 Borago semper virens. Neuer dying Borage.


4 There is a fourth sort of Borage that hath leaues like the precedent, but thinner and lesser, rough and hairy, diuiding it selfe into branches at the bottom of the plant, whereupon are placed faire red floures, wherein is the chiefest difference between this and the last described. @ The figure which belonged to this description was put hereafter for Lycopsis Anglica. @


 The Place.
These grow in my garden, and in others also.


 The Time.
Borage floures and flourishes most part of all Sommer, and till Autumne be far spent.


 The Names.
Borage is called in shops Borago: of the old Writers, (...), which is called in Latine Lingua Bubula: Pliny calleth it Euphrosinum, because it maketh a man merry and ioyfull: which thing also the old verse concerning Borage dothtestifie:
Ego Borago gaudia semper ago.
I Borage bring alwaies courage.
It is called in high Dutch (...): in Italian, Boragine: in Spanish, Boraces: in low Dutch, (...): in English, Borage.


 The Temperature.
It is euidently moist, and not in like sort hot, but seemes to be in a meane betwixt hot and cold.


 The Vertues.
Those of our time do vse the floures in sallads, to exhilerate and make the mind glad. There be  also many things made of them, vsed euery where for the comfort of the heart, for the driuing away of sorrow, and encreasing the ioy of the minde.

The leaues boyled among other pot-herbes do much preuaile in making the belly soluble, they  being boyled in honied water be also good against the roughnesse of the throat, and hoarsenesse, as Galen teacheth.
The leaues and floures of Borage put into Wine make men and women glad and merry, and  driue away all sadnesse, (...), and melancholy, as Dioscorides and Pliny affirme.
Syrrup made of the floures of Borage comforteth the heart, purgeth melancholy, and quieteth  the phrenticke or lunaticke person.
The floures of Borage made vp with sugar do all the aforesaid with greater force and effect.
Syrrup made of the iuyce of Borage with sugar, adding thereto pouder of the bone of a Stags  heart, is good against swouning, the cardiacke passion of the heart, against melancholy and the falling sicknesse.
The root is not vsed in medicine: the leaues eaten raw ingender good bloud, especially in those  that haue been lately sicke.



CHAP. 283. Of Buglosse.

 The Kindes.
LIke as there be diuers sorts of Borage, so are there sundry of the Buglosses; notwithstanding after Dioscorides, Borage is the true Buglosse: many are of opinion, and that rightly, that they may be both referred to one kinde; yet will we diuide them according to the custome of our time, and their vsuall denominations.


1 Buglossa vulgaris. Common Buglosse, or Garden Buglosse.


2 Buglossum luteum. Lang de beefe.




 The Description.
1 THat which the Apothecaries call Buglosse bringeth forth leaues longer than those of Borage, sharpe pointed, longer than the leaues of Beets, rough and hairy. The stalke groweth vp to the height of two cubits, parted aboue into sundry branches, whereon are orderly placed blewish floures, tending to a purple colour before they be opened, and afterward more blew. The root is long, thicke, and grosse, and of long continuance.



@ 3 Buglossa syluestris minor. Small wilde Buglosse.


2 Lang de Beefe is a kinde hereof, altogether lesser, but the leaues hereof are rougher, like the rough tongue of an oxe or cow, whereof it tooke his name. @ The leaues of Lang-de-(...) are very rough, the stalke some cubit and halfe high, commonly red of colour: the tops of the branches (...) (...) in scaly rough heads: these floures are composed of many small yellow leaues in manner of those of Dandelion, and flie away in down like as they do: the floures are of a verie bitter taste, whence Lobel calls it Buglossum (...) luteum Hieracio cognatum. Tabernamontanus (...) fitly called it Hieracium echioides.
3 There is another wilde Buglosse which Dodonaeus hath by the name of Buglossa (...): it hath a small white root, from which arises a slender stalke some foot and halfe high set with smal rough leaues sinuated or cut in on the edges: the stalkes at the top are diuided into three or foure small branches, bearing small blew floures in rough huskes. @


 The Place.
These do grow in gardens euery where. @ The Lang-de-Beefe growes wilde in many places; as betweene Redriffe and Deptsord by the waterie ditch sides. The little wilde Buglosse growes vpon the drie ditch bankes about Pickadilla, and almost euery where. @


 The Time.
They floure from May, or Iune, euen to the end of Sommer. The leaues perish in Winter, and new come vp in the Spring.


 The Names.
Garden Buglosse is called of the later Herbarists Buglossa, and Buglossa Domestica: or garden Buglosse.
Lang-de Beefe is called in Latine Lingua bouis, and Buglossum Luteum Hieracio cognatum, and also Buglossa syluestris, or wilde Buglosse.
@ Small wilde Buglosse is called Borago syluestris by Tragus; Echium Germanicum Spinosum by Fuchsius; and Buglossa syluestris by Dodonaeus. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root, saith Dioscorides, mixed with oile, cureth greene wounds, and adding thereto a little  barley meale, it is a remedie against Saint Anthonies fire.
It causeth sweat in agues, as Plinie saith, if the iuice be mixed with a little Aquavitae, and the body  rubbed therewith.
The Physitions of the later time vse the leaues, floures, and roots in stead of Borage, and put  them both into all kindes of medicines indifferently, which are of force and vertue to driue away sorrow and pensiuenesse of the minde, and to comfort and strengthen the heart. The leaues are of like operation with those of Borage, and are vsed as potherbes for the purposes aforesaid, as wel Buglosse as Lang-de-Beefe, and also to keepe the belly soluble.



CHAP. 284. Of Alkanet or wilde Buglosse.

 The Description.
THese herbes comprehended vnder the name of Anchusa, were so called of the Greeke word (...): (i) Illinere succo, vel pigmentis, that is, to colour or paint any thing: whereupon these

The two figures that were formerly here were both of the ordinary (...), whereof the (...) might well enough (...), but the 2. was much different from that it should haue been.

 1 Anchusa Alcibiadion. Red Alkanet.
The two figures that were formerly here were both of the ordinary (...), whereof the (...) might well enough (...), but the 2. was much different from that it should haue been.

 2 Anchusa lutea. Yellow Alkanet.
@ 3 Anchusa minor. Small Alkanet.
plants were called Anchusa of that flourishing and bright red colour which is in the root, euen as red as pure and cleere bloud: for that is the onely marke or note whereby to distinguish these herbes from those which be called Echum, Lycopsis, and Buglossa, whereto they haue a great resemblance: I haue therefore expressed foure differences of this plant Anchusa or Alkanet from the other kindes, by the leaues, floures, and bignesse.
1 The first kinde of Alkanet hath many leaues like Echium, or small Buglosse, couered ouer with a prickie hoarinesse, hauing commonly but one stalke, which is round, rough, and a cubite high. The cups of the floures are of a skie colour tending to purple, not vnlike the floures of Echium; the seed is small, somewhat long, and of a pale colour: the root is a finger thicke, the (...) or inner part thereof is of a wooddie substance, dying the hands or whatsoeuer toucheth the same, of a bloudie colour, or of the colour of saunders.
2 The second kinde of Anchusa or Alkanet is of greater beautie and estimation than the first; the branches are lesse and more bushie in the toppe: it hath also greater plentie of leaues, and those more woollie or hairie: the stalke groweth to the height of two cubites: at the top grow floures of a yellow colour, far different from the other: the root is more shining, of an excellent delicate purplish colour, and more full of iuice than the first.

3 There is a small kinde of Alkanet, whose root is greater and more ful of iuice and substance than the roots of the other kindes: in all other respects it is lesse, for the leaues are narrower, smaller, tenderer, and in number more, very greene like vnto Borage, yeelding forth many little tender stalks: the floures are lesse than of the small Buglosse, and red of colour: the seed is of an ashe colour, somewhat long and slender, hauing the taste of Buglosse.
4 There is also another kinde of Alkanet, (...) is as the others before mentioned, a kinde of wilde Buglosse, notwithstanding for distinctions sake I haue separated and seuered them. This last Anchusa hath narrow leaues, much like vnto our common Sommer Sauorie. The stalkes are two handfuls high, bearing very smal floures, and of a blewish or skie colour: the root is of a dark brownish red colour, dying the hands little or nothing at all, and of a wooddie substance.


 The Time.
These plants do grow in the fields of Narbone, and about Montpellier and many other parts of France: I found these plants growing in the Isle of Thanet neere vnto the sea, betwixt the house sometime belonging to Sir Henrie Crispe, and Margate; where I found some in their naturall ripenesse, yet scarcely any that were come to that beautifull colour of Alkanet: but such as is sold for very good in our Apothecaries shops I found there in great plentie.
@ I doubt whether our Authour found any of these in the place heere set downe, for I haue sought it but failed of finding; yet if he found any it was onely the first described, for I think the other three are strangers. @


 The Time.
The Alkanets floure and flourish in the Sommer moneths: the roots doe yeeld their bloudie iuice in haruest time, as Dioscorides writeth.


 The Names.
Alkanet is called in Greeke (...) in Latine also (...): of diuers, Fucus (...), and Onocleia, Buglossa Hispanica, or Spanish Buglosse: in Spanish, (...): in French, Orchanet: and in English likewise Orchanet and Alkanet.


 The Temperature.
The roots of Alkanet are cold and drie, as Galen writeth, and binding, and because it is bitter it clenseth away cholericke humours: the leaues bee not so forceable, yet doe they likewise binde and drie.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the root being made vp in a cerote, or searecloth with oile, is very good for  old vlcers; that with parched barley meale it is good for the leprey, and for tetters and ring-worms.
That being vsed as a pessarie it bringeth forth the dead birth.
The decoction being inwardly taken with Mead or honied water, cureth the yellow iaundise, diseases of the kidneies, the spleene and agues.
It is vsed in ointments for womens paintings: and the leaues drunke in wine is good against the  laske.
Diuers of the later Physitions do boile with the root of Alkanet and wine, sweet butter, such as  hath in it no salt at all, vntill such time as it becommeth red, which they call red butter, and giue it not onely to those that haue falne from some high place, but also report it to be good to driue forth the measels and small pox, if it be drunke in the beginning with hot beere.
The roots of these are vsed to color sirrups, waters, gellies, and such like confections as Turnsole is.
Iohn of Ardern hath set down a composition called Sanguis Veneris, which is most singular in deep  punctures or wounds made with thrusts, as follows: take of oile oliue a pint, the root of Alkanet two ounces, earth worms purged, in number twenty, boile them together and keep it to the vse aforesaid.
The Gentlewomen of France do paint their faces with these roots, as it is said.



CHAP. 285. Of Walland Vipers Buglosse.

 The Description.
1 LYcopis Anglica, or wilde Buglosse, so called for that it doth not grow so commonly elsewhere, hath rough and hairie leaues, somewhat lesser than the garden Buglosse: the floures grow for the most part vpon the side of the slender stalke, in fashion hollow like a little bell, whereof some be blew, and others of a purple colour.
2 There is another kinde of Echium that hath rough and hairy leaues likewise, much like vnto the former; the stalke is rough, charged full of little branches, which are laden on euery side with diuers small narrow leaues, sharp pointed, and of a brown colour: among which leaues grow floures, each floure being composed of one leafe diuided into fiue (...) at the top, lesse, and not so wide open as that of Lycopsis; (...) of a sad blew or purple colour at the first, but when they are open they shew to be of an azure colour, long and hollow, hauing certaine smal blew threds in the middle: the seed is small and black; fashioned like the head of a snake or viper: the root is long, and red without.



That (...) which (...) stood in the second place, vnder the title of (...), and whereof there was no more mention made by our Author, neither in (...), name, nor (...), I take to be nothing else than the (...) which (...) with long leaues spred vpon the ground before it comes to send vp the (...); as you may see it exprest apart by it selfe in the figure we giue you; which is the true figure of that plant our Author described and meant: for the figure which (...) gaue was (...) but of the common Borage with (...) leaues, which he described in the fourth place of the (...) of Borage, as I haue (...) (...).

 1 Lycopsis Anglica. Wall Buglosse.


@ 2 Echium (...). Vipers Buglosse.


@ 3 Echium pullo flore. Rough Vipers Buglosse.


@ 4 Echium rubro (...). Red floured Vipers Buglosse.



@ 3 This hath a crested very rough and hairy stalke some foot high; the leaues are like those of Vipers (...), and couered ouer with a soft downinesse, and grow disorderly vpon the (...), which towards the top is parted into sundry branches, which are diuided into diuers foot-stalkes carrying small hollow floures diuided by fiue little gashes at their tops; and they are of a darke purple colour, and contained in rough cups lying hid vnder the leaues. The seed, as in other (...) of this kinde, resembles a Vipers head: the root is long, as thicke as ones little finger, of a dusky colour on the outside, and it liues diuers yeares. This floures in May, and growes in the dry medowes and hilly grounds of Austria. Clusius calls it Echium pullo (...).
4 This other being also of Clusius his description hath long and narrow leaues like those of the common Vipers Buglosse, yet a little broader: the stalkes rise vp some cubit high, firme, crested, and hairy; vpon which grow aboundance of leaues, shorter and narrower than those below; and amongst these towards the top grow many floures vpon short foot-stalks, which twine themselues round like a Scorpions taile: these floures are of an elegant red colour, and in shape somwhat like those of the common kinde; and such also is the seed, but somewhat lesse: the root is lasting, long also, hard, wooddy, and blacke on the outside, and it sometimes sends vp many, but most vsually but one stalke. It floures in May, and was found in Hungary by Clusius, who first set it forth by the name of Echium rubro flore. @


 The Place.
Lycopsis groweth vpon stone walls, and vpon dry barren stony grounds.
Echium groweth where Alkanet doth grow, in great aboundance.


 The Time.
They flourish when the other kindes of Buglosses do floure.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke Echium, and (...), of Alcibiades the finder of the vertues thereof: of (...) it is thought to be Anchusae species, or a kinde of Alkanet: in high-Dutch, wilde (...): in Spanish, Yerua de la Biuora, or Chupamel: in Italian, Buglossa saluatica: in French, Buglosse sauuage: in English, Vipers Buglosse, Snakes Buglosse; and of some, Vipers herbe, and wilde Buglosse the lesser.


 The Temperature.
These herbes are cold and dry of complexion.


 The Vertues.
The root drunke with wine is good for those that be bitten with Serpents, and it keepeth such  (...) being stung as haue drunk of it before: the leaues and seeds do the same, as Dioscorides writes. (...) in his book of Treacles makes Vipers Buglosse to be one of those plants which cure the biting of serpents, and especially of the Viper, and that driue serpents away.
If it be drunke in wine or otherwise it causeth plenty of milke in womens brests.
The herbe chewed, and the iuyce swallowed downe, is a most singular remedie against poyson  and the bitings of any venomous beast; and the root so chewed and layd vpon the (...) workes the same effect.



CHAP. 286. Of Hounds-tongue.

 The Description.
1 THe common Hounds tongue hath long leaues much like the garden Buglosse, but broader, and not rough at all, yet hauing some fine hoarinesse or softnesse like veluet. These leaues stinke very filthily, much like to the pisse of dogs; wherefore the Dutch men haue called it Hounds pisse, and not Hounds tongue. The stalkes are rough, hard, two cubits high, and of a browne colour, bearing at the top many floures of a darke purple colour: the seed is rough, cleauing to garments like Agrimonie seed: the root is blacke and thicke. @ These plants for one yeare after they come vp of seed bring forth onely leaues, and those pretty large; and the second yere they send vp their stalks, bearing both floures and seed, and then vsually the root perisheth. I haue therefore presented you with the figures of it, both when it floures, and when it sendeth forth onely leaues. @



1 Cynoglossum (...) vulgare sine (...). Hounds-tongue without the floure.


1 Cynoglossum maius cum flore and (...). Hounds-tongue with the floure and seed.


@ 2 Cynoglossum Creticum 1. The first Candy Dogs-tongue.


@ 3 Cynoglossum Creticum alterum. The other Candy Dogs-tongue.



2 We haue receiued another sort hereof from the parts of Italy, hauing leaues like Woade; somewhat rough, and without any manifest smell, wherein it differeth from the common kinde; the seed hereof came vnder the title Cynoglossum Creticum, Hounds-tongue of Candy. @ The floures are lesser and of a lighter colour than those of the former; the seeds also are rough, and grow foure together, with a point comming out of the middle of them as in the common kind, but yet lesser; the root is long and withish. Clusius hath this by the name of Cynoglossum Creticum 1.
3 This second Cynoglossum Creticum of Clusius hath leaues some handfull long, and some inch and better broad: among which, the next yeare after the sowing, comes vp a stalke some cubit or more high, crested, stiffe, and straight, and somewhat downy as are also the leaues, which grow vpon the same, being somwhat broad at their setting on, and of a yellowish greene colour. The top of the stalke is diuided into sundry branches, which twine or turne in their tops like as the Scorpion grasse, and carry shorter yet larger floures than the ordinarie kinde, and those of a whitish colour at the first, with many small purplish veines, which after a few dayes become blew. The seeds are like the former in their growing, shape, and roughnesse. @
4 We haue another sort of Hounds-tongue like vnto the common kinde, sauing it is altogether lesser: the leaues are of a shining greene colour.


@ 4 Cynoglossum minus folio virente. Small greene leaued Hounds-tongue.




 The Place.
The great Hounds-tongue growes almost euery where by high-wayes and vntoiled ground: the small Hounds-tongue groweth very plentifully by the waies side as you ride Colchester highway from Londonward, betweene Esterford and Wittam in Essex.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Hounds-tongue is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Lingua canis: of Pliny, Cynoglossos; and he sheweth two kinds thereof: in English, Hounds-tongue, or Dogstongue, but rather Hounds-pisse, for in the world there is not any thing smelleth so like vnto Dogs-pisse as the leaues of this Plant doe.


 The Nature.
Hounds-tongue, but especially his root, is cold and dry.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Hounds-tongue rosted in the  embers and layd to the fundament, healeth the hemorrhoides, and the disease called Ignis sacer, or wilde-fire.
The iuyce boiled with honey of roses and  Turpentine, to the forme of an vnguent, is most singular in wounds and deepe vlcers.
Dioscorides saith, That the leaues boyled  in wine and drunk, do mollifie the belly, and that the leaues stamped with old swines grease are good against the falling away of the haire of the head, which proceedeth of hot sharpe humors.
Likewise they are a remedie against scaldings or burnings, and against the biting of dogs, as the  same Author addeth.



CHAP. 287. Of Comfrey, or great Consound.

 The Description.
1 THe stalke of this Comfrey is cornered, thicke, and hollow like that of Sow-thistle: it groweth two cubits or a yard high: the leaues that spring from the root, and those that

1 (...) maior flore purpureo. Comfrey with purple floures.
3 @ Symphytum tuberosum. Comfrey with the knobby root.
@ 4 Simphytum parvum Boraginis facie. Borage-floured Comfrey.
grow vpon the stalkes are long, broad, rough, and pricking withall, something hairie, and being handled make the hands itch; very like in colour and roughnes to those of Borage, but longer, and sharpe pointed, as be the leaues of Elecampane: from out the wings of the stalkes appeare the floures orderly placed, long, hollow within, of a light red colour: after them groweth the seed, which is blacke. The root is long and thick, blacke without, white within, hauing in it a clammy juice, in which root consisteth the vertue.
2 The great Comfrey hath rough hairy stalks, and long rough leaues much like the garden Buglosse, but greater and blacker: the floures be round and hollow like little bells, of a white colour: the root is blacke without, and white within, and very slimy. @ This differeth no way from the former but onely in the colour of the floure, which is yellowish or white, when as the other is reddish or purple. @
3 There is another kinde of Comfrey which hath leaues like the former, sauing that they be lesser: the stalks are rough and tender: the floures be like the former, but that they be of an ouerworn yellow colour: the roots are thicke, short, blacke without, and tuberous, @ which in the figure are not expressed so large and knobby as they ought to haue been. @

@ 4 This pretty plant hath fibrous and blackish roots, from which rise vp many leaues like those of Borage, or Comfrey, but much smaller and greener, the stalkes are some eight inches high, and on their tops carry pretty floures like those of Borage, but not so sharpe pointed, but of a more pleasing blew colour. This floures in the spring and is kept in some choice Gardens. Lobell calls it Symphytum pumilum repens Borraginis facie, siue Borrago minima Herbariorum. @


 The Place.
Comfrey joyeth in watery ditches, in fat and fruitfull medowes; they grow all in my Garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine Symphytum, and Solidago: in shops, Consolida maior, and Symphytum maius: of Scribonius Largus, Inula rustica, and Alus Gallica: of others, Osteocollon: in high Dutch, Walwurtz: in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Consolida maggiore: in Spanish, Suelda maiore, and Consuelda maior: in French, Consire, and Oreille d'asne: in English, Comfrey, (...) Consound; of some, Knit backe, and Blackewoort.


 The Temperature.
The root of Comfrey hath a cold quality, but yet not much: it is also of a clammie and gluing moisture, it causeth no itch at all, neither is it of a sharpe or biting taste, vnsauory, and without any qualitie that may be tasted; so far is the tough and gluing moisture from the sharpe clamminesse of the sea Onion, as that there is no comparison betweene them. The leaues may cause itching not through heate or sharpenesse, but through their ruggednesse, as we haue already written, yet lesse than those of the Nettle.


 The Vertues.
The rootes of Comfrey stamped, and the juice drunke with wine, helpeth those that spit bloud, and healeth all (...) wounds and burstings.
The same bruised and laid to in manner of a plaister, doth heale all fresh and greene woundes, and are so glutenatiue, that it will sodder or glew together meate that is chopt in peeces seething in a pot, and make it in one lumpe.
The rootes boiled and drunke, doe clense the brest from flegme, and cure the griefes of the  lungs, especially if they be confect with sugar and syrrup; it preuaileth much against ruptures or burstings.
The slimie substance of the root made in a posset of ale, and giuen to drinke against the paine in  the backe, gotten by any violent motion, as wrastling, or ouermuch vse of women, doth in foure or fiue daies perfectly cure the same: although the inuoluntary flowing of the seed in men be gotten thereby.
The roots of Comfrey in number foure, Knotgrasse and the leaues of Clarie of each an handfull, being stamped all together, and strained, and a quart of Muscadell put thereto, the yolkes of three egges, and the powder of three Nutmegs, drunke first and last, is a most excellent medicine against a Gonorrhaea or running of the reines, and all paines and consumptions of the backe.
There is likewise a syrrup made hereof to be vsed in this case, which staieth voiding of bloud: tempereth the heate of agues: allaieth the sharpenesse of flowing humors: healeth vp vlcers of the lungs, and helpeth the cough: the receit whereof is this: Take two ounces of the roots of great Comfrey, one ounce of Liquorice; two handfulls of Folefoot, roots and all; one ounce and an halfe of Pine-apple kernells; twenty iuiubes; two drams or a quarter of an ounce of Mallow seed; one dram of the heads of Poppy; boile all in a sufficient quantitie of water, till one pinte remaine, straine it, and and adde to the liquor strained six ounces of very white sugar, and as much of the best hony, and make thereof a syrrup that must be throughly boiled.
The same syrrup cureth the vlcers of the kidnies, though they haue been of long continuance;  and stoppeth the bloud that commeth from thence.
Moreouer, it staieth the ouermuch flowing of the monethly sickenesse, taken euery day for certaine  daies together.
It is highly commended for woundes or hurts of all the rest also of the intrailes and inward  parts, and for burstings or ruptures.
The root stamped and applied vnto them, taketh away the inflammation of the fundament, and ouermuch flowing of the hemorrhoides.




CHAP. 288. Of Cowslips of Jerusalem.


1 Pulmonaria maculosa. Spotted Cowslips of Ierusalem.


2 Pulmonaria folijs Echij. Buglosse Cowslips.


3 Pulmoria angustifolia ij. Clusij. Narrow leafed Cowslips of Ierusalem.



 The Description.
1 COwslips of Ierusalem, or the true and right Lungwort, hath rough, hairy, and large leaues of a brown green color, confusedly spotted with diuers spots, or drops of white: amongst which spring vp certaine stalkes, a span long, bearing at the top many fine floures, growing together in bunches like the floures of cowslips, sauing that they be at the first red, or purple, and sometimes blew, and oftentimes al these colours at once. The floures being fallen, there come small buttons full of seed. The root is blacke and threddy. @ This is sometimes found with white floures. @
2 The second kinde of Lungwort is like vnto the former, but greater in each respect: the leaues bigger than the former, resembling wilde Buglosse, yet spotted with white spots like the former: the floures are like the other, but of an exceeding shining red colour.
3 Carolus Clusius setteth forth a third kinde of Lungwoort, which hath rough and hairie leaues, like vnto wilde Buglosse, but narrower: among which rises vp a stalke a foot high, bearing at the top a bundle of blew floures, in fashion like vnto those of Buglosse or the last described.



 The Place.
These plants do grow in moist shadowie woods, and are planted almost euery where in gardens. @ Mr. Goodyer found the Pulmonaria folijs Echij, being the second, May 25. Anno 1620. flouring in a wood by Holbury house in the New Forrest in Hampshire. @


 The Time.
They floure for the most part in March and Aprill.


 The Names.
Cowslips of Ierusalem, or Sage of Ierusalem, is called of the Herbarists of our time, Pulmonaria, and Pulmonalis; of Cordus, Symphitum syluestre, or wilde Comfrey: but seeing the other is also of nature wilde, it may aptly be called Symphytum maculosum, or Maculatum: in high Dutch, Lungenkraut: in low Dutch, Onser (...) melcruiit: in English, spotted Comfrey, Sage of Ierusalem, Cowslip of Ierusalem, Sage of Bethlem, and of some Lungwort; notwithstanding there is another Lungwort, of which we will intreat among the kindes of Mosses.


 The Temperature.
Pulmonaria should be of like temperature with the great Comfrey, if the roote of this were clammie: but seeing that it is hard and woody, it is of a more drying quality, and more binding.


 The Vertues.
The leaues are vsed among pot-herbes. The roots are also thought to be good against the infirmities and vlcers of the lungs, and to be of like force with the great Comfrey. 

The figure which formerly was in the fourth place of this Chapter, was onely of he first described with white floures. But the Title (...) (...), and the description fitted to it (though litle to the purpose, and therefore omitted) were intended for the Pulmonaria Gallorum (...) (...), whereof I haue in the due place largely treated, as you may see in this booke, pag. 304. chap, 36.




CHAP. 289. Of Clote Burre, or Burre Docke.


1 Bardana maior. The great Burre Docke.


2 Bardana minor. The lesse Burre Docke.




 The Description.
1 CLot Burre bringeth forth broad leaues and hairie, far bigger than the leaues of Gourds, and of greater compasse, thicker also, and blacker, which on the vpper side are of a darke greene colour, and on the nether side somewhat white: the stalke is cornered, thicke, beset with like leaues, but far lesse, diuided into very many wings and branches, bringing forth great Burres round like bullets or balls, which are rough all ouer, and full of sharpe crooking prickles, taking hold on mens garments as they passe by; out of the tops whereof groweth a floure thrummed, or all of threds, of colour purple: the seed is perfected within the round ball (...) bullet, and this seed when the burres open, and the winde bloweth, is caried away with the winde: the root is long, white within, and blacke without.
@ There is another kinde hereof which hath lesser and softer heads, with weaker prickles; these heads are also hairy or downy, and the leaues and whole plant somewhat lesse, yet otherwise like the fore described; Lobell calls this Arction montanum, and Lappa minor Galeni: it is also the Lappa minor altera of Matthiolus. Lobell found this growing in Somersetshire three miles from Bath, neere the house of one (...). Iohn (...).
2 The lesser Burre hath leaues farre smaller than the former, of a grayish ouerworne (...) like to those of Orach, nicked round about the edges: the stalke is a foot and a halfe high, (...) little blacke spots, diuiding it selfe into many branches: the floures before the Burres come (...) do compasse the small stalkes round about; they are but little, and quickly vade away: then (...) the Burres or the fruit out of the bosome of the leaues, in forme long, on the tops of the (...) as big as an Oliue or a Cornell berry, rough like the balles of the Plane tree, and being (...) cleaue fast vnto mens garments: they do not open at all, but being kept close shut bring forth (...) (...). The root is fastened with very many strings, and groweth not deepe.


 The Place.
The first groweth euery where: the second I found in the high way leading from Draiton to Iuer, two miles from Colbrooke, since which time I haue found it in the high way (...) Stanes and Egham @ It also groweth plentifully in Southwick sheet in Hampshire, as I haue been enformed by Mr. Goodyer. @


 The Time.
Their season is in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The great Burre is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Personata, personatia, and Arcium: in shops, Bardana, and Lappa maior: in high Dutch, Grosskletten: in low Dutch, Groote clissen: (...) rench, Glouteron: in English, Great Burre, Burre Docke, or Clot Burre: Apuleius besides these doth also set downe certaine other names belonging to Clot Burre, as Dardana, Bacchion, Elephantosis, Nephelion, Manifolium.
The lesser Burre Docke is called of the Graecians (...): in Latine, Xanthium: in shops, Lappa minor, Lappa (...), and of diuers, Strumaria: Galen saith it is also called, Phasganion, and Phasganon, or herbe victory, being but bastard names, and therefore not properly so called: in English, Louse Burre, Ditch Burre, and lesser Burre Docke: it seemeth to be called Xanthium of the effect, for the Burre or fruite before it be fully withered, being stamped and put into an earthen vessell, and afterwards when need requireth the weight of two ounces thereof and somewhat more, being steeped in warme water and rubbed on, maketh the haires of the head red; yet the head is first to be dressed or rubbed with niter, as Dioscorides writeth.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of Clot Burre are of temperature moderately dry and wasting; the root is something hot.
The seed of the lesser Burre, as Galen saith, hath power to digest, therefore it is hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
The roots being taken with the kernels of Pine Apples; as Dioscorides witnesseth, are good for  them that spit bloud and corrupt matter.
Apeleius saith that the same being stamped with a little salt, and applied to the biting of a mad  dog, cureth the same, and so speedily setteth free the sicke man.
He also teacheth that the juice of the leaues giuen to drinke with hony, procureth vrine, and taketh  away the paines of the bladder; and that the same drunke with old wine doth wonderfully helpe against the bitings of serpents.
Columella declareth, that the herbe beaten with salt and laid vpon the scarifying, which is made  with the launcet or raser, draweth out the poison of the viper: and that also the root being stamped is more auaileable against serpents, and that the root in like maner is good against the Kings euill.

The stalke of Clot-burre before the burres come forth, the rinde pilled off, being eaten raw with  salt and pepper, or boyled in the broth of fat meate, is pleasant to be eaten: being taken in that manner it increaseth seed and stirreth vp lust.
Also it is a good nourishment, especially boyled: if the kernell of the Pine Apple be likewise  added it is the better, and is no lesse auailable against the (...) of the lungs, and spitting of bloud, than the root is.
The root stamped and strained with a good draught of (...) is a most approued medicine for a  windie or cold stomacke.
Treacle of Andromachus, and the whites of egges, of each a like quantitie, laboured in a leaden  mortar, and spred vpon the Burre leafe, and so applied to the gout, haue been proued many times most miraculously to appease the paine thereof.
Dioscorides commendeth the decoction of the root of (...), together with the seed, against the  (...)-ache, if it be holden a while in the mouth: also that it is good to soment therewith both burnings and kibed heeles; and affirmeth that it may be drunke in wine against the strangury and paine in the hip.
Dioscorides reporteth that the fruit is very good to be laid vnto hard swellings.
The root (...) picked, washed, stamped and strained with Malmesey, helpeth the running of  the reines, the whites in women, and strengthneth the backe, if there be added thereto the (...) of egges, the pouder of (...) and nutmegs brued or mixed together, and drunke first and last.



CHAP. 290. Of Colts-foot, or Horse-foot.


1 Tussilago florens. Colts-foot in floure.


1 Tussilaginis folia. The leaues of Colts-foot.



 The Description.
1 TVssilago or Fole-foot hath many white and long creeping roots, somewhat fat; from which rise vp naked stalkes (in the beginning of March and Aprill) about a spanne long, bearing at the top yellow floures, which change into down, and are caried away with the winde: when the stalke and seed is perished, there appeare springing (...) of the earth

many broad leaues, green aboue, and next the ground of a white hoarie or grayish colour, fashioned like an horse foot; for which cause it was called Fole-foot, and Horse-hoofe: seldome or neuer shall you find leaues and floures at once, but the floures are past before the leaues come out of the ground; as may appeare by the first picture, which setteth forth the naked stalkes and floures; and by the second, which pourtraiteth the leaues onely.
@ 2 Besides the commonly growing and described Colts-foot, there are other two (...) mountaine Colts-feet described by Clusius; the first whereof I will here present you with, but the second you shall finde hereafter in the chapter of Asarum, by the name of Asarina (...). This here delineated hath fiue or six leaues not much vnlike those of Alehoofe, of a darke shining green colour aboue, and very white and downy below: the stalke is naked some handfull high, hollow and downy, bearing one floure at the top composed of purplish threds, and flying away in downe: (...) which the stalke falls away, and so the leaues onely remaine during the rest of the yeare: the (...) is small and creeping. It growes on the tops of the Austrian and Stirian mountaines, where it floures in Iune or August. Brought into gardens it floures in Aprill. Clusius calls it Tussilago Alpina 1. and he hath giuen two figures thereof, both which I here giue you by the same titles as he hath them. @


@ 2 Tussilago Alpina flore aperto. Mountaine Colts-foot full in floure.


@ 2 Tussilago Alpina flore evanido. Mountaine Colts-foot with the floure fading.




 The Place.
This groweth of it selfe neere vnto Springs, and on the brinkes of brookes and riuers, in wet (...), by ditches sides, and in other moist and watery places neere vnto the sea, almost euery where.


 The Time.
The floures, which quickly fade, are to be seene in the end of March, and about the Calends of Aprill, which speedily wither together with the stems: after them grow forth the leaues, which remaine greene all Sommer long: and hereupon it came that Colts-foot was thought to be without floures; which thing also Pliny hath mentioned in his sixe and twentieth booke, cap. 6.


 The Names.
Folefoot is called in Greeke (...): of the Latines likewise (...), and Tussilago: in shops, Farfara, and Vngula Caballana: of diuers, Pata equina: in Italian, Vnghia di Cauallo: in Spanish, vnha d' asno: in French, Pas d' asne: in English, Fole-foot, Colts-foot, Horse-hoofe, and Bull-foot. The same is also (...), which Pliny in his twenty eighth booke, and fifteenth chapter reporteth to be likewise called Farfugium, and Farranum, if there be not an error in the copy: which thing also (...) in his first booke affirmeth, pretermitting the name of Bechium, and attributing vnto it all the vertues and faculties of Bechium or Colts-foot. Whose opinion Orabasius (...) to be of, in his fifteenth booke of his medicinable Collections, making mention of Chamaeleuce: only Pliny

also agreeth with them; shewing that some thinke that Bechium is called by another name Chamaeleuce, in his twenty sixth booke, cap. 6. and it may be that Dioscorides hath written of one and the selfe same herbe in sundry places, and by diuers names. Bechium and Tussilago, which may also be Englished Coughwort, so called of the effect, and Farfara, of the white Poplar tree, to whose (...) it is like; which was named of the Antients Farfarus, as (...) writeth in his Comedie called (...):
-- viscum legioni dedi. fundasque eos prosternebam vt folia Farfari.
To the company I gaue both lime bush and sling. That to the ground as Poplar leaues I might them sling.
@ Dodonaeus (from whom our Author tooke this) sets downe this place in Plautus as you (...) it here, but not well; for the last verse should be Fundasque, (...) praesternebant folia Farfari. Thus it is in most editions of Plautus, and that rightly, as the ensuing words in that place declare. @
The white Poplar tree is called in Greeke (...), and hereupon Bechion or Colts-foot was also (...) Chamaeleuce.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues of Colts-foot being fresh and greene are something cold, and haue withall a (...) qualitie; they are good for vlcers and inflammations: but the dried leaues are hot and drie, (...) somewhat biting.
A decoction made of the greene leaues and roots, or else a syrrup thereof, is good for the cough  that proceedeth of a thin rheume.
The green leaues of Fole-foot pound with hony, do cure and heale the hot inflammation called  Saint Anthonies fire, and all other inflammations.
The fume of the dried leaues taken through a funnell or tunnell, burned vpon coles, effectually  helpeth those that are troubled with the shortnesse of breath, and fetch their winde thicke and often, and breaketh without perill the impostumes of the brest.
Being taken in manner as they take Tobaco, it mightily preuaileth against the diseases aforesaid.



CHAP. 291. Of Butter-Burre.

 The Description.
1 BVtter-Burre doth in like manner bring forth floures before the leaues, as doth Coltsfoot, but they are small, mossie, tending to a purple colour; which being made vp into a big eare as it were, do quickly (together with the stem, which is thicke, (...) of substance, and brittle) wither and fall away: the leaues are very great like to a round cap or hat, called in Latine Petasus, of such a widenesse, as that of it selfe it is big and large enough to keepe a mans head from raine, and from the heate of the Sunne: and therefore they be greater than the leaues of the Clot-burre, of colour somewhat white, yet whiter vnderneath: euery stem beareth his leafe; the stem is oftentimes a cubit long, thicke, full of substance; vpon which standeth the leafe in the centre or middlemost part of the circumference, or very neere, like to one of the greatest Mushroms, but that it hath a cleft that standeth about the stem, especially when they are in perishing and withering away: at the first the vpper superficiall or outside of the Mushroms standeth (...) and when they are in withering standeth more in; and euen so the leafe of Butter-bur hath on the outside a certaine shallow hollownesse: the root is thicke, long, blacke without, white within, (...) taste somewhat bitter, and is oftentimes worme-eaten.


 The Place.
This groweth in moist places neere vnto riuers sides, and vpon the brinks and banks of lakes and ponds, almost euery where.


 The Time.
The eare with the floures flourish in Aprill or sooner: then come vp the leaues, which continue till Winter, with new ones still growing vp.



1 Petasites florens. Butter-Burre in floure.


(...) Petasit is folia. The leaues of Butter-(...).




 The Names.
Butter-bur is called in (...) (...), of the (...) of the lease that is like to (...) or a hat: the Latines call it Petasites: in high- Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in English it is named Butter-Burre: it is very manifest that this is like to Colts-soot, and of the same kinde.


 The Temperature.
Butter-Burre is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thinne parts.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Butter-burre stamped with ale, and giuen to drinke in pestilent and burning Feuers, (...) cooleth and abateth the heate thereof.
The (...) dried and (...) to pouder, and drunke in wine, is a soueraigne medicine against the  plague and pestilent feuers, because it prouoketh sweat and driueth from the heart all (...) and ill heate: it killeth wormes, and is of great force against the suffocation of the mother.
The same cureth all naughty filthy (...), if the pouder be strewed therein.
The same kills wormes in the belly: it prouokes vrine, and brings downe the monthly termes.



@ CHAP. 292. Of Mountaine Horse-foot.

 The (...).
@ 1 THis plant (which the moderne Writers hane referred to the Cacalia of the Antients, and to the kindes of Colts-soot) I haue thought good to name in English, Horsefoot, for that the leaues exceed Colts-foot in bignesse, yet are like them in shape: and of this plant Clusius (whom I here chiefely follow) hath described two (...): the first of these hath many leaues almost like vnto (...) of Colts-(...), but larger, very round, and snipt about the edges, of a (...) greene (...) aboue, and hoarie vnderneath, hauing (...) many (...) or nerues running vp and downe them, and these leaues are of an vngratefull (...), and grow vpon long purplish crested stalkes: The stemme is some two cubits high, crested likewise, and of a purplish colour, set also at certaine (...) with leaues very like vnto the other, but lesser than those

@ 1 Cacalia incano folio. Hoarie leaued Horse-foot.
@ 2 Cacalia folio (...). Smooth leaued Horse-(...).
next the ground, and more cornered and sharper pointed; the tops of the stalkes and branches carrie bunches of purple floures, as in an vmbell: and commonly in (...) bunch there are three little floures consisting of (...) leaues a peece, and a (...) pestell, and these are of a purple colour, and a weake, but not vnpleasant smell, and they at length turne into downe, amongst which lies hid a (...) seed: the root, if old, sends sorth diuers (...), as also store of long whitish (...).
2 The leaues of this are more thin, tough and (...), and of a deeper greene on the vpper sides, neither are they whitish below, nor come so round or close whereas they are fastened to their stalks (which are not crested as those of the (...), but round and (...)) they are also full of veines, and nickt about the edges, and of somewhat an (...) hot and bitter taste. The stalkes are also smoother, and the floures of a lighter (...).


 The Place.
Both these grow in the Austrian and Stirian Alpes vnder the sides of woods, among bushes and such shadowie places: but not in England, that I haue yet heard of.


 The Time.
I find it not set downe when these floure and seed, but iudge it about the same time that Coltsfoot doth.


 The Names.
This by Clusius, Lob l and others, hath beene called (...), and referred to that (...) by (...), lib. 4. cap. 123. which is thought to be that set forth by (...) by the name of (...). In the Historia Lugd. pag. 1052. The later of these two here described is (...) by the name of (...) Alpina sive montana, and the former is there, page 1; 08, by the name of Cacalia, but the floures are not rightly exprest: and ifmy iudgement faile me not, the figure which is in the seuenteenth page of the Appendix of the same Authour, by the title of Aconitum Pardalianches (...), is of no other than this very plant. But because I haue not as yet seene the plant, I will not (...) affirme it: but referre this my opinion to those that are iudicious and curious, to know the plant that raised such controuersie between (...) and Gesner, and whereof neither (...) nor (...), who haue set forth (...) his Commentaries, haue giuen vs any certain or probable knowledge.



 The Temperature and Vertues, out of the Antients.
The root of Cacalia is void of any biting qualitie, and moderately dries, and it is of a grosse and  emplaisticke substance; wherefore steeped in wine and so taken it helpes the cough, the roughnesse of the Arterie or hoarsnes, like as Tragacanth: neither if you chew it and swallow downe the iuice doth it lesse auaile against those effects than the iuice of Liquorice. @



CHAP. 293. Of small Celandine or Pile-woort.

 The Kindes.
THere be two kindes of Celandine, according to the old writers, much differing in (...) and figure: the one greater, the other lesser, which I intende to diuide into two distinct chapters, marshalling them as (...) as may be with their like, in forme and figure, and first of the small Celandine.


(...) minus. Pile-woort.




 The Description.
THe lesser Celandine hath greene round leaues, smooth, slipperie, and shining, lesse than the leaues of the Iuie: the stalks are slender, short, and sor the most part creeping vpon the ground: they bring forth little yellow flours like those of Crow-foot; and after the floures there springeth vp a little fine knop or head full of seede: the root consisteth of slender strings, on which doe hang as it were certaine graines, of the bignes of wheat cornes, or bigger.


 The Place.
It groweth in medows, by common waies, by ditches and trenches, and it is common euery where, in moist and dankish places.


 The Time.
It commeth forth about the Calends of March, and floureth a little after: it beginneth to fade away in Aprill, it is quite gone in May, afterwards it is hard to be found, yea scarcely the root.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...) of the Latines Chelidonium minus, and Hirundinaria minor: of diuers, Scrophularia minor, Ficaria minor: of Serapio, Memiren: in Italian, Fauoscello: in High Dutch, (...): in French, Esclerc, and Petit Bassinet: in English, little Celandine, Fig-woort, and Pile-woort.


 The Temperature.
It is hot (...) drie, also more biting and hotter than the greater: it commeth neerest in (...) to the Crowfoot.
@ This which is here, and by most Authours set forth for Chelidonium minus, hath no such great heat and Acrimonie as Dioscorides and Galen (...) to be in theirs; making it hot in the fourth degree, when as this of ours scarce exceedes the first, as farre as wee may coniecture by the taste. @


 The Vertues.
It presently, as Galen and Dioscorides affirme, exulcerateth or blistereth the skin: it maketh rough  and corrupt nailes to fall away.
The iuice of the roots mixed with honie, and drawne vp into the nosthrils, purgeth the head of  soule and filthie humours.

The later age vse the roots and graines for the piles, which being often bathed with the iuice  mixed with wine, or with the sickmans vrine, are drawne together and dried vp, and the paine quite taken away.
There be also who thinke, that if the herbe be but carried about one that hath the piles, the pain  forthwith ceaseth.



CHAP. 294. Of Marsh Marigold.

 The Description.
1 MArsh Marigold hath great broad leaues somewhat round, smooth, of a gallant greene colour, sleightly indented or purld about the edges: among which (...) vp thicke fat stalkes, likewise greene; whereupon doe grow goodly yellow floures, glittering like gold, and like to those of Crow-foot, but greater: the root is small, composed of verie manie strings.


1 Calthapalustris maior. The great Marsh Marigold.


2 Calthapalustris minor. The small Marsh Marigold.


2 The smaller Marsh Marigold hath many round leaues spred vpon the ground, of a darke greene colour: amongst which rise vp diuers branches, charged with the like leaues: the floures grow at the toppes of the branches, of a most shining yellow colour: the root is also like the former.
3 The great Marsh Marigold with double floures is a stranger in England, his natiue Countrey should seeme to be in the furthest part of Germanie by the relation of a man of those Countries that I haue had conference withall the which hee thus described: it hath (saith hee) leaues, roots, and stalkes like those of our common sort, and hath double floures like those of the garden Marigold, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ Camerarius writes iust contrarie to that which our Authour here affirmes; for hee saith, In Anglia sua sponte non solum plenis, sed oderatis etiam floribus (...) offert. But I feare that both our

3 Calthapalustris multiplex. Double floured Marsh Marigold.
Authour and Camerarius were deceiued by trusting the report of some lying, or else ignorant persons, for I could neuer finde it growing wilde with double floures here, nor Camerarius there: yet I do not denie but by chance some one with double floures may be found both here and there, but this is not euery where. @


The Place.
They ioy in moist and marish grounds, and in watery medowes. @ I haue not sound the double one wilde, but seene it preserued in diuers gardens for the beautie of the floure. @


 The Time.
They floure in the Spring when the Crowfoots doe, and oftentimes in Sommer: the leaues keepe their greenenesse all the Winter long.


 The Names.
Marsh Marigold is called of Valerius Cordus, Caltha palustris: of Tabernamontanus, Populago: but not properly: in English, Marsh Marigolds: in Cheshire and those parts it is called Bootes.


 The Temperature and (...).
Touching the faculties of these plants, wee haue nothing to say, either out of other mens writings, or our owne experiences



CHAP. 295. Of Frogge-bit.


Morsus Rana. Frogge-bit.



. The Description.
THere floteth or swimmeth vpon the vpper parts of the water a small plant, which wee vsually call Frog-bit, hauing little round leaues, thicke and full of iuice, very like to the leaues of wall Peniwoort: the floures grow vpon long stems among the leaues, of a white colour, with a certaine yellow thrum in the middle, consisting of three leaues: in stead of roots it hath slender strings, which grow out of a short and small head, as it were, from whence the leaues spring, in the bottom of the water: from which head also come forth slopewise certaine strings, by which growing forth it multiplieth it selfe.


 The Place.
It is found swimming or floting almost in euery ditch, pond, poole, or standing water, in all the ditches about Saint George his fields, and in the ditches by the Thames side neere to Lambeth Marsh, where any that is disposed may see it.


 The Time.
It flourisheth and floureth most part of all the yeare.


 The Names.
It is called of some Ranae morsus, and Morsus Ranae, and Nymphaeaparua.



 The Temperature and Vertues.
It is thought to be a kinde of Pond-weed (or rather of Water Lillie) and to haue the same faculties  that belong vnto it.



CHAP. 296. Of Water Lillie.

 The Description.
1 THe white water Lillie or Nenuphar hath great round leaues, in shape of a Buckler, thick, fat, and full of iuice, standing vpon long round and smooth foot-stalkes, ful of a spungious substance; which leaues do swim or flote vpon the top of the water: vpon the end of each stalk groweth one floure onely, of colour white, consisting of many little long sharpe pointed leaues, in the middest whereof bee many yellow threds: after the floure it bringeth forth a round head, in which lieth blackish glittering seed. The roots be thicke, full of knots, blacke without, white and spungie within, out of which groweth a multitude of strings, by which it is fastened in the (...).


1 Nymphaea alba. White Water Lillie.


2 Nymphaealutea. Yellow Water Lillie.


2 The leaues of the yellow water Lillie be like to the other, yet are they a little longer. The stalkes of the floures and leaues be like: the floures be yellow, consisting onely of fiue little short leaues something round; in the midst of which groweth a small round head, or button, sharpe towards the point, compassed about with many yellow threds, in which, when it is ripe, lie also glittering seeds, greater than those of the other, and lesser than wheat cornes. The roots be thick, long, set with certaine dents, as it were white both within and without, of a spungious substance.
3 The smal white water Lillie floreth likewise vpon the water, hauing a single root, with some few fibres fastened thereto: from which riseth vp many long, round, smooth, and soft foot-stalkes, some of which doe bring forth at the end faire broad round buckler leaues like vnto the precedent,

but lesser: on the other foot-stalkes stand prettie white floures, consisting of fiue small leaues apeece, hauing a little yellow in the middle thereof.


3 Nymphaea alba minor. The small white Water Lillie.


5 Nymphaea lutea minima. Dwarfe Water Lillie.


4 The small yellow water Lillie hath a little threddie root, creeping in the bottome of the water, and dispersing it selfe far abroad: from which rise small tender stalkes, smooth and soft, whereon do grow little buckler leaues like the last described: likewise on the other small stalke standeth a tuft of many floures likewise floting vpon the water as the others do. @ This hath the floures larger than those of the next described, wherefore it may be fitly named Nymphaea lutea minor flore amplo. @
5 This dwarfe water Lillie differeth not from the other small yellow water Lillie, sauing that, that this kinde hath sharper pointed leaues, and the whole plant is altogether lesser, wherein lieth the difference. @ This hath the floures much lesse than those of the last described, wherefore it is fitly for distinction sake named Nymphaea (...) minor flore paruo. @


 The Place.
These herbes do grow in fennes, standing waters, broad ditches, and in brookes that run slowly, and sometimes in great riuers.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish most of the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
Water Lillie is called in Greeke (...): and in Latine also Nymphaea, so named because it loues to grow in waterie places, as Dioscorides saith: the Apothecaries call it Nenuphar: of Apuleius, Mater Herculania, Alga palustris, Papauer palustre, Clavus veneris, and Digitus veneris: Marcellus a very old writer reporteth, that it is called in Latine Claua Herculis: in French, Badittin: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...): in English, Water Lillie, water Rose.


 The Temperature.
Both the root and seed of water Lillie haue a drying force without biting.


 The Vertues.
Water Lillie with yellow floures stoppeth laskes, the ouerflowing of seed which commeth away  by dreames or otherwise, and is good for them that haue the bloudie flix.

But water Lillie which hath the white floures is of greater force, insomuch as it staieth the  whites: but both this and the other that hath the black root must be drunke in red wine: they haue also a scouring quality, therfore they both clense away the morphew, and be also good against the pilling away of the haire of the head; against the morphew they are steeped in water, and sor the pilling away of the haire in Tarre: but for these things that is sitter which hath the black root, and for the other, that which hath the white root.
Theoprastus saith, that being stamped and laid vpon the wound, it is reported to stay the bleeding.
The Physitions of our age do commend the floures of white Nymphaea against the insirmities  of the head which come of a hot cause: and do certainely (...), that the root of the yellow cureth hot diseases of the kidnies and bladder, and is singular good against the running of the reines.
The root and seed of the great water Lillie is very good against venery or fleshly desire, if one  do drinke the decoction thereof, or vse the seed or root in powder in his meates, for it dryeth vp the seed of generation, and so causeth a man to be chast, especially vsed in broth with flesh.
The conserue of the floures is good for the diseases aforesaid, and is good also against hot burning  feuers.
The floures being made into oile, as yee do make oile of roses, doth coole and refrigerate, causing  sweate and quiet sleepe, and putteth away all venereous dreames: the temples of the head and palmes of the hands and feet, and the brest being annointed for the one, and the genitors (...) and about them for the other.
The greene leaues of the great water Lillie, either the white or the yellow laid vpon the region  of the backe in the small, mightily cease the inuoluntary flowing away of the seed called Gonorrhaea, or running of the raines, being two or three times a day remooued, and fresh applied thereto.



CHAP. 297. Of Pond-weed, or water Spike.


1 Potamogeiton latifolium. Broad leafed Pondweed.


2 Potamogeiton angustifolium. Narrow leafed Pondweed.




 The Description.
1 POnd-weed hath little stalkes, slender, spreading like those of the vine, and jointed: the leaues be long, smaller than the leaues of Plantaine, and harder, with manifest veines runniug alongst them as in Plantains, which standing vpon slender and long stems or footstalkes, shew themselues aboue the water, and lie flat along vpon the superficiall or vpper part thereof, as do the leaues of the water Lillie: the floures grow in short eares, and are of a light red purple colour, like those of Red-shankes or Bistort: the seed is hard.
@ 2 This (whose figure was formerly vnfitly put by our Authour to the following description) hath longer, narrower, and sharper pointed leaues than those of the last described, hauing the veines running from the middle rib to the sides of the leaues, as in a willow leafe, which they somewhat resemble; at the tops of the stalkes grow reddish spikes or eares like those of the last described: the root is long, jointed, and fibrous. @


@ 3 Potamogeiton 3 Dodonaei. Small Pondweed.


@ 4 Potamogeiton longis acutis folijs. Long sharpe leaued Pondweed.


3 There is another Pondweed described thus; it shooteth forth into many slender and round stems, which are distributed into sundry branches: his leaues are broad, long, and sharpe pointed, yet much lesse than the first kinde: out of the bosomes of the branches and leaues there spring certaine little stalkes which beare sundry small white mossie floures, which doe turne into plaine and round seeds, like the common Tare or Vetch: his root is fibrous, throughly fastened in the ground.
@ 4 There is also another Pondweed, which hath whitish and jointed roots creeping in the bottome of the water, and sending downe some fibres, but sending vp slender jointed and long stalkes, small below, and bigger aboue, hauing long narrow and very stiffe shrape pointed leaues. The floures grow in a reddish spike like those of the first described. This is the Potamogeiton (...) of Dodonaeus. @


 The Place.
These herbes do grow in standing waters, pooles, ponds, and ditches, almost euery where.


 The Time.
They do floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is called of the (...), (...) in Latine, (...), and Spicata: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Espi d'caue: in English, Pondweed, and water Spike.



 The Temperature.
Pondweed, saith Galen, doth binde and coole, like as doth Knot-grasse, but his (...) is thicker than that of Knot-grasse.


 The Vertues.
It is good against the itch, and consuming or eating Vlcers, as Dioscorides writeth.
Also it is good being applied to the inflammation of the legges, wherein Ignis sacer hath gotten  the superioritie.



CHAP. 298. Of Water Saligot, water Caltrops, or water Nuts.

 The Description.
1 WAter Caltrops haue long slender stalkes, growing vp, and rising from the bottome of the water, and mounting aboue the same: the root is long, hauing here and there vnder the water certaine tassels full of small strings and threddie haires: the stem towards the top of the water, is very great in respect of that which is lower, the leaues are large and somewhat round, not vnlike those of the Poplar or Elme tree leaues, a little creuised or notched about the edges: amongst and vnder the leaues groweth the fruit, which is triangled, hard, sharpe pointed, and prickly: in shape like those hurtfull engines in the warres, cast in the passage of the enemie to annoy the feet of their horses, called Caltrops, whereof this tooke its name: within these heads or Nuts is contained a white kernell, in taste almost like the (...)-nut, which is reported to be eaten greene, and being dried and ground to serue in stead of bread.
@ There are two other plants which are found growing in many ponds and ditches of this kingdome, both about London and else-where, and I will here giue you the figures out of Lobel and Clusius, and their descriptions as they were sent me by Mr. Goodyer, who hath saued me the labour of describing them.
Tribulus aquaticus minor quercus floribus, Clus. p. 252. Pusillum (...) pathum, Lobelij.
2 This water herbe bringeth forth from the root, thin, flat, knottie stalkes, of a reddish colour, two or three cubits long, or longer, according to the depth of the water (which when they are dire, are pliant and bowing) diuided towards the top into many parts or branches, bearing but one leafe at euery ioint, sometimes two inches long, and halfe an inch broad, thin, and as it were shining, so wrinckled and crompled by the sides that it seemeth to be torne, of a reddish greene colour: the foot-stalkes are something long and thicke, and rise vp from amongst those leaues, which alwaies grow two one opposit against another, in a contrarie manner to those that grow below on the stalk: neere the top of which foot-stalke groweth small grape-like huskes, out of which spring very small reddish floures, like those of the Oke, euery floure hauing foure very small round topped leaues: after euery floure commeth commonly foure sharpe pointed graines growing together, containing within them a little white kernell. The lower part of the stalke hath at euery ioint small white threddie roots, somewhat long, whereby it taketh hold in the mudde, and draweth nourishment vnto it. The whole plant is commonly couered ouer with water. It floureth in Iune and the beginning of Iuly. I found it in the standing pooles or fish-ponds adioyning to a dissolued Abbey called Durford, which ponds diuide Hampshire and Suffex, and in other standing waters elswhere. This description was made vpon sight of the plant the 2. of Iune, 1622.
Tribulus aquaticus minor, muscat (...) floribus.
3 This hath not flat stalkes like the other, but round, kneed, and alwaies bearing two leaues at euery ioint, one opposite against another, greener, shorter and lesser than the other, sharpe pointed, not much wrinckled and crumpled by the edges. Clusius saith, that they are not at all crumpled. I neuer obserued any without crumples and wrinckles: the floures grow on short small footstalkes, of a whitish green colour, like those of Muscatella Cordi, called by Gerard, Radix caua minima (...) flore: viz. two floures at the top of euery foot-stalke, one opposite against another, euery floure containing foure small leaues: which two floures beeing past there come vp eight small

1 Tribulus aquaticus. Water Caltrops.
@ 2 Tribulus aquaticus minor quercus floribus. Small water Caltrops, or Frogs-lettuce.
@ 3 Tribulus aquaticus minor, Muscatellae floribus. Small Frogs-Lettuce.
husks making six seueral waies a square of flours. The roots are like the former. This groweth abundantly in the riuer by Droxford in Hampshire. It floureth in Iune and Iuly when the other doth, and continueth couered ouer with water, greene, both winter and Sommer. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
Cordus saith that it groweth in Germany in myrie lakes, and in citie ditches that haue mud in them: in Brabant and in other places of the Low-countries, it is found oftentimes in standing waters, and springs: Matthiolus writeth, that it groweth not only in lakes of sweet water, but also in certaine ditches by the sea neere vnto Venice.


 The Time.
It flourisheth in Iune, Iuly, and August.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latins, Tribulus aquatilis, and aquaticus, and Tribulus lacustris: the Apothecaries, Tribulus marinus: in High Dutch, (...) (...): the Brabanders, (...) (...): and of the likenesse of yron nailes, (...):

the French men, Macres: in English it is named water Caltrops, Saligot, and Water nuts: most do call the fruit of this Caltrops, Castaneae aquatiles, or water (...)-nuts.


 The Temperature.
Water Caltrop is of a cold nature, it consisteth of a moist essence, which in this is (...) waterie than in the land Caltrops, wherein an earthie cold is predominant, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The herbe vsed in manner of a pultis, as Dioscorides teacheth, is good against all inflammations  or hot swellings: boiled with honie and water, it perfectly healeth cankers in the mouth, sore gums, and the Almonds of the throat.
The Thracians, saith Plinie, that dwell in Strymona, do fatten their horses with the leaues of Saligot, and they themselues do feed of the kernels, making very sweet bread thereof, which bindeth the belly.
The green nuts or fruit of Tribulus aquaticus, or Saligot, being drunke in wine, is good for them  which are troubled with the stone and grauell.
The same drunke in like manner, or laied outwardly to the place, helpeth those that are bitten  with any venomous beast, and resisteth all venome and poison.
The leaues of Saligot be giuen against all inflammations and vlcers of the mouth, the (...) and corruption of the iawes, and against the Kings euill.
A pouder made of the nuts is giuen to such as pisse bloud, and are troubled with grauell, and  it doth bind the belly very much.
@ The two lesser water Caltrops here described are in my opinion much agreeable in temper  to the great one, and are much fitter Succidanea for it then Aron, which some in the composition of Vnguentum Agrippae haue appointed for it. @



CHAP. 299. Of water Sengreene, or fresh water Soldier.


Militaris Aizoides. Fresh water Soldier.



 The Description.
FResh water Soldier or water Housleeke, hath leaues like those of the herbe Aloe, or Semper vivum, but shorter and lesser, setround about the edges with certaine stiffe and short prickles: amongst which commeth forth diuers cases or huskes, verie like vnto crabbes clawes: out of which when they open grow white floures, consisting of three leaues, altogether like those of Frogs-bit, hauing in the middle little yellowish threds: in stead of roots there be long strings, round, white, vetic like to great Harp-strings, or to long wormes, which falling downe from a short head that brought sorth the leaues, go to the bottom of the water, and yet be they seldome there fastened: there also grow from the same other strings aslope, by which the plant is multiplied after the manner of Frogs-bit.


 The Place.
@ I found this growing plentifully in the ditches about Rotsey a smal village in Holdernesse. And my friend Mr. William Broad obserued it in the Fennes in Lincolne-shire. @ The leaues and floures grow vpon the top of the water, and the roots are sent downe through the water to the mud.


 The Time.
It floures in Iune, and sometimes in August.



 The Names.
It may be called Sedum aquatile, or water Sengreen, that is to say, of the likenesse of herbe Aloe, which is also called in Latine Sedum: of some, Cancri chela, or Cancri forficula: in English, VVater Housleeke, Knights Pondwoort; and of some, Knights water Sengreene, fresh water Soldier, or wading Pondweed: it seemeth to be Stratiotes aquatilis, or Stratiotes potamios, or Knights water Woundwoort, which may also be named in Latine Militaris aquatica, and Militaris (...), or Soldiers Yarrow; for it groweth in the water, and floteth vpon it, and if those strings which it sendeth to the bottome of the wat er be no roots, it also liueth without roots.


 The Temperature.
This herbe is of a cooling nature and temperament.


 The Vertues.
This Housleeke staieth the bloud which commeth from the kidneies, it keepeth green wounds  from being inflamed, and it is good against S. Anthonies fire and hot swellings, being applied vnto them: and is equall in the vertues aforesaid with the former.



CHAP. 300. Of Water Yarrow, and water Gillofloure.


1 Viola palustris. Water Violet.


@ Viola Palustris tenuifolia. The smaller leaued water violet.



 The Description.
1 WAter Violet hath long and great iagged leaues, very finely cut or rent like Yarrow, but smaller: among which come vp small stalkes a cubit and a halfe high, bearing at the top small white floures like vnto stocke Gillofloures, with some yellownes in the middle. The roots are long and small like blacke threds, and at the end whereby they are fastened to the ground they are white, and shining like Chrystall.
@ There is another varietie of this plant, which differs from it only in that the leaues are much smaller, as you may see them exprest in the figure. @

2 Water Milfoile, or water Yarrow hath long and large leaues deepely cut with many diuisions like (...), but finelier iagged, swimming vpon the water. The root is single, long, and round, which brings vp a right straight and slender stalke, set in sundry places with the like leaues, but smaller. The floures grow at the top of the stalke tuft fashion, and like vnto the land Yarrow.
3 This water Milfoile differeth from all the kindes aforesaid, hauing a root in the bottom of the water, made of many hairy strings, which yeeldeth vp a naked slender stalke within the water, and the rest of the stalke which floteth vpon the water diuideth it selfe into sundry other branches and wings, which are bedasht with fine small iagged leaues like vnto (...), or rather resembling hairy tassels or fringe, than leaues. From the bosomes whereof come forth small and tender branches, euery branch bearing one floure like vnto water Crow-foot, white of colour, with a little yellow in the midst: the whole plant resembleth water Crow-foot in all things saue in the broad leaues.
@ 4 There is another kinde of water violet very like the former, sauing that his leaues are much longer, somewhat resembling the leaues of Fennell, fashioned like vnto wings, and the floures are somewhat smaller, yet white, with yellownesse in their middles, and shaped like those of the last described. And the seed also growes like vnto that of the Water (...), last described.
5 There is also another kinde of water Milfoile, which hath leaues very like vnto water Violet, smaller, and not so many in number: the stalke is small and tender, bearing yellow gaping floures fashioned like a hood or the small Snapdragon; which caused Pena to put vnto his (...) this additament Galericulatum, that is, hooded. The roots are small and threddy, with some few knobs hanging thereat like the sounds of fish.


2 Millesolium aquaticum. Water Yarrow.


3 Millesolium, siue (...), flore and (...) (...) aquatici, (...) facie. Crow-foot, or water Milsoile.


@ 6 To these may we adde a small water Milfoile, set sorth by Clusius. It hath round greene stalkes set with many ioynts, whereout come at their lower ends many hairy fibres, whereby it taketh hold of the mud: the tops of these stems stand some handfull aboue the water, and at each ioynt stand fiue long finely winged leaues, very greene, and some inch long; which wax lesse and

lesse, as they stand higher or neerer the top of the stalke: and at each of these leaues about the top of the stem growes one small white floure consisting of six little leaues ioyned together, and not opening themselues: and these at length turne into little knobs, with foure little pointals standing out of them. Clusius calls this Myriophyllon aquaticum minus. @


@ 4 Millefolium tenuifolium. Fennell leaued water Milfoile.


@ 5 Millefolium palustre galericulatum. Hooded water Milfoile.




 The Place.
They be found in lakes and standing waters, or in waters that run slowly: I haue not found such plenty of it in any one place, as in the water ditches adioyning to Saint George his field neere London.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part in May and Iune.


 The Names.
The first is called in Dutch water Uiolerian, that is to say, Viola aquatilis: in English, Water Gillofloure, or water Violet: in French, Gyroflees d'eaue: Matthiolus makes this to be also Myrophylli (...), or a kinde of Yarrow, although it doth not agree with the description thereof; for neither hath it one stalke onely, nor one single root, as Myriophyllon or Yarrow is described to haue; for the roots are full of strings, and it bringeth forth many stalkes.
The second is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Millefolium, and Myriophyllon, and also Supercilium Veneris: in shops it is vnknowne. This Yarrow differeth from that of the land: the rest are sufficiently spoken of in their titles.


 The Nature and Vertues.
Water Yarrow, as Dioscorides saith, is of a dry facultie; and by reason that it taketh away hot  inflammations and swellings, it seemeth to be of a cold nature; for Dioscorides affirmeth, that water Yarrow is a remedie against inflammations in greene wounds, if with vineger it be applied greene or dry: and it is giuen inwardly with vineger and salt, to those that haue fallen from a high place.
Water Gillofloure or water Violet is thought to be cold and dry, yet hath it no vse in physicke  at all.




CHAP. 301. Of Ducks meate.


Lens palustris. Ducks meate.



 The Description.
DVckes meate is as it were a certaine greene mosse, with very little round leaues of the bignesse of Lentils: out of the midst whereof on the nether side grow downe very fine threds like haires, which are to them in stead of roots: it hath neither stalke, floure, nor fruit.


 The Place.
It is found in pounds, lakes, city ditches, and in other standing waters euery where.


 The Time.
The time of Ducks meate is knowne to all.


 The Names.
Duckes meate is called in Latine Lens lacustris, Lens aquatilis, and Lens palustris: of the Apothecaries it is (...) Aquae Lenticula: in high-Dutch, Meerlinsen: in low-Dutch, (...), and more vsually Enden gruen, that is to say, Anatum herba, Ducks herbe, because Ducks doe feed thereon; whereupon also in English it is called Ducks meate: some terme it after the Greeke water Lentils; and of others it is named Graines. The Italians call it Lent (...): in French, Lentille d eaue: in Spanish, Lenteias de agua.


 The Temperature.
Galen sheweth that it is cold and moist after a sort in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith that it is a remedie against all  manner of inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire, and hot Agues, if they be either applied alone, or else vsed with partched barley meale. It also knitteth ruptures in young children.
Ducks meate mingled with fine wheaten floure and applied, preuaileth much against hot swellings, as Phlegmons, Erisipelas, and the paines of the ioynts.
The same doth helpe the fundament fallen downe in yong children.



CHAP. 302. Of Water Crow-foot.


1 Ranunculus aquatilis. Water Crow-foot.




 The Description.
1 WAter Crow-foot hath slender branches trailing far abroad, whereupon grow leaues vnder the water most finely cut and iagged like those of Cammomill. Those aboue the water are somwhat round, indented about the edges, in forme not vnlike the smal tender leaues of the mallow, but lesser: among which do grow the floures, small, and white of colour, made of fine little leaues, with some yellownesse in the middle like the floures of the Straw-berry, and of a sweet smell: after which there come round rough and prickly knaps like those of the field Crowfoot. The roots be very small hairy strings.
@ There is sometimes to be found a varietie of this, with the leaues lesse, and diuided into three parts after the manner of an Iuy leafe; and the floures are also much lesser, but white of colour, with a yellow bottome. I question whether this be not the Ranunculus hederaceus Daleschampij, pag. 1031. of the hist. Lugd. @
2 There is another plant growing in the water, of smal moment, yet not amisse to be remembred, called Hederula aquatica, or water Iuie: the which is very rare to finde; neuerthelesse I found it once in a ditch by Bermondsey house neere to London, and neuer elsewhere: it hath small threddy strings in stead of roots and stalkes, rising from the bottome of the water to the top; wherunto are fastned small leaues swimming or floting vpon the water, triangled or three cornered like to those of barren Iuie, or rather noble Liuerwort: barren of floures and seeds.


2 Hederula aquatica. Water Iuie.


@ 3 Stellaria aquatica. Water Starwort.


3 There is likewise another herbe of small reckoning that floteth vpon the water, called Stellaria aquatica, or water Star-wort, which hath many small grassie stems like threds, comming from the bottome of the water vnto the vpper face of the same: whereupon do grow smal double floures of a greenish or herby colour. @ I take this Stellaria to be nothing else but a water Chickeweed, which growes almost in euery ditch, with two long narrow leaues at each ioynt, and halfe a dozen or more lying close together at the top of the water, in fashion of a starre: it may be seene in this shape in the end of Aprill and beginning of May: I haue not yet obserued either the floure or seed thereof. @



 The Place.
Water Crow-foot groweth by ditches and shallow Springs, and in other moist and plashie places.


 The Time.
It floureth in Aprill and May, and sometimes in Iune.


 The Names.
Water Crow-foot is called in Latine Ranunculus aquatilis, and Polyanthemum aquatile: in English, Water Crow-foot, and white water Crow-foot: most Apothecaries and Herbarists do erroneously name it Hepatica aquatica and Hepatica alba; and with greater error they mix it in medicines in stead of Hepatica alba, or grasse of Parnassus. @ I know none that commit this great error here mentioned, neither haue I knowne either the one or the other euer vsed or appointed in medicine with vs in England, though Dodonaeus (from whom our Author had this and most else) doe blame his countreymen for this mistake and error. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Water Crow-foot is hot, and like to common Crow-foot.



CHAP. 303. Of Dragons.


1 Dracontium maius. Great Dragons.


@ 2 (...) minus. Small Dragons.



 The Description.
1 THe great Dragon riseth vp with a straight stalke a cubit and a halfe high or higher, thicke, round, smooth, sprinkled with spots of diuers colours, like those of the adder or snake: the leaues are great and wide, consisting of seuen or more ioyned together in order; euery one of which is long and narrow, much like to the leaues of Docke, smooth and slipperie: out of the top of the stalke groweth a long hose or huske greater than that of the Cuckow pintle, of a greenish colour without, and within crimson, with his pestell which is blackish, long, thicke, and pointed like a horne; the skin or filme whereof when the seed waxeth big, being

1 Dracunculus aquatious. Water Dragons.
stretched or broken asunder, there appeareth the fruit, like to a bunch or cluster of grapes: the berries whereof at the first be greene, afterwards red and full of iuyce; in which is contained seed that is somewhat hard: The root continueth fresh, thicke, like to a knob, white, couered with a thin pilling, oftentimes of the bignesse of a meane apple, full of white little threds appendant thereunto.
2 The lesser Dragon is like Aron or wake Robin, in leaues, hose, or huske, pestell, and berries, yet are not the leaues sprinkled with blacke but with whitish spots, which perish not so soone as those of wake-Robin, but endure together with the berries euen vntil winter: these berries also be not of a deepe red, but of a colour enclining to Saffron. The root is not vnlike to the Cuckow-pint, hauing the forme of a bulbe, full of strings, with diuers rude shapes of new plants, whereby it greatly encreaseth.
@ The figure which our Authour heere gaue by the title of Dracuntium minus, was no other than of Aron, which is described in the first place of the next chapter: neither is the description of any other plant, than of that sort thereof which hath leaues spotted either with white or blacke spots, though our Author say onely with white. I haue giuen you Clusius his figure of Arum Byzantinum, in stead of that which our Author gaue. @
3 The root of water Dragon is not round like a bulbe, but very long, creeping, and ioynted, and of meane bignesse; out of the ioynts whereof arise the stalkes of the leaues, which are round, smooth, and spongie within, and there grow downewards certaine white and slender strings. The fruit springs forth at the top vpon a short stalke, together with one of the leaues, being at the beginning couered with little white threds, which are in stead of the floures: after that it groweth into a bunch or cluster, at the first greene, and when it is ripe, red, lesser than that of Cuckow-pint, but not lesse biting: the leaues are broad, greenish, glib, and smooth, in fashion like those of Iuy, yet lesser than those of Cuckow-pint; and that thing whereunto the clustered fruit growes is also lesser, and in that part which is towards the fruit (that is to say the vpper part) is white.
4 The great Dragon of Matthiolus his description is a stranger not onely in England, but elsewhere for any thing that we can learne: my selfe haue diligently enquired of most strangers skilfull in plants, that haue resorted vnto me for conference sake, but no man can giue me any certaintie thereof; and therefore I thinke it amisse to giue you his figure or any description, for that I take it for a feigned picture.


 The Place.
The greater and the lesser Dragons are planted in gardens. The water Dragons grow in (...) and marish places, for the most part in fenny and standing waters.


 The Time.
The berries of these plants are ripe in Autumne.


 The Names.
The Dragon is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Dracunculus. The greater is named Serpentariamaior: of some, Bisaria, and Colubrina: Cordus calleth it Dracunculus Polyphyllos, and Luph Crispum: in high-Dutch, Schlangenkraut: in low-Dutch, Speerwortele: in French, Serpentaire: in Italian, Dragontea: in Spanish, Taragontia: in English, Dragons, and Dragon-wort. Apuleius calleth Dragon Dracontea, and setteth downe many strange names thereof, which whether they agree with the greater or the lesser, or both of them, he doth not expound; as Pythonion, Anchomanes, Sauchromaton, Therion, Schoenos, Dorcadion, Typhonion, Theriophonon, and Eminion, Athenaeus sheweth, that Dragon is called Aronia, because it is like to Aron.


 The Temperature.
Dragon, as Galen saith, hath a certaine likenesse with Aron or wake-Robin, both in leaues, and also in root, yet more biting and more bitter than it, and therefore hotter, and of thinner parts: it is

also something binding, which by reason that it is adjoined with the two former qualities, that is to say, biting and bitter, is is made in like manner a singular medicine of very great efficacy.


 The Vertues.
The root of Dragons doth clense and scoure all the entrailes, making thinne, especially thicke  and tough humours; and it is a singular remedy for vlcers that are hard to be cured, named in Greeke (...).
It scoureth and clenseth mightely, aswell such things as haue need of scouring, as also white  and blacke morphew, being tempered with vineger.
The leaues also by reason that they are of like qualitie are good for vlcers and greene wounds: and the lesse dry they are, the fitter they be to heale; for the dryer ones are of a more sharpe or biting quality than is conuenient for wounds.
The fruit is of greater operation than either the leaues or the root: and therefore it is thought  to be of force to consume and take away cankers and proud flesh growing in the nostrils, called in Greeke Polypus: also the juice doth clense away webs and spots in the eies.
Furthermore, Dioscorides writeth, that it is reported that they who haue rubbed the leaues or  root vpon their hands, are not bitten of the viper.
Pliny saith, that serpents will not come neere vnto him that beareth Dragons about him, and  these things are read concerning both the Dragons, in the two chapters of Dioscorides.
Galen also hath made mention of Dragon in his booke of the faculties of nourishments; where  he saith, that the root of Dragon being twice or thrice sod, to the end it may lose all his acrimony or sharpenesse, is sometimes giuen as Aron, or wake-Robin is, when it is needfull to expell the more forceable thicke and clammy humours that are troublesome to the chest and lungs.
And Dioscorides writeth, that the root of the lesser Dragon being both sodde and rost with  honie, or taken of it selfe in meate, causeth the humours which sticke fast in the chest to be easily voided.
The juice of the garden Dragons, as saith Dioscorides, being dropped into the eies, doth clense  them, and greatly amend the dimnesse of the sight.
The distilled water hath vertue against the pestilence or any pestilentiall feuer or poison, being  drunke bloud-warme with the best treacle or mithridate.
The smell of the floures is hurtfull to women newly conceiued with child.



CHAP. 304. Of Cockow pint, or wake-Robin.

 The Description.
1 Arum or Cockow pint hath great, large, smooth, shining, sharpe pointed leaues, bespotted here and there with blackish spots, mixed with some blewnesse: among which riseth vp a stalke nine inches long, bespeckled in many places with certaine purple spots. It beareth also a certaine long hose or hood, in proportion like the eare of an hare: in the middle of which hood commeth forth a pestle or clapper of a darke murrie or pale purple colour: which being past, there succeedeth in place thereof a bunch or cluster of berries in manner of a bunch of grapes, greene at the first, but after they be ripe of a yellowish red like corall, and full of pith, with some threddy additaments annexed thereto.
2 There is in Aegypt a kinde of Arum which also is to be seene in Africa, and in certaine places of Lusitania, about riuers and floods, which differeth from that which groweth in England and other parts of Europe. This plant is large and great, and the leaues thereof are greater than those of the water Lillie: the root is thicke and tuberous, and toward the lower end thicker and broader, and may be eaten. It is reported to be without floure and seed, but the (...) that it hath is by the fibres which runne and spread from the roots. @ This plant hath also pestells and clusters, of berryes as the common Aron, but somewhat different, the leaues are not cut into the stalke, but joined before the setting thereto: the root also is very large. Those that desire to see more of this plant, and the question which some haue mooued, whither this be the (...), or Faba Aegyptia of the Antients? let them haue recourse to the first chapter of Fabius Columna his Minus cognitarum stripium pars altera, and there they shall finde satisfaction. @



1 Arum vulgare. Cockow pint.


@ 2 Arum Aegyptiacum. Aegyptian Cockow pint.




 The Place.
Cockow pint groweth in woods neere vnto ditches vnder hedges, euery where in shadowie places.


 The Time.
The leaues appeare presently after winter: the pestell sheweth it selfe out of his huske or sheath in Iune, whilest the leaues are in withering: and when they are gone, the bunch on cluster of berries becommeth ripe, which is in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
There groweth in Aegypt a kinde of Aron or Cuckow pint which is found also in Africa, and likewise in certaine places of Portingale neere vnto riuers and streames, that differeth from those of our countries growing, which the people of Castile call Manta de nuestra senora: most would haue it to be called Colocasia; but Dioscorides saith that Colocasia is the root of Faba Aegyptia, or the Beane of Egypt. @ Fabius Columna (in the place formerly alledged) prooues this not to be the true (...), and yet Prosper Alpinus since in his second booke de plantis exoticis, cap. 17. and 18. labours to proue the contrary: let the curious haue recourse to these, for it is too tedious for me in this place to insist vpon it, being so large a point of controuersie, which hath so much troubled all the late writers. @
The common Cuckow pint is called in Latine, Arum: in Greeke, (...): in shops, Iarus, and BarbaAron: of others, Pes vituli: of the Syrians, Lupha: of the men of Cyprus, Colocasia, as we finde among the bastard names. Pliny in his 24. booke, 16. chapter, doth witnesse, that there is great difference betweene Aron and Dracontium, although there hath been some controuersie about the same among the old writers, affirming them to be all one: in high Dutch it is called, Passen pint: in Italian, Gigora: in Spanish, Taro: in low Dutch, Calfsuoet: in French, Pied (...): in English, Cuckow pint, and Cuckow pintle, wake-Robin, Priests pintle, Aron; Calfes foot, and Rampe; (...) of some Stratchwoort.


 The Temperature.
The faculties of Cuckow pint doe differ according to the varietie of countries: for the root hereof (...) Galen in his booke of the faculties of nourishments doth affirme, is sharper and more (...) (...) (...) (...) than in others, almost as much as Dragons; contrariwise in Cyren a city in Africke, it is (...) in all places hot and dry, at the least in the first degree.



 The Vertues.
If any man would haue thicke and tough humours which are gathered in the chest and lungs to be clensed and voided out by coughing, then that Cuckowpint is best that biteth most.
It is eaten being sodden in two or three waters, and fresh put to, whereby it may lose his acrimonie; and being so eaten, they cut thicke humors meanely, but Dragons is better for the same purpose.
Dioscorides sheweth, that the leaues also are preserued to be eaten; and that they must be eaten after they be dried and boyled; and writeth also, that the root hath a peculiar vertue against the gout, being laid on stamped with Cowes dung.
Beares after they haue lien in their dens forty dayes without any manner of sustenance, but what they get with licking and sucking their owne feet, do as soone as they come forth (...) the herbe Cuckowpint, through the (...) nature whereof the hungry gut is opened (...) (...) fit (...) to receiue sustenance: for by abstaining from food so long a time, the (...) (...) (...) or (...) (...) close together, that in a manner it is quite shut vp, as Aristotle, Aelianus, Plutarch, (...), (...) (...) do write.
The most pure and white starch is made of the roots of Cuckowpint; but most hurtfull to the hands of the Laundresse that hath the handling of it, for it choppeth, blistereth, and maketh (...) hands rough and rugged, and withall (...).



CHAP. 305. Of Friers Cowle, or hooded Cuckowpint.


1 Arisarum latifolium. Broad (...) Friers Cowle.


2 Arisarum angustifolium. Narrow leaued Friers Cowle.



 The Description.
1 BRoad leaued Friers hood hath a leafe like Iuy, broad and sharpe pointed, but far lesse, approching neere to the forme of those of Cuckow pint: the stalke thereof is small and slender: the (...) or hose is little; the pestel small, and of a blacke purplish colour; the cluster when it is ripe is red; the kernels small; the root white, hauing the forme of Aron or Cuckowpint, but lesser, whereof doubtlesse it is a kinde.

2 The second Friers hood hath many leaues, long and narrow, smooth and glittering: The huske or hose is narrow and long; the pestell that commeth forth of it is slender, in forme like a great earth worme, of a blackish purple colour, as hath also the inside of the hose, vpon which, hard to the ground, and sometimes a little within the ground, groweth a certaine bunch or cluster of berries, greene at the first, and afterwards red: the root is round and white like the others.


 The Place.
These plants are strangers in England, but common in Italy, and especially in Tuscane about Rome, and in Dalmatia, as Aloisius Anguillara witnesseth: notwithstanding I haue them in my Garden.


 The Time.
The floures and fruit of these come to perfection with those of Cuckowpint and Dragons.


 The Names.
Friers hood is called of Dioscorides, (...): in Latine, Arisarum: but Pliny calleth it (...), or Aris; for in his twenty fourth booke, cap. 16. he saith, That Aris which groweth in Egypt is like Aron or Cuckowpint: it may be called in English after the Latine name Arisarum; but in my opinion it may be more fitly called Friers hood, or Friers cowle, to which the floures seeme to be like; whereupon the Spaniards name it Frailillos, as Daleschampius noteth.


 The (...).
Friers-Cowle is like in power and facultie to the Cuckow-pint, yet is it more biting, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
There is no great vse of these plants in physicke; but it is reported that they stay running or eating  sores or vlcers: and likewise that there is made of the roots certaine compositions called in Greeke Collyria, good against fistula's: and being put into the secret part of any liuing thing, it rotteth the same, as Dioscorides writeth. 

That which was (...) figured and described in the third place, vnder the title of (...) (...) (...), was the same with that described by the name of (...) (...), in the precedent chapter, (...) therefore here omitted.




CHAP. 306. Of Astrabacca.


1 Asarum. Asarabacca.


2 Asarina Matthioli. Italian Asarabacca.




 The Description.
1 THe leaues of Asarabacca are smooth, of a deepe greene colour, rounder, broader, and tenderer than those of Iuy, and not cornered at all, not vnlike to those of Sow-bread: the floures lie close to the roots, hid vnder the leaues, standing vpon slender footstalkes, of an ill fauoured purple colour, like to the floures and husks of Henbane, but lesse, wherein are contained small seeds, cornered, and somewhat rough: the roots are many, small and slender, growing aslope vnder the vpper crust of the earth, one folded within another, of an vnpleasant taste, but of a most sweet and pleasing smell, hauing withall a kinde of biting qualitie.
2 This strange kinde of Asarabacca, which Matthiolus hath set forth creeping on the ground, in manner of our common Astrabacca, hath leaues somwhat rounder and rougher, sleightly indented about the edges, and set vpon long slender foot-stalkes: the floures grow hard vnto the ground like vnto those of Cammomill, but much lesser, of a mealy or dusty colour, and not without smel. The roots are long and slender, creeping vnder the vpper crust of the earth, of a sharpe taste, and bitter withall. @ This Asarina of Matthiolus, Clusius (whose opinion I here follow) hath iudged to be the Tussilago Alpina 2. of his description; wherefore I giue you his figure in stead of that of our Author, which had the floures exprest, which this wants. @


 The Place.
It delighteth to grow in shadowie places, and is very common in most gardens.


 The Time.
The herbe is alwaies greene; yet doth it in the Spring bring forth new leaues and floures.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...), Asarum: in Latine, Nardus rustica: and of diuers, Perpensa: Perpensa is also Baccharis in Pliny, lib. 21. cap. 21. Macer saith, That Asarum is called Vulgago, in these words:
Est Asaron Graece, Vulgago (...) Latine.
This herbe, Asaron do the Grecians name; Whereas the Latines Vulgago clepe the same.
It is found also amongst the bastard names, that it was called of the great learned Philosophers (...): that is, Martis sanguis, or the bloud of Mars: and of the French men Baccar; and thereupon it seemeth that the word Asarabacca came, which the Apothecaries vse, and likewise the common people: but there is another Baccharis differing from Asarum, yet notwithstanding Crateuas doth also call Baccharis, Asarum.
This confusion of both the names hath been the cause, that most could not sufficiently expound themselues concerning Asarum and Baccharis; and that many things haue beene written amisse in many copies of Dioscorides, in the chapter of Asarum: for when it is set downe in the Greek copies a sweet smelling garden herbe, it belongeth not to the description of this Asarum, but to that of Baccharis: for Asarum (as Pliny saith) is so called, because it is not put into garlands: and so by that meanes it came to passe, that oftentimes the descriptions of the old Writers were found corrupted and confused: which thing, as it is in this place manifest, so oftentimes it cannot so easily be marked in other places. Furthermore, Asarum is called in French Cabaret: in high-Dutch, Hazelwurtz: in low-Dutch, Mansooren: in English, Asarabacca, Fole-foot, and Hazel-wort.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of Asarabacca are hot and dry, with a purging qualitie adioyned thereunto, yet not without a certaine kinde of astriction or binding. The roots are also hot and dry, yet more than the leaues; they are of thin and subtill parts: they procure vrine, bring downe the desired sicknes, and are like in facultie, as Galen saith, to the roots of Acorus, but yet more forceable; and the roots of Acorus are also of a thinne essence, heating, attenuating, drying, and prouoking vrine, as he (...): which things are happily performed by taking the roots of Asarabacca, either by themselues, or mixed with other things.


 The Vertues.
The leaues draw forth by vomit, thicke phlegmaticke and cholericke humours, and withall  moue the belly; and in this they are more forceable and of greater effect than the roots themselues.
They are thought to keepe in hard swelling cankers that they encrease not, or come to exulceration, or creeping any farther, if they be outwardly applied vpon the same.
The roots are good against the stoppings of the liuer, gall, and spleene, against wens and hard  swellings, and agues of long continuance: but being taken in the greater quantitie, they purge flegme and choler not much lesse than the leaues (though Galen say no) by vomit especially, and also by siege.

One dram of the pouder of the roots giuen to drinke in ale or wine, grossely beaten, prouoketh  vomit for the purposes aforesaid; but being beaten into fine pouder, and so giuen, it purgeth very little by vomit, but worketh most by procuring much vrine; therefore the grosser the pouder is, so much the better.
But if the roots be infused or boyled, then must two, three, or foure drams be put to the infusion;  and of the leaues eight or nine be sufficient: the iuyce of which stamped with some liquid thing, is to be giuen. The roots may be steeped in wine, but more effectually in whay or (...) water, as Mesues teacheth.
The same is good for them that are tormented with the Sciatica or gout in the huckle bones, for those that haue the dropsie, and for such also as are vexed with a quartaine ague, who are cured and made whole by vomiting.



CHAP. 307. Of Sea Binde-weed.


1 Soldanella marina. Sea Binde-weed.


@ 2 Soldanella Alpina maior. Mountaine Binde-weed.



 The Description.
1 Soldanella or Sea Binde-weed hath many small branches, somwhat red, trailing vpon the ground, beset with small and round leaues, not much vnlike Asarabacca, or the leaues of Aristolochia, but smaller; betwixt which leaues and the stalkes come forth floures formed like a bell, of a bright red incarnate colour, in euery respect answering the small Bindeweed, whereof it is a kinde, albeit I haue here placed the same, for the reasons rendred in my Proeme. The seed is blacke, and groweth in round huskes: the root is long and small, thrusting it selfe far abroad, and into the earth like the other Binde-weeds.
2 Soldanella or mountaine Binde-weed hath many round leaues spred vpon the ground, not much vnlike the former, but rounder, and more full of veines, greener, of a bitter taste like sea Bindeweed: among which commeth forth a small and tender stalke a handfull high, bearing at the top little floures like the small Bell-floure, of a sky colour. The root is small and threddy.



@ 3 Soldanella Alpina minor. Small Mountaine Bindweed.


@ 3 There is of this kinde another hauing all the parts smaller, and the leaues redder and rounder: the floures also blew, and composed of one leafe diuided into fiue parts, and succeeded by a longish cod, round and sharp pointed. @


 The Place.
The first grows plentifully by the Sea shore in most places of England, especially neere to Lee in Essex, at Mersey in the same countie, in most places of the Isle of Thanet, and Shepey, and in many places along the Northern coast.
The second groweth vpon the mountains of Germanie, and the Alpes; it groweth vpon the mountains of VVales, not far from Cowmers Meare in North-Wales.


 The Time.
These herbes do floure in Iune, and are gathered in August to be kept for medicine.


 The Names.
The first called Soldanella is of the Apothecaries and the Antients called Marina Brassica, that is to say, Sea Co'ewoort: but what reason hath moued them so to doe I cannot conceiue, vnlesse it be penurie and scarsitie of names, and because they know not otherwise how to terme it: of this I am sure, that this plant and Brassica are no more like than things which are most vnlike; for Brassica Marina is the Sea Colewoort, which doth much resemble the garden Cabbage or Cole, both in shape and in nature, as I haue in his due place expressed. A great fault and ouersight therefore it hath been of the old writers and their successors which haue continued the custome of this error, not taking the paines to distinguish a Bindeweed from a Cole-woort. But to auoid controuersies, the truth is, as I haue before shewed, that this Soldanella is a Bindeweed, and cannot be esteemed for a Brassica, that is a Colewoort. The later Herbarists call it Soldana, and Soldanella: in Dutch, Zeewind, that is to say, Convoluulus Marinus: of Dioscorides (...), (i) Brassica Marina: in English, Sea VVithwinde, Sea Bindweed, Sea-bels, Sea-coale, of some, Sea Fole-foot, and Scottish Scuruie-grasse.
The second is called Soldanella montana: in English, Mountaine Bindweed.


 The Nature.
Sea Bindeweed is hot and drie in the second degree: the second is bitter and very astringent.


 The Vertues.
Soldanella purgeth downe mightily all kinde of watrish humours, and openeth the stoppings of  the liuer, and is giuen with great profit against the dropsie: but it must be boiled with the broth of some fat meat or flesh, and the broth drunke, or else the herbe taken in pouder worketh the like effect.
Soldanella hurteth the stomack, and troubleth the weake and delicate bodies which doe receiue it  in pouder, wherefore aduice must be taken to mix the said pouder with Annise seeds, Cinnamon, ginger, and sugar, which spices do correct his malignitie.
Practitioners about Auspurge and Rauispurge (cities of Germanie) do greatly boast that they  haue done wonders with this herbe Soldanella montana; saying, that the leaues taken and emplaistred vpon the nauell and somewhat lower, draw forth water from their bellies that are hydroptike, that is, troubled with water or the dropsie: this effect it worketh in other parts without heating.
It doth also wonderfully bring flesh in wounds, and healeth them.
Dioscorides witnesseth, that the whole herbe is an enemie to the stomacke, biting and extremely  purging (both sodden, and taken with meat) and bringeth troublesome gripings thereunto, and doth oftentimes more hurt than good.
@ My friend Mr. Goodyer hath told me, that in Hampshire at Chichester and (...) they  make vse of this for Scuruio-grasse, and that not without great errour, as any that know the qualities mayeasily perceiue.




CHAP. 308. Of the Grasse of Parnassus.


The figure that was formerly in the first place of this Chapter was of Vnifolium, described before, (...). 90. (...). 409. that which was in the second place belonged to the first description.

 1 Gramen Parnassi. Grasse of Parnassus.


@ 2 Gramen Parnassi flore duplici. Grasse of Parnassus with double floures.



 The Description.
1 THe Grasse of Parnassus hath small round leaues, very much differing from any kind of Grasse, much resembling the leaues of Iuie, or Asarabacca, but smaller, and not of so darke a colour: among these leaues spring vp small stalkes a foot high, bearing little white floures consisting of fiue round pointed leaues; which beeing falne and past, there come vp round knops or heads, wherein is contained a reddish seed. The root is somewhat thicke, with many strings annexed thereto.
2 The second kinde of Gramen Parnassi doth answer the former in each respect, sauing that the leaues are somewhat larger, and the floures double, otherwise verie like.


 The Place.
The first groweth very plentifully in Lansdall and Crauen, in the North parts of England; at Doncaster, and in Thornton fields in the same countrie: moreouer in the Moore neere to Linton, by Cambridge, at Hesset also in Suffolke, at a place named Drinkstone, in the medow called Butchers mead. @ Mr. Goodyer found it in the boggy ground below the red well of Wellingborough in Northampton shire: and Mr. William Broad obserued it to grow plentifully in the Castle fields of Berwicke vpon Tweed. @
The second is a stranger in England.


 The Time.
These herbes do floure in the end of Iuly, and their seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
Valerius Cordus hath among many that haue written of these herbes said something of them to good purpose, calling them by the name of Hepatica alba (whereof without controuersie they are kindes) in English, white Liuerwoort: although there is another plant called Hepatica alba, which

for distinction sake I haue thought good to English, Noble white Liu erwoort.
The second may be called Noble white Liuerwoort with the double floure.


 The Nature.
The seed of Parnassus Grasse, or white Liuer-woort, is drie, and of subtill parts.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the leaues of Parnassus Grasse drunken, doth drie and strengthen the feeble  and moist stomacke, stoppeth the bellie, and taketh away the desire to vomite.
The same boiled in wine or water, and drunken, especially the seed thereof, prouoketh vrine, breaketh  the stone, and driueth it forth.



CHAP. 309. Of white Saxifrage, or Golden Saxifrage.

 The Description.
1 THe white Saxifrage hath round leaues spred vpon the ground, and somewhat iagged about the edges, not much vnlike the leaues of ground Iuie, but softer and smaller, and of a more faint yellowish greene: among which riseth vp a round hairie stalke a cubit high, bearing at the top small white floures, almost like Stockgillofloures: the root is compact of a number of blacke strings, whereunto are fastened very many small reddish graines or round roots as bigge as pepper cornes, which are vsed in medicine, and are called Semen Saxifragae albae; that is, the seede of white Saxifrage, or Stone-breake, although (beside these foresaid round knobbes) it hath also small seed contained in little huskes, following his floure as other herbes haue.


1 Saxifraga alba. White Saxifrage.


2 Saxifraga aurea. Golden Saxifrage.





@ 3 Saxifraga albapetraea. White Rocke Saxifrage.


2 Golden Saxifrage hath round compassed leaues, bluntly indented about the borders like the former, among which rise vp stalkes a handfull high, at the top whereof grow two or three little leaues together: out of the middle of them spring small floures of a golden color, after which come little husks, wherein is contained the red seed, not vnlike the former: the roote is tender, creeping in the ground (...) long threds or haires.
@ 3 Pona hath set forth this plant by the name of Saxifraga alba petraea, and therefore I haue placed it here; though I thinke I might more fitly haue ranked him with (...) rutaceo folio formerly described. It hath a small single root from which arise diuers fat longish leaues, somewhat hairy, and diuided into three parts: amongst those rises vp a round knottie stalke, roughish, and of a purplish colour, some halfe foot high, diuided into sundry branches, which carry white floures, consisting of fiue leaues apiece, with some yellowish threds in their middles: these falling, there remaines a cup containing a very small seed. It floures at the end of Iune in the shadowie places of the Alpes, whereas Pona first obserued it. @


 The Place.
The white Saxifrage groweth plentifully in sundrie places of England, and especially in a field on the left hand of the high way, as you goe from the place of execution called Saint Thomas Waterings vnto Dedford by London. It groweth also in the great field by Islington called the Mantles: also in the greene places by the sea side at Lee in Essex, among the rushes, and in sundrie other places thereabout, and else where. @ It also growes in Saint Georges fields behinde Southwarke. @
The golden Saxifrage groweth in the moist and marish grounds about Bathe and Wels, also in the Moores by Boston and Wisbich in Lincolnshire: @ and Mr. George Bowles hath found it growing in diuers woods at Chisselhurst in Kent: Mr. Goodyer also hath obserued it abundantly on the shadowie moist rockes by Mapledurham in Hampshire: and I haue found it in the like places in Yorkshire. @


 The Time.
The white Saxifrage floureth in May and Iune: the herbe with his floure are no more seen vntill the next yeare.
The golden Saxifrage floureth in March and Aprill.


 The Names.
The first is called in (...) (...) Alba: in English, white (...), or white Stone-breake.
The second is called Golden Saxifrage, or golden Stone-breake.


 The Nature.
The first of these, especially the root and seed thereof, is of a warme or hot complexion.
Golden Saxifrage is of a cold nature, as the taste doth manifestly declare.


 The Vertues.
The root of white Saxifrage boiled in wine and drunken, prouoketh vrine, clenseth the kidneis  and bladder, breaketh the stone, and driueth it forth, and is singular good against the strangurie, and all other griefes and imperfections in the reines.
The vertues of golden Saxifrage are yet vnto vs vnknowne, notwitstanding I am of this minde, that it is a singular wound herbe, equall with Sanicle.




CHAP. 310 Of Sow-bread.

 The Description.
1 THe first being the common kinde of Sowbread, called in shops Panis porcinus, and Arthanita, hath many greene and round leaues like vnto Asarabacca, sauing that the vpper part of the leaues are mixed here and there confusedly with white spots, and vnder the leaues next the ground of a purple colour: among which rise vp little stemmes like vnto the stalks of violets, bearing at the top small purple floures, which turne themselues backward (beeing full blowne) like a Turks cap, or Tulepan, of a small sent or (...), or none at all: which being past there succeed little round knops or heads which containe slender browne seedes: these knoppes
1 Cyclamen orbiculato folio. Round Sowbread.2 Cyclamen folio Heder.. Iuie Sowbread.@ 3 Cyclamen Vernum. Spring Sowbread.
are wrapped after a few daies in the small stalkes, as thred about a bottome, where it remaineth so defended from the iniurie of Winter close vpon the ground, couered also with the greene leaues aforesaid, by which meanes it is kept from the frost, euen from the time of his seeding, which is in September vntill Iune: at which time the leaues do fade away, the stalkes and seed remaining bare and naked, whereby it inioyeth the Sun (whereof it was long depriued) the sooner to bring them vnto maturitie: the root is round like a Turnep, blacke without and white within, with many smal strings annexed thereto.


@ 4 Cyclamen Vernum album. White floured Sowbread.


@ 5 An Cyclaminos altera, hederaceis folijs planta?


2 The second kinde of Sowbread, hath broad leaues spred vpon the ground, sharpe pointed somewhat indented about the edges, of a darke greene colour, with some little lines or strakes of white on the vpper side, and of a darke reddish colour on that side next the ground: among which rise vp slender foot-stalks of two or three inches long: at the tops whereof stand such floures as the precedent, but of a sweeter smell, and more pleasant colour. The seed is also wrapped vp in the stalk for his further defence against the iniurie of winter. The root is somewhat greater, and of more vertue, as shall be declared.
3 There is a third kinde of Sowbread that hath round leaues without peaked corners, as the last before mentioned, yet somewhat snipt about the edges, and speckled with white about the brims of the leaues, and of a blackish colour in the middle: the floures are like to the rest, but of a deeper purple: the root also like, but smaller, and this commonly floures in the Spring.
@ 4 This in leaues and roots is much like the last described, but the floures are smaller, snow white, and sweet smelling. There are diuers other varieties of these plants, which I thinke it not necessarie for me to insist vpon: wherefore I referre the curious to the Garden of floures set forth by Mr. Iohn Parkinson, where they shall finde satisfaction. @
5 There is a plant which I haue set forth in this place that may very well be called into question, and his place also, considering that there hath been great contention about the same, and not fully determined on either part, which hath moued me to place him with those plants that most do resemble one another, both in shape and name: this plant hath greene cornered leaues like to Iuie,

long and small gaping floures like the small Snapdragon: more hath not been said of this plant, either of stalke or root, but is left vnto the consideration of the learned.
@ The plant which our Author here would acquaint you with, is that which Lobel figures with this title which I here giue, and saith it was gathered amongst other plants on the hils of Italy, but in what part or place, or how growing he knew not; and he onely questions whether it may not be the Cyclaminos altera of Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap. 195. @


 The Place.
Sow bread groweth plentifully about Artoies and Vermandois in France, and in the Forest of Arden, and in Brabant: but the second groweth plentifully in many places of Italie.
It is reported vnto mee by men of good credit, that Cyclamen or Sow-bread groweth vpon the mountaines of Wales; on the hils of Lincolnshire, and in Somersetshire by the house of a gentleman called Mr. Hales; vpon a Fox-borough also not far from Mr. Bamfields, neere to a towne called Hardington. The first two kindes do grow in my garden, where they prosper well. @ I cannot learne that this growes wilde in England. @


 The Time.
Sow-bread floureth in September when the plant is without leafe, which doth afterwards spring vp, continuing greene all the Winter, couering and keeping warme the seede vntill Midsommer next, at what time the seed is ripe as aforesaid. The third floureth in the spring, for which cause it was called Cyclamen (...): and so doth also the fourth.


 The Names.
Sow bread is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Tuber terrae, and Terrae rapum: of Marcellus, Orbicularis: of Apuleius, Palalia, Rapum Porcinum, and Terrae malum: in shops, Cyclamen, Panis porcinus, and Arthanita: in Italian, Pan Porcino: in Spanish, Mazan de Puerco: in High Dutch, Schweinbrot: in Low Dutch, Uetckins broot: in French, Pain de Porceau: in English, Sow-bread. Pliny calleth the colour of this floure in Latine, Colossinus color: in English, Murrey colour.


 The Nature.
Sow-bread is hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The root of Sow-bread dried into pouder and taken inwardly in the quantitie of a dram and a  halfe, with mead or honied water, purgeth downeward tough and grosse flegme, and other sharpe humours.
The same taken in wine as aforesaid, is very profitable against all poison, and the bitings of venomous  beasts, and to be outwardly applied to the hurt place.
The pouder taken as aforesaid, cureth the iaundise and the stoppings of the liuer, taketh away  the yellow colour of the bodie, if the patient after the taking hereof be caused to sweat.
The leaues stamped with honie, and the iuice put into the eies, cleereth the sight, taketh away al  spots and webs, pearle or haw, and all impediments of the sight, and is put into that excellent ointment called Vnguentum Arthanitae.
The root hanged about women in their extreame trauell with childe, causeth them to be deliuered  incontinent, and taketh away much of their paine.
The leaues put into the place hath the like effect, as my wife hath prooued sundrie times vpon  diuers women, by my aduise and commandement, with good successe.
The iuice of Sow-bread doth open the Hemorrhoids, and causeth them to flow beeing applied  with wooll or flocks.
It is mixed with medicines that consume or waste away knots, the Kings euill, and other (...) swellings: moreouer it clenseth the head by the nostrils, it purgeth the belly being annointed therwith, and killeth the childe. It is a strong medicine to destroy the birth, being put vp as a pessarie.
It scoureth the skin, and taketh away Sun-burning, and all blemishes of the face, pilling of the  haire, and marks also that remaine after the small pocks and mesels: and giuen in wine to drinke, it maketh a man drunke.
The decoction thereof serueth as a good and effectuall bath for members out of ioint, the gout, aud kibed heeles.
The root being made hollow and filled with oile, closed with a little wax, and rosted in the hot  embers, maketh an excellent ointment for the griefes last rehearsed.
Being beaten and made vp into trochisches, or little flat cakes, it is reported to be a good amorous  medicine to make one in loue if it be inwardly taken.


 The Danger.
It is not good for women with childe to touch or take this herbe, or to come neere vnto it, or stride ouer the same where it groweth; for the naturall attractiue vertue therein contained is such, that without controuersie they that attempt it in maner abouesaid, shall be deliuered before their

time: which danger and inconuenience to auoid, I haue (about the place where it groweth in my garden) fastened sticks in the ground, and some other stickes I haue fastened also crosse-waies ouer them, lest any woman should by lamentable experiment finde my words to bee true, by their stepping ouer the same.
@ I iudge our Author something too womanish in this, that is, led more by vain opinion than by any reason or experience, to confirme this his assertion, which frequent experience shews to be vaine and friuolous, especially for the touching, striding ouer, or comming neere to this herbe. @



CHAP. 311. Of Birthwoorts.

 The Kindes.
BIrthwoort, as Dioscorides writeth, is of three sorts, long, round, and winding: Plinie hath added a fourth kinde called Pistolochia, or little Birthwoort. The later writers haue ioined vnto them a fifth, named Saracens Birthwoort.


1 Aristolochia longa. Long Birthwoort.


2 Aristolochiarotunda. Round Birthwoort.




 The Description.
1 LOng Birthwoort hath many small long slender stalkes creeping vpon the ground, tangling one with another very intricately, beset with round leaues not much vnlike Sowbread or Iuie, but larger, of a light or ouerworne greene colour, and of a grieuous or lothsome smell and sauour: among which come forth long hollow floures, not much vnlike the floures of Aron, but without any pestell or clapper in the same; of a dark purple colour: after which do follow small fruit like vnto little peares, containing triangled seeds of a blackish colour. The root is long, thicke, of the colour of box, of a strong sauour and bitter taste.
2 The round Birthwoort in stalkes and leaues is like the first, but his leaues are rounder: the floures differ onely in this, that they be somewhat longer and narrower, and of a faint yellowish colour, but the small flap or point of the floure that turneth backe againe, is of a darke or blacke purple

colour. The fruit is formed like a peare, sharpe toward the top, more ribbed and fuller than the former: the root is round like vnto Sow-bread, in taste and sauour like the former.


3 Aristolochia clematitis. Climing Birthwoort.


@ 4 Aristolochia Saracenica. Saracens Birthwoort,


@ 5 Pistolochia. Small Birthwoort.


3 Climing Birthwoort taketh hold of any thing that is next vnto it, with his long and clasping stalks, which be oftentimes branched, and windeth it selfe like Bindweed: the stalks of the leaues are longer, whose leaues be smooth, broad, sharpe pointed, as be those of the others: the floures likewise hollow, long, yellow, or of a blackish purple colour: the fruit differeth not from that of the others: but the roots be slender and very long, sometimes creeping on the top of the earth, and sometimes growing deeper, being of like colour with the former ones.
4 There is a fourth kinde of Birthwoort resembling the rest in leaues and branched stalkes, yet

higher, and longer than either the long or the round: the leaues thereof be greater than those of Asarabacca; the floures hollow, long, and in one side hanging ouer, of a yellowish colour: the fruit is long and round like a peare, in which the seeds lie seuered, of forme three square, of an ill fauored blackish colour: the root is somewhat long, oftentimes of a mean thicknesse, yellow like to the colour of Box, not inferior in bitternesse either to the long or to the round Birthwoort: and sometimes these are found to be small and slender, and that is when they were but lately digged vp and gathered: for by the little parcels of the roots which are left, the young plants bring (...) at the beginning tender and branched roots.
5 Small Birthwoort is like to the long and round Birthwoort both in stalkes and leaues, yet is it lesser and tenderer: the leaues thereof are broad, and like those of Iuie: the floure is long, hollow in the vpper part, and on the outside blackish: the fruit something round like the fruit of round Birthwoort: in stead of roots there grow forth a multitude of slender strings.


@ 6 Pistolochia Cretica siue Virginiana. Virginian Snake-root.


@ 6 Clusius figures and describes another smal Pistolochia by the name of Pistolochia Cretica, to which I thought good to adde the Epithite Virginia also, for that the much admired Snakeweed of Virginia seems no otherwise to differ from it than an inhabitant of Candy from one of the Virginians, which none I thinke will say to differ in specie. I will first giue Clusius his description, and then expresse the little varietie that I haue obserued in the plants that were brought from Virginia, and grew here with vs: it sends forth many slender stalks a foot long, more or lesse, and these are cornered or indented, crested, branched, tough, and bending towards the ground, or spred thereon, and of a darke green colour: vpon which without order grow leaues, neruous, and like those of the last described, yet much sharper pointed, and after a sort resembling the shape of those of Smilax aspera; but lesse, and of a darke and lasting greene colour, fastened to longish stalkes: out of whose bosomes grow long and hollow crooked floures, in shape like those of the long Birthwoort, but of a darker red on the outside, but somewhat yellowish within: and these are also fastened to pretty long stalks; and they are succeeded by fruit, not-vnlike, yet lesse than that of the long BirthwortThis hath abundance of roots, like as the former, but much smaller, and more fibrous, and of a stronger smell. It floures in Iuly and August. Thus Clusius describes his, to which that Snakeweed that was brought from Virginia, and grew with Mr. Iohn Tradescant at South-Lambeth, An. 1632. was agreeable in all points, but here and there one of the lower leaues were somwhat broader and rounder pointed than the rest: the floure was long, red, crooked, and a little hairie, and it did not open the top, or shew the inner side, which I iudge was by reason of the coldnesse and vnseasonablenesse of the later part of the Sommer when it floured: the stalks in the figure should haue been exprest more crooking or indenting, for they commonly grow so. How hard it is to iudge of plants by one particle or facultie may very well appeare by this herbe I now treat of: for some by the similitude the root had with Asarum, and a vomiting qualitie which they attributed to it (which certainly is no other than accidentall) would forthwith pronounce and maintaine it an Asarum: some also refer it to other things, as to Primroses, Vincitoxicum, etc. Others morewarily named it Serpentaria Virginiana, and Radix Virginiana, names as it were offering themselues and easily to be fitted and imposed vpon sundry things, but yet too generall, and therefore not fit any more to be vsed, seeing the true and specifick denomination is found. @


 The Place.
Pliny sheweth, that the Birthwoorts grow in fat and champion places, the fieldes of Spaine are

full of these three long and round Birthwoorts: they are also found in Italie and Narbone or Languedock, a countrey in France. Petrus Bellonius writeth, that he found branched Birthwoort vpon Ida, a mountaine in Candie: Carolus Clusius faith, that he found this same about Hispalis, and in many other places of Granado in Spain; among bushes and brambles: they grow all in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in May, Iune, and Iuly.


 The Names.
Birthwoort is called in Greeke (...): in Latine likewise Aristolochia, because it is (...) that is to say, good for women newly brought a bed, or deliuered with childe: in English, Birthwort, Hartwoort, and of some, Aristolochia.
The first is called Aristolochia longa, or long Birthwoort, of the forme of his root, and likewise Aristolochiamas, or male Birthwoort: the second is thought to be Foemina or female Birthwoort, and it is called Rotunda Aristolochia, or round Birthwoort: of diuers also Terrae malum, the Apple of the earth: yet Cyclaminus is also called Terrae malum, or the Apple of the earth:


 The Temperature.
All these Birthwoorts are of temperature hot and drie, and that in the third degree, hauing besides a power to clense.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that a dram weight of long Birthwoort drunke with wine and also applied, is  good against serpents and deadly things: and that being drunke with myrrhe and pepper, it expelleth whatsoeuer is left in the matrix after the childe is deliuered, the floures also and dead children: and that being put vp in a pessarie it performeth the same.
Round Birthwoort serueth for all these things, and also for the rest of the other poisons: it is  likewise auaileable against the stuffing of the lungs, the hicket, the shakings or shiuerings of agues, hardnesse of the milt or (...), burstings, cramps, and couvulsions, paines of the sides if it be drunk with water.
It plucketh out thornes, splinters, and shiuers, and being mixed in plaisters, or pultesses, it draws  forth scales or bones, remoueth rottennesse or corruption, mundifieth and scoureth foule and filthy vlcers, and filleth them vp with new flesh, if it be mixed with Ireos and honie.
Galen saith, that branched Birthwoort is of a more sweet and pleasant smell: and therefore is vsed  in ointments; but it is (...) in operation than the former ones.
Birthwoort, as Pliny writeth, being drunk with water is a most excellent remedie for cramps and  convulsions, bruises, and for such as haue falne from high places.
It is good for them that are short-winded, and are troubled with the falling sicknesse.
The round Aristolochia doth beautifie, clense, and fasten the teeth, if they be often fretted or rubbed  with the pouder thereof.
@ The root of the Virginian Pistolochia, which is of a strong and aromaticke sent, is a singular and  much vsed Antidote against the bite of the Rattle-snake, or rather Adder or Viper, whose bite is very deadly, and therfore by the prouidence of the Creator he hath vpon his taile a skinny dry substance parted into cels which containe some loose, hard drie bodies that rattle in them (as if one should put little stones or pease into a stiffe and very dry bladder) that so he may by this noise giue warning of his approch, the better to be auoided; but if any be bitten, they know, nor stand in need of no better antidote, than this root, which they chew, and apply to the wound, and also swallow some of it downe, by which means they quickly ouercome the malignitie of this poisonous bite, which otherwise in a very short time would proue deadly. Many also commend the vse of this against the plague, small pox, measels, and such like maligne and contagious diseases. @



CHAP. 312. Of Violets.

The Kindes.
THere might be described many kinds of (...) vnder this name of violets, if their differences should be more curiously looked into than is necessarie: for we might ioine hereunto the stock Gillofloures, the Wall floures, Dames Gillofloures, (...) violets, and likewise some of the bulbed floures, because some of them by Theophrastus are termed Violets. But this was not our charge, holding it sufficient to distinguish and diuide them as neere as may be in kindred and neighbourhood; addressing my selfe vnto the Violets called the blacke or purple violets, or March Violets of the Garden, which haue a great prerogatiue aboue others, not onely because the minde conceiueth a certaine pleasure and recreation by smelling and handling of those most odoriferous flours, but also for that very many by these Violets receiue ornament and comely grace: for there bee made of them Galands for the head, Nose-gaies, and poesies, which are delightfull to looke on, and pleasant to smell to, speaking nothing of their appropriate vertues; yea Gardens themselues receiue by these the greatest ornament of all, chiefest beautie and most gallant grace; and the recreation

of the minde which is taken hereby, cannot be but very good and honest: for they admonish and stir vp a man to that which is comely and honest; for floures through their beautie, variety of colour, and exquisite forme, do bring to a liberall and gentle manly minde, the remembrance of honestie, comelinesse, and all kindes of vertues. For it would be an vnseemely and filthie thing (as a certaine wise man saith) for him that doth looke vpon and handle faire and beautifull things, and who frequenteth and is conuersant in faire and beautifull places, to haue his minde not faire, but filthie and deformed.


 The Description.
1 THe blacke or purple Violet doth forthwith bring from the root many leaues, broad, sleightly indented in the edges, rounder than the leaues of Iuie: among the midst wherof spring vp fine slender stems, and vpon euerie one a beautifull floure sweetly smelling, of a blew darkish purple, consisting of fiue little leaues, the lowest whereof is the greatest; and after them doe appeare little hanging cups or knaps, which, when they be ripe, do open and diuide themselues into three parts. The seed is small, long, and somewhat round withall. The root consisteth of many threddie strings.


1 Viola nigra sive purpurea. The purple Garden Violet.


2 Violaflore albo. The white Garden Violet.


2 The white garden Violet hath many milke white floures, in forme and figure like the precedent: the colour of whose floures especially setteth forth the difference.
3 The double garden violet hath leaues, creeping branches, and roots like the garden single violet; differing in that, that this sort of Violet bringeth forth most beautifull sweet double floures, and the other single.
4 The white double Violet likewise agreeth with the other of his kinde, and only differeth in the colour. For as the last described bringeth double blew or purple floures: contrariwise this plant beareth double white floures, which maketh the difference.
5 The yellow Violet is by nature one of the wilde Violets, for it groweth seldome any where but vpon most high and craggie mountains, from whence it hath bin diuers times brought into the garden, but it can hardly be brought to culture, or grow in the garden without great industrie. And by the relation of a Gentleman often remembred, called Mr. Thomas Hesketh, who found it

3 Violamartia purpurea multiplex. The double garden purple Violet.5 Viola martia lutea. Yellow Violets.@ 6 Viola canina syluestris. Dogs Violets, or wilde Violets.
growing vpon the hills in Lancashire, neere vnto a village called Latham; and though he brought them into his garden, yet they withered and (...). The whole plant is described to be like vnto the field Violet, and differeth from it, in that this plant bringeth forth yellow floures, yet like in forme and figure, but without smell.
6 The wilde field Violet with round leaues riseth forth of the ground (...) a fibrous root, with long slender branches, whereupon do grow round smooth leaues. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a light blew colour: @ and this growes commonly in Woods and such like places; and floures in Iuly and August. There is another varietie of this wilde Violet, which hath the leaues longer, narrower, and sharper pointed. And this was formerly figured and described in this place by our Author. @
7 There is found in Germanie, about Noremberg and Strasborough, a kinde of Violet which is altogether a stranger in these parts. It hath (saith my Author) a thicke and tough root of a wooddy substance, from which riseth vp a stalke diuiding it selfe into diuers branches, of a wooddy substance; whereupon grow long iagged leaues like those of the Pansey. The floures grow at the top, compact of fiue leaues apiece, of a watchet colour.



 The Place.
The Violet groweth in gardens almost euery where: the others which are strangers haue beene touched in their descriptions.


 The Time.
The floures for the most part appeare in March, at the farthest in Aprill.


 The Names.
The Violet is called in Greeke (...): of Theophrastus, both (...), and (...): in Latine, Nigraviola, or blacke Violet, of the blackish purple colour of the floures. The Apothecharies keepe the Latine name Viola; but they call it Herba Violaria, and Mater Violarum: in high-Dutch, (...) (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in French, Violette de Mars: in Italian, Violamammola: in Spanish, Violeta: in English, Violet. Nicander in his Geoponickes beleeueth, (as Hermolaus sheweth) that the Grecians did call it (...), because certaine Nymphs of Ionia gaue that floure first to Iupiter. Others say it was called (...), because when Iupiter had turned the young Damosell Io, whom he tenderly loued, into a Cow, the earth brought forth this floure for her food: which being made for her sake, receiued the name from her; and thereupon it is thought that the Latines also called it Viola, as though they should say Vitula, by blotting out the letter t. Seruius reporteth, That for the same cause the Latines also name it Vaccinium, alledging the place of Virgil in his Bucolicks:

Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.

Notwithstanding Virgil in his tenth Eclog sheweth, that Vaccinium and Viola do differ.

Ei nigrae violae sunt, and vaccinia nigra.

@ Vitruvius also in his seuenth booke of Architecture or Building doth distinguish Viola from Vaccinium: for he sheweth that the colour called Sile Atticum, or the Azure of Athens, is made ex Viola; and the gallant purple, ex Vaccinio. The Dyers, saith he, when they would counterfeit Sile, or Azure of Athens, put the dried Violets into a fat, kettle, or caldron, and boyle them with water; afterwards when it is tempered they poure it into a linnen strainer, and wringing it with their hands, receiue into a mortar the liquor coloured with the Violets; and steeping earth of Erethria in it, and grinding the same, they make the Azure colour of Athens. After the same manner they temper Vaccinium, and putting milke vnto it, do make a gallant purple colour. But what Vaccinia are we will elsewhere declare.


 The Temperature.
The floures and leaues of the Violets are cold and moist.


 The Vertues.
The floures are good for all inflammations, especially of the sides and lungs; they take away  the hoarsenesse of the chest, the ruggednesse of the winde-pipe and iawes, allay the extream heate of the liuer, kidneyes, and bladder; mitigate the fierie heate of burning agues; temper the sharpnesse of choler, and take away thirst.
There is an oyle made of Violets, which is likewise cold and moist. The same being anointed  vpon the testicles, doth gently prouoke sleepe which is hindred by a hot and dry distemper: mixed or laboured together in a woodden dish with the yelke of an egge, it asswageth the pain of the fundament and hemorrhoides: it is likewise good to be put into cooling clisters, and into pultesses that coole and ease paine.
But let the oyle in which the Violets be steeped be either of vnripe oliues, called Omphacinum, or of sweet Almonds, as Mesues saith, and the Violets themselues must be fresh and moist: For being dry, and hauing lost their moisture, they doe not coole, but seeme to haue gotten a kinde of heate.
The later Physitians do thinke it good to mix dry Violets with medicines that are to comfort  and strengthen the heart.
The leaues of Violets inwardly taken do coole, moisten, and make the belly soluble. Being outwardly  applied, they mitigate all kinde of hot inflammations, both taken by themselues, and also applied with Barley floure dried at the fire, after it hath lien soking in the water. They are likewise laid vpon a hot stomacke, and on burning eyes, as Galen witnesseth. Dioscorides writeth, that they be moreouer applied to the fundament that is fallen out.
They may helpe the fundament that is fallen out, not as a binder keeping back the fundament, but as a suppler and a mollifier. Besides, Pliny saith that Violets are as well vsed in garlands, as smelt vnto; and are good against surfeting, heauinesse of the head and being dried in water and drunke, they remoue the Squinancie or inward swellings of the throat. They cure the falling sicknesse, especially in yong children, and the seed is good against the stinging of Scorpions.
There is a syrrup made of Violets and Sugar, whereof three or foure ounces being taken at one  time, soften the belly, and purge choler. The manner to make it is as followeth.
First make of clarified sugar by boyling a simple syrrup of a good consistence or meane thickenesse, whereunto put the floures cleane picked from all manner of filth, as also the white ends

nipped away, a quantitie according to the quantitie of the syrrup, to your owne discretion, wherein let them infuse or steepe soure and twenty houres, and set vpon a few warme embers; then strain it, and put more Violets into the same syrrup: thus do three or foure times, the oftner the better; then set them vpon a gentle fire to simper, but not to boyle in any wise: so haue you it simply made of a most perfect purple colour, and of the smell of the floures themselues. Some do adde thereto a little of the iuyce of the floures in the boyling, which maketh it of better force and vertue. Likewise some do put a little quantitie of the iuyce of Lymons in the boyling, which doth greatly encrease the beauty thereof, but nothing at all the vertue.
There is likewise made of Violets and sugar certain plates called Sugar Violet, or Violet tables, or Plate, which is most pleasant and wholesome, especially it comforteth the heart and the other inward parts.
The decoction of Violets is good against hot feuers, and the inflammation of the liuer and all  other inward parts: the like propertie hath the iuyce, syrrup, or conserue of the same.
Syrrup of Violets is good against the inflammation of the lungs and brest, against the pleurisie  and cough, against feuers and agues in yong children, especially if you put vnto an ounce of Syrrup eight or nine drops of oyle of Vitrioll, and mix it together, and giue it to the childe a spoonefull at once.
The same giuen in manner aforesaid is of great efficacie in burning feuers and pestilent diseases, greatly cooling the inward parts: and it may seeme strange to some, that so sharpe a corrosiue as oyle of Vitriol should be giuen into the body; yet being delayed and giuen as aforesaid, sucking children may take it without any perill.
The same taken as aforesaid cureth all inflammations of the throat, mouth, uvula, squinancie, and the falling euill in children.
Sugar-Violet hath power to cease inflammations, roughnesse of the throat, and comforteth the  heart, asswageth the paines of the head, and causeth sleepe.
The leaues of Violets are vsed in cooling plaisters, oyles, and comfortable cataplasmes or pultesses;  and are of greater efficacie among other herbes, as Mercurie, Mallowes, and such like, in clisters, for the purposes aforesaid.



CHAP. 313. Of Hearts-ease, or Pansies.

 The Description.
1 THe Hearts-ease or Paunsie hath many round leaues at the first comming vp; afterward they grow somewhat longer, sleightly cut about the edges, trailing or creeping vpon the ground. The stalkes are weake and tender, whereupon do grow floures in forme and figure like the Violet, and for the most part of the same bignesse, of three sundry colours; whereof it tooke the syrname Tricolor, that is to say, purple, yellow, and white or blew: by reason of the beauty and brauerie of which colours they are very pleasing to the eye; for smell they haue little or none at all. The seed is contained in little knaps, of the bignesse of a Tare, which come forth after the floures be fallen, and do open of themselues when the seed is ripe. The root is nothing else but as it were a bundle of threddy strings.
2 The vpright Paunsie bringeth forth long leaues deepely cut in the edges, sharpe pointed, of a bleake or pale greene colour, set vpon slender vpright stalkes, cornered, ioynted, or kneed a foot high or higher; whereupon do grow very faire floures of three colours, viz. of purple, blew, and yellow, in shape like the common Hearts-ease, but greater and fairer: which colours are so excellently and orderly placed, that they bring great delectation to the beholders, though they haue little or no smell at all. For oftentimes it hapneth, that the vppermost floures are differing from those that grow vpon the middle of the plant, and those varie from the lowermost, as Nature list to dally with things of such beauty. The seed is like the precedent.
3 The wilde Paunsie differeth from that of the garden, in leaues, roots, and tender branches: the floures of this wilde one are of a bleake and pale colour, far inferiour in beauty to that of the garden, wherein consisteth the difference.
4 Stony Hearts-ease is a base and low plant: The leaues are rounder, and not so much cut about the edges as the others: The branches are weake and feeble, trailing vpon the ground: The floures are likewise of three colours, that is to say, white, blew, and yellow, void of smell. The root perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.
5 There is found in sundry places of England a wilde kinde hereof, bringing floures of a faint yellow colour, without mixture of any other colour, yet hauing a deeper yellow spot in the lowest

1 Violatricolor. Hearts-ease.2 Viola assurgens tricolor. Vpright Hearts-ease.3 Violatricolor syluestris. Wilde Paunsies.4 Violatricolor petraea. Stony Hearts-ease.
leafe with foure or fiue blackish purple lines, wherein it differeth from the other wilde kinde: and this hath beene taken of some yong Herbarists to be the yellow Violet.


 The Place.
The Hearts-ease groweth in fields in many places, and in gardens also, and that oftentimes of it selfe: it is more gallant and beautifull than any of the wilde ones.
Matthiolus reporteth, that the vpright Paunsie is found on mount Baldus in Italy. Lobel saith that it groweth in Languedocke in France, and on the tops of some hills in England; but as yet I haue not seene the same.
Those with yellow floures haue been found by a village in Lancashire called Latham, foure miles from (...), by Mr. Thomas (...) before remembred.


 The Time.
They sloure not onely in the Spring, but for the most part all Sommer thorow, euen vntill Autumne.


 The Names.
Hearts-ease is named in Latine Viola tricolor, or the three coloured Violet; and of diuers, Iacea; (yet there is another Iacea syrnamed Nigra: in English, Knap-weed, Bull-weed, and Matfellon) of others, Herba (...), or herbe Trinitie, by reason of the triple colour of the floures: of some others, Herba (...): in French, Pensees: by which name they became knowne to the Brabanders and others of the Low-countries that are next adioyning. It seemeth to be Viola slammea, which Theophrastus calleth (...), which is also called (...): in English, Hearts-ease, Paunsies, Liue in idlenesse, Cull me to you, and Three faces in a hood.
The vpright Pansie is called not vnproperly Viola assurgens, or Surrecta, and withall Tricolor, that is to say, straight or vpright Violet three coloured: of some, Viola arborescens, or Tree Violet, for that in the multitude of branches and manner of growing it resembles a little tree.


 The Temperature.
It is of temperature obscurely cold, but more euidently moist, of a tough and (...) iuyce, like that of the Mallow; for which cause it moistneth and suppleth, but not so much as the Mallow doth.


 The Vertues.
It is good, as the later Physitions write, for such as are sicke of an ague, especially children and  infants, whose convulsions and fits of the falling sicknesse it is thought to cure.
It is commended against inflammations of the lungs and chest, and against scabs and itchings  of the whole body, and healeth vlcers.
The distilled water of the herbe or floures giuen to drinke for ten or more dayes together, three  ounces in the morning, and the like quantitie at night, doth wonderfully ease the paines of the French disease, and cureth the same, if the Patient be caused to sweat sundry times, as Costaeus reporteth, in his booke denatura (...) stirp.



CHAP. 314. Of Ground-Juy, or Ale-hoofe.

 The Description.
1 GRound Iuy is a low or base herbe; it creepeth and spreads vpon the ground hither and thither all about, with many stalkes of an vncertaine length, slender, and like those of the Vine, something cornered, and sometimes reddish: whereupon grow leaues something broad and round, wrinkled, hairy, nicked in the edges, for the most part two out of euerie ioynt: amongst which come sorth the floures gaping like little hoods, not vnlike to those of Germander, of a purplish blew colour: the roots are very threddy: the whole plant is of a strong smell and bitter taste.
@ 2 Vpon the rockie and mountainous places of Prouince and Daulphine growes this other kinde of Ale-hoofe, which hath leaues, stalkes, floures, and roots like in shape to those of the former, but the floures and leaues are of a light purple colour, and also larger and longer. This by Lobel is called Asarina, siue Saxatilis hedera. @


 The Place.
It is found as well in tilled as in vntilled places, but most commonly in obscure and darke places, vpon banks vnder hedges, and by the sides of houses.


 The Time.
It remaineth greene not onely in Sommer, but also in Winter at any time of the yeare: it floureth from Aprill till Sommer be far spent.



1 Hedera terrestris. Ale-hoofe.


@ 2 Hedera saxatilis. Rocke Ale-hoofe.




 The Names.
It is commonly called Hedera terrestris: in Greeke, (...): also Corona terrae: in high-Dutch, Gundelreb: in low-Dutch, Onderhaue: in French, Lierre terrestre: Hedera humilis of some, and Chamaecissum: in English, Ground-Iuy, Ale-hoofe, Gill go by ground, Tune-hoofe, and Catsfoot. @ Many question whether this be the Chamaecissus of the Antients: which controuersie (...) hath largely handled, Pempt. 3. lib. 3. cap. 4. @


 The Temperature.
Ground-Iuie is hot and dry, and because it is bitter it scoureth, and remoueth stoppings out of the intrals.


 The Vertues.
Ground-Iuy is commended against the humming noyse and ringing sound of the eares, being  put into them, and for them that are hard of hearing.
Matthiolus writeth, That the iuyce being tempered with Verdugrease, is good against fistulaes  and hollow vlcers.
Dioscorides teacheth, That halfe a dram of the leaues being drunke in foure ounces and a halfe  of faire water, for fourty or fifty dayes together, is a remedie against the Sciatica, or ache in the huckle bone.
The same taken in like sort six or seuen dayes doth also cure the yellow jaundice. Galen hath attributed  (as we haue said) all the vertue vnto the floures: Seeing the floures of Ground-Iuy (saith he) are very bitter, they remoue stoppings out of the liuer, and are giuen to them that are vexed with the Sciatica.
Ground-Iuy, (...), and Daisies, of each a like quantitie, stamped and strained, and a little  sugar and rose water put thereto, and dropped with a feather into the eyes, taketh away all manner of inflammation, spots, webs, itch, smarting, or any griefe whatsoeuer in the eyes, yea although the sight were nigh hand gone: it is proued to be the best medicine in the world.
The herbes stamped as aforesaid, and mixed with a little ale and honey, and strained, takes away  the pinne and web, or any griefe out of the eyes of horse or cow, or any other beast, being squirted into the same with a syringe, or I might haue said the liquor iniected into the eyes with a syringe. But I list not to be ouer eloquent among Gentlewomen, to whom especially my Works are most necessarie.
The women of our Northerne parts, especially about Wales and Cheshire, do tunne the herbe  Ale-hoof into their Ale; but the reason thereof I know not: notwithstanding without all controuersie

it is most singular against the griefes aforesaid: being tunned vp in ale and drunke, it also purgeth the head from rhumaticke humors flowing from the braine.
Hedera terrestris boyled in water stayeth the termes; and boyled in mutton broth it helps weake  and aking backes.
They haue vsed to put it into ointments against burning with fire, gunpouder, and such like.
Hedera terrestris being bound in a bundle, or chopt as herbes for the pot, and eaten or drunke as  thin broth stayeth the flux in women.



CHAP. 315. Of Juy.

 The Kindes.
THere be two kindes of Iuy, as Theophrastus witnesseth, reckoned among the number of those plants which haue need to be propped vp; for they stand not of themselues; but are fastned to stone walls, trees, and such like, and yet notwithstanding both of a wooddy substance, and yet not to be placed among the trees, shrubs, or bushes, because of the affinitie they haue with climbing herbes; as also agreeing in forme and figure with many other plants that climbe, and are indeed simply to be reckoned among the herbes that clamber vp. But if any will cauill, or charge me with my promise made in the beginning of this historie, where we made our diuision, namely, to place each plant as neere as may be in kindred and neighbourhood; this promise I haue fulfilled, if the curious (...) can be content to reade without rashnesse those (...) following in order, and not onely this climbing Iuy that lifteth her selfe to the tops of trees, but also the other Iuy that creepeth vpon the ground.
Of the greater or the climing Iuy there are also many sorts; but especially three, the white, the blacke, and that which is called Hedera Helix, or Hedera sterilis.


 The Description.
1 THe greater Iuy climbeth on trees, old buildings, and walls: the stalkes thereof are wooddy, and now and then so great as it seemes to become a tree; from which it sendeth a multitude of little boughes or branches euery way, whereby as it were with arms it creepeth and wandereth far about: it also bringeth forth continually fine little roots, by which it fastneth it selfe and cleaueth wonderfull hard vpon trees, and vpon the smoothest stone walls: the leanes are smooth, shining especially on the vpper side, cornered with sharpe pointed corners. The floures are very small and mossie; after which succeed bundles of black berries, euery one hauing a small sharpe pointall.
There is another sort of great Iuy that bringeth forth white fruit, which some call Acharnicam irriguam; and also another lesser, the which hath blacke berries. This Pliny calleth Selinitium.
We also finde mentioned another sort hereof spred abroad, with a fruit of a yellow Saffron colour, called of diuers Dionysias, as Dioscorides writeth: others Bacchica, of which the Poets vsed to make garlands, as Pliny testisieth, lib. 16. cap. 34.
2 Barren Iuy is not much vnlike vnto the common Iuy aforesaid, sauing that his branches are both smaller and tenderer, not lifting or bearing it selfe vpward, but creeping along by the ground vnder moist and shadowie ditch bankes. The leaues are most commonly three square, cornered, of a blackish greene colour, which at the end of Sommer become brownish red vpon the lower side. The whole plant beareth neither floures nor fruit, but is altogether barren and fruitlesse.
@ 3 There is kept for nouelties sake in diuers gardens a Virginian, by some (though vnfitly) termed a Vine, being indeed an Iuy. The stalkes of this grow to a great heighth, if they be planted nigh any thing that may sustaine or beare them vp: and they take first hold by certaine small tendrels, vpon what body soeuer they grow, whether stone, boords, bricke, yea glasse, and that so firmely, that oftentimes they will bring pieces with them if you plucke them off. The leaues are large, consisting of foure, fiue, or more particular leaues, each of them being long, and deeply notched about the edges, so that they somewhat resemble the leaues of the Chesnut tree: the floures grow clustering together after the manner of Iuy, but neuer with vs shew themselues open, so that we cannot iustly say any thing of their colour, or the fruit that succeeds them. It puts forth his leaues in April, and the stalkes with the rudiments of the floures are to be seene in August. It may as I said be fitly called Hedera Virginiana. @


 The Place.
Iuy groweth commonly about walls and trees; the white Iuy groweth in Greece, and the barren Iuy groweth vpon the ground in ditch bankes and shadowie woods.



1 Hedera corymbosa. Clymbing or berried Iuy.


2 Hedera Helix. Barren or creeping Iuy.




 The Time.
Iuy flourisheth in Autumne: the berries are ripe after the Winter Solstice.


 The Names.
Iuy is called in Latine Hedera: in Greeke, (...), and (...) in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Yedra: in French, Liarre.
The greater Iuy is called of Theophrastus (...): in Latine, (...) attollens, or Hedera assurgens: Gaza interpreteth it Hedera excelsa. The later Herbarists would haue it to be Hedera arborea, or tree Iuy, because it groweth vpon trees, and Hedera muralis, which hangeth vpon walls.
Creeping or barren Iuy is called in Greeke (...): in English, Ground-Iuy: yet doth it much differ from Hedera (...), or Ground-Iuy before described: of some it is called Clauicula, Hedera Helix, and Hedera (...); and is that herbe wherein the Bore delighteth, according to Iohannes Khuenius.


 The Temperature.
Iuy, as Galen saith, is compounded of contrarie faculties; for it hath a certaine binding earthy and cold substance, and also a substance somewhat biting, which euen the very taste doth shew to be hot. Neither is it without a third facultie, as being of a certaine warme waterie substance, and that is if it be greene: for whilest it is in drying, this watery substance being earthy, cold, and binding consumeth away, and that which is hot and biting remaineth.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Iuy fresh and greene boyled in wine, do heale old vlcers, and perfectly cure those  that haue a venomous and malicious quality ioyned with them; and are a remedy likewise against burnings and scaldings.
Moreouer, the leaues boyled with vineger are good for such as haue bad spleens; but the floures  or fruit are of more force, being very finely beaten and tempered with vineger, especially so vsed they are commended against burnings.
The iuyce drawne or snift vp into the nose doth effectually purge the head, stayeth the running  of the eares that hath beene of long continuance, and healeth old vlcers both in the eares and also in the nosthrils: but if it be too sharpe, it is to be mixed with oyle of Roses, or sallad oyle.
The gum that is found vpon the trunke or body of the old stocke of Iuy, killeth nits and lice, and taketh away haire: it is of so hot a qualitie, as that it doth obscurely burne: it is as it were a

certaine waterish liquor congealed of those gummie drops. Thus farre Galen.
The very same almost hath Dioscorides, but yet also somewhat more: for ouer and besides hee  saith, that fiue of the berries beaten small, and made hot in a Pomegranat rinde, with oyle of roses, and dropped into the contrarie eare, doth ease the tooth-ache; and that the berries make the haire blacke.
Iuy in our time is very seldome vsed, saue that the leaues are layd vpon little vlcers made in the  thighes, legs, or other parts of the body, which are called Issues; for they draw humors and waterish substance to those parts, and keepe them from hot swellings or inflammations, that is to say, the leaues newly gathered, and not as yet withered or dried.
Some likewise affirme that the berries are effectuall to procure vrine; and are giuen vnto those  that be troubled with the stone and diseases of the kidneyes.
The leaues laid in steepe in water for a day and a nights space, helpe sore and smarting waterish  eyes, if they be bathed and washed with the water wherein they haue beene infused.



CHAP. 316. Of rough Binde-weed.


1 Smilax Peruviana, Salsa parilla. Rough Binde-weed of Peru.


2 Smilax aspera. Common rough Binde-weed.



 The Description.
1 ALthough we haue great plenty of the roots of this Binde-weed of Peru, which we vsually cally Zarza, or Sarsa Parilla, wherewith diuers griefes and maladies are cured, and that these roots are very well knowne to all; yet such hath beene the carelesnesse and small prouidence of such as haue trauelled into the Indies, that hitherto not any haue giuen vs instruction sufficient, either concerning the leaues, floures, or fruit: onely Monardus saith, that it hath long roots deepe thrust into the ground: which is as much as if a great learned man should tell the simple, that our common carrion Crow were of a blacke colour. For who is so blinde that seeth the root it selfe, but can easily affirme the roots to be very long? Notwithstanding, there is in the reports of such as say they haue seene the plant it selfe growing, some contradiction or contrarietie: some report that it is a kind of Bind-weed, and especially one of these rough Bindweeds:

3 Smilax aspera Lusitanica. Rough Binde-weed of Portugall.
others, as one Mr. White an excellent painter, who carried very many people into Virginia (or after some Norembega) there to inhabit, at which time hee did see thereof great plentie, as he himselfe reported vnto me, with this bare description; It is (saith he) the root of a small shrubbie tree, or hedge tree, such as are those of our country called Haw-thorns, hauing leaues resembling those of Iuy, but the floures or fruit he remembreth not. @ It is most certaine, that Sarsa parilla is the root of the Americane Smilax aspera, both by consent of most Writers, and by the relation of such as haue seene it growing there. @
2 The common rough Binde-weed hath many branches set full of little sharpe prickles, with certaine clasping tendrels, wherewith it taketh hold vpon hedges, shrubs, and whatsoeuer standeth next vnto it, winding and clasping it selfe about from the bottom to the top; whereon are placed at euery ioint one leafe like that of Iuy, without corners, sharpe pointed, lesser and harder than those of smooth Binde-weed, oftentimes marked with little white spots, and garded or bordered about the edges with crooked prickles. The floures grow at the top of crooked stalks of a white colour, and sweet of smell. (...) commeth the fruit like those of the wilde Vine, greene at the first, and red when they be ripe, and of a biting taste; wherein is contained a blackish seed in shape like that of hempe. The root is long, somewhat hard, and parted into very many branches.
3 This rough Binde-weed, found for the most part in the barren mountaines of Portugal, differeth not from the precedent in stalkes and floures, but in the leaues and fruit; for the leaues are softer, and lesse prickly, and sometimes haue no prickles at all, and they are also oftentimes much narrower: the fruit or berry is not red but blacke when as it commeth to be ripe. The root hereof is one single root of a wooddy substance, with some fibres annexed thereto, wherein consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
Zarza parilla, or the prickly Binde-weed of America, groweth in Peru a prouince of America, in Virginia, and in diuers other places both in the East and West Indies.
The others grow in rough and vntilled places, about the hedges and borders of fields, on mountaines and vallies, in Italy, Languedock in France, Spaine, and Germany.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the Spring: their fruit is ripe in Autumne, or a little before.


 The Names.
It is named in Greeke (...). Gaza (Theophrastus his Translator) names it Hedera Cilicia; as likewise Pliny, who lib. 24. cap. (...) writeth, that it is also syrnamed Nicophoron. Of the Hetrurians, Hedera spinosa, and Rubus ceruinus: of the Castilians in Spaine, as Lacuna saith, Zarza parilla, as though they should say Rubus viticula, or Bramble little Vine. Parra, as Matthiolus interpreteth it, doth signifie a Vine; and Parilla, a small or little Vine.
Diuers affirme that the root (brought out of Peru a prouince in America) which the later Herbarists do call Zarza, is the root of this Bindeweed. Garcias Lopius (...) granteth it to be like thereunto, but yet he doth not affirme that it is the same. Plants are (...) found to be like one another, which notwithstanding are proued not to be the same by some little difference; the diuers constitution of the weather and of the soile making the difference.
Zarzaparilla of Peru is a strange plant, and is brought vnto vs from the Countries of the new world called America; and such things as are brought from thence, although they also seeme and are like to those that grow in Europe, notwithstanding they doe often differ in vertue and operation: for the diuersitie of the soile and of the weather doth not only breed an alteration in the form,

but doth most of all preuaile in making the vertues and qualities greater or lesser. Such things as grow in hot places be of more force, and greater smell; and in cold, of lesser. Some things that are deadly and pernitious, being remoued wax milde, and are made wholesome: so in like manner, although Zarza parilla of Peru be like to rough Binde-weed, or to Spanish Zarza parilla, notwithstanding by reason of the temperature of the weather, and also through the nature of the soile, it is of a great deale more force than that which groweth either in Spaine or in Africke.
The roots of Zarza parilla of Peru, which are brought alone without the plant, be long and slender, like to the lesser roots of common liquorice, very many oftentimes hanging from one head, in which roots the middle string is hardest. They haue little taste, and so small a smell that it is not to be perceiued. These are reported to grow in Honduras a prouince of Peru. They had their name of the likenesse of rough Binde-weed, which among the inhabitants it keepeth; signifying in Spanish, a rough or prickly vine, as Garcias Lopius witnesseth.


 The Temperature.
The roots are of temperature hot and dry, and of thin and subtill parts, insomuch as their decoction doth very easily procure sweat.


 The Vertues.
The roots are a remedie against long continuall paine of the ioynts and head, and against cold  diseases. They are good for all manner of infirmities wherein there is hope of cure by sweating, so that there be no ague ioyned.
The cure is perfected in few dayes, if the disease be not old or great; but if it be, it requireth a  longer time of cure. The roots here meant are as I take it those of (...) parilla, whereof this Smilax aspera or rough Binde-weed is holden for a kinde: notwithstanding this of Spain and the other parts of Europe, though it be counted lesse worth, yet is it commended of Dioscorides and Pliny against poysons. The leaues hereof, saith Dioscorides, are a counterpoyson against deadly medicines, whether they be drunke before or after. 

The second and (...) were both (...) of one plant, I meane the (...); for the figure in the fourth place should haue been in the third, and the figure in the third was the same (...) the second, and should haue been in the fourth place.




CHAP. 317. Of smooth or gentle Binde-weed.


1 Smilax lenis siue laeuis maior. Great smooth Binde-weed.


2 Smilax lenis minor. Small Binde-weed.




 The Description.
1 IT is a strange thing vnto me, that the name of Smilax should be so largely extended, as that it should be assigned to those plants that come nothing neere the nature, and scarsly vnto any part of the forme of Smilax indeed. But we will leaue controuersies to the further consideration of such as loue to dance in quag-mires, and come to this our common smooth Smilax, called and knowne by that name among vs, or rather more truly by the name of Convolvulus maior, or Volubilis maior: It beareth the long branches of a Vine, but tenderer, and for the length and great spreading therof it is very fit to make shadows in arbors: the leaues are smooth like Iuie, but somewhat bigger, and being broken are full of milke: amongst which come forth great white and hollow floures like bells. The seed is three cornered, growing in small huskes couered with a thin skin. The root is small, white and long, like the great Dogs grasse.
2 Smilax (...) minor is much like vnto the former in stalkes, leaues, floures, seed, and roots, sauing that in all respects it is much smaller, and creepeth vpon the ground. The branches are small and smooth: the little leaues tender and soft: the floures like vnto little bells, of a purple colour: the seed three cornered like vnto the others.


3 Convolvulus minimus spicae-folius. Lauander leafed Binde-weed.


The description which our Author intended in the first place for (...), and took out of the 274. page of the (...), but so (...) and imperfectly, neither agreeing with that he intended, I haue omitted as (...), and made his later, though also vnpersect description, somewhat more compleat and agreeable to the plant figured and intended.

 4 Convolvulus argenteus (...). Siluer leafed Binde-weed.


3 This Bindweed Pena saith he neuer saw but in the brinks of quicke-sets and Oliuets in Prouence, Sauoy, and Narbone; notwithstanding I found it growing in the corne fields about great Dunmow in Essex, in such abundance, that it doth much hurt vnto their corne. This kind of Bindweed or Volubilis is like vnto the small Bindweed before mentioned, but it hath a finer floure, plaited or folded in the compasse of the bell very orderly, especially before the Sun rise (for after it opens it selfe the welts are not so much perceiued) and it is of a darke purple colour: the seed is not vnlike the rest, cornered and flat, growing out of slender branches which stand vpright and thicke together, proceeding out of a wooddy white root. The leaues are long and narrow, resembling Linaria both in colour and hairinesse, in taste drying, and somewhat heating.



5 Volubilis nigra. Blacke Bindweed.


@ 4 The stalkes and branches of this are some cubite long, slender, weake and hairy, so that they lie vpon the ground, if they haue nothing to sustaine them: vpon these without any order grow leaues, shaped like those of luy, or the marsh Mallow, but lesse, and couered ouer with a siluer-like downe or hairinesse, and diuided somewhat deep on the edges, sometimes also curled, and otherwhiles onely snipt about. The floure growes vpon long stalkes like as in other plants of this kinde, and consists of one folding lease, like as that of the last mentioned, and it is either of a whitish purple, or else absolute purple colour: The root is small and creeping. It growes in many places of Spaine, and there floures in March and Aprill. Clusius calls this Convoluulus Altheae folio, and saith that the Portugals name it Verdezilla, and commend it as a thing most effectuall to heale wounds. Our Authour gaue the figure hereof (how fitly let the Reader iudge) by the name of Papauer cornutum luteum minus, making it a horned Poppy, as you may see in the former Edition, Pag. 294. @
@ 5 This kinde of Bindweed hath a (...) root full of threddie strings, from which rise vp immediatly diuers trailing branches, wherupon grow leaues like the common field Bindweed, or like those of Orach, of a black green colour, whereof it tooke his name: the floures are smal, and like those of Orach: the seed is black, three square, like, but lesse than that of Buck-wheat. The whole plant is not onely a hurtfull weed, but of an euill smell also, and too frequently found amongst corne. Dodonaeus calls this Convolvulum (...): and Helxine, Cissampelos: Tabernamontanus, Volubilis nigra: and Lobel, Helxine Cissampelos altera Atriplicis effigie.


 The Place.
All these kindes of Bindweeds do grow very plentifully in most parts of England, @ The third and fourth excepted. @


 The Time.
They do floure from May to the end of August.


 The Names.
The great Bindweed is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Smilax Laeuis: of Galen and Paulus Aegineta, (...) it is surnamed Laeuis or smooth, because the stalkes and branches thereof haue no prickles at all. Dolichus called also Smilax hortensis, or Kidney beane, doth differ from this: and likewise Smilax the tree, which the Latines call Taxus: in English, the Yew tree. The later Herbarists do call this Bindweed Volubilis maior, Campanella, Funis arborum, Convoluulus albus and Smilax laeuis maior: in like manner Pliny in his 21. booke, 5. chapt. doth also name it Conuoluulus. It is thought to be Ligustrum, not the shrub priuet, but that which Martial in his first booke of Epigrams speaketh of, writing against Procillus.
The small Bindweed is called Convoluulus minor, and Smilax laeuis minor, Volubilis minor: in high Dutch, Windkraut: in Low Dutch, Wrange: in French, Liseron: in Italian, Vilucchio: in Spanish, Campanilla Yerua: in English, Withwinde, Bindeweed, and Hedge-bels.


 The Nature.
These herbs are of an hot and dry temperature.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of blacke Bindweed called Helxine Cissampelos, stamped and strained, and the iuice  drunken, doth loose and open the bellie exceedingly.
The leaues pound and laid to the grieued place, dissolueth, wasteth, and consumeth hard lumps  and swellings, as Galen saith.

The rest of the Bindweeds are not fit for medicine, but vnprofitable weeds, and hurtfull vnto each  thing that groweth next vnto them.



CHAP. 318. Of Blew Bindweed.

 The Description.
1 BLew Bindweed bringeth forth long, tender, and winding branches, by which it climeth vpon things that stand neere vnto it, and foldeth it selfe about them with many turnings and windings, wrapping it selfe against the Sun, contrary to all other things whatsoeuer, that with their clasping tendrels do embrace things that stand neere vnto them; whereupon doe grow broad cornered leaues very like vnto those of Iuie, something rough and hairy, of an ouerworne russet greene colour: among which come forth most pleasant floures bell fashion, somthing cornered as are those of the common Bindweed, of a most shining azure colour tending to purple: which being past, there succeed round knobbed seed vessels, wherein is contained long blackish seed of the bignesse of a Tare, and like vnto those of the great hedge Bindweed. The root is threddy, and perisheth at the first approchof Winter.


1 Convolvulus Caeruleus. Blew Binde-weed.


@ 2 Convolvulus caeruleus folio rotundo. Round leaued blew Bindweed.


@ 2 There are also kept in our gardens two other blew floured Bindweeds. The one a large and great plant, the other a lesser. The great sends vp many large and long winding branches, like those of the last described, and a little hairie: the leaues are large and roundish, ending in a sharpe point: the floures are as large as those of the great Bindweed, and in shape like them, but blew of colour, with fiue broad purplish veines equally distant each from other: and these floures commonly grow three neere together vpon three seuerall stalks some inch long, fastened to another

@ 3 Convolvulus caeruleus minor, folio oblongo. Small blew Bindweed.
stalke some handfull long: the cup which holds the floures, and afterwards becomes the seed vessell, is rough and hairie: the seed is blacke, and of the bignesse of a Tare: the root is stringie, and lasts no longer than to the perfecting of the seed. I haue onely giuen the figure of the leafe and floure largely exprest, because for the root and manner of growing it resembles the last described.
3 This small blew Bindweed sendeth forth diuers long slender creeping hairie branches, lying flat vpon the ground, vnlesse there be something for it to rest vpon: the leaues be longish and hairy, and out of their bosomes (almost from the bottome to the tops of the stalks) come small foot-stalkes carrying beautifull floures of the bignesse and shape of the common smal Bindweed; but commonly of three colours; that is, white in the verie bottome, yellow in the middle, and a perfect azure at the top; and these twine themselues vp, open and shut in fiue plaits like as most other floures of this kinde doe. The seed is contained in round knaps or heads, and is blacke and cornered: the root is small, and perishes euery yeare. Bauhine was the first that set this forth, and that by the name of Convolvulus peregrinus caeruleus folio oblongo. @


 The Place.
The seede of this rare plant was first brought from Syria and other remote places of the world, and is a stranger in these Northern parts; yet haue I brought vp and nourished it in my garden vnto flouring, but the whole plant perished before it could perfect his seed.


 The Time.
The seed must be sowne as Melons and Cucumbers are, and at the same time: it floured with me at the end of August.


 The Names.
It is called Campana Lazula, and Lazura: of the later Herbarists Campana Caerulea, and also Convolvulum Caeruleum: it is thought to be the Ligustrum nigrum; of which Columella in his tenth booke hath made mention.

Fer calathis violam, and nigropermista ligustro
Balsamacum Cassia nectens, etc.


In baskets bring thou Violets, and blew Bindweed withall,
But mixed with pleasant Baulme, and Cassia medicinall.

For if the greater smooth Withwinde, or Bindweed be Ligustrum, then may this be not vnproperly called Ligustrum nigrum: for a blew purple colour is oftentimes called blacke, as hath beene said in the blacke Violet. But there be some that would haue this Bindweed to be Granum nil Auicennae, of which he writeth in the 306. chapter; the which differeth from that Nil that is described in the 512. chapter. For this is Isatis Graecorum, or the Grecian Woad: but that is a strange plant, and is brought from India, as both Auicen and Serapio doe testifie: Auicen in this manner: what is Granum Nil? It is Cartamum Indum: and Serapio thus; Habal Nil, is Granum Indicum, in cap. 283. where the same is described in these words: [The plant thereof is like to the plant of (...), that is to say of Convolvulus, or Bindweed, taking hold of trees with his tender stalks: it hath both green branches and leaues, and there commeth out by euery leafe a purple floure, in fashion of the Belfloures: and when the floure doth fall away, it yeeldeth a seed in small cods (I read little heads)

in which are three graines, lesser than the seedes of Stauesaker] to which description this blew Bindweed is answerable.
There be also other sorts of Bindweeds, which be referred to Nil Auicenna; which no doubt may be kinds of Nil; for nothing gainsaith it why they should not be so. Therefore to conclude, this beautifull Bindeweed, which we call Convolvulus Caeruleus, is called of the Arabians Nil: of Serapio, Hab al Nil: about Alepo and Tripolis in Syria the inhabitants call it Hasmisen: the Italians, Campana azurea: of the beautifull azured floures, and also Fior de notte, because his beautie appeares most in the night.


 The Temperature.
(...) (...), or Nil, as Auicen saith, is hot and drie in the first degree: but Serapio maketh it to be hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
It purgeth and voideth forth raw, thicke, flegmaticke, and melancholicke humours: it driues out  all kinde of wormes, but it troubleth the belly, and causeth a readinesse to vomit, as Auicen saith: it worketh slowly, as Serapio writeth; in whom more hereof may be found, but to little purpose, wherefore we thinke good to passe it ouer.



CHAP. 319. Of Scammonie, or purging Bindweed.


1 Scammonium Syriacum Syrian Scammonie.


The titles of the second and (...) were (...) transposed and both the figures belonged to the second description, which was of the (...) (...) of the (...). being the same (...) the (...) Valentina of Clusius.

 2 Scamonea Valentina. Scammonie of Valentia.



 The Description.
1 SCammonie of Syria hath many stalks rising from one root, which are long, slender, and like the clasping tendrels of the vine, by which it climeth and taketh hold of such things as are next vnto it. The leaues bee broad, sharpe pointed like those of the smooth or hedge Bindweed: among which come forth very faire white floures tending to a bush colour, bell fashion. The root is long, thicke, and white within: out of which is gathered a iuice that beeing

hardned, is greatly vsed in Physicke: for which consideration, there is not any plant growing vpon the earth, the knowledge whereof more concerneth a Physition, both for his shape and properties, than this Scammonie, which Pena calleth Lactaria scansoriaque volvula, that is, milkie and climbing Windweed, whereof it is a kinde; although for distinction sake I haue placed them as two seuerall kindes. And although this herbe be suspected, and halfe condemned of some learned men, yet there is not any other herbe to be found, whereof so small a quantitie will do so much good: neither could those which haue carped at it, and reproued this herbe, finde any simple in respect of his vertues to be put in his roome: and hereof insueth great blame to all practitioners, who haue not endeuoured to bee better acquainted with this herbe, chiefely to auoid the deceit of the craftie Drug-seller and Medicine maker of this confected Scammonie, brought vs from farre places, rather to be called I feare infected Scammonie, or poisoned Scammonie, than confected. But to auoid the inconueniences hereof, by reason of the counterfeiting and ill mixing thereof: I haue therefore thought good to set downe what I haue taken out of the diligent, and no lesse learned obseruations of Pena, concerning this plant, Anno 1561, or 1562. Vid. adver s. pag. 272.


@ 3 Scammonium (...). French Scammonie.


(...) Martinellus an Apothecarie of Venice, being a most diligent searcher of Simples, that he might haue the right Scammony of Antioch, trauelled into Syria, where from the citie of Alepo hee sent an 100. weight of the iuice of Scammonie of Antioch, prepared and hardned into a lumpe, at the making whereof he was present himselfe. This man sent also of the seeds thereof, which in all points answered the cornered seed of Volubilis; which being sowne in the beginning of the Spring at Padua and Venice, grew vp to the form of a braue and goodly Convolvulus, in leaues, floures, and shew so like vnto our Cissampelos, that a man would haue taken it for the same without controuersie, sauing that the root was great, and in bignesse equall to the great Brionie, as also in tendernesse. The outward bark of the root was of a dusky colour, and white within: the inner pith beeing taken forth seemeth in all mens iudgements to be the same and the best allowed Turbith officinarum: and yet it differeth from Turbith, in that, that it is more brittle, and will more easily bee broken, though the pith in Scammonie bee no lesse gummie and ful of milkie iuice, than Turbith. Further Pena reporteth, that afterward hee sent of this seed vnto Antwerpe, where it grew very brauely, the climing strings and branches growing vp to the height of fiue or six cubites, not differing from that which was sowne in Italie. Also William Dries of Antwerp, a most excellent Apothecary, did cut off the branches of his Antwerpian Scammonie from the root, and dried them, planted the seeds in his garden, and conferred the superfluous branched roots with the Turbith of Alexandria, and could not find them to differ or disagree the one from the other in any point. But he that will know more concerning the making, difference, choice and vse of Scammony, let him reade Pena in his chapter of Scammonie, in the place formerly cited, where he shall finde many excellent secrets worthy the noting of those which would know how to vse such rare and excellent medicines.
2 Scammony of Valentia (whereof I haue plentie inmy garden) is also a kinde of Bindweed, growing naturally by the sea side vpon the grauelly shore, by the mouth of the riuer Rhodanus, at the waters called Aquas Marianas, where the Apothecaries of Montpellier gather of it great plentie, who haue attempted to harden the milkie iuice thereof, to vse it in stead of Scammonie of Antioch. This plant bringeth forth many slender branches, which will climbe and very well run vpon a pole; as being supported therewith, and mounteth to the height of fiue or six cubits, climbing and ramping like the first kinde of Scammonie. The leaues are greene, smooth, plaine, and sharpe

pointed, which being broken do yeeld abundance of milke: the floures are white, small, and starrefashion: the roots white and many, shooting forth sundry other roots, whereby it mightily increaseth.
@ 3 This strange kinde of Scammonie, which Clusius maketh rightly to be Periplocae species, hath very many long branches ramping and taking hold of such things as do grow neere vnto them, of a darkish ashe colour: whereupon do grow leaues sharp pointed, crooked at the setting on of the stalke like those of the blacke Bryonie, and likewise of an ashe colour, set together by couples: from the bosome whereof thrust forth small tender foot-stalkes, whereon are placed small white floures starre-fashion: the seeds are contained in long coddes, and are wrapped vp in downe, like as those of Swallow-wort. The root is very long, slender, and creeping, like that of the small Bindweed, so that if it once take in any ground, it can hardly be destroyed.


 The Place.
It doth grow in hot regions, in a fat soile, as in Misia, Syria, and other like countries of Asia; it is likewise found in the Islland of Candia, as (...). witnesses; from whence I had some seeds, of which seed I receiued two plants that prospered exceeding well; the one whereof I bestowed vpon a learned Apothecarie of Colchester, which continueth to this day, bearing both floures and ripe seed. But an ignorant weeder of my garden plucked mine vp, and cast it away in my absence, in stead of a weede: by which mischance I am not able to write heereof so absolutely as I determined: it likewise groweth neere vnto the sea side about Tripolis in Syria, where the inhabitants doe call it Meudheudi.


 The Time.
It floured in my garden about S. Iames tide, as I remember, for when I went to Bristow Faire, I left it in floure; but at my returne it was destroyed as aforesaid.


 The Names.
The Greekes call it (...): the Latines, Scammonium, so naming not onely the plant it selfe, but also the hard and condensed iuice: of the Apothecaries, Scammonea; and when it is prepared, Diagridium: as though they should say, (...): which signifieth a little teare: both the herbe and iuice are named Scamony: of Rhasis, Coriziola.


 The Temperature.
The iuice doth mightily purge by the stoole, and is the strongest purge whatsoeuer; for as Oribasius saith, it is in no part ouercome by those things which stir and moue the body. It worketh the same not vehemently by any hot qualitie, but by some other hid and secret propertie of the whole substance; for there is no extremitie of heat perceiued in it by taste: for with what liquor or thing soeuer it is mixed, it giueth vnto it no bitternesse, biting, or other vnpleasant taste at all, and therefore it is not to be accounted among the extreme hot medicines, but among those that are moderately hot and drie.


 The Vertues.
It clenseth and draweth forth especially choler: also thinne and waterish humours, and oftentimes  flegme, yet is it as Paulus teacheth more hurtfull to the stomacke than any other medicine.
Mesues thinketh that it is not onely troublesome and hurtfull to the stomacke, but also that it  shaueth the guts, gnawing and fretting the intrails; openeth the ends of the veins, and through the essence of his whole substance, it is an enemy to the heart, and to the rest of the inward parts: if it be vsed immoderately and in time not (...), it causeth swounings, vomitings, and ouerturnings of the stomacke, scouring, the bloudy flux and vlcers in the lower gut, which bring a continuall desire to the stoole.
These mischiefes are preuented if the Scammonie (...) boiled in a Quince and mixed with the  slime or mucilage of Psillium, called Fleawoort, the pap or pulp of Prunes, or other things that haue a slimie iuice, with a little Masticke added, or some other easie binding thing.
Plinie asfirmeth that the hurt thereof is taken away if Aloes be tempered with it: [Scammonie  (saith he) ouerthroweth the stomack, purgeth (...), (...) the belly vnlesse two drams of Aloes be put vnto one scruple of it] which also Oribasius (...) of in the first booke of his Synopses, and the seuenth booke of his medicinall Collections.
The old Physitions were also wont to boile Scammonie in a Quince, and to giue the Quince to  be eaten, hauing cast away the Scammonie: and (...) (...) so taken doth moue the belly without any hurt vnto the stomacke, as Galen in his first booke of the Faculties of Nourishments doth set downe, and likewise in his third booke of the (...) of simple Medicines.
The Apothecaries do vse Scammonie prepared in a Quince, which as we haue said they name  Diagridium, and do mix it in diuers compositions.

They keepe vsually in their shops two compositions, or electuaries, the one of Psillium or Flea  woort, set downe by (...): the other of Prunes fathered vpon Nicolaus, which were deuised for the tempering and correction of Scammony, and be commended for hot burning agues, and tertians, and for what diseases soeuer that proceed of choler.
Galen hath taken Masticke and Bdellium out of the pilles called Cochiae, which also conteine in  them a great and sufficient quantitie of Scammonie, as we may reade in his first booke of medicines according to the places affected, which also we meane to touch in the chapter of Coloquintida, where we intend to intreat at large concerning masticke, and other binding things, that are accustomed to be mixed for the correction of strong and violent purgers.
The quantitie of Scammony, or of (...) it selfe, as (...) writeth, is from fiue graines to  ten or twelue: it may be kept as the same Author sheweth, foure yeeres: (...) iudgeth it to be after two yeeres little worth: it is to be vsed, saith he, when it is two yeeres old, and it is not good before, nor after. The mixing or otherwise the vse thereof, more than is set downe, I thinke it not expedient to set forth in the Physicall vertues of Scammony, vpon the receipt whereof many times death insueth: my reasons are diuers, for that the same is very dangerous, either if too great a quantitie thereof be taken, or if it be giuen without correction; or taken at the hands of some runnagate (...)-monger quacksaluer, old women-leaches, and such like abusers of Physicke, and deceiuers of people. The vse of Scammony I commit to the learned, vnto whome it especially and onely belongeth, who can very carefully and curiously vse the same.



CHAP. 320. Of Briony, or the white Vine.

 The Kindes.
There be two kindes of Bryony, the one white, the other blacke: of the white Briony as followeth.


Bryonia alba. White Bryonie.




 The Description.
WHite Briony bringeth forth diuers long and slender stalkes with many clasping tendrels like the Vine, wherewith it catcheth hold of those things that are next vnto it. The leaues are broad, fiue cornered, and indented like those of the Vine; but rougher, more hairie, and whiter of colour. The floures be small and white, growing many together. The fruite consisteth in little clusters, the berries whereof are at the first greene, and red when they be ripe. The roote is very greate, long, and thicke, growing deepe in the earth, of a white yellowish colour, extreame bitter, and altogether of an vnpleasant taste. The Queenes chiefe Surgion Mr. William Godorous, a very curious and learned gentleman shewed me a root hereof, that waied halfe an hundred weight, and of the bignesse of a child, of a yeere old.


 The Place.
Briony groweth almost euery where among pot-herbes, hedge-bushes, and such like places.


 The Time.
It floureth in May, and bringeth forth his grapes in Autumne.


 The Names.
Bryony is called in Greek, (...) in Latine,

Vitis alba, or white Vine, and it is named, (...), because it is not onely like the Vine in leaues, but also for that it bringeth forth his fruite made vp after the likenesse of a little cluster, although the berries stand not close together: it is called of Pliny, Bryonia, and Madon: of the Arabians, Alphesera: of Matthaeus Sylvaticus, Viticella: in the poore mans Treasure, Rorastrum: of Apuleius, Apiastellum, vitis Taminia, Vitis alga, and Vitalba: in high Dutch, Suchwurtz: in low Dutch, Brionie: in English, Bryony, white Bryony, and tetter Berrie: in French, Couleuree: in Italian, Zuccasylvatica: in Spanish, Nuezablanca.


 The Temperature.
White Briony is in all parts hot and dry, exceeding the third degree, especially of heate, with an exceeding great force of clensing and scouring, by reason whereof it purgeth and draweth forth, not onely cholericke and flegmaticke humours, but also watrie.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth that the first springs or sproutings being boiled and eaten, do purge by siege  and vrine. Galen saith, that all men vse accustomably to eate of it in the spring time, and that it is a nourishment wholesome, by reason of the binding qualitie that it hath; which is to be vnderstood of those of the wilde Vine, called in Latine, Tamus; and not of the sproutings of this plant; for the sproutings of the first springs of white Bryony are nothing binding at all, but do mightily purge the belly, and torment the stomacke.
Dioscorides also affirmeth, that the juice of the root being pressed out in the spring, and drunke  with meade or honied water, purgeth flegme: and not onely the juice, but also the decoction of the root draweth forth flegme, choler, and waterish humours, and that very strongly; and it is withall oftentimes so troublesome to the stomacke, as it procureth vomite.
This kinde of strong purgation is good for those that haue the dropsie, the falling sicknesse, and the dizzinesse and swimming of the braine and head, which hath continued long, and is hardly to be remooued: yet notwithstanding it is not dayly to be giuen (as Dioscorides admonisheth) to them that haue the falling sickenesse, for it will be troublesome enough to take it now and then: and it is (as we haue said) an exceeding strong medicine, purging with violence, and very forceable for mans nature.
The root put vp in manner of a pessary bringeth forth the dead child and afterbirth: being boiled  for a bath to sit in, it worketh the same effect.
It scoureth the skin, and taketh away wrinckles, freckles, sunne burning, blacke marks, spots, and  scars of the face, being tempered with the meale of vetches or Tares, or of Fenugreeke: or boiled in oile till it be consumed; it taketh away blacke and blew spots which come of stripes: it is good against Whitlowes: being stamped with wine and applied it breaketh biles; and small apostumes, it draweth forth splinters and broken bones, if it be stamped and laid thereto.
The same is also fitly mixed with eating medicines, as Dioscorides writeth.
The fruit is good against scabs and the leprie, if it be applied and annointed on, as the same Author  affirmeth.
Galen writeth, that it is profitable for Tanners to thicken their leather hides with.
Furthermore, an electuary made of the roots and hony or sugar, is singular good for them that  are short winded, troubled with an old cough, paine in the sides, and for such as are hurt and bursten inwardly: for it dissolueth and scatereth abroad congealed and clottered bloud.
The root stamped with salt is good to be laid vpon filthy vlcers and scabbed legs. The fruite  is likewise good to the same intent if it be applied in manner aforesaid.
The root of Bryony and of wake-Robin stamped with some sulphur or brimstone, and made vp  into a masse or lump and wrapped in a linnen clout, taketh away the morphew, freckles, and spots of the face, if it be rubbed with the same being dipped first in vineger.



CHAP. 321. Of blacke Brionie, or the wilde Vine.

 The Description.
1 THe black Bryony hath long flexible branches of a woodie substance, couered with a gaping or clouen barke growing very farre abroad, winding it selfe with his small tendrels about trees, hedges, and what else is next vnto it, like vnto the branches of the Vine. The leaues are like vnto those of Iuie or garden Nightshade, sharpe pointed, and of a shining greene colour: the floures are white, small, and mossie; which being past, there succeed little clusters of red

1 Bryonia nigra. Blacke Bryonie.
berries, somwhat bigger than those of the small Raisons, or Ribes, which wee call Currans, or small Raisins. The root is very great and thick, oftentimes as bigge as a mans legge, blackish without, and verie clammie or slimie within; which being but scraped with a knife, or any other thing fit for that purpose, it seemeth to be a matter fit to spread vpon cloth or leather in manner of a plaister or Seare-cloth: which being so spread and vsed, it scrueth to lay vpon many infirmities, and vnto verie excellent purposes, as shall bee declared in the proper place.
2 The wilde Blacke Bryonie resembleth the former, as well in slender Vinie stalkes as leaues; but clasping tendrels hath it none, neuerthelesse by reason of the infinite branches, and the tendernesse of the same, it taketh hold of those things that stand next vnto it, although easie to bee loosed, contrarie vnto the other of his kinde. The berries heereof are blacke of colour when they be ripe. The root also is blacke without, and within of a pale yellow colour like box. @ This which is here described is the Bryonia nigra of Dodonaeus; But Bauhine calleth it Bryonia Alba, and saith it differeth from the common white Bryonie, onely in that the root is of a yellowish boxe colour on the inside, and the fruit or berries are blacke when as they come to ripenesse.
Bryonianigra slorens non fructum ferens.
3 This is altogether like the first described in roots, branches, and leaues; onely the foot-stalks whereon the floures grow are about eight or nine inches long: the floures are something greater, hauing neither before or after their flouring any berries or shew thereof; but the floures and footstalks do soone wither and fall away: this I haue heretofore, and now this Sommer, 1621, diligently obserued, because it hath not beene mentioned or obserued by any that I know. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Place.
The first of these plants doth grow in hedges and bushes almost euery where.
The second groweth in Hessia, Saxonie, Westphalia, Pomerland, and Misnia where white Bryonie doth not grow, as Valerius Cordus hath written, who saith that it growes vnder Hasell-trees, neere vnto a citie of Germanie called Argentine, or Strawsborough.


 The Time.
They spring in March, bring forth their floures in May, and their ripe fruit in September.


 The Names.
Blacke Bryonie is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Bryonia nigra: and Vitis syluestris, or wilde Vine; notwithstanding it doth not a little differ from Labrusca, or (...) Vinefera syluestris, that is to say, from the wilde vine, which bringeth forth wine, which is likewise called Ampelos agria: Why both these were called by one name, Pliny was the cause, who could not sufficiently expound them in his 23. booke, first chapter; but confounded them, and made them all one, in which errour are also the Arabians.
This wilde Vine also is called in Latine, Tamus, and the fruit thereof Vua Taminia. Pliny nameth it also Salicastrum. (...) saith that in certaine shops it is called Sigillum B. Mariae; it is also called Cyclaminus alt era but not properly: in English, Blacke Bryonie, wilde Vine, and our Ladies-seale.


 The Temperature.
The roots of the wild Vine are hot and drie in the third degree: the fruit is of like (...), but yet nor so forceable: both of them scoure and waste away.



 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the roots do purge waterish humours, and are good for such as haue the  dropsie; if they be boiled in wine, adding vnto the wine a little sea water, and bee drunke in three ounces of faire fresh water: he saith furthermore, that the fruit or berries doth take away the Sunburne and other blemishes of the skin.
The berries do not onely clense and remoue such kinde of spots, but do also very quickly waste  and consume away blacke and blew marks that come of bruises and drie beatings, which thing also the roots performe being laid vpon them.
The young and tender sproutings are kept in pickle, and reserued to be eaten with meat as Dioscorides teacheth. Matthiolus writeth that they are serued at mens tables also in our age in Tuscanie: others report the like also to be done in Andalosia, one of the kingdomes of Granado.
It is said that swine (...) after the roots hereof, which they dig vp and eat with no lesse delight  than they do the roots of Cyclaminus, or Panis porcinus, whereupon it was called Cyclaminus altera; or Sow-bread; if this reason stand for good, then may we in like manner iome hereunto many other roots, and likewise call them Cyclaminus altera, or Sow-bread: for swine do not seeke after the roots of this onely, digge them vp and greedily deuoure them, but the roots of diuers other plants also, of which none are of the kindes of Sow-bread. It would therefore be a point of rashnesse to affirm Tamus or our Ladies-seale to be a kinde of Sowbread, because the roots thereof are pleasant meat to swine.
The root spred vpon a piece of sheepes leather, in manner of a plaister whilest it is yet fresh and  green, taketh away blacke or blew marks, all scars and deformitie of the skin, breaketh hard apostems, draweth forth splinters and broken bones, dissolueth congealed bloud; and being laid on and vsed vpon the hip or huckle bones, shoulders, armes, or any other part where there is great pain and ache, it taketh it away in short space, and worketh very effectually. 

The figure that was formerly in the (...) (...) of this chapter did no waies agree with the (...), for it was of the (...) or Trauellors ioy (hereafter to be mentioned; which (...), (whose figures our Author made vse of) calls (...) (...).




CHAP. 322. Of Bryonie of Mexico.

 The Description.
1 THat plant which is now called Mechoacan, or Bryonie of Mexico, commeth verie neere the kinds of Bindweeds, in leaues and trailing branches, but in roots like the Brionies; for there shooteth from the root thereof many long slender tendrels, which do infinitly graspe and claspe about such things as grow or stand next vnto them: whereupon grow great broad leaues sharpe pointed, of a darke greene colour, in shape like those of our Ladies-seale, somwhat rough and hairie, and a little biting the tongue: among the leaues come forth the floures (as Nicolaus Monardus writeth) not vnlike those of the Orenge tree, but rather of the golden Apple of loue, consisting of fiue small leaues: out of the middest whereof commeth forth a little clapper or pestell in manner of a round lumpe, as big as a Hasell nut; which being diuided with a thin skin, or membrane, that commeth through it, openeth into two parts, in each whereof are contained two seeds, as bigge as Pease, in colour blacke and shining. The root is thicke and long, verie like vnto the root of white Bryonie, whereof we (...) this a kinde, although in the taste of the roots there is some difference: for the root of white Bryonie hath a bitter taste, and this hath little or no taste at all.
2 The Bryony, or (...) of Peru groweth vp with many long trailing flexible branches, interlaced with diuers Vinie tendrels, which take hold of such things as are next or neere vnto them, euen in such manner of clasping and climing as doth the blacke Bryonie, or wine Vine, whereunto it is very like almost in each respect, sauing that his mossie floures do smell very sweetly. The fruit as yet I haue not obserued, by reason that the plant which doth grow in my garden did not perfect the same, by occasion of the great rain and intemperate weather that hapned in An. 1596. but I am in good hope to see it in his perfection, and then we shall easily iudge whether it be that right Mochoacan that hath been brought from Mexico and other places of the West Indies or no? The root by the figure should seeme to answer that of the wilde Vine, but as yet thereof I cannot write certainly.
@ 3 There is brought to vs and into vse of late time the root of another plant, which seemes

1 Mechoacan. Bryonie of Mexico.
2 (...) Peruvi ana. Bryonie of Peru.
haue much affinitie with Mechoacan, and therefore Bauhine hath called it Bryonia Mechoacan nigricans, and thus deliuers the historie thereof. [It is a root like Mechoacan, but couered with a blackish barke, and reddish (or rather grayish) on the inside: and cut into slices, it was brought some yeares agone out of India by the name of Chelapa, or Gelapa. It is called by those of Alexandria and Marscilles Ialapium or Gelapum: and of those of Marseilles it is thought the blacke or male Mechoacan: The taste is not vngratefull, but gummy, and by reason of the much gumminesse, put to the fire it quickly flames: it in facultie exceeds the common Mechoacan; for by reason of the great gumminesse it more powerfully purgeth serous humours with a little griping, also it principally strengthens the liuer and stomacke; wherefore it is safely giuen in the weight of 3j. and performes the operation without nauseousnesse. It is vsually giuen in Succorie water, or some thin broth three houres before meat.] Thus much Bauhine, who saith it was first brought to these parts eleuen yeres before he set forth his Prodromus, so that was about 1611. It hath beene little vsed here till within this ten yeares. @


 The Place.
Some write that Mechoacan was first found in the Prouince of New Spaine, (...) vnto the citie of Mexico or Mexican, whereof it tooke his name. It groweth likewise in a prouince of the West Indies called Nicaragua and (...), where it is thought the best doth grow.


 The Names.
It beareth his name as is said, of the prouince in which it is found. Some take it to be Bryoniae species, or to be a kinde of Bryonie: but seeing the root is nothing bitter, but rather without taste, it hath little agreement with Bryonie; for the root of Bryonie is verie bitter. Diuers name it Rha (...), or white Rubarbe, but vnproperly, being nothing like. It commeth neere vnto (...), and if I might yeeld my censure, it seemeth to be Scammonium (...) Americanum, or a certain Scammonie of America. (...) creepeth, as wee haue sayd, after the manner of Bindweed. The root is both white and thicke: the iuice hath but little taste, as also hath this of Mechoacan: it is called in English, Mechoca and Mechocan, and may bee called Indian (...).



 The Temperature.
The root is of a meane temperature between hot and cold, but yet drie.


 The Vertues.
It purgeth by siege, especially flegme, and then waterish humours. It is giuen from one ful dram  weight to two, and that with wine, or with some distilled water (according as the disease requireth) or els in flesh broth.
It is to be giuen with good effect to all, whose diseases proceed of flegme and cold humors. It is  good against head-ache that hath continued long, old coughes, hardnesse of breathing, the colick, paine of the kidneies and ioints, the diseases of the reines and belly.



CHAP. 323. Of the Manured Vine.

 The Kindes.
THe Vine may be accounted among those plants that haue need of staies and props, and cannot stand by themselues; it is held vp with poles and frames of wood, and by that meanes it spreadeth all about and climbeth aloft: it ioyneth it selfe vnto trees, or whatsoeuer standeth next vnto it.
Of Vines that bring forth wine, some be tame and husbanded; and others that be wilde: of tame Vines there are many that are greater, and likewise another sort that be lesser.


 The Description.
THe trunke or bodie of the Vine is great and thicke, very hard, couered with many barkes, and those full of cliffes or chinkes; from which grow forth branches, as it were armes, many waies spreading; out of which come forth iointed shoots and springs: and from the bosome of those ioints, leaues, and clasping tendrels; and likewise bunches or clusters filled ful of grapes: the leaues be broad, something round, fiue cornered, and somewhat indented about the edges; amongst which come forth many clasping tendrels, that take hold of such props or staies as do stand next vnto it. The grapes do differ both in colour and greatnesse, and also in many other things, the which to distinguish seuerally were impossible, considering the infinite sorts or kindes, and also those which are transplanted from one region or climate to another, do likewise alter both from the forme and taste they had before, in consideration whereof it shall be sufficient to set sorth the figure of the manured grape, and speake somewhat of the rest.
There is found in Graecia and the parts of Morea, as Pantalarea, Zante, Cephalonia, and (...) (wherof some are Islands, and the other of the continent) a certaine Vine that hath a trunke or bodie of a wooddie substance, with a scaly or rugged bark, of a grayish colour, whereupon do grow faire broad leaues, sleightly indented about the edges, not vnlike vnto those of the Marsh-mallow: from the bosome whereof come forth many small clasping tendrels, and also tough and pliant foot-stalkes, whereon do grow verie faire bunches of grapes, of a watchet blewish colour: from the which fruit commeth forth long tender laces or strings, such as is found among Sauorie; whereupon wee call that plant which hath it laced Sauorie, not vnlike that that groweth among, and vpon Flax, which we call Dodder, or Podagra lini, (...) is made a blacke wine, which is called Greeke wine, yet of the taste of Sacke. The laced fruit of this Vine may be fitly termed Vuabarbata, Laced or bearded grapes.
The plant that beareth those small Raisins which are commonly called Corans or Currans, or rather Raisins of Corinth, is not that plant which among the vulgar people is taken for Currans, being a shrubbe or bush that bringeth forth small clusters of berries, differing as much as may bee from Corans, hauing no affinitie with the Vine or any kinde thereof. The Vine that beareth small Raisins or Corans hath a bodie or stocke as other Vines haue, branches and tendrels likewise. The leaues are larger than any of the others, snipt about the edges like the teeth of a saw: among which come forth clusters of grapes, in forme like the other, but smaller, of a blewish colour; which being ripe are gathered and laid vpon hurdles, carpets, mats, and such like, in the Sun to drie: then are they carried to some house and laied vpon heapes, as we lay apples and corne in a garner, vntill the merchants do buy them: then do they put them into large Buts or other woodden vessels, and tread them downe with their bare feet, which they call Stiuing, and so are they brought into these parts for our vse. @ And they are commonly termed in Latine, (...) Corinthiacae, and (...) minores. @



Vitis Vinifera. The manured Vine.


@ There is also another which beareth exceeding faire grapes, whereof they make Raisins, whiter coloured, and much exceeding the bignesse of the common Raisin of the Sunne: yet that Grape whereof the Raisin of the Sun is made is a large one, and thought to be the Vua Zibibi of the Arabians; and it is that which Tabernamontanus figured vnder that name, who therein was followed by our Authour: but the figures being little to the purpose, I haue thought good to omit them. @
There is another kinde of Vine, which hath great leaues very broad, of an ouerworne colour; whereupon do grow great bunches of Grapes of a blewish colour: the pulpe or meate whereof (...) or cleaueth so hard to the graines or little stones, that the one is not easily diuided from the other; resembling some starued or withered berrie that hath been blasted, whereof it was named (...).
There be some vines that bring forth grapes of a whitish or reddish yellow colour: others of a deepe red; both in the outward skinne, pulpe, and iuyce within.
There be others whose grapes are of a blew colour, or something red, yet is the iuyce like those of the former. These grapes do yeeld forth a white wine before they are put into the presse, and a reddish or paller Wine when they are trodden with the husks, and so left to macerate or ferment, with which if they remaine too long they yeeld forth a wine of a higher colour.
There be others which make a blacke and obscure red wine, whereof some bring bigger clusters, and consist of greater grapes; others of lesser: some grow more clustred and closer together, others looser: some haue but one stone, others more: some make a more austere or harsh wine; others a more sweet: of some the old wine is best; of diuers, the first yeares wine is most excellent: some bring forth fruit (...) square, of which sorts or kindes we haue great plenty.


 The Place.
A fit soile for Vines, saith Florentinus, is euery blacke earth, which is not very close nor clammy, hauing some moisture; notwithstanding Columella saith that great regard is to be had what kinde or sort of Vine you would nourish, according to the nature of the countrey and soile.
A wise husbandman will commit to a fat and fruitfull soile a leane Vine, and of his own nature not too fruitfull: to a leane ground a fruitfull vine: to a close and compact earth a spreading vine, and that is full of matter to make branches of: to a loose and fruitfull soile a Vine of few branches. The same Columella saith, that the Vine delighteth not in dung, of what kinde soeuer it be; but fresh mould mixed with some shauings of horne is the best to be disposed about the roots, to cause fertilitie.


 The Time.
Columella saith, that the Vines must be pruned before the young branches bud forth. Palladius writeth, in Februarie: if they be pruned later they lose their nourishment with weeping.


 The Names.
The Vine is called in Greeke (...) (...): as much to say in Latine as, Vitis Vinifera, or the Vine which (...) wine; and (...): that is, Vitis (...), siue cultiua, Tame or manured Vine. And it is called (...), that it may differ (...) both the Bryonies, the white and the blacke, and from Tamus, or our Ladies (...), which be likewise named (...). It is called Vitis, because inuitatur aduvas pariendas. It is cherished to the intent to bring forth full clusters, as Varro saith.
(...) maketh Vua (...), (...) vitis, or Vine of Alexandria, in his fourteenth booke, and third chapter, describing the same by those verv words that Theophrastus doth. Dioscorides setteth it downe to be altera species Vitis (...), or a second kinde of wilde Vine; but wee had rather retaine it among the (...) (...). We (...) name it in English, Raisin Vine. The fruits hereof are

called in shops by the name of Passularum de Corintho: in English, Currans, or small Raisins.
Syluestris Vitis or wilde Vine is called in Greeke (...): and in Latine Labrusca; as in Virgils (...):

-- Adspice vt antrum
Syluestris raris sparsit labrusca racemis.
-- See how the wilde Vine
Bedecks the caue with sparsed clusters fine.

To this wilde Vine doth belong those which Pliny in his sixteenth booke, chapter 27. reporteth to be called Triferae, or that bring three sundry fruits in one yeare, as Insanae and mad bearing Vines, because in those some clusters are ripe and full growne, some in swelling, and others but flouring.
The fruit of the Vine is called in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine, Racemus, and Vua: in English, a bunch or cluster of Grapes.
The cluster of Grapes that hath been withered or dried in the Sun is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Vua passa: in shops, Passula: in English, Raisins of the Sun.
The berry or Grape it selfe is called in Latine Acinus, and also Granum, as Democritus saith, speaking of the berry.
The seeds or stones contained within the berries are called in Latine, Vinacea, and sometimes Nuclei: in shops, Arilli, as though they should say Ariduli, because they are dry, and yeeld no iuyce; notwithstanding Vinacea are also taken in Columella for the drosse or remnant of the Grapes after they be pressed.
The stalke, which is in the middle of the clusters, and vpon which the grapes do hang, is called of Galen, (...): of Varro, Scapus uvarum.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The tender and clasping branches of the Vine and the leaues do coole, and mightily bind. They  stay bleeding in any part of the body: they are good against the laske, the bloudy flix, the heartburne, heate of the stomacke, or readinesse to vomit. It stayeth the lusting or longing of women with childe, though they be but outwardly applied, and also taken inwardly any manner of waies. They be moreouer a remedie for the inflammation of the mouth, and almonds of the throat, if they be gargled, or the mouth washed therewith.
Of the same faculty be also the clusters gathered before they be ripe; and likewise the bunches  of the wilde grape, which is accounted to be more effectuall against all those infirmities.
Dioscorides saith, That the liquor which falleth from the body and branches being (...), and that  sometime is turned as it were into a gum (which driueth forth stones out of the kidnies and bladder, if the same be drunke in wine) healeth ring-wormes, scabs, and leprie, but the place is first to be rubbed with Nitre. Being often anointed or layd on it taketh away superfluous haires: but yet he saith that the same is best which issueth forth of the greene and smaller stickes, especially that liquor which falleth away whilest the branches are burning, which taketh away warts, if it be laid on them.
The stones and other things remaining after the pressing are good against the bloudy flix, the  laske of long continuance, and for those that are much subiect to vomiting.
The ashes made of the stickes and drosse that remaine after the pressing, being laid vpon the  piles and hard swellings about the fundament, doe cure the same, being mixed with oile of Rue, or Herbe-grace and vineger, as the same Author affirmeth, it helpeth to strengthen members out of ioynt, and such as are bitten with any venomous beast, and easeth the paine of the spleene or milt, being applied in manner of a plaister.
The later age do vse to make a lie of the ashes of Vine sticks, in compositions of causticke and  burning medicines, which serue in stead of an hot-iron: the one we call a potentiall cauterie, and the other actuall.


 Of Grapes.
OF Grapes, those that are eaten raw do trouble the belly, and fill the stomacke full of winde, especially such as are of a sowre and austere taste; such kindes of grapes doe very much hinder the concoction of the stomacke; and while they are dispersed through the liuer and veins they ingender cold and raw iuyce, which cannot easily be changed into good bloud.
Sweet grapes and such as are thorow ripe, are lesse hurtfull; their iuyce is hotter, and is easilier  dispersed. They also sooner passe thorow the belly, especially being moist, and most of all if the liquor with the pulpe be taken without the stones and skin, as Galen saith.
The substance of the stones, although it be drier, and of a binding quality, doth descend thorow 

all the bowels, and is nothing changed: as also the skins, which are nothing at all altered in the body, or very little.
Those grapes which haue a strong taste of wine are in a meane betweene soure and sweet.
Such grapes as haue little iuyce do nourish more, and those lesse that haue more iuyce: but  these do sooner descend; for the body receiueth more nourishment by the pulpe than by the iuice; by the iuyce the belly is made more (...).
Grapes haue the preheminence among the Autumne sruits, and nourish more than they all, but  yet not so much as figs: and they haue in them little ill iuyce, especially when they be thorow ripe.
Grapes may be kept the whole yeare, being ordered after that manner as Ioachimus Camerarius reporteth. You shall take (saith he) the meale of mustard seed, and strew in the bottome of any earthen pot well leaded; whereupon you shall lay the fairest bunches of the ripest grapes, the which you shall couer with more of the foresaid meale, and lay vpon that another sort of Grapes, so doing vntill the pot be full. Then shall you fill vp the pot to the brim with a kinde of sweete Wine called Must. The pot being very close couered shall be set into some Cellar or other cold place. The Grapes you may take forth at your pleasure, washing them with faire water from the powder.


 Of Raisins.
OF Raisins most are sweet; some haue an austere or harsh taste. Sweet Raisins are hotter; austere  colder: both of them do moderately binde, but the austere somewhat more, which doe more strengthen the stomacke. The sweet ones do neither slacken the stomacke, nor make the belly soluble, if they be taken with their stones, which are of a binding qualitie: (...) the stones taken forth, they do make the belly loose and soluble.
Raisins do yeeld good nourishment to the body, they haue in them no ill iuyce at all, but doe  ingender somewhat a thicke iuyce, which notwithstanding doth nourish the more.
There commeth of sweet and fat Raisins most plenty of nourishment: of which they are the  best that haue a thin skin.
There is in the sweet ones a temperate and smoothing qualitie, with a power to clense moderately. They are good for the chest, lungs, winde-pipe, kidneyes, bladder, and for the stomacke; for they make smooth the roughnesse of the winde-pipe, and are good against hoarsenesse, shortnesse of breath, or difficultie of breathing: they serue to concoct the spittle, and to cause it to rise more easily in any disease whatsoeuer of the chest, sides, and lungs, and do mitigate the paine of the kidneyes and bladder, which hath ioyned with it heate and sharpenesse of vrine: they dull and allay the malice of sharpe and biting humors that hurt the mouth of the stomacke.
Moreouer, Raisins are good for the liuer, as Galen writeth in his seuenth booke of medicines, according to the places affected: for they be of force to concoct raw humors, and to restrain their malignitie, and they themselues do hardly putrifie: besides, they are properly and of their owne substance familiar to the intrals, and cure any distemperature, and nourish much; wherein they are chiefely to be commended, for Raisins nourish, strengthen, resist putrifaction, and if there be any distemperature by reason of moisture or coldnesse, they helpe without any hurt, as the said Galen affirmeth.
The old Physitians haue taught vs to take forth the stones, as we may see in diuers compositions  of the antient writers; as in that composition which is called in Galen, Arteriaca Mithridatis, which hath the seeds of the Raisins taken forth: for seeing that Raisins containe in them a thicke substance, they cannot easily passe through the veines, but are apt to breed obstructions and stoppings of the intrals: which things happen the rather by reason of the seeds; for they so much the harder passe through the body, and do quicklier and more easily cause obstructions, in that they are more astringent or binding. Wherefore the seeds are to be taken out, for so shall the iuyce of the Raisins more easily passe, and the sooner be distributed through the intrals.
Dioscorides reporteth, That Raisins chewed with pepper draw flegme and water out of the head.
Of Raisins is made a pultesse good for the gout, rottings about the ioynts, gangrens, and mortified vlcers: being stamped with the herbe All-heale it quickly takes away the nailes that are loose in the fingers or toes, being laid thereon.


 Of Must.
MVst, called in Latine Mustum, that is to say, the liquor newly issuing out of the grapes when  they be trodden or pressed, doth fill the stomacke and intrals with winde; it is hardly digested; it is of a thicke iuyce, and if it do not speedily passe through the body it becommeth more

hurtfull. It hath onely this one good thing in it (as Galen saith) that it maketh the body soluble.
That which is sweetest and pressed out of ripe Grapes doth soonest passe through; but that  which is made of soure and austere grapes is worst of all: it is more windy, it is hardly concocted, it ingendreth raw humors; and although it doth descend with a loosenesse of the (...), notwithstanding it oftentimes withall bringeth the collicke and paines of the stone: but if the belly be not mooued all things are the worse, and more troublesome; and it oftentimes brings an extreame laske, and the bloudy flix.
That first part of the wine that commeth forth of it selfe before the Grapes be hard pressed, is  answerable to the Grape it selfe, and doth quickly descend; but that which issues forth afterward, hauing some part of the nature of the stones, stalks, and skins, is much worse.


 Of Cute.
OF Cute that is made of Must, which the Latines call Sapa, and Defrutum, is that liquor which  we call in English Cute, which is made of the sweetest Must, by boyling it to a certain thicknesse, or boyling it to a third part, as Columella writeth.
Pliny affirmeth, That Sapa and Defrutum do differ in the manner of the boyling; and that Sapa is  made when the new wine is boyled away till onely a third part remaineth: and Defrutum till halfe be boyled.
Siraeum, (saith he in his fourteenth booke, cap. 17.) which others call (...), and we Sapa, a worke  of wit, and (...) of nature, is made of new wine boyled to a third part; which being boiled to halfe we call Defrutum.
Palladius ioyneth to these Caroenum, which as he saith is made when a third part is boiled away, and two remaine.
(...) in his Geoponicks sheweth, that Hepsema must be made of eight parts of new wine, and  an hundred of wine it selfe boyled to a third.
Galen testifieth, that (...) is new wine very much boyled. The later Physitians do call Hepsemae or Sapa boyled wine.
Cute or boyled wine is hot, yet not so hot as wine, but it is thicker; yet not so easily distributed  or carried through the body, and it slowly descendeth by vrine, but by the belly oftentimes sooner; for it moderately maketh the same soluble.
It nourisheth more, and filleth the body quickly; yet doth it by reason of his thicknesse sticke  in the stomacke for a time, and is not so fit for the liuer or for the spleene. Cute also doth digest raw humors that sticke in the chest and lungs, and raiseth them vp speedily. It is therefore good for the cough and shortnesse of breath.
The (...) of the Low-countries (I will not say of London) doe make of Cute and Wine  mixed in a certain proportion, a compound and counterfeit wine, which they sell for Candy wine, commonly called Malmsey.
Pliny lib. 14. cap. 9. saith, that Cute was first deuised for a bastard hony.


 Of Wine.
TO speake of Wine, the (...) of Grapes, which being newly pressed forth is called as we haue  said Mustum or new wine: after the dregs and drosse are setled, and now it appeareth pure and cleere, it is called in Greeke (...): in Latine Vinum: in English, Wine, and that not vnproperly. For certaine other (...), as of Apples, Pomegranats, Peares, Medlars, or Seruices, or such as otherwise made (for examples sake) of barley and Graine, be not at all simply called wines, but with the name of the thing added whereof they do consist. Hereupon is the wine which is pressed forth of the pomegranat berries named Rhoites, or wine of pomegranats: out of Quinces, Cydonites, or wine of Quinces: out of Peares, (...), or Perry: and that which is compounded of barley is called Zythum, or Barley wine: in English, Ale or Beere.
And other certaine wines haue borrowed syrnames of the plants that haue beene steeped or infused  in them; and yet all wines of the Vine, as Wormwood wine, Myrtle wine, and Hyssop wine, and these are all called artificiall wines.
That is properly and simply called wine which is pressed out of the grapes of the vine, and is  without any manner of mixture.
The kindes of wines are not of one nature, nor of one facultie or power, but of many differing  one from another: for there is one difference thereof in taste, another in colour; the third is referred to the consistence or substance of the wine; the fourth consisteth in the vertue and strength thereof. Galen addeth that which is found in the smell, which belongs to the vertue and strength of the wine.

That may also be ioyned vnto them which respecteth the age: for by age wines become hotter  and sharper, and doe withall change oftentimes the colour, the substance, and the smell: for some wines are sweet of taste; others austere or something harsh; diuers of a rough taste, or altogether harsh; and most of them sufficient sharpe: there be likewise wines of a middle sort, inclining to one or other qualitie.
Wine is of colour either white or reddish, or of a blackish deepe red, which is called blacke, or  of some middle colour betweene these.
Some wine is of substance altogether thin; other some thicke and fat; and many also of a middle  consistence.
One wine is of great strength, and another is weake, which is called a waterish wine: a ful wine  is called in Latine Vinosum. There be also among these very many that be of a middle strength.
There is in all wines, be they neuer so weake, a certaine winie substance thin and hot. There be  likewise waterie parts, and also diuers earthy: for wine is not simple, but (as Galen testifieth in his fourth booke of the faculties of medicines) consisteth of parts that haue diuers faculties.
Of the sundry mixture and proportion of these substances one with another there rise diuers and  sundry faculties of the wine.
That is the best and fullest wine in which the hot and winie parts do most of all abound: and  the weakest is that wherein the waterie haue the preheminence.
The earthy substance abounding in the mixture causeth the wine to be austere or something  harsh, as a crude or raw substance doth make it altogether harsh. The earthy substance being seuered falleth downe, and in continuance of time sinketh to the bottome, and becomes the dregs or lees of the wine: yet it is not alwaies wholly seuered, but hath both the tast and other qualities of this substance remaining in the wine.
All wines haue their heate, partly from the proper nature and inward or originall heate of the  vine, and partly from the Sun: for there is a double heate which ripeneth not only the grapes, but also all other fruits, as Galen testifieth; the one is proper and naturall to euery thing; the other is borrowed of the Sun: which if it be perceiued in any thing, it is vndoubtedly best and especially in the ripening of grapes.
For the heate which proceeds from the Sun concocteth the grapes and the iuyce of the grapes, and doth especially ripen them, stirring vp and increasing the inward and naturall heat of the wine, which otherwise is so ouerwhelmed with aboundance of raw and waterish parts, as it seemes to be dulled and almost without life.
For vnlesse wine had in it a proper and originall heate, the grapes could not be so concocted by  the force of the Sun, as that the wine should become hot; no lesse than many other things naturally cold, which although they be ripened and made perfect by the heate of the Sun, do not for all that lose their originall nature; as the fruits, iuyces, or seeds of Mandrake, Nightshade, Hemlocke, Poppy, and of other such like, which though they be made ripe, and brought to full perfection, yet still retaine their owne cold qualitie.
Wherefore seeing that wine through the heate of the Sunne is for the most part brought to his  proper heate, and that the heate and force is not all alike in all regions and places of the earth; therefore by reason of the diuersitie of regions and places, the wines are made not a little to differ in facultie.
The stronger and fuller wine groweth in hot countries and places that lie to the Sun; the rawer  and weaker in cold regions and prouinces that lie open to the North.
The hotter the Sommer is the stronger is the wine; the lesse hot or the moister it is, the lesse ripe  is the wine. Notwithstanding not onely the manner of the weather and of the Sunne maketh the qualities of the wine to differ, but the natiue propertie of the soile also; for both the tast and other qualities of the Wine are according to the manner of the Soile. And it is very well knowne, that not only the colour of the wine, but the taste also dependeth vpon the diuersity of the grapes.
Wine (as Galen writeth) is hot in the second degree, and that which is very old in the third; but  new wine is hot in the first degree: which things are especially to be vnderstood concerning the meane betweene the strongest and the weakest; for the fullest and mightiest (being but Horna, that is as I take it of one yeare old) are for the most part hot in the second degree. The weakest and the most waterish wines, although they be old, do seldome exceed the second degree.
The drinesse is answerable to the heate in proportion, as Galen saith in his booke of Simples: but  in his bookes of the gouernment of health he sheweth, that wine doth not onely heate, but also moisten our bodies, and that the same doth moisten and nourish such bodies as are extreme dry: and both these opinions be true.
For the faculties of wine are of one sort as it is a medicine, and of another as it is a nourishment;  which Galen in his booke of the faculties of nourishments doth plainly shew, affirming that those qualities of the wine which Hippocrates writeth of in his booke of the manner of diet, be not

as a nourishment, but rather as of a medicine. For wine as it is a medicine doth dry, especially being outwardly applied; in which case, for that it doth not nourish the body at all, the drines doth more plainly appeare, and is more manifestly perceiued.
Wine is a speciall good medicine for an vlcer, by reason of his heate and moderate drying, as  Galen teacheth in his fourth booke of the method of healing.
Hippocrates writeth, That vlcers, what manner of ones soeuer they are, must not be moistned vnlesse  it be with wine: for that which is dry (as Galen addeth) commeth neerer to that which is whole, and the thing that is moist, to that which is not whole.
It is manifest that Wine is in power or facultie dry, and not in act; for Wine actually is moist  and liquid, and also cold: for the same cause it likewise quencheth thirst, which is an appetite or desire of cold and moist, and by this actuall moisture (that we may so terme it) it is if it be inwardly taken, not a medicine, but a nourishment; for it nourisheth, and through his moisture maketh plenty of bloud; and by increasing the nourishment it moistneth the body, vnlesse peraduenture it be old and very strong: for it is made sharpe and biting by long lying, and such kinde of Wine doth not onely heate, but also consume and dry the body, for as much as it is not now a nourishment, but a medicine.
That wine which is neither sharpe by long lying, nor made medicinable, doth nourish and moisten, seruing as it were to make plenty of nourishment and bloud, by reason that through his actuall moisture it more moistneth by feeding, nourishing, and comforting, than it is able to dry by his power.
Wine doth refresh the inward and naturall heate, comforteth the stomacke, causeth it to haue  an appetite to meate, moueth coucoction, and conueyeth the nourishment through all parts of the body, increaseth strength, inlargeth the body, maketh flegme thinne, bringeth forth by (...) cholericke and waterie humors, procureth sweating, ingendreth pure bloud, maketh the body wel coloured, and turneth an ill colour into a better.
It is good for such as are in a consumption by reason of some disease, and that haue need to  haue their bodies nourished and refreshed (alwaies prouided they haue no feuer,) as Galen saith in his seuenth booke of the Method of curing. It restoreth strength most of all other things, and that speedily: It maketh a man merry and ioyfull: It putteth away feare, care, troubles of minde, and sorrow: It moueth pleasure and lust of the body, and bringeth sleepe gently.
And these things proceed of the moderate vse of wine: for immoderate drinking of wine doth  altogether bring the contrarie. They that are drunke are distraughted in minde, become foolish, and oppressed with a drowsie sleepinesse, and be afterward taken with the Apoplexy, the (...), or altogether with other most grieuous diseases; the braine, liuer, lungs, or some other of the intrals being corrupted with too often and ouermuch drinking of wine.
Moreouer, wine is a remedy against taking of Hemlocke or green Coriander, the iuyce of black  Poppy, Wolfs-bane, and Leopards-bane, Tode-stooles, and other cold poysons, and also against the biting of serpents, and stings of venomous beasts, that hurt and kill by cooling.
Wine also is a remedie against the ouer-fulnesse and stretching out of the sides, windy swellings, the greene sicknesse, the dropsie, and generally all cold infirmities of the stomack, liuer, milt, and also of the matrix.
But Wine which is of colour and substance like water, through shining bright, pure, of a  thin substance, which is called white, is of all wines the weakest; and if the same should be tempered with water it would beare very little: and hereupon Hippocrates calleth it (...), that is to say, bearing little water to delay it withall.
This troubbleth the head and hurteth the sinewes lesse than others do, and is not vnpleasant to  the stomacke: it is easily and quickly dispersed thorow all parts of the body: it is giuen with far lesse danger than any other wine to those that haue the Ague (except some inflammation or hot swelling be suspected) and oftentimes with good successe to such as haue intermitting feuers; for as Galen, lib. 8. of his Method saith, it helpeth concoction, digesteth humors that be halfe raw, procureth (...) and sweat, and is good for those that cannot sleepe, and that be full of care and sorrow, and for such as are ouerwearied.
Blacke wine, that is to say wine of a deepe red colour, is thicke, and hardly dispersed, and doth  not easilv passe through the bladder: it quickly taketh hold of the braine, and makes a man drunk: it is harder of digestion: it remaineth longer in the body; it easily stoppeth the liuer and spleene; for the most part it bindes, notwithstanding it nourisheth more, and is more fit to ingender bloud: it filleth the body with flesh sooner than others do.
That which is of a light crimson red colour is for the most part more delightfull to the taste, fitter for the stomacke; it is sooner and easier dispersed: it troubleth the head lesse, it remains not so long vnder the short ribs, and (...) descendeth to the bladder than blacke wine doth: it doth

also make the belly costiue, if so be that it be not ripe. For such crude and rough wines do oftentimes molest weake stomackes, and are troublesome to the belly.
Reddish yellow wine seemeth to be in a meane betweene a thin and thicke substance: otherwise  it is of all vines the hottest; aand suffereth most water to be mixed with it, as (...) writeth.
The old vine of this kinde, being of a thin substance and good smell, is a singular medicine for  all those that are much subject to swouning, although the cause thereof proceed of choler that (...) the mouth of the stomacke, as Galen testifieth in the (...). booke of his method.
Sweete wine the lesse hot it is, the lesse doth it trouble the head, and offend the minde; and it  better passeth through the belly, making it oftentimes soluble: but it doth not so easily passe or descend by vrine.
Againe, the thicker it is of substance, the harder and slowlier it (...) through: it is good for  the lungs, and for those that haue the cough. It ripeneth raw humours that sticke in the chest, and causeth them to be easilier spit vp; but it is not so good for the liuer, whereunto it bringeth no small hurt when either it is inflamed, or schirrous, or when it is stopped. It is also an enemy to the spleene, it sticketh vnder the short ribs, and is hurtfull to (...) that are full of choler. For this kind of wine, especially the thicker it is, is in them very speedily turned into choler: and in others when it is well concoctod, it increaseth plenty of nourishment.
Austere wine, or that which is somewhat harsh in tast, nourisheth not much; and if so be that it  be thin and white, it is apt to prouoke vrine, it lesse troubleth the head, it is not quickly digested, for which cause it is the more to be shunned, as Galen saith in his 12. booke of his method.
That wine which is altogether harsh or rough in tast, the lesse ripe it is, the neerer it commerh  to the qualities of Veriuice made of sower grapes, being euidently binding. It strengheneth a weake stomacke; it is good against the vnkindely lusting or longing of women with child; it staieth the laske, but it sticketh in the bowels: breedeth stoppings in the liuer and milt; it slowly descendeth by vrine, and something troubleth the head.
Old wine which is also made sharpe by reason of age, is not onely troublesome to the braine, but also hurteth the sinewes: it is an enemy to the entrailes, and maketh the body leane.
New wine, and wine of the first yeere, doth easily make the body to swell, and ingendreth winde, it causeth troublesome dreames, especially that which is not throughly refined, or thicke, or very sweet: for such do sooner sticke in the intrailes than others do. Other wines that are in a meane in colour, substance, taste, or age, as they do decline in vertues and goodnesse from the extreames; so also they be free from their faults and discommodities. They come neere in faculties to those wines whereunto they be next, either in colour, taste, or substance, or else in smell or in age.
Wine is fittest for those that be of nature cold and dry; and also for old men, as Galen (...) in his fifth booke of the gouernment of health: for it heateth all the members of their bodies, and purgeth away the watery part of the bloud, if their be any.
The best wines are those that be of a fat substance: for those both increase bloud, and nourish  the body; both which commodities they bring to old men, especially at such time as they haue no serous humour in their veines, and haue need of much nourishment. It happeneth that oftentimes there doth abound in their bodies a waterish excrement, and then stand they in most need of all of such wines as do prouoke vrine.
As wine is best for old men, so it is worst for children: by reason that being drunke, it both moisteneth  and dryeth ouermuch, and also filleth the head with vapours, in those who are of a moist and hot complection, or whose bodies are in a meane betweene the extreames, whom Galen in his booke of the gouernment of health doth persuade, that they should not so much as taste of wine for a very long time: for neither is it good for them to haue their heads filled, nor to be made moist and hot, more than is sufficient, because they are already of such a heate and moisture, as if you should but little increase either qualitie, they would forthwith fall into the extreme.
And seeing that euery excesse is to be (...), it is (...) most of all to shun this, by which  not onely the body, but also the minde receiueth hurt.
Wherefore we thinke, that wine is not fit for men that be already of full age, vnlesse it be moderately  taken, because is carieth them headlong into fury and lust, and troubleth and dulleth the resonable part of the minde.


 Of the delaying, or tempering of Wine.
IT was an ancient custome, and of long continuance in old time, for wines to be mixed with water, as it is plaine and euident not onely by Hippocrates, but also by other old mens writings. Wine first began to be mixed with water for health and wholesomenesse sake: for as Hippocrates writeth in his booke of ancient Physicke; being simply and of it selfe much drunke, it maketh

a man in some sort weake and feeble: which thing Ouid, seemeth also to allow of writing thus:

Vt Venus eneruat vires, sic copia vini
Et tent at gressus, debilitatque pedes.


As Venery the vigour spends, so store of wine
Makes man to stagger, makes his strength decline.

Moreouer, wine is the sweeter, hauing water poured into it, as Athenaeus saith. Homer likewise  commendeth that wine which is well and fitly allaied. Philocor us writeth (as Athenaeus reporteth) that Amphictyon king of Athens was the first that allaied wine, as hauing learned the same of Dionysius: wherefore he saith, that those who in that manner drunke it remained in health, that before had their bodies feebled and ouerweakened with pure and vnmixed wine.
The maner of mingling or tempering of wine was diuers: for sometimes to one part of wine, there were added two, and sometimes three or foure of water; or two parts of wine three of water: of a lesse delay was that which consisted of equall parts of wine and water.
The old Comedians did thinke that this lesser mixture was sufficient to make men mad, among  whom was Mnesitheus, whose words be extant in Athenaeus.
Hippocrates in the seuenth booke of his Aphorismes saith, that this manner of tempering of wine  and water by equall parts bringeth as it were a light pleasant drunkennesse, and that it is a kinde of remedy against disquietnesse, yawnings, and shiuerings; and this mingling belongeth to the strongest wines.
Such kinde of wines they might be which in times past the Scythians were reported of the old  writers to drinke, who for this cause do call vnmixed wine the Scythians drinke. And they that drinke simple wine say, that they will (...), or do as the Scythians do; as we may reade in the tenth booke of Athenaeus.
The Scythians, as Hippocrates and diuers other of the old writers affirme, be people of Germany  beyond the floud Danubius, which is also called Ister: Rhene is a riuer of Scythia: and Cyrus hauing passed ouer Ister is reported to haue come into the borders of the Scythians.
And in this our age all the people of Germany do drinke vnmixed wine, which groweth in their  owne countrey, and likewise other people of the North parts, who make no scruple at all to drinke of the strongest wines without any mixture.


 Of the liquor which is destilled out of wine, commonly called, Aqua vitae.
THere is drawne out of Wine a liquor, which in Latine is commonly called Aqua vitae, or water  of life, and also Aqua ardens, or burning water, which as distilled waters are drawne out of herbes and other things, is after the same manner distilled out of strong wine, that is to say, by certaine instruments made for this purpose, which are commonly called Limbeckes.
This kinde of liquor is in colour and substance like vnto waters distilled out of herbes, and also  resembleth cleere simple water in colour, but in facultie it farre differeth.
It beareth the syrname of life, because that it serueth to preserue and prolong the life of  man.
It is called Ardens, burning, for that it is easily turned into a burning flame: for seeing it is not  any other thing than the thinnest and strongest part of the wine, it being put to the flame of fire, is quickly burned.
This liquor is very hot, and of most subtill and thin parts; hot and dry in the later end of the  third degree, especially the purest spirits thereof: for the purer it is, the hotter it is, the dryer, and of thinner parts: which is made more pure by often distilling.
This water distilled out of wine is good for all those that are made cold either by a long disease, or through age, as for old and impotent men: for it cherisheth and increaseth naturall heate; vpholdeth strength, repaireth and augmenteth the same: it prolongeth life, quickeneth all the senses, and doth not only preserue the memory, but also recouereth it when it is lost: it sharpeneth the sight.
It is fit for those that are taken with the Catalepsie (which is a disease in the braine proceeding  of (...) and cold) and are subject to dead sleepes, if there be no feuer joined; it serueth for the weakenesse; trembling, and beating of the hart; it strengtheneth and heateth a (...) stomacke; it consumeth winde both in the stomacke, sides, and bowels; it maketh good concoction of meate, and is a singular remedy against cold poisons.
It hath such force and power, in strengthening of the hart, and stirreth vp the instruments of the 

senses, that it is most effectuall, not onely inwardly taken to the quantitie of a little spoonefull, but also outwardly applied: that is to say, set to the nosthrils, or laid vpon the temples of the head, and to the wrests of the armes; and also to foment and bath sundry hurts and griefes.
Being held in the mouth it helpeth the tooth-ache: is is also good against cold cramps and convulsions, being chafed and rubbed therewith.
Some are bold to giue it in quartaines before the fit, especially after the height or prim of the  disease.
This water is to be giuen in wine with great iudgement and discretion; for seeing it is extreme  hot, and of most subtill parts, and nothing else but the very spirit of th wine, it most speedily peirceth through, and doth easily assault and hurt the braine.
Therefore it may be giuen to such as haue the apoplexie and falling sicknesse, the megrim, the  headach of long continuance, the Vertigo, or giddinesse proceeding through a cold cause: yet can it not be alwaies safely giuen; for vnlesse the matter the efficient cause of the disease be small, and the sicke man of temperature very cold, it cannot be ministred without danger: for that it spredeth and disperseth the humours, it filleth or stuffeth the head, and maketh the sicke man worse: and if the humours be hot, as bloud is, it doth not a little increase inflammations also.
This water is hurtfull to all that be of nature and complexion hot, and most of all to cholericke  men: it is also offensiue to the liuer, and likewise vnprofitable for the kidnies, being often and plentifully taken.
If I should take in hand to write of euery mixture, of each infusion, of the sundry colours, and euery other circumstance that the vulgar people doe giue vnto this water, and their diuers vse, I should spend much time but to small purpose.


 Of Argall, Tartar, or wine Lees.
The Lees of wine which is become hard like a crust, and sticketh to the sides of the vessell, and  wine casks, being dried, hard, sound, and well compact, and which way be beaten into powder, is called in shops (...): in English, Argall, and Tartar.
These Lees are vsed for many things; the siluer-Smiths polish their siluer herewith: the Diers  vse it: and it is profitable in medicine.
It doth greatly dry and wast away, as Paulus Aegineta saith: it hath withall a binding facultie, proceeding from the kinde of wine, of which it commeth.
The same serueth for moist diseases of the body: it is good for them that haue the greene sicknes  and the dropsie, especially that kinde that lieth in the flesh, called in Latine, Leucophlagmatica: being taken euery day fasting halfe a penny weight or a full penny weight (which is a dram and nine graines after the Romanes computation) doth not onely dry vp the waterish excrements, and voideth them by vrine, but it preuaileth much to clense the belly by siege.
It would worke more effectually, if it were mixed either with hot spices, or with other things  that breake winde, or else with diuretickes, which are medicines that prouoke vrine; likewise to be mixed with gentle purgers, as the sicke mans case shall require.
The same of it selfe, or tempered with oile of Myrtles, is a remedy against soft swellings, as Dioscorides teacheth: it staieth the laske, and vomiting, being applied outwardly vpon the region of the stomacke in a pultis; and if it be laid to the bottome of the belly and secret parts, it stoppeth the whites, wasteth away hot swellings of the kernels in the flankes, and other places, which be not yet exulcerated: it asswageth great brests, and dryeth vp the milke, if it be annointed on with vineger.
These Lees are oftentimes burnt: if it become all white it is a signe of right and perfect burning, for till then it must be burned: being so burnt, the Grecians terme it, (...), as Aegineta saith: the Apothecaries call it, Tartarum vstum, and Tartarum calcinatum: that it to say, burnt or calcined Tartar.
It hath a very great causticke or burning qualitie: it clenseth and throughly heateth, bindeth, eateth, and very much drieth, as Dioscorides doth write: being mixed with Rosin, it maketh rough and ill nailes to fall away: Paulus saith, that it is mixed with causticks or burning medicines to increase their burning qualitie: it must be vsed whilest it is new made, because it quickly vanisheth: for the Lees of wine burned, do soone relent or wax moist, and are speedily resolued into liquor: therefore he that would vse it dry, must haue it put in a glasse, or glassed vessell well stopped, and set in a hot and dry place. It melteth and is turned into liquor if it be hanged in a linnen bag in some place in a celler vnder the ground.
The Apothecaries call this liquor that droppeth away from it, oile of Tartar. It retaineth a causticke  and burning quality, and also a very dry facultie: it very soon taketh away leprie, scabs, retters, and other filth and deformitie of the skin and face: with an equall quantitie of Rose water

added, and as much Ceruse as is sufficient for a liniment, wherewith the blemished or spotted parts must be anointed ouer night.


 The briefe summe of that hath been said of the Vine.
THe iuyce of the greene leaues, branches, and tendrels of the Vine drunken, is good for those  that vomit and spit bloud, for the bloudy flix, and for women with childe that vomite ouermuch. The kernell within the grapes boyled in water and drunke hath the same effect.
Wine moderately drunke profiteth much, and maketh good digestion, but it hurteth and distempereth  them that drinke it seldome.
White wine is good to be drunke before meate; it preserueth the body, and pierceth quickely  into the bladder: but vpon a full stomacke it rather maketh oppilations or stoppings, because it doth swiftly driue downe meate before Nature hath of her selfe digested it.
Claret wine doth greatly nourish and warme the body, and is wholesome with meate, especially  vnto phlegmaticke people; but very vnwholesome for yong children, as Galen saith, because it heateth aboue nature, and hurteth the head.
Red wine stops the belly, corrupteth the bloud, breedeth the stone, is hurtfull to old people, and  good or profitable to few, saue to such as are troubled with the laske, bloudy flix, or any other loosenesse of the body.
Sacke or Spanish wine hath beene vsed of a long time to be drunke after meate, to cause the  meate the better to digest; but common experience hath found it to be more beneficiall to the stomacke to be drunke before meate.
Likewise Malmsey, Muskadell, Bastard, and such like sweet wines haue been vsed before meat, to comfort the cold and weake stomacke, especially being taken fasting: but experience teacheth, that Sacke drunke in stead thereof is much better, and warmeth more effectually.
Almighty God for the comfort of mankinde ordained Wine; but decreed withall, That it  should be moderatly taken, for so it is wholsome and comfortable: but when measure is turned into excesse, it becommeth vnwhole some, and a poyson most venomous, relaxing the sinewes, bringing with it the palsey and falling sicknesse: to those of a middle age it bringeth hot feuers, frensie, and lecherie; it consumeth the liuer and other of the inward parts: besides, how little credence is to be giuen to drunkards it is euident; for though they be mighty men, yet it maketh them monsters, and worse than brute beasts. Finally in a word to conclude; this excessiue drinking of Wine dishonoreth Noblemen, beggereth the poore, and more haue beene destroyed by surfeiting therewith, than by the sword.



CHAP. 324. Of Hops.

 The Kindes.
THere be two sorts of Hops: one the manured or the Garden Hop; the other wilde or of the hedge.


 The Description.
1 THe Hop doth liue and flourish by embracing and taking hold of poles, pearches, and other things vpon which it climeth. It bringeth forth very long stalkes, rough, and hairie; also rugged leaues broad like those of the Vine, or rather of Bryonie, but yet blacker, and with fewer dented diuisions: the floures hang downe by clusters from the tops of the branches, puffed vp, set as it were with scales like little canes, or scaled Pine apples, of a whitish colour tending to yellownesse, strong of smell: the roots are slender, and diuersly folded one within another.
2 The wilde Hop differeth not from the manured Hop in forme or fashion, but is altogether lesser, as well in the clusters of floures, as also in the franke shoots, and doth not bring forth such store of floures, wherein especially consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
The Hop ioyeth in a fat and fruitfull ground: it prospereth the better by manuring: also it groweth among briers and thornes about the borders of fields, I meane the wilde kinde.



1 Lupus salictarius. Hops.




 The Time.
The floures of hops are gathered in August and September, and reserued to be vsed in beere: in the Spring time come forth new shoots or buds: in the Winter onely the roots remaine aliue.


 The Names.
It is called in shops and in all other places Lupulus: of some, Lupus salictarius, or Lupulus salictarius: in high-Dutch, Hoppe: in low-Dutch, Hoppe: in Spanish, Hombrezillos: in French, Houblon: in English, Hops.
Pliny, lib. (...). cap. 15. maketh mention of Hops among the prickly plants.


 The Temperature.
The floures of the hop are hot and dry in the second degree: they fill and stuffe the head, and hurt the same with their strong smell. Of the same temperature also are the leaues themselues, which doe likewise open and clense.


 The Vertues.
The buds or first sprouts which come forth in  the Spring are vsed to be eaten in sallads; yet are they, as Pliny saith, more toothsome than nourishing, for they yeeld but very small nourishment: notwithstanding they be good for the intrals, both in opening and procuring of vrine, and likewise in keeping the body soluble.
Theleaues and little tender stalkes, and also the  floures themselues remoue stoppings out of the liuer and spleene, purge by vrine, helpe the spleene, clense the bloud, and be profitable against long lingering Agues, scabs, and such like filth of the skin, if they be boyled in whay.
The iuyce is of more force, and doth not onely remoue obstructions out of the intrals, but it is  also thought to auoid choler and flegme by the stoole. It is written, that the same dropped into the eares taketh away the stench and corruption thereof.
The floures are vsed to season Beere or Ale with, and too many do cause bitternesse thereof, and  are ill for the head.
The floures make bread light, and the lumpe to be sooner and easilier leauened, if the meale be  tempered with liquor wherein they haue been boyled.
The decoction of hops drunke openeth the stoppings of the liuer, the spleene, and kidneyes, and  purgeth the bloud from all corrupt humors, causing the same to come forth with the vrine.
The iuyce of Hops openeth the belly, and driueth forth yellow and cholericke humours, and  purgeth the bloud from all filthinesse.
The manifold vertues of Hops do manifestly argue the wholsomenesse of beere aboue ale; for  the hops rather make it a physicall drinke to keepe the body in health, than an ordinary drinke for the quenching of our thirst.



CHAP. 325. Of Trauellers-Joy.

 The Description.
1 THe plant which Lobel setteth forth vnder the title of Viorna, Dodonaeus makes Vitis (...), but not properly; whose long wooddy and viny branches extend themselues very far, and into infinite numbers, decking with his clasping tendrels and white starre-like floures (being very sweet) all the bushes, hedges, and shrubs that are neere vnto it. It sends forth many branched stalkes, thicke, tough, full of shoots and clasping tendrels, wherewith it foldeth it selfe vpon the hedges, and taketh hold and climeth vpon euery thing that standeth neere vnto

it. The leaues are fastned for the most part by fiues vpon one rib or stem, two on either side, and one in the midst or point standing alone; which leaues are broad like those of Iuy, but not cornered at all: among which come forth clusters of white floures, and after them great tusts of flat seeds, each seed hauing a fine white plume like a feather fastned to it, which maketh in the winter a goodly shew, couering the hedges white all ouer with his feather-like tops. The root is long, tough, and thicke, with many strings fastned thereto.
2 Clusius hath set forth a kind of Clematis, calling it Clematis Baetica, hauing a maruellous long small branch full of ioynts, with many leaues indented about the edges like those of the peare tree, but stiffer and smaller, comming from euery ioynt; from whence also at each ioynt proceed two small clasping tendrels, as also the small foot-stalkes whereon the seeds do stand, growing in great tufted plumes or feathers, like vnto the precedent, whereof it is a kinde. The floures are not expressed in the figure, nor seene by the Author, and therefore what hath been said shall suffice.


1 Viorns. The Trauellers Ioy.


2 Clemat is Baetica. The Spanish Trauellers Ioy.




 The Place.
The Trauellers Ioy is found in the borders of fields among thornes and (...), almost in euerie hedge as you go from Grauesend to Canturbury in Kent; in many places of Essex, and in most of these Southerly parts about London, but not in the North of England that I can heare of.
The second is a stranger in these parts: yet haue I found it in the Isle of Wight, and in a wood by Waltham abbey.


 The Time.
The floures come forth in Iuly: the beauty thereof appeares in Nouember and December.


 The Names.
The first is called commonly Viorna, quasi vias ornans, of decking and adorning waies and hedges, where people trauel; and thereupon I haue named it the Trauellers Ioy: of Fuchsius it is called Vitis nigra: of Dodonaeus, Vit alba: of Matthiolus, Clemat is altera: of Cordus, Vit is alba: of Dioscorides, Vit is syluestris: of (...), Atragene: in Dutch, (...): in French, as Ruellius writeth, Viorne.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These plants haue no vse in physicke as yet found out, but are esteemed onely for pleasure, by reason of the goodly shadow which they make with their thicke bushing and clyming, as also for the beauty of the floures, and the pleasant sent or sauor of the same.




CHAP. 326. Of Ladies Bower, or Virgins Bower.

 The Description.
1 THat which Lobel describeth by the name Clemat is peregrina, hath very long and slender stalks like the Vine, which are iointed, of a darke colour; it climeth aloft, and taketh hold with his crooked claspers vpon euery thing that standeth neere vnto it: it hath many leaues diuided into diuers parts; among which come the floures that hang vpon slender foot-stalkes, something like to those of Peruinckle, consisting onely of foure leaues, of a blew colour, and sometimes purple, with certaine threds in the middle: the seeds be flat, plaine, and sharpe pointed. The roots are slender, and spreading all about.


1 2 Clemat is peregrina Caerulea, sive rubra. Blew or red floured Ladies-bower.


@ 3 Clemat is (...) slore pleno. Double floured Virgins-bower.


2 The second differeth not from the other, in leaues, stalkes, hranches nor seed. The onely difference consisteth in that, that this plant bringeth forth red floures, and the other blew.
@ 3 There is preserued also in some Gardens another sort of this Clematis, which in rootes, leaues, branches, and manner of growing differs not from the former: but the floure is much different, being composed of abundance of longish narrow leaues, growing thicke together, with foure broader or larger leaues lying vnder, or bearing them vp, and these leaues are of a darke blewish purple colour. Clusius calls this Clemat is altera flore pleno. @


 The Place.
These plants delight to grow in Sunnie places: they prosper better in a fruitfull soile than in barren. They grow in my garden, where they flourish exceedingly.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August, and perfect their seed in September.


 The Names.
Ladies Bower is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Ambuxum: in English you may call it Ladies

bower, which I take from his aptnesse in making of Arbors, Bowers, and shadie couertures in gardens.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The facultie and the vse of these in Physicke is not yet knowne.



CHAP. 327. Of purging Peruinckle.

 The Description.
1 AMong these plants which are called Clematides these be also to be numbred, as hauing certaine affinitie, because of the spreading, branching, and semblance of the Vine; and this is called Flammula vrens, by reason of his fierie and burning heate, because that being laid vpon the skin, it burneth the place, and maketh an eschar, euen as our common caustick or corrasiue medicines do. The leaues hereof answer both in colour and smoothnesse, Vinca, Peruinca, or Peruinckle, growing vpon long clambring tender branches, like the other kindes of climbing plants. The floures are very white, star-fashion, and of an exceeding sweet smell, much like vnto the smell of Hawthorne floures, but more pleasant, and lesse offensiue to the head: hauing in the middle of the floures certaine small chiues or threds. The root is tender, and disperseth it selfe far vnder the ground.


1 Clemat is vrens. Virgins Bower.


2 Flammula Iovis surrecta. Vpright Virgins Bower.


2 Vpright Clamberer or Virgins Bower is also a kinde of Clematis, hauing long tough roots not vnlike to those of Licorice; from which riseth vp a straight vpright stalke, of the height of three or foure cubits, set about with winged leaues, composed of diuers small leaues, set vpon a middle (...) as are those of the ashe tree, or Valerian, but fewer in number: at the top of the stalks come forth small white floures, very like the precedent, but not of so pleasant a sweet smell; after which come the seeds, flat and sharpe pointed.

3 There is another Clematis of the kinde of the (...) Clemat is or burning Clemat is, which I haue recouered from seed, that hath been sent me from a curious and learned citizen of Strawsborough, which is like vnto the others in each respect, sauing that, that the floures heereof are very double, wherein consisteth the ospeciall difference.
4 Amongst the kindes of climbing or clambering plants, Carolus Clusius, and likewise Lobel haue numbred these two, which approch neere vnto them in leaues and floures, but are far different in clasping tendrels, or climbing otherwise, beeing low and base plants in respect of the others of their kinde. The first hath for his roots a bundle of tough tangling threddes, in number infinite, and thicke thrust together; from which rise vp many small stalkes, of a brownish colour, (...) square, and of a wooddie substance: whereupon doe grow long leaues, of a biting taste, set together by couples, in shape like those of Asclepias, or silken Swallow-woort. The floures grow at the toppe of the stalkes, of a faire blew or skie colour, consisting of foure parts in manner of a crosse, hauing in the middle a bunched pointell, like vnto the head of field Poppie when it is young, of a whitish yellow colour, hauing little or no smell at all. The floures beeing past, then commeth the seed, such as is to be seen in the other kindes of Clemat is. The whole plant dieth at the approch of Winter, and recouereth it selfe againe from the root, which indureth, whereby it greatly increaseth.


4 Clemat is Pannonica. Bush Bower.


5 Clemat is maior Pannonica. Great Bush Bower.


5 The great Bush Bower differeth not from the former last described, but in greatnesse: which name of greatnesse setteth forth the difference.
@ 6 Of these there is another, whose bending crested stalkes are some three cubites high, which send forth sundry small branches, set with leaues growing together by threes vpon short foot-stalkes, and they are like myrtle leaues, but bigger, more wrinckled, darke coloured, and (...) about the edges: the floure resembles a crosse, with foure sharpe pointed rough leaues of a whitish blew colour, which containe diuers small loose little leaues in their middles. The root is long and lasting. It growes vpon the rocky places of mount Baldus in Italy, where Pona found it, and he calls it Clemat is cruciata Alpina. @



@ 6 Clematis cruciata Alpina. Virgins Bower of the Alps.




 The Place.
These plants do not grow wilde in England, that I can as yet learne; notwithstanding I haue them all in my garden, where they flourish exceedingly.


 The Time.
These plants do floure from August to the end of September.


 The Names.
There is not much more found of their names than is expressed in their seuerall titles, notwithstanding there hath beene somewhat said, as I thinke, by hearesay, but nothing of certaintie: wherefore let that which is set downe suffice. We may in English call the first, Biting Clematis, or white Clematis, Biting Peruinkle or purging Peruinkle, Ladies Bower, and Virgins Bower.


 The Temperature.
The leafe hereof is biting, and doth mightily blister, being, as Galen saith, of a causticke or burning qualitie: it is hot in the beginning of the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that the leaues being applied  do heale the scurfe and lepry, and that the seed beaten, and the pouder drunke with faire water or with mead, purgeth flegme and choler by the stoole.



CHAP. 328. Of Wood-binde, or Hony-suckle.

The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Wood-bindes, some of them shrubs with winding stalks, that wrappe themselues vnto such things as are neere about them. Likewise there be other sorts or kindes found out by the later Herbarists, that clime not at all, but stand vpright, the which shall bee set forth among the shrubbie plants. And first of the common Woodbinde.


 The Description.
1 WOodbinde or Honisuckle climeth vp aloft, hauing long slender wooddie stalkes, parted into diuers branches: about which stand by certaine distances smooth leaues, set together by couples one right against another; of a light greene colour aboue, vnderneath of a whitish greene. The floures shew themselues in the topps of the branches many in number, long, white, sweet of smell, hollow within; in one part standing more out, with certaine threddes growing out of the middle. The fruit is like to little bunches of grapes, red when they be ripe, wherein is contained small hard seed. The root is wooddie, and not without strings.
2 This strange kind of Woodbind hath leaues, stalks, and roots like vnto the common Woodbinde or Honisuckle, sauing that neere vnto the place where the floures come forth, the stalkes (...) grow through the leaues, like vnto the herbe Thorow-wax, called Perfoliata; which leaues do resemble little saucers: out of which broad round leaues proceed faire, beautifull, and well smelling floures, shining with a whitish purple colour, and somewhat dasht with yellow, by little and little stretched out like the nose of an Elephant, garnished within with small yellow chiues or threddes: and when the floures are in their flourishing, the leaues and floures do resemble saucers filled with

the floures of Woodbinde: many times it falleth out, that there is to be found three or foure saucers one aboue another, filled with floures, as the (...), which hath caused it to be called double Hony-suckle, or Woodbinde.


1 Periclymenum. Woodbinde or Honisuckles.


2 Periclymenum perfoliatum. Italian Woodbinde.




 The Place.
The VVoodbinde groweth in woods and hedges, and vpon shrubbes and bushes, oftentimes winding it selfe so straight and hard about, that it leaueth his print vpon those things so wrapped.
The double Honisuckle (...) now in my garden, and many others likewise in great plenty, although not long since, very rare and hard to be found, except in the garden of some diligent Herbarists.


 The Time.
The leaues come forth betimes in the spring: the floures bud forth in May and Iune: the fruit is ripe in Autumne.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Volucrum maius: of Scribonius Largus, Syluaemater: in shops, Caprifolium, and Matrisylua: of some, Lilium inter spinas: in Italian, vincibosco: in High Dutch, Geysbladt: in Low Dutch, Gheytenbladt, and Mammekens Cruit: in French, Cheurefueille: in Spanish, (...): in English, VVoodbinde, Honisuckle, and Caprifoly.


 The Temperature.
There hath an errour in times past growne amongst a few, and now almost past recouerie to bee called againe, being growne an errour vniuersall, which errour is, how the decoction of the leaues of Honisuckles, or the distilled water of the floures, are rashly giuen for the inflammations of the mouth and (...), as though they were binding and cooling. But contrariwise Honisuckle is neither cold nor binding; but hot, and attenuating or making thinne. For as Galen saith, both the fruit of VVoodbinde, and also the leaues, do so much attenuate and heat, as (...) somewhat too much of them be drunke, they will cause the vrine to be as red as bloud, yet do they at the first onely prouoke vrine.



 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth that the ripe seed gathered and dried in the shadow, and drunke vnto the  quantitie of one dram weight, fortie daies together, doth waste and consume away the (...) of the spleene, remoueth wearisomnesse, helpeth the (...) and difficultie of breathing, cureth the hicket, procureth bloudie vrine after the sixt day, and causeth women to haue speedie trauell in childe bearing.
The leaues be of the same force: which being drunk thirty daies together, are reported to make  men barren, and destroy their naturall seed.
The floures steeped in oile and set in the Sun, is good to annoint the bodie that is benummed, and growne verie cold.
The distilled water of the floures are giuen to be drunke with good successe against the pissing  of bloud.
A syrrup made of the floures is good to be drunke against the diseases of the lungs and spleene  that is stopped, being drunke with a little wine.
Notwithstanding the words of Galen (or rather of (...)) it is certainely found by experience, that the water of Honisuckles is good against the sorenesse of the throte and uvula: and with the same leaues boiled, or the leaues and floures distilled, are made diuers good medicines against cankers, and sore mouths, as well in children as elder people, and (...) (...) vlcerations and (...) in the priuie parts of man or woman; if there be added to the decoction hereof some allome or Verdigreace, if the sore require greater clensing outwardly, (...) alwaies that there be no Verdigreace put into the water that must be iniected into the secret parts.



CHAP. 329. Of Jasmine, or Gelsemine.


1 Iasminum album. VVhite Gessemine.


2 Iasminum Candiflorum maius. Great white Gessemine.



 The Description.
IAsmine, or Gelsemine, is of the number of those plants which haue need to be supported or propped vp, and yet notwithstanding of it selfe claspeth not or windeth his stalkes about

3 Iasminum luteum. Yellow Iasmine.
such things as stand neere vnto it, (...) onely leaneth and lyeth vpon those things that are prepared to sustaine it about arbors and (...) houses in gardens, by which it is held vp. The stalks therof are long, round, branched, iointed or kneed, and of a green colour, hauing within a white spungeous pith. The leaues stand vpon a middle ribbe, set together by couples like those of the ashe tree, but much smaller; of a deepe greene colour. The floures grow at the vppermost part of the branches, standing in a smal tuft, far set one from another, sweet in smel, of colour white. The seed is flat and broad like those of Lupines, which seldome come to ripenesse. The root is tough and threddie.
2 Lobel reporteth that he saw in a garden at Bruxels, belonging to a reuerend person called Mr. Iohn Boisot, a kinde of (...), very much differing from our Iasmine, which he nourished in an earthen pot: it grew not aboue, saith he, to the height of a cubit, diuided into diuets branches, wherupon did grow leaues like those of the common white Iasmine, but blacker and rounder. The floures to the shew were most beautiful, in shape like those of the common Iasmine, but foure times bigger, gaping wide open, white on the vpper side, and of a bright red on the vnder side.
3 There is a kind hereof with yellow floures: but some doe describe for the yellow Iasmine, the shrubbie Trefoile, called of some Trifolium (...): and of others, (...). But this yellow Iasmine is one, and that is another plant, differing from the kindes of Iasmine, as shall be declared in his proper place. The yellow Iasmine differeth not from the common white Gesmine, in leaues, stalks, nor fashion of the floures: the onely difference is, that this plant bringeth forth yellow floures, and the other white.
4 There is likewise another sort that differeth not from the former in any respect, but in the colour of the floure; for this plant hath floures of a blew colour, and the others not so, wherein consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
Gelsemine is fostered in gardens, and is vsed for arbors, and to couer banquetting houses in gardens: it groweth not wilde in England that I can vnderstand of though Mr. Lyte be of another opinion: the white Iasmine is common in most places of England: the rest are strangers, and not seene in these parts as yet.


 The Time.
They bring forth their pleasant (...) in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Among the Arabians Serapio was the first that named Gessemine, Zambach: it is called Iasminum, and Ieseminum, and also (...): in English, Iasmine, Gessemine, and Iesse.
There is in Dioscorides a composition of oile of Iasmine, which he saith is made in Persia of the white floures of Violets, which Violets seeme to be none other than the floures of this Gessemine: for Dioscorides oftentimes hath reckoned faire and elegant floures amongst the Violets; (...) that it must not seeme strange that he calleth the floures of Gessemine Violets, especially seeing that the plant it selfe was vnknowne vnto him, as it is euident.


 The Temperature.
Gessemine, and especially the floures thereof be hot in the beginning of the second degree, as Scrapio reporteth out of (...).


 The Vertues.
The oile which is made of the floures hereof, wasteth away raw humors, and is good against cold  (...); but in those that are of a hot constitution it causeth head-ache, and the ouermuch smell thereof maketh the nose to bleed, as the same Author (...). It is (...) (as Dioscorides writeth,

and after him (...)) of the Persians in their banquets for pleasure sake: it is good to be (...) after bathes, in those bodies that haue need to be suppled and warmed, but by reason of (...) it is not much vsed.
The leaues boiled in wine vntill they be soft, and made vp to the forme of a pultis, and applied, dissolue cold swellings, wens, hard lumps, and such like outgoings.



CHAP. 330. Of Peruinkle.

 The Description.
1 PEruinkle hath slender and long branches trailing vpon the ground, taking hold here and there as it runneth; small like to rushes, with naked or bare spaces betweene ioint and ioint. The leaues are smooth, not vnlike to the Bay leafe, but lesser. The floures grow hard by the leaues, spreading wide open, composed of fiue small blew leaues.
We haue in our London gardens a kinde hereof bearing white floures, which maketh it to differ from the former.


1 Vinca Peruinca minor. Peruinkle.


@ 2 Clematis Daphnoides, sive Peruinca maior. Great Peruinkle.


There is another with purple floures, doubling it selfe somewhat in the middle, with smaller leaues, wherein is the difference.
2 There is another sort, greater than any of the rest, which is called of some Clematis (...), of the similitude the leaues haue with those of the Bay. The leaues and floures are like those of the precedent, but altogether greater; wherein consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
They grow in most of our London gardens; they loue a moist and shadowie place: the branches remaine alwaies greene.


 The Time.
The floures of them do flourish in March, Aprill, and May, and oftentimes later.



 The Names.
Peruinkle is called in Greeke (...): because it bringeth forth stalkes, which creepe like those of the Vine, and Daphnoides by reason that the leaues are like those of the Bay, as aforesaid. Pliny calleth it Vinca Peruinca, and Chamaedaphne: notwithstanding there is another (...), of which in his place. The same Author likewise calleth it Centunculus: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, Uincoorte, maegden cruyt: in French, Pucellage, Vauche and Peruauche: in Italian, Prouenca: in Spanish, (...): in shoppes, Clematis peruinca: in English, Peruinkle, Peruinkle, and Periwinkle.


 The Temperature.
Peruinkle is something hot, but within the second degree, something drie and astringent.


 The Vertues.
The leaues boiled in wine and drunken, stop the laske and bloudie flix.
An handfull of the leaues stamped, and the iuice giuen to drinke in red wine, stoppeth the laske  and bloudy flix, spitting of bloud, which neuer faileth in any bodie, either man or woman: it (...) stoppeth the inordinate course of the monethly sicknesse.



CHAP. 331. Of Capers.

 The Kindes.
THere be two sorts of Capers especially, one with broad leaues sharpe pointed: the other with rounder leaues. The Brabanders haue also another sort, called Capparis fabago, or Bean Capers,


1 Capparis folio acuto. Sharpe leafed Capers.


2 Capparis rotundiore folio. Round leafed Capers.




 The Description.
1 THe Caper is a prickly shrub, the shoots or branches whereof be full of sharpe prickly thornes, trailing vpon the ground if they bee not supported or propped vp: whereupon

doe grow leaues like those of the Quince tree, but rounder: amongst the which come forth long slender foot-stalkes, whereon do grow round knoppes, which doe open or spread abroad into faire floures, after which commeth in place long fruit, like to an oliue, and of the same colour, wherein is contained flat rough-seeds, of a duskie colour. The root is wooddie, and couered with a thick bark or rinde, which is much vsed in Physicke.
2 The second kinde of Caper is likewise a prickly plant, much like the bramble bush, hauing many slender branches set full of sharpe prickles. The whole plant traileth vpon the place where it groweth, beset with round blackish leaues disorderly placed, in shape like those of Astrabacca, but greater, approching to the forme of Fole-foot: among which commeth forth a small and tender naked twig, charged at the end with a small knap or bud, which openeth it selfe to a small starlike floure, of a pleasant sweet smell; in place whereof comes a small fruit, long and round like the Cornell berrie, of a browne colour. The root is long and wooddie, and couered with a thicke barke or rinde, which is likewise vsed in medicine.


 The Place.
The Caper groweth in Italy, Spaine, and other hot Regions without manuring, in a leane soyle, in rough places amongst rubbish, and vpon old walls, as Dioscorides reporteth.
Theophrastus writeth, that it is by nature wild, and refuseth to be husbanded, yet in these our daies diuers vse to cherish the same, and to set it in dry and stony places: my selfe at the impression hereof, planted some seeds in the bricke walls of my garden, which as yet do spring and grow green, the successe I expect.


 The Time.
The Caper floureth in Sommer, euen vntill Autumne. The knoppes of the floures before they open are those Capers or sauce that wee eat, which are gathered and preserued in pickle or Salt.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): and in Latine also Capparis: but properly Cynosbatos, or Canirub us: which is also taken for the wilde Rose; it is generally called Cappers in most languages: in English, Cappers, Caper, and Capers.


 The Temperature.
Capers, or the floures not yet fully growne, be of temperature hot, and of thinne parts; if they be eaten greene, they yeeld very little nourishment, and much lesse if they be salted. And therefore they be rather a sauce and medicine, than a meat.


 The Vertues.
They stir vp an appetiteto meat; they be good for a moist stomack, and stay the watering thereof, and clenseth away the flegme that cleaueth vnto it. They open the stoppings of the liuer and milt, with meat; they are good to be taken of those that haue a quartaine Ague, and ill spleenes. They are eaten boiled (the salt first washed off) with oile and vineger, as other sallads be, and sometimes are boiled with meat.
The rinde or barke of the root consisteth of diuers faculties, it heateth, clenseth, purgeth, cutteth  and digesteth, hauing withall a certaine binding qualitie.
This barke is of a singular remedie for hard spleenes, being outwardly applied, and also inwardly  taken, and the same boiled in vineger or oxymel, or being beaten and mixed with other simples: for after this manner it expelleth thicke and grosse humours, and conueieth away the same mixed with bloud, by vrine, and also by siege, whereby the milt or spleene is helped, and the paine of the huckle bones taken away: moreouer it bringeth downe the desired sicknesse, purgeth and draweth flegme out of the head, as Galen writeth.
The same barke (as Dioscorides teacheth) doth clense old filthie sores, and scoureth away (...) thicke lips and crusts about the edges, and being chewed it taketh away the tooth-ache.
Being stamped with vineger, it seoureth away tetters or Ring-wormes, hard swellings, and cures  the Kings-euill.
The barke of the roots of Capers is good against the hardnesse and stopping of the spleene, and  profiteth much if it be giuen in drinke to such as haue the Sciatica, the Palsie, and those that are bursten or bruised by falling from some high place: it doth mightily prouoke vrine, insomuch that if it be vsed ouermuch, or giuen in too great a quantity, it procureth bloud to come with the vrine.




CHAP. 332. Of Beane Capers.


Capparis fabago. Beane Capers.



 The Description.
THis plant which the Germanes cal Fabago, and Dodonaeus sauoring of Dutch, calleth it in his last Edition Capparis Fabago, and properly: Lobel calleth it Capparis Leguminosa: between which there is no great difference, who labour to refer this plant vnto the kindes of Capers, which is but a low and base herbe, and not a shrubbie bush, as are the true Capers. It bringeth forth smooth stalks tender and branched, whereupon doe grow long thicke leaues, lesser than those of the true Capers, and not vnlike to the leaues of Purslane, comming out of the branches by couples, of a light greene colour. The floures before they be opened are like to those of the precedent, but when they be come to maturitie and full ripenesse they waxe white, with some yellow chiues in the midst: which being past, there appeare long cods, wherein is contained small flat seed. The root is tender, branching hither and thither.


 The Place.
It groweth of it selfe in corne fields of the low Countries, from whence I haue receiued seeds for my garden, where they flourish.


 The Time.
It floureth when the Caper doth.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine of the later Herbarists Capparis fabago: of most, Capparis Leguminosa: it is thought to be that herbe which Auicen describeth in his 28. chapter, by the name of Ardifrigi: wee may content our selues that Capparis fabago retaine that name still, and seeke for none other, vnlesse it be for an English name, by which it may be called after the Latine, Beane Caper.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Touching the faculties thereof we haue nothing left in writing worth the remembrance.



CHAP. 333. Of Swallow-wort.

 The Description.
1 SWallow-wort with white floures hath diuers vpright branches of a brownish colour, of the height of two cubits, beset with leaues not vnlike to those of Dulcamara or wooddie Night-shade, somewhat long, broad, sharpe-pointed, of a blackish greene colour, and strong sauour: among which come forth very many small white floures star-fashion, hanging vpon little slender foot-stalkes: after which come in place thereof long sharpe pointed cods, stuffed full of a most perfect white cotton resembling silke, as well in shew as handling; (our London Gentlewomen haue named it Silken Cislie) among which is wrapped soft brownish seed. The roots are very many, white, threddie, and of a strong sauour.
2 The second kinde is oftentimes found with stalkes much longer, climing vpon props or such things as stand neere vnto it, attaining to the height of fiue or six cubites, wrapping it selfe vpon them with many and sundry foldings: the floures hereof are blacke: the leaues, cods, and roots be like those of the former.



1 Asclepias flore albo. White Swallow-woort.


2 Asclepias flore nigro. Blacke Swallow-woort.




 The Place.
Both these kindes do grow in my garden, but not wilde in England; yet haue I heard it reported that it groweth in the fields about Northampton, but as yet I am not certaine of it.


 The Time.
They floure about Iune, in Autumne the downe hangeth out of the cods, and the seed falleth to the ground.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists (...): of Ruellius, Hederalis: in High Dutch, (...) (...), that is to say in Latine Hirundinaria: in English, Swallow-woort: of our Gentlewomen it is called Silken Cislie; Aesculapius (who is said to be the first inuenter of Physicke, whom therefore the Greekes and Gentiles honored as a God) called it after his owne name Asclepias, or (...) herbe, for that he was the first that wrote thereof, and now it is called in shoppes Hirundinaria.


 The Temperature.
The roots of Swallow-woort are hot and dry; they are thought to be good against poison.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that the roots of Asclepias or Swallow-woort boiled in wine, and the decoction  drunke, are a remedie against the gripings of the belly, the stingings of Serpents, and against deadly poison, being one of the especiallest herbes against the same.
The leaues boiled and applied in forme of a pultis, cure the euill sores of the paps or dugs, and  matrix, that are hard to be cured.



CHAP. 334. Of Indian Swallow-woort.

 The Description
THere groweth in that part of Virginia, or Norembega, where our English men dwelled (intending there to erect a certaine Colonie) a kinde of Asclepias, or Swallow-woort, which

the Sauages call Wisanck: there riseth vp from a single crooked root one vpright stalke a foot high, slender, and of a greenish colour: whereupon do grow faire broad leaues sharpe pointed, with many ribs or nerues running through the same like those of Ribwort or Plantaine, set together by couples at certaine distances. The floures come forth at the top of the stalks, which as yot are not obserued, by reason the man that brought the seeds and plants hereof did not regard them. After which, there come in place two cods (seldome more) sharpe pointed like those of our Swallowwort, but greater, stuffed full of a most pure silke of a shining white colour: among which silke appeareth a small long tongue (which is the seed) resembling the tongue of a bird, or that of the herbe called Adders tongue. The cods are not only full of silke, but euerie nerue or sinew wherewith the leaues be ribbed are likewise most pure silke; and also the pilling of the stemmes, euen as flax is torne from his stalks. This considered, behold the iustice of God, that as he hath shut vp those people and nations in infidelity and nakednesse, so hath he not as yet giuen them vnderstanding to couer their nakednesse, nor matter wherewith to doe the same; notwithstanding the earth is couered ouer with this silke, which dayly they tread vnder their feet, which were sufficient to apparell many kingdomes, if they were carefullly manured and cherished.


Wisanck, siue Vincctoxicum Indianum. Indian Swallow-wort.


@ Apocynum Syriacum Clusij.


@ This Plant, which is kept in some gardens by the name of Virginia Silke Grasse, I take to be the same, or very like the Beidelsar of Alpinus; and the Apocynum Syriacum of Clusius: at Padua they call it Esula Indica, by reason of the hot milky iuyce. Bauhinus hath very vnfitly named it Lapathum Aegyptiacum lactescens siliqua Asclepiadis. But he is to be pardoned; for Iohannes Carolus Rosenbergus, cap. 16. p. 46. of his Animad. and Exerc. Medicae, or Rosanobilis iatrica, hath taken vpon him the credit and inuention of this absurd denomination: I may call it absurd, for that neither any way in shape or qualitie it resembles or participates any thing with a Docke. I haue giuen you the figure of our Author with his title, and that of Clusius with his: in the former the cods are only well exprest; in the later the leaues and floures reasonably well, but that they are too few in number, and set too far asunder. Vpon the sight of the growing and flouring plant I tooke this description: The root is long and creeping; the stalkes two or three cubits high, square, hollow, a finger thicke, and of a light greene colour, sending out towards the top some few branches: vpon this at

certaine spaces grow by couples leaues some halfe foot long, and three inches broad, darke greene on their vpper sides, more whitish below, and full of large and eminent veines: at the top of the stalke and branches it carries most commonly an hundred or more floures, growing vpon footstalkes some inch long, all close thrust together after the manner of the Hyacinth of Peru at the first flouring: each floure is thus composed; first it hath fiue small greene leaues bending backe, which serue for the cup: then hath it other fiue leaues foure times larger than the former, which bend backe and couer them; and these are greene on the vnder side, and of a pale colour with some rednesse aboue: then are there fiue little graines (as I may so terme them) of a pleasant red colour, and on their outside like cornes of Millet, but hollow on their insides, with a little thred or chiue comming forth of each of them: these fiue ingirt a small head like a button, greenish vnderneath, and whitish aboue. I haue giuen you the figure of one floure by the side of our Authors figure. The leaues and stalkes of this plant are very full of a milky iuyce. @


 The Place.
It groweth, as before is rehearsed, in the countries of Norembega, now called Virginia by the honourable Knight Sir Walter Raleigh, who hath bestowed great summes of money in the discouerie thereof; where are dwelling at this present English men.


 The Time.
It springeth vp, floureth, and flourisheth both Winter and Sommer, as do many or most of the plants of that countrey. @ It dies downe with vs euery Winter and comes vp in the Spring, and floures in August, but neuer bringeth forth the cods with vs, by reason of the coldnesse of our Climate. @


 The Names.
The silke is vsed of the people of Pomeioc and other of the prouinces adioyning, being parts of Virginia, to couer the secret parts of maidens that neuer tasted man; as in other places they vse a white kinde of mosse Wisanck: we haue thought Asclepias Virginiana, or Vincetoxicum Indianum sit and proper names for it: in English, Virginia Swallow-wort, or the Silke-wort of Norembega.


 The Nature and Vertues.
We finde nothing by report, or otherwise of our owne knowledge, of his physicall vertues, but  onely report of the aboundance of most pure silke wherewith the whole plant is possessed.
@ The leaues beaten either crude, or boyled in water, and applied as a pultesse, are good against  swellings and paines proceeding of a cold cause.
The milky iuyce, which is very hot, purges violently; and outwardly applied is good against  tetters, to fetch haire off skins, if they be steeped in it, and the like. Alpinus. @



CHAP. 335. Of the Bombaste or Cotton-Plant.

 The Description.
THe Cotton bush is a low and base Plant, hauing small stalkes of a cubit high, and somtimes higher; diuided from the lowest part to the top into sundry small branches, whereupon are set confusedly or without order a few broad leaues, cut for the most part into three sections, and sometimes more, as Nature list to bestow, somewhat indented about the edges, not vnlike to the leafe of the Vine, or rather the Veruaine Mallow, but lesser, softer, and of a grayish colour: among which come forth the floures, standing vpon slender foot-stalkes, the brimmes or edges whereof are of a yellow colour, the middle part purple: after which appeareth the fruit, round, and of the bignesse of a Tennise ball, wherein is thrust together a great quantitie of fine white Cotton wooll; among which is wrapped vp blacke seed of the bignesse of peasen, in shape like the trettles or dung of a cony. The fruit being come to maturitie or ripenesse, the huske or cod opens it selfe into foure parts or diuisions, and casteth forth his wooll and seed vpon the ground, if it be not gathered in his time and season. The root is small and single, with few threds anexed thereto, and of a wooddy substance, as is all the rest of the plant.


 The Place.
It groweth in India, in Arabia, Egypt, and in certaine Islands of the Mediterranean sea, as Cyprus, Candy, Malta, Sicilia, and in other prouinces of the continent adiacent. It groweth about Tripolis and Aleppo in Syria, from whence the Factor of a worshipfull merchant in London, Master Nicholas (...) before remembred, did send vnto his said master diuers pounds weight of the seed; whereof some were committed to the earth at the impression hereof, the successe we leaue to

Gossipium, siue Xylon. The Cotton bush.
the Lord. Notwithstanding my selfe 3 yeares past did sow of the seed, which did grow verie frankly, but perished before it came to perfection, by reason of the cold frosts that ouertooke it in the time of flouring.


 The Time.
Cotton seed is sowen in plowed fields in the Spring of the yeare, and reaped and cut down in haruest, euen as corne with vs; and the ground must be tilled and sowne new againe the next yeare, and vsed in such sort at we do the tillage for corne and grain: for it is a plant of one yere, and perisheth when it hath perfected his fruit, as many other plants do.


 The Names.
Cotton is called in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine, Xylum, and (...) after the Greeke: in shops, Lanugo, Bombax, and Cotum: in Italian, Bombagia: in Spanish, Algodon: in high-Dutch, (...): in English and French, Cotton, Bombaste and Bombace.
Theophrastus hath made mention hereof in his fourth booke, cap. 9. but without a name; and he saith it is a tree in Tylus which beares wool. Neither is it any maruell if he took an vnknown shrub or plant, and that groweth in Countries farre off, for a tree: seeing also in this age (in which very many things come to be better knownethan in times past) the cotton or wooll hereof is called of the Germanes (as wee haue said) (...) (...), that is, Wooll of a tree, (...) (...) it is rather an herbe or small shrub, and not to be numbred among trees.
Of this Theophrastus writeth thus; It is reported that the same Island (viz. Tylus) doth bring forth many trees that beare wooll, which haue leaues like those of the Vine, etc.
Pliny writing of the same, lib. 19. cap. 1. saith thus: The vpper part of Egypt toward Arabia bringeth forth a shrub which is called Gossipion, or Xylon, and therefore the linnen that is made of it is called Xylina. It is (saith he) the plant that beareth that wooll wherewith the garments are made which the Priests of Egypt do weare.


 The Temperature.
The seed of Cotton (according to the opinion of Scrapio) is hot and moist: the wooll it selfe is hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Cotton is good against the cough, and for them that are short winded: it also stirreth  vp the lust of the body by increasing naturall seed, wherefore it surpasseth.
The oyle pressed out of the seed taketh away freckles, spots, and other blemishes of the skin.
The ashes of the wooll burned stancheth the bleeding of wounds, vsed in restrictiue medicines, as Bole Armonicke, and is more restrictiue than Bole it selfe.
To speake of the commodities of the wooll of this plant were superfluous, common experience  and the dayly vse and benefit we receiue by it shew them. So that it were impertinent to our historie to speake of the making of Fustian, Bombasies, and many other things that are made of the wooll thereof.



CHAP. 336. Of Dogs-bane.

 The Kindes.
THere be two kindes of Dogs-banes: the one a clymbing or clambering plant; the other an vpright shrub.



 The Description.
1 DOgs-bane riseth vp like vnto a small hedge bush, vpright and straight, vntill it haue attained to a certaine heighth; then doth it claspe and clime with his tender branches as do the Bindeweeds, taking hold vpon props or poles, or whatsoeuer standeth next vnto it: whereupon do grow faire broad leaues, sharpe pointed like those of the Bay tree, of a deepe greene colour. The floures come forth at the top of the stalkes, consisting of fiue small white leaues: which being past, there succeed long cods, set vpon a slender foot-stalke by couples, ioyning themselues together at the extreme point, and likewise at the stalke, making of two pieces knit together one entire cod; which cod is full of such downy matter and seed as that of Asclepias, but more in quantity by reason the cods are greater; which being dry and ripe, the silken cotton hangeth forth, and by little and little sheddeth, vntill the whole be fallen vpon the ground. The whole plant yeeldeth that yellow stinking milky iuyce that the other doth, and sometimes it is of a white colour, according to the climate where it groweth; for the more cold the country is, the whiter is the iuyce; and the more hot, the yellower. The root is long and single, with some threds anexed thereto.


1 (...) angustifolia. Climing Dogs-bane.


@ 2 Periplocalatifolia. Broad leafed Dogs-bane.


2 There is another Dogs-bane that hath long and slender stalkes like those of the Vine, but of a browne reddish colour, wherewith it windeth it selfe about such things as stand neere vnto it, in manner of a Bindweed: whereupon are set leaues not vnlike to those of the Iuy, but not so much cornered, of a darke greene colour, and of a ranke smell being bruised betweene the fingers, yeelding forth a stinking yellow milky iuyce when it is so broken: amongst which come forth little white floures, standing scatteringly vpon little huskes: after the floures come long cods, very like vnto Asclepias or Swallow-wort, but greater, stuffed with the like soft downy silke; among which downe is wrapped vp flat blacke seed. The roots are many and threddy, creeping all about within the ground, budding forth new shoots in sundry places, whereby it greatly increaseth.


 The Place.
They grow naturally in Syria, and also in Italy, as Matthiolus reporteth: my louing friend Iohn Robin Herbarist in Paris did send me plants of both the kinds for my garden, where they floure and flourish; but whether they grow in France, or that he procured them from some other region, as yet I haue no certaine knowledge.



 The Time.
They begin to bud forth their leaues in the beginning of May, and shew their floures in September.


 The Names.
Dogs-bane is called by the learned of ourage Periploca: it is euident that they are to be referred to the Apocynum of Dioscorides. The former of the two hath been likewise called (...), and Brassica Canina, or Dogs-Cole: notwithstanding there is another Dogs Cole, which is a kind of wilde Mercurie. We may call the first Creeping Dogs-bane; and the other, Vpright or Syrian Dogsbane.


 The Temperature.
These plants are of the nature of that pestilent or poysonous herbe Thora, which being eaten of Dogs or any other liuing creature doth certainly kill them, except there be in readinesse an Antidote or preseruatiue against poyson, and giuen, which by probabilitie is the herbe described in the former chapter, called (...); euen as Anthora is the Antidote and remedy against the poyson of Thora; and Herba Paris against Pardalianches.


 The Vertues.
Dogs-bane is a deadly and dangerous plant, especially to foure footed beasts; for as Dioscorides writeth, the leaues hereof being mixed with bread and giuen, killeth dogs, wolues, Foxes, and leopards, the vse of their legs and huckle-bones being presently taken from them, and death it selfe followeth incontinent, and therefore not to be vsed in medicine.



CHAP. 337. Of Solomons Seale.


1 Polygonatum. Solomons Seale.


2 Polygonatum minus. Small Solomons Seale.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Solomons Seale hath long round stalkes, set for the most part with long leaues somewhat furrowed and ribbed, not much vnlike Plantaine, but (...), which for the most part stand all vpon one side of the stalk, and hath smal white floures resembling

the floures of Lilly conuall: on the other side when the floures be vaded there come sorth (...) berries, which at the first are greene, and of a blacke colour tending to blewnesse; and when (...) be ripe be of the bignesse of Iuy berries, of a very sweet and pleasant taste. The root is white and thicke, full of knobs or ioynts, which in some places resemble the marke of a seale, whereof I think it tooke the name Sigillum Solomonis; and is sweet at the first, but afterward of a bitter taste, with some sharpenesse.
2 The second kinde of Polygonatum doth not much vary from the former, sauing in the leaues, which be narrower, and grow round about the stalke like a spur, in fashion like vnto (...) or red Madder: among the leaues come forth floures like the former, but of a greener white colour: which being past, there succeed berries like the former, but of a reddish colour: which being past, there succeed berries like the former, but of a reddish colour: the roots are thick and knobby like the former, with some fibres anexed thereto.


3 Polygonatum latifolium 2. Clusij. Sweet smelling Solomons Seale.


4 Polygonatum ramosum. Branched Solomons Seale.


3 The third kinde of Solomons Seale, which Carolus Clusius found in the wooddy mountaines of Leitenberg, aboue Manderstorf, and in many other mountaines beyond the riuer Danubius, especially among the stones, hee sent to London to Mr. Garth a worshipfull Gentleman, and one that greatly delighteth in strange plants, who very louingly imparted the same vnto me. This plant hath stalkes very like vnto the common Solomons Seale, a foot high, beset with leaues vpon one side of the stalke like the first and common kinde, but larger, and more approching to the bignesse of the broad leafed Plantaine, the taste whereof is not very pleasant: from the bosome of which leaues come forth small well smelling greenish white floures not much vnlike the first: which being past, there follow seeds or berries that are at the first green, but afterward blacke, containing within the same berries a small seed as big as a Vetch, and as hard as a stone. The roots are like vnto the other of his kinde, yet not so thicke as the first.
4 The fourth kind according to my account, but the third of Clusius (which he found also in the mountaines aforesaid) groweth a foot high, but seldome a cubit, differing from all the others of his kinde; for his stalkes diuide themselues into sundry other branches, which are garnished with goodly leaues, larger and sharper pointed than any of the rest, which do embrace the stalks about after the manner of Perfoliata or Thorow-wax, yet very like vnto the kindes of Solomons Seale in

shew, saue that they are somewhat hoarie vnderneath the leaues; which at the first are sweete in taste, but somewhat acride or biting towards the later end. From the backe part of the (...) (...) forth small long tender and crooked stems, bearing at the end little gaping white floures not much vnlike Lilium conuallium, sauouring like Hawthorne floures, spotted on the inner side with blacke spots: which being past, there come forth three cornered berries like the narrow leafed (...) seale, greene at the first, and red when they be ripe, containing many white hard graines. The roots differ from all the other kindes, and are like vnto the crambling roots of (...), which the grauer hath omitted in the picture.


5 Polygonatum angustifolium ramosum. Narrow leaued Solomons (...).


5 This rare sort of Solomons Seale rises vp from his tuberous or knobby root, with a straight vpright stalke ioynted at certaine distances, leauing betweene each ioynt a bare and naked stalke, smooth, and of a greenish colour tending to yellownes; from the which ioynts thrust forth diuers smal branches, with foure narrow leaues set about like a star or the herbe Woodroofe: vpon which tender branches are set about the stalkes by certaine spaces long narrow leaues inclosing the same round about: among which leaues come forth small whitish floures of little regard. The fruit is small, and of a red colour, full of pulpe or meate; among which is contained a hard stony seed like that of the first Solomons seale.
@ 6 There is kept in our gardens, and said to be brought from some part of America another Polygonatum, which sends vp a stalk some foot and more high, and it hath leaues long, neruous, and very greene and shining, growing one by another without any order vpon the stalke, which is somewhat crested, crooked, and very greene; bearing at the very top thereof, aboue the highest leafe, vpon little foot-stalks, some eight or nine little white floures, consisting of six leaues a piece, which are succeeded by berries, as in the former. This floures in May, and is vulgarly named Polygonatum Virginianum, or Virginian Solomons seale. @


 The Place.
The first sort of Solomons seale growes naturally wilde in Somerset-shire, vpon the North side of a place called Mendip, in the parish of Shepton Mallet: also in Kent by a village called Crayford, vpon Rough or Row hill: also in Odiam parke in Hampshire; in Bradfords wood, neere to a town in Wiltshire foure miles from Bathe; in a wood neere to a village called Horsley, fiue miles from Gilford in Surrey, and in diuers other places.
That sort of Solomons seale with broad leaues groweth in certaine woods in Yorkshire called Clapdale woods, three miles from a village named Settle.


 The Time.
They spring vp in March, and shew their (...) in May: the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Solomons seale is called in Greeke (...): in Latine likewise Polygonatum, of many, Knees, for so the Greeke word doth import: in shops, Sigillum Salomonis, and Scala coeli: in English likewise Scala coeli, Solomons seale, and White-wort, or white root: in high-Dutch, (...): in French, Seau de Solomon: of the Hetrurians, Frasinella, and Fraxinella.


 The Temperature.
The roots of Solomons (...), as Galen saith, haue both a mixt facultie and qualitie also: For they haue (saith he) a certaine kinde of astriction or binding, and biting withall, and likewise a certaine loathsome bitternesse, as the same Author affirmeth: which is not to be (...) in those that do grow in our climate.



 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, That the roots are excellent good for to seale or close vp greene wounds, being  stamped and laid thereon; whereupon it was called Sigillum (...), of the singular vertue that it hath in sealing or healing vp wounds, broken bones, and such like. Some haue thought it tooke the name Sigillum of the markes vpon the roots: but the first reason (...) to me more probable.
The root of Solomons seale stamped while it is fresh and greene, and applied, taketh away in  one night, or two at the most, any bruise, blacke or blew spots gotten by (...) or womens (...), in stumbling vpon their hasty husbands fists, or such like.
Galen saith, that neither herbe nor root hereof is to be giuen inwardly: but note what experience  hath found out, and of late dayes, especially among the vulgar sort of people in Hampshire, which Galen, (...), or any other that haue written of plants haue not so much as dreamed of; which is, That if any of what sex or age soeuer chance to haue any bones broken, in what part of their bodies soeuer; their refuge is to stampe the roots hereof, and giue it vnto the patient in ale to drinke: which sodoreth and glues together the bones in very short space, and very strangely, yea although the bones be but slenderly and vnhandsomely placed and wrapped vp. Moreouer, the said people do giue it in like manner vnto their cattell, if they chance to haue any bones broken, with good successe; which they do also stampe and apply outwardly in manner of a pultesse, as well vnto themselues as their cattell.
The root stamped and applied in manner of a pultesse, and layd vpon members that haue been  out of ioynt, and newly restored to their places, driueth away the paine, and knitteth the ioynt very (...), and taketh away the inflammation, if there chance to be any.
The same stamped, and the iuyce giuen to drinke with ale or white wine, as aforesaid, or the decoction  thereof made in wine, helps any inward bruse, disperseth the congealed and clotted bloud in very short space.
That which might be written of this herbe as touching the knitting of bones, and that truely, would seeme vnto some incredible; but common experience teacheth, that in the world there is not to be found another herbe comparable to it for the purposes aforesaid: and therefore in briefe, if it be for bruises inward the roots must be stamped, some ale or wine put thereto, strained, and giuen to drinke.
It must be giuen in the same manner to knit broken bones, against bruises, black or blew marks  gotten by stripes, falls, or such like; against inflammation, tumors or swellings that happen vnto members whose bones are broken, or members out of ioynt, after restauration: the roots are to be stamped small, and applied pultesse or plaisterwise, wherewith many great works haue beene performed beyond credit.
Matthiolus teacheth, That a water is drawne out of the roots, wherewith the women of Italy  vse to scoure their faces from sunne-burning, freckles, morphew, or any such deformities of the skinne. 

That which our (...) formerly figured and described in the (...) place of (...) chapter, by the (...) of (...) (...) (...), was that described by him in the fourth place; (...): (...) was not so well exprest.




CHAP. 338. Of Knee-holme, or Butchers broome.

 The Description.
KNee-holme is a low wooddy plant, hauing diuers small branches, or rather stems, rising immediately from the ground, of the height of a foot; whereupon are set many leaues like vnto those of the Box tree, or rather of the Myrtle, but sharpe and pricking at the point. The (...) groweth vpon the middle rib of the leafe, greene at the first, and red as Corall when it is ripe, like those of Asparagus, but bigger. The roots are white, branched, of a meane thicknesse, and full of tough sprouting shoots thrusting forth in other places, whereby it greatly encreaseth.


 The Place.
It groweth plentifully in most places in England in rough and barren grounds, especially vpon Hampsted heath foure miles from London; in diuers places of Kent, Essex, and Barkshire, almost in euery copse and low wood.


 The Time.
The young and tender (...) come forth at the first of the Spring, which are (...) in soms

places, as the yong tender stalkes of Asparagus and such like herbes. The berries are ripe in August.


Ruscus, (...) Bruscus. Knee-holme, or Butchers broome.




 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...), as though they should say Acuta Myrtus, or pricking Myrtle; and Myrtus syluestris, or wild Myrtle: in Latine, Ruscum, or Ruscus: in shops, Bruscus: of diuers, Scopa regia, as testifieth Marcellus Empericus an old Writer: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Rusco, and Pontogopi: in Spanish, Gilbarbeyra: in English, Knee-holme, Knee-huluer, Butchers broome, and Petigree
There be some (saith Pliny, lib. (...). cap. (...).) that call it Oxymyrsine.
Serapio, cap. 288. supposeth that (...) gria, or wilde Myrtle, is the same that (...) are: he alledgeth a reason, because Galen hath not described Myrtus Agria, or Knee-holme; neither Dioscorides Cubebae. Which as it is a reason of no account, so is it also without truth: for Galen doth no where make mention of Cubebae; and be it that he had, it should not therefore follow that Knee-holme is Cubebae. Galen speaketh of Carpesium, which Auicen in his 137 chapter maketh to be Cubebae: and that Carpesium doth much differ from (...) (...), those things do (...) (...) which Galen hath left written hereof in his first book of of Counterpoysons. Carpesium (saith hee) is an herbe like in kinde to that which is called Phu, or Setwall, but of greater (...), and more aromaticall or spicie. This groweth very plentifully in Sida a city of Pamphilia. Also he saith further, that some of the stickes of Carpesium are like to those of Cinnamon: (...) be two kinds thereof, one which is named (...); and another that is called Ponticum. They both take their names of the mountaines on which they grow: but Ponticum is the better, (...) is put into medicines in which the herbe Phu ought to be put. For Carpesium, as I haue (...), is like vnto Phu, or Setwall, yet is it stronger, and yeeldeth a (...) aromaticall (...) both in taste and smell. Thus far Galen. By which it plainly (...), that Knee-holme is not Carpesium, that is to say, Auicenna his Cubebae, as shall be further (...) in the chapter of Cubebae.
Herein Serapio was likewise deceiued, who suspected it to be such a like thing; saying, There be certaine fruits or graines called (...), not sticks: yet do they neither agree with Knee-holm, neither yet were they knowne vnto (...).
Isaac in the second booke of his (...) doth number it among the graines: and likewise Haliabbas in the second booke of his (...) also, num. 162. The later Grecians, among whom is Nicolaus Myrepsus, call them (...)


 The Temperature.
The roots of Knee-holme, which be chiefely vsed, are of temperature hot, and meanly dry, with a thinnesse of essence.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the roots of Knee-holme made in wine and drunken, prouoketh vrine, breaketh  the stone, (...) forth grauell and sand, and easeth those that make their water with great paine.
Dioscorides writeth the same things of the leaues and berries, which moreouer (saith hee) bring  downe the desired sicknesse, helpe the head-ache and the yellow jaundice. Ouer and besides, the roots do serue to raise vp gently tough and grosse flegm which sticketh in the lungs and chest, and do concoct the same.




CHAP. 339. Of Horse-tongue or Double-tongue.

 The Description.
1 HOrse-tongue sendeth forth round stalkes of a span long; wherupon are set long broad and sharpe pointed leaues, but not pricking as are those of Knee-holme, not vnlike to the leaues of the Bay tree, but lesser; greater than those of Knee-holm: out of the middle rib whereof commeth forth another leafe, sharpe pointed also, but small, and of the bignesse of the leafe of Knee-holme, resembling a little tongue. From the (...) of which two leaues commeth forth a berry of the bignesse of a pease, of colour red when it is ripe, which is sometimes in a manner all hid vnder the leafe. The root is white, long, and tough, and of a sweet and pleasant smell.


1 Hippoglossum mas. The male Horse-tongue.


2 Hippoglossum (...). The female Horse-tongue.


2 The female Horse-tongue differeth not from the (...) but in stature and colour of the fruit: it riseth vp (saith my Author) foure or fiue handfulls (...): the berries come forth of the middle part of the greater leafe, and the setting on of the lesser, (...) a feint yellowish red colour, wherein consisteth the difference. @ This is all one with the (...). @
3 There is likewise another sort of Double-tongue set forth by (...), which seemes vnto some not to differ from the first described or best known Horse tongue, being in truth the self same plant without any difference: notwithstanding I haue set forth the figure, that it may appeare to be the same, or very little different, and that not to be distinguished: but (...) may not escape without reprehension, who knowing the vntrue translation of (...), (...) set forth so false a picture in his Commentaries.
@ Our Author here, as in many other places, mistakes himselfe; for Matthiolus did not set forth that figure that our Author giues in this place, for Hippoglossum, but by the title of Laurus Alexandrina altera: and it thus differs from the common Horse-tongue; it hath shorter and (...) leaues, yet sharpe pointed, and the berries are not couered with little leaues as in the other, neither haue they any apparant stalkes at all, but grow close to the leaues, as you may see them exprest in the figure. @



3 Hippoglossum Matthioli. Italian Horse-tongue.




 The Place.
They are found on the Alps of Liguria, and on the mountaines of Austria. Bellonius writeth, that they do grow very plentifully about the hil Athos.
The first of the Horse-tongues growes in my garden very plentifully.


 The Time.
That which groweth in my garden floured in the beginning of May: the fruit is ripe in the fall of the leafe.


 The Names.
Horse-tongue is called in Greek (...): of the later Herbarists, Bonifacia, (...), Bislingua, Lingua Pagana, and (...). The same is also named (...), of Ida a mountaine of Troy, which is called Alexanders Troy: of (...), Laurus Alexandrina, or the Bay of Alexandria, and Laurus Idaea.
This Hippoglossum Bonifacia is called in highDutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Lengua de Cauallo: in English, Horse-tongue, Tongne-blade, Doubletongue, and Laurel of Alexandria.


 The Temperature.
Horse-tongue is euidently hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Double-tongue boiled in wine, and the decoction drunke, helpeth the strangurie, prouoketh vrine, easeth women that haue hard trauell in childe-bearing. It expelleth the secondine or after-birth. The root beaten to pouder, whereof six drams giuen in sweet wine, doth helpe the diseases aforesaid: it bringeth downe the termes, as Dioscorides teacheth. The like writeth Pliny also: adding further, That it causeth women to haue speedy deliuerance, especially if halfe an ounce of the pouder of the root be giuen to drink in a draught of sweet wine.
Baptista Sardus doth notably commend this (...) for the diseases of the mother; by giuing, saith  he, a little spoonfull of the pouder either of the herbe, the fruit, or of the root, to her that is troubled with the mother, she is thereby forthwith recoured. He also writeth, that the same is a singular good medicine for those that be bursten, if a spoonfull of the pouder of the root be drunke in the (...) of flesh certaine dayes together.



CHAP. 340. Of Cucumbers.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers (...) of Cucumber; some greater, others lesser; some of the Garden, some wilde; some of one fashion, and some of another, as shall be declared in the following chapters.


 The Description.
1 THe Cucumber creepes alongst vpon the ground all about, with long rough branches; whereupon do grow broad rough leaues vneuen about the edges: from the bosome whereof come forth crooked clasping tendrels like those of the Vine. The floures shoot forth betweene the stalkes and the leaues, set vpon tender foot-stalks composed of fiue small yellow leaues: which being past, the fruit succeedeth, long, cornered, rough, and set with certaine bumpes or risings, greene at the first, and yellow when they be ripe, wherein is contained a firme and sollid pulpe or substance transparent or thorow-shining, which together with the seed is eaten a little before they be fully ripe. The seeds be white, long, and flat.



1 Cucumis vulgaris. Common Cucumber.


2 Cucumis Anguina. Adders Cucumber.


4 Cucumis ex Hispanica semine (...). Spanish Cucumber.


2 There be also certaine long cucumbers, which were first made (as is said) by art and manuring, which Nature afterwards did preserue: for at the first, when as the fruit is very little, it is put into some hollow cane, or other thing made of purpose, in which the cucumber groweth very long, by reason of that narrow hollownesse, which being filled vp, the cucumber encreaseth in length. The seeds of this kinde of cucumber being sowne bringeth forth not such as were before, but such as art hath framed; which of their own growth are found long, and oftentimes very crookedly turned: and thereupon they haue beene called Anguini, or long Cucumbers.
3 The peare fashioned Cucumber hath many trailing branches lying flat vpon the ground, rough and prickly; whereon doe stand at each ioynt one rough leafe, sharpe pointed, and of an ouerworn green colour; among which come forth clasping tendrels, and also slender foot-stalks, whereon do grow yellow starre-like floures. The fruit succeeds, shaped like a peare, as big as a great Warden. The root is threddy.
4 There hath bin not (...) since sent out of Spain some seeds of a rare and beautiful cucumber, into Strausburg a city in Germany, which there brought forth long trailing branches, rough and hairy, set with very large rough leaues sharp pointed, fashioned like vnto the leaues of

the great Bur-docke, but more cut in or diuided: amongst which come forth faire yellow floures growing nakedly vpon their tender foot-stalks: the which beeing past, the fruit commeth in place, of a foot in length, greene on the side toward the ground, yellow to the Sun ward, straked with many spots and lines of diuers colours. The pulpe or meat is hard and fast like that of our Pompion.


 The Place.
These kindes of Cucumbers are planted in gardens in most countries of the world.


 The Time.
According to my promise heretofore made, I haue thought it good and conuenient in this place to set downe not onely the time of sowing and setting of Cucumbers, Muske-melons, (...), Pompions, Gourds, and such like, but also how to set or sow all manner and kindes of other colde seeds, as also whatsoeuer strange seeds are brought vnto vs from the Indies, or other hot Regions: videl.
First of all in the middest of Aprill or somewhat sooner (if the weather be any thing temperate) you shall cause to be made a bed or banke of (...) and new horse dung taken forth of the stable (and not from the dunghill) of an ell in breadth, and the like in depth or thicknesse, of what length you please, according to the quantitie of your seed: the which bank you shal couer with hoops or poles, that you may the more conueniently couer the whole bed or banke with Mats, old painted cloth, straw or such like, to keepe it from the iniurie of the cold frostie nights, and not hurt the things planted in the bed: then shall you couer the bed all ouer with the most fertilest earth finely (...), halfe a foot thick, wherein you shall set or sow your seeds: that being done, cast your straw or other couerture ouer the same; and so let it rest without looking vpon it, or taking away of your couering for the space of seuen or eight daies at the most, for commonly in that space they will thrust themselues vp nakedly forth of the ground: then must you cast vpon them in the hottest time of the day some water that hath stood in the house or in the Sun a day before, because the water so cast vpon them newly taken forth of a well or pumpe, will so chill and coole them being brought and nourished vp in such a hot place, that presently in one day you haue lost all your labour; I mean not only your seed, but your banke also; for in this space the great heat of the dung is lost and spent, keeping in memorie that euery night they must be couered and opened when the day is warmed with the Sun beames: this must be done from time to time vntill that the plants haue foure or six leaues a piece, and that the danger of the cold nights is past: then must they be replanted verie curiouily, with the earth sticking to the plant, as neere as may be vnto the most fruitfull place, and where the Sun hath most force in the garden; prouided that vpon the remouing of them you must couer them with some Docke leaues or wispes of straw, propped vp with forked stickes, (...) well to keepe them from the cold of the night, as also the heat of the Sun: for they cannot whilest they be young and newly planted, indure neither ouermuch cold nor ouermuch heat, vntill they are wel rooted in their new place or dwelling.
Oftentimes it falleth out that some seeds are more franker and forwarder than the rest, which commonly do rise vp very nakedly with long necks not vnlike to the stalke of a small mushrome, of a night old. This naked stalke must you couer with the like fine earth euen to the greene leaues, hauing regard to place your banke so that it may be desended from the North-windes.
Obserue these instructions diligently, and then you shall not haue cause to complaine that your seeds were not good, nor of the intemperancie of the climat (by reason wherof you can get no fruit) although it were in the furthest parts of the North of Scotland.


 The Names.
The Cucumber is named generally Cucumis: in shops, Cucumer: and is taken for that which the Grecians call (...): in Latine, Cucumis sativus, or garden Cucumber: in High Dutch, Cucumen: in Italian, Concomero: in Spanish, Cogombro: in French, Concombre: in Low Dutch, Concommeren: in English, Cowcumbers and Cucumbers.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
All the Cucumbers are of temperature cold and moist in the second degree. They putrifie soon  in the stomacke, and yeeld vnto the body a cold and moist nourishment, and that very little, and the same not good.
Those Cucumbers must be chosen which are green and not yet ripe: for when they are ripe and  yellow they be vnfit to be eaten.
The seed is cold, but nothing so much as the fruit. It openeth and clenseth, prouoketh vrine, o  peneth the stoppings of the liuer, helpeth the chest and lungs that are inflamed; and being stamped and outwardly applied in stead of a clenser, it maketh the skin smooth and faire.
Cucumber (saith my Author) taken in meats, is good for the stomack and other parts troubled  with heat. It yeeldeth not any nourishment that is good, insomuch as the vnmeasurable vse thereof filleth the weines with naughty cold humours.
The seed stamped and made into milke like as they dowith Almonds, or strained with milke or 

sweet wine and drunke, looseth the belly gently, and is excellent against the exulceration of the bladder.
The fruit cut in pieces or chopped as herbes to the pot and boiled in a small pipkin with a piece  of mutton, being made into potage with Ote-meale, euen as herb potage are made, whereof a messe eaten to break-fast, as much to dinner, and the like to supper; taken in this manner for the space of three weekes together without intermission, doth perfectly cure all manner of sawce-flegme and copper faces, red and shining fierie noses (as red as red Roses) with pimples, pumples, rubies, and such like precious faces.
Prouided alwaies that during the time of curing you do vse to wash or bathe the face with this  liquour following.
Take a pinte of strong white wine vineger, pouder of the roots of Ireos or Orrice three dragmes, searced or bolted into most fine dust, Brimmestone in fine pouder halfe an ounce, Camphire two dragmes, stamped with two blanched Almondes, foure Oke Apples cut thorow the middle, and the iuice of foure Limons: put them all together in a strong double glasse, shake them together very strongly, setting the same in the Sunne for the space of ten daies: with which let the face be washed and bathed daily, suffering it to drie of it selfe without wiping it away. This doth not only helpe firie faces, but also taketh away lentils, spots, morphew, Sun-burne, and all other deformities of the face. 

That which formerly was in the (...) place by the name of (...) (...), was the same with the fifth of the former Edition (now the fourth) and is therefore omitted.




CHAP. 341. Of Wilde Cucumber.


Cucumis Asininus. Wilde Cucumber.



 The Description.
THe wilde Cucumber hath many fat hairie branches, very rough and full of iuice, creeping or trailing vpon the ground, wherupon are set very rough leaues, hairy, sharp pointed, and of an ouerworne grayish greene colour: from the bosome of which come forth long tender footstalkes: on the ends whereof doe grow small floures composed of fiue small leaues of a pale yellow colour: after which commeth forth the fruit, of the bignes of the smallest pullets egge, but somewhat longer, verie rough and hairy on the outside, and of the colour and substance of the stalkes, wherein is contained very much water and smalhard blackish seeds also, of the bignesse of tares; which being come to maturitie and ripenesse, it casteth or squirteth forth his water with the seeds, either of it owne accord, or being touched with the most tender or delicate hand neuer so gently, and oftentimes striketh so hard against those that touch it (especially if it chance to hit against the face) that the place smarteth long after: whereupon of some it hath been called Noli me tangere, Touch me not. The root is thicke, white and long lasting.


The Place.
It is found in most of the hot countries among rubbish, grauell, and other vntilled places: it is planted in gardens in the Low-countries, and being once planted, saith Dodonaeus, it easily commeth vp againe many yeares after (which is true:) and yet saith he further, that it doth not spring againe of the root, but of the seeds spirted or cast about: which may likewise be true where he hath obserued it, but in my garden it is otherwise, for as I said before, the root is long lasting, and continueth from yeare to yeare.



 The Time.
It springeth vp in May, it floureth and is ripe in Autumne, and is to be gathered at the same time, to make that excellent composition called Elaterium.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Agrestis, and Erraticus Cucumis: in shoppes, Cucumer asininus: in Italian, Cocomero saluatico: in Spanish, Cogumbrillo amargo: in English, wilde Cucumber, spirting Cucumbers, and touch me not: in French, Concombres sauvages.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of wilde Cucumbers, roots and their rindes as they are bitter in taste, so they be likewise hot and clensing. The iuice is hot in the second degree, as Galen witnesseth, and of thin parts. It clenseth and wasteth away.


 The Vertues.
The iuice called (...) doth purge forth choler, flegme, and waterie humours, and that with  force, and not onely by siege, but sometimes also by vomit.
The quantity that is to be taken at one time is from fiue grains to ten, according to the strength  of the patient.
The iuice dried or hardened, and the quantitie of halfe a scruple taken, driueth forth by siege  grosse flegme, cholericke humours, and preuaileth mightily against the dropsie, and shortnesse of breath.
The same drawne vp into the nosthrils mixed with a little milk, taketh away the rednesse of the  eies.
The iuice of the root doth also purge flegme, cholericke and waterish humours, and is good for  the dropsie: but not of such force as Elaterium, which is made of the iuice of the fruit: the making whereof I commend to the learned and curious Apothecaries: among which number (...)r. William Wright in (...) Burie my louing friend hath taken more paines in curious composing of it, and hath more exactly performed the same than any other whatsoeuer that I haue had knowledge of.



CHAP. 342. Of Citrull Cucumbers.


1 Citrullus officinarum. Citrull Cucumber.


@ 2 Citrullus minor. Small Citrull.




 The Description.
1 THe Citrull Cucumber hath many long, flexible, and tender stalkes trailing vpon the ground, branched like vnto the Vine, set with certaine great leaues deeply cut, and very much iagged: among which come forth long clasping tendrels, and also tender footstalkes, on the ends whereof do grow floures of a gold yellow colour: the fruit is somewhat round, straked or ribbed with certaine deepe furrowes alongst the same, of a green colour aboue, and vnderneath on that side that lyeth vpon the ground something white: the outward skin whereof is very smooth; the meat within is indifferent hard, more like to that of the Pompion than of the Cucumber or Muske melon: the pulpe wherein the seed lieth, is spungie, and of a slimie substance: the seed is long, flat, and greater than those of the Cucumbers: the shell or outward barke is blackish, sometimes of an ouerworne reddish colour. The fruit of the Citrull doth not so easily rot or putrifie as doth the Melon, which being gathered in a faire dry day may be kept a long time, especially being couered in a heape of wheat, as Matthiolus saith; but according to my practise you may keepe them much longer and better in a heape of dry sand.
2 The second kinde of Citrull differeth not from the former, sauing that it is altogether lesser, and the leaues are not so deepely cut or iagged, wherein consisteth the difference.


 The Place and Time.
The Citrull prospereth best in hot Regions, as in Sicilia, Apulia, Calabria, and Syria, about Alepo and Tripolis. We haue many times sown the seeds, and diligently obserued the order prescribed in planting of Cucumbers.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists do call it Anguria: in shoppes, Citrullus, and Cucumus Citrullus: in English, Citruls, and Cucumber Citruls, and the seed is knowne by the name of Semen Citrulli: or Citrull seed. But is Cucumis Citrullus, be so called of the yellow colour of the Citron, then is the common Cucumber properly Cucumis Citrullus: which is knowne vnto all to be contrarie.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The meat or pulpe of Cucumer Citrull which is next vnto the bark is eaten raw, but more commonly  boiled: it yeeldeth to the bodie little nourishment, and the same cold: it ingendreth a waterish bloud, mitigateth the extremity of heat of the inner parts, and tempereth the sharpnesse and feruent heat of choler: being raw and held in the mouth, it takes away the roughnesse of the tongue in Agues, and quencheth thirst.
The seeds are of the like facultie with those of Cucumbers.



CHAP. 343. Of the wilde Citrull called Colocynthis.

 The Description.
1 COloquintida hath beene taken of many to be a kinde of the wild Gourd, it lieth along creeping on the ground as doe the Cucumbers and Melons, comming neerest of all to that which in those daies of some Herbarists is called Citrull Cucumber: it bringeth forth vpon his long branches smal crooked tendrels like the Vine, and also very great broad leaues deepely cut or iagged: among which come forth small floures of a pale yellow colour; then commeth the fruit round as a bowle, couered with a thin rinde, of a yellow colour when it is ripe, which when it is pilled or pared off, the white pulpe or spungie substance appeareth full of seedes, of a white or else an ouerworne browne colour; the fruit so pared or pilled, is dryed for medicine; the which is most extreame bitter, and likewise the seede, and the whole plant it selfe in all his parts.
2 The second kinde of Coloquintida hath likewise many long branches and clasping tendrels, wherewith it taketh hold of such things as are neere vnto it. It bringeth forth the like leaues, but not so much iagged. The floures are small and yellow: the fruit is fashioned like a peare, and the other sort round, wherein the especiall difference consisteth.


 The Place.
Coloquintida is sowne and commeth to perfection in hot regions, but seldome or neuer in these Northerly and cold countries.



1 Colocynthis. The wilde Citrull or Coloquintida.


2 Colocynthis (...). Peare fashioned Coloquintida.




 The Time.
It is sowne in the Spring, and bringeth his fruit to perfection in August.
It hath beene diuers times deliuered vnto me for a truth, that they doe grow in the sands of the Mediterranean sea shore, or verie neere vnto it, wilde, for euery man to gather that list, especially on the coast of Barbarie, as also without the mouth of the Streights neere to Sancta Crux and other places adiacent; from whence diuers Surgions of London that haue trauelled thither for the curing of sicke and hurt men in the ship haue brought great quantities thereof at their returne.


 The Names.
It is vulgarly called Coloquintida: in Greeke (...): the Latine translators for Colocynthis doe oftentimes set downe Cucurbita (...): notwithstanding there is a Cucurbita syluestris that differeth from Colocynthis, or Coloquintida: for Cucurbita syluestris is called in Greeke (...): or wilde Coloquintida, whereof shall be set sorth a peculiar chapter next after the Cucurbita or Gourd: in English it is called Coloquintida, or Apple of Coloquintida.


 The Temperature.
Coloquintida as it is in his whole nature and in all his parts bitter, so is it likewise hot and drie in the later end of the second degree; and therefore it purgeth, clenseth, openeth and performeth all those things that most bitter things do: but that the strong qualitie which it hath to purge by the stoole, is, as Galen saith, of more force than the rest of his operations.


 The Vertues.
Which operation of purging it worketh so violently, that it doth not onely draw forth flegme  and choler maruellous speedily, and in very great quantitie: but oftentimes fetcheth forth bloud and bloudy excrements, by shauing the guts, and opening the ends of the meseraicall veines.
So that therefore the same is not to bee vsed either rashly, or without some dangerous and extreme  disease constraine thereunto: neither yet at all, vnlesse some (...) and clammie-thing bee mixed there with, whereby the vchemencie thereof may be repressed, the (...) force dulled, and the same speedily passing (...) the belly, the guts be not fret or shaued. M. sues teacheth to mixe with it either Mastich, or gum Tragacanth.
There be (...) of it (...), or little flat cakes, with Mastich, (...) (...), (...) (...)

Bdellium, of these, Mastich hath a manifest binding qualitie: but tough and clammie (...) (...) much better, which haue no astriction at all in them, or very little.
For by such binding or astringent things, violent medicines being restrained and (...), do afterward  work their operation with more violence and trouble: but such as haue not binding things mixed with them do easilier worke, and with lesser paine, as be those pils which (...) in his ninth booke of Almanzor calleth Illiacae: which are compounded of Coloquintida and Scamony, two of the strongest medicines that are; and of a third called gum Sagapene, which through his clamminesse doth as it were daube the intrails and guts, and defend them from the harme that might haue come of either of them.
The which composition, although it be wonderfull strong, and not to be vsed without very great  necessitie vrge thereunto, doth notwithstanding easily purge, and without any great trouble, and with lesser torment than most of the mildest and gentlest medicins which haue Mastich and other things mixed with them that are astringent.
And for this cause it is very like that Galen in his first booke of Medicines, according to the places  affected, would not suffer Mastich and Bdellium to be in the pilles, which are surnamed (...) the which notwithstanding his Schoolemaster Quintus was also woont before to adde vnto the same.
But Coloquintida is not onely good for purgations, in which it is a remedie for the dissinesse or  the turning ficknesse, the megrim, continuall head-ache, the Apoplexie, the falling sicknesse, the stuffing of the lungs, the gnawings and gripings of the guts and intrailes, and other most dangerous diseases, but also it doth outwardly worke his operations, which are not altogether to be (...).
Common oile wherein the same is boiled, is good against the singing in the eares, and deafenes  the same killeth and driueth forth all manner of wormes of the belly, and doth oftentimes (...) to the stoole, if the nauell and bottome of the belly be therewith annointed.
Being boiled in vineger, and the teeth washed therewith, it is a remedie for the tooth-ache, as  Mesues teacheth.
The seed is very profitable to keepe and preserue dead bodies with; especially if Aloes and  Myrrhe be mixed with it.
The white pulpe or spungious pith taken in the weight of a scruple openeth the belly mightily, and purgeth grosse flegme, and cholericke humors.
It hath the like force if it be boiled and laid to infuse in wine or ale, and giuen to drinke.
Being taken after the same manner it profiteth the diseases before remembred, that is, the Apoplexie, falling sicknesse, giddinesse of the head, the collicke, loosenesse of sinewes, and places out of ioint, and all diseases proceeding of cold.
For the same purposes it may be vsed in clisters.
The same boiled in oile, and applied with cotton or wooll, taketh away the pain of the (...).
The decoction made in wine, and vsed as a fomentation or bathe, bringeth downe the desired  sicknesse.



CHAP. 344. Of Muske-Melon, or Million.

The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Melons found at this day, differing very notably in shape and proportion, as also in taste, according to the climate and countrie where they grow: but of the Antients there was onely one and no more, which is that Melopepo called of Galen, Cucumis, or Galens Cucumber: notwithstanding some haue comprehended the Muske-Melons vnder the kindes of Citruls, where in they haue greatly erred: for doubtlesse the Muske-Melon is a kinde of Cucumber according to the best approued Authors.


 The Description.
1 THat which the later Herbarists do call Muske-Melons is like to the common Cucumber in stalks, lying flat vpon the ground, long, branched, and rough. The leaues be much alike, yet are they lesser, rounder, and not so cornered: the floures in like manner bee yellow: the fruit is bigger, at the first somwhat hairy, somthing long, now and then somwhat round; oftentimes greater, and many times lesser: the barke or rinde is of an ouerworne russet greene

1 Melo. The Muske Melon.
2 Melo Saccharinus. Sugar melon.
4 Melo Hispanicus. Spanish Melons.
colour, ribbed and furrowed very deepely, hauing often chappes or chinkes, and a confused roughnesse: the pulpe or inner substance which is to be eaten, is of a faint yellow colour. The middle part whereof is full of a slimie moisture, among which is conteined the seed, like vnto those of the Cucumber, but lesser, and of a browner colour.
2 The sugar Melon hath long trailing stalkes lying vpon the ground, whereon are set small clasping tendrels like those of the Vine, and also leaues like vnto the common Cucumber, but of a greener colour: the fruite commeth forth among those leaues, standing vpon slender footstalkes, round as the fruite of Coloquintida, and of the same bignesse, of a most pleasant taste like Sugar, whereof it tooke the surname Saccharatus.
3 The Peare fashioned Melon hath many long vinie branches, whereupon doe grow cornered leaues like those of the Vine, and likewise great store of long tendrels, clasping and taking hold of each thing that it toucheth: the fruite groweth vpon slender footstalkes, fashioned like vnto a Peare, of the bignes of a great Quince.
4 The Spanish Melon bringeth forth long

trailing branches, whereon are set broad leaues slightly indented about the edges, not diuided at all, as are all the rest of the Melons. The fruite groweth neere vnto the stalke, like vnto the common Pompion, very long, not crested or furrowed at all, but spotted with very many such markes as are on the backeside of the Harts-tongue leafe. The pulpe or meate is not so pleasing in taste as the other.


 The Place.
They delight in hot regions, notwithstanding I haue seen at the Queenes house at Saint Iames very many of the first sort ripe, through the diligent and curious nourishing of them by a skilfull Gentleman the keeper of the said house, called Mr. Fowle, and in other places neere vnto the right Honorable the Lord of (...) house, of Bermondsey by London, where from yeere to yeere there is very great plenty, especially if the weather be any thing temperate.


 The Time.
They are set or sowne in Aprill as I haue already shewne in the chapter of Cucumbers: their fruite is ripe in the end of August, and sometimes sooner.


 The Names.
The Muske Melon is called in Latine, Melo: in Italian, Mellone: in Spanish, Melon: in French, (...): in High Dutch, Melaun: in low Dutch, Meloenen: in Greeke, (...), which doth signifie an apple; and therefore this kinde of Cucumber is more truely called (...) or (...): by reason that Pepo hath the smell of an apple, whereto the smell of this fruit is like; hauing withall the smell as it were of Muske: which for that (...) are also named Melones (...), or Muske Melons.


 The Temperature.
The meate of the Muske Melon, is very cold and moist.


 The Vertues.
It is harder of digestion than is any of the rest of Cucumbers: and if it remaine long in the stomacke is putrifieth, and is occasion of pestilent feuers: which thing also Aetius witnesseth in the first booke of his Tetrabibles, writing that the vse of Cucumeres, or Cucumbers, breedeth pestilent feauers; for he also taketh Cucumis to be that which is commonly called a Melon: which is vsually eaten of the Italians and Spaniards rather to represse the rage of (...), than for any other Physicall vertue.
The seed is of like operation with that of the former Cucumber.



CHAP. 345. Of Melons, or Pompions.

 The Kindes.
THere be found diuers kindes of Pompions which differ either in bignesse (...) (...): it shall be therefore sufficient to describe some one or two of them, and referre the rest vnto the view of the figures, which most liuely do expresse their differences; especially because this volume waxeth great, the description of no moment, and I hasten to an end.


 The Description.
1 TThe great Pompion bringeth forth thicke and rough prickly stalkes, which with their clasping tendrells take hold vpon such things as are neere vnto them, as poles, (...), pales, and ledges, which vnlesse they were neere vnto them would creepe along vpon the ground; the leaues be wilde, and great, very rough, and cut with certaine deepe gashes, nicked also on the edges like a saw; the floures be very great like vnto a bell cup, of a yellow colour like gold, hauing fiue corners standing out like teeth: (...) fruite is great, thicke, round, set with thicke ribbes, like edges sticking forth. The pulpe or meate whereof which is next vnder the rinde is white, and of a meane hardnesse: the pith or substance in the middle is spungie, and slimie: the seed is great, broad, flat, something white, much greater than that of the Cucumber, otherwise not differing at all in forme. The colour of the barke or rinde is oftentimes of an obscure greene, sometimes gray. The rinde of the greene Pompion is harder, and as it were of a woody substance: the rinde of the gray is softer and tenderer.
2 The second kinde of Melons or Pompions is like vnto the former in stalkes and leaues, and also in clasping tendrels: but the gashes of the leaues are not so deepe, and the stalkes be tenderer: the floures are in like manner yellow, gaping, and cornered at the top, as be those of the (...): but the fruite is somewhat rounder; sometimes greater, and many times lesser: and oftentimes

of a greene colour with an harder barke; now and then softer and whiter. The meat within is like the former: the seeds haue also the same forme, but they be somewhat lesser.


1 Pepo maximus oblongus. The great long Pompion.


2 Pepo maximus rotundus. The great round Pompion.


3 Of this kinde there is also another Pompion like vnto the former in rough stalkes, and in gashed and nicked leaues: the floure is also great and yellow, like those of the others: the fruit is of a great bignesse, whose barke is full of little bunnies or hillie welts, as is the rinde of the Citron, which is in like manner yellow when it is ripe.
4 The fourth Pompion doth very much differ from the others in form: the stalks, leaues, and floures are like those of the rest: but the fruit is not long or round, but altogether broad, and in a manner flat like vnto a shield or buckler; thicker in the middle, thinner in the compasse, and curled or (...) in certaine places about the edges, like the rugged or vneuen barke of the Pomecitron; the which rinde is very soft, thin, and white: the meat within is meetely hard and dureable. The seed is greater than that of the common Cucumber, in forme and colour all one.
@ Macocks Virginiani, sive Pepo Virginianus. The Virginian Macocke, or Pompion.
@ This hath rough cornered straked trailing branches proceeding from the roor, eight or nine foot long, or longer, and those againe diuided into other branches of a blackish greene colour, trailing, (...), or running alongst the earth, couering a great deale of ground, sending forth broad (...) rough leaues, on great grosse, long, rough, hairy foot-stalks, like and fully as big as the leaues of the common Pompion, with clasping tendrels and great broad shriueled yellow floures also like those of the common Pompion: the fruit succeedeth, growing a longst the stalkes, commonly not neere the root, but towards the vpper part or toppes of the branches, somewhat round, not extending in length, but flat like a bowle, but not so bigge as an ordinarie bowle, beeing seldome foure inches broad, and three inches long, of a blackish greene colour when it is ripe. The substance or eatable part is of a yellowish white colour, containing in the middest a great deale of pulpe or soft matter, wherein the seed lyeth in certaine rowes also, like the common Pompion, but smaller. The root is made of many whitish branches, creeping far abroad in the earth, and perish at the first approch of Winter.



3 Pepo maximus compressus. The great flat bottommed Pompion.


4 Pepo maximus clypeatus. The great buckler Pompion.


5 Pepo Indicus minor rotundus. The small round Indian Pompion.


6 Pepo Indicus angulosus. The cornered Indian Pompion.






Melones aquatici edules Virginiani. The Virginian Water-Melon.
This Melon or Pompion is like and fully as bigge as the common Pompion, in spreading, running, creeping branches, leaues, floures, and clasping tendrels: the fruit is of a very blackish greene colour, and extendeth it selfe in length neere foure inches long, and three inches broad, no bigger nor longer than a great apple, and grow alongst the branches forth of the bosomes of the leaues, not farre from the root euen to the toppes of the branches, containing a substance, pulpe, and flat seed, like the ordinary Pompion: the root is whitish, and disperseth it selfe verie farre abroad in the earth, and perisheth about the beginning of VVinter. October the tenth, 1621. Iohn (...). @

 The Place.
All these Melons or Pompions be garden plants: they ioy best in a fruitfull soile, and are common in England; except the last described, which is as yet a stranger.


 The Time.
They are planted at the beginning of Aprill: they floure in August: the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The great Melon or Pompion is named in Greeke (...): in Latine likewise Pepo: The fruits of them all when they be ripe are called by a common name in Greeke, (...): in English, Millions or Pompion. Whereupon certaine Physitions, saith Galen, haue contended, that this fruit ought to be called (...), that is to say in Latine, Pepo Cucumeralis, or Cucumber Pompion. Pliny in his ninth booke the fifth Chapter writeth, that Cucumeres when they exceed in greatnesse are named (...): it is called in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, Pepoenen: in French, Pompons.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
All the Melons are of a cold nature, with plenty of moisture: they haue a certaine clensing qualitie, by meanes whereof they prouoke vrine, and do more speedily passe through the bodie than do either the Gourd, Citrull, or Cucumber, as Galen hath written
The pulpe of the Pompion is neuer (...) raw, but boiled. For so it doth more easily descend, making the belly soluble. The nourishment which commeth hereof is little, thin, moist and cold, (bad, saith Galen) and that especially when it is not well digested: by reason whereof it maketh a man apt and readie to fall into the disease called the Cholericke Passion, and of some the (...).
The seed clenseth more than the meat, it prouoketh vrine, and is good for those that are troubled  with the stone of the kidnies.
The fruit boiled in milke and buttered, is not onely a good wholesome meat for mans body, but  being so prepared, is also a most physicall medicine for such as haue an hot stomacke, and the inward parts inflamed.
The flesh or pulpe of the same sliced and fried in a pan with butter, is also a good and wholsome  meat: but baked with apples in an ouen, it doth fil the body with flatuous or windie belchings, and is food vtterly vnwholesome for such as liue idlely; but vnto robustious and rustick people nothing (...) that filleth the belly.



CHAP. 346. Of Wilde Pompions.

 The Description.
1 AS there is a wilde sort of (...), of Melons, Citruls and Gourds, so likewise there be certaine wilde Pompions, that be so of their owne nature. These bring forth rough stalks, set with sharp thorny prickles. The leaues be likewise rough: the floures yellow as be thoseof the garden Melon, but euery part is lesser. The fruit is thicke, round, and sharp pointed, hauing a hard greene rinde. The (...) or meat whereof, and the middle pith, with the seed are like those of the garden Pompion, but very bitter in taste.
2 The second is like vnto the (...), but it is altogether lesser, wherein consisteth the difference.



1 Pepomaior syluestris. The great wilde Pompion.


2 Pepo minor syluestris. The small wilde Pompion.




 The Place.
These Melons do grow wilde in Barbarie, Africa, and most parts of the East and West Indies. They grow not in these parts except they be sowne.


 The Time.
Their time of flouring and flourishing answereth that of the garden Pompion.


 The Names.
Although the Antient Physitions haue made no mention of these plants, yet the thing it selfe doth shew, that there be such, and ought to be called in Greeke (...): in Latine, (...) syluesters: in English, wilde Melons or Pompions.


 The Temperature.
Like as these wilde Melons be altogether of their owne nature very bitter, so be they also of temperature hot and drie, and that in the later end of the second degree. They haue likewise a clensing facultie, not inferior to the wilde Cucumbers.


 The Vertues.
The wine, which when the pith and seed is taken forth, is powred into the rinde, and hath remained  so long therein till such time as it becommeth bitter, doth purge the belly, and bringeth forth flegmaticke and cholerick humors. To be briefe, the iuice hereof is of the same operation that the wilde Cucumber is of; and being dried it may be vsed in stead of Elaterium, which is the dried iuice of the wilde Cucumber.



CHAP. 347. Of Gourds.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Gourds, some wilde, and others tame of the garden; some bringing forth fruit like vnto a bottle; others long, bigger at the end, keeping no certaine forme or fashion; some greater, others lesser. @ I will onely figure and describe two or three of the chiefest, and so passe ouer the rest, because each one vpon the first sight of them knowes to what kinde to referre them. @



 The Description.
1 THe Gourd bringeth forth very long stalkes as be those of the Vine, cornered and parted into diuers branches, which with his clasping tendrels taketh hold and (...) vpon such things as stand neere vnto it: the leaues be very great, broad, and (...) pointed, almost as great as those of the Clot-Burre, (...) softer, and somewhat couered as it were with a white freese, as be also the stalkes and branches, like those of the marish Mallow: the floures be white, and grow forth from the bosome of the leaues: in their places come vp the fruit, which are not all of one fashion, for oftentimes they haue the forme of flagons or bottles, with a great large belly and a small necke. The Gourd (saith Pliny, lib. 19. cap. (...).) groweth into any forme or fashion that you would haue it, either like vnto a wreathed Dragon, the leg of a man, or any other shape, according to the mould wherein it is put whilest it is young: being suffered to clime vpon any Arbour where the fruit may hang, it hath beene seene to be nine foot long, by reason of his great weight which hath stretched it out to the length. The rinde when it is ripe is verie hard, wooddy, and of a yellow colour: the meate or inward pulpe is white, the seed long, flat, pointed at the top, broad below, with two peakes standing out like hornes, (...) within, and sweet in taste.
2 The second differeth not from the precedent in stalkes, (...), or floures: the fruit hereof is for the most part fashioned like a bottle or flagon, wherein especially consisteth the difference.


1 Cucurbita anguina. Snakes Gourd.


2 Cucurbita lagenaria. Bottle Gourds.




 The Place.
The Gourds are cherished in the gardens of these cold regions rather for pleasure than for profit: in the hot countries where they come to ripenesse there are sometimes eaten, but with small delight; especially they are kept for the rindes, wherein they put Turpentine, Oyle, Hony, and also serue them for pales to fetch water in, and many other the like vses.


 The Time.
They are planted in a bed of horse-dung in April, euen as we haue taught in the planting of cucumbers: they flourish in Iune and Iuly; the fruit is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
The Gourd is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Cucurbita edulis, (...) (...): of Pliny,

Cucurbita Cameraria, because it climeth vp, and is a couering for arbours and walking places, and banqueting houses in gardens: he calleth the other which climeth not vp, but lyeth crawling on the ground, Cucurbita (...): in Italian, Zucca: in Spanish, (...): in French, Courge: in high Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in English, Gourds.


 The Temperature.
The meate or inner pulpe of the Gourd is of temperature cold and moist, and that in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The iuyce being dropped into the eares with oyle of roses is good for the paine thereof proceeding  of a hot cause.
The pulpe or meate mitigateth all hot swellings, if it be laid thereon in manner of a pultis, and  being vsed in this manner it taketh away the head-ache and the inflammation of the eyes.
The same Author affirmeth, that a long Gourd or else a Cucumber being laid in the cradle or  bed by the young infant whilest it is asleepe and sicke of an ague, it shall be very quickely made whole.
The pulpe also is eaten sodden, but because it hath in it a waterish and thinne iuyce, it yeeldeth  small nourishment to the body, and the same cold and moist; but it easily passeth thorow, especially being sodden, which by reason of the slipperinesse and moistnesse also of his substance mollifieth the belly.
But being baked in an ouen or fried in a pan it loseth the most part of his naturall moisture, and  therefore it more slowly descendeth, and doth not mollifie the belly so soone.
The seed allayeth the sharpnesse of vrine, and bringeth downe the same.



CHAP. 348. Of the wilde Gourd.


1 Cucurbita lagenaria syluestris. Wilde Bottle Gourd.


2 Cucurbita syluestris fungiformis. Mushrome wilde Gourd.




 The Description
1 THere is besides the former ones a certaine wilde Gourd: this is like the garden Gourd in clymbing stalkes, clasping tendrels, and soft leaues, and as it were downy; all and (...) one of which things being farre lesse: this also clymbeth vpon Arbours and banquetting houses: the fruit doth represent the great bellied Gourd, and those that be like vnto bottles in forme, but in bignesse it is very farre inferiour; for it is small, and scarse so great as an (...) Quince, and may be held within the compasse of a mans hand: the outward rinde at the first is greene, afterwards it is as hard as wood, and of the colour thereof: the inner pulpe is moist, and very full of iuyce, in which lieth the seed. The whole is as bitter as Coloquintida, which hath made so many errors, one especially, in taking the fruit Coloquintida for the wilde Gourd.
2 The second wilde Gourd hath likewise many trailing branches and clasping tendrels, wherwith it taketh hold of such things as be neere vnto it: the leaues be broad, deepely cut into diuers sections, like those of the Vine, soft and very downy, whereby it is especially knowne to be one of the Gourds: the floures are very white, as are also those of the Gourds. The fruit succeedeth, growing to a round forme, flat on the top like the head of a Mushrome, whereof it tooke his syrname.


 The Place.
They grow of themselues wilde in hot regions; they neuer come to perfection of ripenesse in these cold countries.


 The Time.
The time answereth those of the garden.


 The Names.
The wilde Gourd is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Cucurbita syluestris, or wilde Gourd. Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 3. affirmeth, that the wilde Gourd is named of the Grecians, (...), which is hollow, an inch thicke, not growing but among stones, the iuyce whereof being taken is very good for the stomacke. But the wilde Gourd is not that which is so described; for it is aboue an inch thicke, neither is it hollow, but full of iuyce, and by reason of the extreme bitternesse offensiue to the stomacke.
Some also there be that take this for Coloquintida, but they are far deceiued; for Colocynthis is the wilde (...) Cucumber, whereof we haue treated in the chapter of (...).


 The Temperature.
The wilde Gourd is as hot and dry as Coloquintida, that is to say, in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The wilde Gourd is extreme bitter, for which cause it openeth and scoureth the stopped passages  of the body; it also purgeth downwards as do wilde Melons.
Moreouer, the wine which hath continued all night in this Gourd likewise purgeth the belly  mightily, and bringeth forth cholericke and flegmaticke humors.



CHAP. 349. Of Potato's.


Sisarum Peruvianum, (...) Batata Hispanorum Potatus, or Potato's.




 The Description.
THis Plant (which is called of some Sisarum Peruvianum, or Skyrrets of Peru) is generally of vs called Potatus, or Potatoes. It hath long rough flexible branches trailing vpon the ground like vnto Pompions; whereupon are set greene three cornered leaues, very like vnto those of the wilde Cucumber. There is not any that haue written of this planthaue said any thing of the floures: therefore I refer their description vnto those that shall hereafter haue further knowledge of the same. Yet haue I had in my garden diuers roots that haue flourished vnto the first approch of Winter, and haue growne vnto a great length of branches, but they brought not forth any floures at all; whether because the Winter caused them to perish before their time of flouring, or that they be of nature barren of floures, I am not certaine. The roots are many, thicke, and knobbie, like vnto the roots of Peionies, or rather of the white Asphodill, ioyned together at the top into one head, in maner of the Skyrrit, which being diuided into diuers parts and planted, do make a great increase, especially if the greatest roots be cut into diuers goblets, and planted in good and fertile ground.


 The Place.
The Potatoes grow in India, Barbarie, Spaine, and other hot regions; of which I planted diuers roots (that I bought at the Exchange in London) in my garden, where they flourished vntil Winter, at which time they perished and rotted.


 The Time.
It flourisheth vnto the end of September: at the first approch of great frosts the leaues together with the roots and stalkes do perish.


 The Names.
Clusius calleth it Battata, Camotes, Amotes, and Ignames: in English, Potatoes, Potatus, and Potades.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of Potatoes are hot and dry, as may euidently appeare by the taste. The roots are of a temperate (...).


 The Vertues.
The Potato roots are among the Spaniards, Italians, Indians, and many other nations common  and ordinarie meate; which no doubt are of mighty and nourishing parts, and do strengthen and comfort nature; whose nutriment is as it were a meane betweene flesh and fruit, but somwhat windie; but being tosted in the embers they lose much of their windinesse, especially being eaten sopped in wine.
Of these roots may be made conserues no lesse toothsome, wholesome, and dainty than of the  flesh of Quinces: and likewise those comfortable and delicate meats called in shops (...), Placentulae, and diuers other such like.
These Roots may serue as a ground or foundation whereon the cunning Confectioner or Sugar-Baker  may worke and frame many comfortable delicate Conserues, and restoratiue sweete meates.
They are vsed to be eaten rosted in the ashes. Some when they be so rosted infuse them and sop  them in Wine; and others to giue them the greater grace in eating, doe boyle them with prunes, and so eate them. And likewise others dresse them (being first rosted) with Oyle, Vineger, and salt, euerie man according to his owne taste and liking. Notwithstanding howsoeuer they bee dressed, they comfort, nourish, and strengthen the body, procuring bodily lust, and that with greedinesse.



CHAP. 350. Of Potatoes of Virginia.

 The Description.
VIrginia Potato hath many hollow flexible branches trailing vpon the ground, three square, vneuen, knotted or kneed in sundry places at certaine distances: from the which knots commeth forth one great leafe made of diuers leaues, some smaller, and others greater, set together vpon a fat middle rib by couples, of a swart greene colour tending to rednesse; the whole leafe resembling those of the Winter-Cresses, but much larger; in taste at the first like grasse, but afterward sharpe and nipping the tongue. From the bosome of which leaues come forth long

round slender foot-stalkes, whereon do grow very faire and pleasant floures, made of one entire (...) leafe, which is folded or plaited in such strange sort, that it seemeth to be a sloure made of (...) sundry small leaues, which cannot easily be perceiued except the same be pulled open. The whole floure is of a light purple colour, striped downe the middle of euery fold or welt with a light shew of yellownesse, as if purple and yellow were mixed together. in the middle of the floure (...) forth a thicke flat pointall yellow as gold, with a small sharpe greene pricke or point in the middest thereof. The fruit succeedeth the floures, round as a ball, of the bignesse of a little Bullesse or wilde plum, greene at the first, and blacke when it is ripe; wherein is contained small white seed lesser than those of Mustard. The root is thicke, fat, and tuberous, not much differing either in shape, colour, or taste from the common Potatoes, sauing that the roots hereof are not so (...) nor long; some of them are as round as a ball, some ouall or egge-fashion; some longer, and others shorter: the which knobby roots are fastened vnto the stalkes with an infinite number of threddie strings.


Battata Virginiana, siue Virginianorum, and Pappus: Virginian Potatoes.




 The Place.
It groweth natnrally in America, where it was first discouered, as reports C. Clusius, since which time I haue receiued roots hereof from Virginia, otherwise called Norembega, which grow and prosper in my garden as in their owne natiue countrey.


 The Time.
The leaues thrust forth of the ground in the beginning of May: the floures bud forth in August. The fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Indians do call this plant Pappus, meaning the roots: by which name also the common Potatoes are called in those Indian countries. We haue the name proper vnto it mentioned in the title. Because it hath not onely the shape and proportion of Potatoes, but also the pleasant taste and vertues of the same, we may call it in English, Potatoes of America or Virginia.
@ Clusius questions whether it be not the Arachidna of Theophrastus. Bauhine hath referred it to the Nightshades, and calleth it Solanum tuberosum (...), and largely figures and describes it in his Prodromus, pag. 89. @



 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and vertues be referred vnto the common Potatoes, being likewise a food, as  also a meate for pleasure, equall in goodnesse and wholesomenesse vnto the same, being either rosted in the embers, or boyled and eaten with oyle, vineger, and pepper, or dressed any other way by the hand of some cunning in cookerie.
@ Bauhine saith, That he heard that the vse of these toots was forbidden in Bourgondy (where  they call them Indian Artichokes) for that they were persuaded the too frequent vse of them caused the leprosie. @



CHAP. 351. Of the Garden Mallow called Hollihocke.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts or kindes of Mallowes; some of the garden: there be also some of the Marish or sea shore; others of the field, and both wilde. And first of the Garden Mallow or Hollihocke.


1 Malua hortensis. Single Garden Hollihocke.


2 Malua rosea simplex peregrina. Iagged strange Hollihoeke.




 The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Mallow bringeth forth broad round leaues of a whitish greene colour, rough, and greater than those of the wilde Mallow. The stalke is straight, of the height of foure or six cubits; whereon do grow vpon slender foot-stalks single floures not much vnlike to the wilde Mallow, but greater, consisting only of fiue leaues, sometimes white or red, now and then of a deepe purple colour, varying diuersly, as Nature list to play with it: in their places groweth vp a round knop like a little cake, compact or made vp of a multitude of flat seeds like little cheeses. The root is long, white, tough, easily bowed, and groweth deepe in the ground.



3 Malua purpurea multiplex. Double purple Hollihocke.


2 The second being a strange kinde of Hollihocke hath likewise broad leaues, rough and hoarie, or of an ouerworne russet colour, cut into diuers sections euen to the middle ribbe, like those of Palma Christi. The floures are very single, but of a perfect red colour, wherein consisteth the greatest difference. @ And this may be called Malua rosea simplex peregrina folio Ficus. Iagged strange Hollihocke. @
3 The double Hollihocke with purple floures hath great broad leaues, confusedly indented about the edges, and likewise toothed like a saw. The stalke groweth to the height of foure or fiue cubits. The floures are double, and of a bright purple colour.
4 The Garden Hollihocke with double floures of the colour of scarlet, groweth to the height of fiue or six cubits, hauing many broad leaues cut about the edges. The stalke and root is like the precedent. @ This may be called Multea bortensis rubra multiplex, Double red Hollihockes, or Rose mallow. @
5 The tree mallow is likewise one of the Hollihockes; it bringeth forth a great stalke of the height of ten or twelue foot, growing to the forme of a small tree, whereon are placed diuers great broad leaues of a russet greene colour, not vnlike to those of the great Clot Burre Docke, deepely indented about the edges. The floures are very great and double as the greatest Rose, or double Peiony, of a deep red colour tending to blacknesse. The roote is great, thicke, aud of a wooddy substance, as is the rest of the plant. @ This may be called Malua hortensis atrorubente multiplici flore. @


 The Place.
These Hollihockes are sowne in gardens, almost euery where, and are in vaine sought else where.


 The Time.
The second yeere after they are sowne they bring forth their floures in Iuly and August, when the seed is ripe the stalke withereth, the root remaineth and sendeth forth new stalkes, leaues and floures, many yeres after.


 The Names.
The Hollihocke is called in Greeke, (...): of diuers, Rosa vltramarina, or outlandish Rose, and Rosa hyemalis, or winter Rose. And this is that Rose which (...) in his 21. book, 4. chapter writes to haue the stalke of a mallow, and the leaues of a pot-herbe, which they cal Mosceuton: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Rose d'outre mer: in English, Hollihocke, and Hockes.


 The Temperature.
The Hollihocke is meetely hot, and also moist, but not so much as the wilde Mallow: it hath likewise a clammie substance, which is more manifest in the seed and root, than in any other part.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the floures, especially those of the red, doth stop the ouermuch flowing of the  monthly courses, if they be boiled in red wine.
The roots, leaues, and seeds serue for all those things forwhich the wilde Mallowes do, which  are more commonly and familiarly vsed.



CHAP. 352. Of the wilde Mallowes.

 The Description.
1 THe wilde Mallow hath broad leaues somewhat round and cornered, nickt about the edges, smooth, and greene of colour: among which rise vp many slender tough stalkes,

clad with the like leaues, but smaller. The floures grow vpon little footstalkes of a reddish colour mixed with purple strakes, consisting of fiue leaues, fashioned like a bell: after which commeth vp a knap or round button, like vnto a flat cake, compact of many small seeds. The root is white, tough, and full of a slimie juice, as is all the rest of the plant.
2 The dwarfe wilde Mallow creepeth vpon the ground: the stalkes are slender and weake, yet tough and flexible. The leaues be rounder, and more hoary than the other. The floures are small and of a white colour.
3 The crispe or curled Mallow, called of the vulgar sort French Mallowes, hath many small vpright stalkes, growing to the height of a cubit, and sometimes higher; whereon do grow broad leaues somewhat round and smooth, of a light greene color, plaited or curled about the brims like a ruffe. The floures be small and white. The root perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.


1 Malua syluestris. The field Mallow.


2 Malua syluestris pumila. The wilde dwarfe Mallow.


4 The Veruaine Mallow hath many straight stalkes, whereon doe grow diuers leaues deepely cut and jagged euen to the middle rib, not vnlike to the leaues of Veruaine, whereof it tooke (...) name: among which come forth faire and pleasant floures like vnto those of the common Mallow in forme, but of a more bright red colour, mixed with stripes of purple, which setteth forth the beautie. The root is thicke, and continueth many yeeres. @ This is sometimes though more rarely found with white floures. @
@ 5 This annuall Mallow, called by Clusius, Maluatrimestris, is very like our common Mallow sending vp slender branched stalkes some three foot high; the bottome leaues are round, those on the stalkes more sharpe pointed, greene aboue, and whiter vnderneath, the floures consist of fiue leaues of a light carnation colour, the seed is like that of the ordinary mallow, but smaller; and such also is the root which perishes euery yeere as soon as the seed is ripe: it is sowne in some gardens, and growes wilde in Spaine. @


 The Place.
The two first mallowes grow in vntoiled places among pot-herbes, by high waies, and the (...) of (...).
The French mallow is an excellent pot-herbe, for the which cause it is sowne in gardens, and is not to be found wilde that I know of.



3 Malua crispa. The French curled Mallow.


4 Malua verbenaca. Veruaine Mallow.


@ 5 Malua aestiua Hispanica. The Spanish Mallow.


The Veruaine Mallow groweth not euerie where: it growes on the ditch sides on the left hand of the place of execution by London, called Tyborn: also in a field neere vnto a village fourteene miles from London called Bushey, on the backe-side of a Gentlemans house named Mr. Robert Wylbraham: likewise amongst the bushes and hedges as you go from London to a bathing place called the Old Foord; and in the bushes as you go to Hackny a village by London, in the closes next the town, and in diuers other places, as at Bassingburne in Hartfordshire, three miles from Roiston.
@ Mr. Goodyer found the Veruain Mallow with white floures growing plentifully in a close neere Maple-durham in Hampshire, called Aldercrofts. @


 The Time.
These wilde Mallowes do floure from Iune till Sommer be well spent: in the meane time their seed also waxeth ripe.


 The Names.
The wilde Mallow is called in Latine Maluasyluestris: in Greeke, (...), or (...) and (...), as though they should-say a mitigator of paine: of some, Osiriaca: in high-Dutch, (...): in Low-Dutch, (...), and (...) (...): in English, Mallow.

The Veruaine Mallow is called of Dioscorides, Alcea: in Greeke, (...): of some, Herba Hungarica, and Herba Simeonis, or Simons Mallow: in English, Veruaine Mallow, and iagged Mallow.
The name of this herbe Malua seemeth to come from the Hebrewes, who call it in their tongue (...) Malluach, of the saltnesse, because the Mallow groweth in saltish and old ruinous places, as in dung-hills and such like, which in most aboundant manner yeeldeth forth Salt-peter and such like matter: for (...) Melach signifieth salt, as the Learned know. I am persuaded that the Latine word Malua commeth from the Chaldee name Mallucha, the gutturall (...), Ch, being left out for good sounds sake: so that it were better in this word Maliia to reade u as a vowell, than as a consonant: which words are vttered by the learned Doctor Rabbi Dauid Kimhi, and seeme to carrie a great shew of truth: in English it is called Mallow; which name commeth as neere as may be to the Hebrew word.


 The Temperature.
The wilde Mallowes haue a certaine moderate and middle heate, and moistnesse withall: the iuyce thereof is slimie, clammie, or gluing, the which are to be preferred before the garden Mallow or Hollihocke, as Diphilus Siphinus in Athenaeus doth rightly thinke; who plainely sheweth, that the wilde Mallow is better than that of the garden: although some do prefer the Hollihocke, whereunto we may not consent, neither yet yeeld vnto Galen, who is partly of that minde, yet standeth he doubtfull: for the wilde Mallow without controuersie is fitter to be eaten, and more pleasant than those of the garden, except the French Mallow, which is generally holden the wholsommest, and amongst the pot-herbes not the least commended by Hesiod: of whose opinion was Horace, writing in his second Ode of his Epodon,
-- and graui Maluae salubres corpori.
The Mallow (saith Galen) doth nourish moderately, ingendreth grosse bloud, keepeth the bodie soluble, and looseth the belly that is bound. It easily descendeth, not onely because it is moist, but also by reason it is (...).


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Mallowes are good against the stinging of Scorpions, Bees, Wasps, and such like: and if a man be first anointed with the leaues stamped with a little oyle, he shal not be stung at all, Dioscorides saith.
The decoction of Mallowes with their roots drunken are good against all venome and poyson, if it be incontinently taken after the poyson, so that it be vomited vp againe.
The leaues of Mallowes boyled till they be soft and applied, do mollifie tumors and hard swellings  of the mother, if they do withall sit ouer the fume thereof, and bathe themselues therewith.
The decoction vsed in clisters is good against the roughnesse and fretting of the guts, bladde and fundament.
The roots of the Veruaine Mallow do heale the bloudy flix and inward burstings, being drunke  with wine and water, as Dioscorides and Paulus Aegineta testifie.



CHAP. 353. Of Marsh Mallow.

 The Description.
1 MArsh Mallow is also a certaine kinde of wilde Mallow: it hath broad leaues, small toward the point, soft, white, and (...) or cottoned, and sleightly nicked about the edges: the stalkes be round and straight, three or foure foot high, of a whitish gray colour; whereon do grow floures like vnto those of the wilde Mallowes, yet not red as they are, but commonly white, or of a very light purple colour out of the white: the knop or round button wherein the seeds lie is like that of the first wilde Mallow. The root is thicke, tough, white within, and containeth in it a clammy and slimy iuyce.
@ 2 This strange kinde of Mallow is holden amongst the best writers to be a kinde of marsh Mallow: some excellent Herbarists haue set it downe for Sida Theophrasti, wherto it doth not fully answer: it hath stalks two cubits high, wheron are set without order many broad leaues hoarie and whitish, not vnlike those of the other marsh Mallow: the floures consist of fiue leaues, and are larger than those of the marsh Mallow, and of a purple colour tending to rednesse: after which there come round bladders of a pale colour, in shape like the fruit or seeds of round Aristochia, or Birthwort, wherein is contained round blacke seed. The root is thicke and tough, much like that of the common Mallow.



1 Althaea Ibiscus. Marsh Mallow.


2 Althaeapalustris. Water Mallow.


3 Althaea (...): Tree Mallow.


4 Althaea frutex Clusij. Shrubbed Mallow.





@ 5 Alcea fruticosa cannabina. Hempe-leaued Mallow.


3 This wilde Mallow is likewise referred vnto the kinds of marsh Mallow, called generally by the name of (...), which groweth to the form of a smal hedge tree, approching (...) to the substance or nature of wood than any of the other; wherewith the people of Olbia and Narbone in France doe make hedges, to seuer or diuide their gardens and vineyards (euen as we doe with quicke-sets of priuet or thorne) which continueth long: the stalke whereof groweth vpright, very high, comming neere to the Willow in wooddinesse and substance. The floures grow alongst the same, in fashion and colour of the common wild mallow.
4 The shrubby mallow riseth vp like vnto a hedge bush, and of a wooddy substance, diuiding it selfe into diuers tough and limber branches, couered with a barke of the colour of ashes; whereupon do grow round pointed leaues, somewhat nickt about the edges, very soft, not vnlike to those of the common marsh mallow, and of an ouerworne hoary colour. The floures grow at the top of the stalks, of a purple colour, consisting of siue leaues, very like to the common wilde mallow, and the seed of the marsh mallow.
5 We haue another sort of mallow, called of Pena, Alcea fruticosior pentaphylla: it bringeth forth in my garden many twiggy branches, set vpon stiffe stalkes of the bignesse of a mans thumbe, growing to the height of ten or twelue foot: whereupon are set very many leaues deepely cut euen to the middle rib, like vnto the leaues of hempe: the floures and seeds are like vnto the common mallow: the root is exceeding great, thicke, and of a wooddy substance. @ Clusius calls this Alcea fruticosa cannabino folio: and it is with good reason thought to be the Cannabis syluestris described by Dioscorides, lib. 3. cap. 166. @


 The Place.
The common marsh mallow groweth very plentifully in the marshes both on the Kentish and Essex shore alongst the riuer of Thames, about Woolwych, Erith, Greenhyth, Grauesend, Tilburie, Lee, Colchester, Harwich, and in most salt marshes about London: being planted in gardens it prospereth well, and continueth long.
The second groweth in the moist and fenny places of Ferraria, betweene Padua in Italy, and the riuer Eridanus.
The others are strangers likewise in England: notwithstanding at the impression hereof I haue sowen some seeds of them in my garden, expecting the successe.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iuly and August: the root springeth forth afresh euery yeare in the beginning of March, which are then to be gathered, or in September.


 The Names.
The common marsh mallow is called in Greeke (...), and (...): the Latines retaine the names Althaea and Ibiscus: in shops, Bismalua, and Maluauiscus; as though they should say Malua Ibiscus: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...) (...), and (...) (...): in Italian and Spanish, (...): in French, Guimaulue: in English, marsh mallow, moorish mallow, and white mallow.
The rest of the mallowes retaine the names expressed in their seuerall titles.


 The Temperature.
Marsh mallow is moderately hot, but drier than the other mallowes: the roots and seeds hereof are more dry, and of thinner parts, as Galen writeth; and likewise of a digesting, softning, or mollifying nature.



 The Vertues.
The leaues of Marsh Mallow are of the power to digest, mitigate paine, and to (...).
They be with good effect mixed with fomentations and pultesses against paines of the sides, of  the stone, and of the bladder; in a bath also they serue to take away any manner of paine.
The decoction of the leaues drunke doth the same, which doth not only asswage paine which  proceedeth of the stone, but also is very good to cause the same to descend more easily, and to (...) forth.
The roots and seeds are profitable for the same purpose: moreouer the decoction of the roots  helpeth the bloudy flix, yet not by any binding qualitie, but by mitigating the gripings and frettings thereof: for they doe not binde at all, although (...) otherwise thought, but they cure the bloudy flix, by hauing things added vnto them, as the roots of Bistort, Tormentill, the (...) and rindes of Pomegranates and such like.
The mucilage or slimie iuice of the roots, is mixed very effectually with all oils, ointments, and  plaisters that slacken and mitigate paine.
The roots boiled in wine, and the decoction giuen to drinke, expell the stone and grauell, helpe  the bloudy flix, sciatica, crampes, and convulsions.
The roots of Marsh Mallows, the leaues of common Mallowes, and the leaues of Violets, boiled  in water vntill they be verie soft, and that little water that is left drained away, stamped in a stone morter, adding thereto a certaine quantitie of Fenugreeke, and Lineseed in pouder; the root of the blacke Bryonie, and some good quantitie of Barrowes grease, stamped altogether to the forme of a pultis, and applied very warme, mollifie and soften Apostumes and hard swellings, swellings in the ioints, and sores of the mother: it consumeth all cold tumors, blastings, and windie outgrowings; it cureth the rifts of the fundament; it comforteth, defendeth, and preserueth dangerous greene wounds from any manner of accidents that may happen thereto, it helpeth digestion in them, and bringeth old vlcers to maturation.
The seeds dried and beaten into pouder and giuen to drinke, stoppeth the bloudy flix and laske, and all other issues of bloud.



CHAP. 354. Of the yellow Lillie.


Althaea Lutea. Yellow Mallow.



 The Description.
THe yellow Mallow riseth vp with a round stalke, something hard or wooddie, three or foure cubits high, couered with broad leaues something round, but sharpe pointed, white, soft, set with very fine haires like to the leaues of gourds, hanging vpon long tender footstalks: from the bosome of which leaues come forth yellow floures, not vnlike to those of the common Mallow in forme: the knops or seed vessels are blacke, crooked, or wrinckled, made vp of (...) small cods, in which is black seed: the root is small, and dieth when it hath perfected his seed.


 The Place.
The seed hereof is brought vnto vs from Spaine and Italy: we doe yearely sow it in our gardens, the which seldom or neuer doth bring his seed to ripenesse: by reason whereof, we are to seeke for seeds against the next yeare.


 The Time.
It is sowne in the midst of Aprill, it brings forth his floures in September.


 The Names.
Some thinke this to be Abutilon: (...) on that agreeth which Auicen writeth, that it is like to the Gourd, that is to sav in leafe, and to be named (...), and (...): (...)

take it to be that Althaea or Marsh Mallow, vnto which Theophrastus in his ninth booke of the Historie of Plants doth attribute Florem (...), or a yellow floure: for the floure of the common Marsh Mallow is not yellow, but white; yet may Theophrastus his copie, which in diuers places is faultie, and hath many emptie and vnwritten places, be also faultie in this place; therefore it is hard to say, that this is Theophrastus marsh Mallow, especially seeing that Theophrastus seemeth also to attribute vnto the root of Marsh Mallow so much slime, as that water may bee thickened therewith, which the roots of common Marsh Mallow can very well doe: but the root of Abutilon or yellow Mallow not at all: it may be called in English, yellow Mallow, and Auicen his Mallow.


 The Temperature.
The temperature of this Mallow is referred vnto the Tree-mallow.


 The Vertues.
Auicen saith, that Abutilon or yellow Mallow, is held to be good for greene wounds, and doth presently  glew together, and perfectly cure the same.
The seed drunke in wine preuaileth mightily against the stone.
Bernardus Paludanus of Anchusen reporteth, that the Turks do drinke the seed to prouoke sleepe  and rest.



CHAP. 355. Of Venice Mallow, or Good-night at Noone.


1 Alcea Peregrina. Venice Mallow.


2 Sabdarifa. Thornie Mallow.



 The Description.
@ 1 THe Venice mallow riseth vp with long, round, seeble stalkes, whereon are set vpon long slender foot-stalkes, broad iagged leaues, deepely cut euen to the middle rib: amongst which come forth very pleasant and beautifull floures, in shape like those of the common mallow,

@ 3 Alcea Aegyptia. The Aegyptian Codded Mallow.
something white about theedges, but in the middle of a fine purple: in the middest of this floure standeth forth a knap or pestel, as yellow as gold: it openeth it selfe about eight of the clocke, and shutteth vp againe at noone, about twelue a clock when it hath receiued the beams of the Sun, for two or three houres, whereon it should seeme to reioice to look, and for whose departure, being then vpon the point of declension, it seemes to grieue, and so shuts vp the floures that were open, and neuer opens them againe; whereupon it might more properly be called Malva horaria, or the Mallow of an houre: and this Columella seemeth to call Moloche, in this verse;
-- Et Moloche, Prono sequitur quae vertice solem.
The seed is contained in thicke rough bladders, whereupon Dodonaeus calleth it Alcea Vesicaria: within these bladders or seed vessels are contained blacke seed, not vnlike to those of Nigella Romana. The root is small and tender, and perisheth when the seed is ripe, and must be increased by new and yearely sowing of the seed, carefully reserued.
2 Thorn Mallow riseth vp with one vpright stalk of two cubits high, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches, whereupon are placed leaues deeply cut to the middle rib, and likewise snipt about the edges like a saw, in taste like Sorrel the floures forthe most part thrust forth of the trunke or body of the small stalke, compact of fiue small leaues, of a yellowish colour, the middle part whereof is of a purple tending to rednesse: the husk or cod wherein the floure doth stand is set or armed with sharpe thornes: the root is small, single, and most impatient of our cold clymate, insomuch that when I had with great industrie nourished vp some plants from the seed, and kept them vnto the midst of May; notwithstanding one cold night chancing among many, hath destroied them all.
@ 3 This also is a stranger cut leaued Mallow, which Clusius hath set forth by the name of Alcea Aegyptia: and Prosper Alpinus by the title of Bammia: the stalke is round, straight, green, some cubit and halfe high: vpon which without order grow leaues at the bottome of the stalk, like those of Mallow, cornered and snipt about the edges; but from the middle of the stalke to the top they are cut in with fiue deep gashes like as the leaues of the last described: the floures grow forth by the sides of the stalke, in forme and colour like those of the last mentioned, to wit, with fiue yellowish leaues: after these follow long thicke fiue cornered hairy and sharpe pointed seed vessels, containing a seed like Orobus, couered with a little downinesse: this growes in Egypt, where they eat the fruit thereof as we do Pease and Beanes: Alpinus attributes diuers vertues to this plant, agreeable to those of the common Marsh-mallow. @


 The Place.
The seeds hereof haue been brought out of Spaine and other hot countries. The first prospereth well in my garden from yeare to yeare.


 The Time.
They are to be sowne in the most fertill ground and sunnie places of the garden, in the beginning of May, or in the end of Aprill.


 The Names.
Their names haue beene sufficiently touched in their seueral descriptions. The first may be called in English, Venice-mallow, Good-night at noone, or the Mallow flouring but an houre: of Matthiolus it is called Hypecoon, or Rue Poppie, but vnproperly.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is a certaine clammie iuice in the leaues of the Venice Mallow, whereupon it is thought 

to come neere vnto the temperature of the common Mallow, and to be of a mollifying facultie: but his vse in Physicke is not yet knowne, and therefore can there be no certaintie affirmed.



CHAP. 356. Of Cranes-bill.

 The Kindes.
THere be many kindes of Cranes-bil, whereof two were known to Dioscorides, one with the knobby root, the other with the Mallow leafe.


Geranium Columbinum. Doues foot, or Cranes-bill.




 The Description.
DOues-foot hath many hairy stalks, trailing or leaning toward the ground, of a brownish color, somewhat kneed or iointed; wherupon do grow rough leaues of an ouerworne green colour, round, cut about the edges, and like vnto those of the common Mallow: amongst which come forth the floures of a bright purple color: after which is the seed, set together like the head and bil of a bird; wherupon it was called Cranesbill, or Storks-bill, as are also all the other of his kinde. The root is slender, with some fibres annexed thereto.
@ 2 There is another kinde of this with larger stalkes and leaues, also the leaues are more deeply cut in and diuided, and the floures are either of the same colour as those of the common kinde, or else somewhat more whitish. This may be called (...) columbinum maius (...) foliis, Great Doues foot.
3 To this kinde may also fitly be referred the Geranium Saxatile of (...): the root is smal and threddy, the leaues are smoother, redder, more bluntly cut about the edges, and transparent than those of the first described, yet round, and otherwise like them: the floures are small and red, and the bills like those of the former. Master Goodyer found it growing plentifully on the bankes by the high way leading from Gilford towards London, neere vnto the Townes end. @


 The Place.
It is found neere to common high waies, desart places, vntilled grounds, and specially vpon mud walls almost euery where.


 The Time.
It springeth vp in March and Aprill: floureth in May, and bringeth his seede to ripenesse in Iune.


 The Names.
It is commonly called in Latine, Pes Columbinus: in High Dutch, Scarter kraut: in Low Dutch, Duyuen voet: in French, Pied de Pigeon: hereupon it may be called Geranium Columbinum: in English, Doues-foot, and Pigeons-foot: of Dioscorides, Geranium alterum: of some, Pulmonia, and Gruina.


 The Temperature.
Doues foot is cold and somewhat drie, with some astriction or binding, hauing power to soder or ioine together.


 The Vertues.
It seemeth, saith my Author, to be good for greene and bleeding wounds, and asswageth inflammations  or hot swellings.

The herbe and roots dried, beaten into most fine pouder, and giuen halfe a spoonfull fasting, and  the like quantitie to bedwards in red wine, or old claret, for the space of one and twentie daies together, cureth miraculously ruptures or burstings, as my selfe (...) often prooued, whereby I haue gotten crownes and credit: if the ruptures be in aged persons, it shall be needfull to adde thereto the powder of red snailes (those whithout shels) dried in an ouen, in number nine, which fortisi, the herbs in such sort, that it neuer faileth, although the rupture be great and of long continuance: it likewise profiteth much those that are wounded into the body, and the decoction of the herbe made in wine, preuaileth mightily in healing inward wounds, as my selfe haue likewise proued.



CHAP. 357. Of Herbe Robert.


Geranium Robertianum. Herbe Robert.



 The Description.
HErbe Robert bringeth forth slender weake and brittle stalks, somewhat hairie, and of a reddish colour, as are oftentimes the leaues also, which are iagged and deepely cut, like vnto those of Cheruile, of a most loathsome stinking smell. The floures are of a most bright purple colour; which being past, there (...) certaine smal heads, with sharpe beaks or bils like those of birds: the root is small and threddie.


 The Place.
Herbe Robert groweth vpon old walls, as wel those made of bricke and stone, as those of mud or earth: it groweth likewise among rubbish, in the bodies of trees that are cut downe, and in moist and shadowie ditch banks.


 The Time.
It floureth from Aprill till Sommer be almost spent. the herbe is green in winter also, and is hardly hurt with cold.


 The Names.
It is called in high Dutch, Ruprechts kraut: in low Dutch, Robrechts kruit: and thereupon it is named in Latine, Ruberta, and Roberti herba: Ruellius calleth it Robertiana; and we, Robertianum: of Tabernamontanus, Rupertianum: in English, Herbe Robert. Hee that conferreth this Cranes bill with Dioscorides his third Sideritis shall plainely perceiue, that they are both one, and that this is most apparently Sideritis 3. Dioscoridis; for Dioscorides setteth downe three Sideritides, one with the leafe of Horehound; the next with the leafe of Fearne; and the third groweth in walls and Vineyards: the natiue soile of Herbe Robert agree thereunto, and likewise the leaues, being like vnto Cheruile, and not vnlike to those of Corianders, according to Dioscorides description.


 The Temperature.
Herbe Robert is of temperature somewhat cold: and yet both scouring and somewhat binding, participating of mixt faculties.


 The Vertues.
It is good for wounds and vlcers of the dugs and secret parts; it is thought to stanch bloud, which  thing Dioscorides doth attribute to his third Sideritis: the vertue of this, saith he, is applied to heale vp bloudy wounds.




CHAP. 358. Of knobbed Cranes-bill.


Geranium tuberosum. Knobbie Cranes-bill.



 The Description.
THis kinde of Cranes-bill hath many flexible branches, weake and tender, fat, and full of moisture, wheron are placed very great leaues cut into diuers small sections or diuisions, resembling the leaues of the tuberous Anemone, or Wind-floure, but somewhat greater, of an ouerworn greenish colour: among which come forth long foot-stalks, whereon do grow faire floures, of a bright purple colour, and like vnto the smallest brier Rose in forme: which being past, there succeed such heads and beaks as the rest of the Cranes-bill haue: the root is thick, bumped or knobbed, which we call tuberous.


 The Place.
This kinde of Cranes-bill is a stranger in England, notwithstanding I haue it growing in my garden.


 The Time.
The time answereth the rest of the Cranesbills.


 The Names.
Cranes bill is called in Greeke (...) in Latine, Gruinalis, commonly Roftrum Gruis, or Rostrum Ciconiae: of the likenesse of a Cranes-bill, or storkes-bill: of some, Acus moscata: but that name doth rather belong to another of this kind: it is also called Acus Pastoris: in Italian, Rostro di grua: in French, Bec de Grue: in Spanish, Pico di (...), pico del grou: in High Dutch Storckenschuable: in Low Dutch, Oiieuoers beck: in English, Storks-bill, Cranes-bill, Herons-bill, and Pincke-needle: this is also called for distinctions sake, Geranium tuberosum, and Geranium bulbosum: it is likewise Geranium primum Dioscoridis or Dioscorides his first Cranes-bill.


 The Temperature.
The roots of this Cranes-bill haue a little kinde of heat in them.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith that the roots may be eaten, and that a dram weight of them drunk in wine doth  waste and consume away the windinesse of the Matrix.
Also Pliny (...), that the root hereof is singular good for such as after weaknesse craue to  be restored to their former strength.
The same Author affirmeth that the weight of a dram of it drunke in wine three times in a day, is excellent good against the Ptisicke, or consumption of the lungs.



CHAP. 359. Of Musked Cranes-bill.

 The Description.
MVsked Cranes-bil hath many weake and feeble branches trailing vpon the ground, whereon doe grow long leaues, made of many smaller leaues, set vpon a middle rib, snipt or cut about the edges, of a pleasant sweete smell, not vnlike to that of Muske: among which come forth the floures set vppon tender foote-stalkes, of a red colour, compact of fiue small leaues apiece: after which appeare small heads and pointed beakes or bills like the other kindes of Cranes bills: the root is small and threddy.



Geranium moschatum. Musked Cranes bill.




 The Place.
It is planted in Gardens for the sweet smell that the whole plant is possessed with, @ but if you rub the leaues and then smell to them, you shall finde them to haue a sent quite contrary to the former. @


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth all the sommer long.


 The Names.
It is called Myrrhida Plinij Rostrum Ciconiae, Arcus moschata, in shops, and Acus pastoris, and likewise Geranium moschatum: in English, Musked Storkes bill, and Cranes bill, (...), and of the vulgar sort Muschata, and also Pickneedle.


 The Temperature.
This Cranes bill hath not any of his faculties found out or knowne: yet it seemeth to be colde and a little dry, with some astriction or binding.


 The Vertues.
The vertues are referred vnto those of Doues  foot, and are thought of Dioscorides to be good for greene and bloudy wounds, and hot swellings that are newly begun.



CHAP. 360. Of Crow-foot Cranes-bill, or Gratia Dei.

 The Description.
1 CRow foot Cranes bill hath many long and tender branches tending to rednesse, set with great leaues deepely cut or jagged, in forme like those of the fielde Crow foot, whereof it tooke his name; the floures are pretty large, and grow at the top of the stalkes vpon tender footstalkes, of a perfect blew colour: which being past, there succeed such heads, beakes, and bils as the other Cranes bils.
I haue in my garden another sort of this Cranes bill, bringing forth very faire white floures, which maketh it to differ from the precedent; in other respects there is no difference at all.
@ 2 This which is the Geranium 2. Batrachiodes minus of Clusius hath large stalkes and leaues, and those very much diuided or cut in; the stalkes also are diuided into sundry branches, which vpon long footstalkes carry floures like in shape, but lesse than those of the formerly described, and not blew, but of a reddish purple colour, hauing ten threds and a pointall comming forth of the middle of the floure; the beakes or bils which are the seed stand vpright, and hang not downe their points as most others do. The root is large and liues many yeares.
3 The stalkes of this are stiffe, greene, and hairy, diuided at their tops into sundry branches which end in long footstalkes, vpon which grow floures commonly by couples, and they consist of fiue leaues apiece, and these of a darke red colour. The leaues are large, soft, and hairy, diuided into six or seuen parts, and snipt about the edges; the roots are large and lasting. It is kept with vs in gardens, and floures in May. Clusius calls it Geranium 1. (...) flore.
4 This also hath stalkes and leaues much like those of the last described, but somewhat lesse: the florues are as large as those of the last described, but of a more light red, and they are conteined in thicker and shorter cups, and succeeded by shorter seeds or bills, and are commonly of a sweet muske-like smell: The root is very long, red, and lasting. It floures in the middest of May, and is

@ 1 Geranium Batrachioides. Crow-foot Cranes-bill.2 Geranium (...) alterum. Small Crow-foot Cranes-bill.@ 3 Geranium (...) pullo flore. Duskie Cranes-bill.4 Geranium Batrachioides longius radicatum. Long rooted Cranes-bill.
called by Gesner, Geranium montanum: by Dodonaeus, Geranium batrachioides alterum: and by Lobell, Geranium (...) longius radicatum. @


 The Place.
These Cranes bils are wilde of their owne nature, and grow in barren places, and in vallies rather than in mountaines; both of them do grow in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure, flourish, and grow greene most part of the Summer.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke, (...), and Geranium batrachioides, which name it taketh from the likenesse of Crowfoot: of some it is called Ranunculus caeruleus, or blew Crowfoot: Fuchsius calleth it Gottes gnad, that is in Latine, Gratia Dei: in English also Gratia dei, blew Cranes bill, or Cranes bill with the blew floures, or blew Crowfoot Cranes bill.


 The Temperature.
The Temperature is referred to the other Cranes bils.


 The Vertues.
None of these plants are now in vse in Physicke; yet Fuchsius saith, that Cranes bill with the blew floure is an excellent thing to heale wounds.



CHAP. 361. Of Candy Cranes bill.


1 Geranium Creticum. Candy Cranes bill.


2 Geranium Malacoides. Bastard Candy Cranes bill.



 The Description.
1 THe Cranes bill of Candie hath many long tender stalks, soft, and full of iuice: diuiding it selfe into diuers branches, whereon are set great broad leaues, cut, or jagged in diuers

sections or cuts: among which come forth flowers composed of fiue leaues apicce, of a (...) or watchet colour, in the middle part whereof come forth a (...) chiues, and a small pointell of a purplish colour: the head and beake is like to the rest of the Cranes bills, but greater: the (...) dieth when it hath perfected his seed.
2 This Cranes-bill, being a bastard kinde of the former, hath lorg (...) branches growing to the height of two or three cubits, set about with very great leaues, not vnlike to those of Hollihocks, but somewhat lesser, of an ouerworne greene colour: among which rise vp little (...)-stalks, on the ends whereof do grow small floures, lesser than those of the precedent, (...) of a murrey colour: the head and seeds are like also, but much lesser: the (...) doe likewise die at the first approch of Winter.


 The Place.
These are strangers in England, except in the gardens of some Herbarists: they grow in my garden very plentifully.


 The Time.
The time answereth the rest of the Cranes-bils, yet doth that of Candie floure sor the most part with me in May.


 The Names.
There is not more to be said of the names than hath been remembred in their seueral titles: they may be called in English, Cranes-bils, or Storkes-bils.


 The Temperature.
Their temperature answereth that of Doues-foot.


 The Vertues.
Their faculties in working are equall to those of Doues-foot, and vsed for the same purposes, (and rightly) specially being vsed in wound drinks, for the which it doth far excel any of the Cranes bils, and is equall with any other herbe whatsoeuer for the same purpose.



CHAP. 362. Of diuers wilde Cranes-bills.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts or kindes of Cranes-bils which haue not been remembred of the antient, nor much spoken of by the later writers, all which I meane to comprehend vnder this chapter, making as it were of them a Chapter of wilde Cranes-bils, although some of them haue place in our London gardens, and that worthily, especially for the beautie of the floures: their names shall be expressed in their seueral titles, their natures and faculties are referred to the other Cranes-bils, or if you please to a further consideration.


 The Description.
1 SPotted Cranes-bill, or Storkes-bill, the which Lobel describeth in the title thus, Geranium Fuscum flore liuido purpurante, and medio Candicante, whose leaues are like vnto Crowfoot (beeing a kinde doubtlesse of Cranes bill, called Gratia Dei) of an ouerworne dustie colour, and of a strong sauour, yet not altogether vnpleasant: the stalkes are drie and brittle, at the tops whereof doe grow pleasant floures of a darke purple colour, the middle part of them tending to whitenesse: from the stile or pointel thereof, commeth forth a tuft of small purple hairy threds. The root is thick and very brittle, lifting it selfe forth of the ground, insomuch that many of the said roots lie aboue the ground naked without earth, euen as the roots of Floure-de-luces doe.
2 Of these wilde ones I haue another sort in my garden, which Clusius in his Pannonicke obseruations hath called Geranium Haematoides, or sanguine Cranes bill: and Lobel, Geranium Gruinum, or Gruinale: it hath many flexible branches creeping vpon the ground: the leaues are much like vnto Doues foot in forme, but cut euen to the middle rib: the floures are like those of the small wilde mallow, and of the same bignesse, of a perfect bright red colour, which if they be suffered to

1 Geranium maculatum siue fuscum. Spotted Cranes bill.2 Geranium sanguin arium. Bloudy Cranes bill.3 Geranium Cicutae folio inodorum. Vnsauorie fielde Cranes-bill.5 Geranium Violaceum. Violet Storkes-bill.
grow and stand vntill the next day, will be a murry colour; and if they stand vnto the third day, they will turne into a deep purple tending to blewnesse, their changing is such, that you shall finde at one time vpon one branch floures like in forme, but of diuers colours. The root is thicke, and of a wooddie substance.
3 This wilde kinde of musked Cranes bill, being altogether without sauour or smell, is called Myrrhida inodorum, or Geranium arvense inodorum, which hath many leaues spred flat vpon the ground, euery leafe made of diuers smaller leases, and those cut or iagged about the edges, of no smel at all: amongst which rise vp slender branches, whereon doe grow small floures of a light purple colour: the root is long and fibrous.
4 This is also one of the wilde kindes of Cranes-bills, agreeing with the last described in each respect, except the floures, for as the other hath purple floures, so this plant bringeth forth white floures, other difference there is none at all.
5 The Cranes-bill with violet coloured floures, hath a thicke wooddie root, with some, few strings annexed thereto: from which rise immediatly forth of the ground diuers stiffe stalks, which diuide themselues into other small branches, whereupon are set confusedly broad leaues, made of three leaues apiece, and those iagged or cut about the edges: the floures grow at the top of the branches of a perfect Violet colour, whereof it tooke his name: after which come such beakes or bils as the other of his kinde.
@ The figure that was put vnto this Description is the same with Geranium Robertianum, and therefore I thought it not much amisse to put it here againe. @
6 I haue likewise another sort that was sent me from Robinus of Paris, whose figure was neuer set forth, neither described of any: it bringeth from a thicke tough root, with many branches of a brownish colour: wherupon do grow leaues not vnlike to those of Gratia Dei, but not so deeply cut, somewhat cornered, and of a shining greene colour: the floures grow at the top of the tender branches, composed of sixe small leaues, of a bright scarlet colour.


 The Place.
The third and fourth of these Cranes bills growe of themselues about old VValls, and about the borders of fields, VVoods and copses; and most of the rest wee haue growing in our gardens.


 The Time.
Their time of flouring and seeding answereth the rest of the Cranes bills.


 The Names.
Their seuerall titles shall serue for their names, referring what might haue been said more to a further consideration.


 The Nature and Vertues.
There hath not as yet any thing beene found either of their temperature or (...), but may  be referred vnto the other of their kinde.



@ CHAP. 363. Of certaine other Cranes-bills.

 The Description.
@ 1 THis which Clusius receiued from Doctour Thomas Pennie of London, and sets forth by the same title as you finde it here exprest, hath a root consisting offundry long and small bulbes, and which is fibrous towards the top: the stalke is a cubit high, ioynted, and red neere vnto the roote, and about the ioints: out of each of these ioyntes come two leaues which are fastened vnto somewhat long foot-stalkes, and diuided into fiue parts, which also are snipt about theedges: out of each of which ioints by the setting on the

@ 1 Geranium bulbosum Pennaei. Pennies bulbous Cranes bill.
@ 2 Geranium nodosum, Plateau, Knotty Cranes bill.
@ 3 Geranium argenteum Alpinum. Siluer leaued Mountaine Cranes bill.
foot-stalkes come forth fiue little sharpe pointed leaues: the floures grow by couples vpon the tops of the stalkes, and are of a reddish purple colour. It growes wilde in Denmark; whence Dr. Turner brought it, and bestowed it vpon Dr. Penny before mentioned.
2 This hath stalks some foot high, iointed, and of a purplish colour: vpon which grow leaues diuided into three parts; but those below are cut into fiue, and both the one and the other are snipt about the edges: the floures are composed of fiue reddish purple leaues of a pretty largenesse, with a reddish pointall in the middle; and falling, the seed follows, as in other plants of this kind: the root is knotty, and ioynted, with some fibres: it floures in May, and so continueth a great part of the Sommer after. Clusius calls this Geranium 5. nodosum, Plateau. This somtimes is found to carry tuberous excrescences vpon the stalkes, toward the later end of Sommer; whence Plateau distinguished it from the other, but afterwards found it to be the same: and Clusius also figures and describeth this later variet ie by the name of Geranium 6. tuberiferum Plateau.
3 The root of this is some two handfuls

long, blacke without, and white within, and towards the top diuided into sundry parts; whence put forth leaues couered ouer with a fine siluer downe; and they are diuided into fiue parts, each of which againe is diuided into three others, and they are fastned to long slender and round footstalkes: the floures grow vpon foot-stalkes shorter than those of the leaues; the floures in colour and shape are like those of the Veruaine Mallow, but much lesse; and after it is vaded there followes a short bill, as in the other plants of this kinde. It floures in (...), and growes vpon the Alps, where Pona found it, and first set it forth by the name of Geranium Alpinum longius radicatum.
4 The stalkes of this pretty Cranes bill are some foot or better high, whereon grow leaues parted into fiue or six parts like those of the Geranium (...), but of a lighter greene colour: the floures are large, composed of fiue thin and soone fading leaues of a whitish colour, all ouer intermixt with fine veines of a reddish colour, which adde a great deale of beauty to the floure: for these veines are very small, and curiously dispersed ouer the leaues of the floure. It floures in Iune, and is preserued in diuers of our gardens; some cal it Geran. Romanum striatum: in the Hortus (...) it is set forth by the name of Geranium Anglicum variegatum. Baubine calls it Geranium batrachiodes flore variegato. We may call it Variegated or striped Cranes bill.
5 There is of late brought into this kingdome, and to our knowledge, by the industry of Mr. Iohn Tradescant, another more rare and no lesse beautifull than any of the former; and he had it by the name of Geranium Indicum (...) odoratum: this hath not as yet beene written of by any that I know; therefore I will giue you the description thereof, but cannot as yet giue you the figure, because I omitted the taking thereof the last yeare, and it is not as yet come to his perfection. The leaues are larger, being almost a foot long, composed of sundry little leaues of an vnequal bignes, set vpon a thicke and stiffe middle rib; and these leaues are much diuided and cut in, so that the whole leafe somewhat resembles that of Tanacetum inodorum: and they are thicke, greene, and somewhat hairy: the stalke is thicke, and some cubit high; at the top of each branch, vpon foot-stalkes some inch long grow some (...) or twelue floures, and each of these floures consisteth of (...) round pointed leaues of a yellowish colour, with a large (...) purple spot in the middle of each leafe, as if it were painted, which giues the floure a great deale of beauty, and it also hath a good smell. I did see it in floure about the end of Iuly, 1632. being the first time that it floured with the owner thereof. We may fitly call it Sweet Indian Storks bill, or painted Storks bill: and in Latine, Geranium Indicum odoratum flore maculato. @



CHAP. 364. Of Sanicle.


Sanicula, siue Diapensia. Sanicle.



 The Description.
SAnicle hath leaues of a blackish greene colour, smooth and shining, somewhat round, diuided into fiue parts like those of the Vine, or rather those of the maple: among which rise vp slender stalkes of a browne colour, on the tops whereof stand white mossie floures: in their places come vp round seed, rough, cleauing to mens garments as they passe by, in manner of little burs: the root is blacke, and full of threddie strings.


 The Place.
It groweth in shadowie woods and copses almost euerie where: it ioyeth in a fat and fruitful moist soile.


 The Time.
It floureth in May and Iune: the seed is ripe in August: the leaues of the herbe are greene all the yeare, and are not hurt with the cold of Winter.


 The Names.
It is commonly called Sanicula; of diuers, Diapensia: in high and low Dutch, Sanikel: in French, Sanicle: in English, Sanickle, or Sanikel: it is so called, a sanandis vulneribus, or of healing of wounds, as Ruellius saith: there be also

other Sanicles, so named of most Herbarists, as that which is described by the name of (...), or Coral-wort, and likewise Auricula vrsi, or Beares care, which is a kind of Cowslip; and likewise another set forth by the name of Saniculaguttata, whereof we haue entreated among the kindes of Beares eares.


 The Temperature.
Sanicle as it is in taste bitter, with a certaine binding qualitie; so besides that it clenseth, and by the binding faculty strengthneth, it is hot and dry, and that in the second degree, and after some Authors, hot in the third degree, and astringent.


 The Vertues.
The iuyce being inwardly taken is good to heale wounds.
The decoction of it also made in wine or water is giuen against spitting of bloud, and the bloudie  flix: also foule and filthy vlcers be cured by being bathed therewith. The herbe boyled in water, and applied in manner of a pultesse, doth dissolue and waste away cold swellings: it is vsed in potions which are called Vulnerarie potions, or wound drinkes, which maketh whole and sound all inward wounds and outward hurts: it also helpeth the vlcerations of the kidnies, ruptures, or burstings.



CHAP. 365. Of Ladies Mantle, or great Sanicle.


Alchimilla. Lyons foot, or Ladies mantle.



 The Description.
LAdies mantle hath many round leaues, with fiue or six corners finely indented about the edges, which before they be opened are plaited and folded (...), not vnlike to the leaues of Mallowes, but whiter, and more curled: among which rise vp tender stalks set with the like leaues but much lesser: on the tops whereof grow small mossie floures clustering thicke together, of a yellowish greene colour. The seed is small and yellow, inclosed in greene husks. The root is thicke, and full of threddy strings.


 The Place.
It groweth of it selfe wilde in diuers places, as in the towne pastures of Andouer, and in many other places in Barkshire and Hampshire, in their pastures and copses, or low woods, and also vpon the banke of a mote that incloseth a house in Bushey called Bourn hall, fourteen miles from London, and in the high-way from thence to Watford, a small mile distant from it.


 The Time.
It floureth in May and Iune: it flourisheth in Winter as well as in Sommer.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Alchimilla: and of most, Stellaria, Pes Leonis, Pata Leonis, and Sanicula maior: in high-Dutch, Synnauw, and (...) (...) mantel: in French, Pied de Lion: in English, Ladies mantle, great Sanicle, Lyons foot, Lyons paw; and of some, Padelyon.


 The Temperature.
Ladies (...) is like in temperature to little Sanicle, yet is it more drying and more binding.


 The Vertues.
It is applied to wounds after the same manner that the (...) Sanicle is, being of like efficacie: it stoppeth bleeding, and also the ouermuch flowing of the natural sicknesse: it keeps downe maidens paps or dugs, (...) when they be too great or flaggy it maketh them lesser or harder.




CHAP. 366. Of Neese-wort Sanicle.


(...) Alpina. Neesewort Sanicle.



 The Description.
WHen I made mention of Helleborus albus, I did also set downe my censure concerning Elleborine, or Epipactis: but this Elleborine of the Alpes I put in this place, because it approcheth neerer vnto Sanicle and Ranunculus, as participating of both: it groweth in the mountaines and highest parts of the Alpish hills, and is a stranger as yet in our English gardens. The root is compact of many small twisted strings like black Hellebor: from thence arise small tender stalkes, smooth, and easie to bend; in whose tops grow leaues with fiue diuisions, somewhat nickt about the edges like vnto Sanicle: the sloures consist of six leaues somewhat shining, in taste sharp, yet not vnpleasant. This is the plant which (...) found in the forrest of Esens, not sarre from Iupiters mount, and sets forth by the name of Alpina Elleborine Saniculae and Ellebori nigri facie.


 The Nature and Vertues.
I haue not as yet sound any thing of his nature or vertues.



CHAP. 367. Of Crow-feet.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts or kinds of these pernitious herbes comprehended vnder the name of Ranunculus, or Crowfoot, whereof most are very dangerous to be taken into the body, and therefore they require a very exquisite moderation, with a most exact and due manner of tempering, not any of them are to be taken alone by themselues, because they are of most violent force, and therefore haue the greater need of correction.
The knowledge of these plants is as necessarie to the Physitian as of other herbes, to the end they may shun the same, as Scribonius Largus saith, and not take them ignorantly: or also, if necessitie at any time require, that they may vse them, and that with some deliberation and speciall choice, and with their proper correctiues. For these dangerous Simples are likewise many times of themselues beneficiall, and oftentimes profitable: for some of them are not so dangerous, but that they may in some sort, and oftentimes in fit and due season profit and do good, if temperature and moderation be vsed: of which there be foure kindes, as Dioscorides writeth; one with broad leaues, another that is downy, the third very small, and the fourth with a white floure: the later herbarists haue obserued also many moe: all these may be brought into two principall kindes, so that one be a garden or (...) one, and the other wilde; and of these some are common, and others rare, or forreigne. Moreouer, there is a difference both in the roots and in the leaues; for one hath a bumped or knobby root, another a long leafe as Speare-wort: and first of the wilde or field Crowseet, (...) the Reader vnto the end of the stocke and kindred of the same, for the temperature and vertues.



1 Ranunculus pratensis, etiamque hortensis. Common Crow-foot.


2 Ranunculus surrectis cauliculis. Right Crow-foot.


3 Ranunculus aruorum. Crow foot of the fallowed field.


4 Ranunculus Alpinus albus. White mountaine Crow-foot.





 The Description.
1 THe common Crow-foot hath leaues diuided into many parts, commonly three, sometimes fiue, cut here and there in the edges, of a deepe greene colour, in which stand diuers white spots: the stalkes be round, something hairie, some of them bow downe toward the ground, and put forth many little roots, whereby it taketh hold of the ground as it traileth along: some of them stand vpright, a foot high or higher; on the tops whereof grow small floures with fiue leaues apiece, of a yellow glittering colour like gold: in the middle part of these floures stand certaine small threds of like colour: which being past, the seeds follow, made vp in a rough ball: the roots are white and threddy.
2 The second kinde of Crow-foot is like vnto the precedent, sauing that his leaues are fatter, thicker, and greener, and his small twiggy stalkes stand vpright, otherwise it is like: of which kind it chanced, that walking in the field next to the Theatre by London, in the company of a worshipfull merchant named Mr. Nicolas Lete, I found one of this kinde there with double floures, which before that time I had not seene.


 The Place.
They grow of themselues in pastures and medowes almost euery where.


 The Time.
They floure in May and many moneths after.


 The Names.
Crow-foot is called of Lobel, Ranunculus pratensis: of Dodonaeus, Ranunculus hortensis, but vnproperly: of Pliny, Polyanthemum, which he saith diuers name Batrachion: in high-Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in English, King Kob, Gold cups, Gold knobs, Crowfoot, and Butter-floures.


 The Description.
3 The third kinde of Crow-foot, called in Latine Ranunculus aruorum, because it growes commonly in fallow fields where corne hath beene lately sowne, and may be called Corne Crow-foot, hath for the most part an vpright stalke of a foot high, which diuides it selfe into other branches: whereon do grow fat thicke leaues very much cut or iagged, resembling the leaues of Sampire, but nothing so greene, but rather of an ouerworne colour. The floures grow at the top of the branches, compact of fiue small leaues of a faint yellow colour: after which come in place clusters of rough and sharpe pointed seeds. The root is small and threddy.
4 The fourth Crow-foot, which is called Ranunculus Alpinus, because those that haue first written thereof haue not found it elsewhere but vpon the Alpish mountains (notwithstanding it groweth in England plentifully wilde, especially in a wood called Hampsted Wood, and is planted in gardens) hath diuers great fat branches two cub its high, set with large leaues like the common Crow-foot, but greater, of a deepe greene colour, much like to those of the yellow Aconite, called Aconitum luteum Ponticum. The floures consist of fiue white leaues, with small yellow chiues in the middle, smelling like the floures of May or Haw-thorne, but more pleasant. The roots are greater than any of the stocke of Crow-feet.


 The Place and Time.
Their place of growing is touched in their description: their time of flouring and seeding answereth the other of their kindes.


 The Names.
The white Crow-foot of the Alps and French mountaines is the fourth of Dioscorides his description; for he describeth his fourth to haue a white floure: more hath not bin said touching the names, yet Tabern. calls it Batrachium album: in English, white Crow-foot.


 The Description.
5 Among the wilde Crow-feet there is one that is syrnamed Illyricus, which brings forth slender stalks, round, and of a meane length: whereupon doe grow long narrow leaues cut into many long gashes, somthing white, and couered with a certaine downinesse: the floures be of a pale yellow colour: the root consisteth of many small bumpes as it were graines of corne, or little long bulbes growing close together like those of Pilewort. It is reported, that it was first brought out of Illyria into Italy, and from thence into the Low-Countries: notwithstanding we haue it growing very common in England. @ But only in gardens that I haue seene. @
6 The sixth kinde of Crow-foot, called Ranunculus bulbosus, or Onion rooted Crow-foot, and round rooted Crow-foot, hath a round knobby or onion-fashioned root, like vnto a small Turnep, and of the bignesse of a great Oliue: from the which rises vp many leaues spred vpon the ground, like those of the field Crow-foot, but smaller, and of an ouerworne greene colour: amongst which rise vp slender stalkes of the height of a foot: whereupon do grow floures of a feint yellow colour. @ This growes wilde in most places, and floures at the beginning of May. @



 The Place.
It is also reported to be found not only in Illyria and Sclauonia, but also in the Island Sardinia, standing in the Midland, or Mediteranian sea.


 The Names.
This Illyrian Crow foot is named in Greeke (...), that is, Apium syluestre, or wilde Smallage: also Herba Sardoa: it may be, saith my Author, that kinde of Crowfoot called (...) risus, and (...); and this is thought to be that Golotophillis, of which Pliny maketh mention in his 24. booke, 17. chap. which being drunke, saith he, with wine and myrrh, causeth a man to see diuers (...) sights, and not to cease laughing till he hath drunke Pine apple kernells with Pepper in (...) of the Date tree, (I thinke he would haue said vntill he be dead) because the nature of laughing Crowfoot is thought to kill laughing, but without doubt the thing is cleane contrary; for it (...) such convulsions, cramps and wringings of the mouth and jawes, that it hath seemed to some that the partyes haue dyed laughing, whereas in truth they haue died in great torment.


5 (...) Illyricus. Crowfoot of Illyria.


6 (...) (...). Roundrooted Crowfoot.




 The Description.
7 The seuenth kinde of Crowfoot, called Auricomus of the golden lockes wherewith the (...) is thrummed, hath for his root a great bush of (...) hairy strings; from which shoote sorth small jagged leaues, not much vnlike to Sanicle, but diuided onely into three parts, yet sometimes into fiue; among which rise vp branched stalkes of a foot high, whereon are placed the like leaues but smaller, set about the top of the stalkes, whereon do grow yellow floures, sweet smelling, of which it hath been called Ranunculus (...), Tragi, or Tragus his sweet Crowsoot. @ It growes in medowes and about the sides of woods, and floures in Aprill. @
@ 8 Frogge Crowfoot, called of Pena, Aconitum Batrachioides: of Dodonaeus, Batrachion Apulei, is that formerly described in the fourth place, whereto this is much alike, but that the stalkes and leaues are larger, as also the floures, which are white: the root is tough and threddy.
9 The ninth Crowfoote hath many grassie leaues, of a deepe greene tending to blewnesse, somewhat long, narrow and smooth, very like vnto those of the small Bistort, or Snakeweed:

7 Ranunculus auricomus. Golden-haired Crow-foot.@ 8 Ranunculus Aconiti folio. Frog Crow-foot.9 Ranunculus (...) (...). Grassie Crow-(...).10 Ranunculus Autumnalis (...). Winter Crow-foot.
among which rise vp slender stalkes, bearing at the top small yellow floures like the other Crowfeet: the root is small and threddy. @ There is a variety of this hauing double floures; and I haue giuen you the figure thereof in stead of the single that was formerly in this place. @
10 The Autumne or Winter Crow-foot hath diuers broad leaues spred (...) the ground, snipt about the edges, of a bright shining greene colour on the vpper side, and hoary vnderneath, full of ribs or sinewes as are those of Plantaine, of an vnpleasant taste at the first, afterward nipping the tongue: among which leaues rise vp sundry tender foot-stalkes, on the tops whereof stand yellow floures consisting of six small leaues apiece: after which succeed little knaps of seed like to a dry or withered straw-berry. The root is compact of a number of limber roots, rudely thrust together in manner of the Asphodill.
11 The Portugall Crow-foot hath many thicke clogged roots fastned vnto one head, very like those of the yellow Asphodill: from which rise vp three leaues, seldome more, broad, thicke, and pusfed vp in diuers places, as if it were a thing that were blistered, by meanes whereof it is very vneuen. From the middle of which leaues riseth vp a naked stalke, thicke, fat, very tender, but yet fragile, or easie to breake: on the end whereof standeth a faire single yellow floure, hauing in the middle a naked rundle of a gold yellow tending to a (...) colour.


11 Ranunculus Lusitanicus Clusij. Portugall Crow-foot.


12 Ranunculus globosus. Locker Gowlons, or Globe Crow foot.


12 The Globe Crow-foot hath very many leaues deepely cut and iagged, of a bright greene colour like those of the field Crow-foot: among which riseth vp a stalke, diuided toward the top into other branches, furnished with the like leaues of those next the ground, but smaller: on the tops of which branches grow very faire yellow floures, consisting of a few leaues folded or rolled vp together like a round ball or globe: whereupon it was called Ranunculus globosus, or the Globe Crow-foot, or Globe floure: which being past, there succeed round knaps, wherein is blackish seed. The root is small and threddy.
@ 13 This hath large leaues like those of the last described, but rough and hairy: the stalk is some foot high: the floures are pretty large, composed of (...) white sharpish pointed leaues. It floures in Iuly, and growes in the Alps: it is the Ranunculi montani 2. species altera of Clusius.
14 This other hath leaues not vnlike those of the precedent, and such stalkes also; but the floures consist of 5 round leaues, purplish beneath; the edges of the vpper side are of a whitish purple, and the residue wholly white, with many yellow threds in the middle: it grows in the mountain

@ 13 Ranunculus hirsutus Alpinus flo. albo. Rough white floured mountaine Crow-foot.
@ 14 Ranunculus montanus hirsutus purpureus. Rough purple floured mountain Crowfoot.
Iura, against the city of Geneua, whereas it floures in Iune, and ripens the seed in August. Clusius had the figure and description hereof from Dr. Penny, and he calls it Ranunculus montanus 3. @


 The Place.
The twelfth kind of Crowfoot groweth in most places of York-shire and Lancashire, and other bordering shires of the North countrey, almost in euery medow, but not found wilde in these Southerly or Westerly parts of England that I could euer vnderstand of.


 The Time.
It floureth in May and Iune: the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
The Globe floure is called generally Ranunculus globosus: of some, Flos Trollius, and (...) Alpinus: in English, Globe Crow-foot, Troll floures, and Lockron gowlons.



CHAP. 368. Of Double yellow and white Batchelors Buttons.

 The Description.
1 THe great double Crow-foot or Batchelors button hath many iagged leaues of a deepe greene colour: among which rise vp stalkes, whereon do grow faire yellow floures exceeding double, of a shining yellow colour, oftentimes thrusting forth of the middest of the said floures one other smaller floure: the root is round, or fashioned like a Turnep; the form whereof hath caused it to be called of some S. Anthonies Turnep, or Rape Crow-foot. The (...) is wrapped in a cluster of rough knobs, as are most of the Crow-feet.
2 The double yellow Crow-foot hath leaues of a bright greene colour, with many weake branches trailing vpon the ground; whereon do grow very double yellow floures like vnto the precedent, but altogether lesser. The whole plant is likewise without any manifest difference, sauing that these floures do neuer bring forth any smaller floure out of the middle of the greater, as the other doth, and also hath no Turnep or knobby root at all, wherein consists the greatest difference.



The figure that formerly was in the first (...) of this chapter was the double one mentioned in the second description of the foregoing chapter, (...) you may finde a double floure exprest by the side of the figure.Ranunculus maximus Anglicus. Double Crow-foot, or Batchelors buttons.


2 Ranunculus dulcis multiplex. Double wilde Crow-foot.


3 Ranunculus albus multiflorus. Double white Crow-foot.


3 The (...) double Crow-foot hath many great leaues deeply cut with great gashes, and those snipt about the edges. The stalks diuide themselues into diuers brittle branches, on the tops whereof do grow very double floures as white as snow, and of the bignesse of our yellow Batchelors button. The root is tough, limber, and disperseth it selfe farre abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.


 The Place.
The first and third are planted in gardens for the beauty of the floures, and likewise the second, which hath of late beene brought out of Lancashire vnto our London gardens, by a curious gentleman in the searching forth of Simples, Mr. Thomas Hesketh, who found it growing wilde in the towne fields of a smal village called Hesketh, not farre from (...) in Lancashire.


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of May to the end of Iune.


 The Names.
(...) hath made no mention hereof; but (...) hath separated the first of these from the others, intreating of it apart, and naming it by a peculiar name Batrachion; whereupon it is also called (...) Batrachion, or Apuleius Crow-foot.
It is commonly called (...) D. (...), or Saint Anthonies Rape: it may be called in English, Rape Crow-foot: it is called generally about London, Batchelors buttons, and double Crow-foot: in

Dutch, S. Anthony Rapkin. @ These names and faculties properly belong to the (...) bulbosus, described in the sixt place of the last chapter; and also to the first double one (...) described; for they vary little but in colour, and the singlenesse and doublenesse of their floures. @
The third is called of Lobel, Ranunculus niueus polyanthos: of Tabern. Ranunculus albus (...): in English, Double white Crow-foot, or Batchelors buttons.


 The Temperature.
These plants do bite as the other Crow-feet do.


 The Vertues.
The chiefest vertue is in the root, which being stamped with salt is good for those that haue a  plague sore, if it be presently in the beginning tied to the thigh, in the middle between the groin or flanke and the knee: by meanes whereof the poyson and malignitie of the disease is drawn from the inward parts, by the emunctorie or clensing place of the flanke, into those outward parts of lesse account: for it exulcerateth and presently raiseth a blister, to what part of the body soeuer it is applied. And if it chance that the sore-hapneth vnder the arme, then it is requisite to apply it to the arme a little aboue the elbow. My opinion is, that any of the Crow-feet will do the same: my reason is, because they all and euery of them do blister and cause paine, wheresoeuer they be applied, and paine doth draw vnto it selfe more paine; for the nature of paine is to resort vnto the weakest place, and where it may finde paine; and likewise the poyson and venomous qualitie of that disease is to resort vnto that painefull place.
Apuleius saith further, That if it be hanged in a linnen cloath about the necke of him that is lunaticke, in the waine of the moone, when the signe shall be in the first degree of I (...) or Scorpio, that then he shall forthwith be cured. Moreouer, the herbe Batrachion stamped with vineger, root and all, is vsed for them that haue blacke skars or such like marks on their skins, it eats them out, and leaues a colour like that of the body.



CHAP. 369. Of Turkie or Asian Crow-feet.


1 Ranunculus sanguineus multiplex. The double red Crow-foot.


@ 2 Ranunculus Asiaticus flo. pleno miniato. The double Asian skarlet Crow-foot.





@ 3 (...) Asiaticus flore pleno prolifero. The double buttoned scarlet Asian Crow-foot.


4 Ranunculus Tripolitanus. Crow-foot of Tripolie.


@ 5 Ranunculus (...) radice ramosus. Branched red Asian Crow-foot.


@ 6 Ranunculus Asiaticus (...) radice flo. albo. White floured Asian Crow-foot.





@ 7 Ranunculus Asiaticus grumosa radice flore flavo (...). Asian Crow-foot with yellow striped floures.



 The Description.
1 THe double red Crow-foot hath a few leaues rising immediatly forth of the ground, cut in the edges with deepe gashes, somewhat hollow, and of a bright shining green colour. The stalk riseth vp to the height of a foot, smooth and very brittle, diuiding it selfe into other branches, sometimes two, seldome three: whereon do grow leaues confusedly, set without order: the floures grow at the tops of the stalks, very double, and of great beauty, of a perfect scarlet colour. tending to rednesse. The root is compact of many long tough roots, like those of the yellow Asphodill.
@ 2 Of this kinde there is also another, or other the same better exprest; for Clusius the author of these neuer see the former, but makes it onely to differ, in that the floures are of a sanguine colour, and those of this of a kinde of scarlet, or red lead colour.
3 This differs nothing from the former, but that it sends vp another floure somewhat lesser, out of the middle of the first floure, which happens by the strength of the root, and goodnesse of the soile where it is planted. @
4 The Crow-foot of Tripolis or the single red Ranunculus hath leaues at the first comming vp like vnto those of Groundswell: among which riseth vp a stalke of the height of halfe a cubit, somwhat hairy, wheron grow broad leaues deeply cut, euen to the middle rib, like those of the common Crow-foot, but greener: the floure groweth at the top of the stalke, consisting of fiue leaues, on the outside of a darke ouerworne red colour, on the inside of a red lead colour, (...) and shining, in shape like the wilde corne Poppie: the knop or stile in the middle which containeth the seede is garnished or bedeckt with very many small purple thrummes tending to blacknesse: the root is as it were a roundell of little bulbes or graines like those of the small Celandine or Pilewoort.
@ 5 There be diuers other Asian Crow-feet which Clusius hath set forth, and which (...) (...) the most part in the gardens of our prime Florists, and they differ little in their roots, stalkes, or leaues, but chiefely in the floures; wherefore I will onely briefely note their differences, not thinking it pertinent to stand vpon whole descriptions, vnlesse they were more necessary: this fist differs from the fourth in that the stalkes are diuided into sundry branches, which beare like, but lesse floures than those which stand vpon the main stalke: the colour of these differs not from that of the last described.
6 This is like the last described, but the floures are of a pure white colour, and sometimes haue a few streaks of red about their edges.
7 This in stalkes and manner of growing is like the precedent: the stalke seldome parting it selfe into branches; but on the top thereof it carries a faire floure consisting commonly of round topped leaues of a greenish yellow colour, with diuers red veines here and there dispersed and running alongst the leaues, with some purple thrums, and a head standing vp in the middle as in the former. @


 The Place.
The first groweth naturally in and about Constantinople, and in Asia on the further side of Bosphorus, from whence there hath been brought plants at diuers times, and by diuers persons, but they haue perished by reason of their long iourney, and want of skill of those bringers, that haue suffered them to lie in a box or such like so long, that when we haue receiued them they haue been as dry as ginger; not with standing Clusius saith he receiued a plant fresh and greene, the which a domestical theefe stole forth of his garden. My Lord and Master the right Honorable the Lord Treasurer

had diuers plants sent him from thence which were drie before they came, as aforesaid. The other groweth in Aleppo and Tripolis in Syria naturally, from whence we haue receiued plants for our gardens, where they flourish as in their owne countrey.


 The Time.
They (...) forth their pleasant floures in May and Iune, the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
The first is called Ranunculus Constantinopolitanus: Of Lobel, Ranunculus sanguincus multiplex, Ranunculus Bizantinus, sive Asiaticus: in the Turkish tongue, Torobolos, Catamer (...): in English, the double red Ranunculus, or Crow-foot.
The fourth is called Ranunculus Tripolitanus, of the place from whence it was first brought into these parts: of the Turks, Tarobolos Catamer, without that addition (...): which is a proper word to all floures that are double.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their temperature and vertues are referred to the other Crow-feet, whereof they are thought to be kindes.



CHAP. 370. Of Speare-woort, or Bane-woort.

 The Description.
1 SPeare-woort hath an hollow stalke full of knees or ioynts, whereon do grow long leaues, a little hairy, not vnlike those of the willow, of a shining green colour: the floures are very large, and grow at the tops of the stalks, consisting of fiue leaues of a faire yellow colour, verie like to the field gold cup, or wilde Crow-foot: after which come round knops or seed vessels, wherein is the seed: the root is contract of diuers bulbes or long clogs, mixed with an infinite number of hairy threds.


1 Ranunculus flammeus maior. Great Speare-woort.


2 Ranunculus flammeus minor. The lesser Speare-woort.



2 The common Spearewoort being that which we haue called the lesser, hath leaues, floures, and stalks like the precedent, but altogether lesser: the roote consisteth of an infinite number of threddie strings.


3 Ranunculus flammeus serratus. Iagged Speare-woort.


4 Ranunculus palustris rotundifolius. Marish Crow-foot, or Speare-worts.


3 Iagged Speare-woort hath a thicke fat hollow stalke, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches, whereon are set somtimes by couples two long leaues, sharp pointed, and cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The floures grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow colour, in form like those of the field Crowfoot: the root consisteth of a number of hairy strings.
4 Marsh Crow-foot, or Speare-woort (whereof it is a kinde, taken of the best approued authors to be the true Apium risus, though diuers thinke that Pulsatilla is the same: of some it is called Apium (...)) riseth forth of the mud or waterish mire from a threddie root, to the height of a cubit, sometimes higher. The stalke diuideth it selfe into diuers branches, whereupon doe grow leaues deeply cut round about like those of Doues-foot, and not vnlike to the cut Mallow, but somewhat greater, and of a most bright shining green colour: the floures grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow colour, like vnto the other water Crow-feet.


 The Place.
They grow in moist and dankish places, in brinkes or water courses, and such like places almost euery where.


 The Time.
They floure in May when other Crow-feet do.


 The Names.
Speare-woort is called of the later Herbarists Flammula, and Ranunculus Flammeus; of Cordus, Ranunculus (...), or broad leaued Crow-foot: of others, Ranunculus longifolius, or long leafed Crow foot: in Low Dutch, (...): in English, Speare-Crowfoot, Speare-woort, and Banewoort, because it is dangerous and deadly for sheep; and that if they feed of the same it inflameth their liuers, fretteth and blistereth their guts and intrails.


 The Temperature of all the Crowfeet.
Speare-woort is like to the other Crow-feet in facultie, it is hot in the mouth or biting, it exulcerateth

and raiseth blisters, and being taken inwardly it killeth remedilesse. Generally all the Crow-feet, as Galen saith, are of a very sharpe or biting qualitie, insomuch as they raise blisters with paine: and they are hot and drie in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues of all the Crowfeet.
The leaues or roots of Crowfeet stamped and applied vnto any part of the body, causeth the  skin to swell and blister, and raiseth vp wheales, bladders, causeth scars, crusts, and ouglie vlcers: it is laid vpon cragged warts, corrupt nailes, and such like excrescences, to cause them to fall away.
The leaues stamped and applied vnto any pestilentiall or plague sore, or carbuncle, staieth the  spreading nature of the same, and causeth the venomous or pestilentiall matter tobreath forth, by opening the parts and passages in the skin.
It preuaileth much to draw a plague sore from the inward parts, being of danger, vnto other remote  places further from the heart, and other of the spirituall parts, as hath beene declared in the description.
Many do vse to tie a little of the herbe stamped with salt vnto any of the fingers, against the pain  of the teeth; which medicine seldome-faileth; for it causeth greater paine in the finger than was in the tooth, by the meanes whereof, the greater paine taketh away the lesser.
Cunning beggers do vse to stampe the leaues, and lay it vnto their legs and arms, which causeth  such (...) vlcers as we daily see (among such wicked vagabonds) to moue the people the more to pittie.
The kinde of Crowfoot of Illyria, being taken to be Apium risus of some, yet others thinke Aconitum Batrachioides to be it. This plant spoileth the sences and vnderstanding, and draweth together the sinewes and muscles of the face in such strange manner, that those who beholding such as died by the taking hereof, haue supposed that they died laughing; so forceably hath it drawne and contracted the nerues and sinewes, that their faces haue been drawne awry, as though they laughed, whereas contrariwise they haue died with great torment.



@ CHAP. 371. Of diuers other Crowfeet.


@ 1 Ranunculus Creticus latifolius. Broad leaued Candy Crowfoot.


@ 2 Ranunculus folio Plantaginis. Plantaine leaued Crowfoot.




 The Description.
@ 1 THe roots of this are somwhat like those of the Asian Ranunculus: the leaues are verie large and roundish, of a light green colour, cut about the edges, and here and there deeply diuided: the stalke is thicke, round, and stiffe, diuided into two or three branches; at the setting on of which grow longish leaues a little nickt about the end: the floures are of an indifferent bignesse, and consist of fiue longish round pointed leaues, standing a little each from other, so (...) the green points of the cups shew themselues between them: there are yellow threds in the middle of these floures, which commonly shew themselues in Februarie, or March. It is found only in some gardens, and (...) onely hath set it forth by the name we here giue you.
2 This also that came from the Pyrenaean hills is made a Denizen in our gardens: it hath a stalke some foot high, set with neruous leaues, like those of Plantaine, but thinner, and of the colour of Woad, and they are something broad at their setting on, and end in a sharpe point: at the top of the stalke grow the floures; each consisting of fiue round slender pure white leaues, of a reasonable bignesse, with yellowish threds and a little head in the middle: the root is white and fibrous. It floures about the beginning of May. Clusius also set forth this by the title of (...) (...) albo flore.
3 The same Author hath also giuen vs the knowledge of diuers other plants of this kinde, and this hee calls (...) montanus 1. It hath many round leaues, here and there deeply cut in, and snipt about the edges, of a darke greene colour, and shining, pretty thicke, and of a very hot (...): amongst which rises vp a slender, single, and short stalke, bearing a white floure made of fiue little leaues with a yellowish thrum in the middle: which falling, the seeds grow clustering together as in other plants of this kinde: the root is white and fibrous.


@ 3 Ranunculus montanus flo. minore. Mountain Crowfoot with the lesser floure.


@ 4 Ranunculus (...) flore maiore. Mountain Crowfoot with the bigger floure.


4 This also is nothing else but a varietie of the last described, and differs from it in that the floures are larger, and it is sometimes sound with them double. Both these grow on the tops of the Alpes, and there they floure as soone as the snow is melted away, which is vsually in Iune: but brought into gardens they floure very early, to wit, in Aprill.
5 The leaues of this are cut or diuided into many parts, like those of Rue, but softer, and greener (whence Clusius names it Ranunculus-(...) folio) or not much vnlike those of Coriander (whereupon

@ 5 Ranunculus praecox (...) folio. Rue leaued Crowfoot.
@ 6 Ranunculus Praecox (...) (...). Columbine Crowfoot.
@ 7 Ranunculus parvus echinatus. Small rough headed Crowfoot.
Pona calls it Ranunculus Coriandri folio:) amongst or rather before these comes vp a stalk some hand full high, bearing at the top thereof one floure of a reasonable bignesse: on the outside before it be throughly open of a pleasing red color, but white within, composed of twelue or more leaues.
6 This hath a stalke some foot high, small and reddish, whereon grow sundry leaues like those of the greater Thalictrum, or those of Columbines, but much lesse, and of a bitter taste: out of the bosomes of these leaues come the floures at each space one, white, and consisting of fiue leaues apiece: which falling, there succeed two or three little hornes containing a round reddish seed: the root is fibrous, white, very bitter, and creepes here and there, putting vp new shoots. It growes in diuers woods of Austria, and floures in Aprill, and the seed is ripe in May, or Iune. Clusius calls it Ranunculus praecox 2. Thalietri folio. It is the Aquilegiaminor Daleschampij in the Hist. Lugd.
7 This which (as Clusius saith) some call the Ranunculus of Apuleius, hath also a fibrous root, with small leaues diuided into three parts, and cut about the edges, and they grow vpon short footstalkes; the stalkes are some two handfulls-high, commonly leaning on the ground, and on them grow such leaues as the former: and out of their bosomes come little foot-stalks carrying floures of a pale yellow color, made of fiue leaues apiece,

which follow there succed fiue or six sharpe pointed rough cods, conteining seed almost like that of the former. @



CHAP. 372. Of Woolfes-bane.

 The kindes.
There be diuers sorts of Wolfes-bane: whereof some bring forth flowers of a yellow colour; others of a blew, or tending to purple: among the yellow ones there are some greater, others lesser; some with broader leaues, and others with narrower.


1 Thora Valdensis. Broad leafed VVolfes-bane.


2 Thoramontis Baldi, sive Sabaudica. Mountaine VVolfes-bane.




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Aconite, of some called Thora, others adde therto the place where it groweth in great abundance, which is the Alps, and call it Thora Valdensium. This plant tooke his name of the Greek word (...), signifying corruption, poison, or death, which are the certaine effects of this pernicious plant: for this they vse very much in poisons, and when they meane to infect their arrow heads, the more speedily and deadly to dispatch the wilde beasts, which greatly annoy those mountaines of the Alpes: to which purpose also it is brought into the Mart-townes neere vnto those places to be sold vnto the hunters, the iuice thereof beeing prepared by pressing forth, and so kept in hornes and hoofes of beasts, for the most speedie poison of all the Aconites, for an arrow touched therewith, leaueth the wound vncureable (if it but onely fetch bloud where it entereth in) except that round about the wound the flesh bee speedily cut away in great

argueth also that Matthiolus hath vnproperly called it Pseudoaconitum, that is, false or bastard Aconite; for without question there is no worse or more speedie venome in the world, nor no Aconite or toxicall plant comparable hereunto. And yet let vs consider the fatherly care and prouidence of God, who hath prouided a conquerour and triumpher ouer this plant so venomous, namely his Antigonist, (...), or to speake in shorter and fewer syllables, Anthora, which is the very antidote or remedie against this kinde of Aconite. The stalke of this plant is small and rushie, very smooth, two or three handfulls high: whereupon do grow two, three, or foure leaues, seldome more, which be something hard, round, smooth, of a light greene colour tending to blewnesse, like the colour of the leaues of (...), nicked in the edges. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a yellow colour, lesser than those of the field Crowfoot, otherwise alike: in the place therof groweth a knop or round head, wherein is the seed: the root consisteth of nine or ten slender clogs, with some small fibers also, and they are (...) together with little strings vnto one head, like those of the white Asphodill.
2 Wolfes-bane of the mount Baldus hath one stalke, smooth and plaine, in the middle whereof come sorth two leaues and no more, wherein it differeth from the other of the Valdens, hauing likewise three or foure sharpe pointed leaues, narrow and somewhat iagged at the place where the stalke diuideth it selfe into smaller branches; whereon do grow small yellow floures like the precedent, but much lesser.


 The Place.
These venomous plants doe grow on the Alpes, and the mountaines of (...) and Switzer land: the first grow plentifully in the countrey of the Valdens, who inhabite part of those moun taines towards Italie. The other is found on Baldus, a mountaine of Italy. They are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They floure in March and Aprill, their seed is ripe in Iune.


 The Names.
This kinde of Aconite or Wolfes-bane is called Thora, Taura, and (...), it is surnamed Valdensis, that it may differ from Napellus, or Monkes hood, which is likewise named Thora.
Auicen maketh mention of a certaine deadly herbe in his fourth booke, sixt Fen. called Farsiun; it is hard to affirme this same to be Thora Valdensis.
@ Gesaer iudges this to be the Aconitum pardalianches of Dioscorides, and herein is followed by (...). @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The sorce of these Wolfes-banes; is most pernicious and poison some, and (as it is reported) exceedeth the malice of (...), or any of the other Wolfes-banes, as we haue said.
They say that it is of such force, that if a man especially, and then next any foure footed beast  be wounded with an arrow or other instrument dipped in the iuice hereof, they die within halfe an houre after remedilesse. 

(...) were formerly (...) figures in this chapter, with as many (...), though the plants figured and described were but two, to which number they are now reduced. The two (...), which were by the (...) of (...) (...) (...) and (...), (...), (...), (...) male had (...) two (...) round (...), and the (...) (...). The other two being also of one plant are more deeply cut in vpon the top of the (...), which are (...) and (...) (...) (...) of the (...).




CHAP. 373. Of Winter Wolfes-bane.

 The Description.
THis kinde of Aconite is called Aconitum hyemale Belgarum; of Dodonoeus, Aconitum luteum minus: in English, VVolfes-bane, or smal yellow wolfes-bane, whose leaues come forth of the ground in the dead time of winter, many times bearing the snow vpon their heads of his leaues and floures; yea the colder the weather is, and the deeper that the snow is, the fairer and larger is the floure; and the warmer that the weather is, the lesser is the floure, and worse coloured: these leaues I say come forth of the ground immediatly from the root, with a naked, soft, and slender stem, deeply cut or (...) ged on the leaues, of an exceeding faire greene colour, in the midst of which commeth forth a yellow (...), in shew or fashion like vnto the (...) field Crow-foot: after which follow sundry cods full of browne seeds like the other kindes of Aconites: the root is thicke, tuberous, and knottie, like to the kindes of (...).



Aconitum hyemale. Winter Woolfes-bane.




 The Place.
It groweth vpon the mountaines of Germany: we haue great quantitie of it in our (...) gardens.


 The Time.
It floureth in Ianuarie; the seed is ripe in the end of March.


 The Names.
It is called Aconitum hyemale, or (...), or winter Aconite: that it is a kinde of Aconite or Woolfs-bane, both the form of the leaues and cods, and also the dangerous faculties of the herbe it selfe do declare.
It is much like to Aconitum Theophrasti: which he describeth in his ninth booke, saying, it is a short herbe hauing no (...), or superfluous thing growing on it, and is without branches as this plant is: the root, saith he, is like to (...) or to a nur, or els to (...), a dry fig, onely the lease seemeth to (...) it, which is nothing at all like to that of Succorie, which he compareth it vnto.


 The Temperature and Vertues. 
This herbe is counted to be very dangerous and deadly, hot and drie in the sourth degree, as Thcoph. in plaine words doth testifie concerning his owne Aconite; for which he saith that there was (...) found his Antidote or remedie: whereof Athenaeus and Theopompus write, that this plant is the most poisonous herb of all others, which moued Ouid to say Quae quia nascuntur dura vivacia caute: notwithstanding it is not without his peculiar vertues. (...) Camerarius now liuing in Noremberg saith, the water dropped into the eies ceaseth the pain and burning: it is reported to preuaile mightily against the bitings of scorpions, and is of such force, that if the scorpion passe by where it groweth and touch the same, presently (...) becommeth dull, heauy, and sencelesse, and if the same scorpion by chance touch the white Hellebor, he is presently deliuered from his drowsinesse.



CHAP. 374. Of Mithridate Woolfes-bane.

 The Description.
This plant called Anthora, being the antidote against the poison of Thora, Aconite or wolses bane, hath slender hollow stalkes, very brittle, a cubit high, garnished with (...) cut or iagged leaues, very like to Nigella Romana, or the common Larkes spurre, called (...) Regalis: at the top of the stalkes doe grow faire flowers, fashioned like a little helmet, of an ouerworne yellow colour; after which come small blackish cods, wherein is conteined blacke shining seed like those of Onions: the root consisteth of diuers knobs or tuberous lumpes, of the bignesse of a mans thumbe.


 The Place.
This plant which in Greeke we may terme (...): groweth abundantly in the Alps, called Rhetici, in Sauoy, and in Liguria. The Ligurians of Turin, and those that dwell neere the lake Lemane, haue found this herbe to be a present remedy against the deadly poison of the herb Thora and the rest of the Aconites, prouided that when it is brought into the garden there to be kept for (...) vse, it must not be planted neere to any of the Aconites: for through his attractiue qualitie, it will

Anthorasive Aconitum salutiferum. Wholsome Wolfes bane.
draw vnto it self the maligne and (...) poison of the Aconite, whereby it will become of the like qualitie, that is, to become poisonous likewise: but being kept far off, it retaineth his owne naturall qualitie still.


 The Time.
It floureth in August, the seed is ripe in the end of September.


 The Names.
The inhabitants of the lake of Geneua, and the Piemontoise do call it Anthora, and the common people Anthoro. Auicen calleth a certaine herbe which is like to Monks hood, as a remedy against the poison thereof, by the name of Napellus Moysis, in the 500 chap. of his second booke, and in the 745. chap. he saith, that Zedoaria doth grow with Napellus or Monkes hood, and that by reason of the neerenesse of the same, the force and strength thereof is dulled and made weaker, and that it is a treacle, that is, a counterpoison against the Viper, Monks hood, and all other poisons: and hereupon it followeth, that it is not only Napellus Moysis, but also Zedoaria Auicennae: notwithstanding the Apothecaries do sell another Zedoaria differing from Anthora, which is a root of a longer forme, which not without cause is thought to be Auicens and Scrapio's Zerumbeth, or Zurumbeth.
It is called Anthora, as though they should say (...), because it is an enemie to Thora, and a counterpoison to the same. (...) and Anthora, or Tura and Antura, seeme to be new words, but yet they are vsed in Marcellus Empericus, an old writer, who teacheth a medicine to be made of Tura and Antura against the pin and web in the eies: in English, yellow Monks-hood, yellow Helmet floure, and Aconites Mithridate.


 The Vertues.
The root of Anthora is wonderfull bitter, it is an enemie to all poisons: it is good for purgations;  for it voideth by the stoole both waterie and slimie humours, killeth and driueth forth all manner of wormes of the belly:
Hugo Solerius saith, that the roots of Anthora do largely purge, not onely by the stoole, but also  by vomite: and that the measure thereof is taken to the quantitie of (...) (which is commonly called a beane) in broth or wine, and is giuen to strong bodies.
Antonius Guanerius doth shew in his treatie of the plague, the second difference, the (...) chapter, that Anthora is of great force, yea and that against the plague: and the root is of like vertues, giuen with Dittanie, which I haue seene, saith he, by experience: and he further saith, it is an herbe that groweth hard by that herbe Thora, of which there is made a poison, wherewith they of Sauoy and those parts adiacent do enuenome their arrowes, the more speedily to kill the wilde Goats, and other wilde beasts of the Alpish mountaines. And this root Anthora is the Bezoar or counterpoison to that Thora, which is of so great a venome, as that it killeth all liuing creatures with his poisonsome qualitie: and thus much Guanerius.
Simon Ianuensis hath also made mention of Anthora, and Arnoldus Villanovanus in his treatie of  poisons: but their writings do declare that they did not well know Anthora.



CHAP. 375. Of yellow Wolfes-bane.

 The Description.
THe yellow kinde of Wolfes-bane called Aconitum (...) Ponticum, or according to Dodonaeus Aconitum Lycoctonon luteum maius: in English, yellow Wolfes-bane, whereof this our age hath found out sundry sorts not knowne to Diosco ides, although some of the sorts seeme to stand

Aconitum (...) Ponticum. Yellow Woolfes bane.
indifferent betweene the kindes of (...), Helleborus, and Napellus:) this yellow kinde (...) say hath large shining greene leaues fashioned like a vine, and of the same bignesse, deepely indented or cut, not much vnlike the leaues of Geranium Fuscum, or blacke Cranes-bill: the stalkes are bare or naked, not bearing his leaues vpon the same stalkes, one opposite against another, as in the other of his kinde: his stalkes grow vp to the height of three cubits, bearing very fine yellow floures, fantastically fashioned, and in such manner shaped, that I can very hardly describe them vnto you. They are somewhat like vnto the helmet Monkes hood, open and hollow at one end, firme and shut vp at the other: his roots are many, compact of a number of threddy or blacke strings, of an ouerworne yellow colour, spreading far abroad euery way, folding themselues one within another very confusedly. This plant groweth naturally in the darke hillie forrests, and shadowie woods, which are not trauelled nor haunted, but by wilde and sauage beasts, and is thought to be the strongest and next vnto Thora in his poisoning qualitie, of all the rest of the Aconites, or Woolfes banes; insomuch that if a few of the floures be chewed in the mouth, and spit forth againe presently, yet forthwith it burneth the jawes and tongue, causing them to swell, and making a certaine swimming or giddinesse in the head. This calleth to my remembrance an history of a certaine Gentleman dwelling in Lincolneshire, called Mahewe, the true report whereof my very good friend Mr. Nicholas Belson, sometimes fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, hath deliuered vnto me: Mr. Mahewe dwelling in Boston, a student in Physicke, hauing occasion to ride through the Fennes of Lincolneshire, found a root that the hogs had turned vp, which seemed vnto him very strange and vnknowne, for that it was in the spring before the leaues were out,: this he tasted, and it so inflamed his mouth, tongue, and lips, that it caused them to swell very extreamely, so that before he could get to the towne of Boston he could not speake, and no doubt had lost his life if that the Lord God had not blessed those good remedies which presently he procured and vsed. I haue here thought good to expresse this history, for two especiall causes; the first is, that some industrious and diligent obseruer of nature may be prouoked to seeke forth that venemous plant, or some of his kindes: for I am certainely persuaded that it is either the Thora Valdensium, or Aconitum luteum, whereof this gentleman tasted, which two plants haue not at any time been thought to grow naturally in England: the other cause is, for that I would warne others to beware by that gentlemans harme. @ I am of opinion that this root which Mr. Mahewe tasted was of the (...) flammeus maior, described in the first place of the 370. chapter aforegoing; for that growes plentifully in such places, and is of a very hot taste and hurtfull qualitie. @


 The Place.
The yellow Woolfes (...) groweth in my garden, but not wilde in England, or in any other of these Northerly regions.


 The Time.
It floureth in the end of Iune, somewhat after the other Aconites.


 The Names.
This yellow Woolfes-bane is called of Lobel, Aconitum luteum Ponticum, or Ponticke Woolfesbane. There is mention made in Dioscorides his copies of three Woolfes-banes, of which the hunters vse one, and Physitions the other two. Marcellus Virgilius holdeth opinion that the vse of this plant is vtterly to be refused in medicine.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The facultie of this Aconite, as also of the other Woolfes-banes, is deadly to man, and likewise  to all other liuing creatures.

It is vsed among the hunters which seek after wolues, the iuyce whereof they put into raw flesh, which the wolues de uoure, and are killed.



CHAP. 376. Of other Wolfes-banes and Monkes-hoods.

 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Wolfes-bane (called Aconitum Lycoctonum: and of Dodonaeus, Aconitum (...) flore Delphinij, by reason of the shape and likenes that the floure hath with Delphinium, or Larkes-spur: and in English it is called blacke Wolfes-bane) hath many large leaues of a very deepe greene or ouerworne colour, very deepely cut or iagged: among which riseth vp a stalke two cubits high; whereupon do grow floures fashioned like a hood, of a very ill fauoured blewish colour, and the thrums or threds within the hood are blacke: the seed is also blacke and three cornered, growing in small husks: the root is thicke and knobby.


@ 1 Aconitum lycoctonon flore Delphinij. Larks-heele Wolfes-bane.


@ 2 Aconitum lycoctonon caeruleum parvum. Small blew Wolfes-bane.


2 This kinde of Wolfes-bane, called (...) coeruleum parvum, facie Napelli: in Englishsmall Wolfes-bane, or round Wolfes-bane, hath many slender brittle stalkes two cubits high, beset with leaues very much iagged, and like vnto Napellus, called in English, Helmet-floure. The floures do grow at the top of the stalkes, of a blewish colour, fashioned also like a hood, but wider open than any of the rest: the cods and seed are like vnto the other: the root is round and small, fashioned like a Peare or small (...) or Turnep: which moued the Germanes to call the same (...) bloemen, which is in Latine, Flos rapaceus: in English, Rape-floure.
3 This kinde of Wolfes-bane, called Napellus verus, in English, Helmet-floure, or the great Monkes-hood, beareth very faire and goodly blew floures in shape like an helmet; which are so beautifull, that a man would thinke they were of some excellent vertue, but non est semper sides habenda fronti. This plant is vniuersally knowne in our London gardens and elsewhere; but naturally

it groweth in the mountaines of Rhetia, and in sundry places of the Alps, where you shall find the grasse that groweth round it eaten vp with cattell, but no part of the herbe it selfe touched, except by certain flies, who in such aboundant measure swarme about the same that they couer the whole plant: and (which is very strange) although these flies do with great delight feed hereupon, yet of them there is confected an Antidote or most auailable medicine against the deadly bite of the spider called (...), or any other venomous beast whatsoeuer, yea, an excellent remedie not onely against the Aconites, but all other poysons whatsoeuer. The medicine of the foresaid flies is thus made: Take of the flies which haue fed themselues as is aboue mentioned, in number twentie, of Aristolochia rotunda, and bole Armoniack, of each a dram.
4 There is a kinde of Wolfes-bane which Dodonaeus reports he found in an old written Greeke booke in the Emperors Librarie at Vienna, vnder the the title of Aconitum lycoctonum, that answereth in all points vnto Dioscorides his description, except in the leaues. It hath leaues (saith hee) like vnto the Plane tree, but lesser, and more full of iags or diuisions; a slender stalke as Ferne, of a cubit high, bearing his seed in long cods: it hath blacke roots in shape like Creauises. Hereunto agreeth the Emperors picture in all things sauing in the leaues, which are not so large, nor so much diuided, but notched or toothed like the teeth of a saw.


3 Napellus verus coeruleus. Blew Helmet-floure, or Monks-hood.


@ 4 Aconitum lycoctonum ex Cod. Caesareo.


@ 5 Besides these mentioned by our Author there are sundry other plants belonging to this pernitious Tribe, whose historie I will briefely runne ouer: The first of these is that which Clusius hath set forth by the name of Aconitum lycoctonum flo. Delphinij Silesiacum: it hath stalks some two or three cubits high, smooth and hollow, of a greenish purple colour, and couered with a certaine mealinesse: the leaues grow vpon long stalks, being rough, and fashioned like those of the yellow Wolfes bane, but of a blacker colour: the top of the stalke ends in a long spike of spurre-floures, which before they be open resemble locusts or little Lyzards, with their long and crooking tailes; but opening they shew fiue leaues, two on the sides, two below, and one aboue, which ends in a crooked (...) or horne: all these leaues are wrinckled, and purple on their outsides, but smooth, and of an elegant blew within. After the floures are past succeed three square cods, as in other Aconites, wherein is contained an vnequall brownish wrinckled seed: the root is thicke, black, and tuberous. This growes naturally in some mountaines of Silesia, and floures in Iuly and August. (...)



@ 5 Aconitum lycoct. hirsutum flo. Delphinij. Rough Larks-heele Wolfes-bane.


@ 6 Aconitum (...). Violet coloured Monks hood.


@ 7 Aconitum purpureum (...). Purple Monks-hood of Newburg.


@ 8 Aconitum. maximum Iudenbergense. Large floured Monks-hood.



6 The leaues of this are somwhat like, yet lesse than those of our common Monks-hood, blackish on the vpper side and shining. The stalke is some cubit and halfe high, firme, (...) of (...), smooth, and shining; diuided towards the top into some branches carrying (...) (...), like (...) forme to those of the vulgar Monks-hood, of a most elegant and deepe (...) colour: the seeds are like the former, and roots round, thicke, and short, with many fibres. It growes vpon the (...) (...) Saltsburg, where it floures in Iuly: but brought into gardens it floures sooner than the rest of (...) kinde, to wit in May. Clusius calls this Aconitum (...) 4. Tauricum.
7 This hath leaues broader than those of our ordinarie Monks-hood, yet like them: the stalke is round, straight, and firme, and of some three cubits height, and oft times toward the top diuided into many branches, which carry their floures spike-fashion, of a purple colour, absolutely like those of the common sort, but that the thrummie matter in the middest of the floures is of (...) duskier colour. The root and rest of the parts are like those of the common kinde: it growes naturally vpon the Styrian Alpes, whereas it floures somewhat after the common kinde, to wit, in Iuly. Clusius hath it by the name of Aconitum lycoctonum 5. (...).


@ 9 Aconitum maximum nutante coma. Monkes-hood with the bending (...) nodding head.


8 The leaues of this are also diuided into fiue parts, and snipt about the edges, and doe very much resemble those of the smal (...) described in the second place, but that the leaues of that shine, when as these do not: the stalke is two cubits high, not very thicke, yet firme and straight, of a greenish purple colour; and at the top carries fiue or six floures, the largest of all the (...)-hoods, consisting of foure leaues, as in the rest of this kind, with a very large helmet ouer them, being sometimes an inch long, of an elegant blewish purple color: the seed-vessels, seeds, and roots are like the rest of this kinde. This growes on Iudenberg, the highest hill of all Stiria, and floures in August; in gardens about the end of Iuly. Clusius names it Aconitum Lycoct. 9. Iudenbergense.
9 This rises vp to the height of three cubits, with a slender round stalke which is diuided into sundry branches, and commonly hangs downe the head; whence Clusius cals it Aconitum lycoctonum 8. (...) nutante. The floures are like those of the common Monkshood, but of somewhat a lighter purple colour. The leaues are larger and long, and much more cut in or diuided than any of the rest. The roots, seeds, and other particles are not vnlike those of the rest of this kinde. @


 The Place.
Diuers of these Wolfs-banes grow in some gardens, except Aconitum lycoctonon, taken forth of the Emperors booke.


 The Time.
These plants do floure from May vnto the end of August.


 The Names.
The first is Lycoctoni specics, or a kinde of Wolfes-bane, and is as hurtfull as any of the rest, and called of Lobel, Aconitum flore Delphinij, or Larke-spur Wolses-bare. Auicen speaketh hereof in his second booke, and afterwards in his fourth booke, Fen. 6. the first Treatise: hauing his reasons why and wherefore he hath separated this from Canach adip, that is to say, the Wolses strangler, or the Wolfes-bane.
The later and barbarous Herbarists call the third Wolfes bane in Latine Napellus, of the figure and shape of the roots of Napus, or Nauet, or Nauew gentle: it is likewise (...) (...) (...), (...) a kinde of Wolfes-bane: also it may be called Toxicum; sor Toxicum is a deadly medicine wherewith the Hunters poyson their speares, darts, and arrowes, that bring present death: so named (...) arrowes which the Barbarians call Toxcumata, and Toxa. (...) setting downe the (...) (...)

or accidents caused by Toxicum, together with the remedies, reckoneth vp almost the verie same that Auicen doth concerning Napellus: notwithstanding Auicen writes of Napellus and Toxicum seuerally; but not knowing what Toxicum is, as he himselfe confesseth: so that it is not to be maruelled, that hauing written of Napellus, he should afterward entreat againe of Toxicum.


 The Nature and Vertues.
All these plants are hot and dry in the fourth degree, and of a most venomous qualitie.
The force and facultie of Wolfes-bane is deadly to man and all kindes of beasts: the same was  tried of late in Antwerpe, and is as yet fresh in memorie, by an euident experiment, but most lamentable; for when the leaues hereof were by certaine ignorant persons serued vp in sallads, all that did eate thereof were presently taken with most cruell symptomes, and so died.
The symptomes that follow those that do eate of these deadly herbes are these; their lips and  tongues swell forthwith, their eyes hang out, their thighes are stiffe, and their wits are taken from them, as Auicen writeth in his fourth booke. The force of this poyson is such, that if the points of darts or arrowes be touched with the same, it bringeth deadly hurt to those that are wounded therewith.
Against so deadly a poyson Auicen reckoneth vp certaine remedies, which helpe after the poyson  is vomited vp; and among these he maketh mention of the Mouse (as the copies euery where haue it) nourished and fed vp with Napellus, which is altogether an enemie to the poysonsome nature thereof, and deliuereth him that hath taken it from all perill and danger.
Antonius Guancrius of Pauia, a famous physition in his age, in his treaty of poysons is of opinion, that it is not a mouse that Auicen speakes of, but a fly: for he telleth of a certaine Philosopher that did very carefully and diligently make search after this Mouse, and neither could find at any time either Mouse, or the root of Wolfes-bane gnawne or bitten, as he had read; but in searching he found many flies feeding on the leaues, which the same Philosopher tooke, and made of them an Antidote or counterpoyson, which he found to be good and effectuall against other poysons, but especially the poyson of Wolfes-bane.
This composition consisteth of two ounces of Terra lemnia, as many of the berries of the Bay  tree, and the likeweight of Mithridate, 24 of the flies that haue taken their repast vpon Wolfesbane, of honey and oyle Oliue a sufficient quantitie.
The same opinion that Guanerius is of, Petrus Pena and Matthias de Lobel doe also hold; who affirme, that there was neuer seene at any time any Mouse feeding thereon, but that there be Flies which resort vnto it by swarmes, and feed not onely vpon the floures, but on the herbe also.


 The Danger.
There hath (...) little heretofore set downe concerning the vertues of the Aconites, but much might be said of the hurts that haue come hereby, as the wofull experience of the lamentable example at Antwerpe, yet fresh in memorie, doth declare, as we haue said. 

The figure that was in the first place formerly was of the (...) (...) (...); and that in the second place was of a (...).




CHAP. 377. Of blacke Hellebore.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of blacke Hellebor Dodonaeus setteth forth vnder this title Veratrum nigrum; and it may properly be called in English, blacke Hellebor, which is a name most fitly agreeing vnto the true and vndoubted blacke (...); for the kindes and other sorts hereof which hereafter follow are false and bastard kindes thereof. This plant hath thicke and fat leaues of a deepe greene colour, the vpper part whereof is somewhat bluntly nicked or toothed, hauing sundry diuisions or cuts; in some leaues many, in others fewer, like vnto the female (...), or Smyrnium Creticum. It beareth Rose fashioned floures vpon slender stems, growing immediately out of the ground an handfull high, somtimes very white, and oftentimes mixed with a little shew of purple: which being vaded, there succeed small huskes full of blacke seeds: the roots are many, with long blacke strings comming from one head.
2 The second kinde of blacke Hellebor, called of Pena, Helleborastrum; and of Dodonaeus, Veratrum secundum (in English, bastard Hellebor) hath leaues muh like the former, but narrower and blacker, each leafe being much iagged or toothed about the edges like a saw. The stalkes grow to the height of a foot or more, diuiding themselues into other branches toward the top; whereon do grow floures not much vnlike to the former in shew, saue that they are of a greenish herby colour. The roots are small and threddy, but not so blacke as the former.



1 Helleborus niger verus. The true blacke Hellebor.


2 Helleborastrum. Wilde blacke Hellebor.


3 Helleboraster maximus. The great Ox-heele.


4 Consiligo Ruellij, and Sesamoides magnum Cordi. Setter-wort, or Beare-foot.



3 The third kinde of blacke Hellebor, called of Pena, Helleboraster maximus, with this addition, slore and semine praegnans, that is, full both of floures and seed, hath leaues somewhat like the former wilde (...), saue that they be greater, more iagged, and deepely cut. The stalks grow vp to the height of two cubits, diuiding themselues at the top into sundry small branches, whereupon grow little round and bottle-like hollow greene floures; after which come forth seeds which come to perfect maturitie and ripenesse. The root consisteth of many small blacke strings, inuolued or wrapped one within another very intricately.
4 The fourth kinde of blacke Hellebor (called of Pena and Lobel, according to the description of Cordus and (...), Sesamoides magnum, and Consiligo: in English, Ox-heele, or Settter-woort; which names are taken from his vertues in curing Oxen and such like cattell, as shall be shewed afterward in the names thereof) is so well knowne vnto the most sort of people by the name of Bearefoot, that I shall not haue cause to spend much time about the description. @ Indeed is was not much needfull for our Author to describe it, for it was the last thing he did; for both these two last are of one plant, both figures and descriptions; the former of these figures expressing it in floure, and the later in seed: but the former of our Author was with somewhat broader leaues, and the laterwith narrower. @


 The Place.
These Hellebors grow vpon rough and craggy mountains: the last growes wilde in many woods and shadowie places in England: we haue them all in our London gardens.


 The Time.
The first floureth about Christmasse, if the Winter be milde and warme: the others later:


 The Names.
It is agreed among the later writers, that these plants are Veratranigra: in English, blacke Hellebor: in Greeke, (...): in Italian, Elleboro nero: in Spanish, Verde gambre negro: of diuers, Melampodium, because it was first found by Melampos, who was first thought to purge therewith Praetus his mad daughters, and to restore them to health. Dioscorides writeth, that this man was a shepheard: others, a Sooth-sayer. In high Dutch it is called Christwurtz, that is, Christs herbe, or Christmasse herbe: in low Dutch, Heylich Kerst cruyt, and that because it floureth about the birth of our Lord Iesus Christ.
The third kinde was called of Fuchsius, Pseudohelleborus, and Veratrum nigrum adulterinum, which is in English, false or bastard blacke Hellebor. Most name it Consiligo, because the husbandmen of our time do herewith cure their cattell, no otherwise than the old Farriers or horse-leeches were wont to do, that is, they cut a slit or hole in the dew-lap, as they terme it (which is an emptie skin vnder the throat of the beast) wherein they put a piece of the root of Setterwort or Beare-foot, suffering it there to remaine for certaine dayes together: which manner of curing they do call Settering of their cattell, and is a manner of rowelling, as the said Horse-leeches doe their horses with horse haire twisted, or such like, and as in Surgerie we do vse with silke, which in stead of the word Seton; a certaine Physitian called it by the name Rowell; a word very vnproperly spoken of a learned man, because there would be some difference betwixt men and beasts. This manner of settering of cattell helpeth the disease of the lungs, the cough, and wheesing. Moreouer, in the time os pestilence or murraine, or any other diseases affecting cattell, they put the root into the place aforesaid, which draweth vnto it all the venomous matter, and voideth it forth at the wound. The which Absyrtus and Hierocles the Greeke Horse-leeches haue at large set downe. And it is called in English, Beare-foot, Setter-wort, and Setter-grasse.
The second is named in the German tongue, Lowszkraut, that is, Pedicularis, or Lowsie grasse: for it is thought to destroy and kill lice, and not onely lice but sheepe and other cattell: and may be reckoned among the Beare-feet, as kindes thereof.


 The Temperature.
Blacke Hellebor, as Galen holdeth opinion, is hotter in taste than the white Hellebor: in like manner hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Black Hellebor purgeth downwards flegme, choler, and also melancholy especially, and all melancholy  humors, yet not without trouble and difficultie: therfore it is not to be giuen but to robustious and strong bodies, as Mesues teacheth. A purgation of Hellebor is good formad and furious men, for melancholy, dull, and heauy persons, for those that are troubled with the falling sicknes, for lepers, for them that are sicke of a quartane Ague, and briefely for all those that are troubled with blacke choler, and molested with melancholy.
The manner of giuing it (meaning the first blacke Hellebor) saith Actuarius in his first booke, is  three scruples, little more or lesse.
It is giuen with wine of raisins or oxymel, but for pleasantnes sake some sweet and odoriferous 

seeds must be put vnto it: but if you would haue it stronger, adde thereunto a grain or two of Scamonie. Thus much Actuarius.
The first of these kindes is best, then the second; the rest are of lesse force.
The roots take away the morphew and blacke spots in the skin, tetters, ring-wormes, leprosies, and (...).
The root sodden in pottage with flesh, openeth the bellies of such as haue the dropsie.
The root of bastard Hellebor, called among our English women Beare-foot, steeped in wine  and drunken, looseth the belly euen as the true blacke Hellebor, and is good against all the diseases whereunto blacke Hellebor serueth, and killeth wormes in children.
It doth his operation with more force and might, if it be made into pouder, and a dram thereof  be receiued in wine.
The same boyled in water with Rue and Agrimony, cureth the jaundice, and purgeth yellow superfluities  by siege.
The leaues of bastard Hellebor dried in an ouen, after the bread is drawne out, and the pouder  thereof taken in a figge or raisin, or strawed vpon a piece of bread spred with honey and eaten, killeth wormes in children exceedingly.



CHAP. 378. Of Dioscorides his blacke Hellebor.


Astrantianigra, siue (...) nigrum Dioscoridis, Dod. Blacke Master-worts, or Dioscorides his blacke Hellebor.



 The Description.
THis kinde of blacke Hellebor, set forth by Lobel vnder the name of Astrantianigra, agreeth very well in shape with the true Astrantia, which is called Imperatoria: neuertheles by the consent of Dioscorides and other Authors, who haue expressed this plant for a kinde of Veratrum nigrum, or blacke Hellebor, it hath many blackish green leaues parted or cut into foure or fiue deepe cuts, after the maner of the vine leafe very like vnto those of Sanicle, both in greennes of colour, and also in proportion. The stalke is euen, smooth, and plain: at the top wherof grow floures it little tufts or vmbels, set together like those of Scabious, of a whitish light greene colour, dashed ouer as it were with a little darke purple: after which come the seed like vnto Carthamus or bastard Saffron. The roots are many blackish threds knit to one head or master root.


 The Place.
Blacke Hellebor is found in the mountains of Germany, and in other vntilled and rough places: it prospereth in gardens.
Dioscorides writeth, That blacke Hellebor groweth likewise in rough and dry places: and that is the best which is taken from such like places; as that (saith hee) which is brought out of Anticyra a city in Greece. It groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
This blacke Hellebor flowreth not in Winter, but in the Sommer moneths. The herb is green all the yeare thorow.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists, Astrantia nigra: of others, Sanicula foemina: notwithstanding it differeth much from Astrantia, an herbe which is also named Imperatoria, or Master-wort. The vulgar people call it Pellitorie of Spaine, but vntruly: it may be called blacke Master-wort, yet (...) a kinde of Hellebor, as the purging facultie doth shew: for it is certaine, that diuers experienced physitians can witnesse, that the roots hereof do purge melancholy and other humors,

and that they themselues haue perfectly cured mad melancholy people being purged herewith. And that it hath a purging qualitie, Conradus Gesnerus doth likewise testifie in a certaine Epistle written to Adolphus Occo, in which he sheweth, that Astrantianigra is almost as strong as white Hellebor, and that he himselfe was the first that had experience of the purging facultie thereof by siege: which things confirme that it is (...) his blacke Hellebor.
Dioscorides hath also attributed to this plant all those names that are ascribed to the other black Hellebors. He saith further, that the seed thereof in Anticyra is called Sesamoides, the which is vsed to purge with, if so be that the Text be true, and not corrupted. But it seemeth not to be altogether perfect; for if Sesamoides, as Pliny saith; and the word it selfe doth shew, hath his name of the likenesse of Sesamum, the seed of this blacke Hellebor shall vnproperly be called Sesamoides; being not like that of Sesamum, but of Cnicus or bastard Saffron. By these proofes we may suspect, that these words are brought into Dioscorides from some other Author.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The faculties of this plant we haue already written to be by triall found like to those of the  other blacke Hellebor: notwithstanding those that are described in the former chapter are to be accounted of greater force. 

This whole Chapter (as most besides) was out of (...), who, Pempt. 3. lib. 2. cap. 30. labours to proue this plant to be the true blacke Hellebor of (...). There was also another description thrust by our Author into this chapter, being of the (...) (...) or (...) me (...) formerly (...) in the (...) place of the 114. Chap. (...). 446.




CHAP. 379. Of Herbe Christopher.


(...). Herbe Christopher.



 The Description.
ALthough Herbe Christopher be none of the Binde-weeds, or of those plants that haue need of supporting or vnderpropping, wherewith it may clime or rampe, yet because it beareth grapes, or clusters of berries, it might haue been numbred among the (...), or those that grow like Vines. It brings forth little tender stalkes a foot long, or not much longer; whereupon do grow sundry leaues set vpon a tender foot-stalke, which do make one leafe somewhat iagged or cut about the edges, of a light greene colour: the floures grow at the top of the stalks, in spokie tufts consisting of four little white leaues apiece: which being past, the fruit succeeds, round, somwhat long, and blacke when it is ripe, hauing vpon one side a streaked (...) or hollownesse growing neere together as doe the clusters of grapes. The root is thicke, blacke without, and yellow within like Box, with many trailing strings anexed therto, creeping far abroad in the earth, whereby it doth greatly increase, and lasteth long.


 The Place.
Herbe Christopher groweth in the North parts of England, neere vnto the house of the right worshipfull Sir William Bowes. I haue receiued plants thereof from Robinus of Paris, for my garden, where they flourish.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in May and Iune, and the fruit is ripe in the end of Sommer.



 The Names.
It is called in our age Christophoriana, and S. Christophori herba: in English, Herbe Christopher: some there be that name it Costus niger: others had rather haue it Aconitum bacciferum: it hath no likenes at all nor affinitie with Costus, as the simplest may perceiue that do know both. But doubtlesse it is of the number of the Aconites, or Wolfs-banes, by reason of the deadly and pernicious qualitie that it hath, like vnto Wolfes-bane, or Leopards-bane.


 The Temperature.
The temperature of Herbe Christopher answereth those of the Aconites, as we haue said.


 The Vertues.
I finde little or nothing extant in the antient or later writers, of any one good propertie wherewith any part of this plant is possessed: therefore I wish those that loue new medicines to take heed that this be none of them, because it is thought to be of a venomous and deadly qualitie.



CHAP. 380. Of Peionie.

 The Kindes.
THere be three Peionies, one male, and two females, described by the Antients: the later writers haue found out foure more; one of the female kinde, called (...) (...), or dwarfe Peonie; and another called Paeonia promiscua siue neutra, Bastard, Mis-begotten, or neither of both, but as it were a plant participating of the male and female; one double Peionie with white floures, and a fourth kinde bearing single white floures.


1 Poeoniamas. Male (...).


Poeonia mas cum semine. Male Peionie in (...).




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Peionie (being the male, called Paeonia mas: in English, Male Peiony) hath thicke red stalkes a cubit long: the leaues be great and large, consisting of diuers (...) growing or ioyned together vpon one slender stemme or rib, not much vnlike the leaues of

the Wall-nut tree both in fashion and greatnesse: at the top of the stalkes grow faire large red floures very like roses, hauing also in the midst yellow threds or thrums like them in the rose called Anthera: which being vaded and fallen away, there come in place three or foure great cods or huskes, which do open when they are ripe; the inner part of which cods is of a (...) red colour, wherein is contained blacke shining and polished seeds as big as a pease, and betweene euery black seed is couched a red or crimson seed, which is barren and empty. The root is thicke, great, and tuberous, like vnto the common Peionie.
2 There is another kinde of Peionie, called of Dodonaeus, Paeonia foemina prior: of (...), (...) foemina: in English, female Peonie, which is so well knowne vnto all that it needeth not any description.
3 The third kinde of Peionie (which Pena setteth forth vnder the name (...) foemina polyanthos: Dodonaeus, Paeonia foemina multiplex: in English, Double Peionie) hath leaues, roots, and floures like the common female Peionie, saue that his leaues are not so much iagged, and are of a lighter greene colour: (...) roots are thicker and more tuberous, and the floures much greater, exceeding double, of a very deep red colour, in fashion very like the great double rose of Prouince, but greater and more double.


2 Paeonia foemina. Female Peionie.


3 Paeonia foemina multiplex. Double red Peionie.


4 There is found another sort of the double (...), not differing from the precedent in (...), leaues, or roots: this plant bringeth forth white floures, wherein consisteth the difference.
5 There is another kinde of Peionie (called of Dodonaeus, Paeonia foemina altera: but of Pena, Paeonia promiscua, (...) neutra: in English, Maiden or Virgin Peiony) that is like to the common Peiony, sauing that his leaues and floures (...) much lesse, and the stalks shorter: it beareth red floures and seed also like the former.
6 We haue likewise in our London gardens another sort bearing floures of a pale whitish colour, very single, resembling the female wilde (...), in other respects like the double white Peiony, but lesser in all the parts thereof.
@ 7 Clusius by seed sent him from Constantinople had two other varieties of single Peionies; the one had the leaues red when they came out of the ground; and the floure ofthis was (...) a deep red colour: the other had (...) of a whitish greene, and the floures of this were somewhat larger, and of a lighter colour. In the leaues and (...) parts they resembled the (...) double (...). @



4 Poeonia foemina polyanthos flore albo. The double white Peionie.


@ 5 Poeonia promiscua. Maiden Peionie.


@ 6 Poeonia foemina pumila. Dwarfe female Peionie.


@ 7 Poeonia Byzantina. Turkish Peionie.





 The Place.
All the sorts of Peionies do grow in our London gardens, except that double Peiony with white floures, which we do expect from the Low countries of Flanders.
The male Peionie groweth wilde vpon a cony berry in Betsome, being in the parish of Southfleet in Kent, two miles from Grauel-end, and in the ground somtimes belonging to a farmer there called Iohn Bradley.
@ I haue been told that our Author himselfe planted that Peionie there, and afterwards seemed to finde it there by accident: and I do beleeue it was so, because none before or since haue euer seen or heard of it growing wild since in any part of this Kingdome. @


 The Time.
They floure in May: the seed is ripe in Iuly.


 The Names.
The Peionie is called in Greeke (...): in Latine also Poeonia, and Dulcifida: in shops, Pionia: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Pinoine: in Spanish, Rosa del monte: in English, Peionie: it hath also many bastard names, as Rosa fatuina, Herba (...): of some, Lunaris, or Lunaria Poeonia: because it cureth those that haue the falling sicknesse, whom some men call Lunaticos, or Lunaticke. It is called (...) Dactylus: which agreeth with the female Peionie; the knobbie roots of which be like to Dactyli Idaei, and Dactyli Idaei are certaine precious stones of the forme of a mans finger, growing in the Island of Candie: it is called of diuers Aglaophotis, or brightly shining, taking his name of the shining and glittering graines, which are of the colour of scarlet.
There be found two Aglaophotides, described by Aelianus in his 14. booke; one of the sea, in the 24. Chapter: the other of the earth, in the 27. chapter. That of the sea is a kinde of Fucus, or sea mosse, which groweth vpon high rocks, of the bignesse of Tamarisk, with the head of Poppy; which opening in the Sommer Solstice doth yeeld in the night time a certain (...), and as it were sparkling brightnesse or light.
That of the earth, saith he, which by another name is called Cynospastus, lieth hid in the day time among other herbes, and is not knowne at all, and in the night time it is easily seene: for it shineth like a star, and glittereth with a fierie brightnesse.
And this Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, is Paeonia; for Apuleius saith, that the seedes or graines of Peionie shine in the night time like a candle, and that plenty of it is in the night season found out and gathered by the shepheards. Theophrastus and Pliny do shew that Peionie is gathered in the night; which Aelianus also affirmeth concerning Aglaophotis.
This Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus, is called of Iosephus the writer of the Iewes warre, in his seuenth booke, 25. chapter, Baaras, of the place wherein it is found; which thing is plaine to him that conferreth those things which Aelianus hath written of Aglaophotis of the earth, or Cynospastus; with those which Iosephus hath set downe of Baaras: for Aelianus saith, that Cynospastus is not plucked vp without danger; and that it is reported how he that first touched it, not knowing the nature thereof, perished. Therefore a string must be fastned to it in the night, and a (...) dog tied therto, who being allured by the smell of rosted flesh set towards him, may plucke it vp by the rootes. Iosephus also writeth, that Baara doth shine in the euening like the day star, and that they who come neere, and would plucke it vp, can hardly do it, except that either a womans vrine, or her menses be poured vpon it, and that so it may be pluckt vp at the length.
Moreouer, it is set downe by the said Author, as also by Pliny and Theophrastus, that of necessitie it must (...) gathered in the night; for if any man shall pluck off the fruit in the day time, being seene of the VVood-pecker, he is in danger to loose his eies; and if he cut the root, it is a chance if his fundament fall not out. The like fabulous tale hath been set (...) of Mandrake, the which I haue (...) touched in the same chapter. But all these things be most vaine and friuolous: for the root of Peionie, as also the Mandrake, may be remoued at any time of the yeare, day or houre whatsoeuer.
But it is no maruell, that such kindes of (...), and most (...) and wicked ceremonies are found in the books of the most antient writers; for there were many things in their time verie vainly feined and cogged in for (...) sake, as by the Egyptians and other counterfeit mates, as Pliny doth truly testisie: an (...) of whom in times past, was (...) Andreas a Physition, who, as Galen saith, conueied into the art of Physick, lies and subtill (...). For which cause Galen commanded his Schollers to refraine (...) the reading of him, and of all such like lying and deceitfull (...). It is reported that these herbes tooke the (...) of (...), (...) (...), of that excellent Physition of the same name, who (...) (...) (...) (...) and taught the knowledge of this herbe vnto posteritie.



 The Temperature.
The root of Peionie, as Galen saith doth gently binde with a kinde of sweetnesse: and hath also ioined with it a certaine bitterish sharpnesse: it is in temperature not very hot, little more than meanly hot; but it is drie, and of subtill parts.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that the root of the Male Peionie being dried, is giuen to women that be not  well clensed after their deliuerie, being drunke in Mead or honied water to the quantitie of a bean; for it scowreth those plants, appeaseth the griping throwes and torments of the belly, and bringeth downe the desired sicknesse.
Galen addeth, that it is good for those that haue the yellow iaundise, and pain in the kidnies and  bladder, it clenseth the liuer and kidnies that are stopped.
It is found by sure and (...) experience made by Galen, that the fresh root tied about the necks  of children, is an effectuall remedie against the falling sicknesse; but vnto those that are growne vp in more yeares; the root thereof must also be ministred inwardly.
It is also giuen, saith Pliny, against the disease of the minde. The root of the male Peionie is preferred  in this cure.
Ten or twelue of the red berries or seeds drunke in wine that is something harsh or sower, and  red, do stay the inordinate flux, and are good for the stone in the beginning.
The blacke graines (that is the seed) to the number of fifteene taken in wine or mead, helpes the  strangling and paines of the matrix or mother, and is a speciall remedie for those that are troubled in the night with the disease called Ephialtes or night Mare, which is as though a heauy burthen were laid vpon them, and they oppressed therewith, as if they were ouercome by their enemies, or ouerprest with some great weight or burthen; and they are also good against melancholicke dreames.
Syrrup made of the floures of Peionie helpeth greatly the falling sicknesse: likewise the extraction  of the roots doth the same.



CHAP. 381. Of toothed Violets or Corall woorts.


1 Dentaria Bulbifera. Toothed Violet.


2 Dentaria Coralloideradice, sive Dent. Enneaphyllos. The Corall toothed Violet.





3 Dentaria Heptaphyllos (...). The seuen leafed toothed Violet.


4 Dentaria Pentaphyllos (...). Fiue leafed toothed Violet.


@ 5 Dentaria Pentaphyllos altera. The other fiue leaued Corall-wort.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Dentaria (called in Latine Dentaria baccifera: of Dodonaeus, Dentaria prior: in English, Dogs tooth violet) hath a tuberous and knobbie root, toothed, or as it were kneed like vnto the crags of Corall, of an vnpleasant sauor, and somewhat sharp in taste: from which spring forth certaine small and slender stalkes a foot high, which haue leaues verie much cut or iagged, like vnto those of Hempe, of the forme and fashion of Ashen leaues: at the top of the stalkes doe grow small white floures, in shape like (...), that is, Queenes Gillofloures, or rather like stocke-Gillofloures, of a white yellow colour, laid ouer with a light sprinkling of purple: among which come forth small knobs growing vpon the stalks among the leaues, such as are to be seen vpon the Chimists Martagon, which being ripe, do fall vpon the ground, whereof many other plants are ingendred.
2 The second kinde of Dogs-tooth violet bringeth forth small round stalks, firm and stiffe, a foot high, beset with leaues much broader, rounder, and greener than the former, bearing at the top many little floures consisting of foure small leaues, of a pale herbie colour; which beeing past, there succeed long and slender coddes

somewhat like the cods of Queenes Gillofloures, wherein is contained small blackish seed: the root is like the former, but not in euery respect much resembling Corall, yet white and tuberous notwithstanding.
3 The third kinde of Dogs-tooth Violet is called of Clusius, Dentaria heptaphyllos, that is, consisting of seuen leaues fastened vpon one rib, sinew, or small stem: of Lobel with this title, Alabastrites altera, or Dentaria altera: but Cordus calleth it Coralloides altera: in English, Corall violet; it hath stalkes, floures, and roots like vnto the first of his kinde, sauing that the floures are much fairer, and white of colour, and the roots haue a greater resemblance of Corall than the other.
4 The fourth kinde of Dogs-tooth violet, called in English Codded violet (which Clusius setteth forth vnder the title Dentaria Matthioli Pentaphyllos; which Pena doth also expresse vnder the title of Nemoralis alpina Herbarioruus Alabastrites; Cordus calleth it Coralloides, and may very well bee called in English Cinkfoile violet) hath leaues so like the greater Cinkfoile, that it is hard to know one from another; therefore it might very well haue been reckoned among the herbes called Pentaphylla, that is, fiue leaued herbes. This plant groweth in the shadowie forrest about Turin, and the mountain Sauena called Calcaris, and by the Rhene not far from Basill. The stalks grow to the height of a cubit, beset with a tuft of floures at the top like to that of the first, but of a deeper purple colour: which being vaded, there succeed long and flat cods like vnto Rocket, or the great Celandine, wherein is contained a small seed. All the whole plant is of a hot and bitter taste. The roots are like vnto Corall, of a pale whitish colour: the leaues are rough and harsh in handling, and of a deep greene colour.
@ 5 Clusius giues vs another varietie of Dentaria pentaphyllos, whose roots are more vneuen and knobby than the last described: the stalke is some foot high: the leaues fiue vpon a stalke, but not so rough, nor of so deep a greene as those of the former; yet the floures are of a deep purple colour, like those of the last described. @


 The Place.
They grow on diuers shadowie and darke hills. Valerius Cordus writeth, that they are found about the forest Hercinia, not far from Northusium, most plentifully, in a fat soile that hath quaries of stone in it. The first I haue in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure especially in Aprill and May: the seed commeth to perfection in the end of August.


 The Names.
The toothed Violet, or after some, Dogs-tooth violet, is commonly called Dentaria: of Cordus, Coralloides, of the root that is in forme like to Corall. Matthiolus placeth it inter Solidagines and Symphyta, among the Consounds and Comfries. Wee had rather call them (...) (...), of the likenesse the floures haue with Stocke-gillofloures. They may be called in English, Toothed Violets, or Corall-woorts.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
I haue read of few or no vertues contained in these herbes, sauing those which some women  haue experienced to be in the first kinde thereof, and which Matthiolus ascribeth vnto Pentaphylla dentaria the fourth kinde, in the fourth booke of his Commentaries vpon (...), and in the chap. conterning Symphytum, where he saith that the root is vsed in drinkes which are made against Enterocele and inward wounds, but especially those wounds and hurts which haue entred into the hollownesse of the brest.



CHAP. 382. Of Cinkefoile, or fiue finger Grasse.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Cinkfoile is so common and so vniuersally knowne, that I thinke it a needlesse trauell to stand about the description. @ It hath manylong long slender stalks, lying spred vpon the ground, out whereof grow leaues made of fiue longish snipt leaues fastened to one long foot-stalke: the floures also grow vpon the like foot-stalks, and are composed of fiue yellow leaues. The root is pretty large, of a reddish colour, and round; but dried, it becomes square. @
2 The second kinde of Cinkfoile or Quinquefoile hath round and smal stalks of a cubit high; the leaues are large, and very much iagged about the edges, very like the common Cinkfoile: the floures grow at the top of the stalks, in fashion like the common kind, but much greater, and of a pale or bleake yellow or elsewhitish colour: the root is blacke without, and full of strings annexed thereto, and of a wooddie substance.



Quinquefolium vulgare. Common Cinkfoile.


Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.

 2 Quinquefolium maius rectum. Great vpright Cinkfoile.


3 Pentaphyllum purpureum. Purple Cinkfoile.


4 Pentaphyllum rubrum (...). Marsh Cinkfoile.





5 Pentaphyllum petrosum, Heptaphyllum Clusy. Stone Cinkfoile.


Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.

 6 Pentaphyllon supinum Potentillae facie. Siluerweed Cinkfoile.


7 Quinquesolium Tormentillae facie. Wall Cinkfoile.


8 Pentaphyllum Incanum. Hoarie Cinkfoile.



Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.

 3 The third kinde of Cinkefoile hath leaues like those of the last described, and his floures are of a purple colour; which being past, there succeedeth a round knop of seed like a Strawberry before it be ripe: the stalkes are creeping vpon the ground: the root is of a wooddy substance, full of blacke strings appendant thereto. @ This differs not from the last described, but in the colour of the floures. @
4 The fourth kinde of Cinkefoile is very like vnto the other, especially the great kinde: the stalkes are a cubit high, and of a reddish colour: the leaues consist of fiue parts, somewhat snipt about the edges: the floures grow at the tops of the stalkes like vnto the other Cinkefoiles, sauing that they be of a darke red colour: the root is of a wooddy substance, with some fibres or threddy strings hanging thereat.


9 Pentaphyllum incanum minus repens. Small hoary creeping Cinkefoile.


10 Quinquefolium syluaticum majus flo. albo: Wood Cinkefoile, with white floures.


5 The fifth kinke of Cinkefoile groweth vpon the cold mountaines of Sauoy, and in the vallie of Austensie, and in Narbone in France, and (if my memory faile not) I haue seen the same growing vpon Beeston castle in Cheshire: the leaues hereof are few, and thinne set, consisting of siue parts like the other Cinkefoiles, oftentimes six or seuen set vpon one foot-stalke, not snipt about the edges as the other, but plaine and smooth; the leafe is of a shining white siluer colour, very soft and shining: the floures grow like starres, vpon slender stalkes by tufts and bunches, of a white colour, and sometimes purple, in fashion like the floures of Alchimilla, or Ladies mantle: the root is thicke and full of strings, and of a browne purple colour.
@ 6 This plant, whose figure our Author formerly gaue for Fragaria sterilis, and in his description confounded with it, to auoid confusion, I thinke fit to giue you here amongst the Cinkefoiles, and in that place the Fragaria sterilis, as most agreeable thereto. This seemes to challenge kindred of three seuerall plants, that is, Cinkefoile, Tormentill, and Siluer-weed, for it hath the vpper leaues, the yellow floures, creeping branches, and root of Cinkefoile, but the lower leaues are of a darke greene, and grow many vpon one middle rib like those of Siluer-weed; the fruit is like an vnripe Strawberry. Lobel calls this Pentaphyllum supinum Tormentilae facie: and Tabernamontanus, Quinquefolium fragifcrum repens. @
7 The seuenth kinde of Cinkefoile, Pena that diligent searcher of Simples found in the Alpes of Rhetia, nere Clauena, and at the first sight supposed it to be a kinde of Tormentilla, or Pentaphyllum;

saue that it had a more threddy root, rather like Geranium; it is of a darke colour outwardly, hauing some sweet smell, representing Garyophyllata in the sauor of his roots: in leaues and floures it resembles Cinkefoile and Tormentill, and in shape of his stalkes and roots Auens or Garyophyllata, participating of them all: notwithstanding it approcheth neerest vnto the Cinkefoiles, hauing stalkes a foot high, whereupon grow leaues diuided into fiue parts, and jagged round about the edges like the teeth of a saw, hauing the pale yellow floures of Pentaphyllum or Tormentilla; within which are little mossie or downy threddes, of the colour of saffron, but lesser than the common Auens.
8 The eighth kinde of Cinkefoile (according to the opinion of diuers learned men, who haue had the view thereof, and haue iudged it to be the true Leucas of Dioscorides, agreeable to Dioscorides his description) is all hoary, whereupon it tooke the addition Incanum. The stalkes are thicke, wooddy, and somewhat red, wrinckled also, and of a browne colour; which rise vnequall from the root, spreading themselues into many branches, shadowing the place where it groweth, beset with thicke and notched leaues like Scordium, or water Germander, which according to the iudgment of the learned is thought to be of no lesse force against poison than Pentaphyllon, or Tormentilla, being of an astringent and drying quality. Hereupon it may be that some trying the force hereof, haue yeelded it vp for Leucas Dioscoridis. This rare plant I neuer found growing naturally, but (...) the hollownesse of the peakish mountaines, and dry grauelly vallies.


@ 11 Quinquefolium syluaticum minus flo. albo: Small white floured wood Cinkefoile.


@ 12 Quinquefolium minus flo. aureo. Small golden floured Cinkefoile.


@ 9 This hath the like creeping purple branches as the last described: the leaues are narrower, more hairy and deeper cut in: the floures are also of a (...) golden colour, in other respects they are alike. @
Our Author formerly in his description, title, and place of growing (...) that plant which he figured, and (...) yet kept in the second place; and in the first place he figured the common Cinke-foile, and made mention of it, yet without description in the second. That which (...) was in the (...) place, by the name of (...) (...) (...). was the same with that in the (...) place.

 10 The wood Cinkefoile hath many leaues spred vpon the ground, consisting of fiue parts; among which rise vp other leaues, set vpon very tall foot-stalkes, and long in respect of those that did grow by the ground, and somewhat snipt about the ends, and not all alongst the edges. The floures grow vpon slender stalkes, consisting of fiue white leaues. The root is thicke with diuers sibres comming from it.
@ 11 This also from such a root as the last described sends forth many slender branches not (...), but standing vpright, and set with little hoary leaues, snipt onely at the ends, like as

@ 13 Pentaphyllum fragiferum. Strawberry Cinkfoile.
those of the last described: the tops of the branches carry pretty white floures like those of the last described, whereof it seems to be a kinde, yet lesse in each respect.
12 This from a blacke and fibrous root sends forth creeping branches, set with leaues like the common Cinkfoile, but lesse, somewhat hoary and shining; the stalks are some handfull high, and on their tops carry large floures in respect of the smalnesse of the plant, and these of a faire golden colour, with saffron coloured threds in their middle: the seedes grow after the manner of other Cinkfoiles: this floures in Iune, and it is Clusius his Quinquefolium 3. aureo flore. @
13 There is one of the mountain Cinkfoiles that hath diuers slender brittle stalks, rising immediatly out of the ground; whereupon are set by equall distances certain iagged leaues, not vnlike to the smallest leaues of Auens: the floures are white and grow at the top, hauing in them threds yellow of colour, and like to the other Cinkfoiles, but altogether lesser. The root is thicke, tough, and of a wooddie substance. @ The seedes grow clustering together like little Strawberries, whence Clusius calls it Quinquefolium fragiferum. @


 The Place.
They grow in low and moist medowes, vpon banks and by high waies sides: the second is onely to be found in gardens.
The third groweth in the woods of Sauena and Narbon, but not in England: The fourth groweth in a marsh ground adioining to the land called Bourne ponds, halfe a mile from Colchester; from whence I brought some plants for my garden, where they flourish and prosper well.
The fifth groweth vpon Beestone castle in Cheshire: the sixth vpon bricke and stone wals about London, especially vpon the bricke wall in Liuer-lane.
The place of the seuenth and eight is set forth in their descriptions.


 The Time.
These plants do floure from the beginning of May to the end of Iune.


 The Names.
Cinkfoile is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Quinquefolium: the Apothecaries vse the Greek name Pentaphyllon: and sometime the Latine name. There be very many bastard names, wherewith I will not trouble your eares: in High Dutch, (...), (...): in Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in Italian, Cinquefoglio: in French, Quinte fueille: in Spanish, Cinco en rama: in English, Cinkfoile, Fiue finger Grasse, Fiue leaued grasse, and Sinkfield.


 The Temperature.
The roots of Cinkfoile, especially of the first, do vehemently drie, and that in the third degree, but without biting: for they haue very little apparant heat or sharpnesse.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the roots of Cinkfoile drunke, cureth the bloudy flixe, and all other fluxes of  the belly, and stancheth all excessiue bleeding.
The iuice of the roots while they be yong and tender, is giuen to be drunke against the diseases  of the liuer and lungs, and all poison.
The same drunke in Mead or honied water, or wine wherein some pepper hath been mingled, cureth  the tertian or quartaine feuers: and being drunken after the same manner for thirty daies together, it helpeth the falling sicknesse.
The leaues vsed among herbes appropriate for the same purpose, cureth ruptures and burstings  of the rim, and guts falling into the cods.

The iuice of the leaues drunken doth cure the Iaundice, and (...) the stomacke and  liuer.
The decoction of the roots held in the mouth doth mitigate the paine of the teeth, staieth putrifaction, and all putrified vlcers of the mouth, helpeth the inflammations of the almonds, throat, and the parts adioining, it staieth the laske, and helpeth the bloudy flix.
The root boiled in vineger is good against the shingles, appeaseth the rage of fretting sores, and  cankerous vlcers.
It is reported, that foure branches hereof cureth quartaine agues, three tertians, and one branch  quotidians: which things are most vaine and sriuolous, as likewise many other such like, which are not onely found in Dioscorides, but also in other Authors, which we willingly withstand.
Ortolpho Morolto a learned Physition, commended the leaues being boiled with water, and some  Lignum vitae added therto, against the falling sicknesse, if the patient be caused to sweat vpon the taking thereof. He likewise commendeth the extraction of the roots against the bloudy flix.



CHAP. 383. Of Setfoile, or Tormentill.


Tormentilla. Setfoile.



 The Description.
THis herbe Tormentill or Setfoile is one of the Cinkfoiles, it brings forth many stalks slender, weake, scarse able to lift it selfe vp, but rather lieth downe vpon the ground: the leaues be lesser than Cinkefoile, but moe in number, somtimes fiue, but commonly seuen, whereupon it tooke his name Setfoile, which is seuen leaues, and those somewhat snipt about the edges: the floures grow on the toppes of slender stalkes, of a yellow colour, like those of the Cinkfoiles. The root is blacke without, reddish within, thicke, tuberous, or knobbie.


 The Place.
This plant loueth woods and shadowie places, and is likewise found in pastures lying open to the Sun almost euery where.


 The Names.
(...) (...) (...) May, vnto the end of (...)


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists Tormentilla: some (...) it after the number of the leaues (...), and Septifolium: in English, Setfoile and Tormentill: in high-Dutch, (...): most take it to be Chrysogonon; whereof Dioscorides hath made a briefe description.


 The Temperature.
The root of Tormentill doth mightily dry, and that in the third degree, and is of thin parts: it hath in it very little heat, and is of a binding quality.


 The Vertues.
Tormentill is not only of like vertue with Cinkefoile, but also of greater efficacie: it is much  vsed against pestilent diseases: for it strongly resisteth putrifaction, and procureth sweate.

The leaues and roots boiled in wine, or the iuice thereof drunken prouoketh sweat, and by that  means driueth out all venome from the heart, expelleth poison, and preserueth the bodie in time of pestilence from the infection thereof, and all other infectious diseases.
The roots dried made into pouder and drunke in wine doth the same.
The same pouder taken as aforesaid, or in the water of a Smiths forge, or rather the water wherein  hot steele hath been often quenched of purpose, cureth the laske and bloudy flix, yea although the patient haue adioined vnto his scouring a grieuous feuer.
It stoppeth the spitting of bloud, pissing of bloud, and all other issues of bloud, as well in men as  women.
The decoction of the leaues and rootes, or the iuice thereof drunke, is excellent good for all  wounds, both outward and inward: it also openeth and healeth the stoppings of the liuer and lungs, and cureth the iaundice.
The root beaten into pouder, tempered or kneaded with the white of an egge and eaten, staieth  the desire to vomite, and is good against choler and melancholie.



CHAP. 384. Of wilde Tansie or Siluer-weed.


Argentina. Siluerweed, or wilde Tansie.



 The Description.
WIlde Tansie creepeth along vpon the ground with fine slender stalkes and clasping tendrels: the leaues are long made vp of many small leaues, like vnto those of the garden Tansie, but lesser; on the vpper side greene, and vnder very white. The floures be yellow, and stand vpon slender stems, as doe those of Cinkfoile,


 The Place.
It groweth in moist places neere vnto high waies and running brookes euery where.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists do call it Argentina, of the siluer drops that are to be seene in the distilled water therof when it is put into a glasse, which you shall easily see rowling and tumbling vp and downe in the bottome; @ I iudge it rather so called of the fine shining Siluer coloured leaues. @ It is likewise called Potentilla: of diuers, Agrimonia syluestris, Anserina, and Tanacetum syluestre: in High Dutch, (...): in Low Dutch, (...): in French, Argentine: in English, Wilde Tansie, and Siluerweed.


 The Temperature.
It is of temperature moderatly cold, and dry almost in the third degree, hauing withall a binding facultie.


 The Vertues.
Wilde Tansie boiled in wine and drunk, stoppeth the laske and bloudy flix, and all other flux of  bloud in man or woman.
The same boiled in water and salt and drunke, dissolueth clotted and congealed bloud in such  as are hurt or bruised with falling from some high place.
The decoction hereof made in water, cureth the vlcers and cankers of the mouth, if some honie  and allom be added thereto in the boiling.
Wilde Tansie hath many other good vertues, especially against the stone, inward wounds, and  wounds of the priuie or secret parts, and closeth vp all greene and fresh wounds.

The distilled water taketh away freckles, spots, pimples in the face and Sun-burning; but the  herbe laid to infuse or steepe in white wine is far better: but the best of all is to steepe it in strong white wine vinegre, the face being often bathed or washed therewith.



CHAP. 385. Of Auens, or Herbe Bennet.


1 Caryophyllata. Auens or herbe Bennet.


2 Caryophyllata montana. Mountaine Auens.



 The Description.
1 THe common Auens hath leaues not vnlike to Agrimony, rough, blackish, and much clouen or deepely cut into diuers gashes: the stalke is round and hairy, a soot high, diuiding it selfe at the top into diuers branches, whereupon do grow yellow floures like those of Cinkefoile or wilde Tansie: which being past, there follow round rough reddish hairy heads or knops ful of seed, which being ripe wil hang vpon garments as the Burs doe. The root is thicke, reddish within, with certaine yellow strings fastened thereunto, smelling like vnto Cloues or like vnto the roots of Cyperus.
2 The Mountain Auens hath greater and thicker leaues than the precedent, rougher, and more hairie, not parted into three, but rather round, nicked on the edges: among which riseth vp slender stalkes, whereon doe grow little longish sharpe pointed leaues: on the toppe of each stalke doth

3 Caryophyllata Alpina pentaphyllaea. Fiue leaued Auens.@ 4 Caryophyllata montana purpurea. Red floured mountaine Auens.@ 5 Caryophyllata Alpina minima. Dwarfe mountaine Auens.
grow one floure greater than that of the former, which consisteth of fiue little leaues as yellow as gold: after which growes vp the seeds among long hairy threds. The root is long, growing (...), somewhat thicke, with strings anexed thereto.
3 Fiue finger Auens hath many small leaues spred vpon the ground, diuided into siue parts, somewhat snipt about the edges like Cinkefoile, whereof it tooke his name. Among which rise vp slender stalkes diuided at the top into diuers branches, whereon do grow small yellow floures like those of Cinkefoile: the root is composed of many tough strings of the smell (...) Cloues, which makes it a kind of Auens; otherwise doubtles it must of necessitie be one of the Cinksoiles
@ 4 This hath ioynted stringy roots some finger thick, from whence rise vp many large and hairy leaues, composed of diuers little leaues, with larger at the top, and these snipt about the edges like as the common Auens: amongst these leaues grow vp sundry stalkes some foot or better high, whereon grow floures hanging downe their heads, and the tops of the stalkes and cups of the floures are commonly of a purplish colour: the floures themselues are of a pretty red colour, and are of diuers shapes, and grow diuers wayes; which hath beene the reason that Clusius and others haue iudged them seuerall plants, as may be seene is Clusius his Workes, where he giues you the floures, which you here finde exprest, for a different kind. Now some of these floures, euen the greater part of them grow with fiue red round pointed leaues, which neuer lie faire open, but only stand straight out, the middle part being filled with a hairy matter and yellowish threds: other-some consist of seuen, eight, nine, or more leaues; and some againe lie wholly open, with greene leaues growing close vnder the cup of the floure, as you may see them represented in the figure; and some few now and then may be found composed of a great many little leaues thick thrust together, making a very double floure. After the floures are falne come such hairy heads as in other plants of this kinde, amongst which lies the seed. Gesner calls this Geum rivale: Thalius, Caryophyllata maior purpurea: Camerarius, Caryophyllata aquatica: Clusius, Caryophyllata mont ana prima, and tertia.
5 The root of this is also thicke, fibrous, and whitish; from which arise many leaues three fingers high, resembling those of Agrimonie, the little leaues standing directly opposite each against other, snipt about the edges, hairy, a little curld, and of a deepe greene colour: out of the midst of those, vpon a short stalk growes commonly on single floure of a gold-yellow colour, much like the mountaine Auens described in the second place. It floures at the beginning of Iuly, and groweth vpon the Alpes. Pona was the first that described it, and that by the name of Caryophyllata Alpina omnium minima. @


 The Place.
These kindes of Auens are found in high mountaines and thicke woods of the North parts of England: we haue them in our London gardens, where they flourish and encrease infinitely.
@ The red floured mountaine Auens was found growing in Wales by my much honoured friend Mr. Thomas Glynn, who sent some plants thereof to our Herbarists, in whose gardens it thriueth exceedingly. @


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of May to the end of Iuly.


 The Names.
Auens is called Caryophyllata, so named of the smell of Cloues which is in the roots, and diuers call it Sanamunda, Herba benedicta, and Nardus rustica: in high-Dutch, Benedicten (...): in French, Galiot: of the Wallons, Gloriafilia: in English, Auens, and herbe Benet: it is thought to be Geum Plinij, which most do suspect, by reason he is so briefe. Geum, saith Pliny, lib. 26. cap. 7. hath little slender roots, blacke, and of a good smell.
The other kinde of Auens is called of the later Herbarists, Caryophyllata montana, Mountaine Auens: it might (...) with the description of Baccharis, if the floures were purple tending to whitenesse; which as we haue said are yellow, and likewise differ in that, that the roots of Auens smell of Cloues, and those of Baccharis haue the smell of Cinnamon.


 The Temperature.
The roots and leaues of Auens are manifestly dry, and something hot, with a kinde of scouring qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of Auens made in wine is commended against cruditie or rawnesse of the stomacke, paine of the Collicke, and the biting of venomous beasts.
The same is likewise a remedie (...) stitches and griefe in the side, (...) stopping of the liuer; it  concocteth raw humours, scoureth away such things as cleaue to the intrals, wasteth and dissolueth winde, especially being boyled with wine: but if it be boyled with pottage or broth (...) is of great efficacie, and of all other pot-herbes is chiefe, not onely in physicall broths, but commonly to be vsed in all.
The leaues and roots taken in this manner dissolue and consume clottered bloud in any inward 

part of the body; and therfore they are mixed with potions which are drunk of those that are bruised, that are inwardly broken, or that haue fallen from some high place.
The roots taken vp in Autumne and dried, do keep garments from being eaten with moths, and  make them to haue an excellent good odour, and serue for all the physicall purposes that Cinkefoiles do.



CHAP. 386. Of Straw-berries.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Strawberries; one red, another white, a third sort greene, and likewise a wilde Straw-berrie, which is altogether barren of fruit.


1 Fragaria and Fraga. Red Straw-berries.


2 Fragaria and Fraga subalba. White Straw-berries.




 The Description.
1 THe Straw-berry hath leaues spred vpon the ground, somewhat snipt about the edges, three set together vpon one slender foot-stalke like the Trefoile, greene on the vpper side, and on the nether side more white: among which rise vp slender stems, whereon do grow small floures, consisting of fiue little white leaues, the middle part somwhat yellow, after which commeth the fruit, not vnlike to the Mulberrie, or rather the Raspis, red of colour, hauing the taste of wine, the inner pulpe or substance whereof is moist and white, in which is contained little seeds: the root is threddy, (...) long continuance, sending forth many strings, which disperse themselues far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.
2 Of these there is also a second kinde, which is like to the former in stems, strings, leaues, and floures. The fruit is something greater, and of a whitish colour, wherein is the difference.
There is another sort, which brings forth leaues, floures, and strings like the other of his kinde. The fruit is green when it is ripe, tending to rednesse vpon that side that lieth to the Sun, cleauing

That figure which formerly was in this place, and some part of the description were (as I haue (...) noted) of the (...) (...) (...), (...) you may finde described amongst the (...) in the sixth place.

 3 Fragariaminime vesca, siue sterilis. Wilde or barren Straw-berry.
faster to the stemmes, and is of a sweeter taste, wherein onely consisteth the difference.
@ There is also kept in our gardens (onely for varietie) another Strawberrie which in leaues and growing is like the common kinde; but the floure is greenish, and the fruit is harsh, rough, and prickely, being of a greenish colour, with some shew of rednesse. Mr. Iohn Trade scant hath told me that he was the first that tooke notice of this Straw-berry, and that in a womans garden at Plimouth, whose daughter had gathered and set the roots in her garden in stead of the common Straw-berry: but she finding the fruit not to answer her expectation, intended to throw it away: which labor he spared her, in taking it and bestowing it among the louers of such varieties, in whose gardens it is yet preserued. This may be called in Latine, Fragaria fructu hispido, The prickly Straw-berry. @
That figure which formerly was in this place, and some part of the description were (as I haue (...) noted) of the (...) (...) (...), (...) you may finde described amongst the (...) in the sixth place.

 3 This wild Strawberry hath leaues like the other Straw-berry, but somewhat lesse, and softer, slightly indented about the edges, and (...) a light greenecolour: among which rise vp (...) stems bearing such floures as the common Straw-berries doe, but lesser, which doe wither away, leauing behinde a barren or chaffie head, in shape like a Straw-berrie, but of no worth or value: the root is like the others.


 The Place.
Straw-berries do grow vpon hills and vallies, likewise in woods and other such places that be somewhat shadowie: they prosper well in Gardens, the first euery where, the other two more rare, and are not to be found saue only in gardens.
@ The barren one growes in diuers places, as vpon Blacke heath, in Greenwich parke, etc. @


 The Time.
The leaues continue greene all the yeare: in the Spring they spred further with their strings, and floure afterward: the berries are ripe in Iune and Iuly. @ The barren one floures in April and May, but neuer carries any berries. @


 The Names.
The fruit or berries are called in Latine by Virgil and Ouid, Fraga: neither haue they any other name commonly knowne: they are called in high-Dutch Erdbeeren: in low-Dutch, (...): in French, Fraises: in English, Strawberries.


 The Temperature.
The leaues and roots do coole and dry, with an astriction or binding quality: but the berries be cold and moist.


 The Vertues.
The leaues boyled and applied in manner of a pultis taketh away the burning heatc in wounds: the (...) thereof strengthneth the gummes, fastneth the teeth, and is good to be held in the mouth, both against the inflammation or burning heate thereof, and also of the almonds of the throat: they stay the ouermuch flowing of the bloudy flix, and other issues of bloud.
The berries quench thirst, and do allay the inflammation or heate of the stomack: the nourishment  which they yeeld is little, thin, and waterish, and if they happen to putrifie in the stomacke, their nourishment is naught.
The distilled water drunke with white Wine is good against the passion of the heart, reuiuing  the spirits, and making the heart merry.
The distilled water is reported to scoure the face, to take away spots, and to make the face faire  and smooth; and is likewise drunke with good successe against the stone in the kidnies.
The leaues are good to be put into Lotions or washing waters, for the mouth and the priuie  parts.

The ripe Straw-berries quench thirst, coole heat of the stomack, and inflammation of the liuer, take away (if they be often vsed) the rednesse and heate of the face.



CHAP. 387. Of Angelica.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers kindes of Angelica's; the garden Angelica, that of the water, and a third sort wilde growing vpon the land.


1 Angelica satina. Garden Angelica.


2 Angelica syluestris. Wilde Angelica.




 The Description.
1 Concerning this plant Angelica there hath bin heretofore some contention and controuersie; Cordus calling it Smyrnium: some later writers, Costus niger: but to auoid cauill, the controuersie is soone decided, sith it and no other doth assuredly retaine the name Angelica. It hath great broad leaues, diuided againe into other leaues, which are indented or snipt about much like to the vppermost leaues of Sphondylium, but lower, tenderer, greener, and of a stronger sauor: among which leaues spring vp the stalkes, very great, thicke, and hollow, sixe or seuen soot high, ioynted or kneed: from which ioynts proceed other armes or branches, at the top whereof grow tufts of whitish floures like Fennell or Dill: the root is thicke, great, and oilous, out of which issueth, if it be cut or broken, an oylie liquor: the whole plant, as well leaues, stalkes, as roots, are of a reasonable pleasant sauour, not much vnlike Petroleum.
There is another kinde of true Angelica found in our English gardens (which I haue obserued) being like vnto the former, sauing that the roots of this kinde are more fragrant, and of a more aromaticke sauor, and the leaues next the ground of a purplish red colour and the whole plant lesser.



@ 3 Archangelica. Great wilde Angelica.


2 The wilde Angelica, which seldome growes in gardens, but is found to grow plentifully in water soken grounds and cold moist medowes, is like to that of the garden, saue that his leaues are not so deepely cut or iagged; they be also blacker and narrower: The stalkes are much slenderer and shorter, and the floures whiter: the root much smaller, and hath more threddy strings appendant thereunto, and is not so strong of sauour by a great deale.
3 Matthiolus and Gesner haue made mention of another kinde of Angelica, but we are very slenderly instructed by their insufficient descriptions: notwithstanding for our better knowledge and more certain assurance I must needs record that which my friend Mr. Bredwell related to me concerning his sight thereof, who found this plant growing by the (...) which compasseth the house of Mr. Munke of the parish of Iuer, two miles from Colbrook; and since that I haue seene the same in low fenny and marshy places of Essex, about Harwich. This plant hath leaues like vnto the garden Angelica, but smaller, and fewer in number, set vpon one rib a great stalke, grosse and thicke, whose ioynts and that small rib whereon the leafe growes are of a reddish colour, hauing many long branches comming forth of an husk or case, such as is in the common garden Parsnep: the floures doe grow at the top of the branches, and are of a white colour, and (...) fashion: which being past, there succeed broad long and thicke seeds, longer and thicker than garden Angelica: the root is great, thicke, white, of little sauour, with some strings appendant thereto.
@ This of our Authors description seemes to agree with the Archangelica of Lobel, Dodonaeus, and Clusius; wherefore I haue put their figure to it. @


 The Place.
The first is very common in our English gardens: in other places it growes wilde without planting; as in Norway, and in an Island of the North called Island, where it groweth very high. It is eaten of the inhabitants, the barke being pilled off, as we vnderstand by some that haue trauelled into Island, who were sometimes compelled to eate hereof for want of other food; and they report that it hath a good and pleasant taste to them that are hungry. It groweth likewise in diuers mountaines of Germanie, and especially of Bohemia.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August, whose roots for the most part do perish after the seed is ripe: yet haue I with often cutting the plant kept it from seeding, by which meanes the root and plant haue continued sundry yeares together.


 The Names.
It is called of the later age Angelica: in high-Dutch, (...), Brustwurtz, or des (...) (...) (...), that is, Spiritus sancti radix, the root of the holy Ghost, as witnesseth Leonhartus Fuchsius: in low-Dutch, Angeliika: in French, Angelic: in English also Angelica.
It seemeth to be a kind of Laserpitium; for if it be compared with those things which Theophrastus at large hath written concerning Silphium or Laserpitium, in his sixth booke of the historie of plants, it shall appeare to be answerable thereunto. But whether wild Angelica be that which Theophrastus calleth Magydaris, that is to say, another kinde of Laserpitium, we leaue to be examined and considered of by the learned Physitians of our London Colledge.


 The Temperature.
Angelica, especially that of the garden, is hot and dry in the third degree; therefore it openeth, attenuateth or maketh thin, (...), and procureth sweat.



 The Vertues.
The roots of garden Angelica is a singular remedy against poison, and against the plague, and  all infections taken by euill and corrupt aire; if you do but take a peece of the root and hold it in your mouth, or chew the same between your teeth, it doth most certainely driue away the pestilentiall aire, yea although that corrupt aire haue possessed the hart, yet it driueth it out again by vrine and sweat, as Rue and Treacle, and such like Antipharmaca do.
Angelica is an enemy to poisons: it cureth pestilent diseases if it by vsed in season: a dram  weight of the pouder hereof is giuen with thin wine, or if the feuer be vehement, with the distilled water of (...) benedictus, or of Tormentill; and with a little vineger, and by it selfe also, or with Treacle of Vipers added.
It openeth the liuer and spleene: draweth downe the termes, driueth out or expelleth the secondine.
The (...) of the root made in wine, is good against the cold shiuering of agues.
It is reported that the root is auaileable against witchcraft and inchantments, if a man carry the  same about them, as Fuchsius saith.
It attenuateth and maketh thin, grosse and tough flegme: the root being vsed greene, and while  it is full of juice, helpeth them that be asthmaticke, dissoluing and expectorating the stuffings therein, by cutting off and clensing the parts affected, reducing the body to health againe; but when it is dry it worketh not so effectually.
It is a most singular medicine against surfeting and loathsomenesse to meate: it helpeth concoction  in the stomacke, and is right beneficiall to the hart: it cureth the bitings of mad dogges, and all other (...) beasts.
The wilde kindes are not of such force in working, albe it they haue the same vertues attributed  vnto them.



CHAP. 388. Of Masterworts and herbe Gerard.


1 Imperatoria. Masterwoorts.


2 Herba Gerardi. Herbe Gerard, or Aish-weed.




 The Description.
1 IMperatoria or Masterwoort hath great broad leaues not much vnlike wilde Angelica, but smaller, and of a deeper greene colour, in sauor like Angelica, and euery leafe diuided into sundry other little leaues: the tender knotted stalkes are of a reddish colour, bearing at the top round spokie tufts with white floures: the seed is like the seed of Dill: the root is thicke, knotty and tuberous, of a good sauour, and hot or biting vpon the tongue, which hath mooued the vnskilfull to call it Pellitory of Spaine, but very vnfitly and vntruely.
2 Herba Gerardi, which Pena doth also call Imperatoria and Ostrutium: the Germaines Podagraria, that is, Gout-woort: in English, herbe Gerard, or wilde Masterwoot, and in some places after Lyte, Ashweed; is very like the other in leaues, floures, and roots, sauing that they be smaller, growing vpon long stems: the roots tenderer, whiter, and not so thicke or tuberous. The whole plant is of a reasonable good sauour, but not so strong as Masterwoort.


 The Place.
Imperatoria groweth in darke woods and desarts; in my Garden and sundry others very plentifully.
Herbe Gerard groweth of it selfe in gardens without setting or sowing, and is so fruitfull in his increase, that where it hath once taken root, it will hardly be gotten out againe, spoiling and getting euery yeere more ground, to the annoying of better herbes.


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of Iune to the beginning of August.


 The Names.
Imperatoria, or Astrantia, is called in English, Masterwoort, or bastard Pellitory of Spaine.
Herba Gerardi is called in English, Herb Gerard, Aishweed, and Goutwoort: in Latine also Podagraria Germanica.


 The Nature.
Imperatoria, especially the root, is hot and dry in the third degree. The wilde Imperatoria, or herbe Gerard, is almost of the same nature and quality, but not so strong.


 The Vertues.
Imperatoria is not onely good against all poison, but also singular against all corrupt and naughty  aire and infection of the pestilence, if it be drunken with wine.
The roots and leaues stamped, dissolue and cure pestilentiall carbuncles and botches, and such  other apostumations and swellings, being applied thereto.
The root drunke in wine cureth the extreme and rigorous cold fits of agues, and is good against  the dropsie, and prouoketh sweat.
The same taken in manner aforesaid, comforteth and strengthneth the stomack, helpeth digestion, restoreth appetite, and dissolueth all ventosities or windinesse of the stomacke and other parts.
It greatly helpeth such as haue taken great squats, bruses, or falls from some high place, dissoluing  and scattering abroad congealed and clotted bloud within the body: the root with his leaues stamped and laid vpon the members infected, cureth the bitings of mad dogs, and of all other venomous beasts.
Herbe Gerard with his roots stamped, and laid vpon members that are troubled or vexed with  the gout, swageth the paine, and taketh away the swellings and inflammation thereof, which occasioned the Germaines to giue it the name Podagraria, because of his vertues in curing the gout.
It cureth also the Hemorrhoids, if the fundament be bathed with the decoction of the leaues  and roots, and the soft and tender sodden herbes laid thereon very hot.
False Pellitory of Spaine attenuateth or maketh thin, digesteth, prouoketh sweate and vrine, concocteth grosse and colde humors, wasteth away windinesse of the entrailes, stomacke and matrix: it is good against the collicke and stone.
One dram of the root in pouder giuen certaine daies together, is a remedy for them that haue  the dropsie, and also for those that are troubled with convulsions, cramps, and the falling sickenesse.
Being giuen with wine before the fit come, it cureth the quartaine ague, and is a remedy against  pestilent diseases.
The same boiled in sharpe or sower wine, easeth the tooth-ach, if the mouth be washed therewith  very hot.
Being chewed it draweth forth water and flegme out of the mouth (which kinde of remedies  in Latine are called Apophlegmatismi) and disburdeneth the braine of phlegmaticke humours, and are likewise vsed with good successe in apoplexies, drowsie sleepes, and other like infirmities.




CHAP. 389. Of Hercules Wound-wort, or All-heale.

 The Kindes.
PAnax is of sundry kindes, as witnesseth Theophrastus in his ninth booke; one groweth in Syria, and likewise other three, that is to say, Chironium, Heraclium, and Aesculapium; or Chirons Allheale, Hercules All-heale, and Aesculapius All-heale. Besides these there is one (...), or broad (...); so that in Theophrastus there are six kindes of Panax: but Dioscorides describeth only three, Horacleum, Asclepium, and Chironium: whereunto we haue added another sort, whose vertues wee found out by meanes of a husbandman, and for that cause haue named it Panax Coloni, or Clownes wort.


1 Panax Heracleum. Hercules All-heale.


2 Panax (...) maius. Hercules great Wound-wort.




 The Description.
1 HErcules All-heale or Wound-wort hath many broad leaues spread vpon the ground, very rough and hairy, of an ouerworne greene colour, and deepely cut into diuers sections like those of the Cow Parsenep, and not vnlike to the fig leaues: among the which riseth vp a very strong stalke couered ouer with a rough hairinesse, of the height of (...) or fiue cubits. Being wounded it yeeldeth forth a yellow gummie iuyce, as doth euery part of the plant, which is that precious gum called Opopanax: at the top of which stalks stand great tufts or vmbels of yellowish floures, set together in spoky rundles like those of Dill, which turn into seed of a straw colour, sharpe and hot in taste, and of a pleasing (...): the root is very thicke, fat; and full of iuyce, and of a white colour.
2 The great Wound-wort, which the Venetians nourish in their gardens, hath great large leaues somewhat rough or hairie, consisting of diuers small leaues set together vpon a middle rib, which make one entire lease ioyned together in one, whereof each collaterall or side leafe is long,

and sharpe pointed: among which riseth vp a knotty stalke three (...) foure cubits high, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches; on the tops whereof do grow spokie tufts or rundles like the precedent, but the floures are commonly white: the seed is flat and plaine: the root long, thicke, and white, which being broken or wounded, yeeldeth forth liquor like that of the former, of a hot and biting taste.


 The Place.
These plants grow in Syria; the first of them also in my garden: but what Panax of Syria is, Theophrastus doth not expresse. Pliny in his (...) booke, Chap. 26. saith, that the leaues are round, and of a great compasse: but it is suspected that these are drawne from the description of Hercules Panax.
Broad leafed Panax is thought to be the great Centory: for Pliny witnesseth, that Panax which Chiron found out is syrnamed Centaurium, Centorie.
Matthiolus saith it growes of it selfe in the tops of the hills Apennini, in the Cape Argentaria, in the sea coasts of Siena, and it is cherished in the gardens of Italy: but he cannot affirme, That the liquor hereof is gathered in Italy; for the liquor Opopanax which is sold in Venice is brought, saith he, out of Alexandria a city in Egypt: it groweth also in Syria, Booetia, and in Phocide, cities of Arcadia.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from the first of May vnto the end of September.


 The Names.
That which is is called (...) in Greeke, is likewise named Panax in Latine: and that Panax Heraclium which Dioscorides setteth downe is called in Latine, Panax Heraculanum, or Herculeum, or Hercules Panax: it may be called in English, Hercules his Wound-wort or All-heale, or Opopanax wort, of the Greeke name.


 The Temperature.
The barke of the root of Hercules Wound-wort is hot and dry, yet lesse than the iuyce, as Galen teacheth.


 The Vertues.
The seed beat to pouder and drunke in Wormwood wine is good against poyson, the biting of  mad dogs, and the stinging of all manner of venomous beasts.
The leafe or root stamped with honey, and brought to the forme of an Vnguent or Salue, (...) wounds and vlcers of great difficultie, and couereth bones that are bare or naked without flesh.



CHAP. 390. Of Clownes Wound-wortor All-heale.

 The Description.
CLownes All-heale, or the Husbandmans Wound-wort, hath long slender square stalks of the height of two cubits, furrowed or chamfered along the same as it were with small gutters, and somewhat rough or hairy: whereupon are set by couples one opposite to another, long rough leaues somewhat narrow, bluntly indented about the edges like the teeth of a saw, of the forme of the leaues of Speare-mint, and of an ouerworne greene colour: at the top of the stalkes grow the floures spike fashion, of a purple colour mixed with some few spots of white, in forme like to little hoods. The root consisteth of many small threddy strings, whereunto are annexed or tied diuers knobby or tuberous lumpes, of a white colour tending to yellownesse: all the whole plant is of an vnpleasant sauour like Stachys or stinking Hore-hound. @ The root in the Winter time and the beginning of the Spring is somewhat knobby tuberous, and ioynted, which after the stalkes grow vp become flaccide and hollow, and so the old ones decay, and then it putteth forth new ones. @


 The Place.
It groweth in moist medowes by the sides of ditches, and likewise in fertile fields that are somwhat moist, almost euery where; especially in Kent about South-fleet, neere to Grauesend, and likewise in the medowes by Lambeth neere London.


 The Time.
It floureth in August, and bringeth his seed to perfection in the end of September.


 The Names.
That which hath bin said iu the description shall suffice touching the names, as well in Latine as English.



Panax Coloni. Clownes All-heale.


@ This plant by Gesner was called Stachys palustris, and Betonica faetida, and thought to be of the kinde of Herba (...), or Sideritis; to which indeed I should, and Thaltus hath referred it, calling it Sideritis 1. grauis odoris: Caesalpinus calls it Tertiola; and giues this reason, quod Tertianas sanet, because it cures Tertians. Tabernamontan. called it Stachys aquatica, whose figure with a description our Authour in the former edition gaue, pag. 565. by the name of Marrubium aquaticum acutum; yet (as it (...)) either not knowing, or forgetting what he had formerly done, he here againe setteth it forth as a new thing, vnder another title: but the former figure of Tabern. being in my iudgment the better, I haue here giuen you, with addition of the iointed tuberous roots as they are in Winter: yet by the Caruers fault they are not altogether so exquisitely exprest as I intended. @


 The Temperature.
This plant is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.


 The Vertues.
The leaues hereof stamped with Axungia or  hogs grease, and applied vnto greene wounds in manner of a pultesse, healeth them in short time, and in such absolute manner, that it is hard for any that haue not had the experience thereof to beleeue: for being in Kent about a Patient, it chanced that a poore man in mowing of Peason did cut his leg with a sithe, wherein he made a wound to the bones, and withall very large and wide, and also with great effusion of bloud; the poore man crept vnto this herbe, which he bruised with his hands, and tied a great quantity of it vnto the wound with a piece of his shirt, which presently stanched the bleeding, and ceased the paine, insomuch that the poore man presently went to his dayes worke againe, and so did from day to day, without resting one day vntill he was perfectly whole; which was accomplished in a few dayes, by this herbe stamped with a little hogs grease, and so laid vpon in manner of a pultesse, which did as it were glew or soder the lips of the wound together, and heale it according to the first intention, as we terme it, that is, without drawing or bringing the wound to suppuration or matter; which was fully performed in seuen dayes, that would haue required forty dayes with balsam it selfe. I saw the wound, and offered to heale the same for charitie; which he refused, saying that I could not heale it so well as himselfe: a clownish answer I confesse, without any thankes for my good will; whereupon I haue named it Clownes Wound-wort, as aforesaid. Since which time my selfe haue cured many grieuous wounds, and some mortall, with the same herbe; one for example done vpon a Gentleman of Grayes Inne in Holborne, Mr. Edmund Cartwright, who was thrust into the lungs, the wound entring in at the lower part of the Thorax, or the brest-blade, euen through that cartilaginous substance called Mucronata Cartilago, insomuch that from day to day the frothing and puffing of the lungs did spew forth of the wound such excrements as it was possessed of, besides the Gentleman was most dangerously vexed with a double quotidian feuer; whom by Gods permission I perfectly cured in very short time, and with this Clownes experiment, and some of my foreknowne helpes, which were as followeth.
First I framed a slight vnguent hereof thus: I tooke foure handfulls of the herbe stamped, and  put them into a pan, whereunto I added foure ounces of Barrowes grease, halfe a pinte of oyle Oliue, wax three ounces, which I boyled vnto the consumption of the iuyce (which is known when the stuffe doth not bubble at all) then did I straine it, putting it to the (...) againe, adding thereto two ounces of Turpentine, the which I suffered to boyle a little, reseruing the same for my vse.
The which I warmed in a sawcer, dipping therein small soft tents, which I put into the wound, defending the parts adioyning with a plaister of Calcitheos, relented with oyle of roses: which manner of dressing and preseruing I vsed euen vntill the wound was perfectly whole: notwithstanding once in a day. I gaue him two spoonfulls of this decoction following.
I tooke a quart of good Claret Wine, wherein I boyled an handfull of the leaues of Solidago

Saracenica, and Saracens Consound, or foure ounces of honey, whereof I gaue him in the morning two spoonfulls to drinke in a small draught of wine tempered with a little Sugar.
In like manner I cured a Shoo-makers seruant in Holburne, who intended to destroy himselfe  for causes knowne vnto many now liuiug: but I deemed it better to couer the fault, than to put the same in print, which might moue such a gracelesse fellow to attempt the like: his attempt was thus; First, he gaue himselfe a most mortall wound in the throat, in such sort, that when I gaue him drinke it came forth at the wound, which likewise did blow out the candle: another deep and grieuous wound in the brest with the said dagger, and also two others in Abdomine or the nether belly, so that the Zirbus or (...), commonly called the caule, issued forth, with the guts likewise: the which mortall wounds, by Gods permission, and the vertues of this herbe, I perfectly cured within twenty dayes: for the which the name of God be praised.



CHAP. 391. Of Magydare, or Laser-wort.


That figure which formerly was in this place, was of the (...) Lovage described in the following chapter.Laserpitium. Laser-wort.



 The Description.
IT seemeth that neither Dioscorides nor yet Theophrastus haue euer seene Laserpitium, Sagapenum, or any other of the gummiferous roots, but haue barely and nakedly set downe their iudgments vpon the same, either by heare-say, or by reading of other mens Workes. Now then seeing the old Writers be vnperfect herein, it behooueth vs in this case to search with more diligence the truth hereof; and the rather, for that very few haue set forth the true description of that Plant which is called Laserpitium, that is indeed the true Laserpitium, from the roots whereof flow that sap or liquor called Laser. This plant, as Pena and Lobel themselues say, was found out not far from the Isles which Dioscorides calls Stoechades, ouer against Massilia, among sundry other rare plants. His stalke is great and thicke like Ferula, or Fennell gyant: The leaues are like vnto the common Smallage, and of an vnpleasant sauour. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes, tuft-fashion like Ferula or Fennell: which being past, there succeed broad and flat seeds like Angelica, of a good sauour, and of the colour of Box. The roots are many, comming from one head or chiefe root, and are couered ouerwith a thicke and fat barke. These roots and stalkes being scarified or cut, there floweth out of them a strong liquor, which being dried is very medicinable, and is called Laser.


 The Place.
There be sundry sorts of Laser, flowing from the roots and stalkes of Laserpitium, the goodnesse or qualitie whereof varieth according to the countrey or clymate wherein the plant groweth. For the best groweth vpon the high mountaines of Cyrene and Africa, and is of a pleasant smell: in Syria also, Media, Armenia, and Lybia; the liquour of which plant growing in these places is of a most strong and detestable sauour. Lobel reporteth, that Iacobus Rainaudus an Apothecarie of Massilia was the first that made it knowne, or brought the plants thereof to Montpellier in France, vnto the learned Rondeletius, who right well beholding the same, concluded, that of all the kindes of Ferula that he had euer seene, there was not any so answerable vnto the true Laserpitium as this onely plant.


 The Time.
This Plant floureth in Montpellier about Midsommer.



 The Names.
It is called in Latine Laserpitium: in English, Laserwoort, and Magydare: the gum or liquour that issueth out of the same is called Laser, but that which is gathered from those plants that doe grow in Media and Syria, is called (...).


 The Nature.
Laserpitium especially the root, is hot and drie in the third degree: Laser is also hot and drie in the third (...), but it exceedeth much the heate of the leaues, stalkes, and rootes of Laserpitium.


 The Vertues.
The root of Laserpitium well pounded, or stamped with oile, scattereth clotted bloud, taketh away  blacke and blew markes that come of bruises or stripes, cureth and dissolueth the Kings-euill, and all hard swellings and botches, the places being annointed or plaistered therewith.
The same root made into a plaister with the oile of Ireos and wax, doth both asswage and cure  the Sciatica, or gout of the hip or huckle bone.
The same holden in the mouth and chewed, doth asswage the tooth-ache; for they are such roots  as draw from the braine a great quantite of humors.
The liquour or gum of Laserpitium, especially the Laser of Cyrene broken and dissolued in water  and drunken, taketh away the hoarsenesse that commeth suddenly: and being supt vp with a reare egge, cureth the cough: and taken with some good broth or supping, is good against an old pleurisie.
Laser cureth the iaundies and dropsie, taken with dried figs: also being taken in the quantitie of  a scruple, with a little pepper and Myrrhe, is very good against shrinking of sinewes, and members out of ioint.
The same taken with honie and vineger, or the syrrup of vineger, is very good against the falling  sicknesse.
It is good against the flux of the belly comming of the debilitie and weaknesse of the stomacke  (called in Latine Coeliacus morbus) if it be taken with raisons of the Sun.
It driueth away the shakings and shiuerings of agues, being drunke with wine, pepper, and white  Frankincense. Also there is made an electuarie thereof called Antidotus (...) (...), which is a singular medicine against feuer quartaines.
It is excellent against the bitings of all venomous beasts, and venomous shot of darts or arrowes, not onely taken inwardly, but also applied outwardly vpon wounds.
It bringeth to maturation, and breaketh all pestilentiall imposthumes, botches and carbuncles, being applied thereto with Rue, Salt-peter, and honie: after the same manner it taketh away corns after they haue been scarified with a knife.
Being laied to with Copperas and Verdigrease, it taketh away all superfluous outgrowings of  the flesh, the Polypus that happeneth in the nose, and all scuruie manginesse.
If it be applied with vineger, pepper and win, it cureth the naughtie scurfe of the head, and falling  off of the haire.
The gum or liquour of Laserpitium which groweth in Armenia, Lybia, and sundry other places, is  that stinking and lothsome gum called of the Arabian Physitions Asa and Assa, as also with vs in shoppes Asafoetida: but the Laserpitium growing in Cyrene is the best, and of a reasonable pleasant smell, and is called Laser to distinguish and make difference betweene the two iuices; though Asa foetida be good for all purposes aforesaid, yet is it not so good as Laser of Cyrene: it is good also to smell vnto, and to be applied vnto the nauels of women vexed with the choking, or rising of the mother.



CHAP. 392. Of common Louage.

 The Description.
ANtient writers haue added vnto this common kinde of Louage, a second sort, yet knowing that the plant so supposed is the true Siler montanum, and not Leuisticum, though others haue also deemed it Laserpitium. These two suppositions are easily answered, sith they bee sundrie kindes of plants, though they be very neere in shape and faculties one vnto another. This plant

The figure which was here was of the (...) (...), or (...) (...).Leuisticum vulgare. Common Louage.
being our common garden Louage, hath large and broad leaues, almost like to smallage. The stalks are round, hollow and knottie, 3. cubits high, hauing spoky (...), or bushy rundles; and at the top of the stalks of a yellow colour, a round, flat, and browne seed, like the seede of Angelica: the root is long and thicke, and bringeth forth euery yeare new stems.


 The Place.
The right Leuisticum or Louage groweth in sundry gardens, and not wild (as far as I know) in England.


 The Time.
Louage floureth most commonly in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine (...): and by some, Ligusticum: of other some, Siler montanum, but not truly: in High Dutch, (...): in French, Liuische: in Low Dutch, Lauetse: in English, Louage.


 The Nature.
This plant is hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Louage are very good for all  inward diseases, driuing away ventosities or windinesse, especially of the (...).
The seed thereof warmeth the stomack, helpeth  digestion; wherefore the people of Gennes in times past did vse it in their meates, as wee doe peppet, according to the testimonie of Ant. Musa.
The distilled water of Louage cleareth the sight, and putteth away all spots, lentils, freckles, and  rednesse of the face, if they be often washed therewith.



CHAP. 393. Of Cow Parsnep.

 The Description.
THis plant Sphondylium groweth in all Countries, and is knowne by the name of wilde Parsnep or Sphondylium, whereunto it effectually answereth, both in his grieuous and ranke sauour, as also in the likenesse of the root, wereupon it was called Sphondylium; and of the Germanes, Acanthus, but vntruly: the leaues of this plant are long and large, not much vnlike the leaues of wilde Parsnep, or Panax (...); deepely notched or cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw, and of an ouerworne greene colour. The floures grow in tusts or rundles, like vnto wilde Parsneps: the root is like to Henbane: this herbe in each part thereof hath an euill sauour, and differeth from the right Acanthium, not onely in faculties, but euen in all other things.


 The Place.
This plant groweth in fertile moist medowes, and feeding pastures, very commonly in all parts of England, or elsewhere, in such places as I haue trauelled.


 The Time.
Sphondylium floureth in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is called in Greek (...): in Latine likewise Sphondylium: the in shops of High and Low Germany

The figure (...) was of the (...) (...), or (...) of (...), and the figure that should haue beene here was (...), vnder the title of (...).Sphondylium. Cow Parsnep.
Branca vrsina, who vnaduisedly in times past haue vsed it in clysters, in stead of Brancke Vrsine, and thereupon haue named it Bernclaw: in English, Cow Parsnep, medow Parsnep, and Madnep.


 The Nature.
Cow Parsnep is of a manifest warm complexion.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of this plant do consume and  dissolue cold swellings if they be bruised and applied thereto.
The people of Polonia and Lituania vse  to make drinke with the decoction of this herbe, and leuen or some other thing made of meale, which is vsed in stead of beere and other ordinarie drinke.
The seede of Cow parsnep drunken, scoureth  out flegmaticke matter through the guts, it healeth the iaundice, the falling sicknesse, the strangling of the mother, and them that are short winded.
Also if a man be falne into a dead sleepe, or a sw o ne, the fume of the seed will waken him ag (...).
If a pihrenticke or (...) (...) head bee annointed with oile wherein the leaues and roots haue beene sodden, it helpeth him very much, and such as be troubled with the head-ache and the lethargie, or sicknesse called the forgetfull euill.



CHAP. 394. Of Herbe Frankincense.

 The Description.
1 THere hath beene from the beginning diuers plants of sundry kindes, which men haue termed by this glorious name Libanot is, onely in respect of the excellent and (...) smell which they haue yeelded vnto the sences of man, somewhat resembling (...). The sent and smell Dioscorides doth ascribe to the root of this first kinde, which bringeth forth a long stalk with ioints like Fennell, whereon grow leaues almost like Cheruill or Hemlocks, sauing that they be greater, broader, and thicker: at the top of the stalkes grow spokie tassels bearing whitish floures, which do turne into sweet smelling seed, somewhat flat, and almost like the seed of Angelica. The root is blacke without, and white within, hairie aboue, at the parting of the root and stalke like vnto Meum or Peucedanum, and sauoreth like vnto Rosine, or Frankincense.
2 The second kinde of Libanot is hath also a straight stalke, full of knots and ioints: the leaues are like vnto Smallage: the floures grow in tassels like vnto the former, and bring forth great, long and vneuen seed, of a sharpe taste: the root is like the former, and so is the whole plant very like, but lesser.
3 The third kinde of Libanot is differeth somewhat from the others in forme and shape, yet it agreeth with them in smell, which in some sort is like Frankinsence: the leaues are whiter, longer, and rougher than the leaues of Smallage: the stalks do grow to the height of two cubits, bearing at the top the spokie tufts of Dill, somewhat yellow: the root is like the former, but thicker, neither wanteth it hairie tassels at the top of the root; which the others also haue, before rehearsed.



1 Libanotis Theophrasti maior. Great herbe Frankinsence.


2 Libanotis Theophrasti minor. Small herbe Frankinsence.


(...) Libanotis Theophrasti nigra. Blacke herbe Frankinsence.


4 Libanotis Galeni, Cachrys verior. Rosemarie Frankincense.



4 I cannot (...) among all the plants called Libanotides, any one more agreeable to the true and right Libanotis of Dioscorides than this herbe, which ariseth vp to the height of fiue or six cubits with the cleere shining stalks of Ferula; diuiding it selfe from his knottie ioints into sundry arms or branches, set full of leaues like Fennell, but thicker and bigger, and fatter than the leaues of Cotulafoetida, of a grayish greene colour, bearing at the top of the stalks the tufts of (...), or rather of Carrots, full of yellow floures: which being past there succeedeth long flat seed like the seed of the Ash tree, smelling like (...), or Frankincense, which being chewed filleth the mouth with the tast of Frankincense, but sharper: all the rest of the plant is tender, and somewhat hot, but not vnpleasant: the plant is like vnto Ferula, and aboundeth with milke as Ferula doth, (...) a reasonable good (...).


 The Place.
I haue the two last kindes growing in my garden; the first and second grow vpon the high Deserts and mountaines of Germanie.


 The Time.
These herbs do floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
This herbe is called in Greeke (...), because their roots do smell like incense, which is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Rosmarinus; the first may be Englished great Frankincense Rosemarie; the second small Frankincense Rosemarie; Mr. Lite calleth the third in English, blacke Hart-root, the fourth white Hart-root: the seed is called Cachrys or Canchrys.


 The Nature.
These herbes with their seeds and roots are hot and drie in the second degree, and are of a digesting, dissoluing, and mundifying qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Libanotis pounded, stoppe the fluxe of the Hemorrhoides or piles, and supple the  swellings and inflammations of the fundament called Condilomata, concoct the swellings of the throat called Strum, and ripen botches that will hardly bee brought to suppuration or to ripenesse.
The iuice of the leaues and roots mixed with honie, and put into the eies, doth quicken the sight, and cleereth the dimnesse of the same.
The seed mingled with honie, doth scoure and clense rotten vlcers, and being applied vnto cold  and hard swellings consumeth and wasteth them.
The leaues and roots boiled vntill they be soft, and mingled with the meale of Darnell and vineger, asswageth the paine of the gout, if they be applied thereto.
Moreouer being receiued in wine and pepper, it helpeth the iaundice, and prouoketh sweat, and  being put into oile and vsed as an ointment, it cureth ruptures also.
It purgeth the disease called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Vitiligo, or Impetigo, that is, the white spottines  of the skin, chaps, or rifts in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, and by your patience cousin german to the scab of Naples, transported or transferred into France, and prettily well sprinkled ouer our Northern coasts.
When the seed of Libanotis is put into receits, you must vnderstand, that it is not meant of the  seed of Cachris, because it doth with his sharpenesse exasperate or make rough the gullet; for it hath a very heating qualitie, and doth drie very vehemently, yea this seed being taken inwardly, or the herbe it selfe, causeth to purge vpward and downeward very vehemently.



CHAP. 395. Of Corianders.

 The Description.
1 THe first or common kinde of Coriander is a very stinking herbe, smelling like the stinking worme called in Latine Cimex: it hath a round stalke full of branches, two foot long. The leaues are of a faint greene colour, very much cut or iagged: the leaues that grow lowest, and spring first, are almost like the leaues of Cheruill or Parsley, but those which come forth afterward, and grow vpon the stalks, are more iagged, almost like the leaues of Fumitorie, though a great deale smaller, tenderer, and more iagged. The floures are white, and do grow in round tassels like vnto Dill. The seed is round, hollow within, and of a pleasant sent and sauour when it is drie. The root is hard, and of a wooddie substance, which dieth when the fruit is ripe, and soweth it selfe

(...) yeare to yeare, whereby it mightily increaseth.


1 Coriandrum. Coriander.


@ 2 Coriandrum alterum minus odorum. Bastard Coriander.


2 There is a second kinde of Coriander very like vnto the former, sauing that the bottome leaues and stalks are smaller: the fruit thereof is greater, and growing together by couples, it is not so pleasant of sauour nor taste, being a wilde kinde thereof, vnfit either, for meat or medicine.


 The Place.
Coriander is sowne in fertile fields and gardens, and the first doth come of it selfe from time to time in my garden, though I neuer sowed the same but once.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly, and deliuer their seed in the end of August.


 The Names.
The first is called in Latine Coriandrum: in English, Corianders. The second, Coriandrum alterum, wilde Corianders.


 The Temperature.
The greene and stinking leaues of Corianders are of complexion cold and dry, and very naught, vnwholesome and hurtfull to the body.
The drie and pleasant well sauouring seede is warme, and very conuenient to sundrie purposes.


 The Vertues.
Coriander seed prepared and couered with sugar, as comfits, taken after meat closeth vp the  mouth of the stomacke, staieth vomiting, and helpeth digestion.
The same parched or rosted, or dried in an ouen, and drunk with wine, killeth and bringeth forth  wormes, stoppeth the laske, and bloudy flix, and all other extraordinarie issues of bloud.
The manner how to prepare Coriander, both for meat and medicine.
Take the seed well and sufficiently dried, whereupon poure some wine and vineger, and so leaue  them to (...) or steepe foure and twentie houres, then take them forth and drie them, and keepe them for your vse.
The greene leaues of Coriander boiled with the crums of bread or barly meale, consumeth all 

hot swellings and inflammations: and with Beane meale dissolueth the Kings euill, wens, and hard lumpes.
The juice of the leaues mixed and (...) in a leaden mortar, with Ceruse, Litharge of (...), vineger, and oile of Roses, cureth S. Anthonies fire, and taketh away all inflammations whatsoeuer.
The juice of the greene Coriander leaues, taken in the quantitie of foure dragmes, killeth and  poisoneth the body.
The seeds of Coriander prepared with sugar, preuaile much against the gout, (...) in some  small quantitie before dinner vpon a fasting stomacke, and after dinner the like without drinking immediately after the same, or in three or foure houres. Also if the same be taken after (...) it preuaileth the more, and hath more superiority ouer the disease.
Also (...) it be taken with meate fasting, it causeth good digestion, and shutteth vp the stomacke, keepeth away fumes from rising vp out of the same: it taketh away the sounding in the eares, drieth vp the rheume, and easeth the squinancy.



CHAP. 396. Of Parsley.


(...) (...). Garden Parsley.



 The Description.
1 THe leaues of garden Parsley are of a (...) greene, consisting of many little ones fastned together, diuided most commonly into three parts, and also snipt round about the edges: the stalke is aboue one cubit high, slender, something chamfered, on the top whereof stand spoked rundles, bringing forth very fine little floures, and afterwards small seeds somewhat of a fiery taste: the root is long and white, and good to be eaten.
2 There is another garden Parsley in taste and vertue like vnto the precedent: the onely difference is, that this plant bringeth forth leaues very admirably crisped or curled like fannes of curled feathers, whence it is called Apium crispum, siue multifidum; Curl'd Parsley.
@ 3 There is also kept in some gardens another Parsley called Apium siue Petroselinum Virginianum, or Virginian Parsly; it hath leaues like the ordinary, but rounder, and of a yellowish greene colour, the stalkes are some three foot high, diuided into sundry branches whereon grow vmbels of whitish floures: the seeds are like, but larger than those of the common Parsley, and when they are ripe they commonly sow themselues, and the old roots die, and the young ones beare seed the second yeere after there sowing. @


 The Place.
It is sowne in beds in gardens; it groweth both in hot and cold places, so that the ground be either by nature moist, or be oftentimes watered: for it prospereth in moist places, and is delighted with water, and therefore it naturally commeth vp neere to fountaines or springs: Fuchsius writeth that it is found growing of it selfe in diuers fenny grounds in Germany.


 The Time.
It may be sowne betime, but it slowly commeth vp: it may oftentimes be cut and cropped: it bringeth forth his (...) the (...) (...): the (...) be ripe in Iuly or August.


 The (...).
Euery one of the (...) is called in Greeke (...): but this (...) named, (...), that is to say, Apium hortense: the Apothecaries and (...) (...) name it Petroselinum: in high (...),

(...): in low Dutch, (...), (...): in French, du Persil: in Spanish, (...) (...), and Salsa: in Italian, (...): in English, Persele, Parsely, common Parsley, and garden Parsley. Yet is it not the true and right Petroselinum which groweth among rockes and (...), whereupon it tooke his name, and whereof the best is in Macedonia: therefore they are (...) who thinke that garden Parsley doth not differ from stone Parsley, and that the onely difference is, for that Garden Parsley is of lesse force than the wilde; for wilde herbes are more strong (...) operation than those of the garden.


 The Temperature.
Garden Parsley is hot and dry, but the seed is more hot and dry, which is hot in the second degree, and dry almost in the third: the root is also of a moderate heate.


 The Vertues.
The leaues are pleasant in sauces and broth, in which besides that they giue a (...) taste, they  be also singular good to take away stoppings, and to prouoke vrine: which thing the roots likewise do notably performe if they be boiled in broth: they be also delightful to the taste, and agreeable to the stomacke.
The seeds are more profitable for medicine; they make thinne, open, prouoke vrine, dissolue the  stone, breake and waste away winde, are good for (...) as haue the dropsie, draw downe menses, bring away the birth, and after-birth: they be commended also against the cough, if they be mixed or boiled with medicines made for that purpose: lastly they resist poisons, and therefore are mixed with treacles.
The roots or the seeds of any of them boiled in ale and drunken, cast forth strong venome or  poison, but the seed is the strongest part of the herbe.
They are also good to be put into clysters against the stone or torments of the guts.



CHAP. 367: Of water Parsley, or Smallage.


Eleoselinum, siue Paludapium. Smallage.



 The Description.
SMallage hath greene smooth and glittering leaues, cut into very many parcels, yet greater and broader than those of common Parsley: the stalkes be chamfered and diuided into branches, on the tops whereof stand little white floures; after which doe grow seeds something lesser than those of common Parsley: the roote is fastened with many strings.


 The Place.
This kinde of Parsley delighteth to grow in moist places, and is brought from thence into gardens. @ It growes wilde abundantly vpon the bankes in the salt marshes of Kent and Essex. @


 The Time.
It flourishes when the garden Parsley doth, and the stalke likewise commeth vp the next yeere after it is sowne, and then also it bringeth forth seeds which are ripe in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): of Gaza, Paludaplum: in shops, Apium, absolutely without any addition: in Latine, Palustre Apium, and Apium rusticum: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...), and of diuers (...): in Spanish and Italian, Apio: in French, de (...): in English, Smallage, Marsh Parsley, or water Parsley.


 The Temperature.
This Parsley is like in temperature and vertues to that of the garden, but it is both hotter and

drier, and of more force in most things: this is seldome eaten, neither is it (...) good for (...), but it is very profitable for medicine.


 The Vertues.
The juice thereof is good for many things, it clenseth, openeth, attenuateth or maketh thin; it  remooueth obstructions, and prouoketh vrine, and therefore those syrrups which haue this mixed with them, as that which is called Syrupus (...), open the stoppings of the liuer and spleene, and are a remedy for long lasting agues, whether they be tertians or quartains, and all other which proceed both of a cold cause and also of obstructions or stoppings, and are very good against the yellow jaundise.
The same juice doth perfectly cure the malicious and venomous vlcers of the mouth, and of the  almonds of the throat with the decoction of Barly and Mel Rosarum, or hony of Roses added, if the parts be washed therewith: it likewise helpeth all outward vlcers and foule wounds: with hony it is profitable also for cankers exulcerated, for although it cannot cure them, yet it doth keep them from putrifaction, and preserueth them from stinking: the seed is good for those things for which that of the Garden Parsley is: yet is not the vse thereof so safe, for it hurteth those that are troubled with the falling sickenesse, as by euident proofes it is very well knowne.
Smallage, as Pliny writeth, hath a peculiar vertue against the biting of venomous spiders.
The juice of Smallage mixed with hony and beane floure, doth make an excellent mundificatiue  for old vlcers and malignant sores, and staieth also the weeping of the cut or hurt sinewes in simple members, which are not very fatty or fleshie, and bringeth the same to perfect digestion.
The leaues boiled in hogs grease, and made into the forme of a pultis, take away the paine of  felons and whitlowes in the fingers, and ripen and heale them.



CHAP. 398. Of Mountaine Parsley.


This whole chapter was wholly taken from (...) Tempt. 5. lib. 4 cap. 3. wherefore I haue giuen his figure, which was (...) to the history, for the figure our Author here gaue, was of the (...) (...) (...), farre different from this, as I shall here: (...) shew you in the (...). of (...).Oreoselinum. Mountaine Parsley.



 The Description.
THe stalke of mountaine Parsley, as Dioscorides writeth, is a span high, growing from a slender root; vpon which are branches and little heads like those of Hemlock, yet much slenderer: on which stalkes do grow the seed, which is long, of a sharpe or biting taste, slender, and of a strong smell, like vnto Cumin: but we can not find that this kinde of Mountaine Parsley is knowne in our age: the leaues of this we here giue are like those of common parsley, but greater and broader, consisting of many slender footstalkes fastened vnto them; the stalke is short, the floures on the spoked tufts be white; the seed small: the root is white, and of a meane length or bignesse, in taste somewhat biting and bitterish, and of a sweet smell.


 The Place.
This whole chapter was wholly taken from (...) Tempt. 5. lib. 4 cap. 3. wherefore I haue giuen his figure, which was (...) to the history, for the figure our Author here gaue, was of the (...) (...) (...), farre different from this, as I shall here: (...) shew you in the (...). of (...).Dioscorides writeth, that mountaine Parsley groweth vpon rockes and mountaines. And Dodonaeus affirmeth that this herbe described growes on the hills which diuide Silesia from Morauia, called in times past the counntrey of the Marcomans: also it is said to be found on other mountaines and hills in the North parts of England.


 The Names.
The Grecians doe name it of the mountaines (...), which the Latines also for that cause doe call Apium Montanum, and Montapium: in English, mountaine Parsley: in Latine, Apium: but Dioscorides maketh Petroselinum or stone Parsley to differ from mountaine Parsley; for saith he,

we must not be deceiued, taking mountaine Parsley to be that which groweth on (...): (...) rocke Parsley is another plant, of some it is called, (...): in Latine, (...), (in English, much good:) for it is so named because it is good, and profitable (...) many things: and this is not altogether vnproperly termed Orcoselinum, or mountaine Parsley; for it groweth as we haue said on mountaines, and is not vnlike to stone Parsley: the seed is not like to that of Cumin, (...) if it were so: who would deny it to be Oreoselinum, or Dioscorides, his mountaine Parsley.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Oreoselinum, or mountaine Parsley is, as Galen saith, like in faculty vnto Smallage, but more effectuall;  Dioscorides writeth that the seed and root being drunke in wine prouoke vrine, (...) downe the menses, and that they are mixed with counterpoisons, diureticke medicines, and medicines that are hot.
The root of (...), or much good, is also hot and dry, and that in the later end of the second  degree, it maketh thin, it cutteth, openeth, prouoketh, breaketh the stone and expelleth it, (...) the stoppings of the liuer and spleene, and cureth the yellow jaundise: being chewed it helpeth the tooth-ach, and bringeth much water out of the mouth.



CHAP. 399. Of stone Parsley of Macedonie.


The first figure that was formerly in this chapter should haue been in the second place, and that in the second place was of Alexanders, and should haue been put in the following chapter.

 1 Petroselinum (...), (...). Bastard stone Parsley.


The first figure that was formerly in this chapter should haue been in the second place, and that in the second place was of Alexanders, and should haue been put in the following chapter.

 2 Petroselinum Macedonicum (...). The true Parsley of Macedonia.



 The Description.
OF stone Parsley very little is written of the old writers, Dioscorides onely saith that this hath seed like to that of Ameos, but of a more pleasant smell, sharpe, aromaticall, or spiced: touching the forme of the leaues, the colour of the floures, and fashion of the

(...) he writeth nothing at all: and Pliny is more briefe; as for Theophrastus he doth not so much as name it, making mention onely of Parsley, Alexander, Smallage, and mountaine Parsley.
1 For stone Parsley Leonhartus Fuchsius hath set down a plant, hauing leaues not (...) and cut after the manner of garden Parsley, but long, and snipped round about, made vp and fastened to a (...) or stem in the midst, something like, but yet not altogether, to the first leaues of the lesser Saxifrage; the stalke is slender, and a cubit and a halfe high; the floures on the spokie tufts are white: the seed something blacke, like to that of Ameos, and garden Parsley, very sweet of smell, something sharpe or biting: the root is slender and full of strings.
2 Lobel also in stead of the right stone Parsley describeth another, which the Venetians call stone Parsley of Macedonia: this hath leaues like those of garden Parsley, or rather of the Venetian Saxifrage which is the blacke herbe Frankincense formerly described: the stalke is a cubit high; the spokie tufts something white: the seed small, quickely vading (as he saith) inferiour to that of garden Parsley in temperature and vertues: but whether this be the true and right stone Parsley, he addeth, he is ignorant.


 The Place.
It groweth on craggy rocks, and among stones: but the best in Macedonia, whereupon it beareth the surname Macedonicum, of Macedonia.


 The Time.
It floureth in the sommer moneths.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke, (...), of the stony places where it groweth: in Latine, Petrapium, and Petroselinum Macedonicum: in English, stone Parsley: the Apothecaries know it not: they are farre deceiued that would haue the herbe which Fuchsius pictureth to be Amomum: for Amomum differeth from this, as it is very plaine by the description thereof in Dioscorides: but we hold this for the true stone Parsley, till such time as we may learne some other more like in leaues to the Parslies, and in seed, such as that of stone Parsley ought to be: and the very seed it selfe may cause vs to hold this opinion, being so agreeing to the description as no herbe more; for it is sharpe and biting, and of a sweeter smell than is that of Ameos, and of a more spicy sent; yet do not the leaues gainesay it, which though they haue not the perfect forme of other Parsleyes, yet notwithstanding are not altogether vnlike. @ The first of these is thought by Anguillara, Turner, Gesner, Cordus, and others, to be the Sison of Dioscorides, and Tragus calls it, Amomum Germanicum, and the seeds in shops retaine the name of Sem. Amomi. The second is thought by Columna to be the second Daucus of Dioscorides. @


 The Temperature.
The seed of stone Parsley which is most commonly vsed, is hot and dry, hauing withall a cutting quality.


 The Vertues.
It prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the floures: it is profitable against winde in the stomacke, and collicke gut, and gripings in the belly: for it is, as Galen saith, (...), that is to say, a waster  or consumer of winde: it is a remedy against paine in the sides, kidnies, and bladder, it is also mixed in counterpoisons: Dioscorides.



@ CHAP. 400. Of Corne Parsley, or Hone-wort.

 The Description.
THis herbe commeth vp at the first from seed like Parsley, with two small long narrow leaues, the next that spring are two small round smooth leaues nickt about the edges, and so for two or three couples of leaues of the next growth there are such round leaues growing on a middle rib by couples, and one round one, also at the top; after as more leaues spring vp, so the fashion of them also change, that is to say, euery leafe hath about eight or nine small smooth greene leaues, growing on each side of a middle rib one opposite against another, and one growing by it selfe at the top, and are finely snipt or indented about the edges, in forme resembling those of Sium odoratum Tragi, but not so bigge, long, or at all brownish; amongst which rise vp many small round straked stalkes or branches, about two foot long, now and then aboue twenty from one root, sometimes growing vpright, sometimes creeping not farre from the ground, joynted or kneed,

@ Selinum Sij folijs. Honewoort.
and diuiding themselues into very many branches, at euery joynt groweth one lease smaller than the former, which together with the lowermost-perish, so that there is seldome one greene leafe to be seen on this herbe when the seed is ripe, the floures are white, and grow most commonly at the tops of the branches, sometimes at most of the joynts euen from the earth, in vneuen or vnorderly vmbells, euery floure hauing fiue exceeding small leaues, flat, and broad at the toppe, and in the middle very small cheiues with purple tops, the whole floure not much exceeding the bignesse of a small pins head, which being past there commeth vp in the place of euery floure two small gray crooked straked seeds, like Parsley seeds, but bigger, in taste hot and aromaticall. The root is small and whitish, with many threds not so big as Parsley roots. It beginneth to (...) about the beginning of Iuly, and so continues flouring a long time; part of the seed is ripe in August, and some scarse in the beginning of October, mean while some falleth wherby it renueth it selfe, and groweth with flourishing greene leaues all the winter.
I tooke the (...) on of this herbe the yeere, (...). but obserued it long before, not knowing any name for it: first I refered it to (...), calling it, Sium terrestre, and Sium segetum and agrorum; afterwards vpon sight of Selinum peregrinum primum Clusii, which in some respects resembleth this herbe, I named it Selinum Sij folijs; yet wanting an English name, at length about the (...) 1625. I saw Mistris Vrsula Leigh (then seruant to Mistris Bilson of Mapledurham in Hampshire, and now (5. Marcij 1632. wife to Master William Mooring Schoolemaster of Petersfield, a Towne neere the said Mapledurham) gather it in the wheate ershes about Mapledurham aforesaid (where in such like grounds it still groweth, especially in clay grounds) who told me it was called Honewort, and that her Mother mistris Charitie Leigh late of Brading in the Isle of Wight deceased, taught her to vse it after the manner heere expressed, (...) a swelling which shee had in her left cheeke, which for many yeeres would once a yere at the least arise there, and swell with great heat, rednesse, and itching, vntil by the vse of this herbe it was perfectly cured, and rose no more nor swelled, being now (5. Martij 1632) about twenty yeeres since, only the scar remaineth to this day. This swelling her mother called by the name of a Hone, but asking whether such tumors werein the said Isle vsually called Hones she could not tell, by reason shee was brought from Brading aforesaid young, and not being aboue twelue yeeres old when (...) vsed this medicine.


 The Vertues.
Take one handfull of the greene leaues of this Honewort, and stampe them, put to it about  halfe a pinte or more of (...), straine it, and drinke it, and so continue to drinke the like quantity euery morning fasting till the swelling doth abate, which with or in her was performed in the space of two weekes at the most. August, 18. 1620. Iohn Goodyer: @



CHAP. 401. Of Alexander.

 The Description.
THe leaues of Alexander are cu t into many parcells like those of Smallage, but they be much greater and broader, smooth also, and of a deepe greene colour: the stalke is thicke, oftentimes a cubit high: the floures be white, and grow vpon spokie tufts: the seed is thicke,

long, blacke something bitter, and of an aromaticall or spicy smell: the root is thicke, blacke without, white within, like to a little Radish, and is good to be eaten out of which being broken or cut, there issueth forth a juice that quickely waxeth thicke, hauing in it a sharpe bitternesse, like in taste vnto Myrrhe: which thing also Theophrastus hath noted, there issueth out of it, saith he, a juice like Myrrhe.


The figure formerly here was of (...), and that belonging to this place was put in the (...) chapter.Hipposclinum. Alexanders.




 The Place.
Alexanders or great Parsley groweth in most places of England.


 The Time.
The seed waxeth ripe the second yeere, in the Moneth of August.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke, of the greatnesse wherein, it excelleth the other Parsleyes (...), or Horse Parsley; of Gaza, Equapium: it is also named Olus alrum, or the blacke potherbe; and of diuers (...) Apium, or wilde Parsley; of Galen and certaine others, (...), by reason of the juice that issueth forth thereof, that is, as we haue said, like vnto Myrrhe, which is called in Greeke (...): there is also another Smyrnium of mount A man, of which we do write in the 404. chapter: the Apothecaries cal it Petroselinum Macedonicum: others, Petroselinum Alexandrinum: the Germaines, (...) (...): the Low-Country-men, (...) (...) (...): in Spanish, Perexil Macedonico: the French, and Englishmen, Alexandre, Alexanders.


 The Temperature.
The seed and root of Alexanders, are no lesse hot and dry than are those of the Garden Parsley, they clense and make thinne, being hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the leaues and stalkes are boiled and eaten, and dressed alone by themselues, or with fishes: that they are preserued raw in pickle: that the root eaten both raw and sod, is good for the stomacke: the root hereof is also in our age serued to the table raw for a sallade herbe.
The seeds bring downe the floures, expell the secondine, breake and consume winde, prouoke  vrine, and are good against the straingury: the decoction also of the root doth the same, especially if it be made with wine.



CHAP. 402. Of wilde Parsley.

 The Description.
THis is like to the kindes of Parsleyes in the sundry cuts of the leaues, and also in the bignesse; for they be broad and cut into diuers parcels: the stalkes are round, chamfered, set with certaine joints, hollow within, a cubit high or higher, two or three comming forth together out of one root, and in the nether part many times of a darke-reddish colour. The floures be white, and grow vpon spokie tufts: the seed is round, flat, like that of Dill: the root is white within, and diuided into many branches and strings. This plant in what part soeuer it be cut or broken, yeeldeth forth a milky juice.



The figure formerly put in this place was of the (...) (...) of (...), whose history I intend hereafter to giue you.Apium syluestre siue Thisselium. Wilde Parsley.




 The Place.
It is found by ponds sides in moist and dankish places, in ditches also, hauing in them standing waters, and oftentimes by old stockes of Alder trees.
@ I haue not as yet obserued this plant growing wilde with vs. @


 The Time.
It floureth and bringeth forth seed in Iune and Iuly.


 The Nature.
The shops of the Low countries haue miscalled it in times past by the name of Meum, and vsed it for the right Mew, or Spiknel wort. The Germaines name it (...): Valerius Cordus, Olsenichium: diuers in the Low-Countries call it (...) (...): that is to say in Latine, Apium syluestre, or wilde Parsley: and some, (...) (...): that is, Hydroselinon, or Apium aquatile, water Parsley: and oftentimes is it named, as we haue already written, Eleoselinum, and Sium. It may be more rightly termed in Latine, Apium sylucstre, and in English, wilde Parsley.
Dioscorides hath made mention of wilde Parsley in the chapter of Daucus or wilde Carrot: and (...) in his seuenth booke, where he maketh the Parsleyes to differ both in leaues and stalkes, and sheweth that some haue white stalkes, others purple, or else of sundry colours, and that there is also a certaine wilde Parsley; for he saith that those which haue the purple stalkes, and the stalkes of diuers colours, come neerest of all to the wilde Parsley. And therefore seeing that Olsenichium, or wilde Parsley, hath the lower part of the stalke of a purplish colour, and like in leaues to Parsley, which in times past we thought good rather to call Apium syluestre, or wilde Parsley, than to erre with the Apothecaries, and to take it for Mew. And after when we now know that it was held to be Thysselium Plinij, and that we could alledge nothing to the contrary, we also setled our selues to be of their opinion; and the rather, because the faculties are agreeable. Thysselium, saith Pliny, lib. 25. chapter 11. is not vnlike to Parsley: the root hereof purgeth flegme out of the head; which thing also the root of Olsenichium doth effectually performe, as we will forthwith declare. The name also is agreeable, for it seemeth to be called (...), because it extendeth it selfe, in Greeke, (...), thorow (...), or marish places.


 The Temperature.
The root hereof is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The root being chewed, bringeth by the mouth flegme out of the head, and is a remedy for the  tooth-ach, and there is no doubt but that it also makes thin, cutteth and openeth, prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the floures, and doth likewise no lesse but more effectually performe those things that the rest of the Parsleyes do.



CHAP. 403. Of bastard Parsley.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of bastard Parsley is a rough hairy herbe, not much vnlike to Carrots: the leaues are like to those of Corianders, but parted into many small jagges: at the top of the branches do grow shadowie vmbels, or spokie rundles, consisting of many small white

1 Caucalis albis floribus. Bastard Parsley with white floures.@ 2 Caucalis Apij folijs (...) (...). Bastard Parsley with red (...).@ 3 Caucalis Peucedanij folio. Hogs Parsley@ 4 Caucalis maior Clus. Great rough Parsley.
floures: the seed is long and rough, like (...) seed of (...), but (...): the (...) is (...) (...) single, growing deepe into the ground, of a white colour, and in taste like the (...).
2 There is another sort like vnto the former, sauing that the leaues (...) (...) are broader and the floures are of a reddish colour: there hath great controuersie risen (...) out the true determination of Caucalis, because the Latine interpretation of Dioscorides is greatly (...), (...) in it selfe much superfluous matter, not pertinent to the history: but wee deeme that this plant is the true Caucalis, the notes set downe declare it so to be: the floures, saith he, are reddish: the seeds (...) with a rough huske set about with prickles, which cleaue vnto garments that it toucheth, as doe Burs; which roughnesse being pilled (...), the seed appeares like vnto hulled Otes, not vnpleasant in taste, all which do shew it to be the same.
3 There is likewise another sort that hath a long single root, thrummed about the vpper (...) with many thrummy threds of a browne colour: from which riseth vp diuers stalkes full of joynts or knees, couered with a sheath or skinnie silme, like vnto that of (...): the leaues are finely cut or jagged, resembling the leaues of our English Saxisrage: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes in spoky rundles like Fennell: the seed is small like that of Parsley.


@ 5 Caucalis minor flosculis rubentibus. Hedge Parsley.


@ 6 Caucalis nodosa echinoto semine. Knotted Parsley.


@ 4 Clusius vnder the name of Caucalis maior hath described and figured this, which hath many crested straight stalkes some two cubits high or more, which are diuided into sundry branches, and at each joynt send forth large and winged leaues somewhat like those of Angelica, but rougher, and of a darker greene; at the tops of the branches grow vmbels of whitish floures, being of somewhat a purplish or flesh colour vnderneath; and these are succeeded by broad seed almost like those of the Cow-Parsnep, but that they are rougher, and sorked at the top, and prickly: the root is white, hard and wooddy. It floures in Iune, ripens the seed in Iuly and August, and then the root dyes, and the seed must be sowne in September, and so it will come vp and continue greene all the winter.
5 Besides these formerly described there are two others growing wilde with vs; the first of these, which I haue thought good to call Hedge, or field Parsley, (because it growes about hedges, and in plowed fields very plentifully euery where) hath crested hollow stalkes growing vp to some cubit and (...) high, whereon stand winged leaues made of sundry little longish ones, set one

against another, snipt about the edges, and ending in a long and sharpe pointed leafe: these leaues as also the stalkes are somewhat rough and harsh, and of a darke greene color; the floures are small and reddish, and grow in little vmbels, and are succeeded by longish little rough seed of somewhat a strong and aromaticke taste and smell. It is an annuall plant, and floures commonly in Iuly, and the seeds are ripe in August. Cordus and Thalius call it Daucoides minus; and Bauhine, Caucalis semine aspeo flosoulis subrubentibus. There is a bigger and lesser variety or sort of this plant, for you shall find it growing to the height of two cubits, with leaues and all the vpper parts answerable, and you may againe obserue it not to exceed the height of (...) a foot.
6 This other, which (...) hath first set forth in writing by the name of Caucalis nodosa echinato semine, hath a white and long root, from which it sends vp sundry small crested and rough branches which commonly lie along vpon the ground, and they are commonly of an vnequall length, some a cubit long, other-some scarse two handfulls: the leaues are small, rough, winged, and deeply jagged, and at the setting on of each leafe close to the stalkes vsually vpon very short foot-stalkes grow small little floures of colour white, or reddish, and made of fiue little leaues apeece: after these follow the seed, round, small and rough, and they grow close to the stalkes. It floures in Iune and Iuly, and growes wilde in sundry places, as in the fields, and vpon the bankes about S. Iames, and Pickadilla. Fabius Columna iudges it to be the true Scandix of the Antients. @
There is likewise one of these found in Spaine, called Caucalis Hispanica, like the first: but it is an annuall plant, which perishes at the first approach of winter, the which I haue sowne in my garden, but it perished before the seed was perfected.


 The Place.
These plants do grow naturally vpon rockes and stony grounds: we haue the first and the third in our pastures in most places of England: that with red floures is a stranger in England.
@ I haue not heard that the third growes wilde with vs, but the second was found growing in the corne fields on the hilles about Bathe, by Mr. Bowles. @


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from May to the end of August.


 The Names.
Bastard Parsley is called in Greeke (...) in Latine also Caucalis: of some, Daucus (...): among the bastard names of Democritus, (...): in Latine, Pes Gallinaceus, Pes (...): the Egyptians name it Seselis: the country-men of Hetruria, (...) saluatico; in English, bastard Parsley, and Hennes foot.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that bastard Parsley is a pot-herbe which is eaten either raw or boiled, and prouoketh  vrine.
Pliny doth reckon it vp also among the pot-herbes: Galen addeth, that it is preserued in pickle  for sallades in winter.
The seed of bastard Parsley is euidently hot and dry, and that in the second degree: it prouoketh  vrine, and bringeth downe the desired sickenesse: it dissolueth the stone, and driueth it forth.
It taketh away the stoppings of the liuer, spleene, and kidnies: it cutteth and concocteth raw  and flegmaticke humours: it comforteth a cold stomack, dissolueth winde, it quickneth the sight, and resresheth the heart, if it be taken fasting.
Matthiolus in his Commentaries vpon Dioscorides, the second booke, attributeth vnto it many  excellent vertues, to prouoke venery and bodily lust, and erection of the parts. 

The figure which belonged to the third description in this chapter was formerly put for English Saxifrage.




CHAP. 404. Of Candy Alexanders.

 The Description.
DIoscorides and Pliny haue reckoned Smyrnium among the kindes of Parsley, whose iudgements while this plant is young, and not growne vp to a stalke, may stand with very good reason, for that the young leaues next the ground are like to Parsley, but somewhat thicker and larger: among which riseth vp a stalke a cubit high, and somewhat more, garnished with round leaues, farre different from those next the ground, inclosing the stalke about like Thorow wax, or Perfoliata; which leaues are of a yellow colour, and do rather resemble the leaues of Fole-foot than Parsley:

Smyrnium Creticum. Candy Alexander.
at the top of the stalkes (...) grow round spokie tufts of a yellow color, after which commeth round and blacke seed like Coleworts, of a sharpe and bitter taste like Myrrhe: the root is white and thicke, contrary to the opinion of Dodonaeus, who saith it is blacke without, but I speake that which I haue seen and prooued.


 The Place.
Smyrnium groweth naturally vpon the hils and mountaines of Candy, and in my garden also in great plenty: also vpon the mountain Amanus in Cilicia.


 The Time.
Smyrnium floureth in Iune, and the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
This plant is called in Latine, Smyrnium in Greeke, (...) in Cilicia, Petroselinum, and as Galen testifieth, some haue called it, Hipposelinum agreste in English, Candy Alexanders, or Thorow bored Parsley.


 The Nature.
Smyrnium is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Smyrnium dissolue wens  and hard swellings, dry vp (...) and excoriations, and glew wounds together.
The seeds are good against the stoppings of the spleene, kidnies, and bladder.
Candy Alexanders hath force to digest and wast away hard swellings, in other things it is like  to garden Parsley, and stone Parsley, and therefore we vse the seed heereof to prouoke the desired sickenesse, and vrine, and to helpe those that are stuffed in the lungs, as Galen writeth.
The root is hot, so is the herbe and seed, which is good to be drunke against the biting of serpents: it is a remedy for the cough, and profitable for those that cannot take their breath vnlesse they do sit or stand vpright: it helpeth those that can hardly make their water; the seed is good against the infirmity of the spleene or milt, the kidnies and bladder: it is likewise a good medicine for those that haue the dropsie, as Dioscorides writeth.



CHAP. 405. Of Parsneps.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of the tame or Garden Parsneps are broad, consisting of many small leaues fastened to one middle rib like those of the ash tree: the stalke is vpright, of the height of a man: the floures stand vpon spokie tufts, of colour yellow; after which commeth the seed flat and round, greater than those of Dil: the root is white, long, sweet, and good to be eaten.
2 The wilde Parsnep is like to that of the Garden, in leaues, stalke, tuft, yellow floures, flat and round seed, but altogether lesser: the root is small, hard, wooddy, and not fit to be eaten.


 The Place.
The garden Parfnep requireth a fat and loose earth, and that that is digged vp deepe.
The wilde Parsnep groweth in vntoiled places, especially in the salt marshes, vpon the bankes and borders of the same: the seed whereof being gathered and brought into the garden, and sowed

1 Pastinaca latifoliasativa: Garden Parsneps.
2 Pastinaca latifolia syluestris. Wilde Parsneps.
in fertill ground, do proue better roots, sweeter and greater than they that are sowne of seeds gathered from those of the garden.
They floure in Iuly and August, and seed the second yeare after they be sowne.


 The Names.
The Herbarists of our time do call the garden Parsneps (...) and Pastinaca, and therefore wee haue surnamed it Latifolia, or broad leafed, that it may differ from the other garden Parsnep with narrow leaues, which is truly and properly called Staphylinus, that is, the garden Carrot. Some Physitions doubting, and not knowing to what herbe of the Antients it should be referred, haue fained the wilde kinde hereof to be Panacis species, or a kind of Alheale: diuers haue named it Baucia; others, Branca Leonina, but if you diligently marke and confer it with Elaphoboscum of Dioscorides, you shal hardly finde any difference at all: but the plant called at Montpelier Pabulum Ceruinum: in English, Harts fodder, supposed there to be the true Elaphoboscum, differeth much from the true notes thereof. Now Baucia, as Iacobus Manlius reporteth in Luminari maiore, is Dioscorides, and the old Writers Pastinaca, that is to say, Tenuifolia, or Carrot: but the old writers, and especially Dioscorides haue called this wilde Parsnep by the name of Elaphoboscum: and wee doe call them Parsneps and Mypes.


 The Temperature.
The Parsnep root is moderately hot, and more drie than moist.


 The Vertues.
The Parsneps nourish more than doe the Turneps or the Carrots, and the nourishment is somewhat  thicker, but not faultie nor bad; notwithstanding they be somwhat windy: they passe through the bodie neither slowly nor speedily: they neither binde nor loose the belly: they prouoke vrine, and (...) of the bodie: they be good for the stomacke, kidneies, bladder, and lungs.
There is a good and pleasant food or bread made of the roots of Parsneps, as my friend Mr. Plat hath set forth in his booke of experiments, which I haue made no triall of, nor meane to do.
The seed is hotter and drier euen vnto the second degree, it mooueth vrine, and consumeth  winde.

It is reported, saith (...), that Deare are preserued from bitings of Serpents, by eating of  the herbe Elaphoboscum, or wilde Parsnep, wherupon the seed is giuen with wine against the bitings and stingings of Serpents. 

(...) the figures that formerly were in this chapter were of the (...) Parsnep; the first being that of Lebel, and the second that of (...): that hich should haue beene in the second place was (...) put for (...).




CHAP. 406. Of Skirrets.


Sisarum. Skirrets.



 The Description.
THe leaues of the Skirret do likewise confist of many small leaues sastened to one rib, euerie particular one whereof is something (...) in the edges, but they are lesser, greener, and smoother than those of the Parsnep. The stalks be short, and seldome a cubit high; the (...) in the spoked tufts are white, the roots be many in number, growing out of one head an hand bredth long, most commonly not a finger thick, they are sweet, white, good to be eaten, and most pleasant in taste.


 The Place and Time.
This Skirret is planted in Gardens, and especially by the root, for the greater and thicker ones being taken away, the lesser are put into the earth againe: which thing is best to be done in March or Aprill, before the stalks come vp, and at this time the roots which be gathered are eaten raw, or boiled.


 The Names.
This herbe is called in Latin Sisarum, and also in Greeke (...); the Latines do likewise call it Siser; and diuers of the later Herbarists, (...) or (...), or Seruilla. the Germans name it (...): Tragus, Zam garren Rapunkelen: in the Low-countries, Suycker wortelen, that is to say, Sugar roots, and oftentimes (...): in Spanish, Cherinia: in Italian, Sisaro: in French, Cheruy: in English, Skirret and Skirwort. And this is that Siser or Skirret which Tiberius the Emperour commanded to be conueied vnto him from Gelduba a castle about the riuer of Rhene, as Pliny reporteth in lib. 19. cap: 5. The Skirret is a medicinable herb, and is the same that the foresaid Emperour did so much commend, insomuch that he desired the same to be brought vnto him euery yeare out of Germanie. It is not, as diuers suppose, Serapio his Secacul, of which he hath written in his 89. chapter: for Secacul is described by the leafe of Iulben, that is to say, of the pease, as Matthiolus (...) expoundeth it: and it bringeth forth a black fruit of the bignesse of a Cichpease, full of moisture, and of a sweet taste, which is called Granum Culcul: But the Skirret hath not the lease of the pease, neither doth it bring forth fruit like to the Ciche pease; whereupon it is manifest, that the Skirret doth very much differ from Serapio his Secacul: so farre is it from beeing the same.


 The Nature and Vertues.
The roots of the Skirret be moderately hot and moist; they be easily concocted; they nourish  meanly, and yeeld a reasonable good iuice: but they are something windie, by reason whereof they also prouoke lust.
They be eaten boiled, with vineger, salt, and a little oile, after the manner of a sallad, and oftentimes  they be fried in oile and butter, and also dressed after other fashions, according to the skil of the cooke, and the (...) of the eater.

The women in Sueuia, saith Hieronymus Heroldus, prepare the roots hereof for their husbands, and  know full well wherefore and why, etc.
The iuice of the roots drunke with goats milke stoppeth the laske. The same drunke with wine  putteth away windinesse out of the stomacke, and gripings of the belly, and helpeth the hicket or yeoxing. They stir vp appetite, and prouoke vrine.



CHAP. 407. Of Carrots.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of the garden Carrots are of a deepe greene colour, composed of many fine Fennell-like leaues, very notably cut or iagged; among which riseth vp a stalk straight and round, foure cubits high, somwhat hairie and hollow, hauing at the top round spoked tufts, in which do grow little white floures: in their places commeth the seed, rough and hairie, of a sweet smell when it is rubbed. The root is long, thicke and single, of a faire yellow colour, pleasant to be eaten, and very sweet in taste.


1 Pastinaca sativa tenuifolia. Yellow Carrot.


@ 2 Pastinaca satiua airo-rubens. Red Carrot.


2 There is another kinde hereof like to the former in all parts, and differeth from it only in the colour of the root, which in this is not yellow, but of a blackish red colour.


 The Place.
These Carrots are sowne in the fields, and in gardens where other pot herbes are: they require a loose and well manured soile.


 The Time.
They are to be sowne in Aprill; they bring forth their floures and seed the yeare after they be sowne.


 The Names.
The Carrot is properly called in Greeke (...), for that which we haue termed in Latine by the

name of Pastinaca latioris folij, or the Garden Parsnep, is described of the old writers by another name: this Carrot is called in Latine likewise, Pastinaca sativa, but with this addition tenuifolia, that it may differ from the garden Parsnep with broad leaues, and white roots. Theophrastus in the ninth booke of his historie of plants nameth this Staphylinus, or Carrot, (...), and writeth that it groweth in Arcadia, and saith that the best is found in Spartensi Achaia, but doubtlesse he meant that Daucus which we call (...), that may be numbred among the Carrots: Galen in his booke of the faculties of Simple medicines doth also make it to be Daucus, but yet not simply Dancus; for he addeth also Staphilinus or Pastinaca: in High Dutch it is called Geel ruben: in Low Dutch, Geel Peen, Geel Pooten, and Geel (...): in French, Carrotte, and Racine iaulne: in Italian, Pastinaca: in Spanish, Canahoria: in English, Yellow Carrots: the other is called red Carrot, and blacke Carrot.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root of the yellow Carrot is most commonly boiled with fat flesh and eaten: it is temperately  hot and something moist. The nourishment which commeth thereof is not much, and not verie good: it is something windie, but not so much as be the Turneps, and doth not so soon as they passe through the bodie.
The red Carrot is of like facultie with the yellow. The seed of them both is hot and drie, it breaketh  and consumeth windinesse, prouoketh vrine, as doth that of the wilde Carrot.



CHAP. 408. Of Wilde Carrot.


Pastinaca syluestris t enuifolia. Wilde Carrot, or Bees-nest.



 The Description.
THe leaues of the wilde Carrot are cut into diuers slender narrow parcels, very like vnto those of the garden Carrots, but they be somewhat whiter, and more hairie: the stalks be likewise hairie and somewhat rough: the floures are little, and stand vpon broad spoked tuftes, of a white color, of which tuft of floures the middlemost part is of a deep purple: the whole tuft is drawn together when the seedis ripe, resembling a birds nest; whereupon it hath been named of some Birds-nest: the root slender, and of a mean length:


 The Place.
It groweth of it selfe in vntoyled places, in fields, and in the borders thereof, almost euerie where.


 The Time.
It floures and flourishes in Iune and Iuly, the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
The wilde Carrot is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Pastinaca syluestris tenuifolia: in shops, Daucus: and it is vsed in stead of the true Daucus, and not amisse, nor vnprofitably: for Galen also in his time doth testifie that it was taken for Daucus, or bastard Parsly, and is without doubt Dauci sylucstris genus, or a wilde kinde of bastard Parsly, so called of Theophrastus: in high Dutch it is named Wild Pastenen, Uogol nest: in Low Dutch, Uogels nest, and Wilde (...) Crookens cruyt: in French, Pastena de Sauvage: in English, wilde Carrot, and after the Dutch, Birds-nest, and in some places Bees-nest.
Athenaeus citing Diphilus for his Author, saith, that the Carrot is called (...), because it serueth for loue-matters; and Orpheus, as Pliny writeth, said, that the vse hereof winneth loue: which things

be written of wilde Carrot, the root whereof is more effectuall than that of the garden, and containeth in it, as Galen saith, a certaine force to procure lust.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The seed of this wild Carrot, and likewise the root is hot and drie in the second degree, and doth  withall open obstructions.
The root boiled and eaten, or boiled with wine, and the decoction drunke, prouoketh vrine, expelleth  the stone, bringeth forth the birth; it also procureth bodily lust.
The seed drunke bringeth downe the desired sicknesse, it is good for them that can hardly make  water, it breaketh and dissolueth winde, it remedieth the dropsie, it cureth the collick and stone, being drunke in wine.
It is also good for the passions of the mother, and helpeth conception: it is good against the bitings  of all manner of venomous beasts: it is reported, saith Dioscorides, that such as haue first taken of it are not hurt by them.



CHAP. 409. Of Candie Carrots.


Daucus Cret ensis verus. Candie Carrots.



 The Description.
THis Daucus Cretensis, being the true Daucus of Dioscorides, doth not grow in Candy only, but is found vpon the mountaines of Germany, and vpon the hills and rockes of Iura about Geneua, from whence it hath beene sent and conuied by one friendly Herbarist vnto another, into sundrie regions: it beareth leaues which are small, and very finely iagged, resembling either Fennel or wild Carrot: among which riseth vp a stalke of a cubit high, hauing at the top white spokie tufts, and the floures of Dill: which being past, there come great plentie of long seed, well smelling, not vnlike the seed of Cumin, saue that it is whitish, with a certaine mossinesse, and a sharpe taste, and is in greater vse than any part of the plant. The root also is right good in medicine, being lesser than the root of a Parsnep, but hotter in taste, and of a fragrant smell.


 The Time.
This floures in Iune and Iuly, his seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
There is sufficient spoken in the description as (...) the name.


 The Nature.
These plants are hot and drie, especially the seed of Daucus Creticus, which is hot and drie in the third degree: but the seed of the wilde Carrot is hot and drie in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Daucus drunken is good against the strangurie, and painfull making of water, it preuaileth  against the grauell and stone, and prouoketh vrine.
Itasswageth the torments and gripings of the belly, dissolueth windines, cureth the collick, and  ripeneth an old cough.
The same beeing taken in VVine, is verie good against the bitings of beasts, and expelleth  poison.
The seed of Daucus Creticus is of great efficacie and vertue being put into (...), Mithridate, or any antidotes, against poison or pestilence.

The root thereof drunke in wine stoppeth the laske, and is also a soueraigne remedie against venome  and poison.



CHAP. 410. Of stinking and deadly Carrots.

 The Description.
1 THe great stinking Carrot hath very great leaues, spread abroad like wings, resembling those of Fennell gyant (whereof some haue taken it to be a kinde, but vnproperly) of a bright greene colour, somewhat hairie: among which (...) vp a stalk of the height of two cubits, and of the bignesse of a mans finger; hollow, and full of a spungious pith, whereupon are set at certaine ioints, leaues like those next the ground, but smaller. The floures are yellow, standing at the top of the stalkes in spokie rundles, like those of Dill: after which commeth the seed, flat and broad like those of the Parsnep, but much greater and broader. The root is thicke, garnished at the top with certaine capillaments or hairy threds, blacke without, white within, full of milkie iuice, of a most bitter, sharpe, and lothsome taste and smell, insomuch that if a man do stand where the wind doth blow from the plant, the aire doth exulcerate and blister the face, and euery other bare or naked place that may be subiect to his venomous blast, and poisonous qualitie.


1 Thapsia (...) Clusij. Stinking Carrots.


2 Thapsia tenuifolia. Small leafed stinking Carrot.


2 This small kind of stinking or deadly Carrot is like to the last described in each respect, sauing that the leaues are thinner and more finely minced or iagged, wherein consists the difference.
3 The common deadly Carrot is like vnto the precedent, sauing that he doth more neerely resemble the stalkes and leaues of the garden carrot, and is not garnished with the like bush of haire about the top of the stalks: otherwise in seed, root, and euill smell, taste and qualitie like.


 The Place.
These (...) plants delight in stonie hills and mountaines: they are strangers in England.



3 Thapsia vulgaris. Deadly (...).




 The Time.
They floure in August, or somewhat after.


 The Names.
The French Physitians haue accepted the root of Thapsia for a kinde of Turbith, calling it (...) Cineritium; notwithstanding vpon better consideration they haue left the vse thereof, especially in purging, for it mightily hurteth the principall parts, and doth often cause cruell gripings in the guts and belly, with (...) and cramps: neuerthelesse the venomous qualitie may bee taken away with those correctiues which are vsed in mitigating the extreme heate and virulent qualitie of Sarcocolla, Hammoniacum, and Turpetum: but where there be so many wholesome Simples, and likewise compounds, they are not to be vsed.
Of some it is called Turpetum Griseum: it is called Thapsia, as some thinke, of the Island Thapsus, where it was first found; or as we deeme, of the likenesse it hath with Carrots.
Of the people of Sicilia and Apulia it is called (...), where it doth grow in great aboundance.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and faculties in working haue been touched in the description, and likewise in the names.



CHAP. 411. Of Fennell.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Fennell, called in Latine Foeniculum: in Greeke, (...), is so well knowne amongst vs, that it were but lost labour to describe the same.
2 The second kinde of Fennell is likewise well knowne by the name of Sweet Fennell, so called because the seeds thereof are in taste sweet like vnto Annise seeds, resembling the common Fennell, sauing that the leaues are larger and fatter, or more oleous: the seed greater and whiter, and the whole plant in each respect greater.



Foeniculum vulgare. Common Fennell.




 The Place.
These herbs are set and sowne in gardens; but the second doth not prosper well in this (...): for being sowne of good and perfect seed, yet in the second yeare after his sowing it will degenerate from the right kinde, and become common Fennell.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
Fennell is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Marathrum, and Foeniculum in high Dutch, Fenckell: in low-Dutch, (...): in Italian, Finocchio: in Spanish, Hinoio: in French, Fenoil: in English, Fennell, and Fenckell.


 The Nature.
The seed of Fennel is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The pouder of the seed of Fennell drunke for certaine dayes together fasting preserueth the eye-sight: whereof was written this Distichon following:
Foeniculus, Rosa, Verbena, Chelidonia, Ruta, Ex his fit aqua quae lumina reddit acuta.
Of Fennell, Roses, Veruain, Rue, and Celandine, Is made a water good to cleere the sight of (...).
The greene leaues of Fenneil eaten, or the seed drunken made into a Ptisan, do fill womens  brests with milke.
The (...) of Fennell drunke easeth the paines of the kidnies, causeth one to auoid the  stone, and prouoketh vrine.
The roots are as effectuall, and not onely good for the intents aforesaid, but against the dropsie  also, being boyled in wine and drunken.
Fennell seed drunke asswageth the paine of the stomacke, and wambling of the same, or desire  to vomit, and breaketh winde.
The herbe, seed, and root of Fennell are very good for the Iungs, the liuer, and the kidneyes, for  it openeth the obstructions or stoppings of the same, and comforteth the inward parts.
The seed and herbe of sweet Fennell is equall in vertues with Annise seed.



CHAP. 412. Of Dill.

 The Description.
DIll hath a little stalke of a cubit high, round and ioynted; whereupon doe grow leaues verie finely cut, like to those of Fennell, but much smaller: the floures be little and yellow, standing in a spokie (...) or rundle: the seed is round, flat and thin: the whole plant is of a strong smell: the root is threddy.


 The Place.
It is sowne in gardens, and is also sometimes found wilde.



(...). Dill.




 The Time.
It bringeth forth floures and seed in August.


 The Names.
Dil is called in Greek (...): in Latine likewise Anethum, and Anetum: in high-Dutch, Dyllen: in low-Dutch, Dille: in Italian, Anetho: in Spanish, Eneldo: in French, Anet: in English, Dill, and Anet.


 The Temperature.
Dill, as Galen saith, is hot in the end of the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the same, or in the end of the first degree.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the tops of dried Dil, and  likewise of the seed, being drunke, (...) milke in the brests of nurses, allayeth gripings and windinesse, prouoketh vrine, increaseth seed, stayeth the yeox, hicket, or hicquet, as Dioscorides teacheth.
The seed likewise if it be smelled vnto stayeth  the hicket, especially if it be boyled in wine, but chiefely if it be boyled in Wormewood Wine, or Wine and a few branches of Worme-wood, and Rose leaues, and the stomacke bathed therewith.
Galen saith, that being burnt and layd vpon  moist vlcers, it cureth them, especially those in the secret parts, and likewise those sub Praeputio, though they be old and of long continuance.
Common oyle, in which Dill is boyled or sunned, as we do oyle of Roses, doth digest, mitigate  paine, procureth sleepe, bringeth raw and vnconcocted humors to perfect digestion, and prouoketh bodily lust.
Dill is of great force or efficacie against the suffocation or strangling of the mother, if the woman  do receiue the fume thereof being boyled in wine, and put vnder a close stoole or hollow seat fit for the purpose.



CHAP. 413. Of Caruwaies.

 The Description.
CAruwaies haue an hollow stalke foure square, of two cubits high, full of knots or ioynts; from which proceed sundry other small branches, set full of leaues very finely cut or iagged, like vnto those of Carrots or Dill: at the top of the stalkes grow spokie white tufts like those of Dill: after which commeth the seed, sharpe in eating, yet of a pleasant taste: the root is like that of Parsley, often white, seldome yellow, and in taste like vnto the Carrot.


 The Place.
It groweth almost euery where in Germanie and in Bohemia, in fat and fruitfull fields, and in medowes that are now and then ouer-run with water: it groweth also in Caria, as Dioscorides sheweth, from whence it tooke his name.


 The Time.
It floureth and seedeth from May to the end of August.



Carum, siue Careum. Caruwaies.




 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...) in Latine, Carum and Careum: in shops, Carui. Simeon Zethy calleth it Carnabadion: in high-Dutch, Kym, and Kymmel: in low-Dutch, Caruy saet: in French, du Caruy: in Italian, Caro: in Spanish, Carauea, and an article being ioyned vnto it, Alkarauea: in English, Caruwaie, and the seed is called Caruwaie seed.


 The Temperature.
The seed of Caruwaies, as Galen saith, is hot and dry in the third degree, and hath a moderate biting qualitie.


 The Vertues.
It consumeth winde, it is delightfull to the  stomacke and taste, it helpeth concoction, prouoketh vrine, and is mixed with counterpoysons: the root may be sodden, and eaten as the Parsenep or Carrot is.
The seeds confected, or made with sugar  into Comfits, are very good for the stomacke, they helpe digestion, prouoke vrine, asswage and dissolue all windinesse: to conclude in a word, they are answerable to Anise seed in 0-peration and vertues.



CHAP. 414. Of Annise.

 The Description.
1 THe stalke of Annise is round and hollow, diuided into diuers small branches, set with leaues next the ground somewhat broad and round: those that grow higher are more iagged, like those of yong Parsley, but whiter: on the top of the stalkes do stand spokie rundles or tufts of white floures, and afterward seed, which hath a pleasant taste as euerie one doth know.
@ 2 This other Annise (whose vmbels Clusius had out of England from Master Morgan the Queenes Apothecarie, and Iames Garret; and which were brought from the Philippines by Mr. Tho. Candish in his voyage when he incompassed the world) is thus described by Clusius: The vmbels were large, no lesse than those of the Archangelica, made of diuers thicke stiffe foot-stalks, each whereof carried not double seed as the common Annise, but more, in a round head some inch ouer, made of cods set star-fashion, six, 8, or more, of a dusky colour, wrinkled, diuided into two equall parts, and open aboue: most of these huskes were empty, yet some of them contained one smooth shining ash-coloured seed, of the bignesse of that of Orobus; the taste and smell was the same with our common Anise seed, wherefore they which sent it to Clusius called it Anise: yet in the place where it grew it was called Damor; for Mr. Candish had the name so written in the China characters, after their manner of writing. @


 The Place.
It groweth plentifully in Candy, Syria, Egypt, and other countries of the East. I haue often sowne it in my garden, where it hath brought forth his ripe seed when the yeare hath fallen out to be temperate.



1 Anisum. Anise.


@ 2 Anisum Indicum (...). Starry headed Anise..




 The Time.
It is to be sowne in these cold regions in the moneth of May: the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine Anisum: in Greeke, (...): in high-Dutch, Anisz: in low-Dutch, Anissaet: in Italian, Aniso: in Spanish, (...): in French, Anis: in English, Anise, and Annise seed.


 The Temperature.
Galen writeth, That the seed of Anise is hot and dry in the third degree: after others, it is hot in the second degree, and much lesse than dry in the second degree; for it ingendreth milke, which it could not do if it were very dry, as Galen in his chapter of Fennell doth whether hee will or no declare and testifie; in that it doth ingender milke, his opinion is that it is not hot aboue the first degree: which thing also may be in Anise seed, both by this reason, and also because it is sweet. Therefore to conclude, Anise seed is dry in the first degree, and hot in the second.


 The Vertues.
The seed wasteth and consumeth winde, and is good against belchings and vpbraidings of the  stomacke, allayeth gripings of the belly, prouoketh vrine gently, maketh aboundance of milke, and stirreth vp bodily lust: it stayeth the laske, and also the white flux in women.
Being chewed it makes the breath sweet, and is good for them that are short winded, and quencheth  thirst, and therefore it is fit for such as haue the dropsie: it helpeth the yeoxing or hicket, both when it is drunken or eaten dry: the smell thereof doth also preuaile very much.
The same being dried by the fire and taken with honey clenseth the brest very much from flegmaticke  superfluities: and if it be eaten with bitter almonds it doth helpe the old cough.
It is to be giuen to yong children and infants to eate which are like to haue the falling sicknes, or to such as haue it by patrimonie or succession.
It taketh away the Squinancie or Quincie (that is, a swelling in the throat) being gargled with  (...), vineger, and a little Hyssop gently boiled together.




CHAP. 414. Of Bishops Weed, Herbe-William, or Ameos.

 The Description.
1 THe common Ameos, especially with vs here in England, hath round greene stalks, with diuers boughes and branches, and large long leaues, diuided into diuers other narrow long and small leaues, dented or snipt about the edges, hauing at the top of the stalke white floures in great spoky tufts, which bring forth a little sharpe and bitter seed: the root thereof is white and threddie.
2 This excellent and aromaticall Ameos of Candy hath tufts and leaues like Daucus Creticus, and a root like vnto the garden Carrot, of a yellow colour, and hot seed like Origanum, of an excellent spicie sauour or smell, growing in spoky tufts or roundles like Carum: it hath beene brought from Candy and Syria into Venice, and from Venice into France, Flanders, and England, where we haue often sowne it; but without doubt we haue beene beguiled therein by the deceitful drugmasters, who haue first boyled it, or vsed some other false and deceitfull deuice, to bring greater admiration vnto the Venice treacle, for the confection whereof this seed is a chiefe and most principall ingredient.


Ammi vulgare. Common Bishops-weed.


The (...) which was formerly in the second place was of the (...) album of (...).

 2 Ammi Creticum. Candy Bishops-weed.


3 There is another kinde of Ameos, which is an herbe very small and tender, hauing stalkes a foot and a halfe high, very small and tender, beset with leaues like vnto Dill, finely iagged, and somewhat slender; and at the top of the stalkes grow little tufts or spokie white rundles, which afterwards do turne into small gray seed, hot and sharpe in taste. The root is small and slender.


 The Place.
These plants do all grow in my garden, except Ammi Creticum, whereof hath beene sufficiently spoken in the description.



@ 3 Ammi perpusillum. Small Bishops-weed.




 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly, and yeeld their seed in the end of August.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) the Latines also Ammi: diuers call it Cuminum Aethiopicum: others, Cuminum Regium, or Comin Royall: in shops, Ammios, or Ameos in the Genitiue case: the Germanes, Amey: in English, Ameos, or Ammi: of some, Herbe-William, Bull-wort, and Bishops-weed.


 The Temperature.
The seed of Ameos is hot and dry in the later end of the third degree.


 The Vertues.
It auaileth against gripings of the belly in  making of vrine, against the bitings of serpents taken in wine, and also it bringeth downe the floures: being applied with honey it taketh away blacke and blew spots which come of stripes: the seed of Sison doth also the like, for it is hot and dry, and that in the third degree; likewise of thin (...), prouoking vrine, and bringing downe the desired sicknesse.
The seed of Ameos is good to be drunken  in wine against the biting of all manner of venomous beasts, and hath power against all maner of poyson and pestilent feuers, or the plague, and is vsed in the correcting of Cantharides, whereby those flies are made medicinable to be applied to the body without danger.
Ameos brayed and wingled with honey scattereth congealed bloud, and putteth away blacke  and blew markes which come by stripes or falls, if it be applied (...) in manner of a plaister.



CHAP. 416. Of Cheruill.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of Cheruill are slender, and diuersly cut, something hairy, of a whitish green: the stalks be short, slender, round, and hollow within, which at the first together with the leaues are of a whitish green, but tending to a red when the seeds are ripe: the floures be white, and grow vpon scattered tufts. The seed is long, narrow, slender, sharpe pointed: the root is full of strings.
@ 2 There is found in Iune and Iuly, almost in euerie hedge, a certaine plant which Tabernamont. and Bauhine fitly cal Chaerophyllum, or Cerefolium syluestre, and the figure was vnsitly giuen by our Author for Thysselinum: It hath a whitish wooddy root, from which arise round red and hairy stalkes some two cubits high, sometimes more, and oft times somewhat big and swolne about the ioynts, and they are not hollow but full of pith: toward the top it is diuided into sundry branches, which on their tops carry vmbels of small pure white little floures, which are succeeded by longish seeds. The leaues are vsually parted into three chiefe parts, and these againe subdiuided into fiue, and they are snipt about the edges, soft and hairy, of a darke greene or else reddish colour. It floureth in Iune and Iuly, and then ripens the seed. @
3 Great Cheruill hath large leaues deepely cut or iagged, in shew very like vnto Hemlocks, of a very good and pleasant smell and taste like vnto Cheruill, and something hairy, which hath caused vs to call it sweet Cheruill. Among these leaues riseth vp a stalke somwhat crested or furrowed, of the height of two cubits, at the top whereof grow spoky tufts or rundles with white

floures, which do turne into long browne crested and shining seed, one (...) being as (...) (...) (...) Fennell seeds, which being greene do taste like Anise seed. The root is great, thicke, (...) (...) big as Enula (...), exceeding sweet in smell, and tasting like vnto (...) seeds.


1 Cerefolium vulgare (...). Common Cheruill.


@ 2 (...) (...). Hedge Cheruill.


@ 4 There is found in some parts of the Alps, as about (...) and in other places, (...) (...), which in the leaues and vmbels is like that of the last described, but the (...) (...) (...) lesse; the seed is long, small, smooth, and shaped like an Oat, and in (...) somewhat like that (...) the (...) Creticus. Lobel hath this by the same name as we here giue it you.
5 About mud walls, high-wayes, and such places, here about London, and in diuers other places, is found growing a small plant, which in all things but the smell and height agrees with that reserred to this kinde by Fabius (...), and called Myrrhis Aequicolorum noua. The root hereof is small and white, perishing euery yeare when it hath perfected his seed: the stalks are slender, (...), smooth, and not hairy, seldome exceeding the height of a cubit, or cubit and (...); it is diuided into sundry branches, vpon the sides whereof against the setting on of the leaues, or out of their bosomes, grow forth the stalks, which carry vmbels of small white floures: after which follow the seeds, growing two together, and these longish, rough, round, and hairy, about the (...) of Anise seeds. The leaues are small, and finely cut or diuided like those of (...), (...) of a whitish colour, and hairy: it comes vp in March, floures in May, and ripens his seed in Iune. In Italy they (...) the yong leaues in sallads, and call it wilde Cheruile: we may in English for distinctions sake call it small (...) Cheruill.
6 To these we may fitly adde that plant which in the hist. Lugd. is called cicutaria (...), and by (...), (...) (...); for it floures at the same time with the last mentioned, and is (...) in floure and seed in May and Iune very frequently almost in all places; but afterwards his stalkes die downe, yet his roots liue, and the leaues are greene all the yeare. The root of this is very large, and diuided into sundry parts, white also and spungie, of a pleasing strong smell, with a hot and biting taste: the stalks grow vp in good ground to be some three cubits high, and they (...) hollow, ioynted, prerty thicke, greene, and much crested, sending forth of the bosomes of the leaues (...) branches, which vpon their tops carry vmbels composed of many white floures, each floure consisting of siue little leaues, whereof the lowest is twice as big as the rest, the two side-ones lesse, (...) the vppermost the least of all. The leaues are large like those of Myrrhis, but of a dark green colour

and those that grow about the tops of the stalkes are commonly diuided into into three parts, and these subdiuided into sundry long sharpe pointed and snipt leaues like as in Myrrhis. The seeds grow two together, being longish, round, sharpe pointed, blacke, and shining. We may fitly terme this plant, wilde Cicely, for that it so much resembles the Myrrhis or garden Cicely, not onely in shape, but (if (...) be not deceiued) in vertues also. @


3 Ceresolium magnum, siue Myrrhis. Great Cheruill or Myrrh.


@ 4 Myrrhis altera (...). Small sweet Cheruill.




 The Place.
The common Cheruill groweth in gardens with other pot-herbes: it prospers in a ground that is dunged and somewhat moist. The great sweet Cheruill groweth in my garden, and in the gardens of other men who haue been diligent in these matters.


 The Time.
These herbes do floure in May, and their seed is ripe in Iuly.


 The Names.
Cheruill is commonly called in Latine Cerefolium, and as diuers affirme, Chaerofolium, with o in the second syllable. (...) nameth it Chaerephyllum, and it is thought to be so called because it delighteth to grow with many leaues, or rather in that it causeth ioy and gladnes: in high-Dutch, Korffelkraut: in low-Dutch, Keruell: in Italian, (...): in French, Du Cerfueil: in English, Cheruell, and Cheruill.
Myrrhis is also called Myrrha, taken from his pleasant sauour of Myrrh: of some, Conila, as it is found noted among the bastard names. It is also, by reason of the (...) it hath with Hemlocke, called by most late writers, Cicutaria. Of this, Pliny maketh mention, lib. 24. cap. 16. where he reporteth that it is called Smyrrhiza: in English it is called Cheruill, sweet Cheruill, or sweet Cicely.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Cheruill is held to be one of the pot herbes, it is pleasant to the stomacke and (...): it is of a  temperate (...) and (...) drinesse, but nothing so much as the Parsleyes.
It prouoketh vrine, especially being bovled in wine, and applied hot to the share or nethermost  part of the belly, and the (...) (...) in which it was boyled.
It hath in it a (...) (...), by meanes whereof it procureth lust.
It is vsed very much among the Dutch people in a kinde of (...) or kotch-pot which they  do eate, called (...).

The leaues of sweet Cheruill are exceeding good, wholesome, and pleasant, among other sallad  herbs, giuing the taste of Anise seed vnto the rest.
The root, saith Galen, is hot in the second degree, hauing a thinnesse of substance ioined with it.
Dioscorides teacheth, that the root drunke in wine is a remedie against the bitings of the venomous  spiders called in Latine Phalangia; and that it bringeth downe the menses and secondines; and being boyled and drunke it is good for such as haue the ptysick or consumption of the lungs.
The seeds eaten as a sallad whilest they are yet greene, with oyle, vineger, and pepper, exceed all  other sallads by many degrees, both in pleasantnesse of taste, sweetnesse of smell, and wholsomnesse for the cold and feeble stomacke.
The roots are likewise most excellent in a sallad, if they be boyled and after dressed as the cunning  Cooke knoweth how better than my selfe: notwithstanding I doe vse to eate them with oile and vineger, being first boyled; which is very good for old people that are dull and without courage; it reioyceth and comforteth the heart, and increaseth their lust and strength.



CHAP. 417. Of Shepheards needle or wilde Cheruill.

 The Description.
1 SCandix, or Pecten Veneris, doth not much differ in the quantitie of the stalks, leaues, and floures, from Cheruill; but Scandix hath no such pleasant smell as Cheruill hath: the leaues be lesser, more finely cut, and of a browne greene colour: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes in small white tufts; after which come vp long seeds very like vnto pack-needdles, orderly set one by another like the great teeth of a combe, whereof it tooke the name (...) Veneris, or Venus combe, or Venus needle: the root is white, a finger long.


1 Pecten Veneris, fiue Scandix. Shepheards needle, or Venus combe.


@ 2 Scandix minor, siue Anthriscus. Small Shepheards needle.


@ 2 This from a slender long and whitish (...) sends vp many small leaues like those of the last described, but of a pleasing smell and taste something like that of the common Cheruill; amongst these leaues grow vp flender stalks a little hairy, diuided into short green and slender branches carrying little vmbels, consisting of fiue, six, seuen, or eight smal white floures, composed of fiue leaues

apiece, with a darke purplish chiue in the middle: the floures are succeeded by, or rather grow vpon long slender cods, which become some inch long, and resemble those of the last described. It floures in Iune, as Clusius affirmeth, who giues vs the history of it; and he receiued it from Honorius Bellus out of Candy; who writes, that in the Spring time it is much vsed in sallads, and desired, for that it much excites to Venery. He also thinks this plant to be the Anthriscus of Pliny, and by the same name Clusius sets it forth. Columna hath called it Aniso-marathrum, because the smell and taste is betweene that of Anise and Fennell. @


 The Place.
It groweth in most corne fields in England, especially among wheate and barley.


 The Time.
It floureth in May: the seed is ripe in August with corne.


 The Names.
The Latines call it Scandix, hauing borrowed that name of the Grecians, who call it (...): we finde among the bastard words, that the Romans did call it Scanaria, and Acula, of the seed that is like vnto a needle. Ruellius describeth it vnder the name Pecten (...) is: of others, Acus Veneris, and Acus Pastoris, or Shepheards Needle, wilde Cheruill, and Ladies combe: in high-Dutch, Naelde Karnel: This is that herbe (saith Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 22.) which Aristophanes obiected in sport to the Poet Euripides, that his mother was wont to sell no right pot-herbe but Scandix, or Shepheards needle; meaning, as I take it, Visnaga, wherewith the Spaniards doe picke their teeth when they haue eaten no meate at all except a few oranges or such a like trifle, called also Scandix.


 The Temperature.
Shepheards needle, saith Galen, is an herbe somewhat binding, and bitter in taste, insomuch that it is hot and dry either in the later end of the second degree, or in the beginning of the third.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith it is eaten both raw and boyled, and that it is an wholesome pot-herbe among  the Greekes; but in these dayes it is of small estimation or value, and taken but for a wilde Wort, as appeareth by Aristophanes taunting of Euripides, as aforesaid.
The decoction thereof is good for the bladder, kidneyes, and liuer; but as I deeme hee meant  Cheruill, when he set the same downe to be vsed in physicke.



CHAP. 418. Of Tooth-picke Cheruill.

 The Description.
1 THe first of these Tooth-picke Cheruils beareth leaues like wilde Turneps, a round stalke furrowed, ioynted, blackish, and hairy, diuided into many branches, on the tops whereof grow spokie tufts, beset round about with many small leaues. The floures thereof are whitish: after commeth the the seed, which being once ripe do cluster and are drawne together, in a round thicke tuft like a small birds nest, as be those of the wilde Carrot; whose seeds whoso toucheth, they will cleaue and sticke to his fingers, by reason of the glutinous or slimie matter they are possessed with. The root is small and whitish, bitter in taste, as is all the rest of the plant.
2 The Spanish Tooth-picke hath leaues, floures, and knobby stalkes like vnto wilde carrots, sauing that the leaues are somewhat finer, cut or iagged thicker, and tenderer, but not rough or hairy at all as is the former, of a bitter taste, and a reasonable good smell: among which rise vp bushie rundles or spokie tufts like those of the wilde Carrot or Birds nest, closely drawne together when the seed is ripe; at what time also the sharpe needles are hardned, fit to make Tooth-pickes and such like, for which purpose they do very fitly serue.


 The Place.
Both of them grow in Syria, and most commonly in Cilicia: the later is to be found likewise in Spaine almost euery where; and I haue it likewise in my garden in great plentie.


 The Time.
They floure in my garden about August, and deliuer their seed in October.


 The Names.
That which the Grecians call (...), the Latines do likewise name Gingidium: and it is called in Syria Lepidium: yet is there another Lepidium. It is reported among the bastard names to be called by the Romans, Bisacutum: of which name some shew remaines among the Syrians, who commonly call the later, (...), (...): this is named in English, Tooth-picke Cheruill.



1 Gingidium latifolium. Broad Tooth-picke Cheruill.


2 Gingidium Hispanicum. Spanish Tooth-picke Cheruill.




 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is, saith Galen, great increase of Gingidium in Syria, and it is eaten no otherwise than Scandex is with vs at Pergamum: it is, saith he, very wholesome for the stomacke, whether it be eaten raw or boyled; notwithstanding it is euident that it is a medicine rather than a nourishment. As it is bitter and binding, so is it likewise of a temperate heate and drinesse. The heate is not very apparant, but it is found to be dry in the later end of the second degree, as also the said Author alledgeth in his discourse of the faculties of simple medicines.
Dioscorides doth also write the same: This pot-herbe (saith he) is eaten raw, sodden, and preserued  with great good to the stomacke; it prouoketh vrine, and the decoction thereof made with wine and drunke, is profitable to scoure the bladder, prouoketh vrine, and is good against the grauell and stone.
The hard quills whereon the seeds do grow are good to cleanse the teeth and gums, and do easily  take away all filth and baggage sticking in them, without any hurt vnto the gums, as followeth after many other Tooth-picks, and they leaue a good sent or sauor in the mouth.



CHAP. 419. Of Mede-sweet, or Queene of the Medowes.

 The Description.
1 THis herbe hath leaues like those of Agrimonie, consisting of diuers leaues set vpon a middle (...) like those of the Ash tree, euery small leafe sleightly snipt about the edges, white (...) the inner side, and on the vpper side crumpled or wrinkled like vnto those of the Elme Tree; whereof it tooke the name Vlmaria, of the similitude or likenesse that the leaues haue with the Elme leaues. The stalke is three or foure foot high, rough, and very fragile or easie to bee broken, of a reddish purple colour: on the top whereof are very many little floures (...) and growing together, of a white colour tending to yellownesse, and of a pleasant sweete

1 Regina (...). Queene of the Medow.
smel, as are the leaues likewise: after which come the seeds, small, crookedly turning or winding one with another, made into a fine little head. The root hath a sweet smel, spreding far abroad, blacke without, and of a darkish red colour within.
@ 2 There is also another which by (...), Tragus, Lonicerus, Gesner, and others, is called Barba Capri: it hath large wooddie rootes, leaues of the bignesse, and growing somewhat after the manner of the wild Angelica: the stalks are crested, and diuided into sundry branches, which carry long bending spikes or eares of white floures and seeds some what like those of the common kinde. This floures at the same time as the former, and I haue not yet heard of it wilde with vs, but onely seene it growing with Mr. Tradescant. @


 The Place.
It groweth in the brinkes of waterie ditches and riuers sides, and also in medowesit liketh waterie and moist places, and groweth almost euery where.


 The Time.
It floureth and flourisheth in Iune, Iuly, and August.


 The Names.
It is called of the later age Regina prati, and Barba Capri: of some, Vlmaria, a foliorum Vlmi similitudine, from the likenesse it hath with the Elme tree leafe: in high Dutch, (...). It is called Barba (...), which name belongeth to the plant which the Grecians do call Tragopogon: of Anguillara, Potentillamaior. It hath some likenesse with Rhodora Plinij, but yet we cannot affirme it to be the same. It is called in low Dutch Rejjnette: in French, Barbe de Cheure, Reine des Praiz: in English, Meades-sweet, Medow-sweet, and Queene of the medowes, Camerarius of Noremberg saith it is called of the Germanes his countrimen, (...) (...): because the roots, saith he, seem to be eaten with wormes. I rather suppose they call it so, because the antient hackny men and horsleaches do giue the decoction therof to their horses and asses, against the bots and wormes, for (...) which it is greatly commended.


 The Temperature.
Mede-sweet is cold and drie, with an euident binding qualitie adioined.


 The Vertues.
The root boiled, or made into pouder and drunke, helpeth the bloudy flix, staieth the laske, and  all other fluxes of bloud in man or woman.
It is reported, that the floures boiled in wine and drunke, do take away the fits of a quartaine ague, and make the heart merrie.
The leaues and floures farre excell all other strowing herbes, for to decke vp houses, to straw in  chambers, halls, and banqueting houses in the sommer time; for the smell thereof makes the heart merrie, delighteth the senses: neither doth it cause head-ache, or lothsomenesse to meat, as some other sweet smelling herbes do.
The distilled water of the floures dropped into the eies, taketh away the burning and itching  thereof, and cleareth the sight.



CHAP. 420. Of Burnet Saxifrage.

 The Description.
1 THis great kinde of Pimpinell, or rather Saxifrage, hath great and long roots, fashioned like a (...), of an hot and biting taste like Ginger: from which riseth vp an hollow

stalke with ioints and knees two cubits high, beset with large leaues, which do more neerely represent Smallage than Pimpernell, or rather the garden Parsnep. This plant consisteth of many small leaues growing vpon one stem, snipt or dented about the edges like a saw: the floures do grow at the top of the stalkes in white round tufts: the seed is like the common Parsley, sauing that it is hotter and biting vpon the tongue.
@ There is a bigger and lesser of this kinde, which differ little, but that the stalkes and veins of the leaues of the lesser are of a purplish colour, and the root is hotter. Our Authour formerly gaue the figure of the lesser in the second place, in stead of that of Bipinella. @


1 Pimpinella Saxifraga. Burnet Saxifrage.


@ 2 Bipinella, siue Saxifragaminor. Small Burnet Saxifrage.


2 (...) is likewise a kinde of Burnet or Pimpinell, vpon which Pena hath bestowed this addition Saxifragaminor: vnder which name Saxifraga are comprehended diuers herbs of diuers kinds, and the one very vnlike to the other: but that kinde of Saxifrage which is called Hircina, which is rough or hairie Saxifrage, of others Bipinella, is best knowne, and the best of all the rest, like vnto the small Burnet, or common Parsley, sauing that it is void of haires, as may (...) by the old Latine verse,
Pimpinella habet pilos, Saxifraga non habet vllos.
Pimpinell hath haires some, but Saxifrage hath none.
Notwithstanding, I haue found a kinde hereof growing in our pastures adioining to London, the leaues whereof if you take and tenderly breake with your hands, you may draw forth small threds, like the web of a spider, such as you may draw from the leaues of Scabious. The stalke is hollow, diuiding it selfe from the ioints or knees, into sundry other small branches; at the top whereof doe grow small tufts or spokie rundles, of a white colour: after which commeth the seed like to Carui, or Caruwaies, of a sharpe taste: the root is also sharpe and hot in taste.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in drie pastures and medowes in this countrey very plentifully.


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
That which (...) calleth (...) maior, Dodonaeus termeth Saxifragia (...), which kinde of Saxifrage doth more absolutely answer the true Phellandrium of Pliny, than any other plant whatsoeuer:

wherein the Physitions of Paris haue been (...), calling or supposing the medow Rue to be the right (...), whereunto it is not like either in shape or facultie: for it is nothing so effectuall in breaking the stone, or prouoking of (...) as (...) of these plants, especially (...) Hircina, which is not so called, because it hath any rammish smell of a goat, but because practitioners haue vsed to feed (...) with it, whose flesh and bloud is singular good against the stone; (...) we rather take it to be named Hircina, of (...), where it doth grow in great abundance, the sauour of the herbe not being vnpleasant, somewhat resembling the smell and taste of (...), Ligustrum, and Pastinaca: so to (...), both (...) are called (...): the smaller is called of some (...), (...), and Bipenula: of Baptista Sardus, and also of Leonardus Fuchsius, (...) maior: wherefore diuers call it (...) (...): for there is also another Pimpinella, called Pimpinella (...): notwithstanding the (...) before rehearsed sheweth a difference betweene Pimpinella and Saxifraga: in high Dutch, it is called (...): in Low Dutch, Bauenaert: in English the greater may be called great Saxifrage, and the other small Saxifrage.
Bipinella is called Saxifragia minor: in English, Small Saxifrage, as Pimpinella is called great Saxifrage. @ Columna iudges it to be the Tragium of (...). @


 The Nature.
Saxifrage of both kindes, with their seed, leaues, and roots, are hot and drie in the third degree, and of thin and subtill parts.


 The (...).
The seed and root of Saxifrage drunken with wine, or the deco ction thereof made with wine, causeth to pisse well, breaketh the stone in the kidnies and bladder, and is singular against the strangurie, and the stoppings of the kidnies and bladder: whereof it tooke the name (...), or breake stone.
The iuice of the leaues of Saxifrage doth clense and take away all spots and freckles of the face, and leaueth a good colour.
The distilled water thereof mingled with some vineger in the distillation, cleareth the sight, and  taketh away all obscuritie and darknesse of the same.



CHAP. 421. Of Burnet.


1 (...) (...). Garden Burnet.


2 Pimpinella syluestris. Wilde Burnet.




 The Kinds.
Bvrnet of which we will intreat, doth differ from Pimpinella, which is also called (...). (...) of the Burnets is lesser, for the most part (...) in gardens, notwithstanding it groweth in barren fieldes, where it is much smaller: the other greater is (...) wilde.


 The Description.
1 GArden Bumet hath long leaues made vp together of a great many vpon one stem, euery one whereof is something round, nicked on the edges, somwhat (...): among these riseth a stalke that is not altogether without leaues, something chamsered: vpon the tops whereof grow little round heads or knaps, which bring sorth small floures of a (...) purple colour, and after them cornered seeds, which are thrust vp together. The root is long: the whole plant doth smell something like a Melon, or Cucumber.
2 Wilde Burnet is greater in all parts, it hath wider and bigger leaues than those of the sormer: the stalke is longer, sometimes two cubits high: the knaps are greater, of a darke purple colour, and the seed is likewise cornered and greater: the root longer, but this Burnet hath no pleasant smell at all.
@ 3 There is kept in some gardens another of this kinde, with very large leaues, stalkes, and heads, for the heads are some inch and halfe long, yet but slender considering the (...), and the floures (as I remember) are of a whitish colour: in other respects it differs not from the precedent it may fitly be called Pimpinella sanguisorba hortensis maxima, Great Garden (...). @


 The Place.
The small Pimpinell is commonly planted in gardens, notwithstanding it doth grow wilde vpon many barren heaths and pastures.
The great wilde Burnet groweth (as Mr. Lyte saith) in dry medowes about Viluord, and my selfe haue found it growing vpon the side of a causey which crosseth the one halfe of a field, whereof the one part is carable ground, and the other part medow; lying between Paddington and Lysson (...) neere vnto London, vpon the high way.


 The Time.
They floure (...) Iune, vnto the end of August.


 The Names.
The later herbarists doe call Burnet Pimpinella sanguisorba, that it may differ from the other, and yet it is called by seuerall names, (...), and (...): Gesner had rather it should be called (...) of the smell of Melons or Pompious, to which it is like, as we haue said: of others it is named Pimpinella, or Bipennyla: of most men, Solbastrella: in High Dutch, (...), (...) (...) (...), (...) (...): in French, Pimpennelle, (...): in English, Burnet. It agreeth (...) (...) (...) (...), that is to say, with Dioscorides his second Iron-woort: the leafe (and especially that of the lesser sort) which we haue written to consist of many nicks in the edges of the leaues; and this may be the very same which Pliny in his 24 book, chapter 17. (...) to be named in Persia, Sissitiepteris, because it made them merry; he also calleth the same Protomedia, and Casigneta, and likewise (...), for that it doth (...) agree with wine; to which also this Pimpinella (as we haue said) doth giue (...) pleasant sent: neither is that repugnant, that Pliny in another place hath written, De Sideritibus, of the Iron-woorts; for it osten falleth out that he intreateth of one and the selfe same plant in diuers places, vnder diuers names: which thing then (...) sooner when the writers themselues do not well know the plant, as that Pliny did not well know Sideritis or Iron-woort, it is euen thereby manisest, because he setteth not downe his owne opinion hereof, but other mens.


 The Temperature.
Burnet, besides the drying and binding facultie that it hath, doth likewise meanly coole: and the lesser Burnet hath likewise with all a certaine superficiall, sleight, and temperate sent, which when it is put into the wine it doth leaue behind it: this is not in the dry herbe, in the iuice, nor in the decoction.


 The Vertues.
Burnet is a singular good herb for wounds (which thing Dioscorides doth attribute to his second  Ironwoort) and commended of a number: it stancheth bleeding, and therefore it was named Sanguisorba, as well inwardly taken, as outwardly applied.
Either the iuice is giuen, or the decoction of the pouder of the drie leaues of the herbe, beeing  (...), it is outwardly applied, or else put among other externall medicines.
It staieth the laske and bloudy flix: it is also most effectuall to stop the monthly course.
The lesser (...) is pleasant to be eaten in sallads, in which it is thought to make the heart (...) and glad, as also being put into wine, to which it yeeldeth a certaine grace in the drinking.

The decoction of Pimpinell drunken, cureth the bloudy flix, the spitting of bloud, and all other  fluxes of bloud in man or woman.
The herbe and seed made into pouder, and drunke with wine, or water wherein iron hath beene  quenched doth the like.
The leaues of Pimpinell are very good to heale wounds, and are receiued in drinkes that are made  for inward wounds.
The leaues of Burnet steeped in winc and drunken, comfort the heart, and make it merry, and are  good against the trembling and shaking thereof.



CHAP. 422. Of English Saxifrage.

 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Saxifrage our English women Physitions haue in great vse, and is familiarly knowne vnto them, vouchsafing that name vnto it of his vertues against the stone: it hath the leaues of Fennel, but thicker and broader, very like vnto Seseli pratense, Monspeliensium (which addition Pena hath bestowed vpon this our English Saxifrage) among which riseth vp a stalke, of a cubit high or more, bearing at the top spokie rundles beset with whitish yellow floures: the root (...) thicke, blacke without, and white within, and of a good sauour.


I haue formerly Chap. 188. deliuered the history of the Saxifraga (...) of (...), and Saxifraga (...) of (...); (...) think (...) our (...) put their descriptions here amongst the (...), for if I had, I should haue spared my labour there bestowed, and haue giuen their figures here to the (...) (...) of our Author, which are now omitted. The figure formerly here was of the (...), described in the third place of the 403 Chapter.

 1 Saxifraga Anglicana facie Seseli pratensis. English Saxifrage.


@ 2 Saxifraga Pannonica Clusq. Austrian Saxifrage.


@ 2 Clusius hath set forth another plant not much different from this our common Saxifrage, and called it Saxifraga Pannonica, which I haue thought fit here to insert: the leaus, saith he, are much (...) than those of Hogs-Fennell, and somewhat like those of Fumitorie: the stalkes are some soot high, slender, hauing some few small leaues, and at the top carrying an vmbel of white floures: the root is not much vnlike that of Hogs-Fennel, but shorter and more acride; it is (...) at the top

thereof, whence the stalkes and leaues come forth: it growes vpon some hils in Hungarie and Au stria, and floures in Iuly. @


 The Place.
Saxifrage groweth in most fields and medowes euery where through out this our kingdome of England.


 The Time.
It floureth from the beginning of May to the end of August.


 The Names.
Saxifraga Anglicana is called in our mother tongue Stone-breake or English Saxifrage: (...) and Lobel call it by this name Saxifraga Anglicana: for that it groweth more plentifully in England than in any other countrey.


 The Nature.
Stone-breake is hot and drie in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
A decoction made with the seeds and roots of (...), breaketh the stone in the bladder and  kidneies, helpeth the strangurie, and causeth one to pisse freely.
The root of Stone-breake boiled in wine, and the decoction drunken, bringeth downe womens  sicknesse, expelleth the secondine and dead childe.
The root dried and made into pouder, and taken with sugar, comforteth and warmeth the stomack, cureth the gnawings and griping paines of the belly.
It helpeth the collicke, and driueth away ventosities or windinesse.
Our English women vse to put it in their running or rennet for cheese, especially in (...) (where I was borne) where the best cheese of this Land is made.



CHAP. 423. Of Siler Mountaine or bastard Louage.


The figure (...) (...) (...) here was of the (...) (...) described in the next chapter in the fourth place; and that which belonged to this place was put for our common (...). Also that figure which belonged to the second description was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...).

 1 Siler montanum Officinarum. Bastard Louage.


The figure (...) (...) (...) here was of the (...) (...) described in the next chapter in the fourth place; and that which belonged to this place was put for our common (...). Also that figure which belonged to the second description was formerly vnder the title of (...) (...).

 2 Seseli pratense (...). Horse Fennell.




 The Description.
1 THe naturall plants of Seseli, being now better knowne than in times past, especially among our Apothecaries, is called by them Siler montanum, and Sescleos: this plant they haue retained to very good purpose and consideration; but the errour of the name hath caused diuers of our late writers to erre, and to suppose that Siler (...), called in shops, Seselcos, was no other than (...) (...) of Dioscorides. But this plant containeth in his substance much more acrimony, sharpenesse, and efficacy in working, than any of the plants called Seselios. It hath stalkes like Ferula, two cubits high. The root smelleth like Liguslicum: the leaues are very much cut or diuided, like the leaues of Fennell or Seseli (...), and broader than the leaues of Peucedanum. At the top of the stalkes grow spoky tufts like Angelica, which bring forth a long and lcafie seed like Cumine, of a pale colour; in taste seeming as though it were condited with sugar, but withall somewhat sharpe, and sharper than Seseli pratense.
2 There is a second kinde of Siler which Pena and Lobel set forth vnder the title of Seseli pratense Monspeliensiam, which Dodonaeus in his last edition calleth Siler pratense alterum, that is in shew very like the sormer. the stalkes thereof grow to the height of two cubits, but his leaues are somewhat broader and blacker: there are not so many leaues growing vpon the stalke, and they are lesse diuided than the former, and are of little sauour. The seed is smaller than the former, and sauouring very little or nothing. The root is blacke without, and white within, diuiding it selfe into sundry diuisions.


 The Place.
It groweth of it selfe in Liguria, not far from Genua in the craggy mountaines, and in the gardens of diligent Herbarists.


 The Time.
These plants do floure from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
It is called commonly Siler Montanum: in French and Dutch by a corrupt name Ser-Montain: in diuers shops, Seseleos, but vntruly: for it is not Seseli, nor a kinde thereof: in English, Siler mountaine, after the Latine name, and bastard Louage. @ The first is thought to be the Ligusticum of the Antients, and it is so called by Matthiolus and others. @


 The Nature.
This plant with his seed is hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
The seeds of Siler drunke with Wormewood wine, or wine wherein Wormewood hath been  sodden, mooueth womens diseases in great abundance: cureth the suffocation and strangling of the matrix, and causeth it to returne vnto the naturall place againe.
The root stamped with hony, and applied or put into old sores, doth cure them, and couer bare  and naked bones with flesh.
Being drunke it prouoketh vrine, easeth the paines of the guts or entrailes proceeding of cruditie  or rawnesse, it helpeth concoction, consumeth winde, and swelling of the stomacke.
The root hath the same vertue or operation, but not so effectuall, as not being so hot and dry.



CHAP. 224. Of Seselios, or Harte-worts of Candy.

 The Description.
1 THis plant being the Seseli of Candy, and in times past not elsewhere found, tooke his surname of that place where it was first found, but now adaies it is to be seen in the corne fields about Narbon in France, from whence I had seeds, which prosper well in mv garden. This is but an annuall plant, and increaseth from yeere to yeere by his owne sowing. The leaues grow at the first euen with the ground, somewhat hairy, of an ouerworne greene colour, in shape much like vnto Cheruill, but thicker: among which riseth vp an hairy rough stalke, of the height of a cubit, bearing at the top spokie tufts with white floures: which being vaded, there followeth round and flat seed, compassed and cunningly wreathed about the edges like a ring.

The seed is flat like the other, ioyned two together in one, as you may see in the seed of Ferula or Angelica, in shape like a round target, in taste like Myrrhis. Matthiolus did greatly mistake this plant.
2 There is a kinde of Seseli Creticum, called also Tordylion: and is very like vnto the former, sauing that his leaues are more like vnto common Parsneps than Cheruil, and the whole plant is biggerthan the former.


1 Seseli Creticum minus: Small Seseleos of Candie.


@ 2 Seseli Creticum maius. Great Seselios of Candie.


3 There is likewise a kinde of Seseli that hath a root as big as a mans arme, especially if the plant be old; but the new and young plants beare roots an inch thicke, with some knobs and tuberous sprouts, about the lower part, the root is thicke, rough, and couered ouer with a thicke barke, the substance whereof is first gummie, afterward sharpe, and as it were full of spattle; from the vpper part of the root proceed many knobs or thicke swelling roots, out of which there issueth great and large wings or branches of leaues, some whereof are notched and dented round about, growing vnto one side or rib of the leafe, standing also one opposite vnto another, of a darke and delaid green colour, and somewhat shining aboue, but vnderneath of a grayish or ashe colour: from amongst these leaues there ariseth a straked or guttered stalke, a cubit and a halfe high, sometimes an inch thicke, hauing many ioints or knees, and many branches growing about them, and vpon each ioint lesser branches of leaues. At the top of the stalkes, and vpper ends of the branches grow little cups or vmbels of white floures; which being vaded, there commeth in place a seed, which is very like Siler montanum. @ I take this here described to be the Seseli montanum 1. of Clusius, or Ligusticum alterum Belgarum of (...): and therefore I haue giuen you Clusius his figure in this place. @
There is also a kinde of Seseli, which Pena setteth forth for the first kinde of Daucus, whereof I take it to be a kinde, growing euery where in the pastures about London, that hath large leaues, growing for a time euen with the earth, and spred thereupon, and diuided into many parts, in manner almost like to the former for the most part in all things, in the round spokie tufts or vmbels, bearing stiffe and faire white floures in shape like them of Cinkefoile; in smell like Sambucus or Elder. (...) the floure is (...), there commeth in place a yellow guttered seed, of a spicie and very hot taste. The root is thicke, and blacke without, which rotteth and perisheth in the ground (as wee

may see in many gummie or Ferulous plants) after it hath seeded, neither will it floure before the second or third yeare after it is sowne. @ I am ignorant what our Author means by this description. @


@ 3 Seseli Creticum maius. Mountaine (...).


@ 4 Seseli (...). Seselios of (...).


4 There is likewise a kinde of Seseli called (...) Massiliense, which hath leaues very much clouen or cut, and finely iagged, very much like (...) the leaues of sweet Fennell, greater and thicker than the common Fennell. The (...) (...) the height of three cubits, hauing knotty ioints, as it were knees; bearing at the top (...) (...) like vnto Dill, and seed somewhat long and cornered, of a sharpe and biting taste. The root is long and thicke like vnto great Saxifrage, of a pleasant smell, and sharpe in taste.
There is another (...) of (...), which hath large and great leaues like vnto Ferula, and not much vnlike Siler Montanum: among which rise vp stalkes foure cubits high, bearing at the tops spokie tufts like vnto the last before (...) hearsed, of a good sauour. The root is like vnto the sormer in shape, substance, and sauour, but that it is greater.


 The Place.
These plants are strangers in England, notwithstanding I haue them in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in September.


 The Names.
Their names haue been touched in their seuerall descriptions.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It prouoketh vrine and helpeth the strangurie, bringeth downe the sicknesse and dead birth: it  helpeth the cough and shortnesse of breath, the suffocation of the mother, and helpeth the falling sicknesse.
The seed drunke with wine (...) raw humours, taketh away the griping and torments of  the belly, and helpeth the ague, as Dioscorides saith.
The iuice of the leaues is giuen to Goats and other cattell to drinke, that they may the sooner  be (...) of their (...) ones, as the same Author reporteth.




CHAP. 425. Of Spignell, Spicknell, or Mewe.

 The Description.
1 SPignell hath stalkes rising vp to the height of a cubit and a halfe, beset with leaues (...) Fennell or Dill, but thicker, more bushie, and more finely iagged; and at the top of the stalkes do grow spokie tufts like vnto Dil. The roots are thick, and full of an oleous substance, smelling well, and chasing or heating the tongue, of a reasonable good sauour.


1 Meum. Spignell.


@ 2 Meum alterum Italicum. Italian Spignell.


2 There is a bastard kinde of Spignell like vnto the former, sauing that the leaues are not so finely cut or iagged: the floures are tufted more thicker than the former: the roots are many, thick, and full of sap.


 The Place.
Mew, or Meon groweth in Westmerland, at a place called Round-twhat betwixt (...) and Kendall, in the parish of Orton.
(...) Mewe, or Meum, groweth in the waste mountaines of Italie, and the Alps, and (as it hath (...) told me) vpon Saint Vincents rocke by Bristow, where I spent two daies to seeke it, but it was not my hap to find it, (...) I make some doubt of the truth thereof.


 The Time.
These herbes doe floure in Iune and Iuly, and yeeld their seed in August.


 The Names.
It is called of the Grecians (...) or (...): likewise of the Latines, Meum: of the Italians, Meo: in (...), (...) (...) declareth, it is called Imperatrix: in diuers places of Spaine, Sistra: in (...), (...): in High Dutch (...): in French, Sistre: Ruellius saith that it is named in France (...) (...) (...) and (...), or writhed Dil, and wilde Dill: also it is called in English, Spignel, or Spicknell, of (...) Mew, and Bearewoort.
The second may be called bastard Spicknell.



 The Temperature.
These herbes, especially the roots of right Meon, is hot in the third degree, and drie in the second.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Meon, boiled in water and drunke, mightily open the stoppings of the kidnies  and bladder, prouoke vrine and bodily lust, ease and helpe the strangurie, and consume all windinesse and belchings of the stomacke.
The same taken with honie doth appease the griefe of the belly, and is exceeding good against  all Catarrhes, theumes, and aches of the iointes, as also any phlegme which falls vpon the Lungs.
If the same be laied plaisterwise vpon the bellies of children, it maketh them to pisse well.
They clense the entrails, and deliuer them of obstructions or stoppings: they prouoke vrine, driue forth the stone, and bring downe the floures: but if they be taken more than is requisite, they cause the head-ache; for seeing they haue in them more heat than drinesse, they carry to the head raw moisture and windie heat, as Galen saith.



CHAP. 426. Of Horestrange, or Sulphurwoort.

 The Description.
1 SVlphurwoort or Hogs-fennell hath a stiffe and hard stalke full of knees or knots, beset with leaues like vnto Fennell, but greater, comming neerer vnto Ferula, or rather like the leaues of wilde Pine-tree, and at the top of the stalkes round spokie tufts full of little yellow floures, which do turne into broad browne seed. The root is thicke and long: I haue digged vp roots thereof as big as a mans thigh, blacke without, and white within, of a strong and grieuous smell, and full of yellow sap or liquour, which quickly waxeth hard or dry, smelling not much vnlike brimstone, called Sulphur; which hath induced some to call it Sulphurwoort; hauing also at the top toward the vpper face of the earth, a certain bush of haire, of a browne colour, among which the leaues and stalkes do spring forth.
2 The second kinde of Peucedanum or Hogs-fennell is very like vnto the former, (...) that the leaues be like Ferula: the roots are nothing so great as the former, but all the rest of the plant doth far exceed the other in greatnesse.
3 There is another kinde of Peucedanum or Hogs (...), which Pena found vpon Saint Vincents rock by Bristow, whose picture he hath set forth in his Aduersaria, which that famous English Physition of late memorie, D. Turner found there also, supposing it to be the right and true Peucedanum, whereof no doubt it is a kinde: it groweth not aboue a soot high, and is in shape and leaues like the right Peuccdanum, but they be shorter and lesser, growing somwhat like the writhed Fennell of Massilia, but the branches are more largely writhed, and the leaues are of the colour of the branches, which are of a pale greene colour. At the top of the branches grow small white tufts, hauing seed like Dill, but shorter and slenderer, of a good taste, somewhat sharpe. The root is thicker than the smalnesse of the herbe will well beare. Among the people about Bristow, and the rocke asoresaid, this hath been thought good to eat.
@ The figure of this our Authour formerly gaue (yet vnfitly, it not agreeing with that description) for Oreoselinum: it may be he thought it the same with that of (...). his description, because he sound it vnder the same title in (...). This is the Selinum montanum pumilum of Clusius; and the Peucedani facie pusilla planta of Pena and Lobel; whersore (...) was mistaken in his Pinax, whereas he refers that of Lobel to his third Peucedanum: the root of this is black without, and white within, but short, yet at the top about the thicknesse of ones (...): the leaues are small and green, commonly diuided into siue parts; and these againe subdiuided by threes: the (...) is some sixe inches or halfe a foot high, diuided into sundry branches, crested, (...), and at the toppes of the branches, euen when they first shoot vp, appeare little vmbels of white floures very small, and consisting of fiue leaues apiece. The seed is blacke, shining and round, two being ioined together, as in most vmbelliferous plants. It floures in May, and ripens the (...) in Iuly: I receiued in Iuly (...), some plants of this from Bristow, by the meanes of my (...) mentioned friend (...) George (...), who gathered it (...) Saint (...) Rocke, whereas the Authours of the Aduersaria report it to grow. @



1 Peucedanum. Sulphurwoort.


2 Peucedanum maius. Great Sulphurwoort.


@ 3 Peucedanum pumilum. Dwarfe Hogs-Fennell.





 The Place.
The first kinde of Peucedanum or Hogs Fennell groweth very plentifully on the South side of a wood belonging to Waltham, at the Nase in Essex by the high-way side; also at Whitstable in Kent, in a medow neere to the sea side, sometime belonging to Sir Henry Crispe, and adioyning to his house there. It groweth also in great plenty at Feuersham in Kent, neere vnto the hauen vpon the bankes thereof, and in the medowes adioyning.
The second kinde groweth vpon the sea coasts of Montpellier in France, and in the coasts of Italy.


 The Time.
These plants do floure in Iune, Iuly, and August.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latines in like manner Peucedanos, or Peucedanum, and also Pinastellum: most of the shops, and likewise the common people name it Foeniculum Porcinum: of diuers, Stataria: of the Prophets, (...): that is to say, a good Angell or Ghost: in high-Dutch, Harstrang, Schweffel wurkel, Sewfenckel: in Italian and French, Peucedano: in Spanish, (...): in English, Hore-strange, and Hore-strong, Sow-Fennell, or Hogs Fennell, Sulphur-wort, or Brimstone-wort. It is called Peucedanum and Pinastellum, of the Greeke and Latine words, (...) and Pinus.


 The Temperature.
These herbes, especially the yellow sap of the root, is hot in the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the third.


 The Vertues.
The yellow sap of the root of Hogs Fennell, or as they call it in some places of England, Horestrange, taken by it selfe, or with bitter almonds and Rue, is good against the shortnesse of breath, it asswageth the griping paines of the belly, dissolueth and driueth away ventositie or windinesse of the stomacke; it wasteth the swelling of the milt or spleene, looseth the belly gently, and purgeth by siege both flegme and choler.
The same taken in manner aforesaid prouoketh vrine, easeth the paine of the kidneyes and bladder, causeth easie deliuerance of childe, and expelleth the secondine, or after-birth, and the dead childe.
The sap or iuyce of the root mixed with oyle of Roses, or Vineger, and applied, easeth the palsie, crampes, contraction or drawing together of sinewes, and all old cold diseases, especially the Sciatica.
It is vsed with good successe against the rupture or burstings in yong children, and is very good  to be applied vnto the nauels of children that stand out ouer much.
The decoction of the root drunke is of like vertue vnto the iuyce, but not altogether so effectuall  against the foresaid diseases.
The root dried and made into pouder doth mundifie and clense old stinking and corrupt sores  and vlcers, and healeth them: it also draweth forth the corrupt and rotten bones that hinder the same from healing, and likewise splinters and other things fixed in the flesh.
The said pouder or iuyce of the root mixed with oyle of Roses, causeth one to sweat, if the body  be anointed therewith, and therefore good to be put into the vnction or ointment for the French disease.
The congealed liquor tempered with oyle of Roses, and applied to the head after the manner of  an ointment, is good for them that haue the Lethargie, that are franticke, that haue dizzinesse in the head, that are troubled with the falling sicknesse, that haue the palsie, that are vexed with convulsions and crampes, and generally it is a remedie for all infirmities of the sinewes, with Vineger and oyle, as Dioscorides teacheth.
The same being smelt vnto reuiueth and calleth them again that be strangled with the mother, and that lie in a dead sleepe.
Being taken in a reare egge it helpeth the cough and difficultie of breathing, gripings and windinesse, which, as Galen addeth, proceedeth from the grossenesse and clamminesse of humors.
It purgeth gently, it diminisheth the spleene, by cutting, digesting, and making thin humours  that are thicke: it causeth easie trauell, and openeth the matrix.
A small piece of the root holden in the mouth is a present remedie against the suffocation of  the mother.




CHAP. 427. Of Herbe Ferula, or Fennell Gyant.

 The Kindes.
DIoscorides maketh mention of a Ferula, out of which is gathered the Gum Sagapene; and (...) he declareth, that the Gums Galbanum and Ammoniacum are liquors of this herb (...): but what difference there is in the liquors, according to the clymat or countrey where it groweth, he doth not set downe; for it may be that out of one kinde of Ferula sundry iuyces may be gathered, that is to say, according to the diuersitie of the countries where they grow, as we haue said: for as in Laser, the iuyce of Laserwort that groweth in Cyrene doth differ from that liquor which groweth in Media and Syria; so it is likely that the herbe Ferula doth bring sorth in Media Sagapenum, in Cyrene Ammoniacum, and in Syria Galbanum. Theophrastus saith that the herbe Ferula is diuided into mo kindes, and he calleth one great, by the name of Ferula; and another little, by the name Ferulago.


1 Ferula. Fennell Gyant.


@ 2 Ferulago. Small Fennell-Gyant.




 The Description.
1 FErula, or Fennell Gyant, hath very great and large leaues of a deepe greene colour, cut and iagged like those of Fennell, spreading themselues abroad like wings: amongst which riseth vp a great hollow stalke, somewhat reddish on that side which is next vnto the Sun, diuided into certaine spaces, with ioynts or knees like those of Hemlocks or Kexes, of the bignesse of a mans arme in the wrest, of the height of foure or fiue cubits where it groweth naturally, as in Italy, Greece, and other hot countries; notwithstanding it hath attained to the height of fourteene or fifteene foot in my garden, and likewise groweth fairer and greater than from whence it came, as it (...) with other plants that come hither from hot regions: as for example our great Artichoke, which first was brought out of Italy into England, is become (by reason of the great moisture which our countrey is subiect vnto) greater and better than those of Italy;

insomuch that diuers Italians haue sent for some plants of our Artichokes, (...) (...) to be of another kinde; neuerthelesse in Italy they are small and dry as they were before. (...) (...) it hapneth to this Ferula, as we haue said. This foresaid stalke diuideth it selfe toward the top into diuers other smaller branches, whereon are set the like leaues that grow next the ground, out much lesser. At the top of the branches at the first budding of the floures appeare certaine bundles inclosed in thin skins, like the yolke of an egge, which diuers call Corculum Ferulae, or the (...) (...) of Ferula; which being brought to maturitie, open themselues into a tuft or vmbel like that of (...), of a yellowish colour: after which come the seed, in colour and fashion like those of the (...), but longer and greater, alwaies growing two together, so closely ioyned, that it cannot be discerned to be more than one seed vntill they be diuided: the root is very thicke and great, full of a certaine gummie iuyce, that floweth forth, the root being bruised, broken, or cut; which being dried or hardned, is that gum which is called Sagapenum, and in some shops Serapinum.


@ 3 Panax Asclepium Ferulaefacie. Aesculapius his All-heale.


2 There is likewise another smaller (...) like (...) the former in each respect, sauing that it is altogether lesse: the root likewise being wounded yeeldeth forth a sap or iuyce, which when it is hardned is called Galbanum: of the Assyrians, Metopium.
I haue likewise another sort sent mee from Paris, with this title Ferulanigra; which prospereth exceeding well in my garden, but difference I cannot finde any from the former, sathat the leaues are of a more blacke or swart colour.
@ 3 I know not where more fitly than in this place to giue you the historie of that Ferula or Ferulaceous plant that Dodonaeus, Lobel, and others haue set downe vnder the name of Panax Asclepium. The stalke hereof is slender, a cubit high, crested and ioynted, and from these ioynts proceed leaues bigger than those of Fennell, and also rougher, and of a strong smell: at the tops of the branches grow vmbels of yellow floures: the seed is flatrish, like that of the other Ferula: the root long, white, and of a strong smell. This growes naturally in Istria. @


 The Place.
These plants are not growing wilde in England; I haue them all in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly; they perfect their seed in September; not long after, the stalke with his leaues perish: the root remaineth fresh and greene all Winter.


 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Ferula: in Italian, Ferola: in Spanish, (...): in English, Herbe Ferula, and Fennell Gyant.


 The Temperature.
These plants with their Gums are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.


 The Vertues.
The pith or marrow, called Corculum Ferulae, as Galen teacheth, is of an astringent or binding  qualitie, and therefore good for them that spit bloud, and that are troubled with the (...).
Dioscorides saith, that being put into the nosthrils it stayeth bleeding, and is giuen in Wine to  those that are bitten with Vipers.
It is reported to be eaten in Apulia rosted in the embers, first wrapped in leaues or in old clouts, with pepper and salt; which, as they say, is a pleasant sweet food, that stirreth vp lust, as they report.
The seed doth heate, and attenuate or make thinne: it is a remedie against cold fits of an Ague, by procuring sweat, being mixed with oyle, and the body anointed therewith.
A dram of the iuyce of (...) which beareth Sagapenum, purgeth by siege tough and slimie humors,

and all grosse flegme and choler, and is also good against all old and cold diseases which are hard to be cured; it purgeth the brain, and is very good against all diseases of the head, against the Apoplexie and Epilepsie.
Being taken in the same manner, it is good against crampes, palsies, shrinkings and paines of the sinewes.
It is good against the shortnesse of breath, the cold and long cough, the paine in the side and brest, for it mundifieth and clenseth the brest from all cold flegme and rheumaticke humors.
Sagapenum infused or steeped in vineger all night, and spread vpon leather or cloath, scattereth, dissolueth, and driueth away all hard and cold swellings, tumors, botches, and hard lumpes growing about the ioynts or elsewhere, and is excellent good to be put into or mingled with all oyntments or complaisters which are made to mollifie or soften.
The iuyce of Ferula Galbanifera, called Galbanum, drunke in wine with a little myrrh, is good against all venome or poyson that hath beene taken inwardly, or shot into the body with venomous darts, quarrels, or arrowes.
It helps womens paineful trauel, if they do take therof in a cup of wine the quantitie of a bean.
The perfume of Galbanum helpeth women that are grieued with the rising of the mother, and is  good for those that haue the falling sicknesse.
Galbanum softneth, mollifieth, and draweth forth thornes, splinters, or broken bones, and (...) cold and flegmaticke humors, seruing in sundry ointments and emplaisters for the (...) of Surgerie, and hath the same physicall vertues that are attributed vnto Sagapenum.



CHAP. 428. Of Drop-wort, or Filipendula.


1 Filipendula. Drop-wort.


2 Filipendula montana. Mountaine Drop-wort.



 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Drop-worts, some of the champion or fertill pastures, some of more moist and dankish grounds, and some of the mountaine.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Filipendula hath leaues growing and spred abroad like feathers, each leafe consisting of sundry small leaues dented or snipt round about the edges, growing to the stalke by a small and slender stem: these leaues resemble wilde Tansie or Burnet, but that they be longer and thicker, set like feathers, as is aforesaid: among these rise vp stalkes a cubit and a halfe high, at the top whereof grow many faire white floures, each small floure consisting of six slender leaues, like a little star, bushing together in a tuft like the floures of Medesweet, of a soft sweet smell: the seed is small, and groweth together like a button: the roots are small and blacke, whereupon depend many little knops (...) blacke pellets, much like the roots of the female Peonie, sauing that they be a great deale smaller.
2 The second kinde of Filipendula, called of Pena in his Obseruations, Oenanthe, siue Philipendula alter a montana, is neither at this day very well knowne, neither did the old writers heretofore once write or speake of it: but Pena that painefull Herbarist found it growing naturally in Narbone in France, (...) vnto Veganium, on the top of the high hills called Paradisus Dei, and neere vnto the mountaine Calcaris: this rare plant hath many knobby long roots, in shape like to Ashodelus luteus, or rather like the roots of Corruda, or wilde Asparagus; from which riseth vp a stalke a foot high, and more, which is thicke, round, and chanelled, beset full of leaues like those of common Filipendula, but they be not so thicke set or winged, but more like vnto the leaues of a Thistle, consisting of sundry small leaues, in fashion like to Coronopus Ruellij, that is, Ruellius his Bucks horne: round about the top of the stalke there groweth a very faire tuft of white floures, resembling fine small hoods, growing close and thicke together like the floures of Pedicularis, that is, Red Rattle, called of Carolus Clusius, Alectorolophos; whereof he maketh this plant a kinde, but in my iudgement and opinion it is rather like Cynosorchis, a kinde of Satyrion.


3 Filipendula angustifolia. Narrow leafed Drop-wort.


@ 4 Filipendula Cicutaefacie. Hemlocke Drop-wort.


3 There is another kinde of Filipendula set forth vnder the name of Oenanthe, that hath many tuberous and thicke roots like those of Drop-wort, but white of colour, and euery one of those knobs hath a certaine string or fibre annexed thereto; from whence ariseth a crested stalk two foos

5 Filipendula aquatica. Water Drop-wort.
high, diuiding it self toward the top into sundry armes or branches: from the hollow place or bosome of euery ioynt (out of which doe grow those branches) the leaues doe also proceed, very much cut or iagged like Fennell: at the top of those branches come forth spokie rundles of white floures fashioned like stars.
@ 4 The fourth kinde of Filipendula is as strange a plant as the former, especially with vs here in England, except in the waterie places and rilles in the North, where Paludapium or water Smallage groweth; whereunto in leaues it is not vnlike, but more like Ruta pratensis: it hath many large branches, a naughty sauor, and in colour and shape like Cicuta, that is, Hemlocke. The stalkes are more than two cubits high, comming from a root which exceedingly multiplies it selse into bulbes, like Asphodelus albus. The smell of this plant is strong and grieuous; the taste hot and biting, it being full of a iuyce, at first milky, but afterwards turning yellow. The spoky tusts or rundles growing at the top are like Cicuta, yea, it much resembleth Hemlocke in propertie and qualities, and so doe they affirme that haue proued and seene the experience of it: (...) being eaten in sallads it did well nigh poyson those which ate of it, making them giddie in their heads, waxing very pale, staggering and reeling like drunken men. Beware and take good heed of this and such like Simples; for there is no Physitian that will giue it, because there be many other excellent good Simples which God hath bestowed vpon vs from the preuenting and curing of diseases. @ Pernitious and not excusable is the ignorance of some of our time, that haue bought and (as one may probably coniecture) vsed the roots of this plant in stead of those of Peionie; and I know they are dayly by the ignorant women in Cheape-side sold to people more ignorant than themselues, by the name of water Louage; Caueat Emptor. The danger that may ensue by vsing them may be gathered by that which our Author hath here set downe, being taken out of the Aduersaria, pag. 326. @
5 The fifth and last kinde of Filipendula, which is the fourth according to Matthiolus his account, hath leaues like water Smallage, which Pliny calleth Sylaus, the leaues very much resembling those of Lauer Cratcuae: among which riseth vp a small stalke deepely furrowed or crested, bearing at the top thereof spokie or bushy rundles of white floures thicke thrust together. The roots are compact of very many filaments or threds,; among which come forth a few tuberous or knobbie roots like vnto the second.


 The Place and Time.
The first groweth plentifully vpon stonie rockes or mountaines, and rough places, and in fertile pastures. I found great plenty thereof growing in a field adioyning to Sion house, somtime a Nunnerie, neere London, on the side of a medow called Sion Medow.
The second hath been sufficiently spoken of in the description. The third groweth neere vnto brookes and riuers sides. The (...) groweth betweene the plowed lands in the moist and wet furrowes of a field belonging to Battersey by London. @ It also groweth in great aboundance in many places by the Thames side; as amongst the oysiers against Yorke house, a little aboue the Horse-ferrey, against Lambeth, etc. @ The fifth groweth neere the sides of riuers and waterstreames, especially neere the riuer of Thames or Tems, as in S. Georges fields, and about the Bishop of Londons house at Fulham, and such like places.
They floure from May to the end of Iune.


 The Names.
They are commonly called Filipendulae. The first is called of Nicolaus Myrepsus, Philipendula: of some, Saxisragrarubra, and Millefolium syluestre: of Pliny, Molon: in Italian and Spanish, Filipendula: in English, Filipendula and Drop-wort. Water Filipendula is called Filipendula aquatica; Oenanthe aquatica, and Silaus Plinij.

The fourth, whose leaues are like to Homlocks, is as some thinke called of Cordus, Oisenichium: in English Homlocke Filipendula.


 The Nature.
These kindes of Filipendula are hot and dry in the third degree, opening and clensing, and yet with a little astriction or binding. All the kindes of Oenanthes haue the same facultie, except the fourth, whose pernitious facultie we haue formerly touched.


 The Vertues.
The root of common Filipendula boiled in wine and drunken, is good against all paines of  the bladder, causeth one to make water, and breaketh the stone. The like Dioscorides hath written of Oenanthe; the root, saith he, is good for them that pisse by drops.
The powder of the roots of Filipendula often vsed in meate, will preserue a man from the falling  sickenesse. 

The figures that were formerly in the (...) and fifth places, were both of the plant described in the fifth place. I (...) (...) you in the fourth place the figure which Lobel and others haue giuen for the plant there described, but it is not well (...) for the (...) are large like those of Smallage, the stalke, branches and (...) very large, and like those of (...), but rather bigger.




CHAP. 429. Of Homlocks, or herbe Bennet.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Hemlocke hath a long stalke, fiue or six foot high, great and hollow, full of joints like the stalkes of Fennell, of an herby colour; poudered with small red spots, almost like the stems of Dragons. The leaues are great, thicke, and small cut or jagged like the leaues of Cheruill, but much greater, and of a very strong and vnpleasant sauor. The floures are white, growing by tufts or spokie tops, which do change and turne into a white flat seed: the root isshort, and somewhat hollow within.


1 Cicuta. Hemlocks.


2 The Apothecaries in times past not knowing the right Seseli Peloponnense, haue erroniously taken this Cicuta latifolia for the same. The leaues whereof are broad, thicke, and like vnto Cicutaria, yet not the same; they called it Seseli Peloponnense cum folio Cicutae, the faculties whereof deny and refute that assertion and opinion, yea and the plant it selfe, which being touched, yeeldeth or breatheth out a most virulent or lothsome smell: these things sufficiciently argue, that it is not a kinde of Seseli, besides the reasons following: Seseli hath a reasonable good sauour in the whole plant, the root is bare and single, without fibres, like a Carrot; but Cicuta hath not onely a lothsome smell, but his roots are great, thicke, and knobby, like the roots of Myrrhis: the whole plant doth in a manner resemble the leaues, stalkes and floures of Myrrhis odorata, whose small white floures doe turne into long and crooked seeds, growing at the top of the branches three cubits high.
@ 3 This in leaues, stalkes, and roots is larger than the last described, the stalkes equalling or exceeding the height of a man; the smell is strange and greiuous, and in all the parts thereof it is like to the other plants of this kinde. Lobel figures it by the name of Cicutaria maxima Brancionis, and questions whither it be not Thapsia tertia Salamanticensium of Clusius; but Clusius denies it so to be. @



2 Cicuta latifolia faetidissima. Broad leafed stinking Hemlocks.


@ 3 Cicuta latifolia altera. Gyant Hemlocke.




 The Place.
Common Hemlocke groweth plentifully about towne walls and villages in (...) places, and fat soiles neere ditches.
The second groweth vpon mountaines and desart places, and is a stranger in England; yet I haue plants thereof in my garden.


 The Time.
They flourish and seed in September.


 The Names.
Homlocke is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Cicuta: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Spanish, (...) Canaheia: in French, Cigue: in English, Hemlocke, Homlocke, Kexe, and herbe Bennet.
The second is called Cicuta latifolia, and Cicutaria latifolia, and (...) Peloponnense quorundam in English, great Hemlockes, and garden Homlocke.


 The Temperature.
(...) saith, that Homlocke is extreme cold in operation, euen in the fourth degree of coldnesse.



 The Vertues.
It is therefore a very (...) part to lay the leaues of Hemlocke to the stones of yong boyes or virgin  brests, and by that meanes to keepe those parts (...) growing great; for it doth not only (...) cause those members to pine away, but also hurteth the heart and liuer, being outwardly (...): then must it of necessitie hurt more being inwardly taken; for it is one of the deadly (...) which killeth by his cold qualitie, as Dioscorides writeth, saying, Hemlocke is a very euill, dangerous, hurtfull, and poysonous herbe, insomuch that whosoeuer taketh of it into his body dieth remedilesse, except the party drinke some wine that is naturally hot, before the venome haue taken the heart, as Pliny saith: but being drunke with wine the poyson is with greater speed carie to the heart, by reason whereof it killeth presently; theresore not to be applied outwardly, much lesse taken inwardly into the body.
The great Hemlocke doubtlesse is not possessed with any one good facultie, as appeareth by his  lothsome smell, and other apparant signes, and therefore not to be vsed in physicke.



CHAP. 430. Of wilde and water Hemlockes.

 The Description.
The figure formerly in the first place was of (...); the description I thinke was intended, yet not throughly agreeing with this I here giue you, wherefore I haue a little altered it.

 1 THis wilde kinde of Hemlocke hath a small tough white root, from which arise vp diuets stiffe stalkes, hollow, somewhat reddish toward the Sun, ioynted or kneed at certaine distances: from which ioynts spring forth long leaues very greene, and finely minced or iagged like the common. Cheruill or Parsley: the floures stand at the tops of the stalks in small spokie vmbels, with little longish greene leaues about them: the seed solloweth, like those of Hemlocke, or as they grow together on the tops of the stalks they resemble Coriander seeds, but lesser: the whole plant is of a naughty smell.


The figure formerly in the first place was of (...); the description I thinke was intended, yet not throughly agreeing with this I here giue you, wherefore I haue a little altered it.

 1 Cicutaria tenuifolia. Thin leafed wilde Hemlocke.


2 Cicutaria (...). Wilde water Hemlocke.


2 Water Hemlock, which Lobel calleth Cieutariapalustris: Clusius and (...), Phellandrium, riseth vp with a thicke fat and empty hollow stalke, full of knees or ioynts, (...), chamfered, or

furrowed, of a yellowish greene colour: the leaues shoot forth of the ioynts and branches, like vnto wilde Hemlocke, but much thicker, fatter, and oileous, very finely cut or iagged, almost like those of the smallest Visnaga, or Spanish Tooth-pickes: the floures stand at the top of the stalkes in small whitish tusts: the seed followeth, blackish, of the bignesse of Anise seed, and of a sweet sauour: the root is thicke and long, within the water, very soft and tender, with very many strings fastned thereto.


 The Place.
1 This growes among stones and rubbish, by the walls of cities and towns almost euery where. The other groweth in the midst of water ditches and standing pooles and ponds, in most places of England: it groweth very plentifully in the ditches by a causey, as you goe from Redriffe to Detford neere London, and in many other places.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
@ 1 This is Petroselini vitium of Tragus; and Dauci inutilis genus of Gesner: Thalius calls it Apium cicutarium: Lobel, Cicutaria fatua: Tabernamontanus, Petroselinum caninum; which name we may fitly make English, and call it Dogs-parsley.
2 This is Ligusticum syl. and Foeniculum syl. of Tragus: Cicutaria palustris of Lobel and others: Dodonaeus thinkes it Plinies Phellandrion; and Caesalpinus iudges it his Silaus. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their temperature and faculties are answerable to the common Hemlocke, which haue no vse in physicke, as we haue said.



CHAP. 431. Of Earth-nut, Earth Chest-nut, or Kipper-nut.


@ 1 Bulbocastanon minus. Small Earth-nut.


2 Bulbocastanon (...). Great Earth-nut.




 The Description.
1 EArth-nut or Kipper-nut, called after Lobelius, Nucula terrestris, hath small euen crested stalkes a foot or somewhat more high: whereon do grow next the ground leaues like those of Parsley, and those that doe grow higher like vnto those of Dill; the white floures doe stand on the top of the stalkes in spokie rundles, like the tops of Dill, which turne into small seed, growing together by couples, of a very good smell, not vnlike to those of Fennell, but much smaller: the root is round, knobbed, with certaine eminences or bunchings out; browne without, white within, of a firme and sollid substance, and of a taste like the Chesse-nut or Chestnut, whereof it tooke his name.
2 There is also another Earth-nut that hath stalkes a foot high, whereon doe grow iagged leaues like those of English Saxifrage, of a bright greene colour: the floures grow at the top of the branches, in small spokie tufts consisting of little white floures: the root is like the other, bulbous fashion, with some few strings hanging at the bottome, of a good and pleasant taste. @ This differs from the former, in that the leaues are larger and greener: the root also is not so far within the ground, and it also sends forth some leaues from the bulbe it selfe; whereas our common kind hath only the end of a small root that carries the stem and leaues vpon it, fastned vnto it as you see it exprest in the former figure. @


 The Place.
These herbes do grow in pastures and corne fields almost euery where: there is a field adioining to High-gate, on the right side of the middle of the village, couered ouer with the same; and likewise in the next field vnto the conduit heads by Maribone, neere the way that leadeth to Paddington by London, and in diuers other places. @ I haue not yet obserued the second to grow wilde with vs. @


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly: the seed commeth to perfection afterward.


 The Names.
Alexander Trallianus hath made mention of (...), Lib. 7. reckoning it vp among th ose kinds of meate or sustenances which be good for such as haue rotten lungs: of some it is called Agriocastanon.
Guinterius thought the word was corrupted, and that Balanocastanon should be read: but this is as strange a word as Bolbocastanon, which was deriued of the forme of a bulbe, and the tast of a Chestnut: of some, Nuculaterrestris, or the little Earth-nut: it is thought to be Bunium Dioscoridis of some; but we thinke not so: of Dr. Turner, Apios; yet there is another Apios, being a kinde of Tithymale: of Matthiolus, Oenant he, making it a kinde of Filipendula: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, Certnoten: the people of Sauoy call it Fauerottes: in English, Earth-nuts, Kippernuts, and Earth Chest-nuts.


 The Temperature.
The roots of Earth-nuts are moderately hot and dry, and also binding: but the seed is both hotter and drier.


 The Vertues.
The seed openeth and prouoketh vrine, and so doth the root likewise.
The root is good for those that spit and pisse bloud, if the root be eaten raw, or rosted in the embers.
The Dutch people doe vse to eate them boyled and buttered, as we doe Parseneps and Carrots, which so eaten comfort the stomacke, and yeeld nourishment that is good for the bladder and kidneyes.
There is a plaister made of the seeds hereof, whereof to write in this place were impertinent to  our historie.



CHAP. 432. Of Cumin.

 The Description.
THis garden Cumin is a low or base herbe of a foot high: the stalke diuideth it selfe into diuers small branches, whereon doe grow little iagged leaues very finely cut into small parcels, like those of Fennell, but more finely cut, shorter and lesser: the spoky tufts grow at the top of the branches and stalkes, of a red or purplish colour: after which come the seed, of a strong or rancke smell, and a biting taste: the root is slender, which perisheth when it hath ripened his seed.



Cuminum sativum Dioscoridis. Garden Cumin.




 The Place.
Cumin is husbanded and sown in Italy and Spain, and is very common in other hot countries, as in Aethiopia, Egypt, Cilicia, and all the lesser Asia.
It delights to grow especially in putrified and hot soiles: I haue proued the seeds in my garden, where they haue brought forth ripe seed much fairer and greater than any that commeth from beyond the seas.


 The Time.
It is to be sown in the middle of the spring; a shewre of raine presently following doth much hinder the growth thereof, as Ruellius saith.
My selfe did sow it in the midst of May, which sprung vp in six days after: and the seed was ripe in the end of Iuly.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...), that is, tame or garden Cumin, that it may differ from the wilde ones: it is named in Latine Cuminum: in shops, Cyminum: in high-Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Comino: in Spanish, Cominchos: in French, Comin: in English, Cumin.


 The Temperature.
The seed of garden Cumin, as Galen saith, is hot and dry in the third degree: Dioscorides saith that it hath in it also a binding qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Cumin scattereth and breaketh all the windinesse of the stomacke, belly, guts, and  matrix: it is good against the griping torments, gnawing or fretting of the belly, not onely receiued inwardly by the mouth, but also in clisters, and outwardly applied to the belly with wine and barley meale boyled together to the forme of a pultis.
Being handled according to art, either in a cataplasme, pultis, or plaister, or boyled in wine and  so applied, it taketh away blastings, swellings of the cods or genitors: it consumeth windie swellings in the ioynts, and such like.
Being taken in supping broth it is good for the chest and for cold lungs, and such as are oppressed  with aboundance of raw humors.
It stancheth bleeding at the nose, being tempered with vineger and smelt vnto.
Being quilted in a little bag with some small quantitie of Bay salt, and made hot vpon a bedpan  with fire or such like, and sprinkled with good wine vineger, and applied to the side very hot, it taketh away the stitch and paines thereof, and easeth the pleurisie very much.



CHAP. 433. Of wilde Cumin.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers plants differing very notably one from another in shape, and yet all comprehended vnder the title of wilde Cumin.


 The Description.
1 THe wilde Cumin hath small white roots with some fibres thereto appendant; from the which arise sundry little iagged leaues, consisting of many lesser leaues, finely dented about the edges, in fashion like the smallest leaues of wilde Parsnep: among which springeth vp a slender bending stalke a foot high, like vnto (...) (...), bearing at the top thereof white



1 Cuminum syluestre. Wilde Cumin.


2 Cuminum (...). Codded wilde Cumin.


3 Cuminum Corniculatum sive Hypecoum Clusy. Horned wild Cumin.


round and hairle buttons or knops, like Arction, as Dioscorides hath right well obserued: within which knoppes is contained a tender downie substance, among which is the seed, like the seed of Dens Leonis, but much lesser.
2 The second kinde of Cumin is verie like vnto the foresaid wilde Cumin, saue that it beareth a number of horned or crooked cods, after the manner of Scorpioides, but thicker, and lesse crooked, and the seedes within the cods are seucrally distinct and separated one from another by equall partitions, in small crosses, yellow of colour, and somewhat long: the stalkes are little and tender, beset with leaues much like vnto the small leaues of Carui, or Pecten Vencris: and at the top of the stalks there do grow pretty yellow floures, like those of great Celandine or Rocket, sauing that they be somwhat lesser.
@ 3 The third kinde of Cumin is very like vnto the last before mentioned, but the leaues are much greater, more slender, and more finely cut or iagged, like the leaues of Seseli of (...): among which riseth vp a stalke a cubit high or somewhat more, very smooth and whitish: at the top whereof spring forth fine yellow floures, not like the former, but consisting of six leaues apiece;

whereof two are large, and edged with greene on the outside: the other foure are small ones, and grow two on a side betweene the two larger leaues: these floures being vaded, there succeed crooked cods, greater, and more full of knots or diuisions than the former, wherein is contained a small and flat yellow seed like Galega: the root is long, thicke, and single.


 The Place.
These wilde Cumins do grow in Lycia, and Galatia, a prouince of Asia, and in Carthage a citie of Spaine; seldome seene in these Northerne parts: notwithstanding at the impression hereof, the last did floure and flourish in my garden. @ These grow in Prouince in France, and in diuers parts of Spaine. @


 The Time.
They floure in August, and perfect their seed in September.


 The Names.
Their names haue been touched in their titles in as ample manner as hath been set down by any Author.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their temperature and vertues are referred to the garden Cumin; notwithstanding I cannot reade in any Author of their vse in Physicke.



CHAP. 434. Of Flixweed.


1 Sophia Chirurgorum. Flixweed.



 The Description.
1 FLixweed hath round and hard stalks, a cubit and a halfe high, wheron do grow leaues most finely cut and diuided into in numerable fine iags, like those of the sea Wormewood called Seriphium, or Absinthium tenuisolium, but much finer and smaller, drawing neere vnto the smallest leaues of Corianders, of an ouerworne greene colour: the floures grow alongst the tops of the spriggie branches, of a dark yellow colour: after which come long cods full of small red seeds: the root is long, straight, and of a wooddie substance:
2 The second sort differeth not from the precedent, sauing that the leaues of this plant are broader, wherein especially consisteth the difference; notwithstanding in mine opinion Tabernamontanus found this second fort growing in some fertill place, whereby the leaues did grow broader and greater, which moued him to make of this a second sort, whereas in truth they are both but one and the selfe same plant.


 The Place.
This Flixeweede groweth in most places of England, almost euery where in the ruins of old buildings, by high waies, and in filthie obscure base places.


 The Time.
It floureth and seedeth from Iune to the end of September.


 The Names.
Flixweed is called Thalietrum; and of some, Thalictrum, but vnproperly; for Thalictrum belongeth to English Rubarbe: the Paracelsians do vaunt and brag very much of an herbe called Sophia, adding thereto the surname Paracelsi, wherewith they imagine to do wonders, whether this be the same plant it is disputable, the controuersie not as yet decided; neuerthelesse we must be content

to accept of this for the true Sophia, vntil some disciple or other of his do thew or set (...) (...) (...) wherewith their master Paracelsus, did such great matters: in English we call it (...), of his facultie against the flix.


 The Temperature.
Sophia drieth without any manifest sharpenesse or heate.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Sophia or Flixweed drunke with wine, or Smithes water, stoppeth the bloudy flix, the  laske, and all other issues of bloud.
The herbe bruised or put into vnguents, closeth and healeth vlcers, or old sores and wounds, as  Paracelsus saith, and that because it drieth without (...) or sharpnesse.



CHAP. 435. Of the great Celandine, or Swallow-woort.

 The Description.
1 THe great Celandine hath a tender brittle stalke, round, hairie, and full of branches, each whereof hath diuers knees or knottie ioints, set with leaues not vnlike to those of Columbine, but tenderer and deeper cut or iagged, of a grayish greene vnder, and greene on the other side tending to blewnesse: the floures do grow at the top of the stalkes, of a gold yellow colour, in shape like those of the Wall-floure: after which come long cods, full of bleake or pale seeds: the whole plant is of a strong smell, nothing pleasant, and yeeldeth a thicke iuice of a milkie substance, of the colour of Saffron: the root is thicke and knobbie, with some threds annexed thereto, which being broken or bruised, yeeldeth a sap or iuice of the colour of gold.


1 Chelidoniummaius. Great Celandine.


@ 2 Chelidonium majus folio magis dissecto. Great Celandine with more cut leaues.


@ 2 This other doth not in forme and magnitude differ from the former, but in the leaues, which are finelier cut and iagged, and somewhat in their shape resemble an Oken lease: the floures

also are a little iagged or cut about the edges: and in these two particulars (...) (...) (...) difference. Clusius calls it (...) maius lacintato flore; and (...), (...). (...). (...). (...) (...) quernis. @


 The Place.
It groweth in vntilled places, by common way sides, among briers and brambles, about old wals, and in the shade, rather than in the Sun.


 The Time.
It is greene all the yeare, it floureth from Aprill to a good part of Sommer, the coddes are perfected in the meane time.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, (...) maius, and Hirundinaria maior: amongst the Apothecaries, (...): diuers miscall it by the name Celidonium: it is named in Italian, (...): in Spanish Celiduhenha, (...) de las golundrinhas: in high Dutch, Grosz (...): in low Dutch (...) Gouwe: in French, Esclere, or Esclayre, and (...): in English, Celandine, or great Celandine, Swallow-woort, and Tetterwoort.
It is called Celandine, not because it then first springeth at the comming in of the Swallows, or dieth when they goe away: for as we haue said, it may be found all the yeare, but (...) (...) hold opinion, that with this herbe the dammes restore sight to their young ones when their (...) (...) out: the which things are vaine and false; for Cornelius (...) in his sixth booke doth witnesse, that when the sight of the eies of diuers young birds be put forth by some outward meanes, it will (...) a time be restored of it selfe, and soonest of all the sight of the Swallow, wherupon (as the same Author saith) that the tale or fable grew, how thorow an herbe the dams restore that thing, which (...) of it selfe: the very same doth Aristotle alledge in the sixt booke of the (...) of Liuing creatures: [The eies of Swallowes (saith he) that are not fledge, if a man do pricke them out, do grow againe, and afterwards do perfectly recouer their sight.]


 The Temperature.
The great Celandine is manifestly hot and drie, and that in the third (...), and withall (...) and clenseth effectually.


 The Vertues.
The iuice of the herbe is good to sharpen the sight, for it clenseth and consumeth away slimie  things that cleaue about the ball of the eie, and hinder the sight, and especially being boiled with honie in a brasen vessell, as Dioscorides teacheth.
The root cureth the yellow iaundise, which commeth of the stopping of the gall, especially  when there is no ague adioined with it, for it openeth and deliuereth the gall and liuer from stoppings.
The root being chewed, is reported to be good against the tooth-ache.
The iuice must be drawn forth in the beginning of Sommer and dried in the Sunne, saith (...).
The root of Celandine boiled with Annise-seed in white wine, openeth the stoppings of the liuer, and cureth the iaundies very safely, as hath been often proued.
The root cut in small pieces is good to be giuen vnto Haukes against sundry diseases, whereunto  they are subiect, as wormes, craie, and such like.
@ I haue by experience found (saith Clusius) that the iuice of the great Celandine dropped into  small greene wounds of what sort soeuer, wonderfully cures them. @



CHAP. 436. Of Coxcombe, or Yellow Rattle.

 The Description.
CRista Galli, or Crista Gallinacea, hath a straight vpright stalke, set about with narrow (...), snipt round about the edges: the floures grow at the top of the stems, of a yellow colour; after which come vp little flat pouches or purses, couered ouer or contained within a little bladder or flat skin, open before like the mouth of a fish, wherein is contained flat yellowish seed, which being ripe and drie, will make a noise or ratling when it is shaken or moued, of which propertie it tooke the name yellow Rattle.



Crista Galli. Yellow Rattle, or Coxcombe.




 The Place.
It groweth in drie (...) and pastures, and (...) to them a great (...).


 The Time.
It floureth most part of the Sommer.


 The Names.
It is called in low Dutch Ratelen, and Geele Ratelen: commonly in Larine, (...) Galli, and Gallinacca Crista: in English, Coxcombe, Penie grasse, yellow or white Rattle: in High Dutch it is called geel Rodel: in French Creste de Coc: diuers (...) it to be the old writers Alectorolophos. @ Some thinke it to be the Mimmulus: or as others (and that more fitly) reade it, Nummulus, mentioned by Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 28. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
But what temperature or vertue this herbe  is of, men haue not as yet beene carefull to know, seeing it is accounted vnprofitable.



CHAP. 437. Of red Rattle, or Lousewoort.

 The Description.


Pedicularis. Lousewoort, or red Rattle.


REd Rattle (of Dodonaeus called Fistularia, and according to the opinion and censure of Carolus Clusius, Pena and others, the true Alectorolophos) hath very small, rent, or iagged leaues, of a browne red colour, and weake, small and tender stalkes, whereof some lie along trailing vpon the ground; within very moorish medowes they grow a cubit high and more, but in moist and wet heathes, and such like barren grounds not aboue an handful high: the floures grow round about the stalke, from the middest thereof euen to the top, and are of a brown red colour, in shape like the floures of dead Nettle: which being past, there succeed little flat pouches, wherin is contained flat and blackish (...), in shew very like vnto the former: the root is small, white, and tender.


 The Place.
It groweth in moist and moorish medowes, the herbe is not onely vnprofitable, but also hurtfull, and an infirmitie of the medowes.


 The Time.
It is found with his floures and stalkes in May and Iune.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in High Dutch, Braun Rodel: in Latine, Pedicularis, of the effect, because it filleth sheep and other cattel that (...) in medowes where this groweth full of lice: diuers of the later (...) call it (...) of (...), Crista Galli: and diuers take it to be Mimmulus herba: in English, Rattle-grasse, Red Rattle grasse, and Louse-woort.



 The Temperature.
It is cold and drie and astringent.


 The Vertues.
It is held to be good for Fistulaes and hollow vlcers, and to stay the ouermuch flowing of the  menses, or any other flux of bloud, if it be boiled in red wine and drunke.



CHAP. 438. Of Yarrow, or Nose-bleed.

 The Description.
1 COmmon Yarrow hath very many stalkes comming vp a cubit high, round, and somewhat hard: about which stand long leaues, cut in the sides sundry wise, and as it were made vp of many small iagged leaues, euery one of which seeme to come neere to the slender leaues of Coriander: there stand at the top tufts or spoked rundles: the floures whereof are (...) white or purple, which being rubbed do yeeld a strong smell, but vnpleasant; the root sendeth downe many strings.


1 Millefolium terrestre vulgare. Common Yarrow.


2 Millefolium flore (...). Red floured Yarrow.


2 The second kinde of Milsoile or Yarrow hath stalkes, leaues and roots like vnto the former, sauing that his spokie tufts are of an excellent faire red or crimson colour, and being a little rubbed in the hand, of a reasonable good sauour.


 The Place.
The first groweth euery where in drie pastures and medowes: red Milfoile groweth in a field by Sutton in Kent called Holly-Deane, from whence I brought those plants that do grow in my Garden; but it is not common euery where as the other is.


 The Time.
They floure from May to the end of October.



 The Names.
Yarrow is called of the Latine Herbarists Millefolium: it is Dioscorides his (...) in Latine, (...), and Achillea siderit is; which thing he may very plainely see that will compare with that (...) which Dioscorides hath set downe: (...) was found out, saith Pliny in his 25. booke, chap. (...). by Achilles, Chirons disciple, which for that cause is named (...): of others, (...) among vs, (...): yet be there other Sideritides, and also another Panaces (...), whereof we will (...) in another place: Apuleius setteth downe diuers names hereof, some of which are also (...) among the bastard names in Dioscorides: in Latine it is called (...), Supercilium (...), (...), or Acorum syluaticum: of the French-men, Millefucille: in high Dutch, Garben, (...): in low Dutch, Geruwe: in Italian, Millefoglio: in Spanish, Milhoyas yerua: in English, Yarrow, Nosebleed, common Yarrow, red Yarrow, and Milfoile.


 The Temperature.
Yarrow, as Galen saith, is not vnlike in temperature to the Sideritides, or Iron worts, that is to say, clensing, and meanely cold, but it most of all bindeth.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Yarrow doe close vp wounds, and keepe them from inflammation, or fiery swelling: it stancheth bloud in any part of the body, and it is likewise put into bathes for women to sit in: it stoppeth the laske, and being drunke it helpeth the bloudy flixe.
Most men say that the leaues chewed, and especially greene, are a remedy for the tooth-ache.
The leaues being put into the nose, do cause it to bleed, and ease the paine of the megrim.
It cureth the inward excorations of the yard of a man, comming by reason of pollutions or extreme  flowing of the seed, although the issue do cause inflammation and swelling of those secret parts, and though the spermaticke matter do come downe in great quantity, (...) the juice be injected with a syringe, or the decoction. This hath been prooued by a certain friend of mine, sometimes a Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, who lightly brused the leaues of common Yarrow, with Hogs-grease, and applied it warme vnto the priuie parts, and thereby did diuers times helpe himselfe, and others of his fellowes, when he was a student and a single man liuing in Cambridge.
One dram in powder of the herbe giuen in wine, presently taketh away the paines of the colicke.



CHAP. 439. Of yellow Yarrow, or Milfoile.


1 Millefolium luteum. Yellow Yarrow.


The plant here figured and described in the second place, was also figured and described formerly in the fifth (...) of the 209. chapter of this booke, by the title of (...) (...) (...), but the figure of (...) which (...) put there being somewhat imperfect, I thought it not (...) (...) to giue that of (...) which is somewhat more exquisite, otherwise both the figure and history might in this place haue been (...).

 2 Achillea, siue Milsefo lium nobile. Achilles Yarrow.




 The Description.
1 YEllow Yarrow is a small plant seldome aboue a span high: the stalkes whereof are couered with long leaues, very finely cut in the edges like feathers in the wings of little birds: the tufts or spokie (...) bring forth yellow floures, of the same shape and forme of the common Yarrow: the root consisteth of threddy strings.
2 Achilles Yarrow, or noble Milfoile, hath a thicke and tough root, with strings fastened thereto: from which immediately rise vp diuers stalkes, very greene and crested, whereupon doe grow long leaues composed of many small jagges, cut euen to the middle rib: the floures stand on the top of the stalkes with spokie vmbels or tufts, of a whitish colour, and pleasant smell.


 The Place.
These kinds of Yarrow are seldome found: they grow in a fat and fruitfull soile, and sometimes in medowes, and are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They floure from May vntill August.


 The Names.
Dioscorides description doth sufficiently declare, that this herbe is Stratiotes Millefolium: in Greeke, (...): the height of the herbe sheweth it, the (...) of the leaues agree; there is some ambiguity or doubt in the colour of the floures, which Dioscorides describeth to be white, as the vulgar copies haue; but Andreas Lacuna addeth out of the old booke, of a yellow colour: it is named of the later age, Millefolium minus, or little Yarrow, and Millefolium luteum, yellow Yarrow, or Nose-bleede: the Apothecaries and common people know it not.


 The Temperature.
Yarrow is meanely cold and somewhat binding.


 The Vertues.
It is a principall herbe for all kinde of bleedings, and to heale vp new and old vlcers and greene  wounds: there be some, saith Galen, that vse it for fistulaes.
This plant (...) is thought to be the very same wherewith Achilles cured the wounds of his  souldiers, as before in the former chapter.



CHAP. 440. Of Valerian, or Setwall.

 The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Valerian hath his first leaues long, broad, smooth, green, and vndiuided; and the leaues vpon the stalkes greater, longer, and deepely gashed on either side, like the leaues of the greater Parsnep, but yet lesser: the stalke is aboue a cubit high, smooth, and hollow, with certaine joints farre distant one from another: out of which joints grow forth a couple of leaues, and in the tops of the stalkes vpon spokie rundles stand floures heaped together, which are small, opening themselues out of a long little narrow necke, of colour whitish, and sometimes withall of a light red: the root is an inch thicke, growing a slope, (...) on the vpper part of the earth by a multitude of strings, the most part of it standing out of the ground, of a pleasant sweet smell when it is broken.
2 The greater wilde Valerian hath leaues diuided and jagged, as those of the former; those about the stalke hereof are also smooth, hollow, and jointed, and aboue a cubit high: the floures stand on spokie rundles like to those of the former, but of a light purple colour: the roots are slender, and full of strings and small threds, not altogether without smell.
3 The other wilde one is much like in forme to the garden Valerian, but farre lesser: the first leaues thereof be vndiuided, the other are parted and cut in sunder: the stalkes a span long: the floures which stand on spokie rundles are like to those of the others, of a light whitish purple colour: the roots be slender, growing aslope, creeping, and full of fine small threds, of little smell.
4 There is a small Valerian growing vpon rockes and stony places, that is like vnto the last described, sauing it is altogether lesse. @ The stalk is some halfe foot high, and strait, diuiding it selfe into branches toward the top, and that alwaies by couples: the bottome leaues are whole, the top

1 Valeriana hortensis. Garden Valerian, or Setwall.2 Valeriana maior syluestris. Great wilde Valerian.3 Valeriana minor. Small Valerian.4 Valeriana Petraea. Stone Valerian.
leaues much diuided, the floures are small, of a whitish purple colour, parted into fiue, and standing vpon round rough heads, which when the floures are falne, become star-fashioned, diuided into six parts: it floures in Iune, and is an annuall plant. @


5 Valeriana Graeca. Greekish Valerian.


@ 6 Valeriana Mexicana. Indian Valerian.


5 The fisth sort of Valerian hath diuers small hollow stalkes, a foot high and somewhat (...) garnished with leaues like vnto those that do grow on the vpper part of the stalks of (...) (...), but smaller, cut or iagged almost to the middle rib: at the top of the stalkes doe grow the floures clustering together, of a blew colour, consisting of fiue leaues a piece, hauing in the middle thereof small white threds tipped with yellow: the seed is small, growing in little (...) or (...) vessels: the root is nothing else but as it were all of threds.
6 I haue another sort of Valerian (the seed whereof was sent me from that reuerend Physition (...) (...), (...) the title of Valeriana Mexicana:) hauing small tender stalkes trailing vpon the ground, very weake and brittle: whereupon doe grow smooth greenish leaues like those of Corne Sallade (which wee haue set forth amongst the Lettuce, vnder the title Lactuca (...), or Lambs (...):) among the leaues come forth the floures clustering together, like vnto the great Valerian in sorme, but of a (...) purple colour: the root is very small and threddie, which perisheth with the rest of the plant, when it hath brought his seed to maturitie or (...), and must bee (...) anew the next yeare in May, and not before.
7 There is also another sort or kinde of Valerian called by the name Phyteumn, of the learned Physitions of Montpelier and others (set forth vnder the stocke or kindred of the Valerians, resembling, the aforesaid Corn-sallad, which is called of some Prolifera, from the Greeke title (...); as if you should (...), good to make conception, and to procure loue:) the lowest leaues are like those of the small Valerian, of a yellowish colour: the vpper leaues become more iagged: the stalks are (...) (...) (...): on the (...) whereof do stand small round spokie tusts of white floures; which (...) (...), the seeds appeare like small round pearles, which being ripe, grow to be somewhat flat, (...) in the (...) of each seed the print of an hole, as it were grauen or bored therein. The root is (...) (...) (...) (...) some fibres annexed thereto.
@ 8 (...) (...) (...) (...) a white and wooddie root many leaues spred vpon the ground; (...),

@ 8 Valeriana annua, Clus. Annuall Valerian.
@ 9 Valeriana (...) (...). Broad leaued Setwail (...) the Alps
@ 10 Valeriana Alpina angustifolia. Small Alpine Setwall.
and not vnlike those of the Star-(...) among these rise vp some round hollow branched stalks two cubites high: at each ioint grow forth two leaues lesser, yet like the lower: at the tops of the branches grow the floures as it were in little vmbels, consisting of fiue leaues (...); and these of a light red, or flesh colour: and then these as it were vmbels grow into longish branches bearing seed almost like, yet lesse than the red Valerian: it floures in Iuly, and (...) when it hath ripened the seed. (...) hath set this forth by the name of Valeriana annua altera. @
9 The same Author hath also giuen vs the historie of some other Plants of this kind; and this he cals Valeriana syl. Alpina (...) latifol. the stalk hereof is some foot high, round, greene, and crested: vpon which stand leaues longish, sharpe pointed, and cut in with two or three deepe gashes: but the bottome leaues are more round and larger, comming neere to these of (...), yet lesser, slenderer, and bitter of taste: the floures which are white of colour, and the seed, are like those of the other Valerians: the root is small, creeping, fibrous, white and aromatick: it growes vpon the Alpes, and floures in Iune and Iuly.
10 This sendes forth leaues like those of the mountain Daisie: out of the midst of which

riseth vp a stalk some foot high, iointed, and at the top diuided into little branches, carrying white floures like the other Valerians: the root is as aromaticke as that of the last mentioned; and grows in the chinkes of the Alpine rockes, where it floures in Iune and Iuly. Clusius hath it by the name of Valeriana syluestris Alpin. 2. Saxatilis. @


 The Place.
The first and likewise the Greeke Valerian are planted in gardens; the wilde ones are found in moist places hard to riuers sides, ditches, and waterie pits; yet the greater of these is brought into gardens where it flourisheth, but the lesser hardly prospereth.


 The Time.
These floure in May, Iune, and Iuly, and most of the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
Generally the Valerians are called by one name, in Latine, Valeriana: in Greeke, (...): in shoppes also Phu, which for the most part is meant by the garden Valerian, that is called of Diosc. (...) in Latine, (...), or Rustica Nardus: of Pliny, Nardus Cretica: which names are rather referred to those of the next chapter, although these be reckoned as wilde kindes thereof: of certaine in our age, Marinella, Amantilla, Valentiana, Genicularis, Herba Benedicta, and Theriacaria: in most shops, Valeriana Domestica: of Theophrastus Paracelsus, Terdina: in high Dutch, Grosz baldrian: in low Dutch, Speercruyt, S. Ioris cruyt, and Ualeriane: in English, Valerian, Capons taile, and Setwall; but vnproperly, for that name belongeth to Zedoaria, which is not Valerian: what hath been set downe in the titles shall serue for the distinctions of the other kindes.


 The Temperature.
The garden Valerian is hot, as Dioscorides saith, but not much, neither the green root, but the dried ones; for the green is easily perceiued to haue very little heate, and the dried to be hotter, which is found by the taste and smell.


 The Vertues.
The drie root, as Dioscorides teacheth, prouoketh vrine, bringeth downe the desired sicknesse, helpeth  the painc in the sides, and is put into counterpoisons and medicines preseruatiue against the pestilence, as are treacles, mithridates, and such like: whereupon it hath been had (and is to this day among the poore people of our Northerne parts) in such (...) amongst them, that no broths, pottage, or physicall meats are worth any thing, if Setwall were not at an end: whereupon some woman Poet or other hath made these verses:

They that will haue their heale,
Must put Setwall in their keale.

It is vsed generally in sleight cuts, wounds, and small hurts.
The extraction of the roots giuen, is a most singular medicine against the difficultie of making  water, and the yellow iaundies.
Wilde Valerian is thought of the later Herbarists to be good for them that are bursten, for such  as be troubled with the crampe and other convulsions, and also for all those that are bruised with falls.
The leaues of these and also those of the garden, are good against vlcers and sorenes of the mouth  and gums, if the decoction thereof be gargarized or held in the mouth.
Some hold opinion that the roots of wilde Valerian dried and poudered, and a dramme weight  thereof taken with wine, do purge vpward and downeward.



CHAP. 441. Of Mountaine Setwall, or Nardus.

 The Description.
1 THe Nardus named Celtica, but now by some, Ligustica Nardus, flourisheth in high mountaines. The Vallesians in their mother tongue call it Selliga; whence Gesner thought it to be Saliunca; neither do I doubt, but that it is the same which Virgil speaketh of in these verses:

Puniceis humilis quantum Saliunca (...),
Iudicio nostro tantum tibi cedit Amintas.

For it is a very little herbe creeping on the ground, and afterward lifting vp it selfe with a stalke of a handfull high; whereupon from the lower part grow small thin leaues, first green, but afterwards somewhat yellowish: vpon the roughnesse of the root there are many scales, platted one vpon another; but vnder the root there are many browne strings and hairy threds, in smell like the roots of Astrabacca, or rather the wilde mountaine Valerian, whereof it seemes to be a kinde, in taste sharpe and bitter. The floures grow along the vpper branches, white or yellowish, and very small.



1 Nardus Celtica. Celticke Spikenard.


3 Hirculus. Vrine-wort.


4 @ Nardus montana germinans: Mountaine Nard at the first springing vp.


4 Nardus (...). Mountaine Spikenard.


2 The second sort of Spikenard hath many threddy roots, from the which rise vp many scaly rough and thicke stalkes, hauing at the top certaine flat hoary leaues growing vpon smal and tender footstalkes. The whole plant is of a pleasant sweet smell.
3 Hirculus is a plant very rare, which as yet I neuer saw, notwithstanding we are greatly beholding to Carolus Clusius the father of forreine Simples, who finding this plant among many bunches or handfulls of mountaine Spikenard, hath made it knowne vnto posteritie, as he hath done many other rare plants, in

translating of Garcias the Lusitanian Physitian, he setteth it forth with a light description, saying, It is a base and low herbe two handfulls high, bringing forth leaues without any stalkes at all, @ very hairy about the root, and blackish, hauing no pleasant sent at all. The leaues chewed yeeld no aromaticke taste, but are clammie, or viscide; whereas the leaues of Celticke Narde are hot, with a little astriction, and of a pleasant smell and taste. @
4 Mountaine Spikenard hath a great thicke knobbed root, set here and there with some tender fibres, of a pleasant sweet smel; from the which come forth three or foure smooth broad leaues, and likewise iagged leaues deepely cut euen to the middle rib: among which rise vp naked stalks, garnished in the middle with a tuft of iagged leaues. The floures grow at the top of the stalks, in an vmbel or tuft like those of the wilde Valerian in shape and colour, and such also is the seed. @ I haue giuen you the figure of the root and whole leaues as they shew themselues when they first appeare, as it was taken by Clusius. @


5 Nardus Indica. Indian Spikenard.


6 Nardus Narbonensis. French Spikenard.


5 The Spikenard of India is a low plant, growing close vnto the ground, composed of many rough browne hairy cloues, of a strong, yet not vnpleasant smell. The root is small and threddie. @ It hath certainly stalkes, floures, and seeds; but none of our Indian Writers or Trauellers haue as yet described them. I haue seene little pieces of slender hollow stalkes some two inches long fastned to the roots that are brought to vs. @
@ 6 This French Spikenard, being a bastard kinde, groweth close vpon the ground like the precedent, compact of scaly rough leaues: in the middle whereof commeth forth a great bush of round greene stiffe and rushy leaues: among the which shoot vp diuers round stalkes a cubit high, set from the middle to the top with greenish little cods, standing in chaffie huskes like those of Schoenanth. The root is small and threddy: the whole plant is altogether without smell, which sheweth it to be a bastard kinde of Spikenard.


 The Place.
These plants [the first foure] are strangers in England, growing in great plentie vpon the mountaines of Iudenberg and Heluetia, on the rockes among the mosse, and in the mountains of Tiroll and Saltzburg.
The first and second, if my memorie faile me not, do grow in a field in the North part of England,

called Crag close, and in the foot of the mountaine called Ingleborow Fels. @ The sourth may be found in some gardens with vs. The fifth growes in the East Indies, in the (...) of Mandou and Chito in the kingdome of Bengala and Decan. The last growes in Prouince in France, neere a little city called Gange. @


 The Time.
The leaues grow to withering in September, at which time they smell more pleasantly than when they flourished and were greene.


 The Names.
Nardus is called in Pannonia or Hungarie, of the countrey people, Speick: of some, Bechi (...); that is, the herbe of Vienna, because it doth grow there in great aboundance, from whence it is brought into other countries: of Gesner, Saliunca: in English, Celticke Spikenard: of the Valletians, (...), and Nardus Celtica.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Celticke Narde mightily prouokes vrine, as recordeth Rondeletius; who trauelling through the  desart countrey, chanced to lodge in a monasterie where was a Chanon that could not make his water, but was presently helped by the decoction of this herbe, through the aduice of the said (...).
@ The true Spikenard or Indian Nard hath a heating and drying facultie, being (according to  Galen) hot in the first degree [yet the Greeke copy hath the third] and dry in the second. It is composed of a sufficiently astringent substance, and not much acride heate, and a certaine light bitternesse. Consisting of these faculties, according to reason, both inwardly and outwardly vsed it is conuenient for the liuer and stomacke.
It prouoketh vrine, helps the gnawing paines of the stomacke, dries vp the defluxions that trouble  the belly and intrals, as also those that molest the head and brest.
It stayes the fluxes of the belly, and those of the wombe, being vsed in a pessarie, and in a bath  it helpes the inflammation thereof.
Drunke in cold water, it helpes the nauseousnesse, gnawings, and windinesse of the stomacke, the liuer, and the diseases of the kidneyes, and it is much vsed to be put into Antidotes.
It is good to cause haire to grow on the eye lids of such as want it, and is good to be strewed vpon  any part of the body that abounds with superfluous moisture, to dry it vp.
The Celticke-Nard is good for all the forementioned vses, but of lesse esficacie, vnlesse in the  prouoking of vrine. It is also much vsed in Antidotes.
The mountaine Nard hath also the same faculties, but is much weaker than the former, and not in vse at this day that I know of. @



CHAP. 442. Of Larkes heele or Larkes claw.

 The Description.
1 THe garden Larks spur hath a round stem ful of branches, set with tender iagged leaues very like vnto the small Sothernwood: the floures grow alongst the stalks toward the tops of the branches, of a blew colour, consisting of fiue little leaues which grow together and make one hollow floure, hauing a taile or spur at the end turning in like the spurre of Tode-flax. After come the seed, very blacke, like those of Leekes: the root perisheth at the sirst approch of Winter.
2 The second Larks spur is like the precedent, but somewhat smaller in stalkes and leaues: the floures are also like in forme, but of a white colour, wherein especially is the difference. These floures are sometimes of a purple colour, sometimes white, murrey, carnation, and of sundry other colours, varying infinitely, according to the soile or countrey wherein they liue.
@ 3 Larks spur with double floures hath leaues, stalkes, roots, and seeds like the other single kinde, but the floures of this are double; and hereof there are as many seuerall varieties as there be of the single kinde, to wit, white, red, blew, purple, blush, etc.
4 There is also another varietie of this plant, which hath taller stalkes and larger leaues than the common kinde: the floures also are more double and larger, with a lesser heele: this kind also yceldeth vsually lesse seed than the former. The colour of the floure is as various as that of the former, being either blew, purple, white, red, or blush, and sometimes mixed of some of these. @
5 The wilde Larks spur hath most sine iagged leaues, cut and hackt into diuers parts, consusedly set vpon a small middle tendrell: among which grow the floures, in shape like the others, but

1 Consolida regalis satiua. Garden Larks heele.2 Crnsoliaa (...) (...) (...) vel (...). White or red Larks spur.@ 3 Consolida regalis flore duplict. Double Larks spur.@ 4 Consolida reg. elatior (...). (...). Great double Larks spur.
a great deale lesser, sometimes purple, otherwhiles white, and often of a mixt colour. The root is small and threddy.


5 Consolidaregalis syluestris. Wilde Larkes heele.




 The Place.
These plants are set and sowne in gardens: the last groweth wilde in corne fields, and where corn hath grown, @ but not with vs, that I haue yet obserued; though it be frequently found in such places in many parts of Germanie. @


 The Time.
They floure for the most part all Sommet long, from Iune to the end of August, and ofttimes after.


 The Names.
Larks heele is called Flos Regius: of diuers, Consolida regalis; who make it one of the Consounds or Comfreyes. It is also thought to be the Delphinium which Dioscorides describes in his third booke; wherewith it may agree. It is reported by Gerardus of Veltwijcke, who remained Lieger with the great Turke from the Emperor Charles the fifth, That the said Gerard saw at Constantinople a copy which had in the chap. of Delphinium, not leaues but floures like Dolphines: for the floures, and especially before they be perfected, haue a certaine shew and likenesse of those Dolphines, which old pictures and armes of certain antient families haue expressed with a crooked and bending figure or shape; by which signe also the heauenly Dolphine is set forth. And it skilleth not, though the chapter of Delphinium be thought to be falsified and counterfeited; for although it be some other mans, and not of Dioscorides, it is notwithstanding some one of the old Writers, out of whom it is taken, and foisted into Dioscorides his bookes: of some it is called Bucinus, or Bucinum: in English, Larks spur, Larks heele, Larks toes, and Larks claw: in high-Dutch, (...) spooren; that is, Equitis calcar, Knights spur: in Italian, Sperone: in French, Pied d' alouette.


 The Temperature.
These herbes are temperate and warme of nature.


 The Vertues.
We finde little extant of the vertues of Larks heele, either in the antient or later writers, worth the noting, or to be credited; for it is set downe, that the seed of Larks spur drunken is good against  the stingings of Scorpions; whose vertues are so forcible, that the herbe onely thrown before the Scorpion or any other venomous beast, causeth them to be without force or strength to hurt, insomuch that they cannot moue or stirre vntill the herbe be taken away: with many other such trifling toyes not worth the reading.



CHAP. 443. Of Gith, or Nigella.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Gith or Nigella, differing some in the colour of the floures, others in the doublenesse thereof, and in smell of the seed.


 The Description.
1 THe first kind of Nigella hath weake and brittle stalks of the height of a foot, full of branches, beset with leaues very much cut or iagged, resembling the leaues of Fumiterie, but much greener: the floures grow at the top of the branches, of a whitish blew colour, each floure

1 Melanthium. Garden Nigella.2 (...) (...). Wilde Nigella.3 Melanthium Damascenum. Damaske Nigella.@ 4 Melanthium Damascenum slo. pleno. Double floured Damaske Nigella.
being parted into fiue small leaues, starre fashion: the floures being vaded, there come vp small knobs or heads, hauing at the end thereof fiue or six little sharpe hornes or pointalls, and euery knob or head is diuided into sundry small cels or partitions, wherein the seed is conteined, which is of a blackish colour, very like vnto Onion seed, in taste sharpe, and of an excellent sweet sauour.
2 The wilde Nigella hath a streaked stalke a foot or more high, beset full of grayish leaues, very finely (...), almost like the leaues of Dil: the floures are like the former, saue that they are blewer: the cods or knops are like the heads or huskes of Columbines, wherein is conteined the sweet and pleasant seed, like the former.


5 Nigella flore albo multiplici: Damaske Nigella.


@ 6 Nigella Hispanica flore amplo. Great Spanish Nigella.


3 The third kinde of Nigella, which is both faire and pleasant, called Damaske Nigella, is very like vnto the wilde Nigella in his small cut and jagged leaues, but his stalke is longer: the floures are like the former, but greater, and euery floure hath fiue small greene leaues vnder him, as it were to support and beare him vp: which floures being gone, there succeed and follow knops and seed like the former, but without smell or sauour.
@ 4 This in the smalnesse, and shape of the leaues and the manner of growing is like to the last described hauing small leaues growing vnder the floure, which is not single, as in the last described, but double, consisting of fiue or more rankes of little blewish leaues, which are succeeded by such cornered heads as those of the former, hauing in them a blacke seed without any manifest smell. @
5 The fifth kinde of Nigella hath many small and slender stalkes, set full of slender and thin leaues deepely cut or jagged, of a faint yellowish greene colour: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes, of a whitish colour, and exceeding double: which being vaded, there succeed bowles or knobs, full of sweet blacke seed like the former: ths root is small and tender.
@ 6 The root of this is slender, and yellowish; the stalke some cubit high, round, green, (...), and toward the top diuided into sundry branches, the leaues toward the bottome are somewhat small cut, but somewhat larger vpon the stalkes. The floure is much larger than any of the former, composed of fiue leaues, of a light blew aboue, and somewhat whitish vnderneath, with

large veines running about them: in the middle stands vp the head, encompassed with blackish threds, and some 7. or 8. little gaping blewish floures at the (...) of them; the leaues of the floures decaying the head becomes bigger, hauing at the tops thereof 6. 7. or 8. longish twined hornes growing, in a star fashion; the inside is parted into cels conteyning a yellowish green, or else blackish seed. It is set forth in the Hortus Eystettensis by the name of Melanthium Hispanicum maius; by Mr. Parkinson it is called Nigella Hispanica flore simplici; and Bauhine in his Prodromus hath it by the name of Nigella latifolia flore maiore simplici caeruleo. It is an annuall plant, and floures in Iuly; it is sometimes to be found in the gardens of our Florists. @


 The Place.
The tame are sowne in gardens: the wilde ones do grow of themselues among (...) and other graine, in diuers countries beyond the seas.


 The Time.
The seed must be sowne in Aprill: it floureth in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Gith is called in Greeke (...) in Latine also Melanthium: in shops, Nigella, and Nigella Romana: of diuers, Gith, and Salusandria, and some among the former bastard names, (...) nigrum: in high Dutch, Swartzkymmich: in low Dutch, Narvus seat: in Italian, Nigella: in Spanish, Axenuz, Alipiure: in French, Nielle odorante: in English, Gith, and Nigella Romana, in Cambridgeshire, Bishops woort: and also Diuae Catharinae flos, Saint Katharines floure.


 The Temperature.
The seed of the garden Nigella is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin parts.


 The Vertues.
The seed of Nigella Romana drunke with wine, is a remedy against the shortnes of breath, dissolueth  and putteth forth windinesse, prouoketh vrine, the menses, increaseth milke in the brests of nurses if it be drunke moderately; otherwise it is not onely hurtfull to them, but to any that take thereof too often, or in too great a quantity.
The seed killeth and driueth forth wormes, whether it be taken with wine or water, or laid to  the nauell in manner of a plaister.
The oile that is drawne forth thereof hath the same property.
The seed parched or dried at the fire, brought into pouder, and wrapped in a piece of fine lawne  or sarcenet, cureth all murs, catarrhes, rheumes, and the pose, drieth the braine, and restoreth the sence of smelling vnto those which haue lost it, being often smelled vnto from day to day, and made warme at the fire when it is vsed.
It takes away freckles, scurfs, and hard swellings, being laid on mixed with vineger. To be briefe, as Galen saith, it is a most excellent remedy where there is need of clensing, drying, and heating.
It serueth well among other sweets to put into sweet waters, bagges, and odoriferous powders.
The figures of the third and fourth of the (...) edition were transposed.




CHAP. 444. Of Cockle.

 The Description.
COckle is a common and hurtfull weed in our Corne, and very well knowne by the name of Cockle, which Pena calleth Pseudomelanthium, and Nigellastrum, by which names Dodonaeus and Fuchsius do also terme it; Mutonus calleth it Lolium; and Tragus calleth it Lychnoiaes segetum. This plant hath straight, slender, and hairy stems, garnished with long hairy and grayish leaues, which grow together by couples, inclosing the stalke round about: the floures are of a purple colour, declining to rednesse, consisting of fiue small leaues, in proportion very like to wilde Campions; when the floures be vaded there follow round knobs or heads full of blackish seed, like vnto the seed of Nigella, but without any smell or sauour at all.


 The Place and Time.
The place of his growing, and time of his flouring, are better knowne then desired.


 The Names.
Cockle is called Pseudomelanthium, and Nigellastrum, wilde or bastard Nigella; of (...), Lolium: of Mouton, Lychnoides segetum: of Tragus, Githago: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Nielle des Bledz: in English, Cockle, field Nigella, or wilde Nigella: in Italian, Githone; whereupon most Herbarists being mooued with the likenesse of the word, haue thought it to be the true Gith or (...); but how farre they are deceiued it is better knowne, than needfull to be confuted: for it doth not onely differ in leaues from the true Gith, but also in other properties, and yet it is called Gith or Melanthium, and that is of the blackenes of the seed, yet not properly, but with a certain addition, that it may differ from the true Melanthium: for

Pseudomelanthium. Bastard Nigella, or Cockle.
Hippocrates calleth it Melanthium ex Tritico, of wheate: Octauius Horatianus calleth that Gith which groweth among Corne: and for the same cause it is named of the learned of this our time Nigellastrum, Gigatho, and Pseudomelanthium: Ruellius saith it is called in French Niele, and Flos Micancalus.


 The Temperature.
The seed of Cockle is hot and dry in the later end of the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The seed made in a pessarie or mother  suppositorie, with honey put vp, bringeth (...) the desired sicknesse, as Hippocrates in his booke of womens diseases doth witnesse.
Octauius Horatianus giueth the seed parched  and beaten to pouder to be drunke against the yellow jaundice.
Some ignorant people haue vsed the  seed hereof for the seed of Darnell, to the great danger of those who haue receiued the same: what hurt it doth among (...), the spoyle vnto bread, as well in (...), taste, and vnwholesomnes, is better known than desired.



CHAP. 445. Of Fumitorie.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers herbes comprehended vnder the title of Fumitorie; some wilde, and others of the garden; some with bulbous or tuberous roots, and others with fibrous or threddy roots: and first of those whose roots are nothing but strings.


 The Description.
1 FVmitorie is a very tender little herbe: the stalkes thereof are slender, hauing as it were little knots or ioynts full of branches, that scarse grow vp from the ground without proppings, but for the most part they grow sidelong: the leaues round about are small, cut on the edges as those of Coriander; which as well as the stalkes are of a whitish greene: the floures be made vp in clusters at the tops of the small branches, of a red purple colour: then rise (...) huskes, round and little, in which lieth the small seed: the root is slender, and groweth straight downe. @ This is also found with floures of a purple violet colour, and also somtimes with them white. @
2 The second kinde of Fumitorie hath many small long and tender branches, wherupon grow little leaues, commonly set together by threes or fiues, in colour and taste like vnto the former; hauing at the top of the branches many small clasping tendrels, with which it taketh hold vpon hedges, bushes, and whatsoeuer groweth next vnto it: the floures are small, and clustering together of a white colour, with a little spot in their middles; after which succeed cods containing the seed: the root is single, and of a fingers length.
3 The third kinde of Fumitorie hath a very small root, consisting of diuers little strings; from which arise small and tender branches trailing here and there vpon the ground, beset with many small and tender leaues most finely cut and iagged, like the little leaues of Dill, of a deepe greene colour tending to blewnesse: the floures stand on the tops of the branches, in bunches or clusters thicke thrust together, like those of the medow Clauer, or three leafed grasse, of a most bright red colour, and very beautifull to behold: the root is very small and threddy.



1 Fumaria purpurea. Common or purple Fumitory.


There were formerly six figures and (...) in this chapter; whereof the two first figures were of the common Fumitorie, the one with purple, the other (...) white (...); and the two later (...) of the (...) (...), differing onely in the largenesse and smallnesse of the leafe. The description in the second place belonged to the (...) (...), which also (...) againe (...) in the (...) and sixth places, yet not to much purpose; wherefore I haue put the figure to the second, and omitted the other (...) (...).

 2 Fumaria alba latifolia clauiculata. White broad leafed Fumitorie.


3 Fumaria (...). Fine leafed Fumitorie.


4 Fumaria lutea. Yellow Fumitorie.



4 The yellow Fumitorie hath many crambling threddy roots, somewhat thicke, grosse, and fat, like those of Asparagus: from which rise diuers vpright stalkes a cubit high, diuiding themselues toward the top into other smaller branches; wheron are confusedly placed leaues like those of Thalictrum, or English Rubarb, but lesser and thinner: alongst the tops of the branches grow yellow floures, resembling those of Sage: which being past, there followeth small seed like vnto dust.


 The Place.
The Fumitories grow in corne fields among Barley and other graine; in vineyards; gardens, and such like manured (...). I found the second and third growing in a corne field betweene a small village called Charleton and Greenwich.


 The Time.
Fumitorie is found with his floure in the beginning of May, and so continues to the end of sommer. When it is in floure is the best time to gather it to keepe dry, or to distill.


 The Names.
Fumitorie is called in Greeke (...), and (...), and often (...): in Latine, Fumaria: of Pliny, Capnos: in shops, Fumus terrae: in high Dutch, Erdtrauch: in low-Dutch, (...), Duyuen kernel: in Spanish, Palomilha: in French and English, Fumiterre.


 The Temperature.
Fumitorie is not hot, as some haue thought it to be, but cold and something dry; it openeth and clenseth by vrine.


 The Vertues.
It is good for all them that haue either scabs or any other filth growing on the skinne, and for  them also that haue the French disease.
It remoueth stoppings from the liuer and spleene: it purifieth the bloud, and is oft times good  for them that haue a quartane ague.
The (...) of the herbe is vsed to be giuen, or else the syrrup that is made of the iuyce: the  distilled water thereof is also profitable against the purposes aforesaid.
It is oftentimes boyled in whay, and in this manner it helpeth in the end of the Spring and in  Sommer time those that are troubled with (...).
Paulus Aegineta saith that it plentifully prouoketh vrine, and taketh away the stoppings of the  liuer, and feeblenesse thereof; that it strengthneth the stomacke, and maketh the belly soluble.
Dioscorides affirmeth, that the iuyce of Fumitorie, of that which groweth among Barley, as Aegineta addeth, with gum Arabicke, doth take away vnprofitable haires that pricke the eyes, growing vpon the eye lids, the haires that pricke being first plucked away, for it will not suffer others to grow in their places.
The decoction of Fumitorie drunken driueth forth by vrine and siege all hot cholericke burnt  and hurtfull humors, and is a most singular digester of salt and pituitous humors.



CHAP. 446. Of bulbous Fumitorie, or Hollow-root.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of great Hollow root are iagged and cut in sunder, as be those of Coriander, of a light greenish colour, that is to say, like the gray colour of the leaues of Columbine, whereunto they be also in forme like, but lesser: the stalks be smooth, round, and slender, an handfull long; about which, on the vpper part stand little floures orderly placed, long, with a little horne at the end like the floures of Tode-flax, of a light red tending to a purple colour: the seed lieth in flat cods, very soft and greenish when it is ready to yeeld vp his black shining ripe seed: the root is bumped or bulbous, hollow within, and on the vpper part pressed down somewhat flat, couered ouer with a darke yellow skin or barke, with certaine strings fastned thereto, and of a bitter and austere taste.
2 The second is like vnto the first in each respect, sauing that it bringeth floures of a white colour, and the other not so.
3 The small purple Hollow-root hath roots, leaues, stalkes, floures, and seeds like the precedent, the especiall difference is, that this plant is somewhat lesse.

4 The small white Hollow-root likewise agreeth with the former in each respect, (...) that this plant bringeth white floures, and the other not so.


1 (...) caua maior purpurea. Great purple Hollow-root.


2 Radix caua maior alba. Great white Hollow-root.


5 This kinde of Hollow-root is also like the last described, sauing that the floures hereof are mixed with purple and white, which maketh it to differ from the others.
6 There is no difference in this, that can possibly be distinguished, from the last described, sauing that the floures hereof are of a mixt colour, white and purple, with some yellow in the hollownesse of the same, wherein consisteth the difference from the precedent.
7 This thin leafed Hollow-root hath likewise an hollow root, couered ouer with a yellow pilling, of the bignesse of a tennise ball: from which shoot vp leaues spred vpon the ground, very like vnto the leaues of Columbines, as well in forme as colour, but much thinner, more iagged, and altogether lesser: among which rise vp small tender stalkes, weake and feeble, of an handfull high, bearing from the middle thereof to the top very fine floures, fashioned vnto one piece of the Columbine floure, which resembleth a little bird of a purple colour.
8 This other thin leafed Hollow-root is like the precedent, sauing that this plant brings (...) white floures tending to yellownesse, or as it were of the colour of the field Primrose.
9 (...) (...), as the Dutch men doe call it, hath many small iagged (...) growing immediately from the ground; among which rise vp very slender stalkes, whereon doe grow such leaues as those next the ground: on the top of the branches stand faire purple floures like vnto the others of his kinde, sauing that the floures hereof are as it were small birds, the bellies or lower parts whereof are of a white colour, wherein it differeth from all the rest of the Hollow-roots.
10 The last and small hollow-root is like the last described, sauing that it is altogether lesse, and the floures hereof are of a greene colour, not vnlike in shape to the floures of Cinkefoile. @ This plant, whose figure our Author here gaue with this small description, is that which from the smel of muske is called Moschatella, by Cordus and others: it is the Denticulata of Daleschampius: the Fumaria bulbosa tuberosaminima of Tabernamont anus: and the Ranunculus minimus septentrionalium (...) muscoso store of Lobel. The root hereof is small and toothed, or made of little bulbes resembling teeth, and ending in white hairy fibres: it sendeth vp diuers little branches some two

or three inches high: the leaues are somewhat like those of the yellow Fumitorie, or Radix cava, but much lesse: the floures grow clustering on the top of the stalke, commonly fiue or seuen together, each of them made of foure yellowish green leaues with some threds in them; it floures in Aprill, and is to be found in diuers places amongst bushes at that time, as in Kent about Chislehurst, especially in Pits his wood, and at the further end of Cray heath, on the left hand vnder a hedge among bryers and brambles, which is his proper seat. @


9 Radix caua minor. Bunnikens Holwoort.


10 Radix caua (...) viridi flore. Small Bunnikens Holwoort.




 The Place.
These plants do grow about hedges, brambles, and in the borders of fields and vineyards, in low and fertile grounds, in Germanie and the Low-countries, neuerthelesse the two first, and also the two last described do grow in my garden.


 The Time.
These do floure in March, and their seed is ripe in Aprill: the leaues and stalkes are gon in May, and nothing remaining saue onely the roots, so little a while do they continue.


 The Names.
Hollow root is called in high Dutch Holwurtz: in low Dutch, Hoolewortele, that is, Radix cava: in English, Hollow root, and Holewoort: it is vsed in shops in steed of Aristolochia, or round Birthwoort; which errour is better knowne than needfull to be confuted: and likewise their errour is apparant, who rashly iudge it to be Pistolochia, or little Birthwoort. It should seem the old Writers knew it not; wherefore some of our later Authors haue made it Leontopetali species, or a kinde of Lions Turnep: others, Eriphium: and othersome, Thesium: most men, Capnos Chelidonia: it seemeth to agree with Leontopetalon in bulbed roots, and somewhat in leaues, but in no other respects, as may be perceiued by Dioscorides and Plinies description of Leontopetalon. And if Eriphium haue his name (...), that is to say of the Spring, then this root may be not vnproperly Eriphium, and Veris Planta: or the Plant of the Spring: for it is euident that it appeareth and is greene in the Spring onely: some thinke it hath beene called Eriphium, ab Hoedo, or of the Goat: but this Eriphion is quite another plant, as both Apuleius writeth, and that booke also mentioneth which is attributed to Galen, and dedicated to Paternianus. In the booke which is dedicated to Paternianus, there be read these words; [Eriphion is an herbe which is found vpon high mountaines, it hath leaues like (...), a fine floure like the Violet, and a root as great as an Onion: it hath likewise other roots

which send forth roots after roots. Whereby it is euident that this root whereof we intreat is not this kinde of Eriphium. Concerning Thesium the old Writers haue written but little: Theophra (...) saith, that the root thereof is bitter, and being stamped purgeth the belly. Pliny in his 21. booke, chap. 17. sheweth, that the root which is called Thesium is like the bulbed plants, and is rough in taste: Athenaeus citing Timachida for an Authour, saith, that Thesium is called a floure, of which (...) garland was made. These things seeme well to agree with Hollow root; for it is bumped or bulbous, of taste bitter and austere, or something rough, which is also thought to purge: but what certaintie can be affirmed, seeing the old writers are so briefe? what manner of herbe Capnos Chelidonia is, which groweth by hedges, and hereupon is surnamed (...), Aetius doth not expound, onely the name thereof is found in his second Tetrab, the third booke, chap. 110. in (...) his Collyrium, and in his Tetrab. 3. booke, 2. chap. among such things as strengthen the liuer. But if Capnos Chelidonia be that which Pliny in his 25. booke, chap. 13. doth call Prima Capnos, or the first Capnos, and commendeth it for the dimnesse of the sight, it is plain enough that Radix caua, or the Hollow root, is not Capnos Chelidonia: for Plinies first Capnos is branched, and foldeth it selfe vpon hedges: but Hollow root hath no such branches growing on it, and is a low herbe, and is not held vp with props, nor needeth them. But if Aetius his Capnos Chelidonia be another herb differing from that of (...) (which thing perchance was the cause why it should bee surnamed Chelidonia) there is some reason why it should be called Capnos Chelidonia; for it is somewhat like Fumitorie in leaues, though greater, and commeth vp at the first spring, which is about the time when the Swallowes do come in; neuerthelesse it doth not follow, that it is true and right Capnos Chelidonia, for there be also other herbs comming vp at the same season, and perish in short time after, which notwithstanding are not called Chelidonia.


 The Temperature.
Hollow root is hot and drie, yet more drie than hot, that is to say, dry in the third degree, and hot in the second; it bindeth, clenseth, and somewhat wasteth.


 The Vertues.
Hollow root is good against old and long lasting swellings of the Almonds in the throat, and  of the iawes: it likewise preuaileth against the paines of the hemorrhoides, which are swolne and painefull, being mixed with the ointment of Poplar buds, called Vng. Populeon.
It is reported that a dram weight hereof being taken inwardly, doth purge by siege, and draweth  (...) flegme. 

I haue reduced the eight figures which were formerly here put to the first 8. descriptions, being all of one and the same plant, to (...), yet (...) (...) left the descriptions, which in my opinion might haue been as well spared (...) the figures, for excepting the various colour of the (...) there are but two (...) (...) of the (...) (...) a (...), the one hauing a hollownesse in the bottome of the root, and the other (...) it; and (...) which hath the sollid root (...) also the greene leaues betweene the floures (...) in or diuided, the (...) also are lesse, more in number, and of (...) elegant (...) purple colour; and (...) (...) (...) other colour, whereas the other varies much in the colour of the floures.




CHAP. 447. Of Columbine.

 The Description.
1 THe blew Columbine hath leaues like the great Celandine, but somewhat rounder, indented on the edges, parted into diuers sections, of a blewish greene colour, which being broken yeeld forth little iuice or none at all: the stalke is a cubit and a halfe high, slender, reddish, and sleightly haired: the slender sprigs whereof bring forth euerie one one floure with fiue little hollow hornes, as it were hanging forth, with small leaues standing vpright, of the shape of little birds: these floures are of colour somtimes blew, at other times of a red or purple, often white, or of mixt colors, which to distinguish seuerally would be to smal purpose, being things so familiarly knowne to all: after the floures grow vp cods, in which is contained little blacke and glittering seed: the roots are thicke, with some strings thereto belonging, which continue manie yeares.
2 The second doth not differ sauing in the colour of the floures; for like as the others are described to be blew, so these are of a purple red, or horse-flesh colour, which maketh the difference.
3 The double Columbine hath stalks, leaues, and roots, like the former: the floures hereof are very double, that is to say, many of those little floures (hauing the forme of birds) are thrust one into the belly of another, sometimes blew, often white, and other whiles of mixt colours, as nature list to play with her little ones, differing so infinitely, that to distinguish them apart would require



1 Aquilegia caerulea. Blew Columbines.


2 Aquileia rubra. Red Columbines.


3 Aquilina multiplex. Double Columbines.


@ 4 Aquilegia variegata. Variegated Columbine.



@ 5 Aquilegia flo. inversorubro. Columbine with the inuerted red floure.@ 6 Aquilegia flo. inverso albo. Inuerted Columbine with the white floure.@ 7 Aquilegia flore roseo. Rose Columbine.@ 8 Aquilegia degener. Degenerate Columbine.
more time than were requisite to leese: and therefore it shall suffice what hath beene said for their descriptions.
@ 4 There are also other varieties of this double kinde, which haue the floures of diuers or partie colours, as blew and white, and white and red variously marked or spotted.
5 This kinde hath the floures with their heeles or spurres turned outward or in the middle of the floure, whence it is called Aquilina inversa: the floures of this are commonly reddish, or of a light or darke purple colour, and double.
6 This differs from the last in the colour of the floures which are white, yet double, and inuerted as the former.
7 The roots, leaues, and stalks of this are not vnlike those of the precedent, but the floure is much different in shape; for it hath no heels or spurs, but is made of sundrie long leaues lying flat open, being sometimes more single, and otherwhiles more double. The colour of the floure is either red, white, blew, or variously mixt of these as the former.
8 This though it be termed degenerate, is a kinde of it selfe, and it differs from the last described in that the vtmost leaues are the largest, and the colour thereof is commonly greene, or greene somewhat inclining to a purple. @


 The Place.
They are set and sowne in gardens for the beautie and variable colours of the floures.


 The Time.
They floure in May, Iune, and Iuly.


 The Names.
Columbine is called of the later Herbarists Aquileia, Aquilina, and Aquilegia: of Costeus, Pothos: of Gesner, Leontostomum: of Daleschampius, Iouis flos: of some, Herba Leonis, or the herbe wherein the Lion doth delight: in High Dutch, Agley: in Low Dutch, Akeleyen: in French, Ancoiles: in English, Columbine. @ Fabius Columna iudges it to be the Isopyrum described by Dioscorides. @


 The Temperature.
Columbines are thought to be temperate betweene heate and moisture.


 The Vertues.
Notwithstanding what temperature or vertues Columbines haue is not yet sufficiently known;  for they are vsed especially to decke the gardens of the curious, garlands, and houses: neuerthelesse Tragus writeth, that a dram weight of the seed, with halfe a seruple or ten graines of Saffron giuen in wine, is a good and effectuall medicine for the stopping of the liuer, and the yellow iaundise; but saith he, that who so hath taken it must be well couered with cloathes, and then sweat.
Most in these daies following others by tradition, do vse to (...) the leaues in milke against the  sorenesse of the throat, falling and excoriation of the uvula: but the antient writers haue said nothing hereof: Ruellius reporteth, that the floures of Columbines are not vsed in medicine: yet some there be that do affirme they are good against the stopping of the liuer, which effect the leaues doe also performe.
@ Clusius saith, that Dr. Francis Rapard a Physition of Bruges in Flanders, told him that the  seed of this common Columbine very finely beaten to pouder, and giuen in wine, was a singular medicine to be giuen to women to hasten and facilitate their labour, and if the first taking it were not sufficiently effectuall, that then they should repeat it againe. @



CHAP. 448. Of Wormewood.

 The Description.
1 THe first kind being our common and best knowne Wormwood, hath leaues of a grayish colour, very much cut or iagged, and very bitter: the stalkes are of a wooddie substance, two cubits high, and full of branches, alongst which doe grow little yellowish buttons, wherein is found small seed like the seed of Tansey, but smaller: the root is likewise of awooddie substance, and full of fibres.
2 The second kinde of Wormwood bringeth forth slender stalkes about a foot high or somewhat more, garnished with leaues like the former, but whiter, much lesser, and cut or iagged into most fine and small cuts or diuisions: the floures are like the former, hanging vpon small stemmes with their heads downeward: the roots are whitish, small and many, crawling and crambling one ouer another, and thereby infinitely do increase, of sauour lesse pleasant than the common Wormwood.

Some haue termed this plant Absinthium santonicum, but they had slender reason so to do: sor if it was so called because it was imagined to grow in the Prouince of (...); it may very wel appeare to the contrarie; for in the Alpes of Galatia, a countrey in Asia minor, it groweth in great plenty, and therefore may rather be called Galatium Sardonicum, and not Santonicum: but leauing controuersies impertinent to the History, it is the Ponticke Wormwood of Galens description, and so holden of the learned Paludane (who for his singular knowledge in plants is worthy triple honor) and likewise many others.


1 Absinthium latifolium sive Ponticum. Broad leased Wormwood.


The figure which formerly (...) in the second place, (...) of a small (...) not different from the common kinde, but only in the (...), and more (...) (...); it (...) on (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) Alpirum: now our (...) description was (...) (...), whose figure we (...) (...) you, for it (...) the (...) (...), of some, as (...) and (...); and the (...) (...) of (...) and (...).

 2 Absinthium tenuifolium Ponticum Galent. Small Ponticke VVormwood.




 The Place.
This broad leafed Wormewood delighteth to grow on rocks and mountaines, and in vntlled places; it groweth much vpon dry bankes, it is common euery where in all countries: the best, saith Dioscorides, is sound in Pontus, Cappadocia, and on mount Taurus: Pliny writeth, that Ponticke Wormwood is better than that of Italie: Ouid in these words doth declare that Ponticke Wormwood is extreme bitter.


Turpia deformes gignunt Absinthiacampi,
Terraque defructu, quam sit amaradocet.




Vntilled barren ground the lothsome Wormwood yeelds,
And knowne it's by the fruit how bitter are the fields.


And Bellonius in his first booke of Singularities, chap. 76. doth shew, that there is also a broad leafed Wormwood like vnto ours, growing in the Prouinces of Pontus, and is vsed in Constantinople by the Physitions there, it is likewise found in certain cold places of Switzerland, which by reason of the chilnesse of the aire riseth not vp, but creepeth vpon the ground, whereupon diuers cal it creeping Wormwood.


 The Time.
The little flours and seeds are perfected in Iuly and August, then may Wormwood be gathered and laied vp for profitable vses.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...) it is named of Apuleius, Absinthium rusticum, countrey Wormwood,

or pesants Wormewood: we haue named it Absinthium latifolium, broad leafed Wormewood, that it may differ from the rest: the Interpretors of the Arabians call the better sort, which Dioscorides nameth Ponticke Wormwood, Romanum Absinthium, Roman Wormwood: and after these, the barbarous Physitions of the later age: the Italians name Wormwood Assenso: the Spaniards, Axenxios, Assensios, most of them Donzell: the Portingales, Alosna: in high Dutch, (...), (...): in French, Aluyne: in English, common VVormwood.
Victor (...), a singular Physition, in his practise tooke it for Absinthium (...).
2 This is commonly called Absinthium Romanum: and in low Dutch, (...) (...): by which name it is knowne to very many Physitions and Apothecaries, who vse this in stead of (...) wormwood: furthermore it hath a leafe and floure far lesse than the other wormwoods: likewise the smell of this is not onely pleasant, but it yeeldeth also a spicie sent, wheras all the rest haue a strong and lothsome smell: and this Ponticke Wormwood doth differ from that which Dioscorides commendeth: for Dioscorides his Pontick wormwood is accounted among them of the first kinde, or of broad leased wormwood, which thing also Galen affirmeth in his sixt booke of the Faculties of medicines, in the chapter of Sothernwood. There be three kinds of Wormwood (saith he) wherof they vse to call one by the generall name, and that is especially Pontick: whereby it is manifest that Galen in this place hath referred Ponticke to no other than to the first wormwood; and therefore many not without cause maruell, that Galen hath written in his booke of the Method of curing, how Pontick wormwood is lesse in floure and leafe: many excuse him, and lay the fault vpon the corruption of the booke, and in his 9. booke of Method, the lesser they would haue the longer: theresore this wormwood with the lesser leafe is not the right Pontick wormewood, neither againe the Arabians Romane wormewood, who haue no other Romane than Ponticke of the Grecians. Also many beleeue that this is called Santonicum, but this is not to be sought for in Mysia, Thracia, or other countries Eastward, but in France beyond the Alps, if we may beleeue Dioscorides his (...) there be that would haue it grow not beyond the Alps of Italy, but in Galatia a countrie in Asia, and in the region of the Sardines, which is in the lesser Asia; whereupon it was called in Greeke (...) which was changed into the name Santonicum through the errour of the translators: Dioscorides his copies keep the word Sardonium, and Galens copies Santonicum, which came to posterity as it seemeth. iscalled in English, Romane Wormewood, garden or Cypres Wormewood, and French Wormwood.


 The Temperature.
Wormewood is of temperature hot and drie, hot in the second degree, and drie in the third: it is bitter and clensing, and likewise hath power to binde or strengthen.


 The Vertues.
It is very profitable to a weake stomacke that is troubled with choler, for it clenseth it through  his bitternesse, purgeth by siege and vrine: by reason of the binding qualitie, it strengthneth and (...) the stomacke, but helpeth nothing at all to remoue flegme contained in the stomacke, as Galen addeth.
If it be taken before a surfeit it keepeth it off, and remoueth lothsomenesse, saith Dioscorides, and  it helpeth not only before a (...), but also it quickly resresheth the stomack and belly after large eating and drinking.
It is oftentimes a good remedie against long and lingring agues, especially (...): for it doth  not onely strengthen the stomacke and make an appetite to meat, but it yeeldeth strength to the liuer also, and riddeth it of obstructions or stoppings, clensing by vrine naughtie humours.
Furthermore, Wormewood is excellent good for them that vomite bloud from the spleene, the  which hapneth when the spleene being ouercharged and filled vp with grosse bloud doth vnburden it selfe, and then great plenty of bloud is oftentimes cast vp by vomite. It happeneth likewise that store of blacke and corrupt bloud mixed with excrements passeth downewards by the stoole, and it oftentimes hapneth that with violent and large vomiting the sicke man fainteth or swouneth, or when he is reuiued doth fall into a difficult and almost incureable tympanie, especially when the disease doth often happen; but from these dangers Wormewood can deliuer him, if when he is refreshed after vomite, and his strength any way recouered, he shall a good while vse it, in what manner soeuer he himselfe shall thinke good.
Againe, Wormewood voideth away the wormes of the guts, not onely taken inwardly, but applied  outwardly: it withstandeth all putrifactions; it is good against a stinking breath; it keepeth garments also from the Mothes; it driueth away gnats, the bodie being annointed with the oile thereof.
Likewise it is singular good in pultesses and fomentations to binde and to drie.
Besides all this Dioscorides declareth, that it is good also against windinesse and griping pains of  the stomacke and belly, with (...) and French Spikenard: the decoction cureth the yellow iaundies or the infusion, if it be drunke thrise a day some ten or twelue spoonfuls at a time.

It helpeth them that are strangled with eating of Mushroms, or toad stoois, if it be drunk with  vineger.
And being taken with wine, it is good against the poison of Ixia (being a viscous matter proceeding  from the thistle (...)) and of Hemlock, and against the biting of the shrew mouse, and of the Sea Dragon: it is applied to the (...) or inflammations of the throat with honie and niter, and with water to night wheales, and with hony to swartish markes that come vpon bruses.
It is applied after the same manner to dim eies, and to mattering eares.
(...) Camerarius of (...) commendeth it greatly against the iaundice, giuing of the  floures of Wormwood, Rosemarie, Sloes, of each a small quantitie, and a little saffron, boiled in wine, the body first being purged and prepared by the learned Physition.



CHAP. 449. Of Small leafed Wormewood.


Absinthium (...) (...). Austrian Wormewood.



 The Description.
SMall leafed Wormwood bringeth forth very many little branches, slender, a span or a foot high, full of leaues, lesse by a great deale, and tenderer than the former, most finely and nicely minced: the floures like those of the former, hang vpon the little branches and sprigs: the roots are small, creeping ouertwhart, (...) whence do rise a great number of yong sprouts: this VVormwood also is somewhat white, and no lesse bitter than the broad leafed one, and hath not so ranke, or so vnpleasant a smell, but rather delightfull.


 The Place.
It grows plentifully in Mysia, Thracia, Hungarie, and Austria, and in other regions neere adioining: it is also found in Bohemia, and in many vntilled places of Germanie; it is a garden plant in the low Countries, and in (...).


 The Time.
It bringeth forth floures and seed in Autumne: a little while after when winter commeth, the herbe withereth away, but the roote remaineth aliue, from which leaues and stalks do come againe in the spring.


 The Names.
@ This Lobel calls Absinthium Ponticum Tridentinum Herbariorum: Clusius, Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum: Tabernamontanus, Absinthium Nabathaeum (...): wee may call it in English, small leaued Wormwood. @


 The Temperature.
Small leafed VVormwood is of facultie hot and drie, it is as bitter also as the broad leafed one, and of like facultie.


 The Vertues.
The faculties are referred vnto the common VVormwood.




CHAP. 450. Of Sea Wormewood.

 The Description.
1 THe white or common Sea VVormwood hath many leaues cut and diuided into infinite fine iags, like those of Sothernwood, of a white hoaric colour and strong smell, but not vnpleasant: among which rise vp tough hoarie stalks set with the like leaues, on the top wherof do grow smal yellowish floures: the root is tough, and creepeth far abroad, by means whereof it greatly increaseth.


1 Absinthium marinum album. VVhite Sea VVormwood.


2 Absinthium marinum repens. Creeping Sea (...),


2 The broad (...) Sea VVormwood hath very many soft leaues, growing close by the ground, of a darke swart colour, nothing so (...) cut or iagged as the other of his kinde: the floures grow vpon the tops of the stalks, of a yellowish colour: the root is tough and creeping. @ This hath many weake slender branches commonly two foot long at their ful growth, red of colour, and creeping vpon the ground: the leaues are small, narrow, long and iagged, or parted towards their ends into sundry parcels: they are greene aboue, and grayish vnderneath: the toppes of the branches are set with many little stalkes, some inch long: which vpon short foot-stalkes comming out of the bosomes of little longish narrow leaues carry small round knops, like as in other plants of this kind: the taste is a little bitterish, and the smell not vnpleasant: this growes with Mr. Parkinson and others, and (as I remember) it was first sent ouer from the Isle of Rees by Mr. Iohn Tradescant. Lobel in his Obseruations mentions it by the name of Absinth. (...) supinum Herbariorum; and (...): sets it forth by the title of Absinthium repens. @


 The Place.
Thse VVormwoods do grow vpon the raised grounds in the salt marshes neere vnto the sea, in most places of England; which being brought into gardens doth there flourish as in his naturall place, and retaineth his smell, taste, and naturall qualitie, as hath beene often proued. @ I haue not

heard that the later growes wilde in any place with vs in England. @


 The Time.
These bring forth floures and seeds when the other Wormwoods (...). @ The later scarce seedes with vs, it floures so late in the yeare. @


 The Names.
Sea VVormwood is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Absinthium marinum, and likewise (...): in Dutch, (...) (...): of diuers, Santonicum, as witnesseth Dioscorides: neuerthelesse there is another Santonicum differing from sea VVormwood: in English of some women of the countrey, Garden Cypresse.


 The Temperature.
Sea VVormwood is of nature hot and drie, but not so much as the common.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides affirmeth, that being taken of it selfe, or boiled with Rice, and eaten with hony, it killeth  the small wormes of the guts, and gently looseth the belly, the which Pliny doth also affirme.
The iuice of sea VVormwood drunke with wine resisteth poison, especially the poison of Hemlockes.
The leaues stamped with figs, salt-peter, and the meale of (...), and applied to the belly, sides, or flankes, help the dropsie, and such as are spleenticke.
The same is singular against all inflammations, and heat of the stomacke and liuer, exceeding  all the kindes of VVormwood for the same purposes that common VVormwood serueth.
It is reported by such as dwell neere the sea side, that the cattell which do feed where it groweth  become fat and lusty very quickly.
The herbe with his stalks laid in chests, presses, and ward-robes, keepeth clothes from moths and  other vermine.



CHAP. 451. Of Holy Wormewood.


Sementina. Holie VVormewood.



 The Description.
THis Wormwood called Sementina, and Semen sanctum, which we haue Englished, Holy, is that kinde of Wormwood which beareth that seed which we haue invse, called VVormeseed: in shops, Semen Santolinum: about which there hath been great controuersie amongst writers: some holding that the seed of Santonicum Galatium to be the true VVormseed: others deeming it to be that of Romanum Absinthium: it doth much resemble the first of the sea VVormwoods in shape and proportion: it riseth vp with a wooddie stalke, of the height of a cubite, diuided into diuers branches and wings; whereupon are set very small leaues: among which are placed clusters of seeds in such abundance, that to the first view it seemeth to be a plant consisting all of seed.


 The Place.
It is a forreine plant: the seeds being sowne in the gardens of hot regions doe prosper well; in these cold countries it will not grow at all. Neuertheles there is one or two companions about London, who haue reported vnto mee that they had great store of it growing in their gardens yearely, which they sold at a great price vnto our London Apothecaries, and gained much money thereby; one of the men dwelleth by the Bagge and Bottle neere London, whose name is Cornewall; into whose garden I was brought to see the thing that I would not beleeue; for being often

(...) that there it did grow, I still persisted it was not true: but when I did behold this (...) quantitie of VVormwood, it was nothing else but common Amcos. How many (...), haue (...) deceiued, how many they haue robbed of their money, and how many children haue (...) (...) the better for taking it, (...) refer it to the (...) of the simplest, considering their (...) (...), (...) haue sold many hundreth pounds weight of it; the more to their shame be it spoken, and (...) (...) wit or skill in the Apothecaries: therefore haue I set downe this as a (...) (...) those that buy of these seeds, first to taste and trie the same before they giue it to their children, or commit it to any other vse. @ Certainely our Author was either misinformed, or the people of these times were very simple, for I dare boldly say there is not any Apothecary, or scarce any other so simple as to be thus deceiued now. @


 The Time.
It floureth and bringeth forth his seed in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The French men call it (...); the Italians, Semen Zena: whereupon also the (...) name (...) came: the seed is called euery where (...) (...). Holy-seed; and (...) (...) (...): in English, VVormseed; the herb it selfe is also called (...), or wormseed wort: some name it (...) (...), Zedoarie seede, because it hath a smeil somewhat resembling that of Zedoarie.


 The Temperature.
The seed is very bitter, and for that cause of nature hot and drie.


 The Vertues.
It is good against wormes of the belly and entrailes, taken any way, and better also if a little  Rubarbe bee mixed withall, for so the wormes are not onely killed, but likewise they are driuen downe by the siege, which thing must alwaies be regarded.
The seed mixed with a little (...) (...), and brought to the forme of a plaister, and applied  to the nauell of a childe doth the like.



CHAP. 452. (...) and Bastard Wormewoods.


1 (...) album. VVhite wormwood.


2 (...) Aegyptium. VVormwood of Aegypt.




 The Description.
The (...) (...) (...) here (...) in the (...) place, by the name of (...) (...), is the first of the next chapter saue one, where you (...) see more (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...), but no where (...) in the Chapter, is either the same (...), or (...) very like our Sea (...). Let (...) (...) (...) (...): (...) (...) (...) (...). Med. in the title of (...) (...): and in (...), (...). 1. lib. 2. cap. 5. where the (...) (...) is of (...) Wormewood.

 1 ABsinthium album hath straight and vpright stalkes, a foot high, (...) with broad leaues, but very deeply cut or clouen, in shew like vnto (...) of the great (...), but white of colour: at the top of the stalkes, out of (...) (...), as in an vmbell grow floures, compact of six small white leaues: the (...) is long, with some fibres annexed vnto it.
2 This kinde of Wormwood (...) and that learned (...) Valerandus Donraz, called Absinthium Egyptium: the leaues of this plant are very like to the leaues of Trichomanes, which is our common Maiden haire, of a white colour, euery small leafe standing one opposite against another, and of a strong sauour.
3 This VVormwood, which Dodonaens calleth Absinthium inodorum; and Insipidum, is very like vnto the sea VVormwood, in his small and tender leaues: the stalke beareth flowers also like vnto the foresaid Sea-(...), but it is of a sad or deep (...), hauing neither bitter taste, nor any fauour at all; whereupon it was called, and that very fitly, Absinthium inodorum, or Absinthium insipidum: in English, foolish, or vnsauory wormwood. @ (...) saith not that his Absinthium insipidum is like the sea wormwood, but that it is very like our common broad leaued VVormwood, and so indeed it is, and that so like, that it is hard to be discerned therefrom, but onely by the want of bitternesse and smell. @


3 Absinthium inodorum. Vnsauorie VVormwood.


4 Absinthium marinum, Abrotani (...) facie. Small Lauander Cotton.


4 This kinde of Sea-wormwood is a shrubby and wooddie plant, in face and shew like to Lauander Cotton, of a strong smel; hauing floures like those of the common wormwood, at the first shew like those of Lauander Cotton: the root is tough and wooddie.


 The Place.
These plants are strangers in England, yet we haue a few of them in Herbarists gardens.


 The Time.
The time of their flouring and seeding is referred to the other wormwoods.


 The Names.
The white wormwood Conradus Gesnerus nameth Seriphium foemina, and saith, that it is commonly called Herba alba, or white (...): another had rather name it (...); for as Dioscorides saith, Santonicum is found in France beyond the Alpes, and beareth his name of the same

countrey where it groweth: but that part of Swisserland which belongeth to France is accounted of the Romans to be beyond the Alps; and the prouince of Santon is far from it: for this is a part of Guines, scituate vpon the coast of the Ocean, beneath the floud Gerond Northward: therefore Santon Wormwood, if it haue his name from the Santons, groweth (...) from the Alps: but if it grow neere adioyning to the Alps, then hath it not his name from the Santons.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
White Wormwood is hot and somewhat dry.
Vnsauorie Wormwood, as it is without smell and taste, so is it (...) of any hot qualitie, much  lesse hath it any scouring facultie. These are not vsed in physicke, where the (...) may (...) had, being as it were wilde or degenerate kindes of Wormwood; some of them participating both of the forme and smell of other plants.



CHAP. 453. Of Mugwort.


1 (...), mater Herbarum. Common Mugwort.



 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Mug (...) hath broad leaues, very much cut or clouen like the leaues of common Wormewood, but larger, of a darke greene colour aboue, and hoarie vnderneath: the stalkes are long and straight, and full of branches, whereon do grow small round buttons, which are the floures, smelling like Marierome when they wax ripe: the root is great, and of a wooddie substance.
2 The second kinde of Mugwort hath a great thicke and wooddy root, from whence arise sundry branches of a reddish colour, beset full of small and fine iagged leaues, verie like vnto sea Sothernwood: the seed groweth alongst the small twiggy branches, like vnto little berries, which fall not from their branches in a long time after they be ripe. @ I know not how this differeth from the former, but only in the colour of the stalk and floures, which are red or purplish; whereas the former is more whitish. @
3 There is also another Mugwort, which hath many branches rising from a wooddie root, standing vpright in distances one from another, of an ashie colour, beset with leaues not much vnlike sea (...); about the lower part of the stalkes, and toward the top of the branches they are narrower and lesser, and cut with great and deepe iagges, thicke in substance, and of a whitish colour, as all the rest of the plant is: it yeeldeth a pleasant smell like Abrotanum marinum, and in taste is somewhat (...): the floures are many, and yellow: which being vaded, there followeth mossie seed like vnto that of the common Wormwood. @ The leaues of this plant are of two sorts; for some of them (...) long and narrow, like those of Lauander (whence Clusius hath called it (...) folio (...)) other some are cut in or diuided almost to the middle rib; as you may see it exprest apart in a (...) by it (...), which shewes both the whole, as also the diuided leaues.



3 Artemisia marina. Sea Mugwort.


@ (...) (...) ramulus, folia integra and dissecta exprimens. A branch shewing the cut and vncut leaues.




 The Place.
The common Mugwort groweth wilde in sundry places about the borders of fields, about high waies, brooke sides, and such like places.
Sea Mugwort groweth about Rie and Winchelsea castle, and at Portsmouth by the Isle of Wight.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Mugwort is called in Greeke (...): and also in Latine Artemisia, which name it had of Artemisia Queene of Halicarnassus, and wife of noble Mausolus King of Caria, who adopted it for her owne herbe: before that it was called (...), Parthenis, as Pliny writeth. Apuleius (...) that it was likewise called Parthenion; who hath very many names for it, and many of them are placed in Dioscorides among the bastard names: most of these agree with the right Artemisia, and diuers of them with other herbes, which now and then are numbred among the Mugworts: it is also called Mater (...): in high-Dutch, Beifusz, and Sant Iohanus Gurtell: in Spanish and Italian, Artemisia: in French, Armoisa: in low-Dutch, (...), (...) Ians krupt: in English, (...), and common Mugwort.


 The Temperature.
Mugwort is hot and dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent.


 The Vertues.
Pliny saith that Mugwort doth properly cure womens diseases.
(...) (...), that it bringeth downe the termes, the birth, and the after-birth.
And that (...) (...) manner it helpeth (...) mother, and the paine of the matrix, to be boyled as  bathes for (...) to (...) in; and that being put vp with (...), it is of like force that the bath is of. And that the (...) (...) (...) (...) and drunk for the same infirmities; and that they are applied in manner of a (...) to the share, to bring downe the monethly course.
(...) (...) that (...) (...) or way faring man that hath the herbe tied about him feeleth no (...) at all; and that he who hath it about him can be hurt by no poysonsome medicines, nor by any wilde (...), neither yet by the Sun it selfe; and also that it is drunke against Opium, or

the iuyce of blacke Poppy. Many other fantasticall deuices inuented by Poets are to be seene in the Works of the antient Writers, tending to witchcraft and sorcerie, and the great dishonour of God; wherefore I do of purpose omit them, as things vnworthie of my recording, or your reviewing.
Mugwort pound with oyle of sweet almonds, and laid to the stomacke as a plaister, cureth all  the paines and griefes of the same.
It cureth the shakings of the ioynts, inclining to the (...), and helpeth the contraction or drawing  together of the nerues and sinewes. 

There were formerly two descriptions of the (...); wherefore I omitted the former, being the more (...).




CHAP. 454. Of Sothernwood.

 The Kindes.
DIoscorides affirmeth that Sothernwood is of two kindes, the female and the male, which are (...) where knowne by the names of the greater and of the lesser: besides these there is a third kinde, which is of a sweeter smell, and lesser than the others, and also others of a bastard kinde.


The description here in the (...) place is that of the (...) (...) (...) of (...), being the very (...) in his (...). The figure which our (...) put (...) was of the (...) (...), which should haue beene in the next chapter saue one: Now the figure that hee should haue put here was put two chapters (...), by the (...) of (...) (...), by which name (...) also calls it: but I haue thought it (...) to put it here, because here was the better (...), and the plant is the better referred to this kinde.

 1 Abrotanum foemina arborescens. Female Sothernwood.


2 Abrotanum mas. Male Sothernwood.




 The Description.
1 THe greater Sothernwood by carefull manuring doth oftentimes grow vp in manner of a shrub, and commeth to be as high as a man, bringing forth stalkes an inch thicke, or more; out of which spring very many sprigs or branches, set about with leaues diuersly iagged and finely indented, somewhat white, and of a certaine strong smell: in stead of floures, little smal clusters of buttons do hang on the sprigs, from the middle to the very top, of colour yellow, and at the length turne into seed. The root hath diuers strings.



3 Abrotanum humile. Dwarfe Sothernwood.


4 Abrotanum inodorum. Vnsauorie Sothernwood.


5 Abrotanum campestre. Wilde Sothernwood.


2 The lesser Sothernwood groweth low, ful of little sprigs of a woody substance: the leaues are long, and smaller than those of the former, not so white: it beareth clustering buttons vpon the tops of the stalks: the root is made of many strings.
3 The third kinde is also shorter: the leaues hereof are iagged and deeply cut after the maner of the greater Sothernwood, but they are not so white, yet more sweet, wherein they are like vnto Lauander cotton. This kinde is very full of seed: the buttons stand alongst on the sprigs, euen to the very top, and be of a glittering yellow. The root is like to the rest.
4 The vnsauorie Sothernwood groweth flat vpon the ground, with broad leaues deepely cut or iagged in the edges like those of the common Mugwort: among which rise vp weake and feeble stalkes trailing likewise vpon the ground, set confusedly here and there with the like leaues that grow next the ground, of a grayish or hoary colour, altogether without smell. The floures grow alongst the stalkes, of a yellowish colour, small and chaffie: the root is tough and wooddy, with some strings (...) thereto.
5 This wilde Sothernwood hath a great long thicke root, tough and wooddy, couered

ouer with a scaly barke like the scaly backe of an adder, and of the same colour: from which rise very many leaues like those of Fennell, of an ouerworne greene colour: among which grow small twiggy branches on the tops, and alongst the stalkes do grow small clustering floures of a yellow colour: the whole plant is of a darke colour, as well leaues as stalkes, and of a strong (...) smell.


 The Place.
Theophrastus saith that Sothernwood delighteth to grow in places open to the Sun: Dioscorides affirmeth that it groweth in Cappadocia, and Galatia a countrey in Asia, and in Hierapolis a city in Syria: it is planted in gardens almost euery where: that of Sicilia and Galatia is most commended of Pliny.


 The Time.
The buttons of Sothernwood do flourish and be in their prime in August, and now and then in September.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): the Latines and Apothecaries keepe the same name Abrotanum: the Italians and (...) Spaniards call it Abrotano: and other Spaniards, (...) lombriguera: in high Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...), and (...): the French, (...), and Auroesme: the English men, Sothernwood: it hath diuers bastard names in Dioscorides; the greater kinde is Dioscorides his Faemina, or female Sothernwood; and Pliny his Montanum, or mountaine Sothernewood: the mountaine Sothernwood we take for the female, and the champion for the male. There be notwithstanding some that take Lauander Cotton to be the female Sothernwood; grounding thereupon, because it bringeth forth yellow floures in the top of the sprigs like cluster buttons: but if they had more diligently pondered Dioscorides his words, they would not haue been of this opinion: the lesser Sothernwood is Mas, the male, and is also Plinies champion Sothernwood; in Latine, Campestre. The third, as we haue said, is likewise the female, and is commonly called sweet Sothernwood, because it is of a sweeter sent than the rest. Dioscorides seemeth to call this kind Siculum, Sicilian Sothernwood.


 The Temperature.
Sothernwood is hot and dry in the end of the third degree: it hath also sorce to distribute and to rarifie.


 The Vertues.
The tops, floures, or seed boyled, and stamped raw with water and drunke, helpeth them that  cannot take their breaths without holding their neckes straight vp and is a remedie for the cramp, and for sinewes shrunke and drawne together; for the sciatica also, and for them that can hardly make water; and it is good to bring downe the termes.
It (...) wormes, and driueth them out: if it be drunke with wine it is a remedie against deadly  poysons.
Also it helpeth against the stinging of scorpions and field spiders, but it hurts the stomacke.
Stamped and mixed with oyle it taketh away the shiuering cold that commeth by the ague fits, and it heateth the body if it be anointed therewith before the fits do come.
If it be pouned with barley (...) and laid to pushes it taketh them away.
It is good for (...) of the eyes, with the pulpe of a rosted (...), or with crummes of  bread, and applied pultis wise.
The ashes of burnt Sothernwood, with some kinde of oyle that is of thin parts, as of Palma Christi, Radish (...), oyle of (...) Marierome, or Organie, cureth the pilling of the haire off the head, and maketh the beard to grow quickly: being strewed about the bed, or a fume made of it vpon hot embers, it driueth away serpents: if but a branch be layd vnder the beds head they say it prouoketh venerie.
The seed of Sothernwood made into pouder, or boyled in wine and drunke, is good against the  difficultie and stopping of vrine; it expelleth, wasteth, consumeth, and digesteth all cold humors, tough slime and (...), which do vsually stop the spleene, kidneyes, and bladder.
Sothernwood drunke in wine is good against all venome and poyson.
The leaues of Sothernwood boyled in water vntill they be soft, and stamped with barley meale  and barrowes grease vnto the forme of a plaister, dissolue and waste all cold tumors and swellings, being applied or laid thereto.




CHAP. 455. Of Oke of Jerusalem, and Oke of Cappadocia.


1 Botrys. Oke of Ierusalem.


2 Ambrosia. Oke of Cappadocia.



 The Description.
1 OKe of Ierusalem, or Botrys, hath sundry small stems a foot and a halfe high, diuiding themselues into many small branches, beset with small leaues deeply cut or iagged, very much resembling the leafe of an Oke, which hath caused our English women to call it Oke of Ierusalem; the vpper side of the leafe is of a deepe greene, and somewhat rough and hairy, but vnderneath it is of a darke reddish or purple colour: the seedie floures grow clustering about the branches, like the yong clusters or blowings of the Vine: the root is small and threddy: the whole herbe is of a pleasant smell and sauour, and of a feint yellowish colour, and the whole plant dieth when the seed is ripe.
2 The fragrant smell that this kind of Ambrosia or Oke of Cappadocia yeeldeth, hath moued the Poets to suppose that this herbe was meate and food for the gods: Dioscorides saith it groweth three (...) high: in my garden it groweth to the height of two cubits, yeelding many weake crooked and streaked branches, diuiding themselues into sundrie other small branches, hauing from the middest to the top thereof many mossie yellowish floures not much vnlike common Wormwood, standing one before another in good order; and the whole plant is as it were couered ouer with bran or a mealy dust: the floures do change into small prickly cornered buttons, much like vnto Tribulus terrestris; wherein is contained blacke round seed, not vnpleasant in taste and smell: the leaues are in shape like the leaues of Mugwort, but thinner and more tender: all the whole plant is hoary, and yeeldeth a pleasant sauor: the whole plant perished with me at the first approch of Winter.


 The Place.
These plants are brought vnto vs from beyond the seas, especially from Spaine and Italy.


 The Time.
They floure in August, and the seed is ripe in September.



 The Names.
Oke of Ierusalem is called in Greeke (...): in Latine Botrys: In Italian, Botri: in Spanish, (...) granada: in high-Dutch, (...), and (...): in French and low-Dutch, Pyment, in English, Oke of Ierusalem; and of some, Oke of Paradise.
Oke of Cappadocia is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Ambrofia; neither hath it any other knowne name. Pliny saith that Ambrosia is a wandering name, and is giuen vnto other herbes: for Botrys (Oke of Ierusalem, as we haue written) is of diuers also called Ambrosia: In English it is called Oke of Cappadocia.


 The Temperature.
These plants are hot and dry in the second degree, and consist of subtill parts.


 The Vertues.
These plants be good to be boyled in wine, and ministred vnto such as haue their brests stopt, and are short winded, and cannot easily draw their breath, for they cut and waste grosse humours and tough flegme. The leaues are of the same force; being made vp (...) sugar they commonly call it a conserue.
It giueth a pleasant taste to flesh that is sodden with it, and eaten with the broth.
It is dried and layd among garments, not onely to make them smell sweet, but also to preserue  them from moths and other vermine; which thing it doth also performe. 

There were formerly two more descriptions in this chapter, (...) which were made by looking vpon the figures in Lobels (...); the former being of his (...) (...), which is nothing else but the (...) (...), or (...) Cresses. The later was of his Ambrosia (...), which our (...) in (...) (...) (...) set forth by the name of (...) (...).




CHAP. 456. Of Lauander Cotton.


The figure which formerly was in this place was of kinde of Mosse, which (...) set forth by the name of (...) (...): (...) and (...) (...) it (...). See more (...) in the Mofses.Chamaecyparissus. Lauander Cotton.



 The Description.
LAuander Cotton bringeth forth clustred buttons of a golden colour, and of a sweet smell, and is often vsed in garlands, and decking vp of gardens and houses. It hath a wooddy stocke, out of which grow forth branches like little boughes, slender, very many, a cubit long, set about with little leaues, long, narrow, purled, or crumpled; on the tops of the branches stand vp floures, one alone on euery branch, made vp with short threds thrust close together, like to the floures of Tansie, and to the middle buttons of the floures of Cammomill, but yet something broader, of colour yellow, which be changed into seed of an obseure colour. The root is of a wooddy substance. The shrub it selfe is white both in branches and leaues, and hath a strong sweet smell.
@ There are some varieties of this plant, which Matthiolus, Lobel, and others refer to Abrotanum foemina, and so call it; and by the same name our Authour gaue the figure thereof in the last chapter saue one, though the description did not belong thereto, as I haue formerly noted. Another sort thereof our Authour, following Tabernamontanus and Lobel, set forth a little before by the name of Absinthium (...) Abrotani foeminae facie, that (...) calls Santolina prima; and this here figured, Santolina altera. He also mentioneth three other differences thereof, which chiefely consist in the leaues; for his third hath very short and small leaues like those of Heath; whence Bauhine calls it Abrotanum foemina folijs Erica. The fourth hath the leaues lesse toothed, and more like to Cypresse,

hence it is called in the Aducrs. Abrotanum peregrinum cupressi folijs. The fifth hath not the stalkes growing vpright, but creeping: the leaues are toothed, more thicke and hoary than the rest; in other respects alike. Bauhine calls it (...) foemina repens canescens. @


 The Place.
Lauander Cotton groweth in gardens almost euery where.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
They are called by one name Santolina, or Lauander Cotton: of most, Chamaecyparissus. But (...) concerning Chamaecyparissus is so short and briefe, that by him their opinions can neither be reiected nor receiued.
They are doubtlesse much (...) that would haue Lauander Cotton to be Abrotanum foemina, or the female Sothernwood: and likewise they are in the wrong who take it to be Seriphium, sea Wormewood; and they who first set it abroch to be a kinde of Sothernwood we leaue to their errors; because it is not absolutely to be referred to one, but a plant participating of Wormewood and Sothernwood.


 The Temperature.
The seed of Lauander Cotton hath a bitter taste, being hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Pliny saith, That the herbe Chamaecyparissus being drunke in wine is a good medicine against the  poysons of all serpents and venomous beasts.
It killeth wormes either giuen greene or dry, and the seed hath the same vertue against wormes, but auoideth them with greater force. It is thought to be equall with the vsuall worme-seed.



CHAP. 457. Of Sperage, or Asparagus.


1 Asparagus sativus. Garden Sperage.


2 Asparagus (...). Stone or mountaine Sperage.




 The Description.
1 THe first being the manured or garden Sperage, hath at his first rising out of the ground thicke tender shoots very soft and brittle, of the thicknesse of the greatest swans quil, in taste like vnto the greene beane, hauing at the top a certaine scaly soft bud, which in time groweth to a branch of the height of two cubits, diuided into diuers other smaller branches, whereon are set many little leaues like haires, more fine than the leaues of Dill: among which come sorth small mossie yellowish floures, which yeeld forth the fruit, greene at the first, afterward red as Corall, of the bignesse of a small pease; wherein is contained grosse blackish seed exceeding hard, which is the cause that it lieth so long in the ground after the sowing, before it do spring vp. The roots are many thicke soft and spongie strings hanging downe from one head, and spred themselues all about, whereby it greatly increaseth.
2 We haue in our marish and low grounds neere vnto the sea, a Sperage of this kinde, which differeth a little from that of the garden, and yet in kinde there is no difference at all, but only in manuring, by which all things or most things are made more beautiful, and larger. This may be called Asparagus palustris, marish Sperage.


4 Asparagus syluestris aculeatus. Wilde prickly Sperage.


5 Asparagus syluestris Spinosas Clusij. Wilde thornie Sperage.


3 Stone or mountaine Sperage is one of the wilde ones, set forth vnder the title of Corruda; which Lobel calleth Asparagus petraeus; and Galen, Myacanthinus, that doth very well resemble those of the garden, in stalkes, roots, and branches, sauing that those fine hairy leaues which are in the garden Sperage be soft, blunt, and tender; and in this wilde Sperage, sharpe hard and pricking thornes, though they be small and slender: the root hereof is round, of the bignesse of a pease, and of a blacke colour: the roots are long, thicke, fat, and very many.
4 This sourth kinde differeth from the last described, being a wilde Sperage of Spaine and Hungarie: the plant is altogether set with sharpe thornes (three or foure comming forth together) as are the branches of Whinnes, Gose, or Fursen: the fruit is blacke when it is ripe, and full of a greenish pulpe, wherein lie hard and blacke seeds, sometimes one, otherwhiles two in a berry: the roots are like the others, but greater and tougher.



@ 6 Drypis. (...) Thistle.


5 Carolus Clusius describeth also a certain wilde Sperage with sharp prickles all alongst the stalkes, orderly placed at euery ioynt one, hard, stiffe, and whitish, the points of the thornes pointing downward: from the which ioynts also doe grow out a few long greene leaues fastned together, as also a little yellow floure, and one berry three cornered, and of a blacke colour, wherein is contained one black seed, seldome more: the roots are like the other.
6 Drypis being likewise a kinde hereof, hath long and small roots, creeping in the ground like Couch grasse; from which spring vp branches a cubit high, ful of knotty ioints: the leaues are small like vnto Iuniper, not much differing from Corruda or Nepa: the floures grow at the top of the stalke in spokie tufts or rundles, of a white colour, closely thrust together: the seed besore it bee taken out of the huske is like vnto Rice; being taken out, like that of Melilot, of a saffron colour.


 The Place.
The first being our garden Asparagus groweth wild in Essex, in a medow adioining to a mill, beyond a village called Thorp; and also at Singleton not far from Carbie, and in the medows (...) Moulton in Lincolnshire. Likewise it groweth in great plentie neere vnto Harwich, at a place called Bandamar lading, and at North Moulton in Holland, a part of Lincolnshire.
The wilde Sperages grow in Portugal and Biscay among stones, one of the which Petrus Bellonius doth make mention to grow in Candie, in his first booke of Singularities, cap. 18.


 The Time.
The bare naked tender shoots of Sperage spring vp in Aprill, at what time they are eaten in sallads; they floure in Iune and Iuly; the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The garden Sperage is called in Greeke (...): in Latine likewise Asparagus: in shops, Sparagus, and Speragus: in high-Dutch, Spargen: in low-Dutch, (...), and Coralcruijt; that is to say, Herba Coralli, or Corall-wort, of the red berries, which beare the colour of Corall: in Spanish, Asparragos: in Italian, Asparago: in English, Sperage, and likewise Asparagus, after the Latine name: in French, Asperges. It is named Asparagus of the excellencie, because asparagi, or the springs hereof are preferred before those of other plants whatsoeuer; for this Latine word Asparagus doth properly signifie the first spring or sprout of eueric plant, especially when it is render, and before it do grow into a hard stalke, as are the buds, tendrels, or yong springs of wild Vine or hops, nnd such like.
Wilde Sperage is properly called in Greeke (...), which is as much to say as Mouse prickle, and (...), that is to say, (...) Asparagus, or Stone Sperage: it is also named in Latine, Asparagus syluestris, and Corruda.


 The Temperature.
The roots of the garden Sperage, and also of the wilde, doe clense without manifest heate and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
The first sprouts or naked tender shoots hereof be oftentimes sodden in flesh broth and eaten, or boyled in faire water, and seasoned with oyle, vineger, salt, and pepper, then are serued at mens tables for a sallad; they are pleasant to the taste, easily concocted, and gently loose the belly.
They (...) prouoke vrine, are good for the kidnies and bladder, but they yeeld vnto the  body little nourishment, and the same moist, yet not faultie: they are thought to increase seed, and stir vp lust. 

(...) (...) (...) (...) in this (...), but now omitted, was againe set (...) by out Author amongst the (...), where you (...) (...) it.





CHAP. 458. Of Horse-taile, or Shaue-grasse.

 The Description.
1 GReat Horse-taile riseth vp with a round stalke, hollow within like a Reed, a cubit high, compact as it were of many small pieces, one put into the end of another, sometimes of a reddish colour, very rough, and set at euery ioint with many stiffe rush-like leaues or rough bristles, which maketh the whole plant to resemble the taile of a horse, whereof it tooke his name: on the top of the stalke do stand in stead of floures clustered and thicke Catkins, (...) vnlike to the first shoots of Sperage, which is called Myacantha: the root is ioynted, and creepeth (...) the ground.
2 This small or naked Shaue-grasse, wherewith Fletchers and Combe-makers do rub and polish their worke, (...) out of the ground like the first shoots of Asparagus, iointed or kneed by certaine distances like the precedent, but altogether without such bristly leaues, yet exceeding rough and cutting: the root groweth aslope in the earth, like those of the Couch-grasse.


1 Equisetum maius. Great Horse-taile.


2 Equisetum nudum. Naked Horse-taile.


3 Horse-taile which for the most part groweth among corne, and where corne hath been, hath a very slender root, and single; from which rise vp diuers iointed stalkes, whereon doe grow verie long rough narrow iointed leaues, like vnto the first described, but thicker and rougher, as is the rest of the plant.
4 Water Horse-taile, that growes by the brinks of riuers and running streams, and often in the midst of the water, hath a very long root, according to the depth of the water, grosse, thicke, and iointed, with some threds anexed thereto: from which riseth vp a great thick iointed stalke, whereon do grow long rough rushy leaues, pyramide or steeple fashion. The whole plant is also tough, hard, and fit to shaue and rub wooden things as the other.
5 This kinde of Horse-taile that growes in woods and shadowie places, hath a small root, and single, from which riseth vp a rough chamfered stalke ioynted by certaine spaces, hauing at each ioynt two bushes of rough bristly leaues set one against another like the other of his kinde.



3 Equisetum segetale. Corne Horse-taile.


4 Equisetum palustre. Water Horse-taile.


5 Equisetum (...). Wood Horse-taile.


6 Cauda equina foemina. Female Horse-taile.





9 (...) (...). Italian rushie (...)-taile.


6 The female Horse taile (...) for the most part in waterish places, and by the brinks of small rills and pirling brookes; it hath a long root like that of Couch grasse, from which rise vp diuers hollow stalkes, set about at certaine distances with smal leaues in rundles like those of Woodroofe, altogether barren of seed and floure, whereof it was called by Lobel, Polygonon foemina semine (...). @ This is sometimes found with tenne or more seedes at each ioynt; whence Bauhine hath called it (...) palustre breuioribus folijs poly spermon. @
@ 7 In some boggie places of this kingdome is found a rare and pretty Hippuris or Horse taile, which growes vp with many little branches, some two or three inches high, putting forth at each ioynt many little leaues, clustering close about the stalke, and set after the (...) of other Horse-tailes: towards the tops of the branches the ioynts are very thicke: the colour of the whole plant is gray, a little inclining to green, very brittle, and as it were stony or grauelly like Coralline, and will crash vnder your feet, as if it were frozen; and if you chew it, you shall finde it all stonie or grauelly. My friend Mr. Leonard Buckner was the first that found this plant, and brought it to me; he had it three miles beyond Oxford, a little on this side Euansham-ferry, in a bog vpon a common by the Beacon hill neere Cumner-wood, in the end of August, 1632. Mr. Bowles hath since found it growing vpon a bog not far from Chisselhurst in Kent. I question whether this bee not the Hippuris lacustris quaedam folijs (...) arenosis of Gesner: but if Gesners be that which Bauhine in his (...), pag. 24. sets forth by the name of Equisetum nudum minus variegatum, then I iudge it not to be this of my description: for Bauhines differs from this in that it is without leaues, and ofttimes bigger: the stalks of his are hollow, these not so: this may be called Hippuris Coralloides, Horse-taile Coralline.
8 Towards the later end of the yeare, in diuers ditches, as in Saint Iames his Parke, in the ditches on the backe of Southwarke towards Saint Georges fields, etc. you may finde couered ouerwith water a kinde of stinking Horse-taile: it growes sometimes a yard long, with many ioints and branches, and each ioint set with leaues, as in the other Horse-tailes, but they are somewhat iagged or diuided towards the tops. I take this to be the Equisetum faetiduni sub aqua repens, described in the fist place of Bauhinus his (...): we may call it in English, Stinking water Horse-taile. @
9 Clusius hath set forth a plant, that he referreth vnto the stocke of Horse-tailes, which he thus describeth: it hath many twiggie or rushie stalks, whereupon it was called Iuncaria: and may bee Englished, Rush-weed: the leaues grow vpon the branches like those of Flax: on the toppes of the stalks grow small chassie floures of a whitish colour. The seed is small, and blacke of colour. The root is little and white: the whole plant is sweetish in taste.
10 Dodonaeus setteth forth another Horse-taile, which he called climing Horse-taile, or horstaile of Olympus. There is (saith he) another plant like Horse-taile, but greater and higher. It riseth vp oftentimes with a stalke as big as a mans arme, diuided into many branches: out of which there grow long slender sprigs very full of ioints, like to the first Horse-taile. The floures stand about the ioints, of a mossie substance, small as are those of the Cornell tree; in places whereof grow vp red fruit full of sowre iuice, not vnlike to little Mulberries, in which is the seed. The root is hard and wooddie. This growes now and then to a great height, and sometimes lower. Bellonius writeth in his Singularities, that it hath been seene to be equall in height with the Plane (...): it (...) vp lower, neere to shorter and lesser trees or shrubs, yet doth it not fasten it selfe to the trees with any (...) or clasping aglets; much lesse doth it winde it selfe about (...), yet doth it delight to stand neere and close vnto them.



 The Place.
The titles and descriptions shew the place of their growing: the last Bellonius reporteth to grow in diuers vallies of the mountaine Olympus, and not far from Ragusa a citie in Sclauonia.


 The Time.
They floure from Aprill to the end of Sommer.


 The Names.
Horse-taile is called in Greeke (...), Hippuris: in Latine, (...) and Equinalis: of Plinie in his 15. booke, 28 chap. Equisetis, of the likenesse of a horse haire: of some, Salix equina: in shoppes, Cauda equina: in high Dutch, Schaffthew: in low Dutch, Peertsteert: in Italian, Coda di Cauallo: in Spanish, Coda de mula: in French, (...) de cheual: and Caquene: in English, Horse-taile, and Shaue-grasse.
Shaue-grasse is not without cause named Asprella, of his ruggednesse, which is not vnknowne to women, who scoure their pewter and woodden things of the kitchin therewith: which the German women call (...): and therefore some of our huswiues do call it Pewterwoort. Of some the tenth is called Ephedra, Anobasis, and Caucon.


 The Temperature.
Horse-taile, as Galen saith, hath a binding facultie, with some bitternesse, and therefore it doth mightily dry, and that without biting.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that Horse-taile being stamped and laied to, doth perfectly cure wounds, yea  though the sinewes be cut in sunder, as Galen addeth. It is of so great and so singular a vertue in healing of wounds, as that it is thought and reported for truth, to cure the wounds of the bladder, and other bowels, and helpeth ruptures or burstings.
The herbe drunke either with water or wine, is an excellent remedy against bleeding at the nose, and other fluxes of bloud. It staieth the ouermuch flowing of womens floures, the bloudy flix, and the other fluxes of the belly.
The iuice of the herbe taken in the same manner can do the like, and more effectually.
Horse-taile with his roots boiled in wine, is very profitable for the vlcers of the kidnies and bladder, the cough and difficultie of breathing.



CHAP. 459. Of Sea-Cluster, or Sea Raison.


Our Author as you see gaue the history of the lesser in the first place, but formerly the figure was in the third place, and another figure of the same in the (...) place, and the figure of the greater was in the first place.

 1 Vuamarina minor. Small Sea Grape.



 The Description.
1 SMall Sea Grape is not vnlike to horstaile: it bringeth forth slender stalks, almost like rushes, set with many little ioints, such as those are of the Horse-taile, and diuided into many wings and branches; the tops whereof are sharpe pointed, somewhat hard and pricking: it is without leaues: the floursgrow in clusters out of the ioints, with little stems, they are small and of a whitish green colour: the fruit consisteth of many little pearles, like to the vnripe berries of Raspis, or Hind-berry: when it is ripe it is red with a saffron colour, in taste sweet and pleasant: the seede or kernell is hard, three square, sharpe on euery side, in taste binding: the root is iointed, long, and creeps aslope: the plant it selfe also doth rather lie on the ground than stand vp: it groweth all full of small stalkes and branches, casting themselues all abroad.
2 Carolus Clusius hath set forth another sort of sea Grape, far different from the precedent; it riseth vp to the height of a man, hauing manie branches of a wooddie substance, in form like to Spanish Broome, without any leaues at all: wherupon doe grow clusters of floures vpon slender foot-stalks, of a yellowish mossie or herby colour, like those of the Cornell tree: after which come the fruit like vnto the mulberrie, of a reddish colour and sower taste, wherein lieth hid one or two

seeds like those of Millet, blacke without, and white within: the root is hard, tough, and wooddie.


2 Vuamarina maior. Great shrubbie sea Grape.


3 Tragos Matthioli. Bastard Sea Grape.


3 Tragon Matthioli, or rather Tragos improbus, (...), which he vnaduisedly called Tragon, is without controuersie nothing else but a kinde of Kali: this plant riseth vp out of the ground with stalks seldome a cubite high, diuided into sundry other grosse, thicke, and writhen branches, set, or armed with many pricking leaues, of the colour and shape of (...), and somewhat thicke and fleshie: among which come forth such prickley burres, as are to be seen in Tribulus (...), as that it is hard for a man to touch any part thereof without pricking of the hands: the floures are of an herbie colour, bringing forth flat seed like vnto Kali: the (...) is slender, and (...) vnder the turfe of the earth: the whole plant is full of clammie iuice, not any thing astringent, but somewhat saltish, and of no singular vertue that is yet knowne: wherefore I may conclude, that this cannot be Tragos Dioscoridis, and the rather, for that this Tragon of Matthiolus is an herbe, and not a shrub, as I haue before spoken in Vuamarina, neither beareth it any berries or graines like wheat neither is it pleasant in taste and smell, or any thing astringent, all which are to be found in the right Tragos before expressed; which (as Dioscorides saith) is without leaues, neither is it thorney as Tragus improbus Matthioli is: this plant I haue found growing in the Isle of Shepey, in the tract leading to the housc of Sir Edward (...), called Sherland.


 The Place.
It loueth to grow vpon dry banks and sandy places neere to the sea: it is found in Languedocke, not far from Montpelier, and in other places by the sea side, and is a stranger in England.


 The Time.
When it groweth of it selfe the fruit is ripe in Autumne, the plant it selfe remaineth long green, for all the cold in Winter.


 The Names.
It is called of the later Herbarists, Vuamarina: in French, Raisin de Mer, of the pearled fruit, and the likenesse that it hath with the Raspis berrie, which is as it were a Raison or Grape, consisting of many little ones: it is named in Greeke (...) but it is not called Tragus, or Traganos, of a Goat (for so signifieth the Greeke word) or of his ranke and rammish smell, but because it bringeth forth.

fruit fit to be eaten, of the Verbe (...), which signifieth to eat: it may be called Scorpion, because the sprigs thereof are sharpe pointed like to the Scorpions taile.


 The Temperature.
The berries or Raisons, and especially the seed that is in them haue a binding quality, as we haue said, and they are drie in the later end of the second degree.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that the Raisons of sea Grape do stay the flix, and also the whites in women, when they much abound.



CHAP. 460. Of Madder.

 The Kindes.
THere is but one kinde of Madder onely which is manured or set for vse, but if all those that (...) like vnto it in leaues and manner of growing were referred thereto, there should be many (...) as Goose-grasse, soft (...), our Ladies Bedstraw, Woodroofe, and Crosse-woort, all which are like to Madder in leaues, and therefore they be thought to be wilde kinds thereof.


1 Rubia tinctorum. Red Madder.


2 Rubia (...). Wilde Madder.




 The Description.
1 THe garden or manured Madder hath long stalks or trailing branches dispersed farre abroad vpon the ground, square, rough, and full of ioints; at euery ioint set round with greene rough leaues, in manner of a starre, or as those of Woodroofe: the floures grow at the toppe

of the branches, of a faint yellow colour: after which come the seed, round, greene at the first, afterward red, and lastly of a blacke colour: the root long, fat, full of substance, creepeth far abroad within the vpper crust of the earth, and is of a reddish colour when it is greene and fresh.
2 Wilde Madder is like in forme vnto that of the garden, but altogether smaller, and the leaues are not so rough, but smooth and shining: the floures are white: the root is very small and tender, and oftentimes of a reddish colour.


3 Rubia marina. Sea Madder.


@ 4 Rubia spicata Cretica. Small Candie Madder.


3 Sea Madder hath a root two foot long, with many dry threds (...) thereat, of a reddish colour like Alkanet, on the outside of the same forme and bignesse, but within it of the (...) of the scrapings of Iuniper, or Cedar wood, sending forth diuers slender stalks round and ful of ioints: from which come forth small thin leaues, stiffe and sharpe pointed, (...) hairie, in number commonly foure, standing like a Burgonion crosse; from the bosome of which come forth certain tufts of smaller leaues thrust together vpon a heape: the floures grow at the top of the stalks of a pale yellowish colour.
@ Rubia spicata Cretica (...).
@ 4 This hath proceeding from the root many knottie foure square rough little stalks, a foothigh, diuided immediately from the root into many branches, hauing but one side branch growing forth of one ioint: about which ioints grow spred abroad foure or fiue, sometimes sixe narrow, short, sharpe pointed leaues, somewhat rough: the toppes of the stalkes and branches are nothing but long small foure square spikes or eares, made of three leafed greene huskes: out of the top of each huske groweth a very small greenish yellow floure, hauing foure exceeding smal leaues scarce to be seene: after which followeth in each huske one small blackish seed, somewhat long, round on the one side, with a dent or hollownesse on the other. The root is small, hard, wooddie, crooked or scragged, with many little branches or threds, red without, and white within and perisheth when the seeds are ripe. Iuly, 19. 1621.

Synanchica Lug. p. 1185.
5 The root is crooked, blackish without, yellow vnderneath the skinne, white within that and wooddie; about fiue or six inches long, with many hairy strings: from the root arise many fouresquare branches trailing vpon the ground, sometimes reddish towards the root: the leaues are small and sharpe pointed, like those of Gallium, and grow along the stalke, on certaine knees or ioints, foure or fiue together, sometimes fewer: from those ioints the stalk diuideth it selfe towards the top into many parts, whereon grow many floures, each floure hauing foure leaues, sometimes white, sometimes of a flesh colour, and euery leafe of these flesh coloured leaues is artificially straked in the middle, and neere the sides with three lines of a deeper red, of no pleasant smell: after which commeth the seed something round, growing two together like stones. It floureth all the Sommer long, and groweth in drie Chalkie grounds aboundantly. August 13. 1619. Iohn Goodyer. @


@ 6 Rubia minima. Dwarfe Madder.


@ 6 Lobel thus describes this Dwarfe Madder: there is another (saith hee) which I gathered, growing vpon Saint Vincents rocks not farre from Bristow: the leaues are of the bignesse of those of Rupture-woort, sharpe pointed, and growing after the manner of those of Madder, vpon little creeping stalkes, some inch and halfe high, whereon grow yellowish small floures. The root is small, and of the colour of Corall. @


 The Place.
Madder is planted in gardens, and is verie common in most places of England. Master George Bowles found it growing wilde on Saint Vincents rocke; and out of the Cliffes of the rockes at Aberdovie in Merioneth shire.
The second groweth in moist medowes, in moorish grounds, and vnder bushes almost euery where.
3 This grows by the sea side in most places.
@ The fourth growes onely in some few gardens with vs, but the fifth may bee found wilde in many places: I found it in great plenty on the hill beyond Chattam in the way to Canturburie. @


 The Time.
They flourish from May vnto the end of August: the roots are gathered and dried in Autumne, and sold to the vse of Diets and Medicine.


 The Names.
Madder is called in Greeke (...), Erythrodanum: in Latine, Rubia, and Rubeia: in shops, Rubia tinctorum: Paulus Aegineta sheweth that it is named Thapson which the Diers vse, and the Romanes call it Herba Rubia: in Italian Rubbia, and Robbia: in Spanish, Ruvia, Roya, and Granza: in French, Garance: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...), and (...) (...): in English, Madder, and red Madder.


 The Temperature.
Of the temperature of Madder, it hath beene disputed among the learned, and as yet not censured, whether it doe binde or open; some say both; diuers diuersly deeme: a great Physition (I do not say the great learned) called me to account as touching the faculties heereof, although he had no commission so to doe, notwithstanding I was content to be examined vpon the point, what the nature of Madder was, because I haue written that it performeth contrary effects, as shall be shewed: the roots of Madder, which both the Physitions and diers doe vse, as they haue an obscure binding

power and force; so be they likewise of nature and temperature cold and dry: they are withall of diuers thin parts, by reason whereof there colour doth easily pierce: yet haue they at the first a certain little sweetnes, with an harsh binding quality presently following it; which not onely we our selues haue obserued, but also Auicen the prince of Physitions, who in his 58. Chapter hath written, that the root of Madder hath a rough and harsh taste: now (...). Doctor, whether it binde or open I haue answered, attending your censure: but if I haue (...), it is not with the multitude, but with those of the best and best learned.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of the roots of Madder is euery where commended for those that are bursten, brused, wounded, and that are fallen from high places.
It stencheth bleeding, mitigateth inflammations, and helpeth those parts that be hurt and  brused.
For these causes they be mixed with potions, which the later Physitians call wound drinkes: in  which there is such force and vertue, as Matthiolus also reporteth, that there is likewise great hope of curing of deadly wounds in the chest and intrails.
Our opinion and judgement is confirmed by that most expert man, sometimes Physition of  Louaine, Iohannes Spiringus, who in his Rapsodes hath noted, that the decoction of Madder giuen with Triphera, that great composition is singular good to stay the reds, the hemorrhoides and bloudy flixe, and the same approoued by diuers experiments: which confirmeth Madder to be of an astringent and binding qualitie.
Of the same opinion as it seemeth is also Eros Iulia her freed man (commonly called Trotula) who in a composition against vntimely birth doth vse the same: for if he had thought that Madder were of such a qualitie as Dioscorides writeth it to be of, he would not in any wise haue added it to those medicines which are good against an vntimely birth.
For Dioscorides reporteth, that the root of Madder doth plentifully prouoke vrine, and that  grosse and thicke, and oftentimes bloud also, and it is so great an opener, that being but onely applied, it bringeth downe the menses, the birth, and after-birth: but the extreme rednes of the vrine deceiued him, that immediately followeth the taking of Madder, which rednesse came as he thought, from bloud mixed therewith, which notwithstanding commeth no otherwise then from the colour of the Madder.
For the root hereof taken any maner of way doth by and by make the vrine extreme red: no otherwise  than Rubarb doth make the same yellow, not changing in the meane time the substance thereof, nor making it thicker than it was before, which is to be vnderstood in those which are in perfect health, which thing doth rather shew that it doth not open, but binde, no otherwise than Rubarbe doth: for by reason of his binding quality the waterish humors do for a while keepe their colour. For colours mixed with binding things do longer remaine in the things coloured, and do not so soone vade: this thing they will know that gather colours out of the juices of floures and herbes, for with them they mixe allume, to the end that the colour may be retained and kept the longer, which otherwise would be quickely lost. By these things it manifestly appeareth that Madder doth nothing vehemently either clense or open, and that Dioscorides hath rashly attributed vnto it this kinde of qualitie, and after him Galen and the rest that followed, standing stiffely to his opinion.
Pliny saith, that the stalkes with the leaues of Madder, are vsed against serpents.
The root of Madder boiled in Meade or honied water, and drunken, openeth the (...) of the  liuer, the milt and kidnies, and is good against the jaundise.
The same taken in like maner prouoketh vrine vehemently, insomuch that the often vse thereof  causeth one to pisse bloud, as some haue dreamed.
Langius and other excellent Physitions haue experimented the same to amend the lothsome  colour of the Kings-euill, and it helpeth the vlcers of the mouth, if vnto the decoction be added a little allume and hony of Roses.
@ 5 The fifth being the Synanchica of Daleschampius, dries without biting, and it is excellent  against sqinancies, either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly, for which cause they haue called it Synanchica, Hist. Lugd. @



CHAP. 461. Of Goose-grasse, or Cliuers.

 The Description.
1 A Parine, Cliuers or Goose-grasse, hath many small square branches, rough and sharpe, full of joints, beset at euery joint with small leaues star fashion, and like vnto small Madder:

the floures are very little and white, pearking on the tops of the sprigs: the seeds are small, (...), a little hollow in the middest in maner of a nauell, set for the most part by couples: the roots slender and full of strings: the whole plant is rough, and his ruggednesse taketh hold of mens vestures and woollen garments as they passe by: being drawne along the tongue it fetcheth bloud: Dioscorides reports, that the sheepheards in stead of a Cullender do vse it to take haires out of milke, if any remaine therein.
2 The great Goose-grasse of Pliny is one of the Moone-worts of Lobel, it hath a very rough tender stalke, whereupon are set broad leaues somewhat long, like those of Scorpion grasse, or Alysson Galeni, Galens Moone-woort, very rough and hairy, which grow not about the joints, but three or soure together on one side of the stalke: the floures grow at the top of the branches, of a blew colour: after which commeth rough cleauing seeds, that do sticke to mens garments which touch it: the root is small and single.


1 Aparine. Goose-grasse or Cleuers.


2 Aparine maior Plinij. Great Goose-grasse.




 The Place.
Goose-grasse groweth neere the borders of fields, and oftentimes in the fields themselues mixed with the corne also by common waies, ditches, hedges, and among thornes: Theophrastus and (...) write, that it groweth among Lentles, and with hard embracing it doth choke it, and by that meanes is burdensome and troublesome vnto it.


 The Time.
It is found plentifully euery where in summer time.


 The Names.
It is named in Greeke (...): Apparine: in Latine, Lappaminor, but not properly: Pliny affirmeth it to be Lappaginis speciem: of some, Philanthropos, as though he should say, a mans friend, because it taketh hold of mens garments; of diuers also for the same cause, Philadelphos: in Italian, Speronella: in Spanish, (...), or amor di Hortalano: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Reble, ou Grateron: in low Dutch, (...): in English, Goose-share, Goose-grasse, Cleuer, or Clauer.


 The Temperature.
It is, as Galen saith, moderately hot and dry, and somewhat of thin parts.



 The Vertues.
The iuice which is pressed out of the seeds, stalks, and leaues, as Dioscorides writeth, is a remedie  for them that are bitten of the poisonsome spiders called in Latine Phalangia, and of vipers if it be drunke with wine.
And the herbe stamped with swines grease wasteth away the kernels by the throte.
Pliny teacheth that the leaues being applied do also stay the aboundance of bloud issuing out  ofwounds.
Women do vsually make pottage of Cleuers with a little mutton and Otemeale, to cause lanknesse, and keep them from fatnesse.



CHAP. 462. Of Crosse-woort.

 The Description.
1 CRosse-woort is a low and base herbe, of a pale greene colour, hauing many square feeble rough stalks full of ioints or knees, couered ouer with a soft downe: the leaues are little, short, and smal, alwaies foure growing together, and standing crossewise one right against another, making a right Burgunion crosse: toward the top of the stalke, and from the bosome of those leaues come forth very many small yellow floures, of a reasonable good fauour, each of which is also shaped like a Burgunion crosse: the roots are nothing else but a few small threds or fibres.


1 Cruciata. Crosse-woort.


@ 2 Rubia Cruciata laevis. Crosse-woort Madder.


@ 2 This in mine opinion may be placed here as fitly as any where els; for it hath the leaues standing crosse-waies foure at a ioint, somewhat like those of the largest Chickweed: the stalkes are betweene a foot and a halfe and two cubites high. The white Starre-fashioned floures stand in roundles about the tops of the stalks. It growes plentifully in Piemont, on the hills not farre from Turine. Lobel sets it forth by the name of Rubia Laevis Taurinensium. @



 The Place.
Cruciata, or Crosse-woort, groweth in moist and fertile medowes; I sound the same growing in the Churchyard of Hampstead neere London, and in a pasture adioining thereto, by the mill: also it groweth in the Lane or high way beyond Charlton, a small village by Greenwich, and in sundry other places.


 The Time.
It floureth for the most part all Sommer long.


 The Names.
It is called Cruciata, and Cruciatis, of the placing of the leaues in manner of a Crosse: in English, Crosse-woort, or Golden Mugweet.


 The Temperature.
Crossewoort seemeth to be of a binding and dry qualitie.


 The Vertues.
Crossewoort hath an excellent propertie to heale, ioine, and close wounds together, yea it is very  fit for them, whether they be inward or outward, if the said herbe be boiled in wine and drunke.
The decoction thereof is also ministred with good successe to those that are bursten: and so is  the herbe, being boiled vntill it bee soft, and laied vpon the bursten place in manner of a pultis.



CHAP. 463. Of Woodrooffe.


1 Asperula. Woodrooffe.


@ 2 Asperula slore caeruleo. Blew Woodrooffe.



 The Description.
1 WOodrooffe hath many square stalkes full of ioints, and at euery knot or ioint seuen or eight long narrow leaues, set round about like a star, or the rowell of a spurre: the floures grow at the top of the stems, of a white colour, and of a very sweet smell, as is the rest of the herbe, which being made vp into garlands or bundles, and hanged vp in houses in the heat of Sommer, doth very wel attemper the aire, coole and make fresh the place, to the delight and comfort of such as are therein.



@ 3 (...) Spergula. Spurrye.


2 There is another sort of Woodrooffe called Asperula (...), or blew Woodrooffe; it is an herbe of a foot high, soft, hairy, and something branched, with leaues and stalks like those of white Woodrooffe: the floures thereof are blew, standing vpon short stems on the tops of the stalks: the seed is small, round, and placed together by couples: the root is long, and of a red colour.
3 There is another herb called (...) spergula, or Spurry, which is sown in (...), Holland, and Flanders, of purpose to fatten cattel, and to cause them to giue much milke, and there called Spurrey, and Franke Spurrey: it is a base and low herbe, very tender, hauing many iointed stalks, whereupon do grow (...) set in round circles like those of Woodrooffe, but lesser and smoother, in forme like the rowell of a spur: at the top of the stalks do grow small white floures; after which come round seed like those of Turneps: the root is small and threddie.
@ 4 There are one or two plants more, which may fitly be here mentioned: the (...) of them is the (...) of (...), which from a pretty large wooddy and (...) root sends vp iointed stalks some foot (...): at each ioint come forth two long thick round leaues, and out of their bosomes other lesser leaues: the top of the stalks is diuided into sundry branches, bearing floures of a (...) reddish colour, composed of fiue little leaues, with yellowish threds in the middle: after which follow cups or seed vessels, which open into soure parts, and containe a little flat reddish seed: it grows in the salt marshes about Dartford, and other such places; floures in Iuly and August, and in the meane space ripens the seed. We may call this in English, Sea Spurrie.
5 This other hath a large root, considering the smalnesse of the plant: from which arise many weak slender branches some three or foure inches long, (...) more, lying (...) flat on the ground, hauing many knots or ioints: at each whereof vsually grow a couple of white (...) leaues, and out of their bosomes other small sharpe pointed little greene leaues: at the tops of the branches grow little red floures, succeeded by such, yet lesser heads than those of the former: it floures in Iuly and August, and growes in sandy grounds, as in Tuthill-fields nigh Westminster: the figure set forth in Hist. Lugd. p. 2179, by the title of Chamaepeuce (...); Camphor at a minor Daleschampij, seems to be of this plant, but without the floure: (...) in his Prodromus describes it by the name of Alsine Spergulae facie. This may be called Chickweed Spurrey, or small red Spurrey. @


 The Place.
White Woodroose (...) vnder hedges, and in woods almost euery where: the second groweth in many places of Essex, and diuers other parts in sandy grounds. The third in Corne fields.


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Most haue taken Woodrooffe to be Pliny his Alyssos, which as he saith, doth differ from Erythrodanum, or Garden Madder, in leaues onely, and lesser stalks: but such a one is not onely this, but also that with blew floures: for Galen doth attribute to Alyssos, a blew floure: notwithstanding Galens and Plinies Alyssos are thought to differ by Galens owne words, writing of Alyssos in his second booke of Counterpoisons, in (...) his composition, in this maner: Alyssos is an herb very like vnto Horehound, but rougher and fuller of prickles about the circles: it beareth a floure tending to blew.
Woodrooffe is named of diuers in (...) (...) odorata, and of most men Aspergula odorata: of others, Cordialis, and (...): in high (...) (...): in low Dutch, (...): that is to

say Iecoraria, or Hepatica, Liuerwoort: in French, Muguet: in English, Woodrooffe, Woodrowe, and Woodrowell.


 The Temperature.
Woodrooffe is of temperature something like vnto our Ladies Bedstraw, but not so strong, being in a meane between heate and drinesse.


 The Vertues.
It is reported to be put into wine, to make a man merry, and to be good for the heart and liuer: it  preuaileth in wounds, as Cruciata, and other vulnerarie herbes do.



CHAP. 464. Of Ladies Bedstraw.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers of the herbes called Ladies Bedstraw, or Cheese-renning; some greater, others lesse; some with white floures, and some with yellow.


 The Description.
1 LAdies Bedstraw hath small round euen stalkes, weake and tender, creeping hither and thither vpon the ground: whereon doe grow very fine leaues, cut into small iags, finer than those of Dill, set at certaine spaces, as those of Woodrooffe: among which come forth floures of a yellow colour, in clusters or bunches thicke thrust together, of a strong sweet smel but not vnpleasant: the root is small and threddie.


1 Gallium luteum. Yellow Ladies Bedstraw.


2 Gallium album. Ladies Bedstraw with white floures.


2 Ladies Bedstraw with white floures is like vnto Cleauers or Goose-grasse, in leaues, stalkes, and manner of growing, yet nothing at all rough, but smooth and soft: the floures be white, the seed round: the roots slender, creeping within the ground: the whole plant rampeth vpon bushes, shrubs and all other such things as stand neere vnto it: otherwise it cannot stand, but must reele and fall to the ground.

3 This small Gallium, or Ladies little red bed-strow, hath been taken for a kind of wild Madder; neuerthelesse it is a kinde of Ladies bed-strow, or cheese-renning, as appeareth both by his vertues in turning milke to cheese, as also by his forme, being in each respect like vnto yellow Gallium, and differs in the colour of the floures, which are of a dark red colour, with a yellow pointal in the middle, consisting of foure small leaues: the seed hereof was sent me from a Citisen of Strausburg in Germanie, and it hath not been seen in these parts before this time.
4 There is likewise another sort of Gallium for distinctions sake called Mollugo, which hath stalks that need not to be propped vp, but of it selfe standeth vpright, and is like vnto the common white Gallium, but that it hath a smoother leafe. The floures thereof be also white, and very small. The root is blackish.


The figure that was formerly in the third place was of the Gallium album (...) of (...). which commonly hath but two leaues at a ioynt, yet sometimes it is found with three.

 3 Gallium rubrum. Ladies Bed-strow with red floures.


4 Gallium, siue Mollugo montana. Great bastard Madder.




 The Place.
The first groweth vpon sunnie bankes neere the borders of fields, in fruitfull soiles almost euery where.
The second groweth in marish grounds and other moist places.
The third groweth vpon mountaines and hilly places, and is not yet found in England.
The fourth and last groweth in hedges among bushes in most places.


 The Time.
They floure most of the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke (...): it hath that name of milke, called in Greeke (...), into which it is put as cheese-renning: in Latine likewise Gallium: in high-Dutch, Magerkraut, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in French, (...) Muguet: in Italian, Galio: in Spanish, Coaia leche yerua: in English, our Ladies Bed-strow, Cheese-renning, Maids haire, and pety Mugwet.
The others are Species Lappaginis, or kindes of small Burres, so taken of the Antients: The last, of the softnesse and smoothnesse of the leaues, is commonly called Mollugo: diuers take it (...) a kinde of wilde Madder, naming it Rubia syluestris, or wilde Madder.


 The Temperature.
These herbes, especially that with yellow floures, is dry and something binding, as Galen saith.



 The Vertues.
The floures of yellow Maids haire, as Dioscorides writeth, is vsed in ointments against burnings, and it stancheth bloud: it is put into the Cerote or Cere-cloath of Roses: it is set a sunning in a glasse, with Oyle Oliue, vntill it be white: it is good to anoint the wearied Traueller: the root thereof drunke in wine stirreth vp bodily lust; and the floures smelled vnto worke the same effect.
The herbe thereof is vsed for Rennet to make cheese, as Matthiolus reporteth, saying, That the  people of Tuscanie or Hetruria do vse to turne their milke, that the Cheese which they make of Sheeps and Goats milke might be the sweeter and more pleasant in taste, and also more wholsome especially to breake the stone, as it is reported.
The people in Cheshire, especially about Namptwich, where the best cheese is made, do vse it  in their Rennet, esteeming greatly of that cheese aboue other made without it.
We finde nothing extant in the antient writers, of the vertues and faculties of the white (...) but are as herbes neuer had in vse either for physicke or Surgerie.



CHAP. 465. Of Ferne.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Ferne, differing as well in forme as place of growing; whereof there be two sorts according to the old writers, the male and the female; and these be properly called Ferne: the others haue their proper names, as shall be declared.


1 Filix mas. Male Ferne.


2 Filix foemina. Female Ferne, or Brakes.





 The Description.
1 THe male Ferne bringeth forth presently from the root broad leaues and rough, somewhat hard, easie to be broken, of a light greene colour, and strong smell, more than a cubit long, spred abroad like wings, compounded as it were of a great number standing vpon a middle rib, euerie one whereof is like a feather, nicked in the edges, and on the backeside are sprinkled as it were with a very fine earthy-coloured dust or spots, which many rashly haue taken for seed: the root consisteth of a number of tufts or threds, and is thicke and blacke, and is without stalke and seed, and altogether barren.
@ Filicis (vulgo) maris varietates and differentiae. Differences of the male Ferne.
I haue obserued foure sorts of Ferne, by most writers esteemed to be the male Ferne of Dioscorides: by Anguillara, Gesner, Caesalpinus, and Clusius, accounted to be the famale, and so indeed doe I thinke them to be, though I call them the male, with the multitude. If you looke on these Fernes according to their seuerall growths and ages, you may make many more sorts of them than I haue done; which I am afraid hath beene the occasion of describing more sorts than indeed there are in nature. These descriptions I made by them when they were in their perfect growths.
1 Filix mas ramosa pinnulis dentatis.
The roots are nothing but an aboundance of small blacke hairy strings, growing from the lower parts of the maine stalkes (for stalkes I will call them) where those stalkes are ioyned together. At the beginning of the Spring you may perceiue the leaues to grow forth of their folding clusters, couered with brownish scales at the superficies of the earth, very (...) ioyned together: a young plant hath but a few leaues; an old one, ten, twelue, or more: each stalke at his lower end neere the ioyning to his fellowes, at his first appearing, before he is an inch long hauing some of those blacke fibrous roots for his sustenance. The leaues being at their full growth hath each of them a three-fold diuision, as hath that Ferne which is commonly called the female: the maine stalke, the side branches growing from him, and the nerues growing on those side branches bearing the leaues: the maine stalke of that plant I describe was fully foure foot long (but there are vsually from one foot to soure in length) full of those brownish scales, especially toward the root, firme, one side flat, the rest round, naked fully one and twenty inches, to the first paire of side branches. The side branches, the longest being the third paire from the root, were nine inches long, and shorter and shorter towards the top, in number about twenty paire; for the most part towards the root they grow by couples, almost opposite, the neerer the top the further from opposition: the nerues bearing the leaues, the longest were two inches and a quarter long, and so shorter and shorter toward the tops of the side branches; about twentie in number on each side of the longest side branch. The leaues grow for the most part by couples on the nerue, eight or nine paire on a nerue; each leafe being gashed by the sides, the gashes ending with sharpe points, of a deep green on the vpper side, on the vnder side paler, and each leafe hauing two rowes of dusty red scales, of a browne or blackish colour: toward the top of the maine stalke those side branches change into nerues, bearing only the leaues. When the leaues are at their full growth, you may see in the middest of them at their roots the said scaly folding cluster; and as the old leaues with their blacke threddy roots wholly perish, they spring vp; most yeares you may finde many of the old leaues greene all the Winter, especially in warme places. This groweth plentifully in the boggy shadowie moores neere Durford Abbey in Sussex, and also on the moist shadowie rockes by Mapledurham in Hampshire, neere Peters-field; and I haue found it often on the dead putrified bodies and stems of old rotten okes, in the said moores; neere the old plants I haue obserued verie many small yong plants growing, which came by the falling of the seed from those dusty scales: for I beleeue all herbes haue seeds in themselues to produce their kindes, Gen. 1. 11. and 12.
The three other haue but a twofold diuision, the many stalks and the nerues bearing the leaues. The roots of them all are blacke fibrous threds like the first, their maine stalks grow many thicke and close together at the root, as the first doth: the difference is in the fashion of their leaues, and manner of growing, and for distinctions sake I haue thus called them:
2 Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis latis densis minutim dentatis.
The leaues are of a yellowish greene colour on both sides, set very thicke and close together on

the nerue, that you cannot see betweene them, with maruellous small nickes by their sides, and on their round tops: each leafe hath also two rowes of dusty seed scales; the figures set forth by Lobel, Tabern. and Gerard, vnder the title of Filix mas, do well resemble this Ferne. This growes plentifully in most places in shadowie woods and copses.
3 Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis angustis, raris, profunde dentatis.
The leaues are of a deepe greene, not closely set together on the the nerue, but you may far off see betwixt them, deeply indented by the sides, ending with a point not altogether sharpe: each leafe hath also two rowes of dusty seed scales. I haue not seene any figure well resembling this plant. This groweth also in many places in the shade.
4 Filix mas non ramosa pinnulis latis auriculatis spinosis.
The leaues are of a deeper greene than either of the two last described, placed-on the nerue not very close together, but that you may plainly see between them; each leafe (especially those next the stalke) hauing on that side farthest off the stalk a large eare or outgrowing ending, with a sharp pricke like a haire, as doth also the top of the leafe: some of the sides of the leaues are also nicked, ending with the like pricke or haire. Each leafe hath two rowes of dusty seed scales. This I take to be Filix mas aculeat a maior Bauhini. Neither haue I seene any figure resembling this plant. It groweth abundantly on the shadowie moist rockes by Maple-durham neere Peters-field in Hampshire. Iohn Goodyer. Iuly 4. 1633. @
2 The female Ferne hath neither floures nor seed, but one only stalke, chamfered, something edged, hauing a pith within of diuers colours, the which being cut aslope, there appeareth a certain forme of a spred-Eagle: about this stand very many leaues which are winged, and like to the leaues of the male Ferne, but lesser: the root is long and blacke, and creepeth in the ground, being now and then an inch thicke, or somewhat thinner. This is also of a strong smell, as is the male.


 The Place.
Both the Fernes are delighted to grow in barren dry and desart places: and as Horace testifieth,
Neglectis vrenda Filix innascitur agris.
It comes not vp in manured and dunged places, for if it be dunged (as Theophrastus, lib. 8. cap. 8. reporteth) it withereth away.
The male ioyeth in open and champion places, on mountaines and stony grounds, as Dioscorides saith. @ It growes commonly in shadowie places vnder hedges. @
The female is often found about the borders of fields vnder thornes and in shadowie woods.


 The Time.
Both these Fernes wither away in winter: in the spring there grow forth new leaues, which continue greene all Sommer long.


 The Names.
The former is called in Greeke (...): Nicander in his discourse of Treacle nameth it (...): in Latine Filix mas: in Italian, Felce: in Spanish, Helecho, Falguero, and Feyto: in high-Dutch, (...) Farne: in French, Fougere, or Feuchiere masle: in low-Dutch, Uaren Manneken: in English, male Ferne.
The second kinde is called in Greeke (...), that is, Filix foemina, or female Ferne: in Latine, as Dioscorides noteth among the bastard names, Lingna ceruina: in high-Dutch, (...) (...) weiblin, and Grosz Farnkraut: in low-Dutch, Uaren (...): in French, Fougere femelle: in English, Brake, common Ferne, and female Ferne.


 The Temperature.
Both the Fernes are hot, bitter, and dry, and something binding.


 The Vertues.
The roots of the male Ferne being taken to the weight of halfe an ounce, driueth forth long flat  wormes out of the belly, as Dioscorides writeth, being drunke in Mede or honied water; and more effectually, if it be giuen with two scruples or two third parts of a dram of Scamonie, or of blacke Hellebor: they that will vse it, saith he, must first eate Garlicke. After the same manner, as Galen addeth, it killeth the childe in the mothers wombe. The root hereof is reported to be good for them that haue ill spleenes: and being stamped with swines grease and applied, it is a remedie against the pricking of the reed: for proofe hereof, Dioscorides saith the (...) dieth if the Reed be planted about it; and contrariwise, that the Reed dieth if it be compassed with Ferne: which is vaine to thinke, that it hapneth by any antipathie or naturall hatred, and not by reason this Ferne prospereth not in moist places, nor the Reed in dry.
The female Ferne is of like operation with the former, as Galen saith. Dioscorides reports, That  this bringeth barrennesse, especially to women; and that it causeth women to be deliuered before their time: he addeth, that the pouder hereof finely beaten is laid vpon old vlcers, and healeth

the galled neckes of oxen and other cattell: it is also reported, that the root of Ferne cast into an hogshead of wine keepeth it from souring.
The root of the male Ferne sodden in Wine is good against the hardnesse and stopping of the  milt: and being boyled in water, stayeth the laske in yong children, if they be set ouer the decoction thereof to ease their bodies by a close stoole.



CHAP. 466. Of Water-Ferne, or Osmund the water-man.

 The Description.
WAter Ferne hath a great triangled stalke two cubits high, beset vpon each side with large leaues spred abroad like wings, and dented or cut like Polypodie: these leaues are like the large leaues of the Ash tree; for doubtlesse when I first saw them a far off it caused me to wonder thereat, thinking that I had seene yong Ashes growing vpon a bog; but beholding it a little neerer, I might easily distinguish it from the Ash, by the browne rough and round graines that grew on the top of the branches, which yet are not the seed thereof, but are very like vnto the seed. The root is great and thicke, folded and couered ouer with many scales and interlacing roots, hauing in the middle of the great and hard wooddy part thereof some small whitenesse, which hath beene called the heart of Osmund the water-man.


Filix florida, siue Osmunda Regalis. Water Ferne, or Osmund Royall.




 The Place.
It groweth in the midst of a bog at the further end of Hampsted heath from London, at the bottome of a hill adioyning to a small cottage, and in diuers other places, as also vpon diuers bogges on a heath or common neere vnto Bruntwood in Essex, especially neere vnto a place there that some haue digged, to the end to finde a nest or mine of gold; but the birds were ouer fledge, and flowne away before their wings could be clipped. @ It did grow plentifully in both these places, but of late it is all destroyed in the former. @



 The Time.
It flourisheth in Sommer, as the former Fernes: the leaues decay in Winter: the root continueth fresh and long lasting; which being brought into the garden prospereth as in his natiue soile, as my selfe haue proued.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine Osmunda: it is more truly named Filix palustris, or aquatilis: some terme it by the name of Filicastrum: most of the Alchimists call it Lunaria (...): Valerius Cordus nameth it Filix latifolia: it is named in high-Dutch, Grosz Farn: in low-Dutch, Groot Uaren, (...) Uaren: in English, Water-Ferne, Osmund the Water-man: of some, Saint Christophers herbe, and Osmund.


 The Temperature.
The root of this also is hot and dry, but lesse than they of the former ones.


 The Vertues.
The root, and especially the heart or middle part thereof, boiled or else stamped, and taken with  some kinde of liquor, is thought to be good for those that are wounded, dry-bearen, and (...); that haue fallen from some high place: and for the same cause the Empericks do put it in decoctions, which the later Physitians do call wound-drinks: some take it to be so effectuall, and of so great a vertue, as that it can dissolue cluttered bloud remaining in any inward part of the body, (...) that it also can expell or driue it out by the wound.
The tender sprigs thereof at their first comming forth are excellent good vnto the purposes aforesaid, and are good to be put into balmes, oyles, and consolidatiues, or healing plaisters, and into vnguents appropriate vnto wounds, punctures, and such like.



CHAP. 467. Of Polypodie or wall-Ferne.


1 Polypodium. Wall Ferne, or Polypodie of the wall.


2 Polypodium quercinum. Polypodie of the Oke.





@ 3 Polypodium Indicum. Indian Polypody.



 The Description.
1 THe leaues of Polypodie might be thought to be like those of male Ferne, but that they are far lesser, and not nicked at all in the edges: these do presently spring vp from the roots, being cut on both the edges with many deepe gashes, euen hard to the middle rib; on the vpper side they are smooth, on the nether side they are lightly powdred as it were with dusty markes: the root is long, not a finger thick, creeping aslope, on which are seen certaine little buttons like to those pits and dents that appeare in the tailes of cuttle fishes: this hath in it a certaine sweetnesse, with a taste something harsh: this kinde of Ferne likewise wanteth not onely floures and seed, but stalkes also.
2 Polypodie of the Oke is much like vnto that of the wall, yet the leaues of it are more finely cut, smooth on the vpper side, of a pale green color, together with the stalkes and middle ribs; on the nether side rough like those of Ferne: this Ferne also liueth without a stalke: it groweth without seed: the root hath many strings fastned to it, one folded within another, of a meane bignesse, and sweet in taste: it sendeth forth heere and there new dodkins or springs, whereby it increaseth.
@ 3 Clusius in his Exotickes, lib. 4. cap. 17. giues vs the History of an Indian Ferne or Polypody found amongst the papers of one Dr. Nicholas Colie a Dutch Physitian, who died in his returne from the East-Indies. The root of it was six inches long, and almost one thicke, of the same shape and colour as the ordinarie one is: from this came vp three leaues, of which the third was lesser than the other two; the two larger were eleuen inches long, and their breadth from the middle rib (which was very large) was on each side almost fiue inches; the edges were diuided almost like an Oken case: from the middle rib came other veines that ran to the ends of the diuisions, and betweene these be smaller veines variously diuaricated and netted, which made the leafe shew prettily. The colour of it was like that of a dry oken leafe. Where Dr. Colie gathered this it was vncertaine, for he had left nothing in writing. @


 The Place.
It groweth on the bodies of old rotten trees, and also vpon old walls, and the tops of houses: it is likewise found among rubbish neere the borders of fields, especially vnder trees and thornes, and now and then in woods: and in some places it groweth ranke and with a broader leafe, in others not so ranke, and with a narrower leafe.
That which groweth on the bodies of old Okes is preferred before the rest; in stead of this most do vse that which is found vnder the Okes, which for all that is not to be termed Quercinum, or Polypodie of the Oke.


 The Time.
Polypody is greene all the yeere long, and may be gathered at any time; it bringeth forth new leaues in the first spring.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...), of the holes of the fishes Polypi, appearing in the roots: it is called in Latine, Polypodium, after the Greeke name, and many times Filicula, as though they should say (...) Filix, or little Ferne: the Italians name it Polipodio: the Spaniards, Filipodio, and Polypodio: in high Dutch, Engelfusz, Baumfarn, Dropffoourtz: in low Dutch, Boom varen: in French, Polypode: and we of England, Polypodie: that which groweth vpon the wall we call Polypodie of the wall, and that on the Oke, Polypodie of the Oke.


 The Temperature.
Polypodie doth dry, but yet without biting as Galen writeth.



 The Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that it is of power to purge and to draw forth choler and flegme. Actuarius addeth, that it likewise purgeth melancholy: other suppose it to be without any purging sorce at all, or else to haue very little: of the same minde is also Iohannes Monardus, who thinketh it purgeth very gently; which thing is confirmed by Experience, the mistris of things. For in very deed Polypody of it selfe doth not purge at all, but onely serueth a little to make the belly soluble, being boiled in the broth of an old cocke, with Beetes or Mallowes, or other like things that mooue to the stoole by their slipperines. Ioannes Mesue reckoneth vp Polypodie among those things that do especially dry and make thin: peraduenture he had respect to a certaine kinde of (...), or ache in the joints: in which not one only part of the body, but many together most commonly are touched: for which it is very much commended by the Brabanders and other inhabitants about the riuer Rhene, and the Maze. In this kinde of disease the hands, the feet, and the joints of the knees and elbowes do swell. There is joined withall a feeblenesin moouing, through the extremity of the paine: sometimes the vpper parts are lesse grieued, and the lower more. The humors do also easily run from one place to another, and then settle. Against this disease the Geldres and Cleuelanders do vse the decoction of Polypodie, whereby they hope that the superfluous humours may be wasted and dried vp, and that not by and by, but in continuance of time: for they appoint that this decoction should be taken for certaine daies together.
But this kinde of gout is sooner taken away either by bloud letting, or by purgations, or by  both, and afterwards by sweate; neither is it hard to be cured if these generall remedies be vsed in time: for the humors do not remaine fixed in those joints, but are rather gathered together than settled about them.
Therefore the body must out of hand be purged, and then that which remaineth is to be wasted  and consumed away by such things as procure sweate.
Furthermore, Dioscorides saith, that the root of Polypody is very good for members out of  joint, and for chaps betweene the fingers.
The root of Polypodie boiled with a little honie, water, and pepper, and the quantitie of an  ounce giuen, emptieth the belly of cholericke and pituitous humours; some boile it in water and wine, and giue thereof to the quantitie of three ounces for some purposes with good successe.



CHAP. 468. Of Oke-Ferne.
@ OVr Author here (as in many other places) knit knots, somewhat intricate to loose, for first he confounds in the names and nature the Polypody of the Oke, or lesser Polypodie with the Dryopteris, or Oke-Ferne; but that I haue (...) put backe to the former chapter, his fit place; then in the second place did he giue the Description of the Dryopteris of the Aduers. taken from thence, pag. (...). Then were the place, times, names, etc. taken out of the chapter of Dryopteris Candiaa of Dodonaeus, being, Pempt 3. lib. 5. cap. 4. But the figure was of the Filicula foemina petroea 4. of Tabernamontanus. Now I will in this chapter giue you the Dryopteris of the Aduersaria, then that of Dodonaeus, and thirdly that of Tragus; for I take them to be different; and this last to be that figured by our Author, out of Tabernamontanus. @

 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Ferne called Dryopteris, or Filix querna, hath leaues like vnto the female Ferne before spoken of, but much lesser, smaller, and more finely cut or jagged, and is not aboue a foot high, being a very slender and delicate tender herbe. The leaues are so finely jagged that in shew they resemble feathers, set round about a small rib or sinew; the backe side being sprinckled, not with russet or browne markes or specks, as the other Fernes are, but as it were painted with white spots or markes, not standing out of the leaues in scales, as the spots in the male Ferne, but they are double in each leafe close vnto the middle rib or sinew. The root is long, browne, and somewhat hairy, very like vnto Polypody, but much slenderer, of a sharpe and causticke taste. @ Rondeletius affirmed that he found the vse of this deadly, being put into medicines in stead of Polypody by the ignorance of some Apothecaries in Dauphenye in France. Mr. Goodyer hath sent me an acurate description together with a plant of this Ferne which I haue thought good here also to set forth. @



@ Dryopteris Aduers. True Oke Ferne.


@ 2 Dryopteris alba (...). White Oke-Ferne.


@ 3 Dryopteris Tragi. Tree Ferne.


Dryopteris Penae and Lobelij.
The roots creepe in the ground or mire, neere the turfe or vpper part thereof, and fold amongst themselues, as the roots of Polypodium do, almost as big as a wheat straw, and about fiue, six, or seuen inches long, cole blacke without, and white within, of a binding taste inclining to sweetnesse, with an innumerable companie of small blacke fibres like haires growing thereunto. The stalkes spring from the roots in seuerall places, in number variable, according to the length and encrease of the root; I haue seene small plants haue but one or two, and some bigger plants haue fourteene or fifteene: they haue but a two-fold diuision, the stalke growing from the root, and the nerue bearing the leaues: the stalke is about fiue, six, or seuen inches long, no bigger that a bennet or small grasse stalke, one side flat, as are the (...) Fernes, the rest round, smooth, and green. The first paire of nerues grow about three inches from the root, and so do all the rest grow by couples, almost exactly one against another, in number about eight, nine, or ten couples, the longest seldome exceeding an inch in length. The leaues grow on those nerues also by (...), eight or nine couples on a nerue, without any nickes or indentures, of a (...) greene colour. This Ferne (...) be said

to be like Polypodium in his creeping root, like the male Ferne in his stalke, and like the female Ferne in his nerues and leaues. I could finde no seed-scales on the backesides of any of the leaues of this Ferne. Many yeares past I found this same in a very wet moore or bog, being the land of Rlchard Austen, called Whitrow Moore, where Peate is now digged, a mile from Peters-field in Hampshire; and this sixth of Iuly, 1633, I digged vp there many plants, and by them made this description. I neuer found it growing in any other place: the leaues perish at Winter, and grow vp againe very late in the Spring. Iohn Goodyer. Iuly 6. 1633.
2 Dodonaeus thus describes his: Dryopteris (saith he) doth well resemble the male Ferne, but the leaues are much smaller, and more finely cut, smooth on the foresaid, and of a yellowish green together with the stalkes and middle nerues; on the backe it is rough as other Fernes, and also liueth without stalke or seed. The root consists of fibres intricately folded together, of an indifferent thicknesse, here and there putting vp new buds. This is the Adianthum of the Aduers. who affirme the vse thereof to be safe, and not pernitious and deleterie, as that of Dryopteris. It thus differs from the former; the leaues of this are not set directly one opposite to another, the diuisions of the leaues are larger and more diuided. The root is more threddy, and creepes not so much as that of the former.
3 This (which is Clusius his Filix pumila saxatilis prima, and which I take to be the Dryopteris or Filix arborea of Tragus) hath blacke slender long creeping roots, with few small hard hairy fibres fastned to them, of a very astringent taste: from these rise vp sundry stalkes a foot high, diuided into certaine branches of winged leaues, like to those of the female Ferne, but much lesse, tenderer and finer cut, and hauing many blackish spots on their lower sides. This differs from the two former, in that the leaues are branched, which is a chiefe difference; and Bauhinus did very well obserue it, if he had as well followed it, when he diuided Filix into ramosa and non ramosa. @


 The Place.
It is oftentimes found in sunny places, in the vallies of mountains and little hils, and in the tops of the trunks of trees in thicke woods.


 The Time.
The leaues hereof perish in Winter; in the Spring new come forth.


 The Names.
This is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Querna Filix: Oribasius in his eleuenth book of physicall Collections calleth it Bryopteris, of the mosse with which it is found; for, as Dioscorides writoth, it groweth in the mosse of Okes. The Apothecaries in times past miscalled it by the name of Adiantum: but they did worse in putting it in compound medicines in stead of Adiantum. Valerius Cordus calleth it Pteridion: in low-Dutch, Cijcken baren: the Spaniards, Helecho de Roble: it is named in English, Oke-Ferne, Petty-Ferne; and it may most fitly be called MosseFerne.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Oke-Ferne hath many tastes, it is sweet, biting, and bitter, it hath in the root a harsh or choking  taste, and a mortifying qualitie, and therefore it taketh away haires. Dioscorides saith further, that Oke-Ferne stamped roots and all is a remedie to root vp haires, if it be applied to the body after sweating, the sweat being wiped away.



CHAP. 469. Of blacke Oke-Ferne.

 The Description.
1 THere is also a certaine other kinde of Ferne like to the former Oke-Ferne of (...) his description, but the stalkes and ribs of the leaues are blackish, and the leaues of a deeper greene colour: this groweth out also immediately from the root, and is likewise diuersly, but not so finely indented: the root is made vp of many strings, not vnlike to the male Ferne, but much lesser.
2 The female blacke Ferne is like vnto the male, sauing his leaues are not so sharpe at the points, more white and broad than the male, wherein consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
They grow likewise vpon trees in shadowie woods, and now and then in shadowie sandy banks, and vnder hedges.



1 Onopteris mas. The male blacke Ferne.




 The Time.
They remaine greene all the yeare long, otherwise than Polypodie and Maidens haire do; yet do they not cease to bring forth new leaues in Summer: they are destitute of floures and seed, as is the former.


 The Names.
This is called of diuers of the later Herbarists, Dryopteris nigra, or blacke Oke-Ferne, of the likenesse that it hath with Dryopteris; which we haue called in English, Oke-Ferne, or mosse Ferne: of others, Adiantum nigrum, or blacke Maidens haire, that it may differ from the former, which is falsly called Adiantum. There are of the later Herbarists who would haue it to be Lonchitis aspera, or rough Spleen-wort; but what likenesse hath it with the leaues of Scolopendrium? none at all: therfore it is not Lonchitis aspera, much lesse Adiantum Plinij, which differeth not from Adiantum Theophrasti; for what he hath of Adiantum, the same he taketh out of Theophrastus: the right Adiantum we will describe hereafter. Notwithstanding blacke OkeFerne was vsed of diuers vnlearned Apothecaries of France and Germany for Adiantum, or Maiden-haire of Lumbardy: but these men did erre in doing so; yet not so much as they who take Polypodie of the Oke for the true Maiden-haire.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The blacke Oke-Ferne hath no stipticke qualitie at all, but is like in facultie to Trichomanes, or English Maiden-haire.



CHAP. 470. Of Harts-tongue.

 The Description.
1 THe common kinde of Harts-tongue, called (...), that is to say, a plant consisting only of leaues, bearing neither stalke, floure, nor seed, resembling in shew a long tongue, whereof it hath been and is called in shops Lingua ceruina, that is, Harts tongue: these leaues are a foot long, smooth and plaine vpon one side, but vpon that side next the ground straked ouerthwart with certaine long rough markes like small wormes, hanging on the backside thereof. The root is blacke, hairy, and twisted, or so growing as though it were wound together.
2 The other kind of Ferne, called Phyllit is multisida, or Laciniata, that is, iagged Harts tongue, is very like vnto the former, sauing that the leaues thereof are cut or iagged like a mans hand, or the palme and browantles of a Deare, bearing neither stalke, floure, nor seed.
3 There is another kinde of Harts-tongue called Hemionitis, which hath bred some controuersie among writers: for some haue tooke it for a kinde of Harts-tongue, as it is indeed; others describe it as a proper plant by it selfe, called Hemionitis, of (...), that is, Mulus, a Mule, because Mules do delight to feed thereon: it is barren in seeds, stalkes, and floures, and in shape it agreeth very well with our Harts-tongue: the roots are compact of many blackish haires: the leaues are spotted on the backside like the common Harts-tongue, and differ in that, that this Hemionitis in the base or lowest parts of the leaues is arched after the manner of a new Moone, or a forked arrow, the yongest and smallest leaues being like vnto the great Binde-weed, called Volubilis.
4 There is a kinde of Ferne called likewise Hemionitis sterilis, which is a very small and basc herbe not aboue a finger high, hauing fourc or fiue small leaues of the same substance and colour, spotted on the backe part, and in taste like Harts-tongue; but the leaues beare the shape of them of Totabona, or good Henry, which many of our Apothecaries do abusiuely take for Mercurie: The roots are very many, smooth, blacke, and threddie, bearing neither stalke, floure, nor seed: this plant

1 Phyllitis. Harts-tongue.
2 Phylliiis (...). Finger Harts-tongue.
@ 3 Hemionitis maior. Mules Ferne, or Moone-Ferne.
@ 4 Hemionitis minor. Small Moone-Ferne.

@ 5 Hemionitis perigrina. Handed Moone-Ferne.
my very good friend Mr. Nicholas (...) found in a grauelly lane in the way leading to Oxey parke neere vnto Watford, fifteene miles from London: it growes likewise on the stone walls of Hampton Court, in the garden of Mr. Huggens, keeper of the said house or pallace.
5 There is a kinde of Ferne called also Hemionitis, but with this addition Peregrina, that is very seldome found, and hath leaues very like to Harts-tongue, but that it is palmed or branched in the part next the ground, almost in manner of the second Phyllitis, at the top of the leaues; otherwise they resemble one another in nature and forme.


 The Place.
The common Harts-tongue groweth by the waies sides as you trauell from London to Exceter in great plenty, in shadowie (...), and moist stonie vallies and wels, and is much planted in gardens.
The second I found in the garden of Master Cranwich a Chirurgion dwelling at Much-dunmow in Essex, who gaue me a plant for my garden.
@ Mr. Goodyer found it wilde in the banks of a lane neere Swaneling, not many miles from Southampton. @
It groweth vpon Ingleborough hils, and diuers other mountains of the North of England.


 The Time.
It is greene all the yeare long, yet lesse greene in winter: in Sommer it now and then bringeth forth new leaues.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine also Phyllitis: in shops, Lingua ceruina: and falsely Scolopendria, for it differeth much from the right Scolopendria, or Stone Ferne: it is called in high Dutch, Hirszong: in low Dutch, Herstonge: in Spanish, Lengua ceruina: in French, Langue de Cerf: in English, Harts-tongue: of some, Stone Harts-tongue: Apuleius in his 83. Chapter nameth it Radiolus.


 The Temperature.
It is of a binding and drying facultie.


 The Vertues.
This common Harts-tongue is commended against the laske and bloudy flix: Dioscorides teacheth, that being drunke in wine it is a remedie against the bitings of serpents.
It doth open the hardnesse and stopping of the spleen and liuer, and all other griefes proceeding  of oppilations or stoppings whatsoeuer.



CHAP. 471. Of Spleene-woort, or Milt-waste.

 The Description.
1 SPleene-woort being that kinde of Ferne called Asplenium, or (...), and the true Scolopendria, hath leaues a span long, iagged or cut vpon both sides, euen hard to the middle ribbe; euery cut or incisure being as it were cut halfe round (whereby it is knowne from the rough Spleene-woort) not one cut right against another, but one besides the other, set in seuerall order, being slipperie and greene on the vpper side, soft and downie vnderneath; which when they be withered are folded vp together like a scrole, and hairie without, much like to the rough Beareworme wherewith men bait their hookes to catch fish: the root is small, blacke, and rough, much platted or interlaced, hauing neither stalke, floure, nor seeds.



1 Asplenium sive Ceterach. Spleenewoort or Miltwaste.


2 Lonchitis aspera. Rough Spleenewoort.


Formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) (...) put the (...) now in the third place, (...) the figure which should haue beene there, (...) (...) the third (...) of the next chapter, vnder the title of Filicula (...) (...).

 3 Lonchitis aspera maior. Great rough Spleene-woort.


Formerly vnder the title of (...) (...) (...) put the (...) now in the third place, (...) the figure which should haue beene there, (...) (...) the third (...) of the next chapter, vnder the title of Filicula (...) (...).

 4 Lonchitis (...). Bastard Spleene-woort.



2 Rough Spleenewoort is partly like the other Fernes in shew, and beareth neither stalke nor seed, hauing narrow leaues a foot long, and somewhat longer, slashed on the edges euen to the middle rib, smooth on the vpper side, and of a swart greene colour; vnderneath rough, as is the leaues of Polypodie: the root is blacke, and set with a number of slender strings.
@ 3 This greater Spleenwoort hath leaues like Ceterach, of a spanne long, somewhat resembling those of Polypodie, but that they are more diuided, snipt about the edges, and sharpe pointed: the root is fibrous and stringie. This growes on the rockes and mountainous places of Italy, and is the Lonchitis asperamaior of (...) and others. @
4 This kinde of Spleenewoort is not onely barren of stalks and (...), but also of those spots and marks wherewith the others are spotted: the leaues are few in number, growing pyramidis or steeplewise, great and broad below, and sharper toward the top by degrees: the root is thick, black, and bushie, as it were a Crowes nest.


 The Place.
Ceterach groweth vpon old stone walls and rockes, in darke and shadowie places throughout the West part of England; especially vpon the stone walls by Bristow, as you go to Saint Vincents Rocke, and likewise about Bathe, VVells, and Salisburie, where I haue (...) great plentie thereof.
The rough Spleenwoort groweth vpon barren heaths, drie sandie bankes, and shadowie places in most parts of England, but especially on a heath by London called Hampstead heath, where it groweth in great abundance.


 The Names.
Spleene-woort or Milt-waste is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine likewise, Asplenium, and also Scolopendria: of Gaza, Mula herba: in shops, Ceterach: in high Dutch, Steynfarn: in low Dutch, Steynuaren, and (...): in English, Spleenwoort, Miltwaste, Scaleferne, and Stoneferne: it is called Asplenion, because it is speciall good against the infirmities of the (...) or Milt, and Scolopendria, of the likenesse that it hath with the Beare-worme, before remembred.
Rough Miltwaste is called of diuers of the later writers Asplenium syluestre, or wilde Spleenwoort: of some, Asplenium magnum, or great Spleene-woort: Valerius Cordus calleth it (...): and Dioscorides, Lonchitis aspera, or rough Spleene-woort: in Latine according to the same Authour, Longina, and Calabrina: in English, rough Spleen-wort, or Miltwaste.


 The Temperature.
These plants are of thin parts, as Galen witnesseth, yet are they not hot, but in a meane.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides teacheth, that the leaues boiled in wine and drunk by the space of forty daies, do take  away infirmities of the spleen; help the strangurie, and yellow iaundice, cause the stone in the bladder to moulder (...) passe away, all which are performed by such things as be of thinne and subtill parts: he addeth likewise that they stay the hicket, or yeoxing, and also hinder conception, either inwardly taken, or hanged about the partie, and therefore, faith Pliny, Spleenewoort is not to be giuen to women, because it bringeth barrennesse.
There be Empericks or blinde practitioners of this age, who teach, that with this herbe not onely  the hardnesse and swelling of the Spleene, but all infirmities of the liuer also may be effectually, and in very short time remooued, insomuch that the sodden liuer of a beast is restored to his former constitution againe, that is, made like vnto a raw liuer, if it bee boyled againe with this herbe.
But this is to be reckoned among the old wiues fables, and that also which Dioscorides telleth of, touching the gathering of Spleenewoort in the night, and other most vaine things, which are found here and there scattered in old books: from which most of the later Writers do not abstaine, who many times fill vp their pages with lies and friuolous toies, and by so doing do not a little (...) yong students.




CHAP. 472. Of diuers small Fernes.

 The Description.
1 THis small or dwarfe Ferne, which is seldome found except in the banks of stony fountaines, wells, and rockes bordering vpon riuers, is very like vnto the common Brakes in leaues, but altogether lesser: the root is composed of a bundle of blacke threddie strings.
2 The female, which is found likewise by running streames, wells, and fountaines, vpon rockes, and stonie places, is like the precedent, but is a great deale smaller, blacker of colour, fewer rootes, and shorter.


1 Filicula fontanamas. The male (...) Ferne.


It is hard to say what our Author in this chapter meant, by his figures and descriptions, wherefore I haue left his descriptions as I found them: (...) (...) (...) which was very like the first I (...) omited: for the third, which was of the (...) (...), mentioned (...) the (...) chapter, I (...) (...) (...) (...)-(...) of his (...) (...) 2. which growes in such places, and (...) well (...) our Authors description: in the fourth place I haue put Lobbells (...) (...) Anglica, and his description, whch our Author (...) (...) I iudge, intended in that place to haue giuen vs.

 3 Filicula petraeamas. The male dwarfe stone Ferne.


3 The male dwarfe Ferne that groweth vpon the stonie mountaines of the North and West parts of England, especially toward the sea, and also in the ioints of stone walls among the morter, hath small leaues deepely cut on both sides, like vnto Ceterach or Spleene-woort, barren both of seeds and stalks, as also of those spots or markes that are to be seene vpon the backe part of the other Fernes: the root creepeth along, set with some few hairie strings, resembling those of the Oke Ferne, called Dryopteris.
4 The female stone Ferne hath diuers long leaues rising from a threddy root, contrarie to that of the male, composed of many small leaues finely minced or cut like the teeth of a saw, of a whitish green colour, without any spots or marks at all, seeds or stalks, which groweth vnder shadowie rocks, and craggie mountaines in most places. @ From a small root composed of many blacke, hairie, and intricately folding strings, come vp many leaues two or three inches high, stiffe, thicke, darke greene, and shining: in the diuision, growth, position, shape and taste, it resembles the male Ferne, and hath also rustie spots on the backe: the middle ribbe and stalke is of a shining brownish

4 Filicula petraeafoemina, sive Chamaefilix marina Anglica. The female dwarfe stone Ferne.
silken colour: it growes in the chinkes of the rockes by the Sea side in Cornewall.


 The Place.
The place is sufficiently touched in the description.


 The Time.
They flourish both Winter and Sommer, for when the leaues wither by reason of age, there arise young to supplie the place, so that they are not to be seene without greene and withered leaues both at once.


 The Names.
It sufficeth what hath bin said of the names in their seuerall titles: notwithstanding the last described we haue called Chamaefilix marina Anglica: which groweth vpon the rockie cliffe neere Harwich, as also at Douer, among the Sampire that there groweth.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their temperature and faculties in working  are referred vnto the kindes of blacke Oke Fernes, called Dryopteris, and Onopteris.



CHAP. 473. Of true Maiden-haire.

 The Kindes.
THeophrastus and Pliny haue set downe two Maiden-haires, the blacke and the white, whereunto, may be added another called Ruta muraria, or wall Rue, equall to the others in facultie, whereof we will intreat.


1 Capillus Veneris verus. True Maiden-haire.




 The Description.
1 WHoso will follow the variable opinions of writers concerning the Ferne called (...) verum, or Cipillus Veneris verus, must of necessitie be brought into a labyrinth of doubts, considering the diuers opinions thereof: but this I know that Venus-haire, or Maidenhaire, is a low herb growing an hand high, smooth, of a darke crimson colour, and glittering withall: the leaues be smal, cut in sunder; and nicked in the edges something like those of Coriander, confusedly or without order placed, the middle rib whereof is of a blacke shining colour: the root consisteth of manie small threddie strings.
2 This Assyrian Maiden-haire is likewise a base or low herbe, hauing leaues, flat, smooth, and plaine, set vpon a blackish middle rib, like vnto that of the other Maiden-haire, cut or notched in the edges, nature keeping no certaine forme, but making one leafe of this fashion, and another far different from it: the root is tough and threddie.
3 This plant which we haue inserted among the Adianthes as a kinde thereof, may without errour so passe, which is in great request in Flanders and Germanie, where the practitioners in Physicke do vse the same in stead of Capillus Veneris, and with better successe than any of the Capillare

herbs, although Matthiolus and Dioscorides himselfe hath made this wall Rue to be a kinde of Paronychia, or Nailewoort: notwithstanding the Germanes wil not leaue the vse thereof, but receiue it as the true Adianth, esteeming it equal, if not far better, than either Ceterach, Capillus Veneris verus, or Tricomanes, called also Polytrichon: it bringeth forth very many leaues, round and slender, cut into two or three parts, very hard in handling, smooth and greene on the outside of an ill (...) dead colour vnderneath, set with little fine spots, which euidently sheweth it to be a kinde of Ferne: the root is blacke and full of strings.


2 Capillus Veneris Syriaca. Assyrian Maiden-haire.


3 Ruta muraria, sive Saluia vitae. Wall Rue, or Rue Maiden-haire.




 The Place.
The right Maiden-haire groweth vpon walls, in stonie, shadowie, and moist places, neere vnto fountaines, and where water droppeth: it is a stranger in England: notwithstanding I haue heard it reported by some of good credit, that it groweth in diuers places of the West countrey of England.
The Assyrian Maiden-haire taketh his surname of his natiue countrey Assyria, it is a stranger in Europe.
Stone Rue groweth vpon old walls neere vnto waters, wells, and fountaines: I found it vpon the wall of the churchyard of Dartford in Kent, hard by the riuer side where people ride through, and also vpon the walls of the Churchyard of Sittingburne in the same Countie, in the middle of the towne hard by a great lake of water, and also vpon the Church walls of Railey in Essex, and diuers other places.


 The Time.
These plants are greene both winter and sommer, and yet haue neither floures nor seed.


 The Names.
Maiden-haire is called in Greek (...): Theophrastus and Pliny name it Adiantum nigrum, or black Maiden-haire: for they set downe two Maiden-haires, the blacke and the white, making this the blacke, and the Rue of the wall the white: it is called in Latine Polytrichum, Callitrichum, Cincinalis, Terrae Capillus, Supercilium terrae: of Apuleius, Capillus Veneris, Capillaris, Crinita: and of diuers, Coriandrum putei: the Italians keepe the name Capillus Veneris: in English, blacke Maiden haire, and Venus haire, and it may be called our Ladies haire.

It is called Adianton because the leafe, as Theophrastus saith, is neuer wet, for it casteth off water that falleth thereon, or being drowned or couered in water, it remaineth still as if it (...) dry, as Pliny likewise writeth; and is termed Callitricon and Polytricon, of the effect it hath in dying haire, and maketh it to grow thicke.
VVall Rue is commonly called in Latine, Ruta muraria, or Ruta muralis: of some, Saluia vitae, but wherefore I know not, neither themselues, if they were liuing: of the Apothecaries of the LowCountries Capillus Veneris, or Maiden haire, and they haue vsed it a long time for the right Maiden haire; it is that kinde of Adiantum which Theophrastus termed Adiantum (...), or white Maiden haire, for he maketh two, one blacke, and the other white, as we haue said. Pliny doth likewise (...) downe two kindes, one he calleth Polytricon; the other, Tricomanes, or English Maiden-haire, whereof we will intreate in the chapter following, which he hath falsely set downe for a kinde of (...), for Tricomanes doth differ from Adiantum.
Some there (...) that thinke, Wall-Rue is Paronychia Dioscoridis, or Dioscorides his Whitlow-wort, wherein they haue been greatly deceiued: it is called in high Dutch, (...): (...) (...) Dutch, Steencruyt: in French, Rue de maraeille: in English, Wall-Rue, and white Maiden-haire.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The true Maiden-haire, as Galen testisieth, doth dry, make thin, waste away, and is in a meane betweene  heate aud coldnesse: Mesues sheweth that it consisteth of vnlike or disagreeing (...), and that some are watery and earthy, and the same binding, and another superficially (...) and (...): And that by this it taketh away obstructions or stoppings, maketh things thinne that are thicke, looseneth the belly, especially when it is fresh and greene: for as this part is thin, so is it quickly resolued, and that by reason of his binding and earthy parts: it stoppeth the belly, and stayeth the laske and other fluxes.
Being drunke it breaketh the stone, and expelleth not onely the stones in the kidnies, but also  those which sticke in the passages of the vrine.
It raiseth vp grosse and slimie humors out of the chest and lungs, and also those which sticke in  the conduits of the winde pipe, it breaketh and raiseth them out by spetting, if a loch or licking medicine be made thereof.
Moreouer, it consumeth and wasteth away the Kings-euill, and other hard swellings, as the  same Author affirmeth, and it maketh the haire of the head or beard to grow that is fallen and pilled off.
Dioscorides reckoneth vp many vertues and operations of this Maiden-haire, which do not onely  differ, but are also contrary one to another. Among others he saith, that the same stancheth bloud: and a little before, that it draweth away the secondines, and bringeth downe the desired sickenes: whichwords do confound one another with contrarieties; for whatsoeuer things do stanch bloud, the same do also stay the termes.
He addeth also in the end, that it is sowne about sheepe-folds for the benefit of the sheepe, but  what that benefit should be, he sheweth not.
Besides, that it cannot be sowne, by reason it is without seed, it is euident, neither can it fitly be  remooued. Therefore in this place it seemeth that many things are transposed from other places, and falsly added to this chapter: and peraduenture some things are brought hither out of discourse of Cytisus, or Milke Trefoile, whereof here to write were to small purpose.
Wall-Rue is not much vnlike to blacke Maiden-haire in temperature and facultie.
Wall-Rue is (...) for them that haue a cough, that are short winded, and that be troubled with  stitches and paine in their sides.
Being boiled, it causeth concoction of raw humors which sticke in the lungs; it taketh away  the paine of the kidnies and bladder, it gently prouoketh vrine, and driueth forth stones.
It is commended against ruptures in voung children, and some affirme it to be excellent good, if the powder thereof be taken continually for forty daies together.



CHAP. 474. Of English, or common Maiden-haire.

 The Description:
1 ENglish Maiden-haire hath long leaues of a darke green colour, consisting of very many small round leaues set vpon a middle rib, of a shining blacke colour, dashed on the nether side with small rough markes or speckes, of an ouerworne colour: the roots are small and threddy.



1 Trichomanes mas. The Male English Maiden-haire.


2 The female English Maiden haire is like vnto the precedent, sauing that it is lesser, and wanteth those spots or markes that are in the other, wherein consisteth the difference. @ Our Authors figure was of the Trochomanes foemina of Tabernamontanus, which expresses a variety with branched leaues, and therein only was the difference. @


 The Place.
It growes for the most part nere vnto springs and brookes, and other (...) places, vpon old stone walls and rockes: I found it growing in a shadowie sandie lane in Betsome, in the parish of South fleet in Kent, vpon the ground whereas there was no stones or stony ground neere vnto it, which before that time I did neuer see; it groweth likewise vpon stone walls at her Majesties palace of Richmond, and in most stone wals of the West and North parts of England. @ Mr. Goodyer saith, that in Ianuary, 1624. he saw enough to lade an horse growing (...) the bancks in a lane, as he rode betweene Rake and Headly in Hampshire neere Wollmer Forrest. @


 The Time.
It continueth a long time, the coldnesse of winter doth it no harme, it is barren as the other Fernes are, whereof it is a kinde.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke, (...) in Latine, Filicula, as though we should say, Parua Filex, or little Ferne; also Capillaris: in shops, Capillus Veneris. Apuleius in his 51 chapter maketh it all one with Callitrichon: of some it is called Polytrichon: in English, common (...)-haire.


 The Temperature and Vertues..
These, as Dioscorides and Galen do write, haue all the faculties belonging to Adiantum, or blacke  Maiden-haire.
The decoction made in wine and drunke, helpeth them that are short winded, it helpeth the  cough, ripeneth tough flegme, and auoideth it by spitting.
The lie wherein it hath been sodden, or laid to infuse, is good to wash the head, causing the  scurfe and scales to fall off, and haire to grow in places that are pild and bare.



CHAP. 475. Of Thistles.

 The Kindes:
THe matter of the Thistles is diuers, some Thistles serue for nourishment, as the (...) without prickles, and the Artichoke with prickles; other for medicine, as the root of Carline which is good for many things; the blessed thistle also, otherwise called (...) (...); Sea Huluer, and diuers others: some are poisonsome, as Chamaelcon niger; one smooth, plaine, and without prickles, as the Thistle called Beares Breech, or Acanthus satiuus, whereof there is another with prickles, which we make the wilde, of the which two we intend to write in this chapter.


 The Description.
1 BEares breech of the garden hath broad leaues, smooth, somewhat blacke, gashed on both the edges, and set with many cuts and fine nickes: betweene which riseth vp in the midst a big stalke brauely deckt with floures, set in order from the middle vpward, of colour white, of forme long, which are armed as it were with two catkins, one higher, another lower: after them grow forth the huskes, in which is found broad seed: the roots be blacke without, and white within,

andfull of clammie iuice, and are diuided into many off-springs, which as they creepe far, so do they now and then bud forth and grow afresh: these roots are so full of life, that how little (...) of them remaine, it oftentimes also bringeth forth the whole plant.


1 Acanthus sativus. Garden Beares-breech.


@ 2 Acanthus syl. aculeatus. Prickley Beares-breech.


2 Wilde Beares-breech, called Acanthus syluestris, Pena setteth forth for Chamelcont a (...), and reporteth that he found it growing amongst the grauelly and moist places neere to the walls of Montpellier, and at the gate of Aegidia, betweene the fountaine and the brooke neere to the wall: this thistle is in stalke, floures, colour of leaues and seed like the first kinde, but shorter and lower, hauing large leaues, dented or iagged with many cuts and incisions, not onely in some few parts of the leaues, as some other Thistles, but very thickly dented or clouen, and hauing many sharpe, large, white and hard prickles about the sides of the diuisions and cuts, not very easie to be handled or touched without danger to the hand and fingers.


 The Place.
Dioscorides writeth, that garden Branke Vrsine groweth in moist and stonie places, and also in gardens: it were vnaduisedly done to seeke it in either of the Germaines any where, but in gardens onely; in my garden it doth grow very plentifully.
The wilde was found in certain places of Italy neere to the sea, by that notable learned man (...) Pancius, Physition to the Duke of Ferrara, and professor of simples and Physick, and is a stranger in England. @ I haue seene it growing in the garden of Mr. Iohn Parkinson. @


 The Time.
Both the Branke Vrsines do floure in the sommer season, the seed is ripe in Autumne: the root remaineth fresh; yet now and then it perisheth in winter in both the Germaines, if the weather be too cold: but in England the former seldome or neuer dieth.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): the Latines keepe the same name Acanthus: yet doth Acanthus signifie generally all kinde of Thistles, and that is called Acanthus by the figure Antonomasia: the English name is Branke Vrsine, and Beares breech.
The tame or garden Branke Vrsine is named in Latine Sativus, or Hortensis Acanthus: in Greeke, (...): and of Galen, (...), and Pliny, (...): Pliny also calleth this Acanthus laeuis, or smooth

Branke Vrsine, and reporteth it to be a citie herbe, and to serue for arbors: some name it Branca Vrsina (others vse to cal Cow-parsnep by the name of Branca Vrsina, but with the addition Germanica:) the Italians call it Acantho, and Branca Orsina: the Spaniards, Yerua Giguante: the Ingrauers of old time were wont to carue the leaues of this Branke Vrsine in pillers, and other works, and also vpon the eares of pots; as among others Virgill testifieth in the third Eclog of his Bucolicks:
Et (...) idem Alcimedon duo pocula (...), Et molli circum est ansas (...) Acantha.
@ I take Virgils Acanthus to be that which we now commonly call (...), as I shall hereafter shew when I come to treat thereof. @
The other Branke Vrsine is named in Greeke (...): and in Latine, Syluestris Acanthus, or wilde Branke Vrsine, and they may be called properly Acantha, or Spina, a prickle; by which name it is found called of most Herbarists, Acanthus: yet there is also another Acanthus a thornie shrub: the liquour which issueth forth of it, as Herodotus and (...) asfirme, is a gumme: for difference wherof peraduenture this kinde of Acanthus is named Herbacantha: There is likewise found among the bastard names of Acanthus the word Mamolaria, and also Crepula, but it is not expressed to which of them, whether to the wilde or tame it ought to be referred.


 The Temperature.
Theleaues of the garden Branke Vrsine consist in a meane as it were betweene hot and cold, being somwhat moist, with a mollifying and gentle digesting facultie, as are those of the Mallow, and therefore they are profitably boyled in clysters, as well as Mallow leaues. The root, as Galen teacheth, is of a more drying qualitie.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the roots are a remedie for lims that are burnt with fire, and that haue been  out of ioint, if they be laied thereunto: that being drunke they prouoke vrine, and stop the belly: that they helpe those that be broken, and be troubled with the crampe, and be in a consumption of the lungs.
They are good for such as haue the ptisicke and spet bloud withal; for those that haue faln from  some high place, that are bruised and drie beaten, and that haue ouerstrained themselues, and they are as good as the roots of the greater Comfrey, whereunto they are verie like in substance, (...) iuice, and qualitie.
Of the same root is made an excellent plaister against the ache and numnesse of the hands and  feet.
It is put into clysters with good successe against sundry maladies.



CHAP. 476. Of the Cotton Thistle.

 The Description.
1 THe common Thistle, whereof the greatest quantitie of down is gathered for diuers (...), as well by the poore to stop pillowes, cushions, and beds for want of feathers, as also bought of the rich Vpholsters to mixe with the feathers and downe they do sell, which deceit would be looked vnto: this Thistle hath great leaues, long and broad, gashed about the edges, and set with sharp and stiffe prickles all alongst the edges, couered all ouer with a soft cotton or downe: out from the middest whereof riseth vp a long stalke aboue two cubits high, cornered, and set with filmes, and also full of prickles: the heads are likewise cornered with prickles, and bring foorth floures consisting of many whitish threds: the seed which succeedeth them is wrapped vp in down; it is long, of a light crimson colour, and lesser than the seede of bastard saffron: the root groweth deep in the ground, being white, hard, wooddie, and not without strings.
2 The Illyrian cotton thistle hath a long naked root, beset about the top with a fringe of many small threds or iags: from which ariseth a very large and tall stalke, higher than any man, rather like a tree than an annuall herbe or plant: this stalke is garnished with scroles of thinne leaues, from the bottome to the top, set full of most horrible sharpe prickes, and so is the stalke and euerie part of the plant, (...) that it is impossible for man or beast to touch the same without great hurt or danger: his leaues are very great, far broader and longer than any other thistle whatsoeuer, couered with an (...) cotten or downe like the former: the floures doe grow at the top of the stalkes,

which is diuided into sundry branches, and are of a purple colour, set or armed round about with the like, or rather sharper thornes than the aforesaid.


1 Acanthium album. The white Cotton Thistle.


2 Acanthium Illyricum (...). The purple Cotton Thistle.




 The Place.
These Thistles grow by high waies sides, and in ditches almost euery where.


 The Time
They floure from Iune vntill August, the second yeare after they be sown: and in the mean time the seed waxeth ripe, which being thorow ripe the herbe perisheth, as doe likewise most of the other Thistles, which liue no longer than till the seed be fully come to matutitie.


 The Names.
This Thistle is taken for that which is called in Greeke (...), which Dioscorides describeth to haue leaues set with prickles round about the edges, and to be couered with a thin downe like a copweb, that may be gathered and spun to make garments of, like those of silke: in high Dutch it is called (...) (...): in Low Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in French, Chardon argentin: in English, Cotton-Thistle, white Cotton-Thistle, wilde white Thistle, Argentine or the Siluer Thistle.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Dioscorides saith, that the leaues and roots hereof are a remedy for those that haue their bodies  drawne backwards; thereby Galen supposeth that these are of temperature hot.



CHAP. 477. Of our Ladies-Thistle.

 The Description.
THe leaues of our Ladies Thistle are as bigge as those of white Cotton. Thistle: for the leaues thereof be great, broad, large, gashed in the edges, armed with a multitude of (...) and sharpe prickles, as are those of Ote-Thistle, but they are without down, altogether slippery, of a light

Carduus Marioe. Ladies Thistle.
green and speckled, with white and milky (...) and lines drawne diuers waies: the stalk is high, and as big as a mans finger: the floures grow forth of heads full of prickles, being threds of a purple colour: the seed is wrapped in downe like that of Cotton Thistle: the root is long, thicke, and white.


 The Place.
It groweth vpon waste and common places by high waies, and by dung-hils almost euerie where.


 The Time.
It floureth and seedeth when Cotton (...) doth.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine, (...) (...) (...), and Carduus-Martoe; in high Dutch, (...) (...) Distell: in French, (...) (...) (...) (...): in English, our Ladies Thistle: it may properly be called (...), of the white spots and lines that are on the leaues: Pliny in his 27. booke, chap. 11. maketh mentionof an herb called (...), but what maner of one it is he hath not expressed; therefore it would be hard to (...) this to be the same that his Leucographis is; and this is thought to bee Spina alba, called in Greeke (...), or white Thistle, Milk Thistle, and Carduus Ramptarius: of the Arabians, (...), or Bedeguar, as Matthoeus Syluaticus testifieth.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The tender leaues of Carduus (...), the prickles taken off, are sometimes vsed to bee eaten with other herbes.
Galen writeth, that the roots of Spina alba do drie and moderately binde, that therefore it is good  for those that be troubled with the lask and the bloudy flix, that it (...) bleedings, wasteth away cold swellings; easeth the paine of the teeth if they bee washed with the decoction thereof.
The seed thereof is of a thin essence and hot facultie, therefore he saith that it is good for those  that be troubled with cramps.
Dioscorides affirmeth that the seeds being drunke are a remedie for infants that haue their (...) drawne together, and for those that be bitten of serpents: and that it is thought to driue away serpents, if it be but hanged about the necke.



CHAP. 478. Of the Globe Thistle.

 The Description.
GLobe Thistle hath a very long stalke, and leaues iagged, great, long, and broad, deeply gashed, strong of smell, somewhat greene on the vpper side, and on the nether side whiter and downy: the floures grow forth of a round head like a globe, which standeth on the tops of the (...); they are white and small, with blew threds in the midst: the seed is long, with haires of a meane length: the root is thicke and branched.
2 There is another Globe Thistle that hath lesser leaues, but more full of prickles, with round heads also: but there groweth out of them besides the floures, certaine long and stiffe prickles.
3 There is likewise another kinde resembling the first in (...) and figure, but much lesser, and the floures thereof tend more to a blew.
4 There is also another Globe Thistle, which is the least, and hath the sharpest prickles of all the rest: the head is small; the floures whereof are white, like to those of the first.



1 Cardnus globosus. The Globe-Thistle.


@ 2 Carduus (...) (...). Prickly headed Globe-Thistle.


@ 3 Carduus globosus minor. Small Globe-Thistle.


@ 5 Carduus globosus capitulo latiore. Flat headed Globe-Thistle.


5 There is a certaine other kinde hereof, yet the head is not so (...), that is to say, flatter and broader aboue; out of which spring blew floures: the stalke hereof is slender, and couered with a white thin downe: the leaues are long, gashed likewise on both sides, and armed in euery corner with sharpe prickles.

6 There is another called the Down-Thistle, which riseth vp with thicke and long (...). The leaues thereof are iagged, set with prickles, white on the nether side: the heads be round and many in number, and are couered with a soft downe, and sharpe prickles standing forth on (...) (...), being on the vpper part fraughted with purple floures all of strings: the seed is long, and (...), as doth the seed of many of the Thistles.


@ 6 Carduus eriocephalus. Woolly headed Thistle.




 The Place.
They are sown in gardens, and do not grow in these countries that we can finde.
@ I haue found the sixth by Pocklington and in other places of the Woldes in Yorkeshire. Mr. Goodyer also found it in Hampshire. @


 The Names.
They floure and flourish when the other Thistles do.


 The Names.
Fuchsius did at the first take it to be Chamoeleon niger; but afterwards being better aduised, he named it Spina peregrina, and (...) duus globosus. Valerius Cordus doth fitly call it Sphoerocephalus: the same name doth also agree with the rest, for they haue a round head like a ball or globe. Most would haue the first to be that which Matthiolus setteth downe (...) Spina alba: this Thistle is called in English, Globe Thistle, and Ball-Thistle.
The downe or woolly headed Thistle is called in Latine, being destitute of another name, Eriocephalus, of the woolly head: in English, Downe Thistle, or woolly headed Thistle. It is thought of diuers to be that which Bartholomoeus (...) and (...) Palea, Franciscan Friers, report to be called Corona Fratrum, or Friers Crowne: but this Thistle doth far differ from that, as is euident by those things which they haue written concerning Corona Fratrum; which is thus: In the borders of the kingdome of Aragon towards the kingdome of Castile we finde another kind of Thistle, which groweth plentifully there, by common (...), and in wheate fields, etc. Vide Dod. Pempt. 5. lib. 5. cap. 5.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Concerning the temperature and vertues of these Thistles we can alledge nothing at all.



CHAP. 479. Of the Artichoke.

 The Kindes.
THere be three sorts of Artichokes, two tame or of the garden; and one wilde, which the Italian esteemeth greatly of, as the best to be eaten raw, which he calleth Cardune.


 The Description.
1 THe leaues of the great Artichoke, called in Latine Cinara, are broad, great, long, setwith (...) gashes in the edges, with a deepe channell or gutter alongst the middle, hauing no prickles at all, or very few, and they be of a greene ash colour: the (...) is aboue a cubit high, and bringeth forth on the top a fruit like a globe, resembling at the first a cone or Pine apple, that is to (...), made vp of many scales; which is when the fruit is great or loosed of a greenish red colour within, and in the lower part full of substance and white; but when it opens it selfe there growes

1 Cinara maxima Anglica. The great red Artichoke.
2 Cinara maxima alba. The great white Artichoke.
3 Cinara syluestris. Wilde Artichoke.
also vpon the cone a floure all of threds, of a gallant purple tending to a blew (...). The seed is long, greater and thicker than that of our Ladies thistle, lying vnder soft and downy haires which are contained within the fruit. The root is thicke, and of a meane length.
2 The second great Artichoke differeth from the former in the colour of the fruit, otherwise there is little difference, except the fruit hereof dilateth it selfe further abroad, and is not so closely compact together, which maketh the difference.
3 The prickly Artichoke, called in Latine Carduus, or Spinosa Cinara, differeth not from the former, saue that all the corners of the leaues hereof, and the stalkes of the cone or fruit, are armed with stiffe and sharp prickles, whereupon it beareth well the name of Carduus, or Thistle.


 The Place.
The Artichoke is to be planted in a (...) and fruitfull soile: they do loue water and moist ground. They commit great error who cut away the side or superfluous leaues that grow by the sides, thinking thereby to increase the greatnesse of the fruit, when as in truth they depriue the root from much water by that meanes, which should nourish it to the feeding of the fruit; for if you marke the trough or hollow channell that is in euery leafe, it shall appeare very euidently, that the

Creator in his secret wisedome did ordaine those furrowes, euen from the extreme point of the leafe to the ground where it is fastned to the root, for no other purpose but to guide and leade that water which falls far off, vnto the root; knowing that without such store of water the whole plant would wither, and the fruit pine away and come to nothing.


 The Time.
They are planted for the most part about the Kalends of Nouember, or somewhat sooner. The plant must be set and dunged with good store of ashes, for that kinde of dung is thought best for planting thereof. Euery yeare the slips must be torne or slipped off from the body of the root, and these are to be set in Aprill, which will beare fruit about August following, as Columella, Palladius, and common experience teacheth.


 The Names.
The Artichoke is called in Latine Cinara, of Cinis, Ashes, wherewith it loueth to be dunged. Galen calleth it in Greeke (...), but with k and v in the first syllable: of some it is called Cactos: it is named in Italian, (...), Archiocchi: in Spanish, Alcarrhofa: in English, Artichoke: in French, Artichaux: in low-Dutch, Artichoken: whereupon diuers call it in Latine Articocalus, and Articoca: in high-Dutch, Strobidorn.
The other is named in Latine commonly not onely Spinosa cinara, or prickly Artichoke, but also of Palladius, Carduus: of the Italians, Cardo, and Cardino: of the Spaniards, Cardos: of the French men, Chardons: Leonhartus Fuchsius and most writers take it to be Scolymus Dioscoridis; but (...) Dioscoridis hath the leafe of Chameleon or Spina alba, with a stalke full of leaues, and a prickly head: but neither is Cinara the Artichoke which is without prickles, nor the Artichok with prickles any such kinde of herbe; for though the head hath prickles, yet the stalke is not full of leaues, but is many times without leaues, or else hath not past a leafe or two. Cinara doth better agree with that which Theophrastus and Pliny call (...), Cactus, and yet it doth not bring forth stalkes from the root creeping alongst the ground: it hath broad leaues set with prickles; the middle ribs of the leaues, the skin pilled off, are good to be eaten, and likewise the fruit, the seed and down taken away; and that which is vnder is as tender as the braine of the Date tree: which things Theophrastus and Pliny report of Cactus. That which they write of the stalkes, sent forth immediately from the root vpon the ground, which are good to be eaten, is peraduenture the ribs of the leaues: euerie side taken away (as they be serued vp at the table) may be like a stalke, except euen in Sicilia, where they grew only in (...) time. It bringeth forth both certaine stalks that lie on the ground, and another also standing straight vp; but afterwards being remoued and brought into Italy or England, it bringeth forth no more but one vpright: for the soile and clyme do much preuaile in altering of plants, as not onely Theophrastus teacheth, but also euen experience it selfe declareth: and of Cactus, Theophrastus writeth thus; (...) (Cactus) groweth onely in Sicilia: it bringeth forth presently from the root stalkes lying along vpon the ground, with a broad and prickly leafe: the stalkes being pilled are fit to be eaten, being somewhat bitter, which may be preserued in brine: it bringeth forth also another stalke, which is likewise good to be eaten.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The nailes, that is, the white and thicke parts which are in the bottome of the outward scales or  flakes of the fruit of the Artichoke, and also the middle pulpe whereon the downy seed stands, are eaten both raw with pepper and salt, and commonly boyled with the broth of fat flesh, with pepper added, and are accounted a dainty dish, being pleasant to the taste, and good to procure bodily lust: so likewise the middle ribs of (...) leaues being made white and tender by good cherishing and looking to, are brought to the table as a great seruice together with other junkets: they are eaten with pepper and salt as be the raw Artichokes: yet both of them are of ill iuyce; for the Artichoke containeth plenty of cholericke iuyce, and hath an hard substance, insomuch as of this is ingendred melancholy iuyce, and of that a thin and cholerick bloud, as Galen teacheth in his book of the Faculties of nourishments. But it is best to eate the Artichoke boyled: the ribbes of the leaues are altogether of an hard substance: they yeeld to the body a raw and melancholy iuice, and containe in them great store of winde.
It stayeth the inuoluntarie course of the naturall seed either in man or woman.
Some write that if the buds of yong Artichokes be first steeped in wine, and eaten, they prouoke  vrine, and stir vp the lust of the body.
I finde moreouer, that the root is good against the ranke smell of the arme-holes, if when the  pith is taken away the same root be boyled in wine and drunke: for it sendeth forth plenty of (...) vrine, whereby the ranke and rammish sauor of the whole body is much amended.




CHAP. 480. Of Golden Thistles.

 The Description.
1 THe stalkes of Golden Thistle rise vp forthwith from the root, being many, round, and branched. The leaues are long, of a beautifull green, with deepe gashes on the edges, and set with most sharpe prickles: the floures come (...) the (...) of the leaues, set in a (...) chaffie knap, very like to Succorie floures, but of colour as yellow as gold: in their places come vp broad flat and thin seeds, not great, nor wrapped in downe: the root is long, a finger thicke, (...), soft, and good to be eaten, wherewith swine are much delighted: there issueth forth of this thistle in what part soeuer it is cut or broken, a iuyce as white as milke.
@ There is some varietie of this Thistle; for it is found much larger about Montpelier than it is in Spaine, with longer branches, but fewer floures: the leaues also are spotted or (...) with white like as the milke Thistle: whence Clusius, whom I here follow, hath giuen two figures thereof; the former by the name of Scolymus Theophrasti H spanicus; and the other by the title of (...) Theophrasti Narbonensis. This with white spots (...) saw growing this yere with Mr. (...) at South Lambeth. @


1 Carduus Chrysanthemus Hispanicus. The Spanish golden Thistle.


@ Carduus Chrysanthemus (...). The French golden Thistle.


2 The golden Thistle of Peru, called in the West Indies, (...) del Inferno, a friend of mine brought it vnto me from an Island there called Saint Iohns Island, among other seeds. What reason the inhabitants there haue to call it so, it is vnto me vnknowne, vnlesse it be because of his fruit, which doth much resemble a fig in shape and bignesse, but so full of sharpe and venomous prickles, that whosoeuer had one of them in his throat, doubtlesse it would send him packing either to heauen or to hell. This plant hath a single wooddy root as big as a mans thumbe, but somwhat long: from which ariseth a brittle stalke full of ioynts or knees, diuiding it selfe into sundry other small branches, set full of leaues like vnto the milke Thistle, but much smaller, and straked with many white lines or streakes: and at the top of the stalks come (...) faire and goodly yellow floures, very like vnto the sea Poppy, but more elegant, and of greater beauty, hauing in the midst

thereof a small knop or boll, such as is in the middle of our wild Poppy, but full of sharpe thorns, and at the end thereof a stainc or spot of a deepe purple: after the yellow floures be fallen, this foresaid knop groweth by degrees greater and greater, vntill it come to full maturitie, which openeth it selfe at the vpper end, shewing his seed, which is very blacke and round like the seeds of mustard. The whole plant and each part thereof doth yeeld verie great aboundance of milkie iuyce, which is of a golden colour, falling and (...) from any part thereof, if it be cut or bruised the whole plant perisheth at the approch of Winter. The vertues hereof are yet vnknowne vnto me, wherefore I purpose not to set downe any thing thereof by way of coniecture, but shall, God willing, be ready to declare that which certaine knowledge and experience either of myne owne or others, shall make manifest vnto me.


 The Place.
The golden Thistle is sowne in gardens of the Low Countries. Petrus Bellonius writes, That it groweth plentifully in Candy, and also in most places of (...): Clusius reporteth that he found it in the fields of Spaine, and of the kingdome of Castile, and about Montpelier, with fewer branches, and of a higher growth.
The Indian Thistle groweth in Saint Iohns Island in the West Indies, and prospereth very well in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to the end of August: the seed of the Indian golden Thistle must be sowne when it is ripe, but it (...) not grow vp vntill May next after.


 The Names.
This Thistle is called in Latine Carduus Chrysanthemus: in Greeke of Theophrastus, (...); for those things which he writeth of Scolymus in his sixth and seuenth bookes doe wholly agree with this Thistle Chrysanthemus: which are these; Scolymus, doth floure in the Sommer solstice, brauely and a long time together; it hath a root that may be eaten both sod and raw, and when it is broken it yeeldeth a milky iuyce: Gaza nameth it Carduus. Of this Pliny also makes mention, lib. 21. ca. 16. Scolymus, saith he, differs from those kindes of Thistles, viz. Acarna, and Atractilis, because the root thereof may be eaten boyled. Againe, (...). 22. Cap. 22. The East Countries vse it as a meate: and he calleth it by another name (...) Which thing also Theophrastus seemeth to affirme, in his sixt booke; for when he reckoneth vp herbes whose leaues are set with prickles, he addeth Scolymus, or Limonia.
Notwithstanding, Pliny maketh mention likewise of another Scolymus, which hee affirmeth to bring sorth a purple (...), and betweene the middle of the prickes to wax white quickely, and to fall off with the winde; in his twentieth booke, cap. 23. Which Thistle doubtlesse doth not agree with Carduus Chrysanthemus, that is, with Theophraslus his Scolymus, and with that which we mentioned before: so that there be in Pliny two Scolymi; one with a root that may be eaten, and another with a purple (...), turning into downe, and that speedily waxeth white. Scolymus is likewise described by Dioscorides; but this differs from Scolymus Theophrasti, and it is one of those which Pliny reckoneth vp, as we wil more at large declare hereaster. But let vs come againe to Chrysanthemus: This the inhabitants of Candy, keeping the marks of the old name, do call Ascolymbros: the Italians name it Anconitani Rinci: the Romans, Spinaborda: the Spaniards, Cardon lechar: and of diuers it is also named Glycyrrhizon, that is to say, dulcis Radix, or sweet Root: it is called in English, (...) Thistle: some would haue it to be that which (...) in Arte Veterinaria calls Eryngium: but they are deceiued; for that Eryngium whereof Vegetius writeth is Eryngium marinum, or sea Huluer, of which we will intreat.
The golden Thistle of India may be called Carduus Chrysanthemus, of his golden colour, adding thereto his natiue countrey Indianus, or Peruanus, or the golden Indian Thistle, or the golden Thistle of Peru: the seed came to my hands by the name Fique del Inferno: in Latine, Ficus infernalis, the infernall fig, or fig of hell.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root and tender leaues of this Scolymus, which are sometimes eaten, are good for the stomacke, but they containe very little nourishment, and the same thinne and waterie, as Galen teacheth.
Pliny saith, that the root hereof was commended by Eratosthenes, in the poore mans supper, and  that it is reported also to prouoke vrine especially; to heale tetters and dry scurse, being taken with vineger; and with Wine to stir vp fleshly lust, as Hefiod and Alcaeus testifie; and to take away the stench of the arme-holes, if an ounce of the root, the pith picked out, be (...) in three parts of wine, till one part be wasted, and a good draught taken fasting after a bath, and likewise after meat:

which later words Dioscorides likewise (...) concerning his Scolymus: out of whom Pliny is thought to haue borrowed these things. 

The plant our Author here describes in the second place, is (...) which I described and figured (...), pig. 401. by the name of (...) (...). I must (...), I there should haue omitted it, because it is here (...) forth (...) by our Author, (...) (...) I had a (...) remembrance, and therefore (...) that time sought his Index by all the names I could remember, but not making it a (...), I at that time missed thereof; but here (...) it, I haue (...) the history stand as it was, and onely omitted the (...) which you may finde before, and something also in the (...) not here deliuered.




CHAP. 481. Of white Carline Thistle of Dioscorides.

 The Description.
1 THe leaues of Carline are very full of prickles, cut on both edges with a multitude of deepe gashes, and set along the corners with stiffe and very sharpe prickles; the middle ribs whereof are sometimes red: the stalke is a span high or higher, bringing forth for the most part onely one head or knap being full of prickles, on the outward circumference or compasse like the Vrchin huske of a chesnut: and when this openeth at the top, there groweth forth a broad floure, made vp in the middle like a flat (...), of a great number of threds, which is compassed about with little long leaues, oftentimes somewhat white, very seldome red: the seed (...) is slender and narrow, the root is long; a finger thicke, something blacke, so chinked as (...) it were split in sunder, sweete of smell, and in taste somewhat bitter.


@ 1 Carlina caulescens magno flore. Tall Carline Thistle.


2 Carlina, seu (...) albus Dioscoridis. The white Carline Thistle of (...) with the red floure.


2 There is also another hereof without a stalke, with leaues also very full of prickles, like almost to those of the other, lying flat on the ground on euery side: among which (...) groweth forth in the middle a round head or knap, set with prickles without after the same maner, but greater: the floure whereof in the middle is of strings, and paled round about with red leaues, and sometimes with white, in faire and calme weather the floures both of this and also of the other laie

@ 3 Carlina (...) minor flore purp. Dwarfe Carline Thistle.
themselues wide open, and when the weather is foule and misty, are drawne close together: the root hereof is long, and sweet of smell, white, sound, not nicked or splitted as the other.
@ 3 This small purple Carline Thistle hath a prety large root diuided oft times at the top into diuers branches, from which rise many green leaues lying spred vpon the ground, deeply cut and set with sharpe prickles; in the midst of these leaues come vp sometimes one, but otherwhiles more scaly heads, which carry a pretty large floure composed of many purple threds, like that of the (...), but larger, and of a brighter colour; these heads grow vsually close to the leaues, yet sometimes they stand vpon stalkes three or foure inches high: when the floure is past they turne into downe, and are carried away with the winde: the seed is small and grayish. This growes vpon Blacke-Heath, vpon the chalky hills about Dartford, and in many such places. It floures in Iuly and August. Tragus calls it Chamaeleon albus, vel exiguus; Lobel, Carduus acaulis, Septentrionalium, and (...) albus, Cordi; Clusius, Carlina minor (...) flore, and he saith in the opinion of some, it seemes not vnlike to the Chamaeleon whereof (...) makes mention, lib. 6. cap. 3. Hist. plant. @


 The Place.
They both grow vpon high mountaines in desart places, and oftentimes by high way sides: but that which bringeth forth a stalke groweth euery where in Germany, and is a stranger in England.


 The Time.
They floure and seed in Iuly and August, and many times later.


 The Names.
The former is called in Latine, Carlina, and Cardopatium; and of diuers, Carolina, of (...) the first Romane Emperor of that name, whose armie (as it is reported) was in times past through the benefit of this root deliuered and preserued from the plague: it is called in high Dutch, Eberwurtz: in low Dutch, French, and other languages, as likewise in English, Carline, and Carline Thistle: it is Dioscorides his Leucacantha the strong and bitter roots shew the same; the faculties also are answerable, as forthwith we will declare: Leucacantha hath also the other names, but they are counterfeit, as among the Romanes Gniacardus; and among the Thuscans, Spina alba, or white Thistle, yet doth it differ from that Thistle which Dioscorides calleth Spina alba, of which he also writting apart, doth likewise attribute to both of them their owne proper faculties and operations, and the same differing.
The later writers do also call the other Carlina altera, and Carlina humilis, or minor, low or little Carline: but they are much deceiued who go about to referre them both to the Chamaeleons; for in Italy, Germany, or France, Chamaeleones, the Chamaeleons do neuer grow, as there is one witnesse for many, Petrus Bellonius, in his fift booke of Singularities, who sufficiently declareth what difference there is betweene the Carlines and the Chamaeleons; which thing shall be made manifest by the description of the Chamaeleons.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root of Carline, which is chiefely vsed, is hot in the later end of the second degree, and dry  in the third, with a thinnes of parts and substance; it procureth sweate, it driueth forth all kinde of wormes of the belly, it is an enemy to all maner of poisons, it doth not onely driue away infections of the plague, but also cureth the same, if it be drunke in time.
Being chewed it helpeth the tooth-ache; it openeth the stoppings of the liuer and spleene.
It prouoketh vrine, bringeth downe the menses, and cureth the dropsie.
And it is giuen to those that haue been dry beaten, and fallen from some high place.

The like operations Dioscorides hath concerning Leucacantha: Leucacantha (saith he) hath a root  like Cyperus, bitter and strong, which being chewed easeth the paine of the teeth: the decoction thereof with a draught of wine is a remedie against paines of the sides, and is good for those that haue the Sciatica or ache in the huckle bones, and for them that be troubled with the crampe.
The iuyce also being drunke is of like vertues.



CHAP. 482. Of wilde Carline Thistle.

 The Description.
1 THe great wilde Carline Thistle riseth vp with a stalke of a cubit high or higher, diuided into certaine branches: the leaues are long, and very full of prickles in the edges, like those of Carline: the floures grow also vpon a prickely head, being set with threds in the middest, and paled round about with a little yellowish leaues: the root is slender, and hath a twinging taste.
2 Carolus Clusius describeth a certaine other also of this kinde, with one onely stalke, slender, short, and not aboue a handfull high, with prickly leaues like those of the other, but lesser, both of them couered with a certaine hoary downe: the heads or knaps are for the most part two, they haue a pale downe in the midst, and leaues standing round about, being somewhat stiffe and yellow: the root is slender, and of a reddish yellow.


1 Carlina syluestris maior. The great wilde Carline Thistle.


2 Carlina syluestris minor. The little wilde Carline Thistle.




 The Place.
The great Carline is found in vntoiled and desart places, and oftentimes vpon hills. @ It groweth vpon Blacke Heath, and in many other places of Kent. @
The lesser Carline Carolus Clusius writeth that he found growing in dry stony and desart places, about (...) a city of Spaine.



 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is commonly called in Latine, and that not vnfitly, Carlina syluestris; for it is like to Carline in floures, and is not very vnlike in leaues. And that this is (...), it is so much the harder to affirme, by how much the briefer Theophrastus hath written hereof; for he saith that this is like bastard saffron, of a yellow colour and fat iuyce: and Acorna differs from Acarna; for Acarna, as Hesychius saith, is the Bay tree; but Acorna is a prickly plant.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It is hot, especially in the root, the twinging taste thereof doth declare; but seeing it is of no vse, the other faculties be vnsearched out.



CHAP. 483. Of Chamaeleon Thistle.

 The Kindes.
THere be two Chamaeleons, and both blacke: the vertues of their roots to differ, and the roots themselues do differ in kinde, as Theophrastus declareth.


The figure which was sormerly in the first place did not agree with the historie (which was taken out of (...)) though (...). gaue it for ((...) (...) ger; for it is the (...) (...), etc. of Lobel. You shall finde it hereafter with the (...) (...).

 1 Chamaeleon niger. The blacke Chamaeleon Thistle.


2 Chamaeleon niger Salmanticensis. The Spanish blacke Chamaeleon.




 The Description.
1 THe leaues of blacke Chamaeleon are lesser and slenderer than those of the prickely Artichoke, and sprinckled with red spots: the stalke is a cubit high, a finger thicke, and somewhat red: it beareth a tufted rundle, in which are slender prickely floures of a blew colour like the Hyacinth. The root is thicke, blacke without, of a close substance, sometimes eaten away, which being cut is of a yellowish colour within, and being chewed it bites the tongue.

2 This blacke Chamaeleon hath many leaues, long and narrow, very full of prickles, of a light greene, in a manner white: the stalke is chamfered, a foot high, and diuided into branches, on the tops whereof stand purple floures growing forth of prickly heads: the root is blacke, and sweet in taste. This is described by Clusius in his Spanish Obseruations, by the name of Chamaeleon Salmanticensis, of the place wherein he found it: for he saith that this groweth plentifully in the territory of Salmantica a city in Spaine: but it is very manifest that this is not blacke Chamaeleon, neither doth Clusius affirme it.


 The Place.
It is very common, saith Bellonius, in Lemnos, where it beareth a floure of so gallant a blew, as that it seemeth to contend with the skie in beautie; and that the floure of Blew-Bottle being of this colour, seemes in comparison of it to be but pale. It groweth also in the fields neere Abydum, and hard by the riuers of Hellespont, and in Heraclea in Thracia.
Chamaeleon Salmanticensis groweth plentifully in the territorie of Salmantica a city in Spaine.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish when the other Thistles do.


 The Names.
The blacke Chamaeleon is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Chamaeleon niger: of the Romans, Carduus niger, and Vernilago: of some, Crocodilion: in English, the Chamaeleon Thistle, or the Thistle that changeth it selfe into many shapes and colours.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The root hereof, as Galen saith, containeth in it a deadly qualitie: it is also by Nicander numbred  among the poysonous herbes, in his booke of Treacles; by Dioscorides, lib. 6. and by Paulus Aegineta: and therefore it is vsed only outwardly, as for scabs, morphewes, tetters, and to be briefe, for all such things as stand in need of clensing: moreouer, it is mixed with such things as doe dissolue and mollific, as Galen saith.



CHAP. 484. Of Sea Holly.

 The Kindes.
DIoscorides maketh mention onely of one sea Holly: Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 7. seemes to acknowledge two, one growing in rough places, another by the fea side. The Physitians after them haue obserued more.


 The Description.
1 SEa Holly hath broad leaues almost like to Mallow leaues, but cornered in the edges, and set round about with hard prickles, fat, of a blewish white, and of an aromaticall or spicie taste: the stalke is thicke, aboue a cubit high, now and then somewhat red below: it breaketh forth on the tops into prickly or round heads or knops, of the bignesse of a Wall-nut, held in for the most part with six prickely leaues, compassing the top of the stalke round about: which leaues as wel as the heads are of a glistring blew: the floures forth of the heads are likewise blew, with white threds in the midst: the root is of the bignesse of a mans finger, very long, and so long, as that it cannot be all plucked vp, vnlesse very seldome; set here and therewith knots, and of taste sweet and pleasant.
2 The leaues of the second sea Holly are diuersly cut into sundry parcels, being all ful of prickles alongst the edges: the stalke is diuided into many branches, and bringeth sorth prickly heads, but lesser than those of the other: from which there also grow forth blew floures, seldome yellow: there stand likewise vnder euery one of these, six rough and prickly leaues like those of the other, but thinner and smaller: the root hereof is also long, blacke without, white within, a finger thicke, of taste and smell like that of the other, as be also the leaues, which are likewise of an aromaticall or spicie taste, which being new sprung vp, and as yet tender, be also good to be eaten.



1 Eryngium marinum. Sea Holly.


2 Eryngium mediterraneum. Leuant sea Holly.




 The Place.
Eryngium marinum growes by the sea side vpon the baich and stony ground: I found it growing plentifully at Whitstable in Kent, at Rie and Winchelsea in Sussex, and in Essex at Landamer lading, at Harwich, and vpon Langtree point, on the other side of the water, from whence I haue brought plants for my garden.
Eryngium Campestre groweth vpon the shores of the Mediterranean sea, and in my garden likewise.


 The Time.
Both of them do floure after the Sommer solstice, and in Iuly.


 The Names.
This Thistle is called in Greeke (...): and likewise in Latine Eryngium: and of Pliny also Erynge: in shops, Eringus; in English, Sea Holly, sea Holme, or sea Huluer.
The first is called in Latine Eryngium marinum: in low-Dutch euery where, Cryus distil, Eindeloos, Meerwortele: in English, sea Holly.
The second is named of Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 8. Centum capita, or hundred headed Thistle: in highDutch, (...), Branchendistell, Radendistel: in Spanish, Cardo corredor: in Italian, Eringio, and Iringo: this is syrnamed Campestre, or Champion sea Holly, that it may differ from the other.


 The Temperature.
The roots of them both are hot, and that in a mean; and a little dry also, with a thinnesse of substance, as Galen testifieth.


 The Vertues.
The roots of sea Holly boyled in wine and drunken are good for them that are troubled with  the Collicke, it breaketh the stone, expelleth grauell, and helpeth also the infirmities of the kidnies, prouoketh vrine, greatly opening the passages, being drunke fifteene dayes together.
The roots themselues haue the same propertie if they be eaten, and are good for those that be (...)-sicke, and for such as are bitten with any venomous beast: they ease cramps, convulsions, and the falling sicknesse, and bring downe the termes.

The roots condited or preserued with sugar, as hereafter followeth, are exceeding good to be giuen  vnto old and aged people that are consumed and withered with age, and which want naturall moisture: they are also good for other sorts of people that haue no delight or appetite to venerie, nourishing and restoring the aged, (...) amending the defects of nature in the younger.
 The manner to condite Eryngos:
Refine sugar fit for the purpose, and take a pound of it, the white of an egge, and a pint of cleere  water, boile them together and scum it, then let it boile vntill it be come to good strong syrrup, and when it is boiled, as it cooleth, adde thereto a saucer full of Rose-water, a spoone full of Cinnamon water, and a graine of Muske, which haue been infused together the night before, and now strained; into which syrrup being more than halfe cold, put in your roots to soke and infuse vntill the next day; your roots being ordered in manner hereafter following:
These your roots being washed and picked, must be boiled in faire water by the space of foure  houres, vntill they be soft, then must they be pilled cleane, as ye pill parsneps, and the pith must bee drawne out at the end of the root; and if there be any whose pith cannot be drawne out at the end, then you must slit them, and so take out the pith: these you must also keepe from much handling, that they may be cleane, let them remaine in the syrrup till the next day, and then set them on the fire in a faire broad pan vntill they be verie hot, but let them not boile at all: let them there remaine ouer the fire an houre or more, remoouing them easily in the pan from one place to another with a woodden slice. This done, haue in a readinesse great cap or royall papers, whereupon you must straw some Sugar, vpon which lay your roots after that you haue taken them out of the pan. These papers you must put into a Stoue, or hot house to harden; but if you haue not such a place, lay them before a good fire. In this manner if you condite your roots, there is not any that can prescribe you a better way. And thus may you condite any other root whatsoeuer, which will not onely bee exceeding delicate, but very wholesome, and effectuall against the diseases aboue named.
A certaine man affirmeth, saith Aetius, that by the continual vse of Sea Holly, he neuer afterward  voided any stone, when as before he was very often tormented with that disease.
It is drunke, saith Dioscorides, with Carrot seed against very many infirmities, in the weight of a  dramme.
The iuice of the leaues pressed forth with wine is a remedie for those that are troubled with the  running of the reines.
They report that the herbe Sea Holly, if one Goat take it into her mouth, it causeth her first to  stand still, and afterwards the whole flocke, vntill such time as the Shepheard take it forth of her mouth, as Plutarch writeth.



CHAP. 485. Of bastard Sea Hollies.

 The Description.
THis Eryngium which Dodonaeus in his last edition calleth Eryngium planum; and Pena more fitly and truely, Eryngium Alpinum caeruleum, hath stalkes a cubite and a halfe high, hauing spaces (...) euery ioint: the lower leaues are greater and broader, and notched about the edges, but those aboue are lesser, compassing or enuironing each ioint star-fashion, beset with prickles which are soft and tender, not much hurtful to the hands of such as touch them; the knobs or heads are also prickley, and in colour blew. The root is bunchie or knottie, like that of Helenium, that is, Elecampane, blacke without, and white within, and like the Eringes in sweetnesse and taste.
2 The second bastard Sea Holly, whose picture is set forth in Dodonaeus his last Edition veric gallantly, being also a kind of Thistle, hath leaues like vnto the former Erynges, but broader next the rootes than those which grow next the stalkes, somewhat long, greenish, soft, and not prickley, but lightly creuised or notched about the edges, greater than Quince leaues. The stalks grow more than a cubit high; on the tops whereof there hang downwards fiue or six knobs or heads, in colour and floures like the other; hauing three or foure whitish roots of a foot long.
3 The third kinde of bastard Eryngium hath his first leaues (which grow next the ground) great, broad, and soft, growing as it were in a rundle about the root. The stalke is (...) and slender, diuided into some branches, which beare many little leaues, turning or standing many waies, which

1 Eryngium caeruleum. Blew Sea Holly.
2 Eryngium spurium (...) (...). Bastard Sea Holly.
3 Eryngium (...) Clusij. Dwarfe Sea Holly.
4 Eryngium Montanum. Mountaine Sea Holly.

@ 5 Eryngium pusillum planum. Small smooth Sea Holly.
be also slender, prickly, and set about the stalks star-fashion. The knops or heads growing at the tops of the branches are round and prickly, (...) little blew floures and leaues, which compasse them about: the root is slender, and (...) but one yeare.
4 The fourth kinde of bastard Sea Holly, which (...) calleth Eryngium (...) (...), and is the fourth according to (...) his account, is like to the Erynges, not in (...) but in taste: this beareth a very small and slender stalke, of a meane height, whereupon doe grow three or foure leaues, and seldom fiue, made of (...) leaues set vpon a midd'e rib, narrow, long, hard, and of a darke greene (...), dented on both edges of the leafe like a saw: the (...) is a cubit high, iointed or kneed, and diuiding it selfe into many branches, on the tops whereof are round tufts or vmbels, wherin are contained the floures, and after they be vaded, the seedes, which are small, somewhat long, well smelling, and sharpe in taste: the (...) is white and long, not a finger thicke, in taste sweet, but afterwards somewhat (...), and in sent and (...) not vnpleasant: when the root is dried, (...) may be crumbled in pieces, and therefore quickly (...).
@ 5 This is a low plant presently from the root diuided into sundry branches, slender, round and lying on the ground: at each ioint grow leaues without any certain order, broad toward their ends, and narrower at their setting (...), (...) about their edges: those next the root were some inch broad, and two or more long, of a yellowish greene colour: the stalkes are parted into sundry branches, and at each ioint haue little leaues, and rough and greene heads, with (...) floures in them: the roots creepe, and are somewhat like those of Asparagus. This neither Clusius nor Lobel found wilde; but it grew in the garden of Iohn (...) of Tourney, a learned Apothecarie, verie skilfull in the knowledge of plants: whereupon they both called it Eryngium pusillum planum Moutoni. @


 The Place.
These kindes of sea Holly are strangers in England: we haue the first and second in our London gardens.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish when the Thistles do.


 The Names.
These plants be Eryngia spuria, or bastard Sea Hollies, and are lately obserued: and therefore they haue no old names.
The first may bee called in Latine Eryngium Borussicum, or Non spinosum: Sea Hollie without prickles.
The second is called by Matthiolus, Eryngium planum, or flat Sea Holly: others had rather name it Alpinum Eryngium, or Sea Holly of the Alpes.
The third is rightly called Eryngium pumilum, little Sea Huluer.
(...) maketh the fourth to be Crithmum quartum, or the fourth kinde of Sampier: and others, as Dodonaeus and Lobel, haue made it a kinde of Sea Huluer.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Touching the faculties hereof we haue nothing to set downe, seeeing they haue as yet no vse in medicine, nor vsed to be eaten. But yet that they be hot, the very taste doth declare.




CHAP. 486. Of Star-Thistle.

 The Description.
1 THe Star-Thistle, called Carduus stellatus, hath many soft frizled leaues, deepely cut or gasht, altogether without prickles: among which riseth vp a stalke, diuiding it selfe into many other branches, growing two foot high; on the tops whereof are small knops or heads like the other Thistles, armed round about with many sharpe prickles, fashioned like a blasing star, which at the beginning are of a purple colour, but afterwards of a pale bleak or whitish colour: the seed is small, flat, and round; the root is long, and browne without.


1 Carduus stellatus. The Star-Thistle.


There were (...) three figure: and descriptions in this chapter, and all of them out of the 14 and 15. (...). of the (...) booke, and (...) (...) (...) (...); but the first and second (...) (...) both of the first described, the third (...) was of the (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) not what to (...) of, but I thinke it was drawne for, and (if the (...) (...) of the roots were somewhat large) (...) (...) well (...) for the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) I drew it from the plant I will hereafter giue you: the third description was of (...) (...) (...), described in the (...) (...) (...) the 249. Chap. pag. 727.

 2 Carduus Solstitialis. Saint Barnabies Thistle.


2 Saint Barnabies Thistle is another kinde of Star-Thistle; notwithstanding it hath prickles no where faue in the head onely, and the prickles of it stand forth in manner of a star: the stalks are two cubits high, parted into diuers branches softer than are those of star-Thistle, which stalks haue velmes or thin skins cleauing vnto them all in length, by which they seeme to be foure-square: the leaues are somewhat long, set with deep gashes on the edges: the floures are yellow, and consist of threds: the seed is little; the root long and slender.


 The Place.
The two first do grow vpon barren places neere vnto cities and townes, almost euery where.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish especially in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The first is called in Latine, Stellaria; as also Carduus Stellatus, and likewise Carduus Calcitrapa; but they are deceiued, who take it to be Eryngium, or Sea-(...), or any kinde thereof. Matthiolus saith that it is called in Italian Calcatrippa: in high Dutch, Dallen distel: in low Dutch, Sterre distell: in French, (...): in English, Star-Thistle.
S. Barnabies Thistle is called in Latine (...) spina, because it floureth in the Sommer Solstice,

as Gesner saith, or rather because after the Solstice the prickles thereof be sharpest: of Guillandinus, Eryngium, but not properly, and Stellaria (...) Augerij, who with good successe gaue it against the stone, dropsies, greene sicknesse, and quotidian feuers. It is called in English as aboue said, Saint Barnabies Thistle.


 The Temperature.
The Star-Thistle is of a hot nature.


 The Vertues.
The seed is commended against the strangurie: it is reported to driue forth the stone, if it bee  drunke with wine.
Baptista Sardus (...), that the distilled water of this Thistle is a remedie for those that are infected  with the French Pox, and that the vse of this is good for the liuer, that it taketh away the stoppings thereof.
That it clenseth the bloud from corrupt and putrified humours.
That it is giuen with good successe against intermitting feuers; whether they be quotidian or  (...).
As touching the faculties of Saint Barnabies Thistle, which are as yet not found out, we haue  nothing to write.



CHAP. 487 Of Teasels.

 The Kindes.
OVrage hath set downe two kindes of Teasels: the tame, and the wilde. These differ not saue only in the husbanding; sor all things that are planted and manured doe more (...), and become for the most part fitter for mans vse.


1 Dipsacus (...). Garden Teasell.


2 Dipsacus syluestris. Wilde Teasell.





@ 3 Dipsacus minor, sive Virga pastoris. Sheepheards-rod.




 The Description.
1 GArden Teasel is also of the number of the Thistles, it bringeth (...) a stalke that is (...), very long, iointed, and ful of prickles: the leaues grow sorth of the ioints by couples, not onely opposite (...) set one right against another, but also compassing the stalke about, and fastened together; and so fastened, that they hold dew and raine water in manner of a little bason: these be long, of a light greene colour, and like to those of Lettice, but full of prickles in the edges, and haue on the outside all alongst the ridge stiffer prickles: on the tops of the stalkes stand heads with sharpe prickles like those of the Hedge-hog, and crooking backward at the point like hookes: out of which heads grow little floures: The seed is like Fennell seed, and in taste bitter: the heads wax white when they grow old, and there are found in the midst of them when they are cut, certaine little magots: the root is white, and of a (...) length.
2 The second kinde of Teasell which is also a kinde of Thistle, is very like vnto the sormer, but his leaues are smaller and narrower: his sloures of a purple colour, and the hooks of the Teasell nothing so hard or sharpe as the other, nor good for any vse in dressing of cloath.
3 There is another kinde of Teasell, being a wilde kinde therof, and accounted among these Thistles, growing higher than the rest of his kindes; but his knobbed heads are no bigger than a Nutmeg, in all other things else they are like to the other wilde kindes. @ This hath the lower leaues deeply cut in with one gash on each side at the bottome of the leafe, which little ears are omitted in the figure: the leaues also are lesse than the former, and narrower at the setting on, and hold no water as the two former do: the whole plant is also much lesse. @


 The Place.
The first called the tame Teasell is sowne in this countrey in gardens, to serue the vse of Fullers and Clothworkers.
The second kinde groweth in moist places by brookes, riuers, and such like places.
The third I found growing in moist places in the high way leading from Braintree to Henningham castle in Essex, and not in any other place except here and there a plant vpon the high way from Much-Dunmow to London. @ I sound it growing in great plentie at Edgecombe by Croyden, close by the gate of the house of my much honoured friend Sir Iohn Tunstall.


 The Time.
These floure for the most part in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Teasell is called in Greeke (...), and likewise in Latine, Dipsacus, Labrum Veneris, and Carduus Veneris: it is termed Labrum Veneris, and Lauer Lauacrum, of the forme of the leaues made vp in fashion of a bason, which is neuer without water: they commonly call it Virga pastoris minor, and Carduus fullonum: in high Dutch, Karden Distell: in low Dutch, Caerden: in Spanish, Cardencha and Cardo (...): in Italian, Dissaco, and Cardo: in French, Chardon de foullon, Verge a bergier: in English, Teasell, Carde Teasell, and Venus bason.
The third is thought to be Galedragon Plinij: of which he hath written in his 27. book the tenth Chapter.


 The Temperature. 
The rootes of these plants are drie in the second degree, and haue a certaine clensing facultie.



 The Vertues.
There is small vse of Teasell in medicines: the heads (as we haue said) are vsed to dresse woollen  cloth with.
Dioscorides writeth, that the root being boiled in wine, and stamped till it is come to the substance  of a salue, healeth chaps and (...) of the fundament, if it be applied thereunto; and that this medicine must be reserued ina box of copper, and that also it is reported to be good for all kindes of warts.
It is needlesse here to alledge those things that are added touching the little wormes or magots  found in the heads of the Teasell, and which are to be hanged about the necke, or to mention the like thing that Pliny reporteth of Galedragon: for they are nothing else but most vaine and trifling toies, as my selfe haue proued a little besore the impression hereof, hauing a most (...) ague, and of long continuance: notwithstanding Physicke charmes, these worms hanged about my neck, spiders put into a walnut shell, and diuers such foolish toies that I was constrained to take by fantasticke peoples procurement; notwithstanding I say, my helpe came from God himselse, for these medicines and all other such things did me no good at all. 

The (...) which formerly was put into the second place, was of the (...) secundus of (...), which (...) from (...) common one, in (...) the (...) are deeply diuided, or cut in on their edges.




CHAP. 488. Of Bastard Saffron.


@ 1 Carthamus siue Cnicus. Bastard Saffron.


The figure formerly was of the (...) (...).

 2 Cnicus alter caeruleus. Blew floured Bastard Saffron.



 The Description.
1 CNicus, called also bastard Saffron, which may very wel be reckoned among the Thistles, riseth vp with a stalke of a cubite and a (...) high, straight, smooth, round, hard, and wooddy, and branched at the top: it is defended with long leaues, somthing broad, sharp

pointed; and with prickles in the edges: from the tops of the stalks stand out little heads or knops of the bignesse of an Oliue or bigger, set with many sharpe pointed and prickly scales: out of which come forth floures like threds, closely compact, of a deepe yellow shining colour, drawing neere to the colour of Saffron: vnder them are long seeds, smooth, white, somewhat cornered, bigger than a Barly corne, the huske whereof is something hard, the inner pulpe or substance is fat, white, sweet in taste: the root slender and vnprofitable.
2 There is also another kinde of Bastard Saffron, that may very well be numbred amongst the kindes of Thistles, and is very like vnto the former, sauing that his flockie or threddie floures, are of a blew colour: the root is thicker, and the whole plant is altogether more sharpe in prickles: the stalks also are more crested and hairie.


 The Place.
It is sowne in diuers places of Italy, Spaine, and France, both in gardens and in fields: Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 15. saith, that in the raigne of Vespasian this was not knowne in Italy; being in Egypt onely of good account, and that they vsed to make oile of it, and not meat.


 The Time.
The floures are perfected in Iuly and August: the root after the seed is ripe, the same yeare it is sowne withereth away.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine also Cnicus, or Cnecus: in shops, Cartamus, or Carthamum: of diuers, Crocus hortensis, and Crocus Saracenicus: in Italian, Zaffarano Saracinesco, and Zaffarano saluatico: in Spanish, Alasor, and Semente de papagaios: in high Dutch, Widen Zaffran: in French, Safran (...): in English, Bastard Saffron: of some, Mocke Saffron, and Saffron D'orte, as though you should say Saffron de horte, or of the garden. Theophrastus and Pliny call it Cnecus vrbana, and (...), or tame and garden bastard Saffron, that it may differ from Atractilis, which they make to be a kinde of Cnicus syluestris, or wilde Bastard Saffron, but rather a (...) of the Holy Thistle.


 The Temperature.
We vse saith Galen, the seed onely for purgations: it is hot, and that in the first degree, as Mesues writeth.


 The Vertues.
The iuice of the seed of bastard Saffron bruised and strained into honied water or the broth of a  chicken, and drunke, prouoketh to the stoole, and purgeth by siege slimy flegme, and sharp humors: Moreouer it is good against the collicke, and difficultie of taking breath, the cough, and stopping of the brest, and is singular against the dropsie.
The seed vsed as aforesaid, and strained into milke, causeth it to curdle and yeeld much cruds, and  maketh it of great force to loose and open the belly.
The floures drunke with honied water open the liuer, and are good against the iaundice: and the  floures are good to colour meat in stead of Saffron.
The seed is very hurtfull to the stomacke, causing desire to vomite, and is of hard slow digestion, remaining long in the stomacke and entrailes.
Put to the same seed things comfortable to the stomacke, as Annise seed, Galingale, or Mastick, Ginger, (...), and it shall not hurt the stomacke at all, and the operation thereof shall be the more quicke and speedy.
Of the inward pulpe or substance hereof is made a most famous and excellent composition to  purge water with, commonly called Diachartamon, a most singular and effectual purgation for those t hat haue the dropsie.
The perfect description hereof is extant in Guido the Surgion, in his first Doctrine, and the sixt  Tractate.
We haue not read, or had in vse that Bastard Saffron with the blew floure, and therefore can say  nothing of his vertues.



CHAP. 489. Of Wilde Bastard Saffron.

 The Description.
1 ATractylis, otherwise called wilde Bastard Saffron, bringeth forth a straight and firme stalke, verie fragile or brittle, diuided at the toppe into certaine branches: it hath

long iagged leaues set with prickles: the heads on the tops of the branchesare very ful of sharp prickles: out of which grow floures all of threds, like those of bastard Saffron, but they are of a light yellow colour, and sometimes purple: the seed is somewhat great, browne, and bitter, otherwise like that of bastard Saffron: the root is of a meane bignesse.


1 (...). Wilde Bastard Thistle.


2 Carduus Benedictus. The blessed Thistle.


2 The stalkes of Carduus Benedictus, or Blessed Thistle, are round, rough, and pliable, and being parted into diuers branches, do lic flat on the ground: the leaues are iagged round about, and full of harmlesse prickles in the edges: the heads on the tops of the stalks are set with prickles, and (...) with sharpe prickling leaues, out of which standeth a yellow floure: the seed is long, and set with haires at the top like a beard, the root is white, and parted into strings: the whole herb, leaues and stalks, and also the heads, are couered with a soft and thin downe.


 The Place.
Atractylis groweth in Candie, and in diuers prouinces and Islands of Greece, and also in Languedocke: and is an herbe growing in our English gardens.
(...) (...) is found euery where in Lemnos, an Island of the Midland Sea, in Champion grounds, as (...) Bellonius testifieth: it is diligently cherished in Gardens in these Northerne parts.


 The Time.
Atractylis is very late before it floureth and seedeth.
Carduus (...) floureth in Iuly and August, at which time it is especially to be gathered for Physicke matters.


 The Names.
(...) is called in Greeke (...) of the Latins likewise, (...), and Cnicus sylue stris; and because women in the old time were wont to vse the stiffe stalk thereof pro fuso aut colo, for a spindle or a distaffe, it is named Fusus agrestis, and Colus Rustica; which thing Petrus Bellonius reporteth the women in Greece do also euen at this day; who call Atrastylis by a corrupt name Ardactyla: diuers of the later herbarists name it Syluestris Carthamus: that is to say in low Dutch, Wilden Carthamus: and in English, wilde Bastard Saffron: or Spindle Thistle.
Blessed Thistle is called in Latine euery where Carduus Benedictus, and in shops by a compound

word, Cardo-benedictus: it is most plaine, that it is Species (...), or a kind of wil de (...) Saffron: it is called Atractylis hirsutior, hairie wilde bastard Saffron: (...) (...) nameth it (...) supinus: it is called in high Dutch, Beseegnete distell, Kardo Benedict: the later (...) whereos is knowne to the low Countrey men: in Spanish it is called Cardo Sancto: in French, Chardon (...), or (...): in the Isle Lemnos, Garderacantha: in English, Blessed Thistle, but more commonly by the Latine name Carduus Benedictus.


 The Temperature.
Wilde bastard Saffron doth drie and moderately digest, as Galen witnesseth.
As Carduus Benedictus is bitter, so is it also hot and drie in the second degree, and withall ciensing and opening.


 The Vertues.
The tops, seed, and leaues of Atractylis, saith Dioscorides, being beaten and drunk with pepper and  wine, are a remedie for those that are stung of the scorpion.
Blessed Thistle taken in meat or drinke, is good for the swimming and giddinesse of the head, it  strengthneth memorie, and is a singular remedie against deafenesse.
The same boiled in wine and drunke hot, healeth the griping paines of the belly, killeth and (...) pelleth wormes, causeth sweat, prouoketh vrine, and driueth out grauel, clenseth the stomack, and (...) very good against the Feuer (...).
The iuice of the said Carduus is singular good against all poison, as Hierome Bocke witnesseth, in  what sort soeuer the medicine be taken; and helpeth the inflammation of the liuer, as reporteth (...) Camerarius of Noremberg.
The pouder of the leaues ministred in the quantitie of halfe a dram, is very good against the pestilence, if it be receiued within 24. houres after the taking of the sicknes and the party sweat vpon the same: the like vertue hath the wine, wherein the herbe hath been sodden.
The green herb pounded and laid to, is good against all hot swellings, as Erysipelas, plague sores, and botches, especially those that proceed of the pestilence, and is also good to be laied vpon the bitings of mad dogs, serpents, spiders, or any venomous beast whatsoeuer; and so is it likewise if it be inwardly taken.
The distilled water thereof is of lesse vertue.
It is reported that it likewise cureth stubborne and rebellious vlcers, if the decoction be taken  for certaine daies together; and likewise Arnoldus de Villanoua reporteth, that if it be stamped with Barrows grease to the form of an vnguent, adding thereto a little wheat floure, it doth the same, being applied twice a day.
The herbe also is good being stamped and applied, and so is the iuice thereof.
The extraction of the leaues drawne according to Art, is excellent good against the French disease, and quartaine agues, as reporteth the foresaid Camerarius.
The same Author reporteth, that the distilled water taken with the water of Louage, and Dodder, helpeth the sauce-flegme face, if it be drunke for certaine daies together.



CHAP. 490. Of Thistle vpon Thistle, and diuers other Wilde Thistles.

 The Description.
1 AMong all the Thornes and Thistles, this is most full of prickles; the stalks thereof are verie long, and seem to be cornered by reason of certaine thin skins growing to them, being sent downe forth of the leaues: the leaues are set round about with many deep gashes, being very full of prickles as well as the stalks: the heads are very thicke set in euery place with stiffe prickles, and consist of a multitude of scales; out of which grow purple floures, as they do out of other Thistles, seldome white: the root is almost straight, but it groweth not deep.
2 To this also may be referred that which Lobel writeth to be named of the Italians Leo, and Carduus ferox, sor it is so called of the wonderfull sharpe and stiffe prickles, wherewith the whole plant aboundeth. the stalke thereof is short, scarce a handfull high: the floure groweth forth of a prickly head, and is of a pale yellow colour, like that of wilde bastard Saffron, and it is also inuironed and set round about on euery side with long hard thornes and prickles.
3 The third groweth seldome aboue a cubite or two foot high: it bringeth forth many round stalkes, (...) into diuers branches; the leaues are like those of white Cotton Thistle, but lesser, and blacker, and not couered with downe or Cotton: vpon the tops of the stalks grow little heads

@ 1 Polyacanthos. Thistle vpon Thistle.2 Carduus ferox. The cruell Thistle.@ 3 Carduus Asininus sive Onopyxes. The Asses Thistle, or Asses box.@ 4 Carduus (...) viarum. The Way Thistle.
like Hedge-hogs; out of which spring gallant purple floures, that at length are turned into downe, leauing seedes behinde them like those of the other Thistles: the root consisteth of many small strings.
4 The fourth riseth vp with an higher stalke, now and then a yard long, round, and not so full of branches nor leaues, which are sharpe and full of prickles, but lesser and narrower: the heads be also lesser, longer, and not so full of stiffe prickles: the floures are of a white colour, and vanish into downe: the root is blacke, and of a foot long.
5 This wilde Thistle which groweth in the fields about Cambridge, hath an vpright stalke, whereon do grow broad prickley leaues: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, consisting of a flockie downe, of a white colour tending to purple, of a most pleasant sweet smell, (...) with the sauour of muske: the root is small, and perisheth at the approch of Winter. @ I had no figure directly fitting this; wherefore I put that of Dodonaeus his Onopordon, which may well serue for it, if the leaues were narrower, and more diuided. @


@ 5 Carduus Muscatus. The musked Thistle.


6 Carduus lanceatus. The Speare Thistle.


6 The Speare Thistle hath an vpright stalke, garnished with a skinnie membrane, full of most sharpe prickles: whereon do grow very long leaues, diuided into diuers parts with sharp prickles; the point of the leaues are as the point of a speare, whereof it tooke his name: the floures growon the tops of the branches, set in a scaly prickly head, like vnto the heads of Knapweed in forme, consisting of many threds of a purple colour: the root consisteth of many tough strings.
7 Theophrastus his fish Thistle called Acarna, which was brought from Illyria to Venice, by the learned Valerandus Donrez, described by Theophrastus, hath horrible sharpe yellow prickles, set vpon his greene indented leaues, which are couered on the backe side with an hoarie downe (as all the rest of the plant) hauing a stalke of a cubit and a halfe high, and at the top certaine scaly knops containing yellow thrummie floures, armed or fenced with horrible sharp prickles: the root is long and threddie.
8 The other kinde of fish Thistle, being also another Acarna of Valerandus description, hath long and large leaues, set ful of sharpe prickles, as though it were set full of pins: all the whole plant is couered with a certaine hoarinesse, like the former: there ariseth vp a stalke nine inches long, yea in some fertile grounds a cubite high, bearing the floure of Carduus benedictus, standing thicke together, but lesser.



7 Acarna Theophrasti. Theophrastus his fish Thistle.


8 Acarna Valerandi Donrez, Donrez his fish Thistle.


@ 9 Picnomos. The thicke or bush headed Thistle.


@ 9 This Thistle in the opinion of (...), whereto I much incline, is the same with the former. The root is small, the leaues long, welting the stalks at their setting on, and armed on the edges with sharpe prickles: the stalkes lie trailing on the ground like those of the starThistle, so set with prickles, that one knoweth not where to take hold thereof: it hath many closely compact vmbels, consisting of pale yellowish little floures like those of Groundswell: the seed is like that of Carthamus, smal and chaffie. Pena and Lobel call this Picnomos Cretae Salonensis, of a place in Prouince where they first found it, called the Crau. being not farre from the city Salon. Tabernamontanus set it forth for Chamaeleon niger, and our Author formerly gaue the figure hereof by the same title, though his historie belonged to another, as I haue formerly noted. @


 The Time.
The two first grow on diuers banks not farre from mount Apennine, and sometimes in Italy, but yet seldome.
The way Thistles grow euery where by highwaies sides and common paths in great plenty.
The places of the rest baue beene sufficiently spoken of in their descriptions.



 The Time.
These kindes of Thistles do floure from the beginning of Iune vntill the end of September.


 The Names.
These Thistles comprehended in this present chapter are by one generall name called in Latine Cardui syluestres, or wilde Thistles; and that which is the second in order is named (...): but not that Scolymus which Theophr. declareth to yeeld a milky iuyce (of which wee haue written before) but one of those which Pliny in his twentieth booke, cap. 23. describeth: of some they are taken for kindes of Chamaeleon: their seuerall titles do set forth their seuerall Latine names, and also the English.
@ There was formerly much confusion in this chapter, both in the figures and historie, which I will here endeauour to amend, and giue as much light as I can, to the obscuritie of our Authour and some others; to which end I haue made choice of the names as the fittest place.
1 This description was taken out of Dodonaeus, and the title also of Onopordon which was formerly put ouer the figure, and they belong to the Thistle our Author before described by the name of Acanthium purp. Illyricum, cap. 476. I haue therefore changed the title, yet let the description stand, for it reasonable well agrees with the figure which is of the Carduus (...) vulgaris (...) Lobel, and Polyacantha Theophrasti of Tabern. Of this Thistle I obserue three kindes: the first is a Thistle some two cubits and a halfe high, with many slender stalkes and branches exceeding (...), hauing commonly fiue prickly welts running a ongst the stalks: the leaues on the vpper (...) as also the stalkes are of a reasonable fresh greene colour, but the vnderside of the leafe is somwhat whitish: the heads consist of sundry hairy greene threds which looke like prickles, but they (...) weake, and not prickly: the floure is of the bignesse, and of the like colour and shape as the common Knapweed, yet somwhat (...): it growes on ditch sides, and floures in Iuly. This I take to be the (...) Gasae (...) the (...) pag. 3 4. but not that which Lobel figures for it in his (...). This is that which Tabernamontanus figures for Polyacantha, and our Author gaue his figure in this place. The second of these I take to be that which Lobel hath figured for Polyacantha, and (...) for Carduus syl. 3. (which figure we here giue you) and in the Hist. Lugd. pag. 1473. it is both figured and described by the name of Polyacanthos Theophrasti. In the figure there is little difference: in the things themselues this; the stalkes of this are as high as those of the last, but slenderer, with fewer and straighter branches, and commonly edged with foure large welts, which haue fewer, yet longer prickles than those of the former: the leaues and stalkes of this are of a grayish or whitish colour: the heads are longish, but much smaller than those of the former, and they seldom open or spred abroad their floures, but onely shew the tops of diuers reddish threds of a feint colour. This growes as frequently as the former, and commonly in the same places. The third, which I thinke may fitly be referred vnto these, growes on wet heaths and such like places, hauing a stalke sometimes foure or fiue cubits high, growing straight vp, with few branches, and those short ones: the floures are of an indifferent bignesse, and commonly purple, yet sometimes white. I thinke this may be the Onopyxos alter Lugdunens. or the Carduus palustris described in Bauhinus his (...), pag. 156.
2 The second, which is a stranger with vs, is the Phoenix, Leo and Carduus ferox of Lobel and Dod. Bauhine hoth refer'd it to Acarna, calling it Acarna minor caule non folioso.
3 The third description was also out of Dodonaeus, being of his Carduus syluestris primus, or the Onopyxos Dodonaei of the Hist. Lugd. The figures formerly both in the third and fourth place of this chapter were of the Acanthium Illyricum of Lobel; or the Onopordon of Dodonaeus, formerly mentioned.
4 This description also was out of Dodonaeus, being of his Carduus syluestris alter, agreeing in all things but the colour of the floures, which should be purple. Lobel in his Obseruations describeth the same Thistle by the name of Carduus vulgatissimus viarum: but both he and Dodon. giue the figure of Carlina syluestris for it: but neither the floures nor the heads of that agree with that description. I iudge this to be the Thistle that Fabius Columna hath set forth for the Ceanothos of Theophrastus; and Tabern. for Carduus arvensis: and our Author, though vnfitly, gaue it in the next place for Carduus muscatus.
5 The Muske-Thistle I haue seene growing about Deptford, and (as far as my memory serues me) it is very like to the third here described: it growes better than a cubit high, with reasonable large leaues, and also heads which are a little soft or downy, large, with purple floures: the heads before the floures open smell strong of muske. I haue found no mention of this but only in (...), de Collectione in parte, where he hath these words; Carduus arvensis maior purpureo flore (qui flore (...) nato Moschum olebat) floret Iulio. Our Author formerly gaue an vnfit figure for this, as I formerly noted.
There is sufficient of the rest in their titles and descriptions. @



 The Temperature and Vertues.
These wild Thistles (according to Galen) are hot and dry in the second degree, and that through  the propertie of their essence they driue forth stinking vrine, if the roots be boyled in Wine and drunke; and that they take away the ranke smell of the body and arme-holes.
Dioscorides saith, that the root of the common Thistle applied plaisterwise correcteth the silthy  smell of the arme holes and whole body.
And that it workes the same effect if it be boyled in wine and drunke, and that it expelleth plentie  of stinking vrine.
The same Author affirmeth also, that the herbe being as yet greene and tender is vsed to be eaten  among other herbes after the manner of Asparagus.
This being stamped before the floure appeareth, saith Pliny, and the iuyce pressed forth, causeth  haire to grow where it is pilled off, if the place be bathed with the iuyce.
The root of any of the wilde Thistles being boyled in water and drunke, is reported to make  them dry that drinke it.
It strengthneth the stomacke; and it is reported (if we beleeue it) that the same is also good for  the matrix, that boyes may be ingendred: for so Chereas of Athens hath written, and (...), who is thought to write most diligently of Thistles.
This Thistle being chewed is good against stinking breath. Thus farre Pliny, in his twentieth  booke, cap. 23.



CHAP. 491. Of the Melon or Hedge-hog Thistle.


Melocarduus Echinatus Penae and Lob. The Hedge-hog Thistle.



 The Description.
WHo can but maruel at the rare and singular workmanship which the Lord God almighty hath shewed in this Thistle, called by the name Echino-Melocactos, or Melo-carduus Echinatus? This knobby or bunchy masse or lump is strangely compact and context together, containing in it sundry shapes and formes, participating of a Pepon or Melon, and a Thistle, both being incorporate in one body; which is made after the forme of a cock of hay, broad and flat below, but sharp toward the top, as big as a mans body from the belly vpward: on the outside hereof are fourteene hard ribbes, descending from the crowne to the lowest part, like the bunchy or out swelling rib of a Melon standing out, and chanelled betweene: at the top or crowne of the plant issueth forth a fine silken cotton, wherewith it is full fraught; within which cotton or flockes lie hid certain smal sheaths or cods, sharpe at the point, and of a deep sanguine colour, answering the cods of Capsicum or Indian Pepper, not in shew only, but in colour, but the cods are somewhat smaller. The furrowed or chanelled ribs on the outside are garnished or rather armed with many prickly stars, standing in a compasse like sharpe crooked hornes or hookes, each star consisting of ten or twelue pricks, wherewith the outward barke or pilling is garded, so that without hurt to the fingers it cannot be touched: this rinde is hard, thicke, and like vnto Aloes, of the colour of the Cucumber: the flesh or inner pulpe is white, fat, waterish, of taste soure, vnsauory, and cooling, much like vnto the meate of a raw Melon or Pompion. This plant groweth without leafe or stalke, as our Northerne Thistle doth, called Carduus Acaulos, and is bigger than the largest

Pompion: the roots are small, spreading farre abroad in the ground, and consisting of blacke and tough twigs, which cannot endure the iniurie of our cold clymate.


 The Place.
This admirable Thistle groweth vpon the cliffes and grauelly grounds neere vnto the sea side, in the Islands of the West Indies, called S. Margarets and S. Iohns Isle, neere vnto Puerto rico, or Porto rico, and other places in those countries, by the relation of diuers trauellers that haue iournied into those parts, who haue brought me the plant it selfe with his seed; the which would not grow in my garden by reason of the coldnesse of the clymate.


 The Time.
It groweth, floureth, and flourisheth all the yeare long, as do many other plants of those Countries.


 The Names.
It is called Carduus Echinatus, Melocarduus Echinatus, and Echino Melocactos: In English, the Hedge-hog Thistle, or prickly Melon Thistle. @ Such as are curious may see more hereof in Clusius his Exoticks, lib. 4. cap. 24. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is not any thing extant set forth of the antient or of the later writers, neither by any that haue trauelled from the Indies themselues: therefore we leaue it to a further consideration.



CHAP. 492. Of the gummie Thistle, called Euphorbium.


1 Euphorbium. The poysonous gum Thistle.


2 Anteuphorbinm. The Antidote against the poysonous Thistle.



 The Description.
1 EVphorbium (whereout that liquor or gum called in shops Euphorbium is extracted) hath very great thicke grosse and spreading roots, dispersed far abroad in the ground: from which arise long and round leaues, almost like the fruit of a great Cucumber, a foot and a halfe long, ribbed, walled, and furrowed like vnto the Melon: these branched ribs are set or

armed for the most part with certaine prickles standing by couples, the point or sharpe end of one garding one way, and the point of another looking directly a cleane contrarie way: these prickes (...) often found in the gumme it selfe, which is brought vnto vs from Libya and other parts: the (...) hereof being planted in the ground will take root well, and bring forth great increase, which thing I haue proued true in my garden: it hath perished againe at the first approch of winter. The sap or liquor that is extracted out of this plant is of the colour and substance of the Creame of Milke; it burneth the mouth extremely, and the dust or pouder doth very much annoy the head and the parts thereabout, causing great and vehement sneesing, and stuffing of all the pores.
2 This rare plant called Anteuphorbium hath a very thicke grosse and farre spreading root, very like vnto Euphorbium; from which riseth vp many round greene and fleshie stalkes, whereupon do grow thicke leaues like Purslane, but longer, thicker, and fatter: the whole plant is full of cold and clammie moisture, which represseth the scortching force of Euphorbium; and it wholly seemes at the first view to be a branch of greene Corall.


3 Cereus Peruvianus spinosus Lobelij. The Torch-Thistle or thorny Euphorbium.


4 Calamus Peruvianus spinosus Lobelij. The thorny Reed of Peru.


3 There is not among the strange and admirable plants of the world any one that giues more cause of maruell, or more moueth the minde to honor and laud the Creator, than this plant, which is called of the Indians in their mother tongue Vragua, which is as much to say, a torch, taper, or wax candle; whereupon it hath been called in Latine by those that vnderstood the Indian tongue, Cereus, or a Torch. This admirable plant riseth vp to the height of a speare of twenty foot long, although the figure expresse not the same; the reason is, the plant when the figure was drawn came to our view broken: it hath diuers bunches and vallies, euen as is to be seene in the sides of the Cucumber, that is, furrowed, guttered, or chamfered alongst the same, and as it were laid by a direct line, with a welt from one end vnto the other: vpon which welt or line do stand small star-like Thistles, sharpe as needles, and of the colour of those of the Melon Thistle, that is to say, of a browne colour: the trunke or body is of the bignesse of a mans arme, or a cable rope; from the middle whereof thrust forth diuers knobby elbowes of the same substance, and armed with the like prickles that the body of the trunke is set withall: the whole plant is thicke, fat, and full of a fleshie substance, hauing much iuyce like that of (...), when it is hardned, and of a bitter taste: the

floures grow at the top or extreme point of the plant: after which follow fruit in shape like a fig, full of a red iuyce, which being touched staineth the hands of the colour of red leade: the taste is not vnpleasant.
4 There hath been brought from the Indies a prickly reed of the bignesse of a good big staf, of the length of six or eight foot, chamfered and furrowed, hauing vpon two sides growing vnto it an vneuen membrane or skinny substance, as it were a iag or welt set vpon the wing of a garment, and vpon the very point of euery cut or iagge armed with most sharpe prickles: the whole trunke is filled full of a spongeous substance, such as is in the hollownes of the brier or bramble; amongst the which is to be seene as it were the pillings of Onions, wherein are often found liuing things, that at the first seeme to be dead. The plant is strange, and brought dry from the Indies, therefore we cannot write so absolutely hereof as we desire; referring what more might be said to a further consideration or second edition.


 The Place.
These plants grow vpon Mount Atlas, in Libya, in most of the Islands of the Mediterranean sea, in all the coast of Barbarie, especially in S. Crux neere vnto the sea side, in a barren place there called by the English men Halfe Hanneken; which place is appointed for Merchants to (...) of their businesse, euen as the Exchange in London is: from which place my friend Mr. William Martin, a right expert Surgeon, did procure me the plants of them for my garden, by his seruant that he sent thither as Surgeon of a ship. Since which time I haue receiued plants of diuers others that haue trauelled into other of those parts and coasts: notwithstanding they haue not endured the cold of our extreme Winter.


 The Time.
They put forth their leaues in the Spring time, and wither away at the approch of Winter.


 The Names.
It is called both in Greeke and Latine (...), Euphorbium: Pliny in one place putteth the herbe in the feminine gender, naming it Euphorbia: the iuyce is called also Euphorbion, and so it is likewise in shops: we are faine in English to vse the Latine word, and to call both the herbe and iuyce by the name of Euphorbium, (...) other name we hauenone: it may be called in English, the Gum Thistle.


 The Temperature.
Euphorbium (that is to say, the congealed iuvce which we vse) is of a very hot, and, as Galen testifieth, causticke or burning facultie, and of thinne parts: it is also hot and dry in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
An emplaister made with the gumme Euphorbium, and twelue times so much oyle, and a little  wax, is very singular against all aches of the ioynts, lamenesse, palsies, crampes, and shrinking of sinewes, as Galen, lib. 4. de (...) (...) genera, declareth at large, which to recite at this present would but trouble you ouermuch.
Euphorbium mingled with oyle of Bay and Beares grease cureth the scurfe and scalds of the  head, and pildnesse, causing the haire to grow againe, and other bare places, being anointed therewith.
The same mingled with oyle, and applied to the temples of such are very sleepie, and troubled  with the lethargie, doth awaken and quicken their spirits againe.
If it be applied to the nuque or nape of the necke, it bringeth their speech againe that haue lost  it by reason of the Apoplexie.
Euphorbium mingled with vineger and applied taketh away all foule and ill fauoured spots, in  what part of the body soeuer they be.
Being mixed with oyle of (...)-floures, as Mesues saith, and with any other oyle or ointments, it  quickly heateth such parts as are (...) cold.
It is likewise a remedie against (...) paines in the huckle bones, called the Sciatica.
(...), Paulus, (...), and (...) doe report, That if it be inwardly taken it purgeth by  siege water and (...); but withall it setteth on fire, scortcheth and fretteth, not onely the throat and mouth, but also the stomacke, liuer, and the rest of the intrals, and inflames the whole bodie.
For that cause it must not be beaten smal, and it is to be tempered with such things as allay the  heate and sharpenesse thereof, and that make glib and slipperie; of which things there must be such a quantitie, as that it may be sufficient to couer all ouer the superficiall or outward part thereof.
But it is a hard thing so to couer and fold it vp, or to mix it, as that it will not burne or scortch. For though it be tempered with neuer so much oyle, if it be outwardly applied it raiseth blisters, especially in them that haue soft and tender flesh, and therfore it is better not to take it inwardly.

It is troublesome to beate it, vnlesse the nostrils of him that beats it be carefully stopped and  defended; for if it happen that the hot sharpnesse thereof do enter into the nose, it presently causeth (...), and moueth neesing, and after that, by reason of the extremitie of the heate, it draweth out aboundance of flegme and filth, and last of all bloud, not without great quantity of (...).
But against the hot sharpnesse of Euphorbium, it is reported that the inhabitants are remedied  by a certaine herbe, which of the effect and contrarie faculties is named Anteuphorbium. (...) plant likewise is full of iuyce, which is nothing at all hot and sharpe but coole and (...), allaying the heate and sharpnesse of Euphorbium. We haue not yet learned that the old writers haue set downe any thing touching this herbe; notwithstanding it seemeth to be a kinde of Orpine, which is the antidote or counterpoyson against the poyson and venome of Euphorbium.



@ CHAP. 493. Of soft Thistles, and Thistle gentle.
@ THere are certaine other plants by most writers referred to the Thistles; which being omitted by our Author, I haue thought fit here to giue you.


@ Cirsium maximum Asphodeli radice. Great soft bulbed Thistle.


2 Cirsium maius alterum. Great soft Thistle.



 The Description.
1 THe first and largest of these hath roots consisting of great longish bulbes like those of the Asphodill: from whence arise many large stalkes three or foure cubits high, crested and downy: the leaues are very long and large, iuycie, greenish, and cut about the edges, and set with soft prickles. At the tops of the stalkes and branches grow heads round and large, out whereof come floures consisting of aboundance of threds, of a purple colour, which flie away in downe. This growes wilde in the mountainous medowes and in some wet places of Austria. I haue seene it growing in the garden of Mr. Iohn Parkinson, and with Mr. Tuggye. It floures in Iuly. Clusius hath called it Cirsium maximum mont. incano folio, bulbosa radice. But he gaue no figure thereof, nor any else, vnlesse the Acanthium peregrinum in Tabernamont. (which our Author

formerly, as I before noted, gaue by the name of (...) lutea (...)) were intended for this plant, as (...) verily thinke it was. I haue giuen you a figure which I drew some yeares (...) (...) the plant it selfe.
2 The root of this is long, yet sending forth of the sides creeping fibres, but not (...): the leaues are like those of the last mentioned, but lesse, and armed with sharpe prickles of a (...) colour, with the middle rib white: the heads sometimes stand vpright, and (...) long downe; they are very prickly, and send (...) floures consisting of many (...) purple threds. The stalkes are thicke, crested and welted with the setting on of the leaues. This growes wilde (...) (...) sea (...) of Zeeland, Flanders, and Holland: it floures in Iune and Iuly: it is the (...) (...) of (...); and Cirsium maius of Lobel.
3 This whose root is fibrous and liuing, sends forth lesser, narrower, and (...) leaues than those of the former, not iagged or cut about their edges, nor hoary, yet set about with prickles: the stalkes are crested: the heads are smaller, and grow three or foure together, carrying such purple floures as the former. This is that which Matthiolus, (...), and others haue set forth (...) (...): (...), for Cirsium 2. and Clusius hath it for his (...) quartum, or Montanum secundum.


@ 3 Cirsium folijs non hirsut is. Soft smooth leaued Thistle.


@ 4 Cirsium montanum capitulis paruis. Small Burre Thistle.


4 The leaues of this are somewhat like those of the last described, but larger, and welting the stalkes further at their setting on: they are also set with prickles about the edges: the stalks are some two cubits high diuided into sundry long slender branches: on whose tops grow little rough prickly heads, which after the floures come to perfection doe hang downewards, and at the length turne into downe; amongst which lies hid a smooth shining seed. This groweth wilde in diuers wooddy places of Hungarie and Austria. It is the Cirsium of (...); the (...) 2. or Montanum 1. of Clusius; and Cirsium alterum of Lobel. It floures in Iune: the root is about the thicknesse of ones little finger, fibrous also, and liuing.
5 This sends vp long narrow leaues, hairy, and set about the edges with slender prickles: out of the middest of these leaues growes vp a stalke sometimes a foot, otherwhiles a cubit high, slender, stiffe, and downy: vpon which grow leaues somewhat broad at their setting on, and there also a little nicked or cut in: this stalke sometimes hath no branches, otherwhiles two or three long slender ones, at the tops whereof grow out of (...) heads such floures as the common Knap-weed,

@ 5 Cirsium montanum Anglicum. Single headed Thistle.@ Cirsij Anglici alia Icon (...). Pennies figure of the same.@ Cirsij Anglici Icon Lobelij. Lobels figure of the same.@ 6 (...) mollis folijs dissectis. (...) leaued Thistle gentle.
which at length turne into downe; among which lies hid a small shining seed like the other plants of this kind. The root is made of diuers thicke fibres, which run in the ground, and here and there put vp new heads. This plant wants no setting forth; for Clusius giues vs the figure and (...) thereof, first by the name of Cirsium Pannonicum 1. pratense; then he giues another historie thereof, with a worser figure, (which he receiued of Dr. Thomas Penny of London) by the name of (...) Anglicum 2. Lobel also described it, and set it forth with a figure expressing the floure alreadie saded, by the name of Cirsium Anglicum. Bauhine in his Pinax, deceiued by these seuerall expressions, hath made three seuerall plants of this one; a fault frequent in many Writers of plants. (...) found it growing in the mountainous medowes alongst the side of the Danow in Austria: Penny, (...) the medowes at the foot of Ingleborow hill in Yorke-shire: Lobel, in the medowes at a place (...) (...) Acton in Glocester-shire. I found this onely once, and that was in a medow on this side Highgate, hauing beene abroad with the Companie of Apothecaries, and returning that way home, in the companie of Mr. Iames Walsall, William Broad, and some others. I haue giuen you both the (...) of Clusius his owne in the first place, and that of Dr. Penny in the second, but the former is (...) better: I haue also giuen you that of Lobel.


@ 7 Carduus mollis folijs Lapathi. Docke leaued Thistle-gentle.


6 These also Clusius (whom I herein (...)) addeth to the kindes of Thistles. This iagged leafed one, which he calleth Carduus mollior primus, hath many leaues at the root, both spred vpon the ground, and also standing vpright; and they are couered with a white and soft downinesse, yet greene on the vpper side: they are also much diuided or cut in euen to the middle rib, like to the (...) or tenderer leaues of the Starre Thistle: they haue no prickles at all vpon them: (...) of the middest of these leaues grow vp one or two stalkes, round, crested, purplish, hoarie, and some cubit or better high. The leaues that grow vpon the lower part of the stalke are diuided, those aboue not so; the tops of the stalkes sometimes, yet very seldome, are parted into branches, which cary scaly heads containing elegant floures made of many purple strings. The floure decaying, there succeeds a cornered seed: the root somtimes equalls the thickenesse of ones (...), brownish, long, and somewhat fibrous. It floures in May, and growes vpon the hilly places of Hungarie.
7 The stalke of this is some foot or (...) high, thicke, crested, and somwhat hairy: the leaues about the root are somwhat large, aud in shape like those of Bonus Henricus, (abusiuely called in English, Mercurie) somewhat sinuated about the edges, and set with harmelesse prickles, greene aboue, and verie hoarie vnderneath, like the leaues of the white Poplar: those that grow vpon the stalke are lesser and narrower: out of whose bosomes towards the tops of the stalke grow out little branches which carry three, foure, or more little scaly heads like those of the Blew-Bottle, or Knapweed, whereout grow threddy blewish purple floures: the seed is wrapped in downe, and not vnlike that of Blew-Bottle: the root is blacke, hard, and liuing, sending forth shoots on the sides. It growes vpon the highest Austrian Alpes, and floures in Iuly. Clusius calls this (...) mollior Lapathi folio.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These plants seeme by their taste to be of a moderately heating and drying facultie, but (...) of them are vsed in medicine, nor haue their vertues set downe by any Author. @




CHAP. 494. Of three leafed Grasse, or Medow Trefoile.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of three leafed Grasses, some greater, others lesser; some beare floures of one colour, some of another: some of the water, and others of the land: some of a sweet smel, others stinking: and first of the common medow Trefoiles, called in Irish Shamrockes.


1 Trifolium pratense. Medow Trefoile.


@ 3 Trifolinm maius flore albo. Great white Trefoile.




 The Description.
1 MEdow Trefoile bringeth forth stalkes a cubit long, round, and something hairy, the greater part of which creepeth vpon the ground; whereon do grow leaues consisting of three ioyned together, one standing a little from another, of which those that are next the ground and roots are rounder, and they that grow on the vpper part longer, hauing for the most part in the midst a white spot like a halfe moon. The floures grow on the tops of the stalkes in a tuft or small Fox-taile care, of a purple colour, and sweet of taste. The seed groweth in little huskes, round and blackish: the root is long, wooddy, and groweth deepe.
2 There is another of the field Trefoiles, differing from the precedent especially in the colour of the floures; for as those are of a bright purple, contrariwise these are very white, which maketh the difference. The leaues, floures, and all the whole plant is lesse than the former.
3. 4. There is also a Trefoile of this kinde which is sowne in fields of the Low-Countries, in (...) and diuers other places beyond the seas, that commeth vp ranker and higher than that which groweth in medowes, and is an excellent food (...) cattell, both to fatten them, and cause them to (...) great store of milke.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) with white floures, which hath stalks some foot high, and narrow (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of ones little finger. This is Clusius his Trifolium (...) (...)

@ 4 Trifolium maius flo. purpureo. Great purple Trefoile.
@ 5 Trifolium luteum Lupulinum. Hop Trefoile.
@ 6 Trifolium luteum minimum. Little yellow Trefoile.
primum. The other hath stalkes some cubit high, with larger ioynts and leaues: the floure or head of floures is also larger, of an elegant red colour. This Clusius calls Trifolium maius tertium. @
5. 6. Likewise we haue in our fields a smaller Trefoile that bringeth forth yellow floures, a greater and a lesser, and diuers others also, differing from these in diuers notable points, the which to distinguish apart would greatly inlarge our volume, and yet to small purpose: therefore we leaue them to be distinguished by the curious, who may at the first view easily perceiue the difference, and also that they be of one stocke or kindred.
@ The greater of these yellow Trefoiles hath prety large yellow heads, which afterward become of a brownish colour, and somewhat resemble a Hop: whence Thalius called it Lupulus syluaticus, or Trifolium luteum alterum lupulinum: Dodonaeus cals it Trifolium agrarium. The leaues are small, and lightly nickt about the edges. The lesser hath smaller and far lesser yellow heads, which are succeeded by many little crooked clustring seeds: the leaues of this are small, and also snipt about the edges: both this and the other haue two little leaues close by the fastning of the foot-stalkes of the leaues to the main stalks; wherfore I refer them to the Medicks, and vsually cal this later, Medica sem. (...). It is the Trifol. luteum minimum of (...) and Lobel; and Trifolium arvense of Tabern. @



 The Place.
Common Medow Trefoile groweth in medowes, fertile (...), and waterish grounds. The others loue the like soile.


 The Time.
They floure from May to the end of Sommer.


 The Names.
Medow Trefoile is called in Latine Trifolium pratense: in High Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, Claueren: in French, Treffle and Trainiere, and Visumarus, as Marcellus an old writer testifieth: in English, Common Trefoile, Three-leafed grasse: of some, Suckles, and Honi-suckles, Cocksheads; and in Irish, Shamrocks.


 The Temperature.
The leaues and floures of Medow Trefoiles are cold and drie.


 The Vertues.
The decoction of three leaued Grasse made with honie, and vsed in a clyster, is good against the  frettings and paines of the guts, and driueth forth tough and slimie humours that cleaue vnto the guts.
The leaues boiled with a little barrowes grease, and vsed as a pultis, take away hot swellings and  inflammations.
Oxen and other cattell do feed of the herbe, and also calues and young lambs. The floures are  acceptable to Bees.
Pliny writeth, and setteth it downe for certaine, that the leaues hereof do tremble, and stand right  vp against the comming of a storme or tempest.
The medow Trefoile (especially that with the blacke halfe Moon vpon the leafe) stamped with  a little honie, takes away the pin and web in the eies, ceaseth the paine and inflammation thereof, if it be strained and dropped therein.



CHAP. 495. Of stinking Trefoile, or Treacle Clauer.


Trifolium bituminosum, Treacle Clauer.



 The Description.
TReacle Clauer groweth vpright like a shrubbie plant, with stalkes of a cubit and a halfe high, whereupon do grow next the ground broad leaues, 3 ioined together, those vpon the stalkes are longer and narrower. The stalks are couered ouer with a rough euill coloured hairinesse: the leaues are of a dark black greene colour, and of a loth some smell, like the pitch called Bitumen Iudaicum, whereof it took his name: the floures grow at the toppe of the stalks, of a darke purplish colour tending vnto blewnesse, in shape like those of Scabious: the seed is broad, rough, long, and sharpe pointed: the root is small and tender, and cannot indure the coldnesse of our winter, but perisheth at the first approch thereof.


 The Place.
It groweth naturally, saith Hippocrates Hippiatros, not Cous, in rough places, as Ruellius translateth it: in Germanie, France and England it neuer commeth vp of it selfe, but must be sown in gardens, as my selfe haue proued diuers times, and was constrained to sow it yearely, or else it would not come vp, neither of his owne sowing or otherwise.


 The Time.
It floureth not in my garden vntil the end of August.



 The Names.
Nicander calleth this Trefoile (...): in (...), Trifolium acutum, or sharpe pointed (...) (...) Pliny, (...) odoratum, but not properly; of others, Trifolium Asphaltaeum, sive (...), (...) Stone Pitch (...).
(...) calleth it Tarsilon, and not Handacocha: Auicen doth comprehend Dioscorides his (...), (...) is to say, Lotus vrbana (...), and Aegyptia; which Dioscorides confoundeth one with another in (...) (...): in English it is called Clauer gentle, Pitch Trefoile, stinking Trefoile, and (...) (...).


 The Temperature.
This Trefoile, called (...), as Galen saith, is hot and drie, as (...) is, and that in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Being drunke, it taketh away the pain of the sides, which commeth by obstructions or stoppings, prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the desired sicknesse.
Hippocrates writeth, that it doth not onely bring them downe, but likewise the birth, not onely  inwardly taken, but also outwardly applied. If a woman, saith he, be not well clensed after her (...) bearing, giue her this Trefoile to drinke in white wine.
Dioscorides saith, that the seeds and leaues being drunke in water, are a remedie for the (...), dissicultie of making water, the falling sicknesse, the dropsie when it first beginneth, and for (...) that are troubled with the mother: the quantity to be taken at once is three drams of the seeds, and foure of the leaues.
The leaues drunke in Oxymel, or a syrrup of vineger made with honie, is good for those that (...) bitten with serpents.
Some affirme that the decoction of the whole plant, root and leaues, taketh away paine from  those whom serpents haue bitten, if they be washed therewith; but if any other man hauing anvlcer be washed with that water (...) he was bathed that was bitten of the serpent, they say that he shall be troubled in the same manner that the stinged partie was.
Some also giue with wine three leaues, or a small quantitie of the seeds in (...) agues, and in  quartaine foure, as a sure remedie against the fits.
The root also is put into antidotes or counterpoisons, saith (...): but other antient (...) do not onely mix the root with them, but also the seed, as we may see in Galen, by a great (...) compositions in his 2. booke of Antidotes; that is to say, in the Treacles of Aelius (...), (...) Laudoceus, Claudius Apollonius, Eudemus, (...), Dorothaeus, and Heras.
The herbe stamped and applied vpon any enuenomed wound, or made with poisoned weapon, it  draweth the poison from the depth most apparantly. But if it be applied vpon a wound where there is no venomous matter to work vpon, it doth no lesse infect that part, than if it had been bitten with some serpent or venomous beast: which wonderfull effect it doth not performe in respect of any vitious qualitie that it hath in it selfe, but because it doth not finde that venomous matter to work vpon, which it naturally draweth (as the Load-stone doth iron) wherupon it is constrained through his attractiue qualitie, to draw and gather together humours from far vnto the place, whereby the paine is greatly increased.



CHAP. 496. Of diuers other Trefoiles.

 The Description.
1 THree leaued grasse of America hath diuers crooked round stalks, leaning this way and that way, and diuided into diuers branches: whereon do grow leaues like those of the medow Trefoile, of a black greene colour, and of the smel of Pitch Trefoile, or Treacle Clauer: the floures grow at the top of the branches, made vp in a long spiked chassie care, of a white colour: after which commeth the (...), somewhat flat, almost like to those of Tares: the roots are long strings of a wooddie substance.
2 This three leafed grasse (which Dodonaeus in his last Edition calleth Trifolium cochleatum (...): and (...), Fanum (...)) hath diuers round vpright stalks, of a wooddie rough substance, yet not able of it selfe to stand without a prop or stay: which stalks are diuided into diuers small branches, whereupon do grow leaues ioined three together like the other Trefoiles, but osa darke (...) greene colour: the floures grow at the top of the stalks in shape like those of the codded Trefoile, but of a darke purple colour: the seede followeth, contained in small wrinckled

1 Trifolium Americum. Trefoile of America.
The figure (...) put in the second place was of the (...) yellow (...) described in the (...) chapter (...) one.

 2 Trifolium Burgundiacum. Burgundie Trefoile.
3 Trifolium Salmanticum. Portingale Trefoile.
huskes turned round, after the manner of a water snaile: the root is thick, composed of diuers tough threddie strings, and lasteth long in my garden with great increase.
3 This three leaued grasse of Salmanca, a citie as I take it of Portingale, differeth not much from our field Trefoile: it hath many branches weake and tender, trailing vpon the ground, of two cubites and a halfe high: whereupon doe grow leaues (...) together by three vpon a stemme, from the bosome whereof thrust forth tender foot-stalkes, whereon doe stand most fine floures of a bright red tending vnto purple: after which come the seed wrapped in small skinnes, of a red colour.
4 The Hart Trefoile hath very many flexible branches, set vpon a slender stalke, of the length of two or three foot, trailing hither and thither: whereupon doe grow leaues ioined together by

4 Trifolium cordatum. Heart Trefoile.
5 Trifolium siliquosum minus. Small codded Trefoile.
@ 6 (...) ex Codice Caesareo. (...) Trefoile.
three on little slender foot-stalks, euery little leafe of the fashion of a heart, whereof it took his name: among which come forth scalie, or chaffie yellow floures: the root is thick and threddie. @ I take the plant which our Authour here figured and intended to describe vnto vs, to be of that Medica which Camerarius calls Arabica, which growes wilde in many places with vs, hauing the leaues a little dented in at the ends, so that they resemble the vulgar figure of a heart; and each (...) is marked with a blackish, or red spot: the floures be small and yellow: the seeds are contained in rough buttons, wound vp like the other Snaile Trefoiles, whereof it is a kinde. I haue giuen you the figure a little more exquisite, by the addition of the spots and cods. @
5 This kinde of three leaued grasse is a low herb, creeping vpon the ground: the leaues are like those of the common Trefoile, but lesser, and of a grayish greene colour: the floures are faire and yellow, fashioned like those of broome, but lesser: after come three or soure cods, wherein is contained round seed: the root is long and reddish. @ This is the Trifolium (...), or Melilotus Coronata of Lobel: Lotus pentaphyllos of Gesner. @
This codded Tresoile is like vnto the last described in euery respect, sauing that this plant is altogether @ larger, hauing stalks a cubite

and a halfe high: the leaues are also soure times as large, two roundish leaues (...) by the stalke, and three (...) ones growing vpon a short foot-stalke comming forth betweene the two roundish leaues: both the stalke and leaues haue a little soft downinesse or hairinesse on (...): the floures grow clustering together on the tops of the stalks, in shape, bignesse, and colour like (...) of the last described, but commonly more in number: they are also succeeded by such (...) as those of the former.
6 The figure which (...) hath set forth (...) of an old Manuscript in the Emperors Library, being there figured for Coronopus, seemes to be of the last described, or some plant very like thereto, though the fiue leaues at each ioint be not (...) in such order as they should be, yet (...) the parts are well exprest, (...) to the drawing of those times, for you (...) finde (...) antient expressions come so neere as this doth. @
7 There is a kinde of Clauer growing about (...) in France, that hath many twiggie tough branches comming from a wooddy root, whereon are set leaues three together, (...) the maner of the other Trefoiles, so new hat long, (...), and of a hoarie or ouerworne (...) colour. The floures are yellow, and grow at the tops of the branches like those of Broome.


7 Lotus (...), sive (...) Scribonij Largi. Hoarie Clauer.


@ 8 (...) (...) siliqua cornuta. Yellow horned (...).


@ This sends vp many branches from one root, some (...) or more long, commonly lying along vpon the ground, round, flexable, and diuided into sundrie branches: the leaues stand together by threes, and are like those of the true Medica, or Burgundie Trefoile, but much lesse: the floures grow clustering together on the tops of the branches, like in shape to those of the (...); of a yellow colour, and not without smell: they are succeeded by such, yet narrower crooked coddes, as the Burgundy (...) hath (but the Painter hath not wel expressed them:) in these cods are contained seeds like those also of that Trefoile, and such also is the root, which liues long, and much increases. It growes in Hungarie, Austria, and Morauia: it floures in Iune and (...): Clusius calls it Medica flore flavo: (...), Lens maior repens and Tragus, Meliloti maioris species (...): (...) saith that about Nimes in Narbone it is found with floures either yellow white, greene, blew, purple, blacke, or mixed of blew and greene; and hee calleth it Trifolium syluestre (...) (...); or (...). @



 The Place.
The seuerall titles of most of these plants set (...) their naturall place of growing: the rest grow in most fertile fields of England.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish most of the sommer moneths.


 The Names.
There is not much to be said as touching their names, more than hath beene set downe.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and faculties of these Trefoiles are (...) vnto the common (...) Trefoiles.



CHAP. 497. Of the great Trefoiles, or winged Clauers.

 The Description.
Our Author in the first place formerly gaue the figure of (...). his (...) flore albo, being only a variety of that plant: you shall hereafter finde it described by the name of (...) (...); now he made the description somewhat in the leaues to agree with the (...), (...) nothing (...) with the (...) (...) (...) he (...) to describe, for (as it is euident by the names) he (...) to describe both the first and second (which are here now described) in the first place, for he hath (...) them both together in the names.

 1 THe great Hares foot being a kinde of (...), hath a hard and wooddie root, (...) of blacke threddie strings: from (...) (...) diuers tough and feeble (...), whereupon do grow leaues, set together by threes, making the whole plant to resemble those of the Medow Trefoile: the floures grow at the top of the stalks, composed of a bunch of gray (...): among the which soft matter commeth forth small floures of a most bright purple colour, (...) resembling the floures of the common medow Trefoile, but far greater. Lobel calls this Lagopus maximus folio, and facie Trifolij pratensis: Dodonaeus, Lagopus maior folio Trifolij.


@ 1 Lagopus maximus. The great Hares foot Trefoile.


@ 2 Lagopus maior spica (...). Great large headed Hares foot.



@ 2 This elegant plant (which Tragus hath set forth for Cytisus, Lobel by the (...) of (...) altera folio prinnato, and Clusius for his Trifolij maioris 3. altera species) hath stalkes some (...) and better high, whereon grow leaues set together by threes, long, (...) and lightly (...) about the edges, with elegant nerues or veines, running from the middle rib to the sides of the leaues, which are most conspicuous in hot Countries, and chiefly then when the leafe begins to decay. At the tops of the branches, in long and large heads grow the floures, of an elegant sanguine colour. This floures in May and Iune, and growes wilde vpon some mountaines of Hungary and Austria; I haue seene them, both this and the former, growing in the gardens of some of our Florists.
3 This other great kinde of Hares-foot sends forth one slender, yet stiffe stalke, whereon grow leaues whose foot-stalkes are large at the setting on, encompassing the stalkes: the leaues themselues grow by threes, long, narrow, and (...) pointed, of a grayish colour like those of the common Hares-foot; the spike at the top is soft and downy, with little reddish floures amongst the whitish hairinesse. This growes wilde in Spaine: Clusius calls it Lagopus angustifolius Hispanicus maior.
There is another sort of this descrbed by Lobel and Pena in the Aduers. whose leaues are longer and narrower than this, the whole plant also is oft times lesser: they call it Lagopus altera (...) folia. @


@ 3 Lagopus angustifoiius Hispanicus. Narrow leafed Spanish Hare-(...).


4 Lagopodium, Pes leporis. (...) Hares-foot Trefoile.


4 The small Hares-foot hath a round rough and hairy stalke, diuiding it selfe into diuers other branches; whereupon do grow small leaues, three joined together, like those of the small yellow Trefoile: the floures grow at the very point of the stalkes, consisting of a rough knap or bush of haires or downe, like that of Alopecuros, or Fox-taile, of a whitish colour tending to a light blush, with little white floures amongst the downinesse: the root is small and hard.


 The Place.
The first groweth in the fields of France and Spaine, and is a stranger in England; yet it groweth in my garden.
The small Hare-foot groweth among corne, especially among Barly, and likewise in barren pastures almost euery where.


 The Time.
They (...) and flourish in Iune, Iuly, and August.



 The Names.
The great Hare-foot Trefoile is called of Tragus, Cytisus: of Cordus, Trifolium magnum: of Lobclius, (...) maximum, and Lagopodium: in Greeke, (...): in English, the great Hares-soot.
The last, being the smallest of these kindes of Trefoiles, is called Lagopus, and (...) Leporis: in Dutch, Hasen pootkens: in high Dutch, Hasen fusz: in French, (...) de lieure: in English Harefoot.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and faculties are referred vnto the other Trefoiles, whereof these are kindes: notwithstanding Dioscorides saith, that the small Hares-foot doth binde and dry. It stoppeth, saith he, the laske, if it be drunke with red wine. But it must be giuen to such as are feuerish with water.



CHAP. 498. Of Water Trefoile, or Bucks Beanes.


Trifolium paludosum. Marsh Trefoile.



 The Description.
1 THe great Marsh Trefoile hath thicke fat stalkes, weake and tender, full of a spungious pith, very smooth, and of a cubit long: whereon do grow leaues like to those of the garden Beane, set vpon the stalkes three joined together like the other Trefoiles, smooth, shining, and of a deepe greene colour: among which toward the top of the stalkes standeth a bush of feather like floures of a white colour, dasht ouer slightly with a wash of light carnation: after which the seed followeth, contained in small buttons, or knobby huskes, of a browne yellowish colour like vnto Millet, and of a bitter taste: the roots creepe diuers waies in the middle marish ground, being full of joints, white within, and full of pores, and spungie, bringing forth diuers by-shoots, stalkes, and leaues, by which meanes it is easily increased, and largely multiplied.
2 The second differeth not from the precedent, sauing it is altogether lesser, wherein consisteth the difference, if there be any: for doubtlesse I thinke it is the selfe same in each respect, and is made greater and lesser, according to his place of growing, clymate, and countrey.


 The Place.
These grow in marish and Fenny places, and vpon boggie grounds almost euery where.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish from Iune to the end of August.


 The Names.
Marish Trefoile is called in high Dutch, (...), that is to say, Castoris Trifolium, or Trifolium fibrinum: in low Dutch, of the likenesse that the leaues haue with the garden Beanes, (...), that is to say, (...) Hircinus, or Boona Hircina: the later Herbarists call it Trifolium palustre, and Paludosum: of some, (...): in English, marsh-Clauer, marsh-Trefoile, and Buckes-Beanes.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The seed of Isopyrum, saith Dioscorides, if it be taken with meade or honied water, is good against  the cough and paine in the chest.
It is also a remedy for those that haue weake (...) and spet bloud, for as Galen saith it clenseth  and cutteth tough humours, hauing also adjoined with it (...) astringent or binding quality.




CHAP. 499 Of sweet Trefoile, or garden Clauer.


Trifolium odoratum. Sweet Trefoile.



 The Description.
SWeet Trefoile hath an vpright stalk, hollow, and of the height of two cubirs, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches: whereon do grow leaues by three and three like to the other Trefoiles, sleightly and superficiously nicked in the edges: from the bosom wherof come the floures, euery one standing on his owne single foot-stalk; consisting of little (...) husks, of a light or pale blewish colour: after which (...) vp little heads or knops, in which lieth the seed, of a whitish yellow colour, and lesser than that of Fenu-greeke: the root hath diuers strings: the whole plant is not onely of a whitish green colour, but also of a sweet smell, and of a strong (...) or spicie sent, and more sweet when it is dried: which smel in the gathered and dried plant doth likewise continue long: and in moist and rainie weather, it smelleth more than in hot and drie weather: and also when it is yet fresh and greene it loseth and recouereth againe his smell seuen times a day; whereupon the old wiues in Germanie do call it Sieuen gezeiten kraut, that is, the herbe that changeth seuen times a day.


 The Place.
It is sowne in gardens not onely beyond the seas, but in diuers gardens in England.


 The Time.
It is sowne in May, it floureth in Iune and Iuly, and perfecteth his seed in the end of August, the same yere it is sowne.


 The Names.
It is commonly called in Latine Trifolium odoratum: in high Dutch as we haue said Sieuen gezeiten: in low Dutch, Seuenghetijcruijt, that is to say, an herb of seuen times: it is called in Spanish, Trcbol real: in French, Treffle oderiferant: in English, Sweet Trefoile, and garden Clauer: it seemeth to be Lotus Vrbana, or satiua, of which Dioscorides writeth in his fourth booke: neuerthelesse diuers Authors set downe Melilot, for Lotus vrbana, and Trifolium odoratum, but not properly. @ The Gardiners and herbe women in Cheapside commonly call it, and know it by the name of Balsam, or garden Balsam. @


 The Temperature.
Galen saith, that sweet Trefoile doth in a meane concoct and drie, and is in a meane and temperate facultie betweene hot and cold: the which faculties vndoubtedly are plainely perceiued in this sweet Trefoile.


 The Vertues.
The iuice pressed forth, saith Dioscorides, with hony added thereto, clenseth the vlcers of the eies, called in Latine (...), and taketh away spots in the same, called Albugines; and remooueth such things as doe hinder the sight.
The oile whrein the floures are infused or steeped, doth perfectly cure greene wounds in very  short space; it appeaseth the paine of the gout, and all other aches, and is highly commended against ruptures, and burstings in young children.
The iuice giuen in white wine cureth those that haue fallen from some high place, auoideth  congealed and clotted bloud, and also helpeth those that do pisse bloud, by meanes of some great bruise, as was prooued lately vpon a boy in Fanchurch street, whom a cart went ouer, whereupon

he did not onely pisse bloud, but also it most wonderfully gushed forth, both at his nose and mouth.
The dried herbe laied among garments keepeth them from Mothes and other vermine.



CHAP. 500. Of Fenugreeke.

 The Description.
1 FEnugreeke hath a long slender trailing stalke, greene, hollow within, and diuided into diuers small branches: whereon do grow leaues like those of the medow Trefoile, but rounder and (...), greene on the vpper side, on the lower side tending to an ash colour: among which come small white floures, after them likewise long slender narrow cods, in which do lie small vneuen seeds, of a yellowish colour: which being dried, haue a strong smell, yet not vnpleasant: the root is small, and perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.


1 Foenumgraecum. Fenugreeke.


@ 2 Foenumgraecum syluestre. Wilde Fenugreeke.


2 There is a wilde kinde hereof seruing to little vse, that hath small round branches, full of knees or ioints: from each ioint proceedeth a smal tender footstalk, whereon do grow three leaues and no more, somewhat snipt about the edges, like vnto those of Burgundie Haie: from the bosoms whereof come forth small yellow floures, which turne into little cods: the root is thicke, tough, and pliant.


 The Place.
Fenugreeke is sowne in fields beyond the seas: in England wee sow a small quantitie thereof in our gardens.


 The Time.
It hath two seasons of sowing, according to Columella, of which one is in September, at what time it is sowne that it may serue for fodder against winter; the other is in the end of Ianuarie, or the beginning of Februarie, notwithstanding we may not sow it vntill Aprill in England.



 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...), or as it is found in Pliny his copies Carphos: in Latine, (...) Graecum: Columella saith that it is called Siliqua: in Pliny we read Silicia: in Varro, Silicula: in high Dutch, (...): in Italian, Fiengreco: in Spanish, Alfornas: in French, Fenegrec: and in English, (...).


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It is thought according to Galen in his booke of the Faculties of nourishments, that it is one of  those simples which do manifestly heat, and that men do vse it for food, as they do Lupines; for it is taken with pickle to keep the body soluble; and for this purpose it is more agreeable than Lupines, seeing it hath nothing in his owne proper substance, that may hinder the working.
The iuice of boiled Fenegreeke taken with honie is good to purge by the stoole all manner of  corrupt humors that remaine in the guts, making soluble through his sliminesse, and mitigating paine through his (...).
And because it hath in it a clensing or scouring facultie, it raiseth humors out of the chest: but  there must be added vnto it no great quantitie of honie least the biting qualitie should abound.
In old diseases of the chest without a feuer, fat dates are to be boiled with it, but when you haue  mixed the same iuice pressed out with a great quantitie of hony, and haue againe boiled it on a soft fire to a mean thicknesse, then must you vse it long before meat.
In his booke of the Faculties of simple medicines he saith, that Fenegreek is hot in the second  degree, and dry in the first: therefore it doth kindle and make worse hot inflammations, but such as are lesse hot and more hard are thereby cured by being wasted and consumed away.
The meale of Fenegreeke, as Dioscorides saith, is of force to mollifie and waste away: being boiled  with mead and applied it taketh away inflammations, as well inward as outward.
The same being tempered or kneaded with niter and vineger, doth soften and waste away the  hardnesse of the milt.
It is good for women that haue either imposthume, vlcer, or stopping of the matrix, to bathe and  sit in the decoction thereof.
The iuice of the decoction pressed forth doth clense the haire, taketh away dandraffe, scoureth  running sores of the head, called of the Graecians (...): being mingled with goose grease, and put vp in manner of a pessarie, or mother supposititorie, it doth open and mollifie all the parts, about the mother.
Greene Fenegreeke bruised and pounded with vineger, is a remedie for weak and feeble parts, and  that are without skin, vlcerated and raw.
The decoction thereof is good against vlcers in the low gut, and foule stinking excrements of  those that haue the bloudy flix.
The oile which is pressed out thereof scoureth haires and scars in the priuie parts.
The decoction of Fenegreeke seed, made in wine, and drunke with a little vineger, expelleth all  euill humors in the stomacke and guts.
The seed boiled in wine with dates and hony, vnto the form of a syrrup, doth mundifie and clense  the breast, and easeth the paines thereof.
The meale of Fenegreek boiled in mead or honied water, consumeth and dissolueth all cold hard  imposthumes and swellings, and being mixed with the roots of Marsh Mallows and Linseed effecteth the same.
It is very good for women that haue any griefe or swelling in the matrix, or other lower parts, if  they bathe those parts with the decoction thereof made in wine, or sit ouer it and sweat.
It is good to wash the head with the decoction of the seed, for it taketh away the scurfe, scailes, nits, and all other such like imperfections.



CHAP. 501. Of Horned Clauer, and blacke Clauer.

 The Description.
1 THe horned Clauer, or codded Trefoile, groweth vp with many weake and slender stalks lying vpon the ground: about which are set white leaues, somewhat long, lesser, aud narrower than any of the other Trefoiles: the floures grow at the tops, of the fashion of those of Peason, of a shining yellow colour: after which come certain straight cods, bigger than those of Fenegreek, but blunter at their ends, in which are contained little round seed; the root is hard and wooddie, and sendeth forth young springs euery yeare.



1 Lotus trifolia corniculata. Horned or codded Clauer.


2 Lotus quadrifolia. Foure leafed grasse.


2 This kinde of three leafed grasse, or rather foure leafed Tre foile, hath leaues like vnto the common Trefoile, sauing that they bee lesser, and of a browne purplish colour, knowne by the name of Purple-wort, or Purple-grasse; whose floures are in shape like the medow Trefoile, but of a dustie ouerworn colour tending to whitenesse; the which doth oftentimes degenerate, sometime into three leaues, sometimes in fiue, and also into seuen, and yet the plant of his nature hathbut foure leaues and no more. @ I do not thinke this to be the purple leaued Trefoile with the white floure, which is commonly called Purple-grasse; for I could neuer obserue it to haue more leaues than three vpon a stalke. @
@ 3 The root of this is small and white, from which arise many weake hairie branches some cubit long: wheron grow soft hairy leaues three on one foot-stalke, with two little leaues at the root therof, and out of the bosoms of these vpon like footstalkes grow three lesser leaues, as also floures of the bignes and shape of those of a Vetch, but of a braue deep crimson veluet colour: after these are past come cods set with foure thinne welts or skins which make them seem foure square; whence Camerarius called it Lotus pulcherrima tetragonolobus: the seed is of an ash colour, somewhat lesse than a pease. It floures most of the Sommer moneths, and is for the prettinesse of the floure preserued in many Gardens by yearely sowing the seede, for it is an annuall plant. Clusius hath it by the name of Lotus siliquosus rubello flore: and hee saith the seeds were diuers times sent out of Italy by the name of Sandalida. It is also commonly called in Latine (...) quadratum. @


 The Place.
The first groweth wilde in barren ditch bankes, pastures, and drie Mountaines.


@ 3 Lotus siliqua qaudrata. Square crimson veluet pease.



The second groweth likewise in pastures and fields, but not so common as the other; and is planted in gardens.


 The Time.
They floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The second is called Lotus Trifolia: in English, horned Clauer, or codded Trefoile.
The other is called Lotus quadrifolia, or foure leafed Grasse, or Purple-wort: of Pena and Lobel, Quadrifolium phaeum fuscum hortorum.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their faculties in working are referred vnto the medow Trefoiles: notwithstanding it is reported, that the leaues of Purple-wort stamped, and the iuyce giuen to drinke, cureth young children of the disease called in English the Purples.



CHAP. 502. Of Medicke Fodder, or snaile Clauer.

 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Trefoile, called Medica, hath many small and slender ramping branches, crawling and creeping along vpon the ground, set full of broad leaues slightly indented about the edges: the floures are very small, and of a pale yellow colour, which turne into round wrinkled knobs, like the water Snaile, or the fish called Periwinckle: wherein is contained flat seed fashioned like a little kidney, in colour yellow, in taste like a Vetch or pease: the (...) is small, and dieth when the seed is ripe: it growes in my garden, and is good to feed cartell fat.


1 Trifolium Cochleatum. Medicke Fodder.


@ 2 Medicafructu cochleato spinoso. Prickly Snaile Trefoile.


@ There are many varieties of these plants, and they chiefely consist in the fruit; for some are smooth and flat, as this first described: other some are rough and prickely, some with lesser, and

other some with bigger prickles; as also with them standing diuers wayes, some are onely rough, and of those some are as big as a small nut, other some no bigger than a pease. I giue you here the descriptions of three rough ones, (as I receiued them from Mr. Goodyer) whereof the last is of the sea, which, as you may see, our Author did but superficially describe.
2 Medicae maioris Baeticae species prima, spinulis intortis.
This hath foure square reddish streaked hairy trailing branches, like the small English Medica, greater and longer, foure or fiue foot long: the leaues are also smooth, growing three together, neither sharpe pointed, nor yet so broad at the top as the said English Medica, but blunt topped, with a small blacke spot in the midst, not crooked: the floures are also yellow, three, foure, or fiue on a foot-stalke: after commeth a round writhed fruit fully as big as a hasell nut, with small prickles not standing fore-right, but lying flat on the fruit, finely wrapped, plaited, folded, or interlaced together, wherein lieth wrapped the seed in fashion of a kidney, very like a kidney beane, but foure times smaller, and flatter, of a shining blacke colour without, like polished Ieat; containing a white kernell within: the root is like the former, and perisheth also at Winter.
Medicae maioris Baeticae spinosae species altera.
The branches also creepe on the ground, and are straked smooth foure square, reddish here and there, three or foure foot long: the leaues are smooth, finely notched about the edges, sharp pointed, without blacke spots, very like Medica pericarpio plano: the floures are small and yellow like the other: the fruit is round, writhed or twined in also, fully as big as a hasell nut, somewhat cottonie or woolly, with short sharpe prickles: wherein lyeth also wrapped a shining blacke kidney-like seed, so like the last described, that they are not to be discerned apart: the root is also alike, and perisheth at Winter.
Medicae marinae spinosae species.
The branches of this are the least and shortest of all the rest, little exceeding a foot or two in length, and are foure square, greene, somewhat hairie, and trailing on the ground: the leaues are like to those of Medica pericarpio plano, not fully so sharpe pointed, without blacke spots, soft, hairy, three on a foot-stalke: the floures grow alongst the branches, on very small foot-stalkes, forth of the bosomes of the leaues, (not altogether on or neere the tops of the branches) and are very small and yellow, but one on a foot-stalke: after commeth small round writhed fruit, no bigger than a pease, with very short sharpe prickles, wherein is contained yellowish seed of the fashion of a kidney like the former, and is the hardest to be plucked forth of any of the rest: the root is also whitish like the roots of the other, and also perisheth at Winter. Aug. 2. 1621. Iohn Goodyer. @


3 Trifolium Cochleatum marinum. Medick Fodder of the sea.


3 This kinde also of Trefoile, (called Medica marina: in English, sea Trefoile, growing naturally by the sea side about Westchester, and vpon the Mediterranean sea coast, and about Venice) hath leaues very like vnto the common medow Trefoile, but thicker, and couered ouer with a

flockie hoarinesse like Gnaphalium, after the manner of most of the sea herbes: the floures are yellow: the seeds wrinkled like the former, but in quantitie they be lesser.


 The Place.
The first is sowne in the fields of Germanie, Italy, and other countries, to feed their cattell, as we in England do Bucke-wheat: we haue a small quantitie thereof in our gardens, for pleasures sake
The third groweth neere vnto the sea side in diuers places.


 The Time.
Medica must be sowne in Aprill; it floureth in Iune and Iuly: the sruit is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
Medick fodder is called of some Trifolium Cochleatum, and Medica: in French, L'herbe a Limasson: in Greeke, (...) in Spanish, (...): of the Valentians and Catalons, Alfafa, by a word either barbarous or Arabicke: for the chiefe of the Arabian writers, Auicen, doth call Medica, Cot, Alaseleti, and Alfasfasa.
The other is called Sea Clauer, and Medick fodder of the sea.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Medick fodder is of temperature cold, for which cause it is applied greene to such inflammations  and infirmities as haue need of cooling.



CHAP. 503. Of Wood Sorrell, or Stubwort.


1 Oxys alba. Whitewood Sorrell.



 The Description.
1 OXys (...), or Trifolium acetosum, being a kind of three leafed grasse, is a low and base herbe without stalk; the leaues immediately rising from the root vpon short stems at their first comming forth folded together, but afterward they do spred abroad, and are of a faire light greene colour, in number three, like the rest of the Trefoiles, but that each lease, hath a deepe cleft or rift in the middle: amongst these leaues come vp small and weake tender stems, such as the leaues do grow vpon, which beare small star-like floures of a white colour, with some brightnes of carnation dasht ouer the same: the floure consisteth of fiue small leaues; after which come little round knaps or huskes full of yellowish seed: the root is very threddy, and of a reddish colour: the whole herbe is in taste like Sorrell, but much sharper and quicker, and maketh better greene sauce than any other herbe or Sorrell whatsoeuer.
@ My oft mentioned friend Mr. George Bowles sent me some plants of this with very faire red floures, which he gathered in Aprill last, in a wood of Sir Thomas Walsinghams at Chisselhurst in Kent, called Stockwell wood, and in a little round wood thereto adioyning. @
2 The second kinde of Oxys or wood Sorrell is very like the former, sauing that the floures are

2 Oxys lutea. Yellow wood Sorrell.
of a yellow colour, and yeeld for their seed vessels small and long horned cods; in other respects alike.


 The Place.
These plants grow in woods and vnder bushes, in sandie and shadowie places in euery countrie, @ I haue not as yet found any of the yellow growing with vs. @


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of Aprill vnto the end of May and midst of Iune.


 The Names.
Wood Sorrell or Cuckow Sorrell is called in Latine Trifolium acetosum: the Apothecaries and Herbarists call it Alleluya, and Panis Cuculi, or Cuckowes meate, because either the Cuckow feedeth thereon, or by reason when it springeth forth and floureth the Cuckow singeth most, at which time also Alleluya was wont to be sung in Churches. Hieronymus Fracastorius nameth it Lujula. Alexander Benedictus saith that it is called Alimonia: in high-Dutch, (...): in Low-Dutch, (...): in French, Pain de Cocu: in English, wood Sorrel, wood Sower, Sower Trefoile, Stubwort, Alleluia, and Sorrell du Bois.
It is thought to be that which Pliny, lib. 27. cap. 12. calleth Oxys; writing thus: Oxys is three leafed, it is good for a feeble stomacke, and is also eaten of those that are bursten. But Galen in his fourth booke of Simples saith, that Oxys is the same which Oxalis or Sorrell is: and Oxys is found in Pliny to be also Iunci species, or a kinde of Rush.


 The Nature.
These herbes are cold and dry like Sorrell.


 The Vertues.
Sorrell du Bois or wood Sorrell stamped and vsed for greene sauce, is good for them that haue  sicke and feeble stomackes; for it strengthneth the stomacke, procureth appetite, and of all Sorrel sauces is the best, not onely in vertue, but also in the pleasantnesse of his taste.
It is a remedie against putrified and stinking vlcers of the mouth, it quencheth thirst, and cooleth  mightily an hot pestilentiall feuer, especially being made in a syrrup with sugar.



CHAP. 504. Of noble Liuer-wort, or golden Trefoile.

 The Description.
1 NOble Liuerwort hath many leaues spred vpon the ground, three cornered, resembling the three leaued grasse, of a perfect grasse greene colour on the vpper side, but grayish vnderneath: among which rise vp diuers small tender foot-stalkes of three inches long; on the ends whereof stands one smal single blew floure, consisting of six little leaues, hauing in the middle a few white chiues: the seed is inclosed in little round knaps, of a whitish colour; which being ripe do start (...) of themselues: the root is slender, composed of an infinite number of blacke strings.
2 The second is like vnto the precedent in leaues, roots, and seeds: the floures hereof are of a shining red colour, wherein consisteth the difference.

This strange three leaued Liuerwort differeth not from the former, sauing that this brings forth double blew floures tending to purple, and the others not so.
There is another in my garden with white floures, which in stalks and euery other respect is like the others.


1 Hepaticum trifolium. Noble Liuerwort.


2 Hepatica trifolia rubra. Noble red Liuerwort.


3 Hepatica multiflora Lobelij. Noble Liuerwort with double floures.




 The Place.
These pretty floures are found in most places of Germanie in shadowie woods among shrubs, and also by highwaies sides: in Italy likewise, and that not onely with the blew floures, but the same with double floures also, by the report of Alphonsus Pancius Dr. of Physicke in the Vniuersity of Ferrara, a man excellently well seen in the knowledge of Simples. They do all grow likewise in my garden, except that with double floures, which as yet is a stranger in England: @ it is now plentiful in many gardens. @


 The Time.
They floure in March and April, and perfect their seed in May.


 The Names.
Noble Liuerwort is called Hepatica trifolia, Hepatica aurea, Trifolium (...): of Baptista Sardus, Herba Trinitatis: in high-Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in low-Dutch, (...) (...) (...): in French, Hepatique: in English, Golden Trefoile, three leaued Liuerwort, noble Liuerwort, and herbe Trinitie.


 The Temperature.
These herbes are cold and drie, with an astringent or binding qualitie.



 The Vertues.
It is reported to be good against the weakenesse of the liuer which proceedeth of an hot cause;  for it cooleth and strengthneth it not a little.
Baptista Sardus commendeth it, and writeth that the chiefe vertue is in the root; if a spoonfull of  the pouder (...) be giuen certaine dayes together with wine, or with some kinde of broth, it profiteth much against the disease called Enterocele.



CHAP. 505. Of Melilot, or plaister Clauer.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Melilot hath great plenty of small tough and twiggy branches, and stalkes full of ioynts or knees, in height two cubits, set full of leaues (...) together, like vnto Burgondie hay. The floures grow at the top of the stalke, of a pale yellow colour, standing thickly set and compact together, in order or rowes, very like the floures of Securidaca (...): which being vaded, there follow certaine crooked cods bending or turning vpward with a sharpe point, in fashion not much vnlike a Parrets bill, wherein is contained seed like Fenugreeke, but flatter and slenderer: the whole plant is of a reasonable good smell, much like vnto honey, and very full of iuyce: the root is very tough and pliant.


1 Melilotus Syriaca odora. Assyrian Clauer.


2 Melilotus Italica and Patauina. Italian Clauer.


2 The second kinde of Melilot hath small and tender vpright stalkes, a cubit high, and somewhat more, of a reddish colour, set full of round leaues three together, not snipt about the edges like the other Trefoiles; and they are of a very deepe greene colour, thicke, fat, and full of iuyce. The floures grow alongst the tops of the stalkes, of a yellow colour, which turne into rough round seeds as big as a (...), and of a pale colour. The whole plant hath also the sauour of honey, and perisheth when it hath borne his seed.

3 The third kind of Melilot hath round stalks and iagged leaues set round about, not much vnlike the leaues of Fenugreeke, alwaies three growing together like the Trefoiles, and (...) couered ouer with an hoarinesse, as though meale had been strewed vpon them. The floures be yellow and small, growing thicke together in a tuft, which turne into little cods, wherein the seed is contained: the root is small, tough, and pliant.
4 The fourth kinde of Melilot growes to the height of three cubits, set full of leaues like the common Melilot, and of the same sauour: the floures grow alongst the top of the stalks, of a white colour, which turne into small soft huskes, wherein is contained little blackish seed: the root is also tough and pliant.


3 Melilotus Coronata. Kings Clauer.


4 Melilotus Germanica. Germane Clauer.


@ Although our Author intended this last description for our ordinarie Melilot, yet he made it of another which is three times larger, growing in some gardens (where it is onely sowne) aboue two yards high, with white floures and many branches: the whole shape thereof is like the common kinde, as far as I remember. The common Melilot hath weake cornered greene stalkes some two foot and better high; whereon grow longish leaues snipt and oftentimes eaten about the edges, of a fresh greene colour: out of the bosomes of the leaues come little stalkes some handfull long, set thicke on their tops with little yellow floures hanging downe and turning vp again, each floure being composed of two little yellow leaues, whereof the vppermost turnes vp again, and the vndermost seemes to be parted into three. The floures past, there succeed little cods wherein is the seed. @


 The Place.
These plants grow in my garden: the common English Melilot Pena setteth sorth for Melilotus Germanica: but for certaintie no part of the world doth enioy so great part thereof as England, and especially Essex; for I haue feene betweene Sudbury in Suffolke, and Clare in Essex, and from Clare to Heningham, and from thence to Ouendon, Bulmare, and (...), very many acres of earable pasture overgrowne with the same; insomuch that it doth not onely spoyle their land, but the corne also, as Cockle or Darnel, and as a weed that generally spreadeth ouer that corner of the Shire.



 The Time.
These herbes do floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Plaister Clauer is called by the generall name, Melilotus, of some, Trifolium odor at (...); yet there is (...) sweet Trefoile, as hath been declared. Some call it Trifolium Equinum, and (...), or (...). Trefoile, by reason it is good sodder for horses, who do greedily seed thereon: likewise (...) (...), or Beares Trefoile: of Fuchsius, Saxifraga (...), and (...) Campana: of Cato, (...) (...), which most do name Corona Regia: in high Dutch, (...) (...): of the Romanes and Hetrurians, Tribolo, as Matthiolus writeth: in English, Melilot, and Plaister-Clauer: in Yorkeshire, Harts-Clauer.


 The Temperature.
Melilote, saith Galen, hath more plenty of hot substance than cold (that is to say (...) and dry in the first degree) it hath also a certaine binding qualitie besides a wasting and (...) (...). (...) sheweth, that Melilote is of a binding and mollifying qualitie, but the mollifying qualitie is not proper vnto it, but in as much as it (...) away, and digesteth humors (...) in hot swellings, or otherwise: for so far doth it mollifie or supple that thing which is hard, which is not properly called mollifying, but digesting and wasting away by vapors: which kinde of quality the Grecians call (...).


 The Vertues.
Melilote boiled in sweet wine vntill it be soft, if you adde thereto the yolke of a rosted egge, the  meale of Fenegreeke and (...), the roots of Marsh Mallowes and hogs greace stamped together, and vsed as a pultis or cataplasma, plaisterwise, doth asswage and soften all manner of swellings, especially about the matrix, fundament and genitories, being applied vnto those places hot.
With the juice hereof, oile, wax, rosen and turpentine, is made a most soueraigne healing (...) drawing emplaster, called Melilote plaister, retaining both the colour and sauour of the (...), being artificially made by a skilfull Surgion.
The herbe boiled in wine and drunke prouoketh vrine, breaketh the stone, and (...) the  paine of the kidnies, bladder and belly, and ripeneth flegme, and causeth it to be easily cast (...).
The juice thereof dropped into the eies cleereth the sight, consumeth, dissolueth, and (...) taketh away the web, pearle, and spot in the eies.
Melilote alone with water healeth (...) melicerides, a kinde of wens or rather apostems conteyning  matter like honey; and also the running vlcers of the head, if it be laid to with chalke, wine and galls.
It likewise (...) the paine of the eares, if the juice be dropped therein mixed with a little wine, and taketh away the paine of the head, which the Greekes call (...), especially if the head be bathed therewith, and a little vineger and oile of Roses mixed amongst it.



@ CHAP. 506. Of certaine other Trefoiles.
@ THose Tresoiles being omitted by our Author, I haue thought good to put into a chapter by themselues, though they haue little (...) with one another, the two last excepted.

 The Description.
1 THe first of those in roots, stalkes, and manner of growing is like the Medicke or (...) Trefoiles formerly described: the leaues are hairie; the floures yellow and small: after which sollow crooked flat cods, of an indifferent bredth, wherein is contained seeds made after the fashion of little kidnies; this the Italians, according to Lobel, call Lunaria radiata; in the Hist. Ludg. it is called Medica (...). altera lunata.
2 The root of this is long and thicke, couered with a yellowish rinde, and hauing a white sweet (...) in the inside, couered with a hairinesse on the top, and sending forth sundry fibres: from this rise vp many weake long foot-stalkes, whereon grow leaues set together by threes, long, narrow, smooth, lightly nickt on the edges: amongst these rises vp commonly one stalke (yet sometimes two) smooth and naked, three or foure inches long; on the top thereof grow spike fashion, 8. or ten pretty large light purple floures, each of them being set in a cup diuided into 5. parts. This growes vpon diuers parts of the Alpes: and Pena in his Mons Baldus set it forth by the name of (...) angustifolium Alpinum. Bauhinus saith, the root hereof tasts like Liquorice, wherefore it may be called Glycyrhiza Astragaloides, or Astragalus (...): and he receiued it out of Spaine by the name of Glycyrhiza. He calls it in his (...), Trifolium Alpinum flore magno radice dulci.



@ 1 Trifolium siliqua lunata. Moone Trefoile.


@ 2 Trisol. angustifol. Alpinum. Liquorice Trefoile.


@ 3 Trifolium spinosum Creticum. Prickly Trefoile.


3 This thornie Trefoile hath a long threddy root, from which arise many short branched stalkes some two handfulls high, cornered, and spred vpon the ground; the ioynts, which are many, are commonly red, and armed with foure sharpe prickles, and out of each of them, vpon short footstalkes grow two trifoile leaues, greene, longish, and ending in a little prickle: out of these ioynts also grow little foot-stalkes, which carry single floures made of fiue little leaues, of the shape and colour of the little blew Bell-floure, with ten chiues in the middle tipt with yellow: after these follow fiue cornered sharpe pointed heads, containing a single flat red seed in each corner. Clusius set forth this by the name of Trifolium spinosum (...): the seed was sent out of Candy by the name of (...): he questions whether it may not be the true Tribulus terrestris of Dioscorides.
4 The roots, stalkes, and leaues of this pretty Trefoile do not much differ from the common

@ 4 Trifolium fragiferum. Straw-berry (...).
white Trefoile, but there is some difference in the floures and seed; for the floures of this are small, grow thick together, and are of a whitish blush colour: after which follow heads made of little bladders or thinne skins, after such a manner as they resemble a Strawberrie or Raspas, and they are of a grayish colour, here and there marked with red: the stalkes seldome grow aboue three inches high. It growes in most salt marishes, as in Dartford salt marish, in those below Purfleet, and such like: it floures in Iuly and August. Clusius hath set it forth by the name of Trifolium fragiferum Frisicum: some had rather call it Trifolium vesicarium, Bladder Trefoile.
5 There are two other Trefoiles with which I thinke good to acquaint you, and those by the similitude of the cups, which containe the floures, and become the seed vessels, may be fitly called Stellata; and thus Bauhine calls the first Trifolium stellatum; whereto for distinctions sake I adde hirsutum, calling it Trifol. stellatum hirsutum, Rough starrie headed Trefoile: it hath a smal long white root, from which arise stalkes some foot high, round, slender, hairie, and reddish, hauing few leaues or branches: the leaues stand three on a stalke, as in other Trefoiles, smooth on the vpper side, and hairy below: the floures are small and red, like in shape to those of the common red Trefoile, but lesser; and they stand each of them in a cup reddish and rough below, and on the vpper part cut into fiue long sharpe leaues standing open as they commonly figure a starre: the floures fallen, these cups dilate themselues, and haue in the middle a longish transuerse whitish spot. I saw this flouring in May in the garden of Mr. Tradescant, who did first bring plants hereof from Fermentera a small Island in the Mediterranean sea.
6 This other (which for any thing that I know is not figured nor described by any) hath stalks sometimes a foot, otherwhiles little aboue an inch high, hairy, and diuided but into few branches: the leaues, which stand by threes, are fastned to long foot-stalkes, and they themselues are somewhat longish, hauing two little sharpe pointed leaues growing at the setting on of the footstalkes to the stalkes: they are greene of colour, and not snipt about the edges. The heads that grow on the tops of the stalkes are round, short, and greene, with small purple or else whitish floures like those of the common Trefoile, but lesser, standing in cups diuided into fiue parts, which when the floures are fallen become somewhat bigger, harsher, and more prickly, but open not themselues so much as those of the former: the seed is like that of Millet, but somwhat rounder. This floures in Iune, and the seed is ripe in Iuly. I first obserued it in Dartford salt marish, the tenth of Iune, 1633. I haue named this Trifolium stellatum glabrum, Smooth starrie headed Trefoile. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These, especially the three last, seeme to be of the same temper and vertue as the common Medow Trefoiles, but none of them are at this day vsed in Physicke, or knowne, vnlesse to some few. @



CHAP. 597. Of Pulse.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Pulse, as Beanes, Peason, Tares, Chiches, and such like, comprehended vnder this title Pulse: and first of the great Beane, or garden Beane.



 The Description.
1 THe great Beane riseth vp with a foure square stalke, smooth, hollow, without ioynts, long and vpright, which when it is thicke sowne hath no need of propping, but when it is sowne alone by it selfe it soone falleth downe to the ground: it bringeth forth long leaues one standing from another, consisting of many growing vpon one rib or stem, euerie one whereof is somewhat fat, set with veines, slipperie, more long than round. The floures are (...), in forme long, in colour either white with blacke spots, or of a blackish purple: after them come vp long cods, thicke, full of substance, slenderer below, frized on the inside with a certaine whitewooll as it were, or soft flockes; which before they be ripe are greene, and afterwards being dry they are blacke and somewhat hard, as be also the cods of broome, yet they be longer than those, and greater: in which are contained three, foure, or fiue Beanes, seldome more, long, broad, flat, like almost to a mans naile, great, and oftentimes to the weight of halfe a dram; for the most part white, now and then of a red purplish colour; which in their vpper part haue a long black nauell as it were, which is couered with a naile, the colour whereof is a light greene: the skin of the (...) or beane is closely compacted, the inner part being dry is hard and sound, and easily cleft in sunder; and it hath on the one side an euident beginning of sprouting, as haue also the little pease, great Pease, Ciches, and many other Pulses. The roots hereof are long, and fastned with many strings.


1 Fabamaior hortensis. The great garden Beane.


2 Fabasyluestris. The wilde Beane.


2 The second kinde of Beane (which Pena setteth forth vnder the title of Syluestris Graecorum Faba, and Dodonaeus, Bonasyluestris; which may be called in English Greeke Beanes) hath square hollow stalkes like the garden Beanes, but smaller. The leaues be also like the common Beane, sauing that the ends of the rib whereon those leaues do grow haue at the very end small tendrels (...) claspers, such as the pease leaues haue. The (...) are in fashion like the former, but of a darke red colour: which being vaded, there succeed long cods which are blacke when they be ripe, within which is inclosed blacke seed as big as a Pease, of an vnpleasant taste and sauour.

@ 3 The common Beane in stalkes, leaues, floures, and cods is like the former great garden Beane, but lesser in them all; yet the leaues are more, and grow thicker, and out of the bosomes of the leaues vpon little foot-stalkes grow the floures, commonly six in number, vpon one stalk, which are succeeded by so many cods, lesser and rounder than those of the former: the beans themselues are also lesse, and not so flat, but rounder, and somewhat longish: their colour are either whitish, yellowish, or else blacke. This is sowne in most places of this kingdome, in corne fields, and known both to man and beast. I much wonder our Author forgot to mention so common and vulgarly knowne a Pulse. It is the (...) or Faselus minor of Dodonaeus; and the Faba minor of Pena and Lobel. @


 The Place.
The first Beane is sowne in fields and gardens euery where about London.
This blacke Beane is sowne in a few mens gardens who be delighted in varietie and study of herbes, whereof I haue great plenty in my garden.


 The Time.
They floure in Aprill and May, and that by parcels, and they be long in flouring: the fruit is ripe in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The garden Beane is called in Latine Faba: in English, the garden Beane: the field Beane is of the same kinde and name, although the fertilitie of the soile hath amended and altered the fruit into a greater forme. @ The difference betweene the garden and field Beane is a specificke difference, and not an accidentall one caused by the soile, as euery one that knoweth them may well perceiue. @
The blacke Beane, whose figure we haue set forth in the second place, is called Faba (...): of some thought to be the true physicke Beane of the Antients; whereupon they haue named it Faba Veterum, and also Faba Graecorum, or the Greeke Beane. Some would haue the garden Beane to be the true Phaseolus, or Kidney Bean; of which number Dodonaeus is chiefe, who hath so wrangled and ruffled among his relatiues, that all his antecedents must be cast out of dores: for his long and tedious tale of a tub we haue thought meet to commit to obliuion. It is called in Greeke (...). whereupon the Athenians feast dayes dedicated to Apollo were named (...), in which Beans and Pulses were sodden: in Latine it is also called Faba fresa or fracta, broken or bruised Beane.
@ Dodonaeus knew well what he did, as any that are either iudicious or learned may see, if they looke into the first chapter of the second booke of his fourth Pemptas. But our Authors words are too iniurious, especially being without cause, and against him, from whom he borrowed all that was good in this his booke, except the figures of Tabernamontanus. It may be Dr. Priest did not fit his translation in this place to our Authors capacitie; for Dodonaeus did not affirme it to be the Phaseolus, but (...), distinguishing betweene them. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Beane before it be ripe is cold and moist: being dry it hath power to bind and restraine, according  to some Authors: further of the temperature and vertues out of Galen.
The Beane (as Galen saith in his booke of the Faculties of nourishments) is windie meate, although  it be neuer so much sodden and dressed any way.
Beanes haue not a close and heauy substance, but a spongie and light, and this substance hath a  scouring and clensing facultie; for it is plainly seene, that the meale of Beanes clenseth away the filth of the skin; by reason of which qualitie it passeth not slowly through the belly.
And seeing the meale of Beanes is windie, the Beanes themselues if they be boyled whole and  eaten are yet much more windie.
If they be parched they lose their windinesse, but they are harder of digestion, and doe slowly  descend, and yeeld vnto the body thicke or grosse nourishing iuyce; but if they be eaten green before they be ripe and dried, the same thing hapneth to them which is incident to all fruits (...) are eaten before they be fully ripe; that is to say, they giue vnto the body a moist kinde of nourishment, and therefore a nourishment more full of excrements, not onely in the inward parts, but also in the outward, and whole body thorow: therefore those kindes of Beans do lesse nourish, but they do more speedily passe thorow the belly, as the said Author in his booke of the Faculties of simple Medicines saith, that the Beane is moderately cold and dry.
The pulpe or meate thereof doth somewhat clense, the skin doth a little binde.
Therefore diuers Physitians haue giuen the whole Beane boyled with vineger and salt to those  that were troubled with the bloudy flix, with laskes and vomitings.
It raiseth flegme out of the chest and lungs: being outwardly applied it drieth without hurt the  watery humors of the gout. We haue oftentimes vsed the same being boiled in water, and so mixed with swines grease.

We haue laid the meale therof with Oxymel, or syrrup of vineger, both vpon bruised and wounded  sinewes, and vpon the wounded parts of such as haue been bitten or stung, to take away the fierie heat.
It also maketh a good plaister and pultis for mens stones and womens paps: for these parts when  they are inflamed, haue need of moderate cooling, especially when the paps are inflamed through the cluttered and congealed milke contained in them.
Also milke is dried vp with that pultis.
The meale thereof (as Dioscorides further addeth) being tempered with the meale of Fenugreek  and hony, doth take away blacke and blew spots, which come by drie beatings, and wasteth away kernels vnder the eares.
With Rose leaues, Frankincense, and the white of an egge, it keepeth backe the watering of the  eies; the pin and the web, and hard swellings.
Being tempered with wine it healeth suffusions, and stripes of the eies.
The Beane being chewed without the skin, is applied to the forehead against rheumes and falling  downe of humours.
Being boiled in wine it taketh away the inflammation of the stones.
The skins of Beans applied to the place where the hairs were first plucked vp, wil not suffer them  to grow big, but rather consumeth their nourishment.
Being applied with Barly meale parched and old oile, they waste away the Kings euill.
The decoction of them serueth to die woollen cloth withall.
This Beane being diuided into two parts (the skin taken off) by which it was naturally ioined  together, and applied, stancheth the bloud which doth too much issue forth after the biting of the horseleach, if the one halfe be laied vpon the place.
The blacke Beane is not vsed with vs at all, seeing, as we haue said, it is rare, and sowne onely in a  few mens gardens, who be delighted in varietie and studie of herbes.



CHAP. 508. Of Kidney Beane.

 The Kindes.
THe stocke or kindred of the Kidney Bean are wonderfully many; the difference especially consisteth in the colour of the fruit: there be other differences, wherof to write particularly would greatly stuffe our volume with superfluous matter, considering that the simplest is able to distinguish apart the white Kidney Beane from the blacke, the red from the purple, and likewise those of mixt colours from those that are onely of one colour: as also great ones from little ones. Wherefore it may please you to be content with the description of some few, and the figures of the rest, with their seuerall titles in Latine and English, referring their descriptions vnto a further consideration, which otherwise would be an endlesse labour, or at the least needlesse.


 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Phaseolus or garden Smilax hath long and small branches growing very high, taking hold with his clasping tendrels vpon poles and stickes, and whatsoeuer standeth neere vnto him, as doth the hop (...) vine, which are so weake and tender, that without such props or supporters they are not able to sustaine themselues, but will run ramping on the ground fruitlesse: vpon the branches do grow broad leaues almost like Iuie, growing together by three, as in the common Trefoile or three leaued Grasse: among which come the floures, that do vary and differ in their colours, according to the soile where they grow, sometimes white, sometimes red, and oftentimes of a pale colour: afterwards there come out long cods, whereof some are crooked, and some are straight, and in those the fruit is contained, smaller than the common Beane, somwhat flat, and fashioned like a Kidney, which are of diuers colours, like vnto the floures: whereto for the most part these are like.
2 There is also another Dolichus or Kidney Beane, lesser, shorter, and with smaller cods, whose floures and fruit are like in forme to the former Kidney Beanes, but much lesser, and of a blacke colour.
3 There is likewise another strange Kidney Beane, which doth also winde it (...) about poles and props neere adioining, that hath likewise three leaues hanging vpon one stem, as haue the other Kidney Beans, but euery one is much narrower and also blacker: the cods be shorter, plainer, and flatter, and containe fewer seeds.



1 Phaseolus albus. White Kidney Beane.


2 Phascolus niger. Blacke Kidney Beane.


3 Smilax hortensis rubra. Red Kidney Beane.


4 Smilax hortensis (...). Pale yellow Kidney Beane.





@ 5 Phaseolus peregrinus (...) minore albo. Indian Kidney Beane with a small white fruit.


@ 6 Phaseolus peregrinus fructa minore frutescens. Indian Kidney Beane with a small red fruit.


@ 7 Phaseolus peregrinus (...). Narrow leafed Kidney Beane.


4 This Kidney Bean differeth not from the others, but onely in the colour of the fruit, which are of a pale yellow colour, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ Besides the varieties of these Kidney Beans mentioned by our Author, there are diuers other (...) vp by (...), which haue been brought out of the East and West Indies, and from some parts of Africa; I will only giue you the figures of two or three of them outof Clusius, with the colours of their floures and fruit.
5 The stalke of this is low and stiffe, the floures of a whitish yellow on the outside, and of a violet colour within: the fruit is snow white, with a blacke spot in the eye: This is Phaseolus peregrinus 4. of Clusius.
6 This hath leaues like the Marsh Trefoile, floures growing many together, in shape and magnitude like those of common Pease: the cods were narrow, and contained three or foure seeds, which were small, no bigger than the seeds of Laburnum; the Painter expressed two of them in the leafe next vnder the vppermost tuft of floures: this is Clusius his Phaseolus peregrinus. 5.
7 This growes high, winding about poles or other supporters: the leaues are narrower than the former: the fruit lesser and flatter, of a reddish colour. This is the Phaseolus percgrinus 6. of Clusius.
8 This windes about poles, and growes to a

8 (...) Brasilianus. Kidney Beane of Brasile.
8 Phascoli (...) ad vivum. The Brasile Kidney Bean in his ful bignesse.
9 Phaseolus Aegyptiacus. The party coloured Beane of Egypt.

10 (...) Americi (...). Purging Kidney Bean of America:
(...) paruiex (...).
(...) paruipallido albiex America delati.
(...) magnilati (...).
(...) rubri.
(...) Indiani (...).
(...) (...).
great height, with soft hairy leaues and large cods, wherein are contained seeds of diuers colours, sometimes they are red, otherwhiles of a whitish ash colour, sometimes wholly black, and otherwhiles spotted.
9 The Egyptian Beane is somewhat like the other Kidney Beanes in his growing: his fruit is of the bignesse of a small Hasell nut, blacke on one side, and of a golden yellow or Orenge colour on the other.
Besides these you finde here figured, and diuers others described by Clusius, I think it not amisse to mention two more. The first of these, which was procured by Mr. (...) (...); and groves in our Gardens, is a large plant, not differing in (...) of growth (...) the former Indian Kidney Beanes, but his floures are large, many, and of an elegant (...) colour: whence it is vulgarly termed by our Flourists, the Scarlet Beane. The other I haue seene grow to a little height, but it would not indure; but the cods of it which were brought to vs were some three inches long, and couered with a hairie downe of a reddish colour, which put vpon the hands or skin in (...) part of the body would sting like a Nettle, and this was called the Stinging Beane: I thinke it came from some part of the East Indies. @



 The Place.
Kidney Beanes doe easily and soone spring vp, and grow into a very great length, being (...) neere to long poles fastned hard by them, or hard by arbors or banqueting places, otherwise they he (...) on the ground, slowly come vp, hardly bring forth fruit, and become faultie and smitted, as (...) writeth.


 The Time.
It is sowne in the Spring, especially in the midst of April, but not before: the fruit is ripe about the end of Sommer.


 The Names.
Hippocrates, Diocles, Theophrastus, and most of the other old Writers do call it (...): diuers of the (...) of the seed do name it(...) and (...) in Latine, (...) (...) calleth it (...), because it climeth vp as Smilax doth, and taketh hold of props, staies, and shrubbes standing neere vnto it: others name it (...), a Diminitiue deriued from (...) for (...) and (...) are not one and the selfe same pulse called by diuers names, as some suppose, but sundry fruits one differing from the other, as (...) in his first booke of the Faculties of Nourishments doth sufficiently declare, where he intreateth of them both. For first he disputeth of Phaseli and (...), Beans, and Pease; then afterward others comming betweene, he writeth of Dolichus, which also is named Phascolus: and though (...) may be thought to doubt what manner of pulse that is which (...) calleth (...): lotwith standing he gathereth and concludeth that it is a fruit of a garden plant in Italy, and in Caria, growing in the fields, which is in forme longer than the Cichlings, and was commonly called in his time (...). Of his opinion is Paulus (...), writing of (...), which hee nameth (...), in the 79. chap. of his first booke. Moreouer, Faselus was in times past a common pulse in Italy and Rome, and (...) a strange pulse; for (...) and Palladius, writers of husbandry, haue made mention of the sowing of Phaselus: and Virgil calleth it Vilis in the first of his Georgicks: but concerning the sowing of Dolichus or Kidney Beane, none of the Latines haue written, by reason that the same was rare in Italy, and sowne onely in gardens, as Galen hath (...), naming it ostentimes a garden plant, and shewing that the same, as we haue said, is sowne in Caria; and likewise (...) nameth it (...) that is to say, Smilax hortensis, or garden Smilax, because it groweth in gardens: who also writing of this in another (...) chapter, (...) plainely, that Smilax hortensis, or Dolichus is another plant differing from Faselus, which he nameth (...).
For which causes it is not to be doubted, but that (...) with three syllables, differeth from Faseolus with foure syllables, no otherwise than Cicer, Cicercula, and Cicera differ, which notwithstanding be neere one to another in names: and it is not to be doubted but that they are deceiued, who thinke it to be one and the selfe same Pulse called by sundry names.
This plant is named in English, Kidney Beane, Sperage Beanes: of some, (...), or long Peason, French Beanes, garden Smilax, and Romane Beanes: in French, Feues de Romme: in Dutch, (...).


 The Temperature.
Kidney Beanes, as (...) teacheth, do more loose the belly than Peason; they are lesse windy, and nourish well, and no lesse than Peason, as Diocles faith: they be also without ingendring (...) at all: the Arabian Physitions say that they are hot and moist of nature.


 The Vertues.
The fruit and cods of Kidney Beanes boiled together before they be ripe, and (...), and so  eaten with their cods, are exceeding delicate meat, and do not ingender winde as the other Pulses doe.
They doe also gently loose the belly, prouoke vrine, and ingender good bloud reasonably well;  but if you eat them when they be ripe, they are neither toothsome nor wholsome. Therefore they are to be taken whilest they are yet greene and tender, which are first boiled vntill they be tender; then is the tib or sinew that doth run alongst the cod to be taken away; then must they be put into a stone pipkin, or some other vessell with butter, and set to the fire againe to stew, or boile gently: which meat is very wholsome, nourishing, and of a pleasant taste.



CHAP. 509. Of the flat Beane called Lupine.

 The Description.
1 THe tame or garden Lupine hath round hard stems, which of themselues do stand vpright without any succour, help or stay: the leaues consist of fiue, six, or seuen ioined together.

1 Lupinus sativus. Garden Lupines.2 Lupinus flore luteo. Yellow Lupines.3 Lupinus flore (...). Blew Lupine.@ 4 Lupinus maior (...) (...); The great blew Lupine.
like those of the Chast tree, green on the vpper side, and on the nether side white and downy; and in the euening about the setting of the Sun they hang flagging downwards as though they were withered: among these there commeth vp a tuft of floures of a pale or light blush colour, which turne into great rough cods, wherein is the fruit, which is flat and round like a cake, of a white colour, and bitter in taste: and where they cleaue vnto the cod, in that part they haue a certaine dent like a little nauell. This Lupine hath but one root, which is slender and wooddie, hauing hanging on it a few small threds like haires.
2 The yellow Lupine is like to the garden one in stalke and leaues, yet both of these lesser and shorter. It hath beautifull floures of an exceeding faire gold yellow colour, sweet of smell, made vp into an eare, of the colour of the yellow violet, and somewhat of the smell: the coddes are small, hard, somew hat hairy: the seeds be little, flat, (...), in taste ex treme bitter, of sundry colours, ill fauored, far lesser than the (...) one.
3 The blew Lupines are longer than the yellow, and diuided into more wings and branches: the leaues be lesser and thinner: the floures small, and lesser than the yellow, of a blew colour: the seeds be also of diuers colours, bitter, and lesser than any of them all.
@ 4 There is also another blew Lupine, whose leaues, stalks, floures, and cods are like, but larger than those of the first described: the floures are of colour blew, with some whitenesse here and there intermixt. @


 The Place and Time.
They require (saith (...)) a sandy and bad soile: they hardly come vp in tilled places, being of their owne nature wilde: they grow in my garden, and in other mens gardens about London. They are planted in Aprill, and bring sorth their fruit at two or three sundrie times, as though it did floure often, and bring forth many crops: the first in May, the second in Iuly, the last in September, but it seldome commeth to ripenesse.


 The Names.
This pulse is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Lupinus, and Lupinus (...): in high Dutch, Feigbonen: in Italian, Lupino domestico: in Spanish, Entramocos: in the Brabanders language, (...) boonen, and Lupinen: in French, Lupins: in English, Garden Lupine, tame Lupine, and of some after the German name Fig-beane.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The seed of the garden Lupine is (...), that is to say, much and often vsed, as Galen saith in his  books of the Faculties of Nourishments: for the same being boiled and afterwards steeped in faire water, vntill such time as it doth altogether lose his naturall bitternes, and lastly being seasoned with a reasonable quantitie of salt, it is eaten with pickle. The Lupine is of an hard and earthy substance, wherefore it is necessarily of hard digestion, and containeth in it a thicke iuice; of which being not perfectly concocted in the veines, is ingendred a bloud or iuice which is properly called crude, or raw: but when it hath lost all his bitternes by preparing or dressing of it (as aforesaid) it is like (...), that is to say, to such things as are without relish, which is perceiued by the taste; and being so prepared, it is, as Galen writeth in his books of the Faculties of simple medicines, one of the emplaistickes or clammers.
But whilest the naturall bitternesse doth as yet remaine, it hath power to clense and to consume  or waste away; it killeth wormes in the belly, being both applied in manner of an ointment and giuen with hony to licke on, and also drunke with water and vineger.
Moreouer, the decoction thereof inwardly taken, voideth the wormes; and likewise if it be sundry  times outwardly vsed as a bath, it is a remedy against the morphew, sore heads, the small Pox, wilde scabs, gangrenes, venomous vlcers, partly by clensing, and partly by consuming and drying without biting; being taken with Rew and Pepper, that it may be the pleasanter, it scoureth the liuer and milt.
It bringeth downe the menses, and expelleth the dead childe if it be layed to with (...) and  honie.
Moreouer, the meale of Lupines doth waste or consume away without any biting qualitie, for it  doth not onely take away blacke and blew spots that come of dry beatings, but also it cureth (...), and Phymata: but then it is to be boiled either in vineger or oxymell, or else in water and vineger, and that according to the temperature of the grieued parties, and the diuersities of the diseases, Quod ex vsu est (...): and it also taketh away blew marks, and what thing soeuer else we haue said the decoction could do, all the same doth the meale likewise performe.
These Lupines, (...) Dioscorides doth furthermore write, being boiled in raine water till they yeeld  a certaine creame, are good to clense and beautifie the face.
They cure the (...) in sheepe with the root of blacke Chameleon Thistle, if they be washed  with the warme decoction.

The (...) boiled with water and drunke, prouoketh vrine.
The Lupines being made sweet and pleasant, mixed with vineger and drunk, take away the lothsomnesse  of the stomacke, and cause a good appetite to meat.
Lupines boiled in that strong leigh which Barbars do vse, and some Wormwood, Centorie, and  bay salt added thereto, stay the running and spreading of a Gangroena, and those parts that are depriued of their nourishment and begin to mortifie, and staieth the ambulatiue nature of running and spreading vlcers, being applied thereto very hot, with stuphes of cloth or tow.



CHAP. 510. Of Peason.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Peason, differing very notably in many respects; some of the garden, and others of the field, and yet both counted tame: some with tough skinnes or membranes in the cods, and others haue none at all, whose cods are to be eaten with the Pease when they be young as those of the young Kidney (...): others carrying their fruit in the tops of the branches, are esteemed and taken for Scottish Peason, which is not very common. There be diuers sorts growing wild, as shall be declared.


1 (...) (...). (...) Pease.


2 Pisum minus. Garden and field Pease.




 The Description.
1 THe great Pease hath long (...), hollow, brickle, of a whitish green colour, branched, and spread vpon the ground, vnlesse they be held vp with proppes set neere vnto them: the leafe thereof is wide and long, made vp of many little leaues which be smooth, white, growing vpon one little stalke or stem, and set one right against another: it hath also in the vpper part long clasping tendrels, wherewith it foldeth it selfe vpon props and staies standing next vnto

3 Pisum vmbellatum. Tufted or Scottish Pease.4 Pisum excorticatum. Pease without skins in the cod.5 Pisum syluestre. Wilde Pease.6 Pisum perenne syluestre. Euerlasting wilde Pease.
it: the floure is white and hath about the middle of it a purple spot: the cods be long, round (...): in which are contained seeds greater than Ochri, or little Peason; which being drie are cornered, and that vnequall, of colour sometimes white and sometimes gray: the roots are small.
2 The field Pease is so very well knowne to all, that it were a needlesse labour to spend time about the description.
3 Tufted Pease are like vnto those of the field, or of the garden in each respect; the difference consisteth onely in that, that this plant carrieth his floures and fruit in the tops of the branches in a round (...) or vmbel, contrary to all other of his kinde, which bring forth their fruit in the midst, and alongst the stalks: the root is thicke and fibrous.
4 Pease without skins, in the cods differ not from the precedent, sauing that the cods hereof want that tough skinny membrane in the same, which the hogs cannot eat by reason of the toughnesse; whereas the other may be eaten cods and all the rest, euen as Kidney beanes are: which being so dressed are exceeding delicate meat.
5 The wilde Pease differeth not from the common field Pease in stalke and leaues, sauing that this wilde kinde is somewhat lesser: the (...) are of a yellow colour, and the fruit is much lesser.
6 The Pease whose root neuer dies, (...) not from the wilde Pease, onely his continuing without sowing, being once sowne or planted, setteth forth the difference.


 The Place.
Pease are set and sown in gardens, as also in the (...) in all (...) of England. The tufted Pease are in reasonable plenty in the West part of (...) about Sennocke or Seuenock; in other places not so (...).
The wilde Pease do grow in pastures and (...) fields in diuers places, specially about the field belonging vnto Bishops Hatfield in (...).


 The Time.
They be sowne in the Spring time, like as be also other pulses, which are ripe in Summer: they prosper best in warme weather, and easily take harme by cold, especially when they floure.


 The Names.
The great Pease is called in Latine (...) Romanum, or (...) maius: in English, Roman Pease, or the greater Pease, also garden Pease: of some, Branch Pease, French Pease, and (...). (...) and other old Writers do call it in Greeke (...): in Latine also Pisum: in low Dutch, Roomsche (...): in French, (...) Pois. The little Pease is called of the Apothecaries euery where Pisum, and (...): it is called in English, little Pease, or the common Pease:


 The Temperature and Vertnes.
The Pease, as Hippocrates saith, is lesse windie than Beans, but it passeth sooner through the belly. Galen writeth, that Peason are in their whole substance like vnto Beanes, and be eaten after the same manner that Beans are, notwithstanding they differ from them in these two things, both because they are not so windie as be the beanes, and also for that they haue not a clensing faculty, and therefore they do more slowly descend through the belly. They haue no effectuall qualitie manifest, and are in a meane between those things which are of (...) and bad iuice, that nourish much and little, that be windie and without winde, as Galen in his booke of the Faculties of Nourishments hath written of these and of beans.



CHAP. 511. Of the (...) or Garden Ciche.

 The Description.
GArden Ciche bringeth forth round stalks, branched and somewhat hairy, leaning on the one side: the leaues are made of many little ones growing vpon one stem or rib, and set one right against another: of which euery one is small, broad, and nicked on the edges, lesser than the leaues of wilde Germander: the floures be smal, of colour either white, or of a reddish purple: after which come vp little short cods, puffed vp as it were with winde like little bladders, in which doe lie two or at the most three seeds cornered, small towards the end, with one sharp corner, not much vnlike to a Rams head, of colour either white, or of a reddish blacke purple; in which is plainly seen the place where they begin first to sprout. The root is slender, white and long: For as Theophrastus saith, the Ciche taketh deepest root of all the Pu ses.


 The Place.
It is sowen in Italy, Spaine and France, euery where in the fields. It is sowen in our London (...), but not common.



Cicer sativum. Garden Ciche.




 The Time.
It is sowne in Aprill, being first steeped in water a day before: the fruit is ripe in August.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...) in Latine, Cicer (...), or Rams Ciches, and of the blackish purple colour, Cicer nigrum, vel (...), blacke or red Ciche: and the other is named Cand, dum (...) album (...): orwhite Ciche: in English, Common Cich, or Ciches, red (...), of (...), Sheepes Ciche Pease, or Sheepes Ciche Peason.


 The Temperature and (...).
The Ciche, as Galen writeth in his booke of  the Faculties of nourishments, is no lesse (...) than the true Bean, but it yeeldeth a stronger nourishment than that doth: (...) (...) lust, and it is thought to ingender seed.
Some giue the same to stalion borses. Moreouer, Ciches do scoure more than do the true Beanes: insomuch as certaine of them do manifestly diminish or (...) away the stones in the Kidneyes: those be the blacke and little Ciches called Arutina, or (...) Ciches, but it is better to drinke the broth of them sodden in water.
Both the Rams Ciches, as Dioscorides saith, the white and the blacke proucke (...), if the decoction therof be made with Rosemary and giuen vnto those that haue either the Dropsie or yellow iaundice; but they are hurtfull vnto the bladder and Kidneies that haue vlcers (...) them.



CHAP. 512. Of wilde Ciches.

 The Kindes.
THe wilde Ciche is like to the tame (saith Dioscorid (...)) but it differeth in seed: the later writers haue set downe two kindes hereof, as shall be declared.


 The Description.
1 THe first wilde Cich bringeth forth a great number of stalks branched, lying flat on the ground: about which be the leaues, consisting of many vpon one rib as do those of the garden Ciche, but not nicked in the edges, more like to the leaues of (...): the fioures come forth fastned on small stems, which grow close to the stalks, of a pale yellow colour, and like vnto eares: in their places come vp little cods, in forme and bignesse of the fruit of garden Ciches, black and something hairie, in which lieth the seed, that is smal, hard, flat, and glittering, in taste like that of Kidney Beane: the root groweth deepe, fastened with many strings.
2 There is another kinde of wilde Cich that hath also a great number of stalks lying vpon the ground, about which stand soft leaues, something hairy and white, consisting of (...) (...) standing vpon a middle rib, the least of which stand neerest to the stem, and the greatest at the very too: the floures come forth at the bottome of the leaues many together, of colour (...); after which grow small long huskes, soft and hairy, in cuery one whereof is a little cod, in which lie two seeds like little Cichlings.



1 Cicer syluestre. The wilde Cich.


2 Cicer syluestre (...). Broad leafed wilde Cich.




 The Place.
These plants are sowne in the parts beyond the seas for to feed their cattell with in winter, as we do tares, vetches, and such other base pulse.


 The Time.
The time answereth the Vetch or tare.


 The Names.
Thewild Cich hath no other name in Latine but Cicer syluestre: the later writers haue not found any name at all.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Their temperature and vertues are referred to the garden Cich, as Theophrastus (...); and Galen saith that the wilde Cich is in all things like vnto that of the garden, but in Physicks vse more effectuall, by reason it is more hotter and drier, and also more biting and bitter.



CHAP. 513. Of Lentils.

 The Description.
1 THe first Lentil growes vp with slender stalks, and leaues which be somwhat hard, growing aslope from both sides of the rib or middle stalke, narrow and many in number like those of Tares, but narrower and lesser: the floures be small, tending somewhat towards a purple: the cods are little and broad: the seeds in these are in number three or foure, little, round, plaine, and flat: the roots are small and threddy.
2 The second kinde of Lentill hath small tender and pliant branches a cubit high, wheron (...) grow leaues diuided or (...) of sundry other small leaues, like the wilde Vetch, ending at the (...) rib with some clasping tendrels, wherewith it taketh (...) of such things as are neere (...) it: among these come sorth little brownish floures mixed with white, which turne into small (...) (...), (...), little browne slat seed, and sometimes white.



1 Lens maior. Great Lentils.


2 Lens minor. Little Lentils.




 The Place.
These Pulses do grow in my garden; and it is reported vnto me by those of good credit, that about Watford in Middlesex and other places of England the husbandmen do sow them for their cattell, euen as others do Tares.


 The Time.
They both floure and wax ripe in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
They are called in Greeke (...), or (...): in Latine, Lens, and Lenticula: in high-Dutch, (...): in French, Lentille: in Italian, Lentichia: in Spanish, Lenteia: in English, Lentils.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Lentils, as Galen saith, are in a meane betweene hot and cold, yet are they dry in the second degree: their skin is astringent or binding, and the meate or substance within is of a thicke and earthy iuyce, hauing a qualitie that is a little austere or something harsh, much more the skin thereof; but the iuyce of them is quite contrarie to the binding qualitie; wherefore if a man shal boile them in faire water, and afterwards season the water with salt and pickle, aut cum ipsis oleo condiens, and then take it, the same drinke doth loose the belly.
The first decoction of Lentils doth loose the belly; but if they be boyled againe, and the first  decoction cast away, then doe they binde, and are good against the bloudy flixe or dangerous laskes.
They do their operation more effectually in stopping or binding, if all or any of these following  be bovled therewith, that is to say, red Beets, Myrtles, pils of Pomegranats, dried Roses, Medlars, Seruice berries, vnripe Peares, Quinces, Paintaine leaues, Galls, or the berries of Sumach.
The meale of Lentils mixed with honey doth mundifie and clense corrupt vlcers and rotten  (...); filling them with flesh againe; and is most singular to be put into the common digestiues vsed among our (...) Surgeons for greene wounds.
The Lentil hauing the skin or coat taken off, as it loseth that strong binding qualitie, and those  accidents that depend on the same, so doth it more nourish than if it had the skin on.
It in gendreth thicke and naughty iuyce, and slowly passeth thorow the belly, yet doth it not  stay the loosnesse as that doth which hath his coat on; and therefore they that vse to eat too much

thereof do necessarily become Lepers, and are much subiect to cankers, for thicke and dry nourishments are apt to breed melancholy.
Therefore the Lentill is good food for them that through waterish humours be apt to fall into  the dropsie, and it is a most dangerous food for dry and withered bodies; for which cause it bringeth dimnesse of sight, though the sight be perfect, through his excessiue drinesse, whereby the spirits of the sight be wasted; but it is good for them that are of a quitecontrarie constitution.
It is not good for those that want their termes; for it breedeth thicke bloud, and such as slowly  passeth through the veines.
But it is singular good to stay the menses, as Galen in his booke of the faculties of nourishments  (...).
It causeth (...) dreames (as Dioscorides doth moreouer write) it hurteth the head, sinewes, and lungs.
It is good to swallow downe thirty graines of Lentils shelled or taken from their husks, against  the (...) of the stomacke.
Being boyled with parched barly meale and laid to, it asswageth the paine and ach of the gout.
With honey it filleth vp hollow sores, it breaketh aschares, clenseth vlcers: being boyled in  wine it wasteth away wens and hard swellings of the throat.
With a (...), and Melilot, and oyle of Roses it helpeth the inflammation of the eyes and fundament;  but in greater inflammations of the fundament, and great deep (...), it is boyled with the rinde of a pomegranat, dry Rose leaues, and honey.
And after the same maner against (...) sores that are mortified, if sea water be added; it is also  a remedie against pushes, the shingles, and the hot inflammation called S. Anthonies fire, and for kibes, in such manner as we haue written: being boyled in sea water and applied, it helps womens brests in which the milke is cluttered, and cannot suffer too great aboundance of milke.



CHAP. 514. Of Cich or true Orobus.


Orobus receptus Herbariorum. The true Orobus.



 The Description.
THis Pulse, which of most Herbarists is taken for the true Orobus, and called of some, bitter Fitch, is one of the Pulses whose tender branches traile vpon the ground, as (...) saith, and whose long tender branches spred far abroad, whereon doe grow leaues like those of the field Vetch: among which grow white floures: after which come long cods, that appeare bunched on the outside against the place where the seeds do lie, which are small, round, russet of colour, and of a bitter taste: the root is small and single.


 The Place.
It prospereth best in a leane (...), according to Columella: it groweth in woods and copses in sundry places of Spaine and Italy, but here only in gardens.


 The Time.
This is sowne early and late, but if it be sowne in the spring it easily commeth vp, and is pleasant, and vnpleasant if it be sowne in the fall of the leafe.


 The Names.
This is called in Greeke (...) the shops of Germanie haue kept the name Orobus: the Italians cal it Macho: the Spaniards, Yeruo, and Yeruos: in English it is called bitter Vetch, or bitter Fitch, and Orobus, after the Latine name. Of some Ers, after the French name.



 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen in his first booke of the Faculties of nourishments saith, That men do altogether abstaine  from the bitter Vetch, for it hath a very vnpleasant taste, and naughty iuyce; but Kine in Asia and in most other countries do eate thereof, being made sweet by steeping in water; notwithstanding men being compelled through necessitie of great famine, as Hippocrates also hath written, do oftentimes feed thereof; and we also dressing them (...) the manner of Lupines, vse the bitter Vetches with honey, as a medicine that purgeth thicke and grosse humors out of the chest and lungs.
Moreouer, among the bitter Vetches the white are not so medicinable, but those which are  neere to a yellow, or to the colour of Okar; and those that haue beene twice boyled, or sundrie times soked in water, lose their bitter and vnpleasant taste, and withall their clensing and cutting qualitie, so that there is onely left in them an earthy substance, which serues (...) nourishment, that drieth without any manifest bitternesse.
And in his booke of the Faculties of simple medicines he-saith, That bitter Vetch is dry in the  later end of the second degree, and hot in the first: moreouer, by how much it is bitter, by so much it clenseth, cutteth, and remoueth stoppings: but if it be ouermuch vsed it bringeth forth bloud by vrine.
Dioscorides writeth, that bitter Vetch causeth head-ache and heauy dulnesse, that it troubles the  belly, and driueth forth bloud by vrine; notwithstanding being boyled it serueth to fatten Kine.
There is made of the seed a meale fit to be vsed in medicine, after this maner: the full and white  graines are chosen out, and being mixed together they are steeped in water, and suffered to lie till they be plumpe, and afterwards are parched till the skinne be broken; then are they ground, and searsed or shaken thorow a meale sieue, and the meale reserued.
This looseth the belly, prouoketh vrine, maketh one well coloured: being ouermuch eaten or  drunke it draweth bloud by the stoole, with gripings, and also by vrine.
With honey it clenseth vlcers, taketh away freckles, sun-burnes, blacke spots in the skinne, and  maketh the whole (...) faire and cleane.
It stayeth running vlcers or hard swellings, and gangrens or mortified sores; it sosteneth the  hardnesse of womens breasts, it taketh away and breaketh eating vlcers, carbuncles, and sores of the head: being tempered with wine and applied it healeth the bitings of dogs, and also of venomous beasts.
With vineger it is good against the strangurie, and mitigateth paine that commeth thereof.
It is good for them that are not nourished after their meat, being parched and taken with hony  in the quantitie of a nut.
The decoction of the same helpeth the itch in the whole body, and taketh away kibes, if they  be washed or bathed therewith.
Cicer boyled in fountaine water with some (...) doth asswage the swelling of the yard and priuie  parts of man or woman, if they be washed or bathed in the decoction thereof; and the substance hereof may also be applied plaisterwise.
It is also vsed for bathing and washing of vlcers and running sores, and is applied vnto the (...) of the head with great profit.



CHAP. 515. Of the Vetch or Fetch.

 The Description.
1 THe Vetch hath slender and foure squared stalkes almost three foot long: the leaues be long, with clasping tendrels at the end made vp of many little leaues growing vpon one rib or middle stem; euery one whereof is greater, broader, and thicker than that of the Lentil: the floures are like to the floures of the garden beane, but of a blacke purple colour: the cods be broad, small, and in euery one are contained fiue or six graines, not round, but flat like those of the Lentil, of colour blacke, and of an vnpleasant taste.
@ 2 There is another of this kinde which hath a creeping and liuing root, from which it (...) deth forth crested stalkes some cubit and halfe high: the leaues are winged, commonly a dozen growing vpon one rib, which ends in a winding tendrel: each peculiar leafe is broader toward the bottome, and sharper towards the top, which ends not flat, but somewhat round. Out of the (...) of the leaues towards the tops of the stalkes, on short foot-stalkes grow two, three or more pretty large pease-fashioned blewish purple floures, which are succeeded by such cods as the former, but somewhat lesser; which when they grow ripe become blacke, and fly open of themselues,

@ 1 Vicia. Tare, Vetch, or Fetch.The figure of the common (...) was formerly wanting, and in the (...) thereof was put that of the other, described here in the second place:

 2 Vicia maxima (...). Bush Vetch.@ 3 Vicia syl. flo. albo. White floured Vetch.4 Vicia sylue stris, siue Cracca maior. Strangle Tare, Tine, or wilde Fetch.
and so seatter their seed. This growes in many places wilde among bushes, both here and in (...), as appeares by that name Bauhine thence giues it, calling it Vicia maxima dumetorum. Tragus (...) it his (...). altera; and iudges it to be the Aphace of Dioscorides; and he saith the Latines call it (...): the high-Dutch, S. Cristoffels kraut, and Schwarts Linsen. Tabern. calls it (...) maior.


@ 5 (...). siue Cracca minima. Small wilde Tare.


3 This also hath a lasting root, which sendeth vp round crested branches, a foot and somtimes a cubit high, whereon grow such leaues as those of the former, but more white and downie: the floures, which grow on short footstalkes, out of the bosomes of the leaues, towards the top of the stalks, are of a whitish colour, with veines of a dusky colour, diuaricated ouer the vpper leafe: the cods are like those of the common Fetch. Clusius found this in some wilde places of Hungarie; it floured in May (...) he calls it Vicia syluestris albo flore. @
4 Strangle Tare, called in some countries Tine, and of others wilde Vetch, is a ramping herbe like vnto the common Tare, (...) and clymbing among corne where it chanceth, that it plucketh it downe to the ground, and ouergroweth the same in such sort, that it spoileth and killeth not only wheat, but all other graine whatsoeuer: the herbe is better known than desired, therefore these few lines shall suffice for the description. @ This groweth pretty long, with many slender weake branches: the leaues are much smaller than the former, and end in clasping tendrels: the floures are of a purple colour, and commonly grow but one at a ioint, and they are succeeded by flat sharpe pointed cods which containe some nine or ten seeds apiece.
5 This also growes a good height, with slenderer stalks than the former, which is diuided into sundry branches: the leaues grow foure or six vpon foot-stalkes, ending also in clasping tendrels: the floures grow vpon pretty long but very slender foot-stalkes, sometimes two or three, otherwhiles more, very small, and of a whitish colour inclining to blewnesse: which are succeeded by little short flat cods, containing commonly foure or fiue little seeds of a blackish colour: this is the Arachus, siue Cracca minima of Lobel; but I question whether it be that which Bauhine in his Pinax hath made the same with it, calling it Vicia segetum cum siliquis plurimis hirsutis: for that which I haue described, and which exactly agrees with this figure of Lobel and that description in the Aduers. hath cods very smooth without any hairinesse at all. This floures most part of Sommer, and growes in most places both in corne fields and medowes. @


 The Place.
The Tare is sowne in any ground or soile whatsoeuer.


 The Time.
It floureth in May, and perfecteth his seed toward September.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine Vicia, a vinciendo, of binding or wrapping, as Varro noteth, because, saith he, it hath likewise clasping tendrels such as the vine hath, by which it crawles vpward vpon the stalks of the weeds which are next vnto it: of some, Cracca, and Arachus, and also Aphaca: it is called in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, Uitsen: in French, Vesce: in most shops it is falsely termed (...), and Fruum; for Eruum doth much differ from Vicia: it is called in English, Vetch, or Fetch. The countrey men lay vp this Vetch with the seeds and whole plant, that it may be a fodder for their cattell.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Notwithstanding I haue knowne, saith Galen, some, who in time of famin haue fed hereof, especially  in the spring, it being but greene; yet is it hard of digestion, and bindeth the belly.

Therefore seeing it is of this kinde of nature, it is manifest that the nourishment which comes thereof hath in it no good iuyce at all, but ingendreth a thicke bloud, and apt to become melancholy.



CHAP. 516. Of Chichlings, Pease, and Tare euerlasting.

 The Description.
1 THere is a Pulse growing in our high and thicke woods, hauing a very thicke tough and wooddy root; from which rise vp diuers long weake and feeble branches, consisting of a tough middle rib, edged on both sides with a thin skinny membrane, smooth, and of a grasse greene colour; whereon do grow at certaine distances small flat stems, vpon which stand two broad leaues ioyning together at the bottome: from betwixt those leaues come forth tough clasping tendrels which take hold of such things as grow next vnto them: from the bosome of the stem, whereon the leaues do grow, shooteth forth a naked smooth foot-stalke, on which doe grow most beautifull floures like those of the Pease, the middle part whereof is of a light red, tending to a red Purple in graine; the outward leaues are somewhat lighter, inclining to a blush colour: which being past, there succeed long round cods, wherein is contained seed of the bignesse of a Tare, but rounder, blackish without, and yellowish within, and of a bitter taste.


@ 5 Lathyrus maior latifolius. Pease euerlasting.


@ 2 Lathyrus angustifolius flore albo. White floured Chichelings.


@ 2 Ofwhich kinde there is likewise another like vnto the precedent in each respect, sauing that the leaues hereof are narrower and longer, and therefore called of most which set forth the description, Lathyrus angustifolia: the floures of this are white, and such also is the colour of the fruit: the root is small, and not lasting like that of the former.
@ 3 The stalks, leaues, and floures of this are like those of the precedent, but the floures (...) of a reddish purple colour: the cods are lesser than those of the former, and in them are contained

lesser, harder, and rounder seeds, of a darke or blackish colour. This growes not wilde with vs, but is sometimes sowne in gardens, where it floures in Iune and Iuly.
4 This Egyptian differs not in shape from the rest of his kinde, but the floures are of an elegant blew on the inside, but of an ash colour inclining to purple on the outside: the cods grow vpon long foot-stalkes, and are a little winged or welted, and containe but two or three little cornered seeds spotted with blacke spots. This floures in Iune and Iuly; and the seed thereof was sent to Clusius from Constantinople, hauing been brought thither out of Egypt.


@ 3 Lathyrus angustifol. flo. purp. Purple floured Chichelings.


@ 4 Lathyrus Aegyptiacus. Egyptian Chichelings.


5 The stalkes of this are some two or three foot long, winged, weake, and lying on the ground vnlesse they haue somewhat to support them Vpon these at certaine distances grow winged leaues with two little eares at their setting on to the stalke: these leaues consist of six long and narrow greene leaues like those of the other plants of this kinde; and these six leaues commonly stand vpright, by couples one against another; otherwhiles alternately: the footstalke whereon these stand ends in clasping tendrels: the floures are in shape like the former, but the outer leafe is of a faire red or crimson colour, and the inner (...) white: after the floures come the cods, containing some foure or fiue pretty large flat seeds, which swell out of the cods where they lie, which in the spaces betweene each seed are deprest, like that of Orobus. This is only a garden plant with vs, and floures in Iune and Iuly, the seed is ripe in August. I haue for this giuen you Lobels figure of his Lathyris angustiore gramineo folio; which may serue, if you but make the leaues and cods to agree with this description. @
6 The yellow wilde (...) or Fetch hath diuers very small ramping stalkes, tough, and leaning this way and that way, not able to stand of it selfe without the helpe of props or things that stand by it: the leaues are very thin and sharpe pointed: the floures grow alongst the leaues in fashion of the pease floures, of a bright yellow colour: the roots are very small, long, tough, and in number infinite, insomuch that it is impossible to root it forth, being once gotten into the ground, vnlesse the earth be digged vp with the roots, and both cast into the riuer, or burned. Doubtlesse it is the most pernicious and hurtfull weed of all others, vnto all manner of greene wholsome herbes or any wood whatsoeuer.



@ 5 Lathyrus annuus (...) Orobi. Party coloured Cicheling.


@ 6 (...) syluestris (...). (...). Tare euerlasting.




 The Place.
The first growes in shadowie woods, and among bushes: there groweth great store thereof in Swainscombe wood, a mile and a halfe from Greenhithe in Kent, as you go to a village thereby called Betsome, and in diuers other places.
The sixth groweth in most grassie pastures, borders of fields, and among graine almost euerie where.


 The Time.
The time answereth the other Pulses.


 The Names.
The first is called Lathyrus, to make a difference betweene it and Lathyris, or Spurge: of Matthiolus, Clymenum: of Cordus, Eruum sativum: of Tragus, Pisum Graecorum: in English, Pease euerlasting, great wilde Tare, and Cichling.
@ The second is the Evum album sativum of Fuchsius: Lathyrus or Cicercula of Dodonaeus: Lathyrus angustiore (...) folio of Lobel.
The third is the Aracus siue Cicera of Dodonaeus: the Lathyrus slore purpurco of Camerarius.
The fourth by Clusius is called Cicercula Aegyptiaca: by Camerarius, Aracus Hispanicus, siue Lathyrus Aegyptiacus.
The (...) is not mentioned by any (that I remember) but Mr. Parkinson, in his garden of floures, and that by the name I giue you it.
The sixth is the Lathyrus syluestris slo. luteis of Thalius: Legumenterrae glandibus (...) of (...): Vicia of Tabernamontanus: and it may be, the Aracus (...) luteo of the Aduers. Howeuer, I haue put (...) figure of Aracus for it, which well enough agrees with it. I vse for some resemblance it hath to Aphaca to call it Aphacoides. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and vertues are referred to the manured Tare or Vetch; notwithstanding they are not vsed (...) meate or medicine.




CHAP. 517. Of the oylie Pulse called Sesamum.


Sesamum, siue Sisamum. The Oylie Graine.



 The Description.
@ SEsamum hath a thicke and fat vpright stalke a cubit and a halfe high, garnished with leaues much like the Peach or Almond, but (...), and cut in with somwhat deepe gashes on their sides: amongst these leaues come forth large white or else red floures, somewhat shaped like those of Foxgloues, which turne into round long crested cods, containing white flat oileous seed. Theophrastus affirmeth that there is a kinde thereof which is white, bearing only one root. No kinde of beast will eate this plant while it is greene, because of his bitternesse; but being withered and dried, the seed thereof becommeth sweet, and the cattell will feed on the whole plant.


 The Place.
It groweth both in Egypt and in India: Sesama, saith Pliny, came from the Indies; they make an oile of it. It is a stranger in England.


 The Time.
It is one of the Sommer grains, and is sowne before the rising of the seuen starres, as Pliny writeth; yet Columella saith, that (...) must be sowne after the Autumne Aequinoctial, against the Ides of October: they require for the most part a rotten soile, which the husbandmen of Campania do call a blacke mold.


 The Names.
The Grecians cal this grain (...): the Latines also Sesamum, and Sisamum, and often in the (...) gender Sesama: we are constrained for want of an English name to vse the Latine: it is vnknowne to the Apothecaries, especially the plant it selfe; but the seed and oyle thereof is to be found among them in other countries: we may call it Turky Millet.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
According to some it is hot and dry in the first degree: the seed thereof, as Galen saith, is fat, and  therefore being layd vp it commeth to be oylie very quickly; wherfore it speedily filleth and stuffeth vp those that feed thereof, and ouerthroweth the stomacke, and is slow of digestion, and yeeldeth to the body a fat nourishment: therefore it is manisest that it cannot strengthen the stomack, or any part thereof, as also no other kind of fat thing: and the iuice that commeth thereof is thick, and therefore it cannot speedily passe thorow the veines. Men do not greedily feed of it alone, but make cakes thereof with honey, which they call (...): it is also mixed with bread, and is of an hot temperature, for which cause it procureth thirst: and in his booke of the faculties of simple Medicines he saith, that Sesamum is not a little clammy and fat, and therefore it is an emplasticke, and a softner, and is moderately hot: the oile which commeth thereof is of like temperature, and so is the decoction of the herbe also.
Dioscorides writeth, That Sesamum is an enemie to the stomacke, it causeth a stinking breath, ifit  remaine sticking betweene the teeth after it is chewed.
It wasteth away grossenes of the sinewes; it is a remedie against bruises of the eares, inflammations, burnings and scaldings, pains of the ioynts, and biting of the poysonsom horned serpent called Cerastes. Being mixed with oile of Roses it takes away the head-ache which commeth of heate.
Of the same force is the herbe boyled in wine, but it is especially good for the heate and (...) of the eyes.
Of the herb is made an oile vsed of the Egyptians, which as Pliny saith is good for the eares. It is a (...) (...) (...) sounding and ringing of the eares.




CHAP. 518. Of Hatchet Fetch.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Hatchet Fetch hath many small branches trailing here and there vpon the ground: vpon which grow small leaues spred abroad like the leaues of the wilde Fetch; among which come forth clusters of small yellow floures, which (...) away, and turne into little flat thin and browne cods, wherein is contained small reddish seed of a bitter taste.
2 The second kinde of hatchet Fetch hath many round tough and flexible branches, trailing vpon the ground: whereupon do grow leaues like the former, but more like the leaues of Liquorice, and hauing the taste of the Liquorice root; which hath giuen occasion to some to deeme it a kinde of Liquorice: among these leaues come forth pale yellow floures, after which there succeed small crooked cods, turning their points inwardly, one answering another like little hornes, containing small flat seeds soure cornered, and fashioned like a little wedge: the root is tough, of a wooddy (...), and doth continue fruitfull a very long time.


The figure which formerly (...) in the first place, (...) with the third description that which was in the second place was of the (...) (...), of (...) (...), beeing a kinde of (...) (...), which (...) the cods many together on the tops of the branches, and (...) in Germanie: (...) (...) (...), it (...) (...) (...) (...) in (...).

 1 Hedysarum maius. Hatchet Fetch.


@ 2 Hedysarum Glycyrhizatum. Liquorice hatchet Fetch.


3 There is another kind of (...) or hatchet (...), which hath branches, leaues, and roots like the last before remembred, and differeth in that, that the floures of this plant are mixed, and do vary into sundry colours, being on the vpper part of a flesh colour, and on the lower of a white or snowie colour, with a purple Storks bill in the middle: the leaues are in taste bitter: the cods are small like those of Birds foot, and not much vnlike the cods of Orobus.
4 There is likewise another kinde of Securidaca or hatchet Fetch, which is dedicated vnto Carolus Clusius by the aforenamed Dr. Penny, who found it in the North parts of England, hauing leaues, roots, and branches like vnto the former: but the floures of this are white, and mixed with some purple, and bitter also in taste (...) the cods are like the claw of a (...), or (as Clusius saith) like the knife which shoo-makers do vse in Flanders; in which cods are contained small reddish seed: this root also is of long continuance. @ Clusius doth not say that Dr. Penny found this in the North of England, but in the territorie of Geneua not far from Pontetremile, amongst the bushes, and no where else. @



@ 3 Hedysarum maius siliquis (...). Hatchet Fetch with ioynted cods.


@ 4 Securidaca minor pallide caerulea. Small blew floured hatchet Fetch.


@ 5 Securidaca minor lutea. Small yellow hatchet Fetch.


@ 6 Securidaca siliquis planis (...). Indented hatchet Fetch.



@ 5 This in the stalks, leaues, colour, and shape of the floures is like, yet lesse than the first described; the cods are also smaller, lesser, and more crooked: and herein onely consists the chiefe (...), it is an annuall plant, and grows onely in some gardens. Matthiolus, Lobel, Dodonaeus, and other, make this their (...), or Securidaca minor.
6 This hath many crested branches, whereon great winged leaues, that is, some twentie or more (...) to one rib: the floures are like those of the other plants of this kinde; but the cods are of an inch long (...), or indented or toothed on their sides. But of what colour the floures and seeds are of it is not exprest by Clusius, who onely set this forth by a picture, and some pieces of a dried plant thereof, which he receiued from Cortusus, by the name of Scolopendria leguminosa, or (...) (...): (...) had it from Honorius Bellus, who obserued it growing vpon the Rocks at (...), a citie of Illyria. @
7 There is also another sort of Hatchet Fetch, which hath very long and tough branches trailing vpon the ground beset with leaues like the former, but much greater: the floures do grow at the top of the branches, of a pale colour, and turne into rough round and flat cods, fashioned like little bucklers: the root of this (as of the first) dieth at the first approch of winter, as soone as the seed is ripe: (...) The stalks of this are stiffe and crested, growing to the height of two cubits, with leaues as large as those of Liquorice: the floures are of a faire bright red colour: the cods are made as it were of many rough buckler-like seeds, or rather seed vessels wherein are contained smal brown seeds. @


@ 7 (...) (...). French Honysuckle.


8 Ferrum Equinum. Horse-shoo.


8 Horse-shoo hath many stalks slender and lying vpon the ground: the leaues be thinne, and lesser than those of Axseed: the floures along the stalks are little: after which come vp long (...) something broad, and a little bowing; which haue vpon the one side deepe round and indented cuts, like after a sort to an Horse-shoo: the root is somewhat long.


 The Place.
These plants do grow (...) my garden: the second kinde I found growing in Suffolke, in the highway on the right hand, as you goe from Sudbury to Corner Church, about an hundred paces from the end of the towne, as also in sundry other places of the same countrey; and in Essex about Dunmow,

and in the townes called Clare and Hennyngham. @ Also it growes by Purfleet, about the foot of the hill whereon the Wind-mill stands; and in diuers parts of Kent. @
Horse-shooe commeth vp in certaine vntilled and sunnie places of Italy and Languedocke: it groweth likewise in my garden.


 The Time.
These plants do floure in Iune, and their seed is ripe in August:


 The Names.
The Grecians name this, whether it be a pulse or an infirmitie among corne, (...): the (...), of the forme of the seed, Securidaca, and Hedysarum: in English, Axseed, Axwoort, Ax-fitch, and Hatchet Fitch: it is vnknowne to the Apothecaries.
@ The second is the Faenugraecum Syluestre of Tragus and Dodonaeus: the Glycyrhiza syluestris of Gesner; and the Glaux vulgaris of Lobel. @
Horse-shooe is commonly called in Italian Sferro de cauallo: you may name it in Latine Ferrum equinum: in English, Horse-shooe.


 The Temperature.
The seeds of these plants are hot and drie of complexion.


 The Vertues.
Being drunke it is acceptable to the stomacke, and remoueth stoppings out of the intrailes, and  of like vertue be the new leaues and tender crops of the whole plant.
Dioscorides sheweth that it is also good for the stomacke being taken in drink, and is mixed with  counterpo isons.
And it is thought to hinder conception, if it be applied with honie before the act.
The seed of Axwoort openeth the stoppings of the liuer, the obstruction of the spleen, and of all  the inward parts.
Horse-shooe is bitter and like in nature to Axseed.



CHAP. 519. Of Pease Earth-Nut.

 The Description.
1 THe Pease Earth nut commeth vp with slender and weake stalkes: the leaues be thin, and little, growing vpon slender stems, with clasping tendrels at the ends, with which it imbraceth and taketh hold of such things as stand neere vnto it: the floures on the tops of the stalkes are like to those of Pease, but lesser, of a red purple colour, in smell not vnpleasant: in their places come vp long cods, in which are three or foure round seeds: the roots be thicke, long, like after a sort to acorns, but much greater, blacke without, gray within, in taste like to the Chesse-nut: out of which beneath doth hang a long slender string: there grow out of the same also other strings, hard to the setting on of the stalk, vnto which creeping a slope do grow other kernelled roots whilst the plant doth thus multiplie it selfe.
@ 2 This with Thalius in his Sylua Harcynia, set forth by the name of Astragalus syluaticus, was by our Author (...) for, and confounded with the Terraeglandes, and therefore I haue put it with it, that the difference might the better appeare, which is not a little to such as heedfully obserue it: But our Author in this is to be pardoned, seeing Dr. Turner, a man more exquisite in the knowledge of plants, and who had seene the true Terraeglandes in Germany, mistooke this for it, as may appeare by that little Tract of his of the names of plants in Latine and English, set sorth Anno, 1548; for there he saith, [I haue seene this herbe of late in Come parke more astringent than it of Germany:] and indeed this growes there, and is much more astringent and wooddie than that of Germany, and no wise fit to be eaten. The root consists of many blacke tuberous particles, here and there sending forth fibers: from hence arise cornered stalks some foot high, smal below, and somwhat larger aboue: the leaues grow forth of the stalks, consisting sometimes of two, and otherwhiles of 4. longish narrow leaues fastned to one sootstalk, which at the setting on hath two little leaues or eares: forth of the bosomes of these leaues grow stalks some two inches long, each of which vsually carry a couple of Pease-fashioned floures of a purple colour: which fading, vsually become blew: after these follow cods, straight, (...) and, blacke; and in each of them are commonly contained nine or ten (...)

round seeds: it floures most part of Summer, and perfects the seed in Iuly and August. @


1 Terraglandes. Pease Earth-nut.


@ 2 Astragalus syluaticus. Wood Pease, or Heath Pease.




 The Place.
@ 1 This groweth in (...) fields, both with the corne it selfe, and also about the borders of fields among briers and brambles: it is found in diuers places of Germany, but not with vs that I can yet learne.
2 This is found in the woods and pastures of England, especially in Hampstead wood neere London: it groweth in Richmond Heath, and in Come parke likewise.


 The Time.
Itfloureth in Iune and Iuly, the nuts after haruest be digged vp and gathered.


 The Names.
It is called in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...), (...), and Muysen (...), that is to say, tailed Mise, of the similitude or likenesse of domesticall mise, which the blacke, round, and long nuts, with a piece of the slender string hanging out behind, do represent: the later writers do call it in Latine Terrae glandes or Terrestres glandes: and in Greeke, (...), (...) balani: in English, Pease Earth nut.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Nuts of this Pease being boiled and eaten, are hardlier digested than be either Turneps or  Parsneps, yet do they nourish no lesse than the Parsneps: they are not so windie as they, they doe more slowly passe through the belly, by reason of their binding qualitie, and being eaten raw they be yet harder of digestion, and do hardlier and slowlier descend.
They be of temperature meanly hot, and somewhat drie, being withall not a little binding: wherupon  also they do not onely stay the fluxes of the belly, but also all issues of bloud, especially from the mother or bladder.
The root of Pease Earth-nut stoppeth the belly, and the inordinate course of womens sicknesse.




CHAP. 520. Of Milke Vetch.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of herbes contained vnder the title of Astragalus; whether I may, (...) breach of promise made in the beginning, insert them among the (...), pulses, or (...) plants, it is doubtfull: but seeing the matter is disputable, I think it not amisse to suffer them thus to passe, vntill some other shall finde a place more conuenient and agreeing vnto them in neighbourhood.


 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Astragalus hath reddish stalks, a cubit high, a finger thicke, (...) (...) or surrowed, and couered ouer with an hairy mossines; which diuide (...) into sundry smal branches, (...) with leaues consisting of sundry little leaues (...) vpon a middle rib, like the wilde Vetch placed on the small pliant branches like feathers, which are (...) couered ouer with a woollie (...); in taste astringent at the first, but afterwards burning hot: among these leaues come forth many small white floures, in fashion like the floures of (...), which before their opening seeme to be somewhat yellow: the root is maruellous great and large, considering the smalnesse (...) the plant; for sometimes it groweth to the bignesse of a mans arme, keeping the same bignesse for the space of a span in length, and after diuideth it selfe into two or more forks or branches, blacke without, and wrinckled; white within, hard and wooddie, and in taste vnpleasant, which being dried becommeth harder than an horne.


1 Astragalus Lusitanicus Clusij. Portingale milke Vetch.


2 Astragalus Syriacus. Assyrian milke Vetch.


2 The second kinde of Astragalus is a rare and gallant plant, and may well be termed Planta (...) guminosa, by reason that it is accounted for a kinde of Astragalus, resembling the same in the (...) of his stalkes and leaues, as also in the thicknesse of his rootes, and the creeping and folding

thereof; and is garnished with a most thicke and pleasant comlinesse of his delectable red floures, growing vp together in great tufts, which are very seemly to behold.
3 There hath been some controuersie about this third kinde, which I am not willing to prosecute or enter into: it may very well be Astragalus of Matthiolus his description, or else his Polygala, which doth exceeding well resemble the true Astragalus: his small stalkes grow a foot high, (...) with leaues like Cicer or Galega, but that they are somewhat lesser: among which come forth small Pease like floures, of an Orange colour, very pleasant in sight: the root is tough and flexible, of a finger thicke.


@ 3 Astragalus Matthioli. Matthiolus his milke Vetch.


@ 4 Astragaloides. Bastard Milke Vetch.


4 The fourth is called of (...) and other learned Herbarists, Astragaloides, for that it resembleth the true Astragalus, which groweth a cubit high, and in shew resembleth Liquorice: the floures grow at the tops of the stalks, in shape like the Pease bloome, of a faire purple colour, which turne into small blacke cods when they be ripe: the root is tough and very long, creeping vpon the vpper part of the earth, and of a wooddy substance.


The Place.
They grow amongst stones, in open places, or as (...) writeth, in places subiect to winds, and couered with snow: Dioscorides copies do adde, in shadowie places: it groweth plentifully in Phenea a citie in Arcadia, as Galen and Pliny report: in Dioscorides his copies there is read, in Memphis a citie of Arcadia; but Memphis is a citie of Egypt, and in Arcadia there is none of that name: some of them grow in my garden, and in sundrie other places in England wilde; they grow in the medowes neere Cambridge, where the schollers vse to sport themselues: they grow also in sundrie places of Essex, as about Dunmow and Clare, and many other places of that countrey.
@ I should be glad to know which or how many of these our Authour heere affirmes to grow wilde in England; for as yet I haue not heard of, nor seene any of them wilde, nor in gardens with vs, except the last (...), which growes in some few gardens. @


 The Time.
They floure in Iune and Iuly, and their seed is ripe in September.



 The Names.
Milke Vetch is called of Matthiolus, Polygala, but not properly: of most it is called Astragalus; in Spanish, Garauancillos: in the Portingales tongue, Alphabeca: in Dutch, Cleyne Ciceren.


 The Temperature and Vertues. 
Astragalus, as Galen saith, hath astringent or binding roots, and therefore it is of the number of those simples that are not a little drying; for it glueth and healeth vp old vlcers, and staieth the flux of the belly, if they be boiled in wine and drunke: the same things also touching the vertues of Astragalus Dioscorides hath mentioned: the root, saith he, being drunke in wine staieth the laske, and prouoketh vrine, being dried and cast vpon old vlcers it cureth them: it likewise procureth great store of milke in cattell that do eat thereof, whence it tooke his name.
It stoppeth bleeding, but it is with much ado beaten, by reason of his hardnesse.



CHAP. 521. Of Kidney Vetch.

 The Description.
1 KIdney Vetch hath a stalke of the height of a cubit, diuiding it selfe into other branches; whereon do grow long leaues, made of diuers leaues, like those of the Lentill, couered as it were with a softwhite downinesse: the floures on the tops of the stalks of a yellow colour, verie many ioined together, as it were in a spokie rundle: after which grow vp little cods, in which is contained small seed: the root is slender, and of a wooddie substance. @ This is sometimes found with white floures: whereupon (...) gaue two figures, calling the one Lagopodium flore luteo, and the other Lagopodium flo. albo. Our Author vnfitly gaue this later mentioned figure in the chapter of Lagopus, by the name of Lagopum maximum. @


1 Anthyllis Leguminosa. Kidney Vetch.


2 Stella leguminosa. (...) Kidney Vetch.


2 The Starry Kidney Vetch, called Stella leguminosa, or according to Cortusus, Arcturo hath

many small flexible tough branches, full of small knots or knees, from each of which springeth forth one long small winged leafe, like birds foot, but bigger: from the bosome of those leaues come forth little tender stems, on the ends whereof do grow small whitish yellow floures, which are very slender, and soone vaded, like vnto them of Birds-foot: these floures turne into small sharpe pointed cods, standing one distant from another, like the diuisions of a (...), or as though it consisted of little hornes; wherein is contained small yellowish seeds: the root is tough, and deeply growing in the ground.
3 There is another sort of Kidney Vetch called Birds-foot, or Ornithopodium, which hath very many small and tender branches, trailing here and there close vpon the ground, set full of small and (...) leaues, of a whitish greene, in shape like the leaues of the wilde Vetch, but a great deale lesser, and siner, almost like small feathers: amongst which the floures doe grow, that are very small, yellowish, and sometimes whitish; which being vaded there come in place thereof little crooked (...), fiue or six growing together, which in shew and shape are like (...) a small birds foot, and each and euery cod resembling a claw; in which are inclosedsmall seed like that of Turneps.


@ 3 (...) (...). The great Birds-foot.


@ 4 Ornithopodium minus. Small Birds-foot.


@ 5 Scorpoides Leguminosa. Small Horned pulse.


4 There is also another kinde of Ornithopodium, or Birds-foot, called small Birds-foot, which is very like vnto the first, but that it is much smaller: the branches or sprigs grow not aboue a hand or halfe an hand in length, spreading themselues vpon the ground with his small leaues and branches, in maner of the lesser Arachus: the floures are like vnto those of the former, but very small, and of a red colour.
@ 5 This small horned pulse may fitly here take place: The root thereof consists of many little fibres, from which arise two or three little slender straight stalkes some handfull and halfe or foot high: at the tops of these grow little sharpe pointed crooked hornes, rounder and slenderer than those of (...), turning their ends inwards like the tailes of Scorpions and so jointed; the floures are small and yellow; the leaues little, and winged like those of Birds foot. Pena and (...) found this amongst the corne in the fields in Narbon in France, and they set it forth by the (...) as I haue here giuen you it. @


 The Place.
(...) 4. These plants I found growing vpon Hampstead Heath neere London, right against

the Beacon, vpon the right hand as you go from London, neere vnto a grauell pit: they grow also vpon blacke Heath, in the high way leading from Greenwich to Charleton, within halfe a mile of the towne.


 The Time.
They floure from Iune to the middle of September.


 The Names.
@ 1 This Gesner calls Vulneraria rustica: Dodonaeus, Lobel, and Clusius, call it Anthyllis, and (...) leguminosa. @
3. 4. I cannot finde any other name for these plants, but Ornithopodium: the (...) is called in English, great Birds-foot; the second small Birds-foot.


 The Nature and Vertues.
These herbes are not vsed either in meate or medicine, that I know of as yet; but they are very good food for cattel, and procure good store of milke, whereupon some haue taken them (...) kindes of Polygala.



CHAP. 522. Of Blacke milke Tare.


Glaux Dioscoridis. Dioscorides his milke Tare.



 The Description.
THe true Glaux of Dioscorides hath very many tough and wooddy branches trailing vpon the ground, set full of small winged leaues, in shape like the common Glaux, but a great deale smaller, resembling the leaues of Tares, but rather like Birds-foot, of a very gray colour: amongst which come forth knobby and scaly, or chaffie heads, very like the Medow Trefoile, of a faire purple colour: the root is exceeding long and wooddy, which the figure doth not expresse and set forth.


 The Place.
The true Glaux groweth vpon Barton hill, foure miles from Lewton in Bedfordshire, vpon both the sides of the declination of the hill.


 The Time.
These plants do floure and flourish about Midsommer.


 The Names.
These plants haue in times past been called Glaux, i. folia habens glauca, siue pallentia; that is, hauing skie coloured, or pale leaues.
Sithens that in times past, some haue counted Glaux among the kindes of Polygala, or Milkewoorts, we may therefore call this kinde of Glaux, blacke Milke-woort.


 The Nature.
These herbes are dry in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The seeds of the common Glaux are in vertue like the Lentils, but not so much astringent: they  stop the flux of the belly, dry vp the moisture of the stomacke, and ingender store of milke. 

Our Author either not knowing, or (...) what he had done, againe in this chapter, described the Glaux (...), whose history he gaue vs but (...) chapter (...) before, by the name of (...) (...); (...) I haue omitted it here as not necessary.





CHAP. 523. Of red Fitchling, Medick Fitch, and Cockes-head.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Onobrychis hath many small and twiggie pliant branches, ramping and creeping through and about bushes, or whatsoeuer it groweth neere vnto: the leaues and all the rest of the pulfe or plant is very like to the wilde Vetch or Tare: the floures grow at the top of small naked stalks, in shape like the pease bloome, but of a purple colour layed (...) with blew, which turne into small round prickly husks, that are nothing else but the seed.


1 Onobrychis, sive Caput Gallinaceum. Medick Fitchling, or Cockes-head.


2 Onobrychis flore purpureo. Purple Cockes-head.


2 The second kind of Fitchling or Cocks-head, of Clusius his description, hath very many stalks, especially when it is growne to an old plant, round, hard, and leaning to the ground like the other pulses; and leaues very like Galega, or the wilde Vetch, of a bitter taste and lothsome sauour: among which come forth small round stems, at the ends whereof do grow floures spike fashion, three inches long, in shape like those of the great Lagopus, or medow Trefoile, but longer, of an excellent shining purple colour, but without smell: after which there follow small coddes, containing little hard and blacke seed, in taste like the Vetch. The root is great and long, hard, and of a wooddy substance, spreading it selfe far abroad, and growing very deep into the ground.
3 The third kinde of Fitchling or Cocks-head hath from a tough smal and wooddie root, many twiggie branches growing a cubit high, full of knots, ramping and creeping on the ground. The leaues are like the former, but smaller and shorter: among which come forth smal tender stemmes, whereupon do grow little floures like those of the Tare, but of a blew colour tending to purple: the floures being vaded, there come the small cods, which containe little blacke seed like a Kidney, of a blacke colour.
4 The fourth kinde of Fitchling hath firme green hard stalks a cubit and a halfe high, whereupon grow leaues like to the wilde Tare or Galega, but smaller and somewhat hairie, bitter and vnpleasant in taste, and in the end somewhat sharpe. At the top of the stalks come forth long spiked

3 Onobrychis 2. Clusij. Blew Medicke Fitch.
4 Onobrychis 3. Clusij flore pallido. Pale coloured Medicke Fitch.
5 Onobrychis montana 4. Clusij. Mountaine Medick Fetch.
floures, of a pale colour, and in shape like those of the second kinde; which being vaded, there follow small bottle cods, wherein is contained little blacke seed like the seed of Fenegreek, but smaller. The root is thicke and hard, and of a wooddie substance, and lasting very long.
5 The fifth kinde of Onobrychis hath many grosse and wooddie stalks, proceeding immediatly from a thick, fat, and fleshie tough root: the vpper part of which are small, round, and pliant, garnished with little leaues like those of Lentils, or rather Tragacantha, somewhat soft, and couered ouer with a woollie hairinesse: amongst which come forth little long and naked stems, eight or nine inches long, whereon do grow many small floures of the fashion of the Vetch or Lentill, but of a blew colour tending to purple, and after them come smal cods, wherein the seed is contained.


 The Place.
The first and second grow vpon Barton hill, foure miles from Lewton in Bedfordshire, vpon both the sides of the hill: and likewise vpon the grassie balks between the lands of corn two miles from Cambridge, neere to a water mill towards London; and diuers other places by the way from London to Cambridge: the rest are strangers in England.


 The Time.
These plants do floure in Iuly, and their seed is ripe shortly after.



 The Names.
It is (...), or without a name among the later writers: the old and antient Physitions do call it (...): for all those things that are found written in Dioscorides or Pliny concerning (...), doe especially agree hereunto. Dioscorides writeth thus; Onobrychis hath leaues like a Lentill, but longer; a stalk a span high; a crimson floure; a little root: it groweth in moist and vntilled places: and Pliny in like manner; Onobrychis hath the leaues of a Lentill, somwhat longer, a red floure, a small and slender root: it groweth about springs or fountaines of water.
All which things and euery (...) are in this (...), or namelesse herbe, as it is manifest: and therefore it is not to be doubted at all, but that the same is the Onobrychis of the old Writers: it may be called in English red Fetchling, or as some suppose Medick Fitch, or Cockes-head.


 The Temperature.
These herbs as Galen hath written in his books of the Faculties of simple Medicines, do (...) or make thin and waste away.


 The Vertues.
Therefore the leaues thereof when it is greene, being but as yet layed vpon hard swellings, waxen  kernals, in manner of a salue, do waste and consume them away, but beeing dried and drunke in wine they cure the strangurie; and laied on with oile it procureth sweat.
Which things also concerning Onobrychis, Dioscorides hath in these words set downe: the herbe  stamped and applied wasteth away hard swellings of the kernels; but beeing drunke with wine it helpeth the strangurie, and rubbed on with oile it causeth sweatings.



CHAP. 524. Of Bastard Dittanie.


Fraxinella. Bastard Dittanie.



 The Description.
BAstard Dittanie is a very rare and gallant plant, hauing many browne stalks, somwhat rough, diuided into sundry small branches, garnished with leaues like Liquorice, or rather like the leaues of the Ash tree, but blacker, thicker, and more ful of iuice, of an vnpleasant sauor: among which grow floures, consisting of fiue whitish leaues stripped with red, whereof one which groweth vndermost hangeth downe low; but the four which grow vppermost grow more stiffe and vpright: out of the midst of this floure commeth forth a tassell, which is like a beard, hanging also downwards, and somewhat turning vp at the lower end: which beeing vaded, there come in place foure huskes ioined together, much like the husks or coddes of Columbines, somewhat rough without, slimie to handle, and of a lothsome sauour, almost like the smell of a goat; whereupon some Herbarists haue called it Tragium: in the cods are contained small black shining seeds like Peonie seeds in colour: the roots are white a finger thicke, one twisting or knotting within another, in tast somwhat bitter.
There is another kinde hereof growing in my garden, not very much differing: the leaues of the one are greater, greener, harder, and sharper pointed: of the other (...), not so hard, nor so sharpe pointed: the floures also hereof be somthing more bright coloured, and of the other a little redder.


 The Place.
Bastard Dittany groweth wilde in the monntaines of Italy and Germanie, and I haue it growing in my garden.



 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly: the seed is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists name it Fraxinella: most, (...), as though they should say Humilis Fraxinus or a low Ash: in English, bastard, or false Dittanie: the shops call it (...), and (...), but not truly, and vse oftentimes the roots hereof in stead of the right Dittanie. That it is not the right Dittanie it is better knowne than needfull at all to be confuted; and it is as euident that the same is not Dioscorides his Pseudodictamnum, or bastard Dittanie: but it is plaine to be a kinde of Tragium of the old Writers wherewith it seemeth to agree in shew, but not in substance.
@ The root of this is onely vsed in shops, and there knowne by the name of Radix Diptamni, (...) Dictamni. @


 The Temperature.
The root of bastard Dittanie is hot and dry in the second degreee, it is of a wasting, attenuating and opening facultie.


 The Vertues.
It bringeth downe the menses, it also bringeth away the birth and after birth; it helpeth cold diseases  of the matrix: and it is reported to be good for those that haue ill stomackes and are short winded.
They also say, that it is profitable against the stingings and bitings of venomous serpents; against  deadly (...), against contagious and pestilent diseases, and that it is with good (...) mixed with counterpoisons.
The seed of Bastard Dittanie taken in the quantitie of a dram is good against the strangury, prouoketh  vrine, breaketh the stone in the bladder, and driueth it forth.
The like vertue hath the leaues and iuice taken after the same sort; and being applied outwardly, it draweth thornes and splinters out of the flesh.
The root taken with a little Rubarb killeth and driueth forth wormes.
Dioscorides reporteth, that the wilde Goats being stricken with darts or arrowes, will eat Dictam, and thereby cause them to fall out of their bodies; which is meant of the right Dictam, though Dodonaeus reporteth that this plant will do the like (which I do not beleeue) @ nor (...) affirme. @



CHAP. 525. Of Land Caltrops.


Tribulus terrestris. Land Caltrops.



 The Description.
LAnd Caltrops hath long branches full (...) ioints, spred abroad vpon the ground, garnished with many leaues set vpon a middle rib, after the manner of Fetches; (...) which grow little yellow branches, consisting of fiue smal leaues, like vnto the floures of Tormentill: I neuer saw the plant beare yellow, but white floures, agreeing with the description of (...) in each respect, saue in the colour of the floures, which (...) turne into small square fruit, rough, and full of prickles, wherein is a small kernell or seed: the root is white, and full of strings.


 The Place.
It groweth plentifully in Spain in the fields: it is hurtful to corne, but yet as Pliny saith, it is rather to be accounted among the diseases of corne, than among the plagues of the earth: it is also found in most places of Italy and France; I found it growing in a moist medow adioyning to the wood or Park of Sir Francis Carew, (...) Croidon, not far from London, and not elsewhere; from whence I brought plants sor my garden.



 The Time.
It floureth in Iune and Iuly: the fruit is ripe in August.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...) and in Latine Tribulus: and that it may differ from the other which groweth in the water, it is named (...), or Tribulus terrestris: it may be called in English, land Caltrops, of the likenesse which the fruit hath with Caltrops, that are instruments of (...) cast in the way to annoy the feet of the Enemies horses, as is before remembred in the Water Saligot.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
In this land Caltrop there is an earthy and cold qualitie abounding, which is also binding, as  Galen saith.
The fruit thereof being drunke wasteth away stones in the kidneyes, by reason that it is of thin  parts.
Land Caltrops, saith Dioscorides, being (...) to the quantitie of a French crowne weight, and  (...) applied, cureth the bitings of the Viper.
And if it be drunke in wine it is a remedie against poysons: the (...) thereof sprinckled  about killeth fleas.



@ CHAP. 526. Of Spring or mountaine (...) or Vetches.


@ 1 Orobus Venetus. Venice Pease.


@ 2 Orobus syluaticus vernus. Spring Pease.



 The Description.
@ 1 THis, which Clusius calls Orobus Venetus, hath many cornered stalkes some foot long whereon grow winged leaues, foure or six fastned to one rib, standing by couples one against another, without any odde leafe at the end: these leaues are of an indifferent largenesse,

and of a light greene colour: the floures grow vpon long foot-stalks comming (...) of the (...) of the leaues, many together, hanging downe, small, yet shaped like those of other Pulses, and of a purple colour: after these follow cods almost like those of Fetches, but (...), (...) when they be ripe, and containing in them a longish white seed: the root is hard and wooddy, running (...) wayes with many fibres, and (...) sundry yeares: this varies somtimes with yellower (...) leaues and white floures. It floures in May, and growes onely in some few gardens with vs.
2 The stalkes of this also are a foot or more high, stiffe, (...), and (...); on these do grow winged leaues six or eight on a rib, after the manner of those of the last (...): each of these leaues hath three veines running alongst it: the floures in shape and manner of growing are like those of the former, but of a most elegant purple colour: which fading, they become blew. The floures are succeeded by such cods as the former, wherein are contained longish small (...) seed: which ripe, the cods fly open, and twine themselues round, as in most plants of this kinde: the root is blacke, hard, tuberous and wooddy, sending forth each yeare new shouts. This floures in April and May, and ripeneth the seed in Iune. This was found by Clusius in diuers (...) wooddie places of Hungarie: he calls it Orobus Pannonicus 1.


@ 3 Orobus montanus (...). albo. White mountaine Pease.


@ 4 Orobus montanus (...). Narrow leafed mountaine Pease.


3 This hath stalkes some cubit high, stiffe, straight, and crested; whereon by turnes are fastned winged leaues, consisting of foure sufficiently large and sharpe pointed leaues, whereto sometimes at the very end growes a fifth: the veines in these run from the middle rib towards their edges: their taste is first somewhat sourish, afterwards bitterish. The floures grow vpon short stalks comming forth of the bosomes of the leaues, fiue or six together, like those of the Fetch, but of colour white, with some little yellownesse on the two little leaues that turne vpwards. The cods are like those of the last described, and containe in them a brownish seed, larger than in any of the other kindes. This is an annuall plant, and perishes as soone as it hath perfected the seed. (...) giues vs this by the name of Orobus Pannonicus 4. (...) giues the same figure for his Arachus latifolius: and Bauhine affirmes this to be the Galegamontana, in the Hist. Lugd. pag. 1139. But these seeme to be of two seuerall plants; for Dodonaeus affirmes his to haue a liuing root, and such seemes also that in the Hist. Lugd. to be: yet Clusius saith expressely that his is an annuall, and floureth in

Aprill and May, and groweth in some wooddy mountainous places of the kingdom of (...).
4 This fourth hath straight firme cornered stalkes some foot or more high, whereupon grow leaues vsually foure on a foot-stalke, standing two against two, vpright, being commonly almost three inches long, at first of a sourish taste, but afterwards bitter: it hath no clauicles, because the stalkes need no supporters: the floures grow vpon long foot-stalkes, spike-fashion like those of Pease, but lesse, and white of colour: after these follow long blackish cods, full of a blacke or else spotted seed: the roots are about the length of ones little finger, fashioned like those of the Asphodill or lesser female (...), but lesser, blacke without, and white within. Clusius found this on the mountainous places (...) the baths of Baden, and in the like places in Hungarie: he calls it Orobus Pannonicus 3.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These are not knowne nor vsed in physicke; yet if the third be the Galega montana of the Historia Lugd. then it is there said to be effectuall against poyson, the wormes, the falling sicknesse, and the Plague. @



@ CHAP. 527. Of some other Pulses.


@ 1 (...), (...) Ervilia. Birds Pease.


@ 2 Ervum (...). Crimson grasse Fetch.



 The Description.
@ 1 THe first of these hath cornered broad stalks like those of euerlasting Pease, and they are weake, and commonly lie vpon the ground, vnlesse they haue something to support them: the lower leaues are broad, and commonly welt the stalke at their setting on, and at the end of the first leafe do vsually grow out after an vnusuall manner, two, three, or more other prety large leaues more long than broad, and the middle rib of the first leafe runnes out beyond the setting on of the highest of the out-growing leaues, and then it ends in two or three clasping tendrels. Those leaues that grow the lowest vpon the stalkes haue commonly the fewest comming out of

them. The floures are like those of other Pulses, of colour white: the cods are some inch and halfe long, containing some halfe dozen darke yellow or blackish small Pease: these cods grow one at a ioynt, on short foot-stalkes comming forth of the bosomes of the leaues, and are welted on their broader side, which stands towards the maine stalke. This growes with vs only in gardens. Dodonaeus, Pena, and Lobel call it Ochrus syluestris, siue Ervilia.
2 The stalkes of this grow vp sometimes a cubit high, being very slender, diuided into branches, and set vnorderly with many grasse-like long narrow leaues: on the tops of the stalkes and branches, vpon pretty long foot-stalkes grow pretty pease-fashioned floures of a faire and pleasant crimson colour: which fallen, there follow cods, long, small, and round, wherein are nine, ten, or more round hard blacke shining graines: the root is small, with diuers fibres, but whether it die when the seed is perfected, or no, as yet I haue not obserued. This growes wilde in many places with vs, as in the pasture and medow grounds about Pancridge Church. Lobel and Dodon. call this Ervum sylucstre; and they both partly iudge it to be the first Catanance of Dioscorides, and by that name it is vsually called. It floures in Iune and Iuly, and the seed is ripe in August.
3 This also, though it be not frequently found, is no stranger with vs; for I haue found it in the corne fields about Dartsord in Kent and some other places. It hath long slender ioynted creeping stalkes, diuided into sundry branches, whereon stand pretty greene three cornered leaues two at a ioynt, in shape and bignesse like those of the lesser Binde-weed. Out of the bosomes of these leaues at each ioynt comes a clasping tendrel, and commonly together with it a foot-stalke some inch or more long, bearing a pretty little pease-fashioned yellow floure; which is succeeded by a short flattish cod containing six or seuen little seeds. This floures in Iune, Iuly, and August, and so ripens the seed. It is by Lobel and others thought to be the Aphace of Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny: and the Pitine of Theophrastus, by Anguillara.


@ 3 Aphaca. Small yellow Fetch.


I finde mention in Stowes Chronicle, in Anno 1555, of a certaine Pulse or Pease, as they term it, wherewith the poore people at that time, there being a great dearth, were miraculously helped: he thus mentions it; In the moneth of August (saith he) in Suffolke, at a place by the sea side all of hard stone and pibble, called in those parts a shelfe, lying betweene the townes of Orford and Aldborough, where neither grew grasse, nor any earth was euer seene; it chanced in this barren place suddenly to spring vp without any tillage or sowing, great aboundance of Peason, whereof the poore gathered (as men iudged) aboue an hundred quarters, yet remained some ripe and some blossoming, as many as euer there were before: to the which place rode the Bishop of Norwich and the Lord Willoughby, with others in great number, who found nothing but hard rockie stone the space of three yards vnder the roots of these Peason: which roots were great and long, and very sweet.
Gesner also, de Aquatilibus, lib. 4. pag. 256. making mention, out of Dr. Cajus his letters, of the spotted English Whale, taken about that time at Lin in Norfolke, also thus mentions those pease: Pisa (saith he) in littore nostro Britannico quod Orientem spectat, certo quodam in loco Suffolciae, inter Alburnum and Ortfordium oppida, saxis insidentia (mirabile dictu) nulla terra circumfusa, autumnali tempore Anno 1555, sponte (...) (...), (...) magna copia, vt sufficerent vel millibus hominum. These Pease, which by their great encrease did such good to the poore that yeare, without doubt grew there for many yeares before, but were not obserued till [Magister artis, ingenique largitor Venter] -- hunger made them take notice of them, and quickned their inuention, which commonly in our people is very dull, especially in finding out food of this nature.

My Worshipfull friend Dr. Argent hath told me, that many yeares ago he was in this place, and caused his man to pull away the beach with his hands, and follow the roots so long, vntill hee got some equall in length vnto his height, yet could come to no ends of them: hee brought these vp with him to London, and gaue them to Dr. Lobel, who was then liuing; and he caused them to be drawne, purposing to set them forth in that Worke which he intended to haue published, if God had spared him longer life. Now whether these Pease be truly so (...), and be the same with the Pisum (...) Perenne, or different; or whether they be rather of the stocke of the Lathyrus maior, or of some other Pulse here formerly described, I can affirme nothing of certaintie, because I haue seene no part of them, nor could gather by any that had, any certaintie of their shape or figure: yet would I not passe them ouer in silence, for that I hope this may come to be read by some who liue thereabout, that may by sending me the things themselues, giue me certaine knowledge of them; that so I may be made able, as I am alwaies willing, to impart it to others.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
I haue not haue not sound any thing written of the faculties of the two first; but of Aphace, Galen saith it hath an a stringene facultie like as the Lentill, and also is vsed to be eaten like as it, yet it is harder of concoction, but it dries more powerfully, and heates moderately. The seeds (saith hee) haue an astringent facultie; wherefore parched, broken, and boyled, they stay fluxes of the belly. We know (saith Dodonaeus) by certaine experience, that the Aphace here described hath this astringent force and facultie. @



CHAP. 528. Of bastard Rubarb.


1 Thalietrum, siue Thalictrum maius. Great bastard Rubarb.


2 Thalictrum minus. Small bastard Rubarb.



 The Description.
1 THe great Thalietrum or bastard Rubarb hath large leaues parted or diuided into diuers other small leaues, somewhat snipt about the edges, of a blacke or darke green colour:

the stalkes are crested or streaked, of a purple colour, growing to the height of two cubits: at the top whereof grow many small and hairy white floures, and after them come small narrow huskes like little cods, soure or fiue growing together: the root is yellow, long, round, and knotty, dispersing it selfe far abroad on the vpper crust of the earth.
2 The small bastard Rubarb is very like vnto the precedent, but that it is altogether lesser: his stalkes are a span or a foot long: his leaues be thin and tender; the root fine and slender: the little floures grow together in small bundles or tufts, of a light yellow colour, almost white, and are of a grieuous sauour.
@ 3 There is kept in some gardens a plant of this kinde growing vp with large stalkes to the height of three cubits: the leaues are very like those of Columbines: the floures are made of many white threds: it floures in Iune, and is called Thalictrum maius Hispanicum, Great Spanish Bastard Rubarb. @


 The Place.
These Plants doe grow alongst the Ditch sides leading from Kentish street vnto Saint Thomas a-Waterings (the place of Execution) on the right hand. They grow also vpon the bankes of the Thames, leading from Blacke-wall to Woolwich, neere London, and in sundry other places also.


 The Time.
The floure for the most part in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Diuers of the later Herbarists do call it Pigamum, as though it were (...), that is, Rue; whereupon most call it Rut a palustris, or Fen Rue: others, Pseudo-Rhabarbarum, and Rbabarbarum Monachorum, by reason of the yellow colour of the root. But neither of their iudgements is greatly to be esteemed of: they iudge better that would haue it to be Thalietrum, which Dioscorides describeth to haue leaues something flatter than those of Coriander; and the stalke like that of Rue, vpon which the leaues doe grow. Pena calleth it Thalietrum, Thalictrum, and Rutapratensis: in English, bastard Rubarb, or English Rubarb: which names are taken of the colour, and taste of the roots.


 The Temperature.
These herbes are hot and dry of complexion.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of bastard Rubarb with other pot-herbes do somewhat moue the belly.
The decoction of the root doth more effectually.
Dioscorides saith, that the leaues being stamped do perfectly cure old vlcers. Galen addeth, that  they dry without biting.



CHAP. 529. Of Goats Rue.

 The Description.
GAlega or Goats Rue hath round hard (...) two cubits or more high, set full of leaues displayed or winged abroad; euerie leafe consisting of sundrie small leaues set vpon a slender rib, resembling the leaues of the field Vetch or Tare, but greater and longer. The floures grow at the top of the stalke, clustering together after the manner of the wilde Vetch, of a light (...) colour, which turne into long cods small and round, wherein the seed is contained. The root is great, thicke, and of a white colour.


 The Place.
It groweth plentifully in Italy euery where in fat grounds and by riuers sides: it groweth likewise in my garden.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The Italians call it (...), and Ruta Capraria: diuers name it corruptly Gralega: Hieronymus

Galega. Goats Rue.
Fracastorius calleth it Herba Gallcca: the Hetruscians, Lauanese; and it is also called by diuers other names in sundry places of Italy, as Gesner saith, as are Castracane, Lauanna, Thorina, or Taurina, Martanica, Sarracena, Capragina, Herbanesa, Foenum graecum syluestre, and as (...) witnesseth, Giarga. It is named in English, Italian Fitch, and Goats Rue.
Some iudge that the old Physitions were wont to call it Onobrychis: others, Glauce: diuers would haue it to be Polemonium, but not so much Petr. And (...) in his commentaries, as euery one of the descriptions mentioned by Dioscorides do gainsay them; as also those, who thinke that Galega, is Polygalon, and that the name of Galega came of Polygalon, the very description also of Polygalon is against them: for Galega is higher and greater than that it may be called a little shrub onely of an hand bredth high.


 The Temperature.
This plant is ina meane temperature betweene hot and cold.


 The Vertues.
Goats Rue is a singular herbe against all  venome and poison, and against wormes, to kill and driue them forth, if the juice be giuen to little children to drinke.
It is of like vertue if it be fryed with  Lineseed oyle, and bound vpon the (...) nauell.
It is ministred vnto children which are possessed with the falling euill, a spoonefull euery morning  in milke.
Being boiled in vineger, and drunke with a little Treacle, it is very good against the (...) of the plague, especially if the medicine be taken within twelue houres.
The herbe it selfe is eaten, being boiled with flesh, as we vse to eate Cabbage and otherwoorts, and likewise in sallades, with oile, vineger and pepper, as we do eate boiled Spinage, and such (...), Which is most excellent being so eaten, against all poison and pestilence, or any venomous infirmitie whatsoeuer, and procureth sweat.
It also helpeth the bitings and stingings of venomous beasts, if either the juice or the herbe  stamped be laid vpon the wound.
Halfe an ounce of the juice inwardly taken is reported to helpe those that are troubled with  convulsions, crampes, and all other the diseases (...).
The seedes do feed pullen exceedingly, and cause them to yeeld greater store of egs than ordinary.
@ The juice of the leaues, or the leaues themselues bruised and applied to any part swollen  by the sting of a bee or waspe, mitigate the paine, and are a present remedy, as Mr. Cannon a louer of Plants, and frind of mine, hath assured me he hath seen by frequent experience. @



CHAP. 530. Of Pliny his Leadwoot.

 The Description.
DEntaria or Dentillaria hath offended in the superlatiue degree, in that hehath hid himselfe like a runnagate souldier, when the assault should haue been giuen to the plant Lepidium, whereof doubtlesse it is a kinde. But if the fault be mine, as without question it is, I craue pardon for the ouersight, and do intreate thee gentle reader to censure me with fauour, whereby I may more boldly insert it in this place, rather than to leaue it vntouched. The learned of Narbone (especially Rondeletius) haue not without good cause accounted this goodly plant for a kinde

Plumbago Plinij. Leadwoort.
thereof, because the whole plant is of a biting taste, and a burning faculty, and that in such extremity, that it will raise blisters vpon a mans hand: for which cause some of the learned sort haue accounted it Plinies Molybdaena, or Aegineta his Lepidium: but the new Herbarists call it Dentaria, or Dentillaria Rondeletij, who made the like vse hereof, as he did of Pyrethrum, and such burning plants, to appease the immoderate pain of the tooth-ache and such like. This plant hath great thicke tough roots, of a wooddy substance, from whence spring vp long and tough stalkes two cubits high, confusedly garnished and beset with long leaues, in colour like Woad, of a sharpe and biting taste. The floures grow at the top of the stalkes of a purple colour; which being past, there succeed close glistering and hairy huskes, wherein is contained small blackish seed.


 The Place.
Pena reporteth that Dentillaria groweth about Rome, nigh the hedges and corne fields: it likewise groweth in my Garden in great plenty.


 The Time.
It floureth in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Leadwoort is called Molybdaena, (...) Plinij, and Dentillaria Rondeletij: in Italian, Crepanella, the Romanes, Herba S. Antonij: in Illyria, Cucurida: in English, Leadwoort.


 The Temperature.
Dentillaria is of a causticke quality.


 The Vertues.
It helpeth the tooth-ache, and that as some say if it be holden in the hand some small while.



CHAP. 531. Of Rue, or herbe Grace.

 The Description.
1 GArden Rue or planted Rue, is a shrub full of branches, now and then a yard high, or higher: the stalkes whereof are couered with a whitish barke, the branches are more green: the leaues hereof consist of diuers parts, and be diuided into wings, about which are certaine little ones, of an odde number, something broad, more long than round, smooth and somewhat fat, of a gray colour, or greenish blew: the floures in the top of the branches are of a pale yellow, consisting of foure little leaues, something hollow: in the middle of which standeth vp a little head or button foure square, seldome fiue square, containing as many little coffers as it hath corners, being compassed about with diuers little yellow threds: out of which hang pretie fine tips of one colour; the seed groweth in the little coffers: the root is wooddy, and fastned with many strings: this Rue hath a very strong and ranke smell, and a biting taste.
2 The second being the wilde or mountaine Rue, called Ruta syluestris, is very like to garden Rue, in stalkes, leaues, floures, seed, colour, taste, and sauour, sauing that euery little leafe hath smaller cuts, and is much narrower: the whole plant dieth at the approch of winter, being an annuall plant, and must either stand till it do sow himselfe, or else must be sowne of others. @ This second is a variety of the garden Rue differing from the former onely in smallnesse. @
3 This plant is likewise a wilde kinde of Rue, and of all the rest the smallest, and yet more virulent, biting, and stinking than any of the rest: the whole plant is of a whitish pale greene, agreeing with the last before mentioned in each respect, saue in greatnesse, and in that the venomous fumes or vapors that come from this small wilde Rue are more noisome and hurtfull than the (...). @ The leaues lie spred vpon the ground, and are very finely cut and diuided: the whole plant is of

1 (...) hortensis. Garden Rue.
3 Ruta syluestris minima. The smallest wilde Rue.
4 Ruta (...). Mountaine Rue.
5 Harmala. Wilde Rue with white floures.

@ 6 Ruta Canina. Dogs Rue.
such acrimonie, that Clusius saith the hath oftner than once obserued it to pierce through three paire of gloues to the hand of the gatherer; and if any one rub his face with his hand that hath newly gathered it, forthwith it will mightily inflame his face. He tells a history of a Dutch Student of Mompelier that went with him a simpling, who putting some of it betweene his hat and his head to keepe him the cooler, had by that meanes all his face presently inflamed and blistred wheresoeuer the sweat ran downe. @
4 There is another wilde Rue growing vpon the mountaines of Sauoy and other places adioyning, hauing a great thicke root, from which do arise great shoots or stalkes; (...) do grow leaues very thicke and fat, parted into diuers longish sections, otherwise resembling the leaues of the first described, of a strong and stinking smell: the floures grow on the tops of the stalkes, consisting of foure small yellow leaues: the seeds are like the other.
5 Harmel is one of the wilde Rues: it bringeth forth immediatly from the root diuers little stalks of a cubit high; whereupon do grow greene leaues diuersly cut into long pieces, longer and narrower than those of the wild strong smelling Rue: the floures be white, composed of fiue white leaues: the fruit is three square, bigger than that of the planted Rue, in which the seed lieth: the root is thick, long, and blaekish: this Rue in hot countries hath a maruellous strong smell; in cold Countries not so.
@ 6 This, which Matthiolus gaue for (...) 3. and Lobel, Clusius, and others for Ruta canina, hath many twiggy branches some cubit and halfe high; whereon grow leaues resembling those of the Papauer Rhaeas or Argemone, lesser, thicker, and of a blackish greene: the floures are of a whitish purple colour, fashioned somewhat like those of Antirrhinum: the seed is small, and contained in such vessels as those of Rue, or rather those of Blattaria. The whole plant is of a strong and vngratefull smell: it growes in the hot and dry places about Narbon in France, Rauenna and Rome in Italy. @


 The Place.
Garden Rue ioyeth in sunny and open places: it prospereth in rough and brickie ground, and among ashes: it cannot in no wise away with dung.
The wilde are found on mountaines in hot countries, as in Cappadocia, Galatia, and in diuers prouinces of Italy and Spaine, and on the hills of Lancashire and Yorke.
Pliny saith that there is such friendship betweene it and the fig tree, that it prospers no where so well as vnder the fig tree. The best for physicks vse is that which groweth vnder the fig tree, as Dioscorides saith: the cause is alledged by Plutarch in the first booke of his Symposiacks or Feasts, for he saith it becommeth more sweet and milde in taste, by reason it taketh as it were some part of the sweetnes of the fig tree, whereby the ouer rancke quality of the Rue is allayd; vnlesse it be that the fig tree whilest it draweth nourishment vnto it selfe, it likewise draweth away the rancknesse of the Rue.


 The Time.
They floure in these cold countries in Iuly and August; in other countries sooner.


 The Names.
The first, which is Hortensis Ruta, garden Rue: in high-Dutch, Rauten: in low-Dutch, (...): the Italians and Apothecaries keepe the Latine name: in Spanish, Aruda: in French, Rue de (...): in English, Rue, and Herbe-Grace.
Wilde Rue is called in Greeke (...), Peganon: in Latine, Ruta syluestris, or wilde Rue: in Galatia and Cappadocia, (...) of diuers, Harmala: of the Arabians, Harmel: of the Syrians, Besara.


 The Temperature.
Rue is hot and dry in the later end of the third degree, and wild Rue in the fourth: it is of (...)

and subtill parts: it wasts and consumes winde, it cutteth and digesteth grosse and tough humors.


 The Vertues.
Rue or Herbe-Grace prouokes vrine, brings downe the sicknes, expels the dead child and afterbirth, being inwardly taken, or the decoction drunke; and is good for the mother, if but smelled to.
Plin. lib. 20. ca. 13. saith it opens the matrix, and brings it into the right place, if the belly all ouer  and the share (the brest say the old false copies) be anointed therewith: mixed with hony it is a remedie against the inflammation and swelling of the stones, proceeding of long abstinence from venerie, called of our English Mountebanks the Colts euill, if it be boyled with Barrowes grease, Bay leaues, and the pouders of Fenugreeke and Linseed be added thereto, and applied pultis wise.
It takes away crudity and rawnesse of humors, and also windines and old paines of the stomack.
Boiled with vineger it easeth paines, is good against the stitch of the side and chest, and shortnes  of breath vpon a cold cause, and also against the paine in the ioynts and huckle bones.
The oile of it serues for the purposes last recited: it takes away the collicke and pangs in the  (...), not only in a clister, but also anointed vpon the places affected. But if this oile be made of the oile pressed out of Lineseed it will be so much the better, and of singular force to take away hard swellings of the spleene or milt.
It is vsed with good successe against the dropsie called in Greeke (...) being applied to the  belly in manner of a pultis.
The herb a little boiled or scalded, and kept in pickle as Sampier, and eaten, quickens the sight 
The same applied with honey and the iuyce of Fennell is a remedie against dim eyes.
The iuyce of Rue made hot in the rinde of a pomegranat and dropped into the eares, takes away  the paine thereof.
S. Anthonies (...) is quenched therewith: it killeth the shingles, and running vlcers and sores in  the heads of yong children, if it be tempered with Ceruse or white Lead, vineger, and oile of roses, and made into the forme of (...) or Triapharmacon.
Dioscorides saith, that Rue put vp in the nosthrils stayeth bleeding.
Of whose opinion Pliny also is; when notwithstanding it is of power rather to procure bleeding  through the sharpe and biting qualitie that it hath.
The leaues of Rue beaten and drunke with wine, are an antidote against poisons, as Pliny saith.
Dioscorides writeth, that a twelue penny weight of the seed drunke in wine is a counterpoyson against  deadly medicines or the poyson of Wolfs-bane, Ixia, Mushroms, or Tode-stooles, the biting of Serpents, stinging of Scorpions, spiders, bees, hornets, and wasps; and it is reported, that if a man be anointed with the iuyce of Rue these will not hurt him; and that the Serpent is driuen away at the smell thereof when it is burned, insomuch that when the Weesell is to fight with the Serpent, she armeth her selfe by eating Rue against the might of the Serpent.
The leaues of Rue eaten with the kernels of wallnuts or figs stamped together and made into a  masse or paste, is good against all euill aires, the pestilence or plague, resists poyson and all venom.
Rue boiled with Dil, Fennell seed, and some Sugar, in a sufficient quantitie of wine, swageth the  torments and griping paines of the belly, the paines in the sides and breast, the difficulty of breathing, the cough, and stopping of the lungs, and helpeth such as are declining to a dropsie.
The iuyce taken with Dill, as aforesaid, helpeth the cold fits of agues, and alters their course: it  helpeth the inflammation of the fundament, and paines of the gut called Rectum intestinum.
The iuyce of Rue drunke with wine purgeth women after their deliuerance, driuing forth the  secondine, the dead childe, and the vnnaturall birth.
Ruevsed very often either in meate or drinke, quencheth and drieth vp the naturall seed of generation, and the milke of those that giue sucke.
The oile wherein Rue hath beene boyled, and infused many dayes together in the Sun warmeth  and chafeth all cold members if they be anointed therewith: also it prouoketh vrine if the region of the bladder be anointed therewith.
If it be ministred in clisters it expells windinesse, and the torsion or gnawing paines of the guts.
The leaues of garden (...) boiled in water and drunke, causeth one to make water, prouoketh the  termes, and stoppeth the laske.
Rutasyluestris or wilde Rue is much more vehement both in smell and operation, and therefore  the more virulent or pernitious; for somtimes it fumeth out a vapor or aire so hurtfull that it scorcheth the face of him that looketh vpon it, raising vp blisters, wheales, and other accidents: it venometh their hands that touch it, and will infect the face also, if it be touched with them before they be cleane washed; wherefore it is not to be admitted vnto meate or medicine.
The end of the second Booke.






THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF PLANTS.

Containing the Description, Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Vertues, of Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, Fruit-bearing Plants, Rosins, Gums, Roses, Heath, Mosses: some Indian Plants, and other rare Plants not remembred in the Proeme to the first Booke. Also Mushroms, Corall, and their seuerall kindes, etc.


The Proeme.
HAuing finished the Treatise of Herbes and Plants in generall, vsed for meat, medicine, or sweet smelling vse, onely some few omitted for want of perfect instruction, and also being hindered by the slackenesse of the Cutters or Grauers of the those; which wants we intend to supplie in this third and last part. The Tables as well generall as particular shall be set forth in the end of this present Volume.


CHAP. 1. Of Roses.

 The Kindes.
THe Plant of Roses, though it be a shrub full of prickles, yet it had been more fit and conuenient to haue placed it with the most glorious floures of the world, than to insert the same here among base and thornie shrubs: for the Rose doth deserue the chiefest and most principall place among all floures whatsoeuer; beeing not onely esteemed for his beautie, vertues, and his fragrant and odoriferous smell; but also because it is the honour and ornament of our English Scepter, as by the coniunction appeareth in the vniting of those two most royall houses of Lancaster and Yorke. Which pleasant floures deserue the chiefest place in Crownes and garlands, as Anacreon Thius a most antient Greeke Poet (whom Henricus Stephanus hath translated in a gallant Latine verse) affirmes in those verses of a Rose, beginning thus

(...)
Rosahonos, decusque florum,
Rosa, cura, amorque Veris.
Rosa, caelitum voluptas,
Rose is puer Cytheres.
Caput implicat Corollis,
Charitum Choros (...).



The Rose is the honour and beautie of floures,
The Rose is the care and loue of the Spring,
The Rose is the pleasure of th'heauenly powres:
The Boy of faire Venus, Cytheras darling,
Doth wrap in his head round with garlands of Rose,
When to the dances of the Graces he goes.

Augerius (...) speaking of the estimation and honor of the Rose, reporteth that the Turks can by no meanes indure to see the leaues of Roses fall to the ground, because that some of them haue dreamed, that the first or most antient Rose did spring of the bloud of Venus; and others of the Mahumetans say, that it sprang of the sweat of (...).
But there are many kindes of Roses differing either in the bignesse of the floures, or the plant it selfe, roughnesse or smoothnesse, or in the multitude of the floures, or in the (...), or else in colour and smell: for diuers of them are high and tall, others short and low; some haue fiue leaues, others very many. (...) telleth of a certaine Rose growing about Philippi, with an hundred leaues, which the inhabitants brought sorth of Pangaeum, and planted it in Campania, as Pliny saith; which wee hold to be the Holland Rose, that diuers call the Prouince Rose, but not properly.
Moreouer, some be red, others white, and most of them or all, sweetly smelling, especially those of the garden.


1 Rosa (...). The White Rose.




 The (...).
1 IF the (...) could so be content, one general description might serue to distinguish the whole stocke or kindred of the Roses, beeing things so well knowne: notwithstanding I thinke it not amisse to say something of them seuerally, in hope to satisfie all. The white Rose hath very long stalkes of a wooddle substance, set or armed with diuers sharpe prickles: the branches whereof are likewise full of prickles, whereon doe grow leaues consisting of fiue leaues for the most part, set vpon a middle rib by couples; the old leafe standing at the point of the same, and euery one of those small leaues somewhat snipt about the edges, somewhat rough, and of an ouerworne green colour: from the bosom wherof shoot forth long foot-stalks, whereon do grow very faire double floures, of a white colour, and very sweet smell, hauing in the middle a few yellow threds or chiues; which being past there succeedeth a long fruit, greene at the first, but red when it is ripe, and stuffed with a downie choaking matter, wherein is contained seed as hard as stones. The root is long, tough, and of a wooddie substance.
2 The Red Rose groweth very low in respect of the former: the stalkes are shorter, smoother, and (...) of colour: the leaues are like, yet of a worse dustie colour: the floures grow on the (...) of the branches, consisting of many leaues, of a perfect red colour: the fruit is likewise red when it is ripe: the root also wooddie.
3 The common Damaske Rose in stature, prickley branches, and in other respects is like the

2 Rosa rubra. The red Rose.
3 Rosa Prouincialis, sive (...). The Prouince, or Damaske Rose.
5 Rosa sine spinis. The Rose without prickles.
white Rose; the especiall difference consisteth in the colour and smell of the floures; for these are of a pale red colour, and of a more pleasant smell, and fitter for meate or medicine:
4 The Rosa Provincialis minor, or (...) (...) Rose differeth not from the former, but is altogether lesser: the floures and fruit are like: the vse in physick also agreeth with the precedent.
5 The Rose without prickles hath many young shootes comming from the root, diuiding themselues into diuers branches, (...), and of a woody substance as are all the rest of the Roses, of the hight of two or three (...), smooth and plaine without any roughnesse or prickles at all; whereon do grow leaues like those of the Holland Rose, of a shining deepe greene colour on the vp. per side, vnderneath somewhat (...) and hairy. The floures grow at the toppes of the branches, consisting of an infinite number of leaues, greater than those of the (...) Rose, more double, and of a colour betweene the Red and Damaske Roses, of a most sweet smell. The fruit is round, red when it is ripe, and stuffed with the like flockes and seeds of those of the Damask Rose. The root is great, wooddie, and far spreading.

6 The Holland or Prouince Rose hath diuers shoots proceeding from a wooddie root, full (...) sharpe prickles, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches, whereon do grow leaues consisting of (...) leaues set vpon a rough middle rib, and those snipt about the edges: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, in shape and colour like the Damaske Rose, but greater and more double, insomuch that the yellow chiues in the middle are hard to be seene; of a reasonable good smell, but not ful so sweet as the common Damaske Rose: the fruit is like the other of his kinde.


6 Rosa Hollandica, sive Bataua. The great Holland Rose, commonly called the great Prouince Rose.


We haue in our London gardens one of the red Roses, whose floures are in quantitie and beauty equal with the former, but of greater estimation, of a perfect red colour, wherein especially it differeth from the Prouince Rose; in stalks, stature, and manner of growing it agreeth with our common red Rose.


 Te Place.
All these sorts of Roses we haue in our London gardens, except that Rose without prickles, which as yet is a stranger in England. The double white Rose doth grow wilde in many (...) of Lancashire in great abundance, euen as Briers do with vs in these Southerly parts, (...) in a place of the countrey called Leyland, and in a place called Roughford, not far (...) Latham. (...), in the said Leyland fields doth grow our garden Rose wilde, in the plowed fields among the (...) in such abundance, that there may be gathered daily, during the time, many (...) els of Roses, equall with the best garden Rose in each respect: the thing that giueth great cause of worder is, that in a field in the place aforesaid, called Glouers field, euery yeare that the field is (...) (...) corne, that yeare the field will be spred ouer with Roses; and when it lyeth as they call it ley, and not (...), then shall there be but few Roses to be gathered, by the relation of a curious Gentleman there dwelling, so often remembred in our Historie.
@ I haue heard that the Roses which grow in such plenty in Glouers field euery yeare the field is plowed, are no other than corne Rose, that is, red Poppies, howeuer our Author was informed. @


 The Time.
These floure from the end of May to the end of August, and diuers times after, by reason (...) tops and superfluous branches are cut away in the end of their flouring: and then do they sometimes floure euen vntill October, and after.



 The Names.
The Rose is called in Latine Rosa: in Greeke (...): and the plant it selfe (...): (which in Latine keepeth the same name that the floure hath) and it is called Rodon (as Plutarch saith) because it sendeth forth plenty of smell.
The middle part of the Roses, that is, the yellow chiues, or seeds and typs, is called Anthos, and Flos Rosae, the floure of the Rose: in shops, Anthera, or the blowing of the rose.
The white parts of the leaues of the floure it selfe, by which they are fastened to the cups, be named Vngues or (...). That is called Calix, or the cup, which containeth and holdeth in together the yellow part and leaues of the floure.
Alabastri, are those parts of the cup which are deeply cut, and that compasse the floure close about before it be opened, which be in number fiue, two haue beards and two haue none, and the fift hath but halfe one: most do call them Cortices Rosarum, or the husks of the roses: the shoots of the plant of roses, Strabo Gallus in his little garden doth call Viburna.
The white Rose is called Rosa alba: in English, the white Rose: in high Dutch, Weisz Roosen: in low Dutch, Ditte Roosen: in French, Rose Blanche: of Plinie, Spincola Rosa, or Rosa Campana.
The red Rose is called in Latine, Rosa rubra: the Frenchmen, Rose Franche, Rose de Prouins, a towne in Campaigne: of Plinie, Trachinia, or Praenestina.
The Damaske Rose is called of the Italians Rosa incarnata: in high Dutch, Leibfarbige Roosen: in low Dutch, Prouenice Roose: of some, Rosa Provincialis, or Rose of Prouence: in French of some, Melesia: the Rose of Melaxo, a citie in Asia, from whence some haue thought it was first brought into those parts of Europe.
The great Rose, which is generally called the great Prouence rose, which the Dutch men cannot endure; for say they, it came first out of Holland, and therefore to be called the Holland Rose: (...) by all likelihood it came from the Damaske rose, as a kinde thereof, made better and fairer by art, which seemeth to agree with truth.
The rose without prickles is called in Latine, Rosa sine spinis, and may be called in English, the rose without thornes, or the rose of Austrich, because it was first brought from Vienna, the Metropolitan citie of Austrich, and giue nto that famous Herbarist Carolus Clusius.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of the floures of roses, because they doe consist of diuers parts, haue also diuers and sundry faculties: for there be in them certain that are earthy and binding, others moist and watery, and sundrie that are spirituall and airie parts, which notwithstanding are not all after one sort, for in one kinde these excell, in another those, all of them haue a predominant or ouerruling cold tempe rature, which is neerest to a meane, that is to say, of such as are cold in the first degree, moist, airie, and spirituall parts are predominant in the White roses, Damaske and Muske.


 The Vertues.
The distilled water of roses is good for the strengthning of the heart, and refreshing of the spirits, and likewise for all things that require a gentle cooling.
The same being put into iunketting dishes, cakes, sauces, and many other pleasant things, giueth  a fine and delectable taste.
It mitigateth the paine of the cies proceeding of a hot cause, bringeth sleep, which also the fresh  roses themselues prouoke through their sweet and pleasant smell.
The (...) of these roses, especially of Damask, doth moue to the stoole, and maketh the belly (...): but most (...) that of the Musk roses: next to them is the iuice of the Damask, which is more commonly vsed.
The infusion of them doth the same, and also the syrrup made thereof, called in Latine (...), or Serapium: the Apothecaries call it Syrrup of roses solutiue, which must be made of the infusion in which a great number of the leaues of these fresh roses are diuers and sundry times steeped.
It is profitable to make the belly loose and soluble, when as either there is no need of other stronger  purgation, or that it is not fit and expedient to vse it: for besides those excrements which stick to the bowels, or that in the first and neerest veines remaine raw, flegmaticke, and now and then cholericke, it purgeth no other excrements, vnlesse it be mixed with certaine other stronger medicines.
This syrrup doth moisten and coole, and therefore it alayeth the extremitie of heart in hot burning  feuers, mitigateth the inflammations of the intrails, and quencheth thirst: it is scarce good for aweake and moist stomacke, for it leaueth it more slacke and weake.
Of (...) vertue also are the leaues of these preserued in Sugar, especially if they be onely bruised  with the hands, and diligently tempered with Sugar, and so heat at the fire rather than boiled.


 The Temperature of Red Roses.
There is in the red Roses, which are common euery where, and in the other that be of a deep purple, called Prouence roses, a more earthie substance, also a drying and binding qualitie, yet not

without certaine moisture ioined, being in them when they are as yet fresh, which they lose when they be dried: for this cause their iuice and infusion doth also make the bodie soluble, yet not so much as of the others aforesaid. These roses being dried and their moisture (...), do bind and dry; and likewise coole, but lesser than when they are fresh.


 The Vertues.
They strengthen the heart, and helpe the trembling and beating thereof.
They giue strength to the liuer, kidneies, and other weake intrails; they dry and comfort a weak  stomacke that is flashie and moist; stay the whites and reds, stanch bleedings in any part of the body, stay sweatings, binde and loose, and moisten the body.
And they are put into all manner of counterpoisons and other like medicines, whether they be  to be outwardly applied or to be inwardly taken, to which they giue an effectuall binding, and certaine strengthning qualitie.
Honie of Roses, or Mel Rosarum, called in Greeke (...), which is made of them, is most excellent  good for wounds, vlcers, issues, and generally for such things as haue need to be clensed and dried.
The oile doth mitigate all kindes of heat, and will not suffer inflammations or hot swellings to  rise, and being risen it doth at the first asswage them.


 The Temperature and Vertues of the parts.
The floures or bloomings of Roses, that is to say, the yellow haires and tips, do in like maner dry  and binde, and that more effectually than of the leaues of the roses themselues: the same temperature the cups and beards be of; but seeing none of these haue any sweet smell, they are not so profitable, nor so familiar or beneficiall to mans nature: notwithstanding in fluxes at the sea, it shall auaile the Chirurgion greatly, to carry store thereof with him, which doth there preuaile much more than at the land.
The same yellow called Anthera, staieth not onely those lasks and bloudy fluxes which do happen at the sea, but those at the land also, and likewise the white flux and red in women, if they bee dried, beaten to pouder, and two scruples thereof giuen in red wine, with a little powder of Ginger added thereto: and being at the sea, for want of red wine you may vse such liquour as you can get in such extremitie.
The little heads or buttons of the Roses, as Pliny writeth, do also stanch bleeding, and stoppe the  laske.
The nailes or white ends of the leaues of the floures are good for watering eies.
The iuice, infusion, or decoction of Roses, are to be reckoned among those medicines which are  soft, gentle loosing, opening and purging gently the belly, which may be taken at all times and in all places, of euery kinde or sex of people, both old and yong, without danger or perill.
The syrrup made of the infusion of Roses, is a most singular and gentle loosing medicine, carrying  downwards cholericke (...), opening the stoppings of the liuer, helping greatly the yellow iaundies, the trembling of the heart, and taking away the extreme heat in agues and burning feuers which is thus made:
Take two pound of Roses, the white ends cut away, put them to steepe or infuse in six pintes of  warme water in an open vessell for the space of twelue houres: then straine them out, and put thereto the like quantitie of Roses, and warme the water again, so let it stand the like time: do thus foure or fiue times; in the end adde vnto that liquor or infusion, foure pound of fine sugar in powder; then boyle it vnto the forme of a syrrup, vpon a gentle fire, continually stirring it vntill it be cold; then straine it, and keepe it for your vse, whereof may be taken in white wine, or other liquour, from one ounce vnto two.
Syrrup of the iuice of Roses is very profitable for the grieses aforesaid, made in this manner:
Take Roses, the white nailes cut away, what quantitie you please, stampe them, and straine our  the iuice, the which you shall put to the fire, adding thereto sugar, according to the quantity of the iuice: boiling them on a gentle fire vnto a good consistence.
Vnto these syrrups you may adde a few drops of oyle of Vitriol, which giueth it a most beautifull  colour, and also helpeth the force in cooling hot and burning feuers and agues: you likewise may adde thereto a small quantitie of the iuice of Limons, which doth the like.
The conserue of Roses as well that which is crude and raw, as that which is made by ebullition  or boiling, taken in the morning fasting, and last at night, strengthneth the heart, and taketh away the shaking and trembling thereof, strengthneth the liuer, kidneies, and other weake intrails, comforteth a weake stomacke that is moist and raw; staieth the whites and reds in women, and in a word is the most familiar thing to be vsed for the purposes aforesaid, and is thus made:
Take the leaues of Roses, the nails cut off, one pound, put them into a clean pan; then put thereto  a pinte and a halfe of scalding water, stirring them together with a woodden slice, so let them stand

to macerate, close couered some two or three houres; (...) set them to the fire slowly to boyle, adding thereto three pounds of sugar in powder, letting them to simper together according to discretion, some houre or more; then keepe it for your vse.
The same made another way, but better by many degrees: take Roses at your pleasure, put them  to boyle in faire water, hauing regard to the quantity; for if you haue many roses, you may take the more water; if fewer, the lesse water will serue: the which you shall boyle at the least three or foure houres, euen as you would boyle a piece of meat, vntill in the eating they be very tender, at which time the roses will lose their colour, that you would thinke your labour lost, and the thing spoyled. But proceed, for though the Roses haue lost their colour, the water hath gotten the tincture thereof; then shall you adde vnto one pound of Roses, foure pound of fine sugar in pure powder, and so according to the rest of the roses. Thus shall you let them boyle gently after the Sugar is put therto, continually stirring it with a woodden Spatula vntill it be cold, whereof one pound weight is worth six pound of the crude or raw conserue, as well for the vertues and goodnesse in taste, as also for the beautifull colour.
The making of the crude or raw conserue is very well knowne, as also Sugar roset, and diuers  other pretty things made of roses and sugar, which are impertent vnto our historie, because I intend neither to make thereof an Apothecaries shop, nor a Sugar bakers storehouse, leauing the rest for our cunning confectioners.



CHAP. 2. Of the Muske Roses.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Roses planted in gardens, besides those written of in the former chapter, which are of most writers reckoned among the wilde roses, notwithstanding we thinke it conuenient to put them into a chapter betweene those of the garden and the brier roses, as indifferent whether to make them of the wilde roses, or of the tame, seeing we haue made them denizons in our gardens for diuers respects, and that worthily.


1 Rosa Moschata simplici flore. The single Muske rose.


2 Rosa Moschata multiplex. The double Muske rose.





 The Description.
1 THe single Muske Rose hath diuers long shoots of a greenish colour and wooddie substance, armed with very sharpe prickles, diuiding it selfe into diuers branches: whereon do grow long leaues, smooth and shining, made of diuers leaues set vpon (...) middle rib, like the other roses: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, of a white colour, and pleasant sweet smell, like that of Muske, whereof it tooke his name; hauing certain yellow seeds in the middle, as the rest of the roses haue: the fruit is red when it is ripe, and filled with such (...) flocks and seeds as those of the other roses: the root is tough and wooddie.
2 The double Muske rose differeth not from the precedent in leaues, stalks, and roots, nor in the colour of the floures, or sweetnesse thereof, but onely in the doublenesse of the floures, wherein consisteth the difference.
3 Of these roses we haue another in our London gardens, which of most is called the blush rose; it floureth when the Damaske rose doth: the floures hereof are very single, greater than the other Muske roses, and of a white colour, dasht ouer with a light wash of carnation, which maketh that colour which wee call a blush colour: the proportion of the whole plant, as also the smell of the floures, are like the precedent.


3 Rosae Moschatae species maior. The great Muske rose.


4 Rosa Holosericea. The veluet rose.


4 The Veluet rose groweth alwaies very low, like vnto the red rose, hauing his branches couered with a certaine hairie or prickley matter, as fine as haires, yet not so sharpe or stiffe that it will harme the most tender skin that is: the leaues are like the leaues of the white rose: the floures grow at the top of the stalks, doubled with some yellow thrums in the midst, of a deepe and blacke red colour, resembling red crimson veluet, whereupon some haue called it the (...) rose: when the floures be vaded, there follow red berries full of hard seeds, wrapped in a downe or woollinesse like the others.
5 The yellow rose which (as diuers do report) was by Art so coloured, and altered from his (...) estate, by graffing a wilde rose vpon a Broome stalke; whereby (say they) it doth not onely change his colour, but his smell and force. But for my part I hauing found the contrarie by mine (...) (...), cannot be induced to beleeue the report: for the roots and off-springs of this (...) (...)

brought forth yellow roses, such as the maine stocke or mother bringeth out, which euent is not to be seen in all other plants that haue been graffed. Moreouer, the seeds of yellow roses haue brought forth yellow roses, such as the floure was from whence they were taken; which they would not do by any coniecturall reason, if that of themselues they were not a naturall kind of rose. Lastly, it were contrary to that true principle,
Naturae sequitur semina quodque suae: that is to say;
Euery seed and plant bringeth forth fruit like vnto it selfe, both in shape and nature: but leauing that errour, I will proceed to the description: the yellow rose hath browne and prickly stalks or shoots, fiue or six cubits high, garnished with many leaues, like vnto the Muske rose, of an excellent sweet smell, and more pleasant than the leaues of the (...): the floures come forth among the leaues, and at the top of the branches of a faire gold yellow colour: the thrums in the middle, are also yellow: which being gone, there follow such knops or heads as the other roses do beare.


5 Rosa lutea. The yellow rose.


@ 6 Rosa Lutea multiplex. The double yellow rose.


@ 6 Of this kinde there is another more rare and set by, which in stalks, leaues, and other parts is not much different from the last described, onely the floure is very double, and it seldome fairly shewes it selfe about London, where it is kept in our chiefe gardens as a prime raritie. @
7 The Canell or Cinnamon rose, or the rose smelling like Cinnamon, hath shoots of a brown colour, foure cubits high, beset with thorny prickles, and leaues like vnto those of Eglantine, but smaller and greener, of the sauour or smell of Cinnamon, whereof it tooke his name, and not of the smell of his floures (as some haue deemed) which haue little or no sauour at all: the floures be exceeding double, and yellow in the middle, of a pale red colour, and sometimes of a carnation: the root is of a wooddie substance.
8 We haue in our London gardens another Cinnamon or (...) rose, not differing from the last described in any respect, but onely in the floures; for as the other hath very double floures, contrariwise these of this plant are verie single, wherein is the difference.



7 Rosa Cinnamomea pleno flore. The double Cinnamon Rose.


@ 8 Rosa Cinnamomea flore (...). The single Cinnamon Rose.




 The Place.
These Roses are planted in our London gardens, and elsewhere, but not found wilde in England.


 The Time.
The Muske Rose floureth in Autumne, or the fall of the leafe: the rest floure when the Damask and red Rose do.


 The Names.
The first is called Rosa Moschata, of the smell of Muske, as we haue said: in Italian, Rosa Moschetta: in French, Roses Musquees, or Muscadelles: in Low Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Musk Rose: the Latine and English titles may serue for the rest.


 The Temperature.
The Muske rose is cold in the first degree, wherein airie and spiritual parts are predominant: the rest are referred to the Brier rose and Eglantine.


 The Vertues.
Conserue or syrrup made of the Muske rose, in manner as before told in the Damaske and red  roses, doth purge very mightily waterish humors, yet safely, and without all danger, taken in the quantitie of an ounce in weight.
The leaues of the floures eaten in the morning, in manner of a sallad, with oile, vineger and pepper, or any other way according to the appetite and pleasure of them that shall eat it, purge very notably the belly of waterish and cholericke humors, and that mightily, yet without all perill or paine at all, insomuch as the simplest may vse the quantitie, according to their owne fancie; for if they do desire many stooles, or sieges; they are to eat the greater quantity of the leaues; if fewer, the lesse quantitie; as for example: the leaues of twelue or foureteene floures giue six or eight stooles, and so increasing or diminishing the quantitie, more or fewer, as my selfe haue often proued.
The white leaues stamped in a woodden dish with apeece of Allum and the iuice strained forth into some glased vessell, dried in the shadow, and kept, is the most fine and pleasant yellow colour that may be diuised, not only to limne or wash pictures and Imagerie in books, but also to colour meates and sauces, which notwithstanding the Allum is very wholsome.

There is not any thing extant of the others, but are thought to be equall with the white Muske Rose, whereof they are taken and holden to be kindes.



CHAP. 3. Of the wilde Roses.

 The Description.
1 THe sweet Brier doth oftentimes grow higher than all the kindes of Roses; the shoots of it are hard, thicke, and wooddie; the leaues are glittering, and of a beautifull greene colour, of smell most pleasant: the Roses are little, fiue leaued, most commonly whitish, seldom tending to purple, of little or no smell at all: the fruit is long, of colour somewhat red, like a little oliue stone, and like the little heads or berries of the others, but lesser than those of the garden: in which is contained rough cotton, or hairie downe and seed, folded and wrapped vp in the same, which is small and hard: there be likewise found about the slender shoots hereof, round, soft, and hairie spunges, which we call Brier Balls, such as grow about the prickles of the Dog-rose.


1 Rosasyluestris odora. The Eglantine, or (...) Brier.


2 We haue in our London gardens another sweet Brier, hauing greater leaues, and much sweeter: the floures likewise are greater, and somewhat doubled, exceeding sweet of smell, wherein it differeth from the former.
3 The Brier Bush or Hep tree, is also called Rosa canina, which is a plant so common and well knowne, that it were to small purpose to vse many words in the description thereof: for euen children with great delight eat the berries thereof when they be ripe, make chaines and other prettie gewgawes of the fruit: cookes and gentlewomen make Tarts and such like dishes for pleasure thereof, and therefore this shall suffice for the description.
4 The Pimpinell rose is likewise one of the wilde ones, whose stalks shoot forth of the ground in many places, of the height of one or two cubits, of a browne colour, and armed with sharpe prickles,

@ 2 Rosa syl. odora flore duplici. The double Eglantine.
3 Rosa Canina inodora. The Brier Rose, or Hep tree.
4 Rosa Pimpinellae folio. The Pimpinell Rose.
which diuide themselues toward the tops into diuers branches, whereon doe grow leaues consisting of diuers small ones, set vpon a middle rib like those of Burnet, which is called in Latine Pimpinella, whereupon it was called Rosa Pimpinella, the Burnet Rose. The floures grow at the tops of the branches, of a white colour, very single, and like vnto those of the Brier or Hep tree: after which come the fruit, blacke, contrarie to all the rest of the roses, round as an apple; whereupon some haue called it Rosa Pomifera, or the Rose bearing apples: wherein is contained seed, wrapped in chaffie or flockie matter, like that of the Brier: the root is tough and wooddie.


 The Place.
These wilde Roses do grow in the borders of fields and woods, in most parts of England. The last (...) very plentifully in a field as you go from a village in Essex, called Graies (vpon the brinke of the riuer Thames) vnto Horndon on the hill, insomuch that the field is full (...) therewith all ouer.
It groweth likewise in a pasture as you goe from a village hard by London called Knights bridge, vnto Fulham, a village thereby, and in many other places.
We haue them all except the Brier Bush in our London gardens, which we thinke vnworthy the place.



 The Time.
They floure and flourish with the other Roses.


 The Names.
The Englantine Rose, which is Cynorrhodi, or Caninae Rosae species, a kinde of Dogs Rose: and (...) syluestris, the wild Rose: in low-Dutch, Eglantier: in French, Esglentine; and as Ruellius testifies, Eglenterium: who also suspects it to be Cynosbaton, or Canirubus: of which Dioscorides hath written in these words; Cynosbatus, or Canirubus, which some call Oxycantha, is a shrub growing like a tree, full of prickles, with a white floure, long fruit like an oliue stone, red when it is ripe, and downie within: in English we call it Eglantine, or sweet Brier.
The spongie balls which are found vpon the branches are most aptly and properly called Spongiolaesyluestris Rosae, the little sponges of the wilde Rose. The shops mistake it by the name of Bedeguar; for Bedeguar among the Arabians is a kinde of Thistle, which is called in Greeke (...): that is to say, Spina alba the white Thistle, not the white Thorne, though the word doe import so much.
The Brier or Hep tree is called Syluestris Rosa, the wilde Rose: in high-Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Roses (...): Pliny, lib. 8. cap. 25. saith that it is Rosa Canina, Dogs Rose: of diuers, Caninasentis, or Dogs Thorne: in English, Brier bush, and Hep tree: the last hath been touched in the description.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The faculties of these wilde Roses are referred to the manured Rose, but not vsed in physicke  where the other may be had: notwithstanding Pliny (...), that the root of the Brier bush is a singular remedie found out by oracle, against the biting of a mad dog, which he sets downe in his eighth booke, chap. 41.
The same Author, lib. 25. cap. 2. affirmeth, that the little spongie Brier ball stamped with honey  and ashes causeth haires to grow which are fallen through the disease called (...), or the Foxes euill, in plaine termes the French pocks.
Fuchsius affirmes, that the spongie excrescence or ball growing vpon the Brier are good against  the stone and strangurie, if they be beaten to pouder and inwardly taken.
They are good not as they be diureticks or prouokers of vrine, or as they are wearers away of the  stone, but as certaine other binding medicines that strengthen the weake and feeble kidneyes; which do no more good to those that be subiect to the stone, than many of the diuretickes, especially of the stronger sort; for by too much vsing of diureticks or pissing medicines, it hapneth that the kidneyes are ouer-weakened, and often times too much heated, by which meanes not only the stones are not diminished, worne away, or driuen forth, but oftentimes are also increased and made more hard: for they separate and take away that which in the bloud is thin, waterie, and as it were wheyish; and the thicker part, the stronger sorts of diuretickes do draw together and make hard: and in like maner also others that are not so strong, by the ouermuch vsing of them, as Galen. lib. 5. of the faculties of simple medicines reporteth.
The fruit when it is ripe maketh most pleasant meats and banqueting dishes, as tarts and such  like; the making whereof I commit to the cunning cooke, and teeth to eat them in the rich mans mouth.



CHAP. 4. Of the Bramble or black-Berry bush.

 The Description.
1 THe common Bramble bringeth forth slender branches, long, tough, easily bowed, tamping among hedges and whatsoeuer stands neere vnto it; armed with hard and sharpe prickles, whereon doe grow leaues consisting of many set vpon a rough middle rib, greene on the vpper side, and vnderneath somewhat white: on the tops of the stalks stand certaine floures, in shape like those of the Brier Rose, but lesser, of colour white, and sometimes washt ouer with a little purple: the fruit or berry is like that of the Mulberry, first red, blacke when it is ripe, in taste betweene sweet and soure, very soft, and full of grains: the root creepeth, and sendeth forth here and there yong springs.
@ Rubus repens fructu caesio.
@ 2 This hath a round stalke set full of small crooked and very sharpe pricking thornes, and creepeth on hedges and low bushes of a great length, on the vpper side of a light red colour, and vnderneath greene, and taketh rootwith the tops of the trailing branches, whereby it doth mightily

encrease: the leaues grow without order, composed of three leaues, and sometimes of fiue, or else the two lower leaues are diuided into two parts, as Hop leaues are now and then, of a light greene colour both aboue and vnderneath. The floures grow on the tops of the branches, racematim, many together, sometimes white, sometimes of a very light purple colour, euery floure containing fiue leaues, which are crompled or wrinkled, and do not grow plaine: the fruit followes, first green, and afterwards blew, euerie berry composed of one or two graines, seldome oboue foure or fiue growing together, about the bignesse of corans; wherein is contained a stony hard kernell or seed, and a iuyce of the colour of Claret wine, contrarie to the common Rubus or Bramble, whose leaues are white vnderneath: the berries being ripe are of a shining blacke colour, and euery berry containes vsually aboue forty graines closely compacted and thrust together. The root is wooddy and lasting. This growes common enough in most places, and too common in ploughed fields. Sept. 6. 1619. Iohn Goodyer. @
3 The Raspis or Framboise bush hath leaues and branches not much vnlike the common Bramble, but not so rough nor prickly, and sometimes without any prickles at all, hauing onely a rough hairinesse about the stalkes: the fruit in shape and proportion is like those of the Bramble, red when they be ripe, and couered ouer with a little downinesse; in taste not very pleasant. The root creepeth far abroad, whereby it greatly encreaseth. @ This growes either with prickles vpon the stalkes, or else without them: the fruit is vsually red, but sometimes white of colour. @


1 Rubus. The Bramblebush.


2 Rubus Idaeus. The Raspis bush or Hinde-berry.


4 Stone Bramble seldome groweth aboue a foot high, hauing many small flexible branches without prickles, trailing vpon the ground, couered with a reddish barke, and somwhat hairy: the leaues grow three together, set vpon tender naked foot-stalkes somewhat snipt about the edges: the floures grow at the end of the branches, consisting of foure small white leaues like those of the Cherry tree: after which come small Grape-like fruit, consisting of one, two, or three large transparent berries, set together as those of the common Bramble, of a red colour when they be ripe, and of a pleasant taste, but somewhat astringent. The roots creepe along in the ground very farre abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.
4 Chamaemorus (called in the North part of England, where they especially doe grow, Knotberries, and Knought-berries) is likewise one of the Brambles, though without prickles: it brings

forth small weake branches or tender stems of a foot high; whereon do grow at certaine distances rough leaues in shape like those of the Mallow, not vnlike to the leaues of the Gooseberrie bush: on the top of each branch standeth one floure and no more, consisting of fiue small leaues of a dark purple colour: which being fallen, the fruit succeedeth, like vnto that of the Mulberrie, whereof it was called Chamaemorus, dwarfe Mulberry; at the first white and bitter, after red and somwhat pleasant: the root is long, something knotty; from which knots or ioynts thrust forth a few threddie strings. @ I take that plant to which our Author hereafter hath allotted a whole chapter, and called Vaccinia nubis, or Cloud-berries, to be the same with this, as I shall shew you more largely in that place. @


4 Rubus Saxatilis. Stone blacke Berry bush.


5 Chamaemorus. Knot berry bush.




 The Place.
The Bramble groweth for the most part in euery hedge and bush.
The Raspis is planted in gardens: it groweth not wilde that I know of, except in the field by a village in Lancashire called Harwood, not far from Blackburne.
I found it among the bushes of a causey, neere vnto a village called Wisterson, where I went to schoole, two miles from the Nantwich in Cheshire.
The stone Bramble I haue found in diuers fields in the Isle of Thanet, hard by a village called (...), neere Queakes house, sometimes Sir Henry Crispes dwelling place. @ I feare our Author mistooke that which is here added in the second place, for that which he figured and described in the third (now the fourth) which I know not yet to grow wilde with vs. @
Knot-berries do loue open snowie hills and mountaines; they grow plentifully vpon (...) hils among the heath and ling, twelue miles from Lancashire, being thought to be the highest hill in England.
They grow vpon Stane-more betweene Yorkshire and Westmerland, and vpon other wet Fells and mountaines.


 The Time.
These floure in May and Iune with the Roses: their fruit is ripe in the end of August and September.



 The Names.
The Bramble is called in Greeke (...): in French, Ronges, Loi Duyts Brelmers: in Latine, Rubus, and Sentis, and Vepres, as Ouid writeth in his first booke of Metamorpho sis.

Aut Leporiqui vepre latens hostilia cernit
Oracanum. --


Or to th'Hare, that vnder Bramble closely lying, spies
The hostile mouthes of Dogs. --

Of diuers it is called Cynosbatus, but not properly; for Cynoslatus is the wild Rose, as we haue written: in high-Dutch, Bremen: in low-Dutch, Breemen: in French, Rouce: in Italian, Garza: in English, Bramble bush, and Black-berry bush.
The fruit is named in Latine Morum rubi; and as Fuchsius thinketh, Vacinium, but not properly: in shops, Mora Bati: and in such shops as are more barbarous, Mora Bassi: in English, Blackeberries.
The Raspis is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Rubus Idaeus, of the mountaine Ida on which it groweth: in English, Raspis, Framboise, and Hinde-berry.


 The Temperature and (...).
The yong buds or tender tops of the Bramble (...) the floures, the leaues, and the vnripe fruit, do very much dry and binde withall: being chewed they take away the heate and inflammation of the mouth, and almonds of the throat: they stay the bloudy flix, and other fluxes, and all maner of bleedings: of the same force is their decoction, with a little honey added.
They heale the eyes that hang out, hard knots in the fundament, and stay the hemorrhoids, if  the leaues be layd thereunto.
The iuyce which is pressed out of the stalks, leaues, and vnripe berries, and made hard in the Sun, is more effectuall for all those things.
The ripe fruit is sweet, and containeth in it much iuyce of a temperate heate, therefore it is not  vnpleasant to be eaten.
It hath also a certaine kinde of astriction or binding qualitie.
It is likewise for that cause wholsome for the stomack, and if a man eat too largely therof, saith  Galen, he shall haue the head-ache: but being dried whilest it is yet vnripe it bindeth and drieth more than the ripe fruit.
The root besides that it is binding containeth in it much thin substance, by reason whereof it  wasteth away the stone in the kidnies, saith Galen.
Pliny writeth, that the berries and floures do prouoke vrine, and that the decoction of them in  wine is a present remedie against the stone.
The leaues of the Bramble boiled in water, with honey, allum, and a little white wine added  thereto, make a most excellent lotion or washing water to heale the sores in the mouth, the (...) parts of man or woman, and the same decoction fastneth the teeth.
The Raspis is thought to be like the Bramble in temperature and vertues, but not so much (...) or drying. The Raspis, saith Dioscorides, performeth those things which the Bramble doth. The fruit is good to be giuen to those that haue weake and queasie stomacks.



CHAP. 5. Of Holly Roses, or Cistus.

 The Kindes.
(...) hath been taken of diuers to be a kinde of Rose: the old Writers haue made two sorts thereof, male and female; and likewise a third sort, which is called Ledum: the later Herbarists haue discouered diuers more, as shall be declared.


 A generall Description, wherein all the sorts of Cistus are comprised.
CIstus and his kindes are wooddy shrubs full of branches, of the height of two or three cubits: some haue broad leaues, others rough, vneuen, wrinkled, somewhat downy, and most like the leaues of Sage; although some haue the leaues of Rosemary, others the forme of those of the Poplar tree: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, like vnto the wild Rose, yet such as very quickly fade, perish, and fall away: those of the male are most of a reddish blew or purple colour; and of the female white: in their places come vp little heads or knops somwhat round, in which is contained small seed: the roots of them all are wooddy.

There groweth vp sometimes vnder the shrub hard to the roots, a certaine (...) (...) hypocist, which is thicke, fat, grosse, full of iuyce, without leaues, wholly consisting of many little cases or boxes, as do those of Henbane or of the Pomegranat tree; of a yellowish red (...) in one kinde, and in another white, and in certaine other greene or grassie, as Dioscorides saith.


 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Cistus groweth vp like a small bush or shrub, of a wooddy substance, three or foure cubits high, garnished with many small and brittle branches, set full of crumpled or rugged leaues very like vnto Sage leaues: at the top of the branches come floures of a purple colour, in shape like vnto a single Brier Rose, hauing leaues somwhat wrinkled like a cloath new dried before it be smoothed, and in the midst a few yellow chiues or thrums: the floures for the most part do perish and fall away before noone, and neuer cease flouring in such maner from the moneth of May vnto the beginning of September, at which time the seed is ripe, being of a reddish colour, and is contained in an hard hairie huske not much vnlike the husk of Henbane.


1 Cistus mas angustifolius. The male Holly Rose.


2 Cistus mas cum Hypocistide. The male Holly Rose with his excrescence.


2 The second sort of Cistus, being another kind of the male Cistus, which Pena calls Cistus mas cum Hypocistide, is like vnto the former, but that from the root of this kinde there commeth a certaine excrescence or out-growing, which is sometimes yellow, sometimes greene, and sometimes white; from which is drawne by an artificiall extraction a certaine iuyce called in shops (...).
3 This kinde of Cistus hath many wooddy stalks diuided into diuers brittle branches of a russet colour; whereon do grow rough leaues somewhat cut or toothed on the edges, and of an ouerworne colour: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, in forme of a Muske Rose, but of an excellent bright purple colour: after which come round knops, wherein is contained smal reddish seed: the root is tough and wooddy,
4 This fourth sort of Cistus hath diuers wooddy branches, whereon are set, thicke thrust together, diuers smal leaues narrow like those of Winter Sauorie, but of an ouerworne russet colour: the root and floures are like the precedent.



3 Cistus mas dentatus. Toothed or snipt male Cistus.


4 Cistus mas tenuifolius. Thin leafed Cistus.


5 Cistus foemina. The female Cistus.


7 Cistus folio Halimi. Cistus with leaues like Sea Purslane.



5 The first of the females is like vnto the male Cistus in each respect, sauing that the floures hereof are of a white colour, with diuers yellow thrummes in the middle, and the others purple, wherein consisteth the difference.
6 The second female of Matthiolus description hath many hard and wooddie stalks, branched with diuers armes or wings: whereon are set by couples rough hoary and hairy leaues, of a darke russet colour: among which come forth small white floures like vnto those of the (...) root is tough and wooddy. @ This I iudge all one with the former, and therefore haue omitted the figure as impertinent, although our Authour followed it, making the floure so little in his description. @
@ 7 The seuenth sort of Cistus groweth vp to the height of a small hedge bush, hauing diuers brittle branches full of pith: whereon are set leaues by couples, like those of sea Purslane, that is to say, soft, hoary, and as it were couered ouer with a kinde of mealinesse: the floures are yellow, and lesse than those of the former.


8 Cistus folio Lauandulae. Lauander leaued Cistus,


9 Cistus folio Thymi. Cistus with the leaues of Tyme.


8 The eighth Cistus hath likewise shrubbie stalks in maner of a hedge tree, whereon do grow at certaine distances diuers leaues close ioyned together at the stalke, like those of the former, but somewhat lower and narrower: the floures we haue not expressed in the figure, by reason we haue no certaine knowledge of them.
9 This ninth Cistus is likewise a wooddy shrub some foot high: the stalks are very brittle, as are all the rest of his kinde, whereon do grow very small leaues like those of Tyme: the floures are white, which maketh it one of the females.
10 The low or base Cistus with broad leaues, groweth like a small shrub, of a wooddy substance: the leaues are many, of a darke greene colour: the floures are in forme like the other, but of a yellow colour: the roots are likewise wooddy.
11 This narrow leafed low Cistus hath diuers tough branches leaning to the ground, whereon do grow without order many small narrow leaues somewhat long, of a gummy taste at the first, afterwards bitter: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, of a yellow colour, consisting of fiue leaues, with certaine chiues in the middle; after which follow three square cods or seed-vessels: the root is tough and wooddy.



10 Cistus humilis latifolius. Low Cistus with broad leaues.


11 Cistus humilis angustifolius. Low Cistus with narrow leaues.


12 Cistus humilis Austriaca Clusij. Low Cistus of Austria.


13 Cistus (...) serpilli folio. Low Cistus with leaues like wilde Tyme.



12 The low or base Cistus of Austria groweth likewise leaning to the ground, hauing many wooddy branches very firme and tough, couered with a blackish barke; whereon do grow very many rough and hairy leaues in shape like those of the small myrtle, of a shining greene on the vpperside, and of an astringent taste: on euery branch standeth one floure, seldome two, in forme like the other, but consisting of one leafe deeply diuided into fiue parts, and of a white colour tending to a flesh colour.
13 This low sort of Cistus hath many long tough branches trailing vpon the ground, of a reddish colour, whereon do grow small leaues like those of wilde Tyme, of a darke green colour, very thicke and fat, and somewhat hairy: the floures grow at the top of the branches, of a yellow gold colour, consisting of fiue small leaues of a very sweet smell. The root is thicke, hard, and wooddie.
14 This strange and rare plant of Lobels obseruation I haue thought meet to be inserted amongst the kindes of Cistus, as a friend of theirs, if not one of the kinde: it hath leaues like vnto the male Cistus (the first in this chapter described) but more hairy, bearing at the top of his branches a small knop in shape like a rotten Strawberry, but not of the same substance; for it is compact of a scaly or chaffie matter such as is in the middest of the Camomill floures, and of a russet colour.


14 Cistus exoticus (...). Lobels strange Cistus.


16 Myrtocistus Tho. Pennei Angli. Dr. Penny his Cistus.


15 This adulterine or counterfeit or forged Cistus growes to the height of a (...) bush: the branches are long or brittle, whereon do grow long leaues like those of the Willow, of an ouerworne russet colour: the floures are small, consisting of fiue little yellow leaues: the whole plant being well viewed seemeth to be a Willow, but at the first sight one of the Cistus; so that it is a plant participating of both: the root is wooddy. @ (...) iudges this (which our Author out of Tabern. figured and named Cistus adulterinus) to (...) the Cistus set forth in the eighth place of the next chapter saue one: but I rather iudge it to be of the Ledum Silesiacum set forth in the eleuenth place of that chapter, and againe in the twelfth, where you may finde more thereof. @
16 This kinde of Cistus, which Dr. Penny (a famous Physitian of London deceased) did gather vpon the Islands of Majorica or Majorca, and called it by the name (...), in Latine, Myrtocistus Balearica, is a shrub growing to the height of three cubits, hauing a very rough barke, beset round about with rough and scabbed warts; which bark wil of it selfe easily fall away from the

old branches or boughes of the tree. The leaues of this tree are almost like them of Myrtus, very rough vnderneath like the branches aforesaid; but the leaues that grow higher, and toward the top of the branches, are smooth, growing about the branches very thicke together, as in the other kindes of Cistus. The floures are yellow, growing on the top of the twigs, consisting of fiue long leaues full of many very long chiues within. When the floures be vaded, there followeth a verie long and fiue square head or huske full of seed. The whole tree is very sweet, out of which issueth a gum or rosine, or rather a thicke clammy and fat iuyce, such as commeth forth of the kindes of Ledum.
17 This annual Cistus groweth vp from seed with one vpright stalke to the height of a cubit, oft times diuided into other small branches; whereon grow rough leaues somwhat long, of a dark greene colour. The floures grow at the top of the stalks, consisting of 5 small yellow leaues: which being past, there followeth a three square seed vessell full of small reddish seed. The root is small and wooddy, and perisheth when the seed is perfected.


17 Cistus annuus. Cistus lasting one yeare.


18 Cistus annuus longifolius Lobelij. Long leafed yearely Cistus.


18 This other Cistus that lasteth but one yeare hath long stalks diuided into other branches of the height of two cubits; whereon do grow long rough leaues, set three together at certain distances, the middlemost whereof is longer than the other two: the floures grow on the sides of the branches, like the female Cistus, of a white colour: the root is of a wooddy substance, as are all the rest of his kinde.
@ 19 This growes some foot high, with a square rough greenish stalke, whereon by couples at certaine spaces stand little longish rough leaues, yet toward the top of the stalk they stand somtimes three together: vpon the top of the little branches grow floures like those of the other Cistus, of colour yellow, with a fine sanguine spot vpon each leafe of the floure. It groweth in some parts of France, as also on the Alps in Italy. Clusius describes it by the name of Cistus annuus 2. Pona in his Mons Baldus calls it Cistus annuus flore guttato.
20 This hath many slender branches whereon grow small roundish leaues, hoarie, and somewhat like those of (...), somwhat lesse, with the middle rib standing out. The floures (...) vpon the tops of the branches, and consist of fiue white leaues, with a darke purple spot in the middle of each leafe: the threds in the middle of the floure are of a yellow colour: their seed-vessels

are of the bignesse of those of flax, but three square, containing a seed of the bignesse of that of Henbane. Clusius found this in diuers parts of Spaine, and sets it forth by the (...) of Cistus folio Sampsuchi. @


@ 19 Cistus annuus flore (...). Spotted annuall Cistus.


@ 20 Cistus folio Sampsuchi. Marjerome leaued Cistus.




 The Place.
Holly Roses grow in Italy, Spaine, and Languedoc, and in the countries bordering vpon the riuer Padus, in all Hetruria and Massiles, and in many other of the hotter prouinces of Europe, in dry and stony places, varying infinitely according to the (...) of the regions where they doe grow; of which I haue two sorts in my garden, the first, and the Cistus annuus.


 The Time.
They floure from May to September.


 The Names.
The Holly Rose is called in Greeke (...), or (...): in Latine also Cistus, and Rosa syluatica: of diuers, Rosa Canina, as Scribontus Largus writeth, but not properly: in Spanish, Estepa: of the Portugals, Rosella: in English, Holly Rose, and Cistus, after the Greeke name. The fungous excrescence growing at the root of Cistus, is called in Greeke (...), because it groweth vnder the shrub Cistus: it is also called Limodoron: some call it (...): among whom is (...) Aegineta, who also doth not call that (...) which groweth vnder the shrub Cistus, but the iuyce hereof; whereupon might grow the word Hypocistis, by which name the Apothecaries call this iuyce when it is hardned: of some (...) is called Erithanon, Citinus, and Hypoquistidos.


 The Temperature.
Cistus, as Galen saith, doth greatly dry, neere hand in the second degree, and it is of that coldnesse, that it hath withall a temperate heate: the leaues and the first buds being bearen do only dry and binde, in such sort as they may close vp vlcers, and ioyne together greene wounds.


 The Vertues.
The floures are of most force, which being drunke with wine are good against the bloudy flix, weakenesse of the stomacke, fluxes, and ouerflowings of moist humors.
They cure (...) vlcers being applied in manner of a pultis: Dioscorides teacheth that they  are a remedie for eating vlcers, called in Greek (...), being anointed therewith; and that they cure (...), scaldings, and old vlcers.

Hypocistis is much more binding: it is a sure remedie for all infirmities that come of fluxes, (...) voiding of bloud, the whites, the laske, and the bloudy flix: but if it be requisit to strengthen that part which is ouerweakned with a superfluous moisture, it doth notably comfort and strengthen the same.
It is excellent to be mixed with somentations that serue for the stomacke and liuer.
It is put into the Treacle of Vipers, to the end it should comfort and strengthen weake (...), as Galen writeth.



CHAP. 6. Of other Plants reckoned for dwarfe kindes of Cistus.


1. 2. Helianthemum Anglicum luteum vel album. English yellow or white dwarfe Cistus.



 The Description.
1 THe English dwarfe Cistus, called of Lobel, (...) Chironium ((...) there is another Panax of (...) description, which I hold to be the true and right Panax, notwithstanding he hath inserted it amongst the kindes of Cistus, as being indifferent to ioyne with vs and others for the insertion) is a low and base plant creeping vpon the ground, hauing many smal tough branches, of a browne colour; whereupon do grow little leaues set together by couples, thicke, fat, and ful of substance, and couered ouerwith a soft downe: from the bosome whereof come forth other lesser leaues: the floures (...) they be open are small knops or buttons, of a browne colour mixed with yellow; and being open and spred abroad are like those of the wild Tansie, and of a yellow colour, withsome yellower chiues in the middle: the root is thicke, and of a wooddy substance.
2 The second is very like vnto the precedent, sauing that the leaues are long, and doe not grow so thicke thrust together, and are more woolly: the floures are greater, and of a white colour, wherein the especiall difference consisteth. The root is like the former.


3 Helianthemum luteum Germanicum. The yellow dwarfe Cistus of (...)



3 There is found in Germanie, a certaine plant like to Cistus, and Ledon, but much lesser, creeping vpon the ground, vnlesse it be propped vp, hauing a multitude of twiggie branches, slender, and sine: whereupon do grow leaues lesser than those of Ledon or Cistus, very like to that of our English white dwarfe Cistus, of a full substance, fleightly haired, wherein is contained a tough iuice: the floures are small like little Roses, or the wilde Tansie, of a yellow colour: the roots be slender: wooddie, and something red.


4 Helianthemum album Germanicum. The white dwarse Cistus of Germanie.


5 Helianthemum (...). The dwarfe Cistus of Sauoy.


6 Helianthemum angustifolium. Narrow leafed dwarfe Cistus.


4 This differeth not from the last described, sauing that the floures hereof are very white, and the others yellow, wherein they especially differ.

5 The Dwarfe Cistus of Sauoy hath diuers tough branches, of a reddish colour, very tough and wooddy, diuided into diuers other branches: whereon are set small leaues, foure together, by certain spaces; the floures grow at the top of the branches like those of our yellow Dwarfe Cistus, of a yellow colour: the root is very wooddie.
6 This dwarfe Cistus with narrow leaues, hath very many (...) flexible branches, of a (...) colour, very smooth, and ramping vpon the ground; whereon do grow small, long, narrow leaues, like those of Time of Candie, from the bosome whereof come forth diuers (...) smaller leaues: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, of a bleak yellow colour: the root is (...) wooddy.
@ 7 To these I may fitly adde two more: the first of these hath creeping stalks, some foot (...) two long, blackish, and diuided into sundry smaller branches: the leaues grow thick and many together, set by couples (though the figure do not wel expresse so much:) these leaues are smal, of (...) bignes of those of Time, thick, green aboue, and whitish vnderneath, and of a bitter tast: at (...) ends of the branches grow two or foure floures neere together, very small, composed of fiue little leaves, of a kinde of flesh colour: to these succeed heads opening themselues when they come to (...) into fiue parts, and containing a very small seed: the root is hard and wooddie, sending out certaine fibres: also the branches here and there put forth some fibres. This plant dryed hath a pretty pleasing smell. This growes vpon the highest Austrian and Styrian alpes, and is set forth by Clusius by the name of Chamaeciftus septimus.


@ 7 Chamaecistus serpillifolius. Tyme leaued dwarfe Cistus.


@ 8 Chamaecistus (...). Frisian Dwarfe Cistus.


8 The same Author also in his Curae posteriores giues vs the historie of this, which he receiued with some other rare plants from Iohn Dortman, a famous and learned Apothecarie of Groeningen: This little plant is in leafe and root almost like and neere of the same bignesse with the Celticke Nard, yet the stalks are vnlike, which are small, set with a few longish leaues, and at the tops they carry fiue or six pretty floures like those of Crow feet, consisting of six leaues apiece, of a yellow colour, yet with some few spots of another colour, and these set in a double ring about the middle; after these follow heads or seed vessels with forked tops, filled with a chaffie seed: the whole plant smells somewhat strong. It growes together with Gramen Pernassi in rotten moorish places about a village in the county of Drent. Dortman called this Hirculus Frisicus: Clusius addes, qui Chamaecisti genus. @



 The Place.
Their (...) titles haue touched their naturall countries: they grow in rough, drie, and sunnie places, in plaine fields and vpon mountaines.
Those of our English growing, I haue found in very many places, especially in Kent, vpon the chalkie bankes about Graues-end, Southfleet, and for the most part all the way from thence vnto Canturburie and Douer.


 The Time.
They floure from Iuly to the end of August.


 The Names.
Tragus calleth dwarfe Cistus in the high Dutch tongue, (...) (...): in Latine, Gratia Dei; but there is another herbe called also of the later Herbarists Gratia Dei, which is Gratiola: Valerius Cordus nameth it Helianthemum, and (...) flos, or Sunne floure: of Clusius, Chamaecistus, or Dwarfe (...).
Pliny writeth, that Helianthe groweth in the champion countrey Temiscyra in Pontus, and in the mountaines of Cilicia neere to the sea: and he saith further, that the wise men of those countries, and the kings of Persia do annoint their bodies herewith, boiled with Lions fat, a little Saffron, and wine of Dates, that they may seeme faire and beautiful; and therefore haue they called it (...), or the beautie of the Sun: Matthiolus saith, that Helianthemum is taken of some to be Panaces Chironium, or Chirons All-heale: but it is nothing likely, as we haue said.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The faculties and temperature are referred to the kindes of Cistus, for it healeth wounds, stancheth  bloud, and stoppeth the spittings of bloud, the bloudie flixe, and all other issues of bloud.
The same boiled in wine healeth vlcers in the mouth and priuie parts, if they be washed therewith: to be briefe, it ioineth together and strengthneth: which things doe plainely and euidently shew, that it is not onely like to Cistus and Ledon in forme, but in vertues and faculties also, and therefore it is manifest, that it is a certaine wilde kinde of Cistus and Ledon.



CHAP. 7. Of Cistus Ledon, and Ladanum.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Cistus, whereof that gummy matter is gathered, called in shops Ladanum, and Labdanum, but vnproperly.


 The Description.
1 CIstus Ledon is a shrub, growing to the height of a man, and sometimes higher; hauing many hard wooddie branches, couered with a blackish bark: wherupon do grow leaues set together by couples, one right against another like vnto wings, of an inch broad, of a blacke swart greene on the vppersides, and whitish vnderneath: whereon is gathered a certain clammie transparent or through shining liquour, of a very hot sweet smell, which being gathered and hardned, is that which in shops is called Labdanum: the floures grow at the ends of the branches like little roses, consisting of fiue white leaues, euery one decked or beautified toward the bottome with pretty darke purplish spots tending to blacknesse, hauing in the middle very many yellow chiues, such as are in the middle of the Rose: after come the knaps or seed vessels, full of most smal reddish seed; the whole plant being dried, groweth somewhat whitish, and of a pleasant smell, the which it retaineth many yeares.
2 The second groweth likewise to the height of an hedge bush; the branches are long, and very sragile or easie to breake, whereon do grow leaues greener than any other of his kinde, yet vnderneath of a hoarie colour; growing toward winter to be somewhat reddish, of a sower and binding taste: the floures are like the precedent: the forme whereof the Grauer hath omitted, in other respects like the former.
3 The third sort of Cistus Ledon groweth vp to the height of a small hedge bush, hauing many twiggie branches; whereon do grow leaues like those of the Poplar tree, sharpe at the point, couered ouer with that clammie dew that the others are: the floures grow at the tops of the branches, of a white colour like the precedent.



1 Cistus Ledon 1. Clusij. The first Cistus bringing (...).


2 Cistus ledon 2. Clusij. The second gum Cistus.


3 Cistus ledon populea fronde. Cistus ledon with leaues like the Poplar.


4 Cistus ledon 4. Clusij. Cistus ledon, the 4. of (...).





5 Cistus Ledon 5. Clusij. The fist Cistus Ledon.


6 Cistus Ledon 6. Clusij. The sixth (...) Ledon.


7 Cistus Ledon 7. Clusij. The 7. Cistus Ledon.


8 Cistus Ledon cum Hypocistide Lobelij. The 8. Cistus Ledon, with his excrescence.





9 (...) Ledon 10. Clusij. The 10. Cistus Ledon.


10 Cistus Ledon Myrtifolium. Cistus Ledon with leaues like Myrtle.


11 Cistus Ledum Silesiacum. The Polonian Cistus Ledon.


4 The fourth of Clusius description groweth likewise to the height of a shrubby bush, hauing many branches, flexible, hoarie, and hairie: the leaues are like the rest of his kind, but softer, more hairy, of a swart green colour, dasht ouer with that dewie fatnesse, not onely in the spring time, but in the heat of (...) likewise: the floures are white, with yellow thrums in the middle: the rest answereth the last described.
5 The fift groweth vp like a hedge (...) with many tough branches, whereon are set long rough leaues, hoarie vnderneath, somewhat dasht ouer with that fattie dew or (...) mour that the rest are possessed of: the floures are likewise of a white colour, with (...) yellow chiues in the middle: the root is wooddie.
@ 6 The sixth hath diuers small branches couered with a blackish bark: the floures are set together at the tops of the branches by certaine spaces: they are yellow, and like the former in each respect.
7 The seuenth is a low shrub growing to the height of two cub its, hauing many branches couered with a barke of the colour of ashes; whereon are confusedly set diuers leaues at certaine distances, small, narrow, like those of winter Sauory, of an ouerworne russet colour, very thick, fat, and glutinous: the floures are white, and differ not, nor the seed from the rest.

8 The eighth (...) vp like a little hedge bush, hauing leaues like the common (...) (...), (...) that those of this plant are sprinckled ouer with that clammy moisture, and the other not so: the (...) and seed are also like. From the root of this plant commeth such like excrescence called (...), (...), or Hypocistis, as there doth from the first male Cistus, wherein it differeth from all the rest vnder the name Ledon.
9 The ninth hath diuers brittle stalkes of an ash colour tending to a russet; whereon are set very many leaues like those of Thyme, of an ouerworne colour: the floures are white, with certaine yellow chiues in the middle, which the grauer hath omitted in the figure.
10 The tenth groweth vp like a small shrub, hauing brittle stalkes, couered with a blackish barke, and diuided into diuers branches; whereon are set vpon short truncheons or fat footstalkes, foure or fiue like those the Myrtle tree, of a strong smell: the floures are likewise of a white colour.


12 Cistus Ledum Rorismarini folio. Cistus Ledon with leaues like Rosemarie.


13 Cistus Ledum Matthioli. Cistus Ledon of Matthiolus description.


11. 12. The twelfth kinde of Cistus Ledon groweth vpright with a straight body or stocke, bringeth at the top many small twigs or rods of a cubit long, couered with a barke os the colour of ashes, which diuide themselues into other branches, of a purplish colour, beset with long and narrow leaues, not much vnlike to Rosemary, but longer; of a greene colour aboue, but vnderneath hauing as it were a long rib, made or compact of wooll or downe; of a sweet and pleasant smell, and somewhat sharpe in taste: on the tops of the branches grow knops or heads, compact as it were of many scales, of an iron or rustie colour: out of which commeth and proceedeth a certaine round and long mane, or hairy panickled tuft of floures, with many long, tender, greene, and somewhat woolly stalkes or twigs growing vnto them, of a sweet sent and smell: the floures consist of fiue little white leaues, within which are contained ten white chiues with a long stile or pointal in (...) midst of the floure: when the floures be vaded, there succeed long knops or heads which are (...) cornered, in shape and bignesse like vnto the fruite and berries of Cornus; which being (...), (...) bespeckled with many siluer spots, but being ripe, are of a red colour; conteining within (...) (...) long yellow seed, which is so small and slender, that it is like to the dust or powder that (...) (...) (...) worme holes. @ This is the Ledum Silesiacum of Clusius; and the Ledum Rorismarini folio of (...) (...): it is also the (...) (...) of Matthiolus; and (...) of Cordus: and I (...)

deceiued if the figure which Tabernamont anus and our Author out of him gaue by the name of Cistus adulterinus, were not of this. @
13 Among the shrubby bushes comprehended vnder the title of Cistus Ledum, Matthiolus hath set forth one, whereof to write at large were impossible, considering the Author is so briefe, and of our selues we haue not any acquaintance with the plant it selfe: Dioscorides to helpe what may be, saith, that it is a shrub growing like vnto the stocke or kindred of the Cisti: from whose leaues is gathered a clammy dew which maketh that gummie matter that is in shops called Lapdanum: it groweth, saith he, in hot regions (but not with vs:) the Mauritanians call the juice or clammy matter, Leden, and Laden: of some, Ladano, and Odano: in Spanish, Xara and surther saith, it groweth in Arabia, where the bush is called Chasus thus much for the description. @ Our Author here seems to make Dioscorides to comment vpon Matthiolus, which shewes his learning, and how well he was exercised in reading or vnderstanding any thing written of Plants. But of this (...); The plant here figured which Matthiolus iudges to be the true Ledon, or Cistus Ladanifera of Dioscorides, hath (...) stalkes and branches, whereon grow very thicke leaues, broad also and long, with the (...) running alongst the leaues, the floure of this consists of fiue white leaues, and the seed is contained in a three cornered seed vessel. @


14 Cistus Ledum Alpinum Clusij. The Mountaine Cistus.


@ 15 Cistus Ledon folijs Rorismarini. Rosemary leaued Cistus Ledon.


14 The foureteenth Cistus, being one of those that do grow vpon the Alpish mountaines, which Lobel setteth downe to be Balsamum alpinum of Gesner: notwithstanding I thinke it not amisse to insert it in this place, hauing for my warrant that famous Herbarist Carolus Clusius: this plant is one of beautifullest, differing in very notable points, and yet resembleth them in the wooddy branches and leaues: it riseth vp hauing many weake branches leaning to the ground, yet of a wooddy substance, couered ouer with an ash coloured barke: the leaues are broad, and very rough, of a shining greene colour, and a binding taste: the floures grow at the tops of the branches like little bels, hanging downe their heads, diuided at the lips or brims into fiue diuisions, of a deepe red color on the out side, and dasht ouer here and there with some siluer spots; on the inside of a bright shining red colour, with certaine chiues in the middle, and of a very sweet smell, as is all the rest of the plant; after which come small heads or knaps, full of seed like dust, of a very strong smell, making the head of them to ake that smel thereto: the root is long, hard, and very woody: oftentimes there is

found vpon the trunke or naked part of the stalks certaine excrescences, or out-(...) in manner of galls, of a fungous substance, like those of Touchwood, white within, and red without, of an astringent or binding (...)
@ 15 This growes some cubite and better high, and hath long narrow glutinous leaues like in shape to those of Rosemarie, set by couples, but not very thick: the branches whereon the floures do grow are slender, and the seed vessels are diuided into fiue parts as in other plants of this kinde. This Clusius found in Spaine, and sets forth for his Ledum nonum @.


 The Place.
Cistus Ledon groweth in the Island of Candie, as Bellonius doth testifie, in vntilled places euery where: it is also found in Cyprus, as Pliny sheweth, and likewise in many places of Spaine that lie open to the Sun: moreouer both the forme and bignesle of the leaues, and also of the plants themselues, as well of those that bring sorth Ladanum, as the other Cistus, do varie in this wonderful maner, according to the (...) of the places and countries where they grow: they are strangers in these Northerly parts, being very impatient of our cold clymate.


 The Time.
They floure for the most part from May to the end of August: the clammie matter which falleth vpon the leaues, which is a liquid kinde of Rosen of a sweet smell, is gathered in the Spring time as Dioscorides saith: but as Petrus Bellonius asfirmeth (being an eye witnes of the gathering) in the midst of sommer, and in the extreme heat of the Dog-daies, the which in our time not without great care and diligence, and as great labour, is gathered from the whole plant (with certain instruments made in manner of tooth pickes, or eare pickes, which in their tongue they call Ergastiri) and not gathered from the beards of Goats, as it is reported in the old fables of the lying Monks themselues, called Calohieros, that is to say Greekish Monkes, who of very mockerie haue foisted that fable among others extant in their workes.
@ I thinke it not amisse for the better explanation of the matter here treated of, as also to shew you after what manner our Author in diuers places gaue the testimonies of sundry Writers, and how well he vnderstood them, here to set downe in English the words of Bellonius concerning the gathering of Ladanum, which are these. [The Greekes (saith he) for the gathering of Ladanum, prouide a peculiar instrument which in their vulgar tongue they terme Ergastiri: This is an instrument like to a Rake without teeth, to this are fastened sundry thongs cut out of a raw and vntanned hide; they gently rub these vpon the Ladanum bearing shrubs, that so the liquid moisture concrete about the leaues may sticke to them, which afterwards with kniues they shaue off these thongs in the heat of the day. Wherefore the labour of gathering Ladanum is exceeding great, yea intollerable, seeing they must of necessitie stay in the mountaines all the day long in the greatest heat of the Dogdaies: neither vsually shall you finde any other who will take the paines to gather it, besides, the Calohieroi, that is the Greeke Monkes. It is gathered no where in the whole Island of Candy in greater plenty, than at the foot of the mountaine Ida at a village called Cogualino, and at Milopotamo. @]


 The Names.
The shrub it selfe is called in Greeke (...), or (...): the Latines keep the name Ledon or Ladon, and is a kinde of Cistus or Hollie Roses: the fat or clammie matter which is gathered from the leaues, is named Ladanon and Ledanon, according to the Greeke: the Apothecaries corruptly call it Lapdanum: Dioscorides counteth that to be the best which is sweet of smell, and somewhat greene, that easily waxeth soft, is fat, without sand, and is not easily broken, but very full of Rosine or Gumme.


 The Temperature.
Ladanum, saith Galen, is hot in the later end of the first degree, hauing also a little astrictiueor binding qualitie; it is likewise of a thin substance, and therefore it softeneth, and withall doth moderately digest, and also concoct.


 The Vertues.
Ladanum hath a peculiar property against the infirmities of the mother, it keepeth haires from  falling; for it wasteth away any setled or putrified humour that is at their roots.
Dioscorides saith, that Ladanum doth bind, heat, souple, and open, being tempered with wine, Myrrhe, and oile of Myrtles; it keepeth haires from falling being annointed therewith; or laied on mixed with wine, it maketh the markes or scars of wounds faire and well coloured.
It taketh away the paine in the eares if it be powred or dropped therein, mixed with honied water, or with oile of Roses.
A fume made thereof draweth forth the afterbirth, and taketh away the hardnesse of the matrix.

It is with good successe mixed with mollifying plaisters that mitigate paine.
Being drunke with wine, it stoppeth the laske, and prouoketh vrine.
There is made hereof diuers sorts of Pomanders, chaines, and bracelets, with other sweets mixed  therewith.



CHAP. 8. Of Rosemarie.

@ The Description.
1 ROsemarie is a wooddie (...), growing oftentimes to the height of three or foure cubits, especially when it is set by a wall: it consisteth of slender brittle branches, wheron do grow verie many long leaues, narrow, somewhat hard, of a quicke spicy taste, whitish vnderneath, and of a full greene colour aboue, or in the vpper side, with a pleasant sweet strong smell; among which come forth little floures of a whitish blew colour: the seed is blackish: the roots are tough and woody.


1 Rosmarinum Coronarium. Garden Rosemarie.


2 Rosmarinum syluestre. Wilde Rosemarie.


2 The wilde Rosemarie Clusius hath referred vnto the kindes of Cistus Ledon; we haue as a poore kinsman thereof inserted it in the next place, in kinred or neighbourhood at the least. This wilde Rosemarie is a small wooddie shrub, growing seldome aboue a foot high, hauing hard branches of a reddish colour, diuiding themselues into other smaller branches of a whitish color: wheron are placed without order diuers long leaues, greene aboue, and hoarie vnderneath, not vnlike to those of the dwarfe Willow, or the common Rosemarie, of a drie and astringent taste, of little smel or none at all: the floures stand on the tops of the branches, set vpon bare or naked footstalks, consisting of fiue small leaues of a reddish colour, somewhat shining; after which appeare little knaps full of small seed: the root is tough and wooddie.
3 This plant grows vp like an hedge shrub of a wooddie substance, to the height of two or three

3 Casia Poetica, Lobelij. The Poets Rosemarie or Gardrobe.
cubits; hauing many twiggie branches of a green colour: wherupon do grow narrow leaues like vnto Linaria or Toad-flax, of a bitter taste; among which come forth small mossie floures, of a greenish yellow colour like those of the Cornell tree, and of the smell of Rosemarie: which hath mouedme to placeit with the Rosemaries as a kinde thereof, not finding any other plant so neere vnto it in kinde and neighbourhood: after the floures be past, there succeed fruit like those of the Myrtle tree, greene at the first, and of a shining red colour when they bee ripe, like Corall, or the berries of Asparagus, soft and sweet in taste, leauing a certaine acrimonie or sharpe taste in the end: the stone within is hard as is the nut, wherein is contained a smal white kernel, sweet in tast; the root is of a wooddie substance: it floureth in the Sommer; the fruit is ripe in the end of October: the people of Granade, Montpelier, and of the kingdom of Valentia, doe vse it in their presses and Wardrobes, whereupon they call it Guardalobo. @ This in Clusius his time when he liued about Montpelier was called Osyris; but afterwards they called it Casia, thinking it that mentioned by the Poet Virgil; the which it cannot be, for it hath no sweet smell. Pena and Lobel iudge it to be the Casia of (...), wherewith also it dothnot well agree. @


 The Place.
Rosemarie groweth in France, Spaine, and in other hot countries; in woods, and in vntilled places: there is such plentie thereof in Languedocke, that the inhabitants burne scarce any other fuell: they make hedges of it in the gardens of Italy and England, being a great ornament vnto the same: it groweth neither in the fields nor gardens of the Easterne cold countries; but is carefully and curiously kept in pots, set into the stoues and sellers, against the iniuries of their cold Winters.
Wilde Rosemarie groweth in Lancashire in diuers places, especially in a field called Little Reed, amongst the Hurtleberries, neere vnto a small village called Maudsley; there found by a learned Gentleman often remembred in our historie (and that worthily) Mr. Thomas Heskcth.


 The Time.
Rosemarie floureth twice a yeare, in the Spring, and after in August.
The wilde Rosemarie floureth in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
Rosemarie is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Rosmarinus Coronaria: it is surnamed Coronaria, for difference sake betweene it and the other Libanotides, which are reckoned for kindes of Rosemarie, and also because women haue been accustomed to make crownes and garlands thereof: in Italian, Rosmarino coronario: in Spanish, Romero: in French and Dutch Rosmarin.
Wilde Rosemarie is called Rosmarinus syluestris: of Cordus, (...).


 The Temperature.
Rosemarie is hot and drie in the second degree, and also of an a stringent or binding quality, as being compounded of diuers parts, and taking more of the mixture of the earthy substance.


 The Vertues.
Rosemarie is giuen against all fluxes of bloud; it is also good, especially the floures thereof, for  all infirmities of the head and braine, proceeding of a cold and moist cause; for they dry the brain, quicken the sences and memorie, and strengthen the sinewie parts.
(...) witnesseth, that Rosemarie is a remedie against the stuffing of the head, that commeth  through coldnesse of the braine, if a garland thereof be put about the head, whereof (...) Mesuai giueth testimonie.
Dioscorides teacheth that it cureth him that hath the yellow iaundice, if it be boiled in water and  drunk before exercise, and that after the taking therof the patient must bathe himselfe and drink wine.

The distilled water of the floures of Rosemarie being drunke at morning and euening first and  last, taketh away the stench of the mouth and breath, and maketh it very sweet, if there be added thereto, to sleep or insuse for certaine daies, a few Cloues, Mace, Cinnamon, and a little Annise seed.
The Arabians and other Physitions succeeding, do write, that Rosemarie comforteth the brain  the memorie, the inward senses, and restoreth speech vnto them that are possessed with the dumbe palsie, especially the conserue made of the floures and sugar, or any other way confected with sugar, being taken euery day fasting.
The Arabians, as Serapio witnesseth, giue these properties to Rosemarie: it heateth, say they, is  of subtill parts, is good for the cold rheume which salleth from the braine, driueth away windines, prouoketh vrine, and openeth the stoppings of the liuer and milt.
Tragus writeth, that Rosemarie is spice in the Germane Kitchins, and other cold countries. Further, he saith, that the wine boiled with Rosemarie, and taken of women troubled with the mother, or the whites, helpeth them, the rather if they fast three or foure houres after.
The floures made vp into plates with sugar after the manner of Sugar Roset and eaten, comfort  the heart, and make it merry, quicken the spirits, and make them more liuely.
The oile of Rosemaire chimically drawne, comforteth the cold, weake and feeble braine in most  wonderfull maner.
The people of Thuringia do vse the wilde Rosemarie to prouoke the desired sicknesse.
Those of Marchia vse to put it into their drinke the sooner to make their clients drunke, and also  do put it into chests and presses among clothes, to preserue them from morhes or other vermine. 

The vertues in the two last places (...) belong to the (...) (...) of (...), (...) is the (...) of Cordus, and is described in the (...). (...) of the foregoing Chapter, by the name of (...) (...) (...).




CHAP. 9. Of Vpright Wood-binde.


1 Periclymenum rectum Sabaudicum. Sauoy Honisuckles.


2 Periclymenum rectum Germanicum. Germane Honisuckles.




 The Description.
1 THis strange kinde of Hony-suckle, found in the woods of Sauoy, represents vnto vs that shrub or hedge-bush called Cornus foemina, the Dog-berry tree, or Pricke-timber tree, hauing leaues and branches like the common Wood-binde, sauing that this doth not clamber or clymbe as the others do, but contrariwise groweth vpright, without leaning to one side or other, like a small tree or hedge-bush: the floures grow vpon the tender sprayes or twiggie branches. by couples, not vnlike in shape and colour to the common Wood-binde, but altogether lesser, and of a white colour, hauing within the same many hairy chiues like the other of his kinde: after which come red berries ioyned together by couples: the root is tough and (...).
2 The stalkes of the second be oftentimes of a meane thicknesse, the wooddy substance somwhat whitish and soft: the branches be round, and couered with a whitish barke, notwithstanding in the beginning when the sprayes be yong they are somewhat reddish. The leaues be long, like those of the common Hony-suckle, soft, and of a white greene: on the lower side they be whiter, and a little hairy: the floures be lesser than any of the Wood-bindes, but yet of the (...) fashion, and of a whitish colour, ioyned together by couples vpon seuerall slender foot-stalkes, like little wilde Cherries, of a red colour, the one lesser oftentimes than the other.


3 Periclymenum rectum fructu (...). Vpright Wood-binde with blew berries.


4 Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro. Cherry Wood-binde.


3 This strange kinde of Wood-binde, which Carolus Clusius hath set forth in his Pannonicke Obseruations, riseth vp oftentimes to the height of a man, euen as the former doth; which diuides it selfe into many branches, couered with a rough blacke barke, that choppeth and gapeth in sundrie clefts as the barke of the Oke. The tender branches are of a whitish greene colour, couered with a woolly hairinesse, or an ouerworne colour, whereupon do grow leaues set by couples one against the other, like vnto the common Wood-binde, of a drying bitter taste: the floures grow by couples likewise, of a whitish colour. The fruit succeedeth, growing like little Cherries, each one on his owne foot-stalke, of a bright and shining blew colour; which being bruised, doe die the hands of a reddish colour, and they are of a sharpe winie taste, and containe in them many small flat seeds. The root is wooddy, dispersing it selfe far abroad.

4 This kind of vpright Wood-bind groweth vp likewise to the height of a man, and oftentimes more high, like to the last described, but altogether greater. The berries hereof are very blacke, wherein especially is the difference. @ The leaues of this are as large as Bay leaues, sharpe pointed, greene aboue, and whitish vnderneath, but not hairy, nor snipt about the edges: the floures grow by couples, of a whitish purple, or wholly purple: to these paires of floures there commonly succeeds but one berry, larger than any of the former, of the bignesse of a little cherry, and of the same colour, hauing two marks vpon the top therof, where the floures stood. @


Periclymeni 3. and 4. flores. The floures of the third and fourth.


5 Chamaepericlymenum. Dwarfe Hony-suckle.


5 To the kindes of Wood-bindes this plant may likewise be referred, whose picture with this description was sent vnto Clusius long since by that learned Doctor in physicke Thomas Penny (of our London colledge of famous memorie:) it riseth vp with a stalke of a foot high; whereupon are set by couples faire broad leaues one right against another, ribbed with certaine nerues like those of Plantaine, sharpe pointed, and somewhat hollowed in the middle like Spoon-wort: from the bosome of which leaues come forth small floures, not seene or described by the Author: after which commeth forth a cluster of red berries, thrust hard together as those of Aaron or priests pint. The root is tough and very slender, creeping far abroad vnder the vpper crust of the earth, whereby it occupieth much ground.


 The Place.
These plants are strangers in England: they grow in the woods and mountaines of Switzerland, Germany, Sauoy, and other those parts tending to the East, East North-East, and East and by South.
I haue a plant of the (...) kinde in my garden: the rest as yet I haue not (...), and therefore cannot write so liberally thereof as I could wish.
@ The dwarfe Hony-suckle growes in the maritime parts of Norway and Sweden, and the countries thereabout. @


 The Time.
They floure for the most part when the others do, that is to say in May and Iune, and their fruit is ripe in September.



 The Names.
Vpright Wood-binde or Hony-suckle is called Periclymenum stans, and Periclymenum rectum, (...) vpright Wood-binde: of Dodonaeus, Xylosteum: in high-Dutch, Honds kirsen, that is to say, Canum Cerasa, or Dog Cherries. The English names are expressed in their seuerall titles. It hath bin called Chamaecerasus, but not truly.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Touching the temperature and vertues of these vpright Wood-bindes, we haue no experience at all our selues, neither haue we learned any thing of others.



CHAP. 10. Of Sene.


Sena folijs obtusis. Italian Sene.



 The Description.
SEne bringeth forth stalks a cubit high, set with diuers branches: the leaues are long, winged, consisting of many small leaues like those of Liquorice, or of bastard Sene: the floures come forth of the bottom of the wings, of colour yellow, standing vpon slender footstalks; from which after the floures be gone hang forked cods, the same bowing inward like a halfe-moone, plain and flat, in (...) are contained seeds like to the seeds or kernells of grapes, of a blackish colour. The root is slender, long, and vnprofitable, which perisheth when the leaues are gathered for medicine, and the seeds be ripe, and must be sowne againe the next yeare, euen as we do corne.
There is another kinde of Sene growing in Italy, like the other in each respect, sauing that it is greater, and hath not that force in purging that the other hath.


 The Place and Time.
This is planted in Syria and Egypt, also in Italy, in Prouince in France, in Languedoc. It hardly groweth in high and low Germany, neither in England: it prospereth in hot Regions, and cannot away with cold; for that cause it is in Italy sowne in May, and continueth no longer than Autumne: the best is brought from Alexandria and Egypt. The Arabians were the first that found it out.


 The Names.
The Persians call it Abalzemer, as Mesue his copy teacheth: the Apothecaries (...), by which name it was knowne to Actuarius the Grecian, and to the later Latines: it is called in English, Sene.


 The Temperature.
Sene is of a meane temperature, neither hot nor cold, yet inclining to heate, and dry almost in the third degree: it is of a purging facultie, and that by the stoole, in such sort as it is not much troublesome to mans nature, hauing withall a certaine binding qualitie, which it leaueth after the purging.


 The Vertues.
It voideth forth (...) and cholericke humors, also grosse and melancholike, if it be helped with something tending to that end.
It is a singular purging medicine in many diseases, fit for all ages and kindes.
It purgeth without violence or hurt, especially if it be tempered with Anise seed or other like  sweet smelling things added, or with gentle purgers or lenitiue medicines. It may be giuen in pouder, but commonly the infusion thereof is vsed.

The quantitie of the pouder is a dram weight, and in the infusion, foure, fiue, or more. It may be  mixed in any liquor.
It is in the decoction or in the infusion tempered with cold things in burning agues and other  hot diseases: in cold and long infirmities it is boyled with hot opening simples and such like; or else it is steeped in wine, in which manner, as familiar to mans nature, it draweth forth gently by the stoole, almost without any kinde of paine, crude and raw humors.
Most of the Arabians commend the cods, but our Physitions the leaues rather; for vnlesse the  cods be full ripe they ingender winde, and cause gripings in the belly. For they are oftentimes gathered before they be ripe, and otherwise easily fall away being shaken downe by the wind, by reason of their weake and slender stalks.
Some also thinke that Sene is hurtfull to the stomacke, and weakneth the same, for which cause  they say that Ginger or some sweet kinde of spice is to be added, whereby the stomacke may be strengthned. Likewise Mesue noteth that it is slow in operation, and therefore Salgem is to be mixed with it. Moreouer, Sene purgeth not so speedily as stronger medicines do.
Notwithstanding it may be helped not only by Salgem, but also by other purging things mixed  therewith, that is to say with simple medicines, as Rubarb, Agaricke, and others; and with compounds, as that which is called Catholicon, or the Electuarie Diaphoenicon, or that which is made of the iuyce of Roses, or some other, according as the condition or qualitie of the disease and of the sicke man requireth.
The leaues of Sene are a familiar purger to all people, but they are windie, and do binde the bodie  afterwards, very much disquieting the stomack with rumbling and belching: for the auoiding of which inconuenience there must be added Cinnamon, Ginger, Annise seed, and Fennell seed, Raisins of the Sun, and such like that do breake winde, which will the better help his purging qualitie.
Sene doth better purge when it is infused or steeped, than when it is boyled: for doubtlesse the  more it is boiled the lesse it purgeth, and the more windie it becommeth.
Take Borage, Buglosse, Balme, Fumitorie, of each three drams, Sene of Alexandria very wel prepared  and pouned, two ounces, strow the pouder vpon the herbes and distill them: the water that commeth thereof reserue to your vse to purge those that liue delicately, being ministred in white wine, with sugar, in condited confections, and such dainty waies, wherein delicate and fine people do greatly delight: you may also (as was said before) adde hereunto according to the maladie, diuers purgers, as Agaricke, Mirobalans, etc.
The pouder of Sene after it is well prepared two ounces, of the pouder of the root of Mechoacan  foure drams, pouder of Ginger, Anise seeds, of each a little, a spoonfull of Anise seeds, but a very little Ginger, and a modicum or small quantitie of Salgemmae: this hath beene proued a verie fit and familiar medicine for all ages and sexes. The patient may take one spoonful or two therof fasting, either in pottage, some supping in drink, or white wine. This is right profitable to draw both flegme and melancholy from the brest and other parts.
The leaues of Sene and Cammomil are put in baths to wash the head.
Sene opens the inward parts of the body which are stopped, and is profitable against all griefes  of the principall members of the body.
Take Sene prepared according to art one ounce, Ginger half a quarter of an ounce, twelue cloues, Fenell seed two drams, or in stead thereof Cinnamon and Tartar, of each halfe a dram, pouder all these; which done, take thereof in white wine one dram before supper, which doth maruellously purge the head.
Handle Sene in maner aboue specified, then take halfe an ounce thereof, which don, adde thereto  sixty Raisins of the Sunne with the stones pickt out, one spoonfull of Anise seeds braied, boile these in a quart of ale till one halfe be wasted, and while it is boiling put in your Sene: let it stand so till the morning, then straine it, and put in a little Ginger: then take the one halfe of this potion and put thereunto two spoonfulls of syrrup of Roses: drinke this together, I meane the one halfe of the medicine at one time, and if the patient canot abide the next day to receiue the other halfe, then let it be deferred vntil the third day after.
Sene and Fumitorie (as Rasis affirmeth) do purge adust humors, and are excellent good against  scabs, itch, and the ill affection of the body.
If Sene be infused in whey, and then boyled a little, it becommeth good physicke against melancholy, clenseth the braine and purgeth it, as also the heart, liuer, milt, and lungs, causeth a man to looke yong, ingendreth mirth, and taketh away sorrow: it cleareth the sight, strengthneth hearing, and is very good against old feuers and diseases arising of melancholy. 

There were formerly two figures in this chapter, which differed onely in that the first, which was the Sexa (...), (...), narrower, and sharper (...) (...) than the (...) (...), which was the second.





CHAP. 11. Of bastard Sene.

 The Description.
1 Colutea and Sene be so neere the one vnto the other in shape and shew, that the (...) Herbarists haue deemed Colutea to be the right Sene. This bastard Sene is a shrubby plant growing to the forme of a hedge bush or shrubby tree: his branches are straight, brittle, and wooddy; which being carelesly broken off, and as negligently prickt or stucke in the ground, will take root and prosper at what time of the yeare soeuer it be done; but slipt or cut, or planted in any curious sort whatsoeuer, among an hundred one will (...) grow: these boughes or branches are beset with leaues like Sena or Securidaca, not much vnlike Liquorice: among which come forth faire broome-like yellow floures, which turne into small cods like the sownd of a fish or a little bladder, which will make a cracke being broken betweene the fingers: wherein are contained many blacke flat seeds of the bignesse of Tares, growing vpon a small rib or sinew within the cod: the root is hard, and of a wooddy substance.


1 Colutea. Bastard Sene.


2 Colutea Scorpioides. Bastard Sene with Scorpion cods.


2 Bastard Sene with Scorpion cods is a small wooddy shrub or bush, hauing leaues, branches, and floures like vnto the former bastard Sene, but lesse in each respect: when his small yellow floures are fallen there succeed little long crooked cods like the long cods or husks of (...) his Scorpioides, whereof it tooke his name: the root is like the root of the Box tree, or rather resembling the roots of Dulcamara or Bitter-sweet, growing naturally in the shadowie woods of Valena in Narbone; whereof I haue a small plant in my garden, which may be called Scorpion Sene.
3 The low or dwarfe Colutea of (...) description, hath a thicke wooddy root couered with a yellowish barke, with many fibres anexed thereto, which bringeth forth yearely new shoots, whereby it greatly encreaseth, of a cubit and a halfe high, smooth, and of a greene colour; whereon doe grow leaues composed of six or seuen leaues, and sometimes nine, set vpon a middle rib like those of the common kinde, of a stipticke taste, with some sharpnesse or biting: the floures grow vpon

3 Colutea scorpioides humilis. Dwarfe bastard Sene.
4 Colutea scorpioides montana (...). Mountaine bastard Sene.
5 Colutea minima, siue Coronilla. The smallest bastard Sene.
slender foot-stalkes, long and naked like those of the Pease, and of a yellow colour, of little or no smell at all, and yet that little nothing pleasant: after which come forth long cods, wherein is contained small seed like those of the Strangle Tare.
4 This mountaine bastard Sene hath stalks, leaues, and roots like the last described. The floures grow on the tops of the branches in maner of a crowne; whereupon some haue called it Coronilla: in shape like those of the pease, and of a yellow colour: the cods as yet we haue not seen, and therefore not expressed in the figure.
5 This small bastard Sene groweth like a small shrub creeping vpon the ground, halfe a cubit high, bringing forth many twiggie branches, in maner of those of the Spanish broome; wherupon do grow leaues like those of Lentils or the Strangle Tare, with many smal leaues set vpon a middle rib, somewhat fat or full of iuice, of the colour of the leaues of Rue or Herbegrace, of an astringent and vnpleasant taste: the floures grow at the tops of the branches, of a yellow colour, in shape likethose of the smallest broome: after which come little crooked cods like the clawes or toes of a bird, wherein is contained seed somwhat long, blacke, and of an (...) taste: the root is long, hard, tough, and of a wooddy substance.

6 There is also found another sort hereof, not much differing from the former, sauing that this plant is greater in each respect, wherein especially consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
Colutea or bastard Sene groweth in diuers gardens, and commeth vp of seed; it quickly commeth to perfection, insomuch that if a sticke thereof be broken off and thrust into the ground, it quickly taketh root, yea although it be done in the middle of summer, or at any other time, euen as the sticks of Willow or Elder, as my selfe haue often prooued; the which bring forth floures and fruit the next yeere after.
The second with Scorpion cods groweth likewise in my garden: the last doth grow in diuers barren chalky grounds of Kent towards Sittinbourne, Canturbury, and about Southfleet; I haue not seene them elsewhere: the rest are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They floure from May till summer be well spent, in the meane season the cods bring forth ripe seed.


 The Names.
This shrub is called of Theophrastus in Greeke (...) with the diphthong (...) in the second sillable: in Latine, as Gaza expoundeth it, Coloutea or Colutea: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in French, Baguenaudier: they are deceiued that thinke it to be Sena, or any kinde thereof, although we haue followed others in giuing it to name Bastard Sene, which name is very vnproper to it: in low Dutch it is called (...) (...): and we may vse the same name Sene tree, in English.
This Calutea, or bastard Sene, doth differ from that plant (...) with v in the second syllable, of which Colytea, Theophrastus writeth in his third booke. @ The fifth is the Polygala (...) of (...). @


 The Nature and Vertues.
Theophrastus, neither any other hath made mention of the temperature or faculties in working  of these plants, more than that they are good to fatten cattell, especially sheepe. 

There were (...) (...) the fifth and (...) places here two (...) no (...) different, but that which was in the (...) place was a little larger, and (...) title which (...) (...) in (...) (...), (...) this (...) diuided (...) them: for as (...) (...), (...) (...), (...) (...), was ouer in the fifth; and (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the sixth.




CHAP. 12. Of (...)

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Liquorice hath many (...) (...), rising vp to the height of two or three cubits, beset with leaues of an (...) (...) colour, consisting of many small leaues set vpon a middle rib, like the leaues (...) Colutea, or the (...) tree, somewhat glutinous in handling: among which come small knops growing vpon short stems betwixt the leaues and the branches, clustering together, and making a round forme and shape: out of which grow small blew floures, of the colour of an English Hyacinth; after which succeed round, rough, prickly heads, consisting of diuers rough or (...) huskes closely and thicke compact together; in which is contained a flat seed: the root is straight, yellow within, and browne without: of a sweet and pleasant taste.
2 The common and vsuall Liquorice hath stalkes and leaues very like the former, sauing that his leaues are greener and greater, and the floures of a light shining blew colour: but the floures of this are succeeded by longish cods that grow not so thicke clustring together in round heads as the former, but spike fashion, or rather like the wilde Vetch called (...), or Galega: the cods are small and flat like vnto the Tare: the roots are of a brownish colour without, and yellow within like Box, and sweeter in taste than the former.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in sundry places of Germany wilde, and in France and Spaine, but they are planted in gardens in England, whereof I haue plenty in my garden: the poore people of the North parts of England do manure it with great diligence, wherby they obtain great plenty thereof, replanting the same once in three or foure yeares.


 The Time.
Liquorice floureth in Iuly, and the seed is ripe in September.



1 Glycyrrhiza Echinata Dioscoridis. Hedge-hogge Licorice.


@ 2 (...) vulgaris. Common Licorice.




 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Dulc is radix, or sweet Root: this Licorice is (...) knowne either to the Apothecaries or to the vulgar people: we call it in English, Dioscorides his Licorice.
It is most euident that the other is (...), or Licorice: the Apothecaries call it by a corrupt word, Liquiritia: the Italians, Regalitia: the Spaniards, Regeliza and Regalitia: in high Dutch, Suszhotz, Suszwurtzel: in French, Rigolisse, Raigalisse, and Reglisse: in low Dutch, (...), suethout: in English, common Licorice: Pliny calleth it Scythica herba: it is named Scythice of the countrey Scythia, where it groweth.


 The Temperature.
The Nature of Dioscorides his Licorice, as Galen saith, is familiar to the temperature of our bodies, and seeing it hath a certaine binding quality adioined, the temperature thereof so much as is hot and binding, is specially of a warme buality, comming neerest of all to a meane temperature; besides, for that it is also sweet, it is likewise meanely moist.
For as much as the root of the common Licorice is sweet, it is also temperately hot and moist; notwithstanding the barke thereof is something bitter and hot, but this must be scraped away; the fresh root when it is full of juice doth moisten more than the dry.


 The Vertues.
The root of Licorice is good against the rough harshnesse of the throat and brest; it openeth  the pipes of the lungs when they be stuffed or stopped, and ripeneth the cough, and bringeth forth flegme.
The iuice of Licorice made according to Art, and hardned into a lumpe, which is called (...) Liquiritiae, serueth well for the purposes aforesaid, being holden vnder the tongue, and there suffered to melt.
Moreouer, with the juice of Licorice, Ginger, and other spices, there is made a certaine bread or  cakes, called Ginger-bread, which is very good against the cough, and all the infirmities of (...) lungs and brest: which is cast into moulds, some of one fashion, and some of another.
The iuice of Licorice is profitable against the heate of the stomacke, and of the mouth.

The same is drunke (...) wine of Raisons against the infirmities of the liuer and chest, scabs or  sores of the bladder, and diseases of the kidneyes.
Being melted vnder the tongue it quencheth thirst: it is good for greene wounds being layed  thereupon, and for the stomacke if it be chewed.
The decoction of the fresh roots serueth for the same purposes.
But the dried root most finely poudered is a singular remedie for a pin and a web in the eye, if it  be strewed thereupon.
Dioscorides and Pliny also report, that Liquorice is good for the stomack and vlcers of the mouth, being cast vpon them.
It is good against hoarsenesse, difficultie of breathing, inflammation of the lungs, the pleurisie, spitting of bloud or matter, consumption or rottennes of the lungs, all infirmities and ruggednes of the chest.
It takes away inflammations, mitigateth and tempereth the sharpnesse and saltnes of humors, concocteth raw humors, and procureth easie spitting.
The decoction is good for the kidnies and bladder that are exulcerated.
It cureth the strangurie, and generally all infirmities that proceed of sharpe, salt, and biting humors.
These things concerning Liquorice hath also Theophrastus: viz. that with this and with cheese  made of Mares milke the Scythians were reported to be able to liue eleuen or twelue dayes.
The Scythian root is good for shortnesse of breath, for a dry cough, and generally for all infirmities  of the chest.
Moreouer, with honey it healeth vlcers, it also quencheth thirst if it be held in the mouth: for  which cause they say that the Scythians do liue eleuen or twelue dayes with it and Hippace, which is cheese made of Mares milke, as Hippocrates witnesseth.
Pliny in his twenty fifth booke, chap. 8. hath thought otherwise than truth, that Hippace is an  herbe so called. 

Both the figures formerly were of the first described.




CHAP. 13. Of Milke Trefoile or Shrub Trefoile.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers kindes or sorts of the shrubby Trefoile, the which might very well haue passed among the three leaued Grasses, had it not beene for my promise in the proeme of our first part, That in the last booke of our History the shrubbie or wooddy plants should be set forth, euerie one as neere as might be in kindred and neighbourhood.


 The Description.
@ 1 THe sirst kinde of Cytisus or shrubby Trefoile growes to the forme of a small shrub or wooddy bush two or three cubits high, branching into sundry small boughes or armes, set full of leaues like the small Tresoile, darke greene, and not hairie, three growing alwaies together: among these come forth smal yellow floures like them of French Broome, which doe turne into long and flat cods, containing small seed of a blackish colour.
2 The second kinde of Cytisus is likewise a small shrub, in shape after the manner of the former, but that the whole plant is altogether smaller, and the leaues rounder, set together by couples, and the small cods hairy at the ends, which sets forth the difference. @ The leaues of this are almost round, and grow three together close to the stalke: they are smooth, of a fresh greene, and the middlemost leafe of the three is the largest, and ends in a sharpe point: the floures are of the bignesse and colour of the Trifolium corniculatum: it floures in May. @
3 The root of this third kinde is single, from whence spring vp many smooth brittle stalks diuided into many wings and branches, whereon grow greene leaues smaller than those of medow Trefoile: the floures are yellow, lesser than Broome floures, otherwise very like, growing about the tops of the twiggie branches, diuided into spoky tufts: which being vaded, there follow thinne long narrow cods, lesser than those of the Broome, wherein is contained small blacke seed. The root is long, deeply growing into the ground, and sometimes waxeth crooked in the earth. @ This also hath smooth green leaues, and differs little (if any thing at all) from the first described, wherefore I thought it needlesse to giue a figure. Our Author called it Cytisus siliquosus, Codded shrub Trefoile, because one of the branches was fairely in the figure exprest with cods; I know no other reason, for all the Cytisi are codded as well as this. @



1 Cytisus. The first shrub Trefoile.


2 Cytisus. The second shrub Trefoile.


4 Cytisus hirsutus. Ilairy shrub Trefoile.


5 Cytisus incanus. Hoary shrub Trefoile.



4 The fourth kinde of Cytisus hath a great number of small branches and stalkes like the former, but it is a lower plant, and more woolly; whose stalks and branches grow not very high, but yet very plentifully spred about the sides of the plant: the leaues are greater than the former, but lesser than those of medow Trefoile: the floures grow close together, as though they were bound vp or compact into one head or spokie tuft somewhat greater than the former: the cods are also greater, and more hairy: the root groweth very deepe into the ground, whereunto are adioyned a few fibres: it falleth out to be more hairy or woolly in one place than in another, and the more hairie and woolly that it is, the whiter it waxeth; for the roughnesse bringeth it a certain whitish colour. @ The branches of this oft times lie along vpon the ground: the leaues are smooth and greene aboue, and hoarie vnderneath: the floures yellow, which fading sometimes become orange coloured: the cods are round, and seeds brownish. @
5 The fifth kinde of (...) groweth to the height of a cubit or more, hauing many slender twiggy branches like Broome, streaked and very hard: whereupon grow leaues very like (...), yet all hoary, three together: from the bosome of which, or betweene the leaues and the stalkes, (...) sorth yellow (...) very like Broome, Spartum, or Pease, but smaller: the cods be like vnto Broome cods, of an ash colour, but slenderer, rougher, and flatter; in the seueral cels or diuisions whereof are contained bright shining seeds like the blacke seeds of Broome: all the whole plant is hoarie like (...) or (...).


6 Cytisus (...). Winged shrub Trefoile.


7 Cytisus 7. Cornutus. The Horned shrub Trefoile.


6 The sixth kinde of Cytisus or bush Tresoile groweth to the height of a tall man, with long stalkes couered ouer with a blackish barke, and a few boughes or branches, beset or garnished with leaues like the common Trefoile, but smaller, growing also three together, whereof the middlemost (...) the three leaues is twice as long as the two side leaues; the vpper side whereof is green, and the lower side somwhat reddish and hairie: the floures grow along the stalks almost from the bottome to the top, of a golden yellow colour, fashioned like the Broome floure, but greater than any of the rest of his kinde, and of a reasonable good sauour: the seed hath the pulsie taste of Cicer.
7 The seuenth kinde of Cytisus hath many tough and hairy branches rising from a wooddie root, foure or fiue cubits high, which are diuided into sundry smaller branches beset with leaues like the medow (...); among which come (...) yellow floures like Broome, that turne into

crooked flat cods like a sickle; wherein is contained the seed tasting like Cicer or Legumen. The whole plant is hoarie like Rhamnus, and being broken or bruised smelleth like Rocket.
8 This eighth kinde of Cytisus, which Pena setteth forth, is doubtlesse another kinde of (...), resembling the former in leaues, floures, and cods, sauing that the small leaues (which are alwaies three together) area little snipt about the edges: the whole plant is slenderer, softer, and greener, rather resembling an herbe than a shrub: the root is small and single.
9 This bastard or mis-begotten shrub Trefoile, or bastard Cytisus, groweth vp like a shrub, but not of a wooddy substance, hauing tender stalks smooth and plaine: whereon do grow hairy leaues like the other, diuers set vpon one foot-stalke, contrarie to all the rest: the floures grow along the stems like those of the stocke Gillofloures, of a yellow colour: the root is tough and wooddy.


8 Cytisus 8. The eighth shrub Trefoile.


9 Cytisus adulterinus, (...) Alysson fruticans. Bastard shrub Trefoile.




 The Place.
These plants were first brought into Italy and Greece from one of the (...) of Cyclades, called Cyntho or Cynthusa, and since found in many places of France, as about Montpelier, Veganium, and other places: they are strangers in England, though they grow very plentifully in Scotland, as it is reported; whereof I haue two sorts in my garden, that is to say, Cytisus Maranthae, or the horned Cytisus, and likewise one of the smallest, that is to say, the third in number. @ The second groweth in the garden of Mr. Iohn (...). @


 The Time.
These plants floure for the most part in May, Iune, and Iuly, and some after: the seed is (...) (...) September.


 The Names.
The Grecians and Latines do call this shrub (...), of Cynthusa an Island before mentioned, in which place they are in great estimation for that they do so wonderfully feed cattell, and encrease milke in their dugs, nourish sheepe and goats, which bring yong ones good for store and increase. One Author doth call these plants in Greeke (...), that is to say in Latine (...) foenum, fertile or fruitfull Hay, for that the kindes hereof cause milke to encrease, maketh good bloud and iuice, augmenteth strength, and multiplieth the naturall seed of generation: they may be called in English, milke Trefoile, of the store of milke which they encrease.



 The Temperature.
The leaues of milke Trefoile do coole, as Dioscorides writeth; they asswage swellings in the beginning, if they be stamped and laid vnto them with bread: the decoction thereof drunke prouoketh vrine: Galen teacheth, that the leaues of Milke Trefoile haue a digesting or wasting qualitie mixed with a waterie and temperate facultie, as haue those of the Mallow.


 The Vertues.
Women, saith Columella, if they want milke must steepe dry milke Trefoile in fairewater, and  when it is throughly soked, they must the next day mix a quart or thereabouts of the same pressed or strained forth with a little wine, and so let it be giuen vnto them to drinke, and by that meanes they themselues shall receiue strength, and their children comfort by abundance of milke.
Hippocrates reckoneth vp Milk-Trefoile among those things that encrease milke, in his booke of  the Nature of women, and of womens diseases.
Also Aristomachus of Athens in Pliny, commandeth to giue with wine the dry plant, and the same  likewise boiled in water, to nurses to drinke when their milke is gone.
Democritus and Aristomachus do promise that you shall want no Bees, if you haue milke Trefoile  for them to feed on: for all writers with one consent do conclude (as Galen saith) that (...) (...) gather of the floures of Milke Trefoile very great store of honie.
Columella teacheth, that Milke Trefoile is notable good for hennes, Bees, Goats, Kine, and all  kinde of Cattell, which quickely grow fat by eating thereof, and that it yeeldeth very great store of milke.
The people of Betica and Valentia (where there is great store of Cytisus) doe vse it very much  for the Silke Worms to hang their web vpon after they haue been well fed with the leaues of Mulberries.
Milke Trefoile is likewise a maruellous remedie against the Sciatica, and all other kindes of  gouts. 

The description that formerly was in the first place belonged to that described and figured in the (...).




CHAP. 12. Of Bastard Milke-Trefoiles.

 The Description.
1 THis riseth vp with little stalks from the root, brittle, very many in number, parted into wings and branches, about which grow many leaues lesser than those of the medow Trefoile, of colour greene: the floures about the tops of the twigs be orderly placed in maner like ears, of colour yellow, lesser than those of broom, otherwise all alike: in their places grow vp slender cods long, narrow, and lesser than the cods of Broome: rough also and hairy; in which do lie little blackish seeds: the root is long, and groweth deepe, and oftentimes creepeth aslope.
2 The second kinde of bastard Milke-Tresoile is like vnto the former in plentifull stalkes and twigges, but (...) it is lower and more downie; neither doe the stalkes thereof stand vpright, but rather incline to the one side: the leaues also are somewhat greater, but yet lesser than those of the medow Trefoile, wholly white, and they (...) open themselues out, but keep alwaies folded with the middle rib standing out: the floures likewise be closelier ioined together, and compacted as it were into a little head, and be also something greater: the cods in like manner are a little bigger and hairy, and of a blackish purple or murrey: the root groweth deepe in the ground, being diuided into a few sprigs; it oftentimes happeneth to grow in one place more hairie or downie than in another: the more hairie and downie it is, the more white and (...) it is; for the hairinesse doth also bring with it a certaine whitish colour.
3 The third kinde of bastard Milke Trefoile bringeth forth a companie of young shoots that are somewhat writhed and crooked, long leaues of a faire greene colour: the floures are closed together, long, white, or else galbineous, sweetly smelling, that is to say, hauing the smel of honie: the shrub it selfe is alwaies greene both Sommer and Winter. @ This growes some foot or better high, with slender hoarie branches, set with leaues three standing together vpon a very short stalke, and the middle leafe is as long againe as the other two; they are very white and (...), and the yellow floures grow out of the bosomes of the leaues all alongst the stalks. This is that mentioned in the vertues of the former chapter at F for the Silke wormes to worke vpon. @
4 The fourth shrub is likewise one of the wilde kinde, though in face and stature like the manured

1 Pseudocytisus 1. The first bastard shrub Trefoile.2 Pseudocytisus 2. The 2. bastard shrub Trefoile.3 Cytisus semper (...). The euer-greene shrub Trefoile.4 Pseudocytisus hirsutus. The hairie bastard tree Trefoile.Cytisus: It groweth vp like a small shrub or hedge bush to the height of two or three yards; on whose branches do grow three rough or hairie leaues, set vpon a slender foot-stalke, of a grasse greene colour aboue, with a reddish hairinesse below: the floures grow alongst the stalks from the middle to the toppe, of a bright shining yellow colour: the root is likewise wooddie.


 The Place.
These kindes of Milke Trefoiles are found in Morauia, so called in our age, which in times past was named Marcomannorum prouincia, and in the vpper Pannonia, otherwise called Austria, neere to high waies, and in the borders of fields; for they seeme after a sort to ioy in the shade. @ These grow (according to Clusius) in sundry parts of Spaine. @


 The Time.
They floure especially in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is euident enough that they are bastard kindes of Milke Trefoiles, and therefore they may be called and plainly termed (...), or bastard Milke Trefoiles, or (...) syluestres, that is to say, wilde Milke Trefoiles.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
What temperature these shrubs are of, or what vertues they haue we know not, neither haue wee as yet found out by our owne experience any thing, and therefore they may be referred to the other Milke-Trefoiles.



CHAP. 15. Of the venomous Tree Trefoile.


The figures were formerly (...).

 1 Dorycnium Monspeliensium. The venomous Trefoile of Montpelier.


2 Dorycnium Hispanicum. The venomous Trefoile of Spain.



 The Description.
1 THe venomous tree Trefoile of Montpelier hath many tough and pliant stalkes, two or three cubits high, diuided into sundry small twiggie braunches, beset with leaues three

together, placed from ioint to ioint by spaces, somewhat hoarie, very like vnto the leaues of Cytisus, or Rue: among which come forth many small mossie white floures, tuft fashion, in small bundles like Nose-gaies, and very like the floures of the Oliue or Oke tree, which turne into small roundish bladders, as it were made of parchment: wherein is contained blacke seed like wilde Lotus, but in taste like the wilde tare: the whole plant is of an (...) smell; the root is thicke, and of a wooddie substance.
2 The Spanish venomous Trefoile hath a wooddie stalke, rough and hoary, diuided into other small branches, whereon do grow leaues like the precedent: the floures grow on the tops of the branches, whereon do grow leaues like those of the Pease, and of a yellow, or rather greenish colour, wherein it differeth from the precedent.


 The Place.
These venomous Trefoiles grow in Narbone, on the barren and stonie craggie mountaines, at Frontignana, and about the sea coasts, and are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They flourish from May to the end of Iune.


 The Names.
Dorycnium, or (...), is that poisonous or venomous plant wherewith in times past they vsed to poison their arrow heads, or rather weapons, thereby to do the greater hurt vnto those whom they did assaile or pursue, whereupon it tooke his name: great controuersie hath been among Herbarists, what manner of plant Dorycnium should be; some saying one thing, and some another: which controuersies and sundry opinions are very well confuted by the true censure of Rondeletius, who hath for a definitiue sentence set downe the plant described for the true Dorycnium, and none other, which may be called in English, Venomous tree Trefoile. @ These plants do not sufficiently answer to the description of Dioscorides, neither can any one say certainly, that they are poisonous. @


 The Temperature.
Dorycnium is very cold, without moistning.


 The Vertues.
Venomous Trefoile hath not one good qualitie that I can reade of, but it is a pestilent venomous  plant, as hath been said in the description.



CHAP. 16. Of the shrub Trefoile called also Makebate.


Polemonium sive Trifolium fruticans. Shrubby Trefoile, or yellow Iasmine.



 The Description.
THis shrubby plant called (...), hath many wooddie twigges, growing vnto the height of foure or fiue cubits, hauing smal twiggie branches, of a darke green colour, garnished with small leaues of a deepe greene colour, alwaies three ioined together vpon little footstalks, like the Cytisus bush, or the field Trefoile, but smaller: the floures be yellow, and round, diuided into fiue or six parts, not much vnlike the yellow Iasmine, which hath caused many to call it yellow Iasmine, euen vnto this day: when the floures be vaded, there succeed small round berries as big as a Pease, of a black purplish colour when they be ripe, which being broken will die or colour the fingers like Elder Berries: within these berries are contained a small flat seed, like vnto Lentils: the root is long and small, creeping hither and thither vnder the earth, putting forth new springs or shoots in sundry places, whereby it wonderfully increaseth.


 The Place.
It groweth plentifully in the countrey of Montpellier at New Castle vpon the drie hills, and hot banks of the Oliue fields, and in the stony fields and wood of Gramuntium: it growes in my garden, and in other Herbarists gardens in England.



 The Time.
It floureth in Sommer: the seed is ripe in Autumne; the shrub it selfe is (...) greene, and hath a lasting root.


 The Names.
Most do call it Cytisus, but we had rather name it Trifolium fruticans: for it doth not agree with Cytisus or Milk-Trefoile, as in the chapter before it is plaine enough by his description, vnlesse it be Cytisus Marcelli, or Marcellus his Milke-Trefoile, with which peraduenture it might be thought to haue some likenesse, (...) the floures which are yellow were white, or galbineous, that is to say, blew.
There be diuers also that take this Trefoile to be Polemonium, forasmuch as the leaues hereof seeme to be somewhat like those of common Rue, but Polemonium hath not the leafe of common Rue, otherwise called Herb-grace, but of the other, that is to say, of S. Iohns Rue: it is called in English, shrubby Trefoile, or Make-bait.


 The Temperature.
Polemonium is of temperature dry in the second degree, with some Acrimonie or sharpnesse.


 The Vertues.
This shrubby plant hath so many singular and excellent vertues contained in it, that some haue  called it by the name Chiliodunamis, that is, hauing an hundred properties.
It is very (...) against the stinging of Scorpions, and (as some write) if a man hold it in his  hand, he cannot be hurt with the biting of any venomous beast.
Being taken in vineger it is very good for those that are spleneticke, and whose spleen or Milt is  affected with oppilations or stoppings.
If the root be taken in wine it helpeth against the bloudy flix, it prouoketh vrine being drunke  with water, scoureth away grauell, and easeth the paine and ache called the Sciatica.



CHAP. 17. Of Broome, and Broome Rape.


1 Genista. Broome.


2 (...) (...), (...) Orobanche. Broome Rape, or Orobanch.





@ Orobanche (...) flo. oblongis. Long floured Broome Rape.


@ Orobanche flore maiore. Great floured Broome Rape.


@ (...) (...). Branched Broome Rape.



 The Description.
1 BRoome is a bush or shrubby (...), it hath stalkes or rather wooddie branches: from which do spring slender twigs, cornered, greene, tough, and that be (...) bowed, many times diuided into small branches: about which do grow little leaues of an obscure green colour, and braue yellow floures; and at the length flat cods, which being ripe are blacke, as be those of the common Vetch, in which do lie flat seeds, hard, something brownish, and lesser than Lentils: the root is hard and wooddie, sending forth diuers times another plant of the colour of an Oken leafe, in shape like vnto the bastard Orchis, called Birds nest, hauing a root like a Turnep or Rape, whereupon it is called Rapum (...), or Broom Rape.
2 This is a certaine bulbed plant growing vnto the roots of broome, big below, and (...) aboue, couered with blackish scales, and of a yelowish pulpe within: from which doth rise a stalke a span long, hauing whitish floures about the top, like almost to those of Dead Nettle: after which grow forth long, thicke, and round husks, in which are contained very many seeds, and good for nothing: the whole plant is of the colour of the Oken leafe.



3 Genista Hispanica. Spanish Broome.


5 Chamaegenista Anglica. English Dwarfe Broome.


6 (...) Pannonica. Dwarfe broome of Hungarie.


@ Of this Orobanche or Broome Rape there are some varieties obserued and set forth by Lobel and Clusius: the first of these varieties hath longer and smaller floures than the ordinarie. The second hath larger floures, and those of a blewish colour, and is sometimes found among corne. The third is parted towards the top into sundry branches; the floures of this are either blew, purplish, or else white, and it willingly growes among hempe. @
3 The Spanish Broome hath likewise wooddy stems, from whence grow vp slender pliant twigs, which be bare and naked without leaues, or at the least hauing but few small leaues, set here and there far distant one from another, with yellow floures not much vnlike the floures of common Broome, but greater, which turne into small long cods, wherein is conteined browne and flat seed: the roote is tough and wooddy.
4 Small leafed or thin leafed Broome hath many tough pliant shoots rising out of the ground, which grow into hard and tough stalks, which are diuided into diuers twiggy branches whereon doe grow very small thin leaues, of a whitish colour; whereupon some haue called it Genista alba, white Broome: the floures grow at the top of the stalkes, in shape like those of the common Broom, but of a white colour, wherein it specially differeth from the other Broomes.

5 English Dwarfe Broome (...) many twiggy branches, very (...), (...), (...) at (...) or cornered, leaning toward the ground: (...) do grow leaues set without (...), (...) two together, and (...) (...) or foure growing fast together, like (...) (...) common (...), greene on the (...) (...), (...) (...), (...) (...) a (...) taste: among which (...) come forth yellow floures like (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...), of little or no smell at all: after which appeare small (...) (...) at (...), (...) is contained small seed: the root is tough and wooddy. @ Bauhine iudges these two last (...) to be onely varieties of the common Broome; to (...) opinion I do much (...), (...) I haue let our Authrs description stand, (...) with the figure (...) this later, which (...) (...) the greatest difference. @
6 The Dw arfe Broome of Hungary hath stalkes and yellow floures like those of the last described: the leaues hereof are different, they are longer, and more in number: the whole plant is altogether greater, wherein especially consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
The common Broome groweth almost euery where in dry pastures and low woods.
The Broome Rape is not to be found but where Broome doth grow; it groweth in a Broome field at the foot of Shooters hill next to London; vpon Hampstead Heath, and in diuers (...) places.
Spanish Broome groweth in diuers kingdomes of Spaine and Italy; we haue it in our London gardens.
The White Broome groweth likewise in Spaine and other hot regions; it is a stranger in England; of this Titus Calphurnius makes mention in his second Eclog of his Bucolicks, writing thus:

Cernis vt, eccepater, quas tradidit Ornite vaccae
Molle sub hirsuta latus explicuere genista.


See father, how the Kine stretch out their tender side
Vnder the hairy broome, that growes in fields so wide.



 The Time.
Broome floureth in the end of Aprill or May, and then the young buds of the floures are to be gathered, and laid in pickle or salt, which afterwards being washed or boyled, are vsed (...) (...), as Capers be, and be eaten with no lesse delight: the cods and seeds be ripe in August; the Rape appeareth and is seene especially in the moneth of Iune.
The Spanish Broome doth floure sooner, and is longer in flouring.


 The Names.
This shrub is called in Latine, Genista, oras some would haue it Genesta: in Italian, Genestra: in Spanish likewise (...), or (...): in high Dutch, Pfrimmen: in low Dutch, Brem: in French, Genest: in English, Broome. @ The Spanish Broome by most writers is iudged to be the Spartum of Dioscorides. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The twigs, floures, and seeds of Broome are hot and dry in the second degree: they are also of a  thin essence, and are of force to clense and open, and especially the seed, which is dryer and not so full of superfluous moisture.
The decoction of the twigs and tops of Broome doth clense and open the liuer, milt, and kidnies.
It driueth away by the stoole watery humours, and therefore it is wholesome for them that haue  the dropsie, especially being made with wine; but better for the other infirmities with water.
The seed also is commended for the same purposes.
There is also made of the ashes of the stalkes and branches dryed and burnt, a lie with thin white  wine, as Rhenish wine, which is highly commended of diuers for the greene sickenesse and dropsie, and this doth mightily expell and driue forth thin and watery humors together with the vrine, and that by the bladder; but withall it doth by reason of his sharpe quality many times hurt and fret the intrailes.
Mesue saith, that there is in the floures and branches a cutting moisture, but full of excrements, and therefore it causeth vomit: and that the plant doth in all his parts trouble, cut, attenuate, and violently purgeth by vomit and stoole, flegme and raw humours out of the ioints.
But these things are not written of Broome, but of Spartum, which purgeth by vomit, after the  manner of Hellebor, as both Dioscorides and Pliny do testifie.
Mesue also addeth, that Broome doth breake the stone of the kidnies and bladder, and (...) not the matter whereof the stone is made to lie long, or to become a stone.
The young buds or little floures preferued in pickle, and eaten as a sallad, stir vp an appetite to  meate and open the stoppings of the liuer and milt.

The same being fully blowne, stamped and mixed with swines grease, do ease the paine of the  gout.
And Mesue writeth, that this tempered with honie of Roses, or with an egge, doth consume away  the Kings-euill.
The Rape of the Broom or Broome Rape, being boyled in wine, is commended against the pains  of the kidnies and bladder, prouoketh vrine, breaketh the stone, and expelleth it.
The iuice pressed forth of Broom rape healeth green wounds, and clenseth old and filthy vlcers: the later Physitions do affirme that it is also good for old venomous and malicious vlcers.
That worthy Prince of famous (...) Henry 8. King of England, was woont to drinke the distilled  water of Broome floures, against surfets and diseases thereof arising.
Sir Thomas Fitzherbert Knight, was woont to cure the blacke iaundice with this drinke onely.
Take as many handfuls (as you thinke good) of the dried leaues of Broom gathered and brayed  to pouder in the moneth of May, then take vnto each handfull of the dried (...), one spoonful and a halfe of the seed of Broom braied into pouder: mingle these together, and let the sicke drinke thereof each day a quantitie, first and last, vntill he finde some (...). The medicine must be continued and so long vsed, vntil it be quite extinguished: for it is a disease not very (...) cured, but must by little and little be dealt withall.
Orobanch or Broom rape sliced and put into oyle Oliue, to insuse or (...) in (...) same, as ye  do Roses for oile of Roses, scoureth and putteth away all spots, lentils, freck les, pimples, wheals and pushes from the face, or any part of the body, being annointed therewith.
Dioscorides writeth, that Orobanch may be (...) either raw (...) boiled, in manner as we vse to eat  the sprigs or young shoots of Asparagus.
The floures and seeds of Spanish Broome are good to be drunke with Mead or honied water in  the quantitie of a dram, to cause one to vomite with great force and violence, euen as white Hellebor, or neesing pouder.
If it be taken alone, it looseneth the belly, driueth forth great quantitie of waterie and filthie  humours.



CHAP. 18. Of base Broome or greening weed.

 The Description.
1 THis base kinde of Broom called Greene weed or Diers weed, hath many tough branches proceeding from a wooddie root: whereon do grow great store of leaues, of a deep green colour, somewhat long like those of Flax: the floures grow at the top of the branches not much vnlike the leaues of Broome, but smaller; of an exceeding faire yellow colour, which turne into small flat cods, wherein is contained a little flat seed.
2 Carolius Clusius setteth forth another kinde of Broome, which Dodonaeus calleth Genistatinctoria, being another sort of Diers weed: it groweth like the Spanish Broome: vpon whose branches do grow long and small leaues like Flax, greene on the vpper side, and of an hoarie shining colour on the other. The floures grow at the top of the stalks, spike fashion, in forme and colour like the former: the roots are thicke and wooddie.
3 Carolus Clusius setteth forth two kindes of Broome. The first is a low and base plant, creeping and lying flat vpon the ground, whose long branches are nothing else, but as it were stalkes consisting of leaues thicke in the middest, and thinne about the edges, and as it were diuided with small nicks; at which place it beginneth to continue the same leafe to the end, and so from leafe to leafe, vntill it haue increased a great sort, all which doe as it were make one stalke; and hath none other leaues, sauing that in some of the nicks or diuisions there commeth forth a small leafe like a little eare. At the end of those flat and leafed stalks come forth the (...), much like the floures of the common Greening weed, but lesser, and of a yellow colour, which turne into small cods. The roots are very long, tough, and wooddie, ful of fibres, closing at the top of the root, from whence they proceed as from one body.
4 This kinde of Greenweed called of some Chamaesparium, hath a thicke wooddie root: from which rise vp diuers long leaues, consisting as it were of many pieces set together like a paire of Beads (as may better be perceiued by the figure, than expressed by words) greene on the vpper side, and whitish vnderneath, very tough, and as it were of a rushie substance: among which rise vp very small naked rushie stalkes; on the top whereof groweth an eare or spike of a chaffie matter, hauing here and there in the said care diuers yellow floures like Broome, but very small or little.



1 Genistella tinctoria. Greeneweed or Diers weed.


2 Genistella infectoria. Wooddie Diers weed.


3 Genistella pinnata. Winged Greeneweed.


4 Genistella globulata. Globe Greene weed.



5 The fist Greeneweed hath a wooddie tough root, with certaine strings annexed thereto: from which rise vp diuers long, flat leaues, tough, and very hard, consisting as it were of many little leaues, set one at the end of another, making of many one entire leafe, of a greene colour: amongst which come forth diuers naked hard stalks, very small and stiffe, on the tops whereof stand spikie (...) of yellow floures, like those of Broome, in shape like that great three leafed grasse, called Lagopus, (...) like the Fox-taile grasse: after which come flat cods, wherein is inclosed small seed like to Tares both in taste and forme.


5 Genistella Lagopoides maior. Hares foot Greeneweed.


6 Genistella Lagopoides minor. Small Greenweed with Hares foot floure.


6 This differeth not from the precedent in stalks, roots and leaues: the floures consist of a flockie soft matter, not vnlike to the grassie tuft of Foxtaile, resembling the floure of Lagopus, or Haresfoot, but hauing small yellow floures lesser than the former, wherein it chiefely differeth from the other of his kinde.


 The Place.
The first being (...) common Diers-weed, groweth in most fertile pastures and fields almost euery where. The rest are strangers in England.


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of Iuly to the end of August.


 The Names.
The first of these Greenweeds is named of most Herbarists Flos Tinctorius, but more rightly, Genista Tinctoria, of this Pliny hath made mention [The Greenweeds, saith he, do grow to dye cloths with] in his 18. booke 16. Chapter. It is called in high Dutch, Ferblumen, and Ackerbrem: in Italian, Cerretta, and Cosaria, as Matthiolus writeth in his chapter of Lysimachia, or Loose-strifie: in (...), Diers Greening weed, base Broome, and Woodwaxen.
The rest we refer to their seuerall titles.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These plants are like vnto common Broome in bitternesse, and therefore are hot and drie in the  second degree: they are likewise thought to be in vertues equall; notwithstanding their vse is not so well known, and therefore not vsed at all where the other may be had: we shall not need to speak of that vse that Diers make thereof, being a matter impertinent to our Historie.




CHAP. 19. Of Spanish base Broomes.

 The Description.
@ 1 THis growes to the height of a cubit, and is couered with a crested and rough (...) and diuided into many longish branches crested and green, which at their first springing vp haue some leaues vpon them, which fall away as soon as the plant comes to floure: from the sides of the branches come forth long foot-stalks whereon hang some small yellow floures, which are succeeded by short round yellowish red cods which commonly containe but one seed, (...) two, and these hard and blacke, and like a little Kidney, which when it is ripe will rattle in the cod being shaken. @


1 Pseudospartum Hispanicum Aphyllum: Spanish Broome without leaues.


2 Pseudospartum album Aphyllum. The white leafe-lesse Spanish broom.


2 This naked broome groweth vp to the height of a man: the stalk is rough, and void of leaues very greene and pliant, which diuideth it selfe into diuers twiggie branches, greene, and tough, like rushes: the floures grow all along the stalks like those of broome, but of a white colour, wherein it differeth from all the rest of his kinde.


 The Place.
These grow in the prouinces of Spaine, and are in one place higher and more bushie, and in an other lower.


 The Time.
@ The first floures in May, and the second in Februarie. @


 The Names.
These base Spanish broomes may be referred to the true, which is called in Greeke (...): the Latines vse the same name, calling it sometimes Spartum, and Spartium: in Spanish, Retama: in English, Spanish broome, and bastard Spanish broome.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Both the seeds and iuice of the branches of these base broomes, wherewith they in Spaine and  other hot regions do tie their vines, do mightily draw, as Galen writeth.

Diosoorides saith, that the seeds and floures being drunke in the quantitie of a dram, with Mede  or honied water, doth cause one to vomit strongly, as the Hellebor or neesing pouder doth, but yet without ieopardie or danger of life: the seed purgeth by stoole.
The iuyce which is drawne from out of the branches steeped in water, being first bruised, is a remedie  for those that are tormented with the Sciatica, and for those that be troubled with the Squincie, if a draught thereof be drunke in the morning; some vse to steepe the branches in sea water, and to giue the same in a clister, which purgeth forth bloudy and slimie excrements. 

In this chapter formerly in the first place was againe (...). (...) the time (...) or Spanish (...): which I haue (...) omitted, because it was (...) and described in the last (...): saue one before. In the (...) place (...) (...) that figured in the third: and in the third place was a description to no purpose, which I therefore omitted, and as you see described (...) and put in the first place that which formerly held the second.




CHAP. 20. Of Furzes, Gorsse, Whin, or prickley Broome.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of prickly Broome, called in our English tongue by sundry names, according to the speech of the countrey people where they doe grow: in some places, Furzes; in others, Whins, Gorsse, and of some, Prickly Broome.


This chapter hath vndergone a great alteration: as thus; the first, third, and fourth descriptions belonged to the third figure: the second and fifth description, to the fifth figure: and the first, second, and (...) figures had no descriptions belonging to them. The figure that was in the first place is now in the third; the second still holds his place: the third is in the first, belonging thereto of right: and for handsomnesse sake I haue made the fourth and fifth change places. (...) (...) also in the sixth place was formerly mentioned by our Author (but now omitted) in the chapter of (...).Genista spinosa vulgaris. Great Furze bush.


2 Genista spinosa minor. The small Furze bush.




 The Description.
1 THe Furze bush is a plant altogether a Thorne, fully armed with most sharpe prickles, without any leaues at all except in the spring, and those very few and little, and quickly falling away: it is a bushy shrub, often rising vp with many wooddy branches to the height of foure or fiue cubits, or higher, according to the nature and soile where they grow: the greatest and highest that I did euer see do grow about Excester in the West parts of England,

where the great stalks are dearely bought for the better sort of people, and the small thorny spraies for the poorer sort. From these thorny branches grow little floures like those of Broome, and of a yellow colour, which in hot Regions vnder the extreme heate of the Sunne are of a very perfect red colour: in the colder countries of the East, as Danzicke, Brunswicke, and Poland, there is not any branch hereof growing, except some few plants and seeds which my selfe haue sent to Elbing, otherwise called Meluin, where they are most curiously kept in their fairest gardens, as also our common Broome, the which I haue sent thither likewise, being first desired by diuers earnest letters: the cods follow the floures, which the Grauer hath omitted, as a German who had neuer seen the plant it selfe, but framed the figure by heare-say: the root is strong, tough, and wooddy.
We haue in our barren grounds of the North parts of England another sort of Furze, bringing forth the like prickley thornes that the others haue: the onely difference consisteth in the colour of the floures; for the others bring forth yellow floures, and those of this plant are as white as snow.
This chapter hath vndergone a great alteration: as thus; the first, third, and fourth descriptions belonged to the third figure: the second and fifth description, to the fifth figure: and the first, second, and (...) figures had no descriptions belonging to them. The figure that was in the first place is now in the third; the second still holds his place: the third is in the first, belonging thereto of right: and for handsomnesse sake I haue made the fourth and fifth change places. (...) (...) also in the sixth place was formerly mentioned by our Author (but now omitted) in the chapter of (...).

 2 To this may be ioyned another kinde of Furze which bringeth forth certaine branches that be some cubit high, stiffe, and set round about at the first with small winged Lentill-like leaues and little harmelesse prickles, which after they haue been a yeare old, and the leaues gon, be armed onely with most hard sharpe prickles, crooking or bending their points downwards. The floures hereof are of a pale yellow colour, lesser than those of Broome, yet of the same forme: the cods are small, in which do lie little round reddish seeds: the root is tough and wooddy.


This chapter hath vndergone a great alteration: as thus; the first, third, and fourth descriptions belonged to the third figure: the second and fifth description, to the fifth figure: and the first, second, and (...) figures had no descriptions belonging to them. The figure that was in the first place is now in the third; the second still holds his place: the third is in the first, belonging thereto of right: and for handsomnesse sake I haue made the fourth and fifth change places. (...) (...) also in the sixth place was formerly mentioned by our Author (but now omitted) in the chapter of (...).

 3 Genista Spinosa minor siliqua rotunda. Small round codded Furze.


4 Genistella aculeata. Needle Furze or petty Whin.


@ Of this Clusius reckons vp three varieties: the first growing some cubit high, with deepe yellow floures: the second growes higher, and hath paler coloured floures: the third groweth to the height of the first, the floures also are yellow, the branches more prickly, and the leaues hairy; and the figure I giue you is of this third varietie.
3 This seldome exceeds a foot in height, and it is on euerie side armed with sharpe prickles, which grow not confusedly, as in the common sort, but keepe a certaine order, and still grow forth by couples: they are of a lighter greene than those of the common Furze: on the tops of each of the branches grow two or three yellow floures like those of the former; which are succeeded by little round rough hairy cods of the bignesse of Tares. This floures in March, and groweth in the way between Burdeaux and Bayone in France, and vpon the Pyrenean mountaines. Clusius makes it his Scorpius 2. or second sort of Furze: Lobel calls it Genista spartium spinosum alterum. @

4 This small kinde of Furze (growing vpon Hampstead heath neere London, and in diuers other barren grounds, where in manner nothing else wil grow) hath many weake and flexible branches of a wooddy substance: whereon do grow little leaues like those of Tyme: among which are set in number infinite most sharpe prickles, hurting like needles, whereof it tooke his name. The floures grow on the tops of the branches like those of Broome, and of a pale yellow colour. The root is tough and wooddy.
@ 5 This plant (saith Clusius) is wholly new and elegant, some span high, diuided into many branches, some spred vpon the ground, others standing vpright, hauing plentifull store of greene prickles: the floures in shape are like those of Broome, but lesse, and of a blewish purple colour, standing in rough hairy whitish cups, two or three floures commonly growing neere together: sometimes whilest it floures it sendeth forth little leaues, but not very often, and they are few, and like those of the second described, and quickly fall away, so that the whole plant seemes nothing but prickles, or like a hedge-hog when she folds vp her selfe: the root is wooddy, and large for the proportion of the plant. It growes in the kingdome of Valentia in Spaine, where the Spaniards call it Erizo, that is, the Hedge-hog; and thence Clusius also termed it Erinacea. It floureth in Aprill. @


5 Genista spinosa humilis. Dwarfe or low Furze.


6 Genista (...) minor, siue Nepa Theophr. Scorpion Furzes.


6 The smallest of all the Furzes is that of the Antients called Nepa, or Scorpion Furze, as the word Nepa seemeth to import: it is a stranger in England: it hath beene touched of the Antients in name onely: which fault they haue beene all and euerie of them to be complained of, being so briefe that nothing can be gathered from their description: and therefore I refer what might hereof be said to a further consideration. @ This hath a thicke wooddy blacke root some halfe foot long, from whence arise many slender branches some foot high, which are set with many stiffe and sharpe prickles, growing somewhat after the maner of the wilde prickly Sperage: the yong plants haue little leaues like those of Tragacanth; the old ones none: the floures are smal, and come forth at the bottome of the prickles, and they are succeeded by broad cods wherein the seed is contained. It growes in diuers places of France and Spaine, and is thought to be the Scorpius of Theophrastus, which (...) translates Nepa. @


 The Place.
The common sort hereof are very well knowne to grow in pastures and fields in most places of England. The rest are likewise well knowne to those that curiously obserue the difference.


 The Time.
They floure from the beginning of May to the end of September.


 The Names.
Furze is commonly called Genista spinosa: in high-Dutch, (...): in English, Furze, Furzen bushes, Whinne, Gorsse, and Thorne-Broome.
This thorny Broome is taken for Theophrastus his Scorpius, which Gaza nameth Nepa: the name Scorpius in Pliny is (...), that is to say, signifying many things, and common to certaine Plants:

for besides this Scorpius of which he hath made mention, lib. 25. cap. 5. setting downe Theophrastus his words, where he maketh Aconitum Thelyphonon to be Scorpius, lib. 23. cap. 10. and likewise other plants vnder the same title, but vnproperly.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is nothing written in Theophrastus concerning the faculties of Scorpius spinosus, or Furze: Pliny seemeth to attribute vnto it the same vertues that (...) hath: notwithstanding the later Writers do agree that it is hot and dry of complexion: the seeds are vsed in medicines against the stone, and staying of the laske.



CHAP. 21. Of Cammocke Furze, Rest-Harrow, or Petty Whinne.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Rest-Harrow, which some haue inserted among the smooth Broomes; others, among those with prickles, whereof some haue purple floures and likewise ful of prickles; others, white floures, and sharpe thornes: some also purple floures, others white, and also yellow, and euery of them void of prickles.


1 Anonis, siue Resta Bouis. Cammocke, or Rest-Harrow.


3 Anonis non (...). Purple Rest-Harrow without prickles.




 The Description.
1 CAmmocke or ground Furze riseth vp with stalkes a cubit high, and often higher, set with diuers ioynted branches, tough, pliable, and full of hard sharpe thornes: among which do grow leaues in forme like those of S. Iohns wort, or rather of the Lentill, of a

deep green colour: from the bosome of which thorns and leaues come forth the (...), like those of Peason, of a purple colour: after which do come the cods, in which do lie flat seed: the root is long, and runneth far abroad, very tough, and hard to be torne in pieces with the plough, (...) that the oxen can hardly passe forward, but are constrained to stand still; whereupon it was called Rest-Plough, or Rest-Harrow.


4 Anonis, siue Spinalutea. Yellow Rest-Yarrow.


2 We haue in our London pastures, and likewise in other places, one of the Rest-Harrowes, not differing from the precedent in stalkes, leaues, or prickles: the onely difference is, that this plant bringeth forth white floures, and the others not so: whence we may call it Anonis flore albo, Cammocke with white floures.
3 Rest-Harrow without thornes hath a tough hoary rough stalke, diuided into other rough branches, whereon are set without order, long leaues sharpe pointed, sleightly cut about the edges, of an hoary colour, and somewhat hairy: from the bosome whereof commeth forth purple Pease-like floures of a reasonable good smell: the root is verie tough, long, and wooddy.
4 The yellow floured Cammock is a (...) in these parts, it is only found in the cold Easterne countries, for ought that I can learne; it differs not from the last described, sauing that the floures hereof are of a darke yellow colour, wherein it differeth from all the other of his kinde.


 The Place.
These grow in (...) grounds in fertile pastures, and in the borders of fields, in a fat, fruitful, and long lasting soile: it is sooner found than desired of husbandmen, because the tough and wooddie roots are combersome vnto them, for that they stay the plough, and make the oxen stand.


 The Time.
They send forth new shoots in May: they be ful growne in Autumne, and then those that of nature are prickly be fullest of sharpe thornes: they floure in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
Cammocke is called in Greeke (...), or (...): and likewise in Latine Anonis, and Ononis: Of Herbarists commonly Aresta Bouis, and Remora aratri, because it maketh the Oxen whilest they be in plowing to rest or stand still: it is also called Acutella, of the stiffe and sharpe thorns which prick those that passe by: in French, Areste beuf, and Boucrande.
Crateuas nameth it Aegipyrus: in high-Dutch, Stalkraut: in low-Dutch, Prangwortele: in Italian, Bonaga: in Spanish, Gattilhos: in French, Arreste beuf, Beuf and Bouerande: in (...), Cammocke, Rest-Harrow, Petty Whinne, and ground Furze.


 The Temperature.
The root of Cammocke is hot in the third degree, as Galen saith: it cutteth also and maketh thinne.


 The Vertues.
The barke of the root drunke with Wine prouoketh vrine, breaketh the stone, and driueth it  sorth.
The root boyled in water and vineger allayeth the paine of the teeth, if the mouth be often washed  therewith hot.
Pliny reporteth, that being boyled in Oxymel (or the syrrup made with honey and vineger) till  the one halfe be wasted, it is giuen to those that haue the falling sicknesse. (...) reporteth, that he knew a man cured of a rupture, by taking of the pouder of this root for many moneths together.
The tender sprigs or crops of this shrub before the thornes come forth, are preserued in pickle, and be very pleasant sauce to be eaten with meat as sallad, as a Dioscorides teacheth.




CHAP. 22. Of Goose-berrie, or Fea-berry Bush.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of the Goose-berries; some greater, others lesse: some round, others long, and some of a red colour: the figure of one shall serue for the rest.
@ I will not much insist vpon diuersities of fruits, because my kinde friend Mr. Iohn Parkinson hath sufficiently in his late Worke discoursed vpon that subiect; onely because I iudge many will be desirous to know their names, and where to get them, I will briefely name the chiefe varieties our Kingdome affords; and such as are desirous of them may finde them with Mr. Iohn (...) liuing in Old-street.
The sorts of Goose-berries are these: the long greene, the great yellowish, the blew, the great round red, the long red, and the prickly Goose-berrie.


Vua Crispa. Goose-berries.




 The Description.
THe Goose-berry bush is a shrub of three or foure cubits high, set thicke with (...) sharpe prickles: it is likewise full of branches, slender, wooddy, and prickly: whereon doe grow round leaues cut with deepe gashes into diuers parts like those of the Vine, of a very greene colour: the floures be very smal, of a whitish greene, with some little purple dashed here and there: the fruit is round, growing scatteringly vpon the branches, greene at the first, but waxing a little yellow through maturitie, full of a winie iuyce somewhat sweet in taste when they be ripe; in which is contained hard seed of a whitish colour: the root is woodie, and not without strings anexed thereto.
There is another whose fruit is almost as big as a small Chery, and very round in forme: as also another of the like bignesse, of an inch in length, in taste and substance agreeing with the common sort.
We haue also in our London gardens another sort altogether without prickles: whose fruit is very smal, lesser by much than the common kinde, but of a perfect red colour, wherein it differeth from the rest of his kinde.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in our London (...) and elsewhere in great aboundance.


 The Time.
The leaues come forth in the beginning of Aprill or sooner: the fruit is ripe in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
This shrub had no name among the old Writers, who as we deeme knew it not, or else esteemed it not: the later writers call it in Latine Crossularia: and oftentimes of the berries, Vua Crispa, (...) spina, Vua spinella, and Vua Crispina: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, Stekelbesien: in Spanish, Vua Crispa, or Espina: in Italian, Vua spina: in French, Groiselles: in English, Goose-berry, Goose-berry bush, and Fea-berry bush in Cheshire, my natiue countrey.


 The Temperature.
The berries of this bush before they be ripe are cold and dry, and that in the later end of the second degree, and also binding.


 The Vertues.
The fruit is vsed in diuers sauces for meate, as those that are skilfull in cookerie can (...) tel than my selfe.

They are vsed in broths in stead of Veriuice, which maketh the broth not onely-pleasant to the  taste, but is greatly profitable to such as are troubled with a hot burning ague.
They are diuersly eaten, but how soeuer they be eaten they alwaies ingender raw and cold bloud: they nourish nothing or very little: they also stay the belly, and stench bleedings.
(...) stop the menses, or monethly sickenes, except they happen to be taken into a cold stomack, then do they not helpe, but rather clog or trouble the same by some manner of (...).
The ripe berries, as they are sweeter, so doe they also little or nothing binde, and are something  hot, and yeeld a little more nourishment than those that be not ripe, and the same not crude or raw; but these are seldome eaten or vsed as sauce.
The iuice of the greene Gooseberties cooleth all inflammations, Erysipelas, and Saint Anthonies  fire.
They prouoke appetite, and coole the vehement heate of the stomacke and liuer.
The young and tender leaues eaten raw in a sallad, prouoke vrine, and driue forth the stone  and grauell.



CHAP. 23. Of Barberries.

 The Kindes:
There de diuers sorts of Barberries, some greater, others lesser, and some without stones.


Spina acida, siue Oxyacantha. The Barberry bush.




 The Description.
THe Barberry plant is an high shrub or bush, hauing many young straight shootes and branches, very full of white and prickly thornes, the rinde whereof is smooth and thin, the wood it selfe yellow: the leaues are long, very greene, slightly nicked about the edges, and of a sowre taste: the floures be yellow, standing in clusters vpon long stemmes: in their places come vp long berries, slender, red when they be ripe, with a little hard kernell or stone within; of a sowre and sharpe taste: the root is yellow, disperseth it selfe farre abroad, and is of a wooddy substance.
Wee haue in our London gardens another sort, whose fruite is like in forme and substance, but one berry is as big as three of the common kinde, wherein consisteth the difference.
We haue likewise another without any stone, the fruite is like the rest of the Barber ries, both in substance and taste.


 The Place.
The Barberrie bush groweth of it selfe in vntoiled places and desart grounds, in woods, and the borders of fields, especially about a Gentlemans house called Mr. Monke, dwelling in a village called Iuer, two miles from Colebrooke, where most of the hedges are nothing else but Barberry bushes.
They are planred in gardens in most places of England.


 The Time.
The leaues spring forth in Aprill: the floures and fruite in September.


 The Names.
Galen calleth this thorne in Greeke, (...) who maketh it to differ from (...) in his booke of the Faculties of simple medicines: but more plainely in his booke of the Faculties of Nourishments; where he (...) vp the tender springs of Barberries among the tender shoots that are

to be eaten, such as Oxyacanthus or the Hawthorne bringeth not sorth, wherein he plainely (...) a difference, Oxyacantha the Barbery bush, and (...) the Hawthorne tree.
Dioscorides hath not made mention of this Thorne; for that which he calleth Oxyacantha in the Foeminine gender, is Galens Oxyacanthus in the Masculine gender.
Auicen seemeth to containe both these shrubs vnder the name of Amyrberis, but we know they are neither of affinitie or neighbourhood, although they be both prickly.
The shrub it selfe is called in shops Barbaries, of the corrupted name (...), of the later writers Crespinus: in Italian, Crespino in Spanish, Espino de maiuelas: in high Dutch, Paisselbeer: in low Dutch, Sauseboom: in French, Espine vinette: and thereupon by a Latine name, (...) Spina acida, and Oxyacantha Galeni. @ In English, a Barbery bush, or Piprige Tree, according to (...) Turner. @


 The Temperature.
The leaues and berries of this thorne are cold and dry in the second degree: and as (...) affirmeth, they are of thin parts, and haue a certaine cutting qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The leaues are vsed of diuers to season meate with, and in stead of a (...), as be those of (...).
The decoction thereof is good against hot burnings and cholericke agues: it allaieth the (...) of the bloud, and tempereth the ouermuch heate of the liuer.
The fruite or berries are good for the same things, and be also profitable for hot laskes, and (...) the bloudy flixe, and they stay all manner of superfluous bleedings.
The greene leaues of the Barbery bush stamped, and made into sawce, as that made of Sorrell, called greene sauce, doth coole hot stomackes, and those that are vexed with hot burning agues, and procureth appetite.
The conserue made of the fruite and sugar performeth all those things bescre remembred, (...) with better force and successe.
The roots of the tree steeped for certaine daies together in strong lie, made with ashes of the  ash-tree, and the haire often moistned therewith, maketh it yellow.
@ The barke of the roots is also vsed in medicines for the iaundise, and that with good successe. @



CHAP. 24. Of the white Thorne, or Hawthorne Tree.

 The Kindes.
THere be two sorts of the white Thorn Trees described of the later writers, one very common in most parts of England: there is another very rare, and not found in Europe, except in some few rare gardens of Germanie; which differeth not from our common Haw thorne, sauing that the fruit here of is as yellow as Saffron: we haue in the West of England one growing at a place called Glastenburie, which bringeth forth his floures about Christmas, by the report of diuers of good credit, who haue seen the same; but my selfe haue not seen it; and therefore leaue it to be better examined.


 The Description.
1 THe white Thorne is a great shrub growing oftentimes to the height of the Peare-tree the trunke or body is great: the boughes and branches hard and wooddy, set full of long sharpe thornes: the leaues be broad, cut with deepe gashes into diuers sections, smooth, and of a glistering greene colour: the floures grow vpon spokie rundles, of a pleasant sweet smell, sometimes white, and often dasht ouer with a light wash of purple; which hath moued some to thinke some difference in the plants: after which come the fruit, being round berries, green at the first, and red when they be ripe; wherein is found a soft sweet pulpe, and certaine whitish seed: the root groweth deepe in the ground, of a hard wooddy substance.
2 The second and third haue been touched in the first title, notwithstanding I haue (...) it not vnfit to insert in this place a plant perticipating with the Hawthorne in floures and fruit and with the Seruice tree in leaues, and not vnlike in fruit also.
Theophrastus hath set forth this tree vnder the name of Aria, which groweth vnto the (...) of a small tree, delighting to grow in our shadowie woods of Cumberland and Westmerland, and many other places of the North country, where it is to be found in great quantitie: but seldome in

Spaine, Italy, or any hot Region. This tree is garnished with many large branches beset with leaues like the Peare tree, or rather like the Aller leafe, of a darke greene colour aboue, and of a white colour vnderneath: among these leaues come forth tufts of white floures, very like vnto the Hawthorne floures, but bigger: after which succeed small red berries, like the berries of the Hawthorne, and in taste like the Neapolitan Medlar: the temperature and faculties whereof are not yet knowne.


1 Oxyacanthus. The Haw-thorne tree.


2 Aria Theophrasti. Cumberland Haw-thorne.




 (...) (...)
The Haw-thorne groweth in woods and in (...) (...) high-waies almost euery where. The second is a stranger in England. The last (...) (...) (...) Abbey, as it is credibly reported vnto me. @ The Aria groweth vpon (...) (...), and in many places of the West of England. @


 The Time.
The first and second floure in May; whereupon many do call the tree it selfe the May-bush, as a chiefe token of the comming in of May: the leaues come forth a little sooner: the fruit is ripe in the beginning of September, and is a food for birds in Winter.


 The Names.
Dioscorides describeth this shrub, and nameth it (...), in the foeminine gender: and Galen in his booke of the Faculties of simple medicines, (...), in the masculine gender: Oxyacanthus, saith he, is a tree, and is like to the wilde Peare tree in forme, and the vertues not vnlike, etc. Of Oxyacantha, Dioscorides writeth thus: It is a tree like to the wild Peare tree, very full of thorns, etc. Serapio calleth it Amyrberis: and some, saith Dioscorides, would haue it called (...), but the name Pyrina seemeth to belong to the yellow Haw-thorne: it is called in high-Dutch, Haogdoren: in low-Dutch, Hagedoren: in Italian, Bagaia: in Spanish, Pirlitero: in French, Aub-espine: in English, White-thorne, Haw-thorne tree; and of some Londoners, May-bush. @ This is not the Oxyacantha of the Greekes, but that which is called Pyracantha, as shall be shewed hereafter.
The second is thought to be the Aria of Theophrastus, and so Lobel and Tabernamontanus call it. Some, as Bellonius, Gesner, and Clusius, refer it to the Sorbus, and that not vnfitly: in some places of this kingdome they call it a white Beame tree. @



 The Temperature.
The fruit of the Haw-thorne tree is very astringent.


 The Vertues.
The Hawes or berries of the Haw-thorne tree, as Dioscorides writeth, do both stay the laske, the  menses, and all other fluxes of bloud: some Authors write, that the stones beaten to pouder, and giuen to drinke are good against the stone.



CHAP. 25. Of Goats Thorne.

 The Description.
1 THe first Tragagantha or Goats-thorne hath many branchie boughes and twigs, slender and pliant, so spred abroad vpon euerie side, that one plant doth sometimes occupie a great space or roome in compasse: the leaues are small, and in shape like Lentill leaues, whitish, and somewhat mossie or hairy, set in rowes one opposite against another: the floure is like the blossome of the Lentill, but much lesser, and of a whitish colour, and sometimes marked with purple lines or streaks: the seed is inclosed in small cods or husks, (...) like vnto the wilde Lotus or horned Trefoile: the whole plant on euery side is set full of sharpe prickely thornes, hard, white, and strong: the roots run vnder the ground like Liquorice roots, yellow within, and blacke without, tough, limmer, and hard to breake; which being wounded in sundry places with some iron toole, and laid in the Sun at the highest and hottest time of Sommer, issueth forth a certain liquor, which being hardned by the Sun, is that gum which is called in shops Tragacantha: and of some, (...) barbarously Dragagant.


1 Tragacantha, siue spina Hirci. Goats Thorne.


2 Spina (...) minor. Small Goats Thorne.


2 The second kinde of Tragacantha is a low and thicke shrub, hauing many shoots growing from one turfe: of a white or grayish colour, about a cubit high, stiffe and wooddy: the leaues are like the former, and garded with most stiffe pricks not very safely to be touched: among the (...) leaues come forth many floures in small tufts like Genistella, but that they are white: the cods

are many, straight and thorny like Genistella, wherein are many small white and three cornered seeds as big as mustard seed. @ This differs from the former in that it is smaller, and loseth the leaues euery Winter, when as the former keepes on the leaues vntill new ones come in the Spring. The middle rib of the winged leaues ends in a pricke, which by the falling of the leaues becommeth a long and naked thorne. I haue giuen you a more accurate figure hereof out of Clusius, wherein the leaues, floures, cods, and seeds are all expressed apart. @
3 The Grecians haue called this plant (...), because it is good for the sinewes: it should seeme it tooke the name Potcrion, of Potrix, because it loueth a watry or fenny soile: it hath small branches, and leaues of (...), growing naturally in the tract of Piedmont in Italy: it spreadeth abroad like a shrub: the barke or rinde is blackish, and dry without great moisture, very much writhed or wrinkled in and out as that of Nepa or Corruda: the sharpe pricks stand not in order as Tragacantha, but confusedly, and are finer and three times lesser than those of Tragacantha, growing much after the manner of (...): but the particular leaues are greene aboue, and white below, shaped somewhat like Burnet: the seed is small and red, like vnto Sumach, but lesser.


@ (...) minoris icon accuratior. A better figure of the Goats-thorne.


The figure which was in the third place was of the plant described in the second which (...) and (...) made their (...), (...) it (...) not with the description which was taken out of the (...).

 3 Poterion Lob. siue Pimpinella spinosa Camer. Burnet Goats-thorne.




 The Place.
Petrus Bellonius in his first booke of Singularities reports, that there is great plenty hereof growing in Candy vpon the tops of the mountaines. Theophrastus saith that it was thought to grow no where but in Candy; but now it is certaine that it is found in Achaia, Peloponessus, and in Asia: it doth also grow in Arcadia, which is thought not to be inferiour to that of Candy. It is thought by Lobel to grow in Languedock in France, whereof Theophr. hath written in his ninth booke, that the liquor or gum issueth out of it selfe, and that it is not needfull to haue the root broken or cut. The best is that, saith Dioscorides, which is through-shining, thin, smooth, vnmixt, and sweet of smel and taste.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in the Sommer moneth: I haue sowne the seed of Poterion in Aprill, which I receiued from Ioachimus Camerarius of Noremberg, that grew in my garden two yeares together, and after perished by some mischance.



 The Names.
Goats-thorne is called in Greeke (...): of most Herbarists likewise Tragacantha: we may cal it in Latine Spina Hirci: in French, Barbe Renard: and in English for want of a better name, GoatsThorne: the liquor or gum that issueth forth of the roots beareth the name also of Tragacantha: it is called in shops Gummi Tragacanthae; and in a barbarous manner Gummi Tragacanthi: in English, Gum Dragagant.


 The Temperature.
This plant in each part thereof is of a drying facultie without biting. It doth consolidate or glew together sinewes that be cut: but the roots haue that facultie especially, which are boyled in wine, and the decoction giuen vnto those that haue any griefe or hurt in the sinewes.
Gum Dragagant hath an emplasticke qualitie, by reason whereof it dulleth or allayeth the sharpnesse of humors, and doth also somthing dry.


 The Vertues.
The Gumme is singular good to be licked in with honey against the cough, roughnesse of the  throat, hoarsenesse, and all sharpe and thin rheumes or distillations: being laid vnder the tongue it taketh away the roughnesse thereof.
Being drunke with Cute or the decoction of Liquorice it taketh away and allayeth the heat of  the vrine: it is also vsed in medicines for the eyes.
The greatest part of those artificiall beades, sweet chaines, bracelets, and such like pretty sweet  things of pleasure are made hard and fit to be worne by mixing the gum hereof with other sweets, being first steeped in Rose water till it be soft.



CHAP. 26. Of the Aegyptian Thorne.


@ 1 Acacia Dioscoridis. The Egyptian Thorne.


Oar Author gaue but formerly one figure, which was that in the second place, and he would haue (...) vs, that it was of the right (...), yet in his (...) (...) vs otherwaies.

 2 Acacia alteratrifolia. Thorny Trefoile.




 The Description.
1 DIoscorides maketh mention of Acacia, whereof the first is the true and right Acacia, which is a shrub or hedge tree, but not growing right or straight vp as other small small trees do: his branches are wooddie, beset with many hard and long Thorns; about which grow the leaues, compact of many small leaues clustering about one side, as in the Lentill: the floures are whitish, the husks or cods be plaine and flat, yea very broad like vnto Lupines, especially on that side where the seed growes, which is contained sometimes in one part, and sometimes in two parts of the husk, growing together in a narrow necke: the seed is smooth and glistering. There is a blacke iuice taken out of these huskes, if they be dried in the shadow when they be ripe; but if when rhey are not ripe, then it is somewhat red: some do wring out a iuice out of the leaues and fruit: there floweth also a gum out of this tree which is the gum of Arabia, called Gum Arabicke.
2 Dioscorides hauing described Spina Acacia, setteth downe a second kinde thereof, calling it Acacia altera, which hath the three leaues of Rue or Cytisus, and coddes like those of Genistella, but somewhat more blunt at the end, and thicke at the backe like a Rasor, and still groweth forward narrower and narrower, vntill it come to haue a sharpe edge: in these cods are contained three or foure flat seeds like Genistella, which before they wax ripe are yellow, but afterwards blacke: the whole plant groweth to the height of Genista spinosa, or Gorsse, both in shape, height, and resemblance, and not to the height of a tree, as Matthiolus would persuade vs, but full of sharpe Thornes like the former.


 The Place.
The true Acacia groweth in Egypt, Palestina, Lombardie, and Syria, as Dioscorides writeth: among the shrubs and trees that remaine alwaies greene, Acacia is noted for one by Petrus Belloninius, in his first booke of Singularities, chap. 44.
The other Acacia groweth in Cappadocia and Pontus, as Dioscorides writeth: it is also found in Corsica, and on diuers mountaines of Italy, and likewise vpon all the coast of Liguria and Lombardie, and vpon the Narbone coast of the Mediterranean sea.


 The Time.
These floure in May, and their fruit is ripe in the end of August.


 The Names.
The tree Acacia is named of the Graecians (...), yea euen in our time, and likewise of the Latins Acacia: it is also called Aegyptia spina: this strange thorne hath no English name that I can learn, and therefore it may keep still the Latine name Acacia; yet I haue named it the Egyptian thorne: the iuice is called also Acacia after the name of the plant: the Apothecarics of Germanie do vse in stead hereof, the iuice that is pressed forth of sloes or snags, which they (...) call Acacia Germanica: Matthiolus pictureth for Acacia the tree which the later Herbarists do call Arbor (...), to which he hath vntruly added Thorns, that he might belie Acacia, and yet he hath not made it agree with Dioscorides his description.
They call this (...): in Latine Acacia altera, or the other Acacia, and Pontica Acacia, or Ponticke Acacia.


 The Nature.
The iuice of Acacia, as Galen saith, consisteth not of one only substance, but is of substance both cold and earthie, to which also is coupled a certaine waterie essence, and it likewise hath thin and hot parts dispersed in it selfe: therefore it is dry in the third degree, and cold in the first if it be not washed; and in the second, if it be washed: for by washing it loseth his sharpe and biting quality and the hot parts.


 The Vertues.
The iuice of Acacia stoppeth the laske, the inordinate course of womens termes, and mans inuoluntarie  issue called Gonorrhaea, if it be drunke in red wine.
It healeth the blastings and inflammations of the eies, and maketh the skin and palmes of the  hands smooth after the healing of the Serpigo: it healeth the blisters and extreme heat in the mouth, and maketh the haires blacke that are washed therewith.
It is good, saith Dioscorides, against S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, Chimetla, Pterygia, and whitlowes.
The gum doth binde and somewhat coole: it hath also ioined vnto it an emplaistick quality, by  which it dulleth or alayeth the sharpnesse of the medicines wherewith it is mixed. Being applied with the white and yolk of an egge, it suffereth not blisters to rise in burned or scalded parts. Diosc.
The iuice of the other, saith Dioscorides, doth also binde, but it is not so effectuall nor so good in  eie medicines.




CHAP. 27. Of box Thorne, and the iuice thereof called Lycium.

 The Description.
1 BOx Thorne is a rare plant, in shape not vnlike the Box tree, whereof it hath beene recko ned for a wilde kinde, hauing many great branches set full of round and thicke leaues, very like that of the common Box tree: amongst which grow forth most sharpe pricking thornes: the floures grow among the leaues, which yeeld forth small blacke berries of a bitter tast, as big as a pepper corne: the iuice whereof is somewhat oilie, and of a reddish colour; which bitter iuice being set on fire, doth burne with a maruellous cracking and sparkling; the ashes thereof are of a red colour: it hath many wooddie roots growing aslope.


1 Lycium, sive (...). Box Thorne.


@ 2 Lycium Hispanicum. Spanish Box Thorne.


2 The other kinde of Pyxacantha or Lycium, groweth like vnto the common Priuet, hauing such like leaues, but somewhat narrower: the tops of the slender sprigs are furnished with prickles: the root is tough, and of a wooddie substance.


 The Place.
They grow in Cappadocia and Lycia, and in many other countries: it prospereth in rough places, it hath likewise been found in Languedoc, and Prouence in France: Bellonius writeth that hee found it in Palestina.
Matthiolus pictureth for Box Thorne, a plant with box leaues, with very many boughes, and certaine thornes standing among them: but the notable Herbarist Anguillara and others, hold opinion, that it is not the right; with whom we also do agree.
There is drawne out of the leaues and branches of box Thorn, or as Pliny saith, out of the (...) and roots being throughly boiled, a iuice, which is named Lycium.
Dioscorides saith, that the leaues and branches must be braied, and the infusion made many daies

in the decoction thereof, after which the feces or wooddie stuffe must be cast away, and that (...) remaineth boiled againe till it become as thicke as honie: Pliny saith, that the roots and branches are very bitter, and for three daies together they must be boiled in a copper vessell, and the wood and sticks often taken out till the decoction be boiled to the thicknesse of honie.


 The Time.
They floure in Februarie and March, and their fruit is ripe (...) September.


 The Names.
It is named in Greeke (...), which a man may call in Latine Buxea spina: and in English, Box Thorne: of some, Asses Box Tree, and prickley Boxe: it is also named Eycium, of the iuice which is boyled out of it: the iuice is properly called (...), and retaineth in Latine the same name Lycium: it is termed in English Thorne box. But it seemeth to me, that the originall name Lycium is fitter, being a strange thing, and knowne to very few: the Apothecaries know it not, who in stead thereof do vse amisse the iuice of the fruit of Woodbinde, and that not without great errour, as we haue already written. @ It is vnknowne in our shops, neither is there any thing vsed for it, it being wholly out of vse, wherefore our Author might here well haue spared Dodonaeus his words. @
Dioscorides teacheth to make a (...) of Sumach which is good for those things that Lycium is, and is vsed when Lycium is not to be had, and it is fit to be put in all medicines in stead thereof.


 The Temperature.
Lycium, or the iuice of Box Thorne, is as Galen teacheth, of a drying qualitie, and compounded of diuers kindes of substances, one of thinne parts digesting and hot; another earthie and cold, by which it enioyeth his binding facultie: it is hot in a meane, and therefore it is vsed for seuerall purposes.


 The Vertues.
Lycium cleareth the sight, saith Dioscorides, it healeth the scuruie festred sores of the eye lids, the  itch, and old fluxes, or distillations of humors; it is a remedie for the running of the eares; for vlcers in the gummes, and almonds of the throat, and against the chappes or gallings of the lips and fundament.

The figure which was in the 2. place, was of the Lycium Italicum of (...) and others; but the description and title better (...) this (...) Hispanicum (...) (...), which therefore I put thereto. The figure also of the Lycium Italicum of (...) our Author (...) againe in the next chapter saue two.




CHAP. 28. Of Ramme or Harts Thorne.

 The Kindes.
AFter the opinion of Dioscorides there be three sorts of (...), one with long, flat and soft leaues: the other with white leaues; and the third with round leaues, which are somewhat blackish (...) (...) and Pliny affirme that there are but two, the one white, and the other black, both which do beare Thornes: but by the labour and industry of the new and late writers there are found sundry sorts moe, all which and euery one of them are plants of a wooddie substance, hauing also many straight twiggie and pliant branches, set with most sharpe pricking thornes.


 The Description.
1 THis is a shrubbe growing in the hedges, and bringing forth straight branches and hard thornes, like to those of the Hawthorne, with little leaues, long, something fat and soft: and this hath that notable learned man Clusius described more diligently in these words: the (...) is a shrub fit to make hedges of, with straight branches, (...) it selfe into many twigs, white, and set with stiffe and strong thornes, hauing leaues, which for the most part grow by foures or fiues at the root of euery Thorne, long, something fat, like to those of the Oliue tree, somewhat white, but tender and full of iuice; which in Autumne doe sometimes fall off, leauing new growing in their places: the floures in Autumne are something long, whitish, diuided at the brims into fiue parts: in their places is left a seed, in shew as in Gelsemine: notwithstanding it was neuer my chance to see the fruit: the root is thicke and diuersly parted.
@ I obserued another (saith the same Author) almost like to the former, but lower, and diuided into more branches, with lesser leaues, more thick and salt of taste, and whiter also than the former: the floures are like, in all things but their colour, those of the former, which in this are (...).
2 This hath more flexible stalks and branches, and these also set with thornes: the leaues are narrow, and not so thicke or fleshie as those of the former, yet remaine alwaies greene like as they do: the floures are small and mossie, of a greenish colour, growing thicke about the branches, and they are succeeded by a round fruit, yellowish when it is ripe, and remaining on the shrubbe all the

@ 1 Rhamnus 1. Clusij flo. albo. White floured Ram-thorne.@ 2 Rhamnus 2. Clusij. Sallow-Thorne.@ Rhamnus alter (...). flore purpureo. Purple floured Ram-thorne.3 Ramnus tertius Clusij. Ram or Harts-Thorne.
Winter: The whole shrubbe lookes as if it were sprinckled ouer with dust.
3 To these may be added another growing with many branches to the height of the Sloe-tree or blacke Thorne, and these are couered with a blackish barke, and armed with long prickles: the leaues, as in the first, grow forth of certaine knots many together, long, narrow, sleshie, greene, and continuing all the yeare: their taste is astringent, somewhat like that of Rhabarb: the floures shew themselues at the beginning of the Spring, of a greenish colour, growing thicke together, and neere the setting on of the leaues; in Summer it carries a blacke fruit almost like a Sloe, round, and harsh of taste.


 The Place.
The first of these growes in sundry places of (...), Portugall, and Prouince: the other varietic thereof Clusius saith he found but onely in one place, and that was neere the citie Horivela, called by the Antients Orcellis, by the riuer Segura, vpon the borders of the kingdome of Valentia: the second growes in many maritime places of Flanders and Holland, and in some vallies by riuers sides. The third growes in the vntilled places of the kingdome of Granado and Murcia. @


 The Time.
This Ram is euer greene together with his leaues: the fruit or berries remaine on the shrub, yea euen in Winter.


 The Names.
The Grecians call this thorne (...): the Latines also Rhamnus and of diuers it is also named (...), that is Spina alba, or white Thorne, Spina Cerualis, or Harts-thorne, as we finde written among the bastard words. Marcellus nameth it Spina salutaris, and Herba salutaris; which hath, saith he, as it were a grape. It is called in Italian Marruca and (...): in Spanish, Scambrones: in English, Ram, or Harts Thorne.


 The Temperature.
The Ram, saith Galen, doth drie and digest in the second degree, it cooleth in the later end of the first degree, and in the beginning of the second.


 The Vertues.
The leaues, saith Dioscorides, are layed pultis wise vpon hot cholericke inflammations, and Saint  Anthonies fire, but we must vse them whilest they be yet but tender, as Galen addeth.
@ The leaues and buds or young shoots of the first, are eaten as sallads with oile, vineger, and  salt, at Salamanea and other places of Castile, (...) they haue a certaine acrimonie and (...) which are gratefull to the taste. A decoction of (...) (...) of the third is good to foment relaxed and weake or paralyticke members, and to ease (...) (...) of the gout, as the Inhabitants of Granado told Clusius. @ 

Our Author in this chapter gaue onely the (...) of the third, and (...) the second, with the names and faculties in (...).




CHAP. 29. Of (...) Thorne.

 The Description.
CHrists (...) or Ram of Lybia, is a very tough and hard shrubby bush, growing vp sometimes vnto the height of a little tree, hauing very long and sharpe pricklie branches: but the thornes that grow about the leaues are lesser, and not so prickly as the former. The leaues are small, broad, and almost round, somewhat sharpe pointed; first of a darke greene colour, and then somwhat (...). The floures grow in clusters at the top of the stalks, of a yellow colour: the husks wherein the seeds be contained, are flat and broad, very like vnto small bucklers as hard as wood, wherein are contained three or foure thin and flat seeds, like the seed of Line or Flax.


 The Place.
This Thorne groweth in Lybia; it is better esteemed of in the countrey of Cyrene than is their Lote tree, as Pliny (...). Of this shrub Diphilus Siphnius in (...) in his foureteenth booke maketh mention, saying, that hee did verie often eat of the same in Alexandria that beautifull Citie.
Petrus Bellonius who trauelled ouer the Holly Land, saith, that this shrubbie thorne Paliurus was

Paliurus. Christs Thorne.
the thorne wherewith they (...) our (...) Christ: his reason for the (...) (...) is this, that in Iudaea there was not any (...) (...) common, so pliant, or so fit for to (...) a crown or garland of, nor any so full of cruell (...) prickles. It groweth throughout the whole countrey in such aboundance, that it is their common fuell to burne; yea so common with them there, as our Gorsse, Brakes, and broome is here with vs. Iosephus in his first booke of Antiquities, and 11. chap. saith, that this Thorne hath the most sharpe prickles of any other; and therefore that Christ might be the more tormented, the Iewes rather tooke this than any other. Of which I haue a small tree growing in my garden, that I haue brought forth by sowing of the seed.


The Time.
The leaues fall away and continue not alwaies green, as do those of the Rams: it buddeth forth in the Spring, as Pliny testifieth.


 The Names.
This Thornie shrubbe is called in Greeke (...) the Latines and Italians retaire the same name Paliurus: for want of an English name, it may be termed Ramme of Lybia, or Christs Thorne: Pliny reporteth, that the (...) is called Zura.


 The Temperature.
The leaues and root of Christs (...) doe euidently binde and cut.


 The Vertues.
(...) vertue of this cutting quality the seed doth weare away the stone, and cause tough and slimy  humors to remoue out of the chest and lungs, as Galen saith.
The decoction of the leaues and root of Christs Thistle, as Dioscorides writeth, stoppeth the belly, prouoketh vrine, and is a remedy against poisons, and the bitings of serpents.
The root doth waste and consume away Phymata, and Oedemata if it be stamped and applied.
The seed is good for the cough, and weareth away the stone in the bladder.



CHAP. 30. Of Buck-Thorne, or laxatiue (...).

 The Description.
1 BVck-thorne groweth in manner of a shrub or hedge tree; his trunke or body is often as big as a mans thigh; his wood or timber is yellow within, and his barke is of the colour of a Chestnut, almost like the bark of a Cherry tree. The branches are beset with leaues that are somewhat round, and finely snipt about the edges like the leaues of the Crab or Wilding tree: among which come forth Thornes which are hard and prickly: the floures are white and smal, which being vaded there succeed little round berries, greene at the first, but afterwards black, wherof that excellent greene colour is made, which the Painters and Limners do call Sap-greene; but these berries before they be ripe do make a faire yellow colour, being steeped in vineger.
@ 2 Besides the common kinde, Clusius mentions two other: the first of which hath branches some two cubits long, subdiuided into diuers others, couered with a smooth barke like that of the former, which, the vpper rinde being taken off, is of a yellowish greene colour, and bitterish taste: the branches haue some few prickles vpon them, and commonly end in them: the leaues are almost like those of the common kinde, but smaller, narrower, and somewhat resembling those of the blacke Thorn, hauing somewhat a drying taste: the floure consists of foure leaues of a yellowish

@ 1 Rhamnus solutivus. Buck-thorne.
@ 2 Rhamnus solutivus minor. Middle Buck-thorne.
@ 3 Rhamnus solutivus pumilus. Dwarfe Buck-thorne.
greene colour: the root is wooddie as in other shrubs: Clusius found this growing in the mountanous places of Austria, and calls it (...) (...) pumila.
3 This other hath branches some cubite long, and of the thicknesse of ones little finger, or lesser, couered with a blacke and shriuelled barke: and towards the top diuided into little boughs, which are couered with a thin and smoother barke, and commonly end in a sharp thorn: the leaues much resemble those of the Slo-tree yet are they shorter and lesser, greene also, and snipt about the edges; first of an astringent, and afterwards of somewhat a bitterish taste; the floures which grow amongst the leaues are of an herby colour, and consist of foure leaues: the fruit is not much vnlike that of the former; but distinguished with two, and somtimes with three crests or dents, first green, and then black when it is ripe: the root is thicke, wooddie and hard. Clusius found this on the hill aboue the Bathes of Baden, hee calls it Spina infectoria pumila 2. This Matthiolus and others call Lycium Italicum: and our Author formerly gaue the figure of Matthiolus and Tabernamontanus, by the name of Lycium Hispanicum, and here againe another for his Rhamnus solutivus, which made mee to keepe it in this chapter, and omit it in the former, it being described in neither. @



 The Place.
Buck-thorne groweth neere the borders of fields, in hedges, woods, and in other vntoiled places: it delighteth to grow in riuers and in water ditches: it groweth in Kent in sundry places, as at Farningham vpon the cony burrowes belonging sometime to Mr. Sibil, as also vpon cony burrowes in Southfleet, especially in a small and narrow lane leading from the house of Mr. William (...) vnto Longfield downes, also in the hedge vpon the right hand at Dartford townes end towards London, and in many places more vpon the chalkie bankes and hedges.


 The Time.
It floureth in May, the berries be ripe in the fall of the leafe.


 The Names.
The later Herbarists call it in Latine Rhamnus (...), because it is set with thornes, like as the Ram, and beareth purging berrics. Matthiolus namethit Spina infectoria; Valerius Cordus, Spina (...), and diuers call it Burgispina. It is termed in high Dutch, (...) weghdorn: in Italian, Spino Merlo, Spino Zcrlino, Spino Ceruino: in English, Laxatiue Ram, Way-thorne, and Buck-thorne: in low Dutch they call the fruit or berries Rhijnbesien, that is, as though you should say in Latine, Baccoe Rhenanoe: in English, Rheinberries: in French, Nerprun.


 The Temperature.
The berries of this Thorne, as they be in taste bitter and binding, so be they also hot and dry in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The same do purge and void by the stoole thicke flegme, and also cholericke humors: they are  giuen being beaten into pouder from one dram to a dram and a halfe: diuers do number the berries, who giue to strong bodies from fifteene to twenty or moe; but it is better to breake them and boile them in fat flesh broth without salt, and to giue the broth to drinke: for so they purge with lesser trouble and fewer gripings.
There is pressed forth of the ripe berries a iuice, which being boyled with a little Allum is vsed  of painters for a deep greene, which they do call Sap greene.
The berries which be as yet vnripe, being dried and insufed or steeped inwater, do make a saire  yellow colour, but if they be ripe they make a greene.



CHAP. 31. Of the Holme, Holly, or Huluer tree.


Agrifolium. The Holly tree.



 The Description,
THe Holly is a shrubbie plant, notwithstanding it oftentimes growes to a tree of a reasonable bignesse: the boughes whereof are tough and flexible, couered with a smooth and green bark. The substance of the wood is hard and sound, and blackish or yellowish within, which doth also sinke in the water, as doth the Indianwood which is called Guaiacum: the leaues are of a beautifull green colour, smooth and glib, like almost the bay leaues, but lesser, and cornered in the edges with sharp (...), which notwithstanding they want or haue few when the tree is old: the floures be white, and sweet of smell: the berries are round, of the bignesse of a little Pease, or not much greater, of colour red, of tast vnpleasant, with a white stone in the midst, which do not easily fall away, but hang on the boughes a long time: the root is wooddie.
There is made of the smooth barke of this tree or shrub, Birdlime, which the birders and country men do vse to take birds with: they pul off the barke, and make a ditch in the ground, specially in moist, boggy, or foggy earth, wherinto they put this bark, couering the ditch with boughes of trees, letting it remaine there till it be rotten and putrified, which will be done in

the space of twelue daies or thereabout: which done, they take it forth, and beat in morters vntill it be come to the thicknesse and clamminesse of Lime: lastly, that they may cleare it from pieces of barke and other (...), they do wash it very often: after which they adde vnto it a little oyle of nuts, and after that do put it vp in earthen vessells.


 The Place.
The Holly tree groweth plentifully in all countries. It groweth green both winter and sommer; the berries are ripe in September, and they do hang vpon the tree a long time after.


 The Names.
This tree or shrub is called in Latine Agrifolium: in Italian, Agrifoglio, and (...): in Spanish, Azebo: in high Dutch, walddistell, and of diuers Stecpalmen: in low Dutch, (...): in French, Hous and Housson: in English, Holly, Huluer, and Holme.


 The Temperature.
The berries of Holly are hot and drie, and of thin parts, and waste away winde.


 The Vertues.
They are good against the collicke: for ten or twelue being inwardly taken bring away by the  stoole thicke flegmaticke humors, as we haue learned of them who oftentimes made triall thereof.
The Birdlime which is made of the barke hereof is no lesse hurtfull than that of Misseltoe, for it  is maruellous clammie, it glueth vp all the intrails, it shutteth and draweth together the guts and passages of the excrements, and by this meanes it bringeth destruction to man, not by any qualitie, but by his glewing substance.
Holly beaten to pouder and drunke, is an experimented medicine against all the fluxes of the  belly, as the dysenterie and such like.



CHAP. 32. Of the Oke.


1 Quercus vulgaris cum glande and musco suo. The Oke Tree with his Acornes and Mosse.



 The Description.
1 THe common Oke groweth to a great tree; the trunke or body wherof is couered ouer with a thicke rough barke full of chops or rifts: the armes or boughs are likewise great, dispersing themselues farre abroad: the leaues are bluntly indented about the edges, smooth, and of a shining greene colour, whereon is often found a most sweet dew and somewhat clammie, and also a fungous excrescence, which we call Oke Apples. The fruit is long, couered with a browne hard and tough pilling, set in a rough scaly cup or husk: there is often found vpon the body of the tree, and also vpon the branches, a certaine kind of long white mosse hanging downe from the same: and sometimes another wooddie plant, which we cal Misseltoe, being either an excrescence or outgrowing from the tree it selfe, or of the doung (as it is reported) of a bird that hath eaten a certaine berrie. @ Besides these there are about the roots of old Okes within the earth certaine other excrescences, which Bauhine and others haue called Vuoe quercinoe, because they commonly grow in clusters together, after the manner of Grapes and about their bignes, being sometimes round, and otherwhiles cornered, of a woody substance, hollow within; and somtimes of a purple, otherwhiles of a whitish colour on the outside: their taste is astringent, and vse singular in all (...)

and fluxes of bloud, as Encelius affirmes, Cap. 51. de Lapid. and Gen. @
3 Carolus Clusius reporteth that hee found this base or low Oke not far from Lisbone, of the height of a cubite, which notwithstanding did also beare an acorne like that of our Oke-tree, sauing that the cup is smoother, and the Acorne much bitterer, wherein it differeth from the rest of his kinde.


2 Quercus vulgaris cum excrementis fungosis: The common Oke with his Apple or greene Gall.


3 Quercus humilis. The dwarfe Oke.


There is a wilde Oke which riseth vp oftentimes to a maruellous height, and reacheth very (...) with his armes and boughes, the body wherof is now and then of a mighty thicknesse, in compasse two or three fathoms: it sendeth forth great spreading armes, diuided into a multitude of boughs, The leaues are smooth, something, hard, broad, long, gashed in the edges, greene on the vpper (...): the Acornes are long, but shorter than those of the tamer Oke; euery one (...) in his owne cup, which is rough without: they are couered with a thin rinde or shell: the substance or kernell within is diuided into two parts, as are Beans, Pease, and Almonds: the bark of the yong Okes is smooth, glib, and good to thicken skins and hides with, but that of the old Okes is rugged, thicke, hard, and full of chops: the inner substance or heart of the wood is somthing yellow, hard and sound, and the older the harder: the white and outward part next to the barke doth easily rot, being subiect to the worme, especially if the tree be not felled in due time: some of the roots grow deepe into the earth, and othersome far abroad, by which it stiffely standeth.


 The Place.
The Oke doth scarcely refuse any ground; for it groweth in a drie and barren soile, yet doth it prosper better in a fruitfull ground: it groweth vpon hills and mountaines, and likewise in vallies: it commethyp euery where in all parts of England, but is not so common in other of the South and hot regions.


 The Time.
The Oke doth cast his leaues for the most part about the end of Autumne: some keepe their leaues on, but dry all winter long, vntill they be thrust off by the new spring.


 The Names.
The Oke is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Quercus: of some, Placida, as Gaza translateth it. It may be called (...), Vrbana, or Culta; some also, Emeros mudion, and Robur: the Macedonians (...)

as though you should say Veriquercus, as Gaza expo undeth it, or Vere Quercus, the true Oke. We may name it in English, the tamer Oke-tree: in French, Chesne: in Dutch, (...) boom.
The fruit is named in Greeke (...): in Lat ine, Glans: in high Dutch, Eichel: in low Dutch, Eekel: in Spanish, Bellotus: in Italian, Chiande: in English, Acorne and Mast.
The cup wherein the Acorne standeth is named in Greeke (...), as Paulus Aegineta in his third booke, 42 chapter testifieth, saying, Omphacis is the hollow thing out of which the Acorne groweth: in Latine, Calix glandis: in shops, Cupula glandis: in English, the Acorne cup.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues, barke, Acorne cups, and the Acornes themselues, doe mightily binde and drie in the  third degree, being somewhat cold withall.
The best of them, saith Galen, is the thin skin which is vnder the barke of the tree, and that next, which lieth neerest to the pulpe, or inner substance of the Acorne; all these stay the whites, the reds, spitting of bloud and laskes: the decoction os these is giuen, or the pouder of them dried, for the purposes aforesaid.
Acornes if they be eaten are hardly concocted, they yeeld no nourishment to mans body, but  that which is grosse, raw, and cold.
Swine are fatted herewith, and by feeding hereon haue their flesh hard and sound.
The Acorns prouoke (...), and are good against all venome and poison, but they are not of such  a stopping and binding facultie as the leaues and barke.
The Oke apples are good against all fluxes of bloud and lasks, in what manner soeuer they be taken, but the best way is to boile them in red wine, and being so prepared, they are good also against the excessiue moisture and swelling of the iawes and almonds or kernels of the throat.
The decoction of Oke apples staieth womens diseases, and causeth the mother that is falne  downe to returne againe to the naturall place, if they doe sit ouer the said decoction being very hot.
The same steeped in strong white wine vineger, with a little pouder of Brimstone, and the root of  Ireos mingled together, and set in the Sun by the space of a moneth, maketh the haireb lacke, consumeth proud and superfluous flesh, taketh away sun-burning, freckles, spots the morphew, with all deformities of the face, being washed therewith.
The Oke Apples being broken in sunder about the time of their withering, do foreshew the sequell  of the yeare, as the expert Kentish husbandmen haue obserued by the liuing things found in them: as if they finde an Ant, they foretell plenty of graine to insue: if a white worme like a Gentill or Magot, then they prognosticate murren of beasts and cattell; if a spider, then (say they) wee shall haue a pestilence or some such like sicknesse to follow amongst men: these things the learned also haue obserued and noted; for Matthiolus writing vpon Dioscorides saith, that before (...) haue an hole through them, they containe in them either a flie, a spider, or a worme; if a flie, then war insueth, if a creeping worme, than scarcitie of victuals, if a running spider, then followeth great sicknesse or mortalitie.



CHAP. 33. Of the Scarlet Oke.

 The Kindes.
ALthough Theophrastus hath made mention but of one of these Holme Holmeor Holly Okes onely, yet hath the later age set downe two kindes thereof; one bearing the scarlet grain, and the other only the Acorn which thing is not contrary to Dioscorides his opinion, for he intreateth of that which beareth the Acorne, in his first booke, among (...) or the Okes; and the other hee describeth in his fourth booke, vnder the title (...) or Coccus Baphice.


 The Description.
THe Oke which beareth the scarlet graine is a small tree, in manner of a hedge tree, of a meane bignesse, hauing many faire branches or boughes spread abroad: whereon are set leaues, green aboue, white vnderneath, snipt about the edges, and at euery corner one sharpe prickle, in manner of the smoother Holly: among which commeth sometimes, but not often, small Acornes, standing in little cups or husks, armed with prickes as sharpe as thornes, and of a bitter taste. Besides the Acornes, there is found cleauing vnto the wooddie branches, a certaine kinde of berries, or rather an excrescence, of the substance of the Oke Apple, and of the bignesse of a Pease, at the first white, and of the colour of ashes when they be ripe, in which are ingendred little Maggots, which seeme

Ilex (...). The Scarlet Oke.
to be without life vntill they feeleth e heat of the sun, and then they creep, and seeke to flie away. But the people of the countrey (which make a gaine of them) doe watch the time of their flying, euen as we doe Bees, which they then take and put into a linnen bag, wherein they shake and boult them vp and downe vntil they be dead, which they make vp into great lumpes oftentimes, and likewise sell them to diers apart, euen as they were taken forth of the bag, whereof is made the most perfect Scarlet.


 The Place.
This Oke groweth in Languedocke, and in the countries thereabout, and also in Spain: but it beareth not the scarlet grain in all places, but in those especially, which lie towards the Midland sea, and which be subiect to the scorching heat of the Sun, as Carolus Clusius witnesseth; and not there alwaies, for when the tree waxeth old it growes to be barren. Then do the people cut and lop it downe, that after the young shoots haue attained to two or three yeares growth, it may become fruitfull againe.
Petrus Bellonius in his books of Singularities sheweth, that Coccus Baphicus or the Scarlet graine doth grow in the Holy land, and neere to the lake which is called the Sea of Tiberias, and that vpon little trees, whereby the inhabitants get great store of wealth, who seperat the husks from the pulpe or Magots, and sell this being made vp into balls or lumpes, much dearer than the emptie shels or husks.
Of this graine also (...) hath made mention in his tenth booke, and sheweth, that the tree which bringeth forth this graine is not great, and also groweth in Phocis, which is a countrey in Macedonia neere to the Boetians, not far from the mountain Parnassus.
(...) writeth, that (...), or the Scarlet Oke, is a great tree, and riseth vp to the height of the common Oke: amongst which writers there are some contrarietie. Petrus Bellonius reporteth it is a little tree, and Theophrastus a great one, which may chance according to the soyle and climate; for that vpon the stonie mountaines cannot grow to that greatnesse as those in the fertill grounds.


 The Time.
The little graines or berries which grow about the boughes begin to appeare especially in the Spring, when the Southwest windes do blow: the floures fall and are ripe in Iune, together with the Maggots growing in them, which receiuing life by the heat of the Sun, do forthwith flie away (in manner of a Moth or Butterflie) vnlesse by the care and diligence of the keepers, they be killed by much and often shaking them together, as aforesaid.
The tree or shrub hath his leaues alwaies greene: the Acornes be very late before they be ripe, seldome before new come vp in their place.


 The Names.
The Scarlet Oke is called in Greeke (...) in Latine Ilex: the later writers, Ilex Coccigera, or Coccifera; in Spanish, Coscoia: for want of a fit English name, we haue thought good to call it by the name of Scarlet Oke, or Scarlet Holme Oke: for Ilex is named of some in English, Holme, which signifieth Holly or Huluer. But this Ilex, as well as those that follow, might be called Holm Oke. Huluer Oke, or Holly Oke, for difference from the shrub or hedge tree Agrifolium, which is simply called Holme, Holly, and Huluer.
The graine or berrie that serueth to die with is properly called in Greeke (...) in Latine, Coccus infectoria, or Coccum infectorium: Pliny also nameth it Cusculium: or as most men doe reade it, (...): the same Author saith, that it is likewise named Scolecion, or Maggot berrie.
The Arabians and the Apothecaries doe know it by the name of Chesmes, Chermes, and (...): They are deceiued who thinke that (...) doth differ from Infectorium Coccum: it is called in Italian, Grano detinctori: in Spanish, Grana detintoreros: in high Dutch, Scharlachbeer: in French,

Vermillon, and Graine d'escarlate: in English, after the Dutch, Scarlet Berry, or Scarlet graine, and after the Apothecaries word, Coccus Baphicus: the maggot within is that which is named Cutchonele, as most do deeme.
Theophrastus saith the Acorne or fruit hereof is called of diuers, (...) Acylum.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
This graine is astringent and somwhat bitter, and also dry without sharpnesse and biting, therefore, saith Galen, it is good for great wounds and sinewes that be hurt, if it be layd thereon: some temper it with Vineger; others with Oxymel or syrrup of vineger.
It is commended and giuen by the later Physitians to stay the Menses: it is also counted among  those Simple which be cordials, and good to strengthen the heart. Of this graine that noble and famous confection Alkermes, made by the Arabians, hath taken his name, which many doe highly commend against the infirmities of the heart: notwithstanding it was chiefly deuised in the beginning for purging of melancholy; which thing is plainly perceiued by the great quantitie of Lapis Lazulus added thereto: and therefore seeing that this stone hath in it a venomous quality, and likewise a property to purge melancholy, it canot of it selfe be good for the heart, but the other things be good, which be therefore added, that they might defend the heart from the hurts of this stone, and correct the malice thereof.
This composition is commended against the trembling and shaking of the heart, and for swounings  and melancholy passions, and sorrow proceeding of no euident cause: it is reported to recreate the minde, and to make a man merry and ioyfull.
It is therefore good against melancholy diseases, vaine imaginations, sighings, griefe and sorrow  without manifest cause, for that it purgeth away melancholy humors: after this maner it may becomfortable for the heart, and delightfull to the minde, in taking away the materiall cause of sorrow: neither can it otherwise strengthen a weake and feeble heart, vnlesse this stone called Lapis Cyaneus be quite left out.
Therefore he that is purposed to vse this composition against beatings and throbbings of the  heart, and swounings, and that not as a purging medicine, shall do well and wisely by leauing out the stone Cyaneus; for this being taken in a little weight or small quantitie, cannot purge at all, but may in the meane season trouble and torment the stomacke, and withall thorow his sharpe and venomous qualitie (if it be oftentimes taken) be very offensiue to the guts and intrailes, and by this meanes bring more harme than good.
Moreouer, it is not necessarie, no nor expedient, that the bristle died with Cochenele, called  Chesmes, as the Apothecaries terme it, should be added to this composition, for this bristle is not died without Auripigmentum, called also Orpiment, and other pernitious things ioyned therewith, whose poysonsome qualities are added to the iuyces together with the colour, if either the bristle or died silke be boyled in them.
The berries of the Cochenele must be taken by themselues, which alone are sufficient to dy the  iuices, and to impart vnto them their vertue: neither is it likewise needfull to boile the raw silke together with the graines, as most Physitians thinke: this may be left out, for it maketh nothing at all for the strengthning of the heart.



CHAP. 34. Of the great Skarlet Oke.

 The Description.
THe great Skarlet Oke, or the great Holme Oke, groweth many times to the full height of a tree, sometimes as big as the Peare tree, with boughes far spreading like the Acorne or (...) Mast trees: the timber is firme and sound: the leaues are set with prickles round about the edges, like those of the former Skarlet Oke: the leaues when the tree waxeth old haue on them no prickles at all, but are somwhat bluntly cut or indented about the edges, greene on the vpper side, and gray vnderneath: the Acorne standeth in a prickly cup like our common Oke Acorne, which when it is ripe becommeth of a browne colour, with a white kernel within of taste not vnpleasant. There is found vpon the branches of this tree a certaine kinde of long hairy mosse of the colour of ashes, not vnlike to that of our English Oke. @ This tree is euer greene, and at the tops of the branches about the end of May, here in England, carrieth diuers long catkins of mossie yellow floures, which fall away, and are not succeeded by the acornes, for they grow out vpon other stalks. Clusius in the yeare 1581 obserued two trees; the one in a garden aboue the Bridge, and the other in the priuat garden at White-Hall, hauing lesser leaues than the former. The later of these is yet standing, and euery yeare beares small Acornes, which I could neuer obserue to come to any maturitie. @



Ilex maior Glandifera. The great Skarlet Oke.


@ Ilicis ramus floridus. The floures of the great Skarlet Oke.




 The Place.
In diuers places there are great woods of these trees, hills also and vallies are beautified therewith: they grow plentifully in many countries of Spaine, and in Languedocke and Prouence in great plenty. It is likewise found in Italy. It beareth an Acorne greater, and of a larger size than doth the tame Oke; in some countries lesser and shorter: they are strangers in England, notwithstanding there is here and there a tree thereof, that hath been procured from beyond the seas: one groweth in her Maiesties Priuy Garden at White-Hall, neere to the gate that leadeth into the street, and in some other places here and there one.


 The Time.
It is greene at all times of the yeare: it is late before the Acornes be ripe. Clusius reporteth, that he saw the floures growing in clusters of a yellow colour in May.


 The Names.
This Oke is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Ilex: in Spanish, Enzina: in Italian, Elize: in French, Chesneuerd: in English, Barren Skarlet Oke, or Holme Oke, and also of some, French or Spanish Oke.
The Spaniards call the fruit or Acorne Bellota, or Abillota. Theophrastus seemeth to call this tree not Prinos, but Smilax; for he maketh mention but of one Ilex onely, and that is of Scarlet Oke; and he sheweth that the Arcadians do not call the other Ilex, but Smilax: for the name Smilax is of many significations: there is Smilax among the Pulses, which is also called Dolichus, and Phaseolus; and Smilax aspera, and Laeuis, amongst the Binde-weeds: likewise Smilax is taken of Dioscorides to be Taxus, the Yew tree. Of Smilax, Theophrastus writeth thus in his third booke: the inhabitants of Arcadia do call a certaine tree Smilax, being like vnto the Skarlet Oke: the leaues thereof be not set with such sharpe prickles, but tenderer and softer.
Of this Smilax Pliny also writeth, in his sixteenth booke, chap. 6. There be of Ilex, saith he, two kindes, Ex ijs in Italia folio non multum ab oleis distant, called of certain Grecians Smilaces, in the proninces Aquifolia: in which words, in stead of Oliue trees may perchance be more truly placed Suberis, or the Corke tree; for this kinde of Ilex or Smilax is not reported of any of the old writers

to haue the leafe of the Oliue tree: but Suber in Greeke, called Phellos, or the Corke tree, hath a little leafe.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues of this Oke haue force to coole and repell or keepe backe, as haue the leaues of the  Acornes or Mast trees: being stamped or beaten, and applied, they are good for soft swellings, and strengthen weake members.
The barke of the root boiled in water vntill it be dissolued, and layd on all night, maketh the  haire blacke, being first scoured with Cimolia, as Dioscorides saith.
Clusius reporteth, that the Acorne is esteemed of, eaten, and brought into the market to be sold, in the city of Salamanca in Spaine, and in many other places of that countrey; and of this Acorne Pliny also hath peraduenture written, lib, 16. cap. 5. in these words: Moreouer, at this day in Spain the Acorne is serued for a second course.



CHAP. 35. Of the great Holme-Oke.


1 Cerris maiore Glande. The Holme Oke with great Acornes.


2 Cerris minore Glande. The Holme Oke with lesser Acorns.



 The Description.
1 AMong the wilder Okes this is not the least, for his comely proportion, although vnprofitable for timber, to make coles, carts, Wainscot, houses, or ships of: the fruit is not fit for any man or beast to eate, neither any propertie knowne sor the vse of physicke or surgerie: it groweth vp to the height of a faire tree, the trunke or body is great, and verie faire to looke vpon: the wood or timber soft and spongie, scarce good to be burned: from which shooteth forth very comely branches dispersing themselues farre abroad; whereon are set for the most part by couples very faire leaues, greene aboue, and of an ouerworne russet colour vnderneath, cut or snipt about the edges very deepe: the Acorne groweth fast vnto the boughes, without any foot-stalke at all, being very like vnto our common Acorne, set in a rough and prickly cup like an Hedge-hog or the Chesnut huske, of a harsh taste, and hollow within: this tree beareth or

@ Cerri minoris (...) cum flore. A branch of the smaller Holme Oke with floures.
bringeth forth oft times a certain smooth kinde of Gall not altogether vnprofitable. This Oke likewise bringeth forth another kinde of excresence, which the Grauer hath omitted in the figure, which is called in Greeke (...): Gaza nameth it Penis. This Penis or pricke is hollow, mossie, hanging downe halfe a yard long, like a long rag of linnen cloath.
2 The second is altogether like the first, sauing that this beareth smaller Acornes, and the whole tree is altogether lesse, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ Both this and the former cary floures clustering vpon long stalkes, like as in the common Oke; but the fruit doth not succeed them, but grow forth in other places. @


 The Place.
This Oke groweth in vntoiled places, it is seldome times found, and that but in Woods onely: it is for the most part vnknowne in Italy, as Pliny reporteth.


 The Time.
They bring forth their fruit or (...) in the fall of the leafe.


 The Names.
This Oke is called in Greeke (...) in Latine, Cerrus: yet doth Pliny make mention both of Aegilops, and also of Cerrus: (...) is likewise one of the diseases of corne, called in Latine Festuca: in English, wilde Otes, and far differing from the tree Aegilops.
That which hangeth from the boughs, Pliny, lib. 16. cap. 8. calleth Panus onely: that acorne tree named Aegilops bringeth forth Panos arentes, withered prickes, couered with white mossie iags hanging downe, not only in the barke, but also from the (...), halfe a yard in bignesse, bearing a sweet smell, as we haue said, among ointments.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
We finde nothing written of the faculties of this tree among the old Writers, neither of our owne experience.



CHAP. 36. Of the Corke Oke.

 The Description.
1 THe Corke tree is of a middle bignesse like vnto Ilex, or the barren skarlet Oke, but with a thicker body, and fewer boughes: the leaues be for the most part greater, broader, rounder, and more nicked in the edges: the barke of the tree is thicke, very rugged, and full of chinkes or crannies that cleaueth and diuideth it selfe into pieces, which vnlesse they be taken away in due time do giue place to another barke growing vnderneath, which when the old is remoued is maruellous red, as though it were painted with some colour: the (...) standeth in a cup, which is great, bristled, rough, and full of prickles: this Acorne is also astringent or binding, more vnpleasant than the Holme Acorne, greater in one place, and lesse in another.
2 The Corke tree with narrow leaues groweth likewise to the height and bignesse of a great tree; the trunke or body whereof is couered with a rough and scabbed barke of an ouerworn blackish colour, which likewise cleaueth and casteth his coat when the inner barke groweth somwhat thicke: the branches are long, tough, and flexible, easie to be bowed any way, like those of the

Oziar; whereupon do grow leaues like those of the precedent, but longer, and little or nothing indented about the edges: the fruit groweth in small cups as the Acornes doe: they are lesser than those of the other kinde, as is the rest of the tree, wherein is the chiefest difference. @ This varies in the leafe, (as you may see in the figure) which in some is snipt about the edge, in other (...) not at all.


1. 2. Suber latifolium and angustisolium. The Corke tree with broad and narrow leaues.




 The Place.
It groweth in the countrey of Aquitania, neere to the mountaines called Pyrenaei: it also groweth plentifully in the kingdomes of Spaine, differing somewhat from that of Aquitania, as (...) declareth: it is likewise found in Italy, and that in the territorie of Pisa, with a longer leafe, and sharper pointed; and about Rome with a broader, and cut in the edges like a saw, and rougher, (...) Matthiolus testifieth.


 The Time.
The leaues of the first are alwaies greene in Spaine and Italy, about the Pyrenaean mountaines they fall away in Winter.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine Suber: in French, Liege: in Italian, Sugaro: the same names do also belong to the barke: the Spaniards call the tree Alcornoque: the Englishmen, Corke tree; and the barke, Corchade Alcornoque; whereupon the Low-countrey men and English men also do call it Corke; and yet it is called in low-Dutch also (...).


 The Temperature and Vertues.
This barke doth manifestly dry, with a binding facultie.
Being beaten to pouder and taken in water it stancheth bleeding in any part of the body. The  Corke which is taken out of wine vessels, saith Paulus, being burnt, maketh ashes which do mightily  dry, and are mixed in compositions diuised against the bloudy flix.
Corke is also profitable for many things: it is vsed (saith Pliny) about the anchors of (...), Fishers  nets, and to stop vessels with; and in Winter for womens shooes, which vse remaines with vs euen to this day: fishermen hang this barke vpon the wings of their nets for feare of sinking: and shoo-makers put it in shooes and pantofles for warmnesse sake.




CHAP. 37. Of the Gall tree.

 The Kindes.
OF trees that bring forth Galls there be diuers sorts, as may appeare by the diuers formes and sorts of Galls set forth in this present chapter, which may serue for their seuerall distinctions, whereof some bring forth Acornes likewise, and some nothing but Galls: the figures of some few of the trees shall giue you sufficient knowledge of the rest: for all the Acorne or Mast trees bring forth Galls, but those trees whose figures we haue set forth do beare those Galls fit for medicine, and to thicken skins with.
Dioscorides and Galen make but two sorts of Galls; the one little, yellow, full of holes, and more spongie in the inner part, both of them round, hauing the forme of a little ball, and the other smooth and euen on the out side: sinee, the later wrirers haue found moe, some hauing certain little knobs sticking forth, like in forme to the Gall, which doth also cleaue and grow without (...) to the leafe. There is also found a certaine excrescence of a light greene colour, spongic and waterie, in the middle whereof now and then is found a little flie or worme: which soft ball in hot countries doth oftentimes become hard, like the little smooth Gall, as Theophrastus saith.


1 Galla, siue Robur maius. The great Gall tree.


@ 2 Robur, siue Galla maior altera. Another great Gall tree.




 The Description.
1 THe Gall tree growes vp to a sufficient height, hauing a very faire trunk or body, whereon are placed long twiggy branches bringing forth very faire leaues, broad, and nicked in the edges like the teeth of a saw: among which come forth acornes, although the figure expresse not the same, like those of the Oke, and likewise a wooddy excrescence, which we name the Gall, hauing certaine small eminences or bunches on the out side, growing for the most part vpon the slender branches without stalks, and somtimes they grow at the ends thereof; which by the heate of the Sun are harder, greater, and more sollid in one countrey than another, according to the soile and clymat.



3 Galla minor. The little Gall tree.


@ 2 This growes to the height of a tall man, hauing leaues deepely diuided on the edges like the Oke, and they are green aboue, but hairy and hoary below: it carries a great Gall of the bignesse of a little Apple, and that in great plenty, and without any order. This groweth in diuers parts of old Castile in Spain, and in all the mountainous woods about Vienna in Austria. @
3 The lesser Gall tree differeth not from the former, sauing that it is altogether lesser: the fruit and Gall is likewise lesser, wherein especially consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
The Galls are sound in Italy, Spaine, and Bohemia, and most of the hot regions.


 The Time.
The Gall, saith Pliny, appeareth or commeth forth when the Sun commeth out of the signe Gemini, and that generally in one night.


 The Names.
The Gall tree is called Quercus, Robur, and Gallae arbor: the Gall is called in Greeke (...): the Apothecaries and Italians keepe the name Galla for the fruit: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in Spanish, (...) Galha, and Bugalha: in French, Noix de Galle: in English, Gaules, and Galls.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Gall called Omphacitis, as Galen writeth, is dry in the third degree, and cold in the second: it is a very harsh medicine, it fastneth and draweth together faint and slacke parts, as the ouergrowings in the flesh: it repelleth and keepeth backe rheumes and such like fluxes, and doth effectually dry vp the same, especially when they haue a descent into the gums, almonds of the throat, and other places of the mouth.
The other Gall doth dry and also binde; but so much lesser, by how much the harsh or choking  qualitie is diminished: being boyled, beaten, and also applied in manner of a plaister is laid with good successe vpon the inflammations of the fundament, and falling downe thereof: it is boiled in water if there be need of a little astriction; and in wine, especially in austere wine, if more need require.
Galls are very profitable against the Dysenterie and the Coeliacke passion, being drunk in wine, or the pouder thereof strewed vpon meats.
Galls are vsed in dying and colouring of sundry things, and in making of inke.
Last of all, burnt Galls doe receiue a further facultie, namely to stanch bloud, and are of thin  parts, and of a greater vertue to dry than be those that are not burnt: they must be layd vpon hot burning coles vntill they come to be thorow white, and then they are to be quenched in Vineger and wine.
Moreouer, Galls are good for those that are troubled with the bloudy flix and common laskes, being taken in wine or water, and also applied or vsed in meats: finally, these are to be vsed as oft as need requireth to dry and binde.
Oke Apples are much of the nature of Galls, yet are they far inferiour to them, and of lesser  force. 

Our Author out of (...) gaue the figures of (...) (...) of Galls; some being (...), others small; some round, others longish, and other (...) (...) cornered.





CHAP. 38. Of Misseltoe or Misteltoe.


1 (...). Misseltoe.



 The Description.
1 VIscum or Misseltoe hath many (...) branches spred (...) one another, and wrapped and interlaced (...) within another: the bark (...) is of a light green or Popinjay colour: the leaues of this (...) excrescence be of a browne greene colour: the floures be smal and yellow: which being past, there appeare small clusters of white translucent berries, which are so cleare that a man may see through them, and are full of clammy or viscous moisture, whereof the best Bird-lime is made, far exceeding that which is made of Holme or Holly barke: and within this berry is a small blacke (...) or seed: this excresence hath not any root, neither doth encrease himselfe of his seed, as some haue supposed; but it rather commeth of a certaine moisture and substance gathered together vpon the boughes and ioints of the trees, through the barke whereof this vaporous moisture proceeding, bringeth forth the Misseltoe. Many haue diuersly spoken hereof: some of the Learned haue set downe that it comes of the dung of the bird called a Thrush, who hauing sed of the seeds thereof, as eating his owne bane, hath voided and left his dung vpon the tree, whereof was ingendred this berry, a most sit matter to make lime of to intrap and catch birds withall.
2 Indian Misseltoe groweth likewise vpon the branches of trees, running alongst the same in manner of Polypodie: the strings of the roots are like those of Couch-grasse; from which rise vp diuers stalks smooth and euen, set with ioints and knees at certain distances: toward the top comes forth one leafe ribbed like the Plantain lease, whereon are marked certaine round eyes such as are in the haft of a knife; from the bosome whereof commeth forth a chaffie branch, set with small leaues which continue greene winter and Sommer.


2 Viscum Indicum Lobelij. Indian Misseltoe.


3 Viscum Peruvianum Lobelij. Misseltoe of Peru.



3 There is found also another plant growing vpon the boughes or branches of trees, in maner as our Misseltoe doth, and may very well be reckoned as a kinde thereof: the plant cleaueth vnto the branches, being set thereto as it were with the pillings of the sea onion, of the bredth of a mans hand toward the bottome, and somewhat hollow: the tops whereof are very small and rushy, hollow likewise, and of a purple colour: among which comes forth a branch like that of Haslula Regia, or the Kings Speare, resembling the bush of Otes, couered with a white silke, such as is to be found in Asclepias, of a salt and nitrous taste, and very vnpleasant.


 The Place.
The first kinde of Misseltoe groweth vpon Okes and diuers other trees almost euery where; as for the other two they are strangers in England.


 The Time.
(...) is alwaies greene as well in Winter as in Sommer: the berries are ripe in Autumne; they remaine all Winter thorow, and are a food for diuers birds, as Thrushes, Blacke-birds, and Ring-doues.


 The Names.
Misseltoe is called in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine, Viscum: in high-Dutch, Mistell: in LowDutch, Marentacken: in Italian, Vischio: in Spanish, Liga: in the Portugal language, Visgo: in English, Missel, and Misseltoe.
The glue which is made of the berries of Missel is likewise called Viscum and Ixia in English, Bird-lime. Ixia is also called (...) albus, by reason of the glue which is oftentimes found about the root thereof. This word is also ascribed to Chamaeleon niger, as we reade among the bastard names. Ixia is likewise reckoned vp by Dioscorides, lib. 6. and by Paulus Aegineta, lib. 5. among the poysons: but what this poysonsome and venomous Ixia is it is hard and doubtfull to declare: many would haue it to be Chamaeleon niger: others, the glue or clammy substance which is made of the berries of Missel-toe; who do truly thinke that Ixia differeth from Chamaeleon niger: for Paulus Aegineta, lib. 5. cap. 30. in reckoning vp of simple poysons hath first made mention of Chamaeleon niger, then a little after of Ixia: and whilest he doth particularly discourse of euery one, he intreateth of Chamaeleon niger, cap. 32. and of Ixia (which hee also nameth Vlophonon) cap. 47. and telleth of the dangerous and far differing accidents of them both. And Dioscorides himselfe, lib. 6. where he setteth downe his iudgement of simple poysons, intreateth first of Chamaeleon niger, and then a little after of Ixia. These things declare that (...) niger doth differ from Ixia, which is reckoned among the poysons. Moreouer, it can no where be read that (...) niger beareth Birdlime, or hath so glutinous and clammy a substance as that it ought to be called Ixia: therfore Ixia, as it is one of the poysons, is the glue that is made of the berries of Misseltoe, which because it is sharpe and biting, inflameth and setteth the tongue on fire, and with his slimie and clammy substance doth so draw together, shut, and glue vp the guts, as that there is no passage for the excrements, which things are mentioned among the mischiefes that Ixia bringeth.
@ I can by no meanes approue of, or yeeld to this opinion here deliuered out of Dodonaeus by our Author; which is, That the Bird-lime made of the berries of Misseltoe is poyson; or that Ixia set forth by Dioscorides and Nicander for a poyson is meant of this: for this is manifestly treated of in Dioscorides, lib. 3. cap. 103. by the name of (...): when as the other is mentioned, lib. 6. cap. 21. by the name of (...). Also dayly experience shewes this plant to haue no maligne nor poisonous, but rather a contrarie facultie, being frequently vsed in medicines against the Epilepsie. Such as would see more concerning Ixia or Ixias, let them haue recourse to the first chapter of the first part of Fabius Columna, de Stirpib. min. cognitis and rarioribus, where they shall finde it largely treated of. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues and berries of Misseltoe are hot and dry, and of subtill parts: the Bird-lime is hot  and biting, and consists of an airy and waterie substance, with some earthy qualitie; for according to the iudgement of Galen, his acrimony ouercommeth his bitternesse; for if it be vsed in outward applications it draweth humors from the deepest or most secret parts of the body, spreading and dispersing them abroad, and digesting them.
It ripeneth swellings in the groine, hard swellings behinde the eares, and other impostumes, being  tempered with rosin and a little quantitie of wax.
With Frankincense it mollifieth old vlcers and malicious impostumes, being boyled with vnslaked  lime, or with Gagate lapide, or Asio, and applied, it wasteth away the hardnes of the spleene.
With Orpment or Sandaraca it taketh away foule ill fauoured nailes, being mixed with vnslaked  lime and wine lees it receiueth greater force.
It hath been most credibly reported vnto me, that a few of the berries of Misseltoe bruised and  strained into Oyle, and drunken, hath presently and forthwith rid a grieuous and sore stitch.




CHAP. 39. Of the Cedar tree.

 The Kindes.
THere be two Cedars, one great bearing Cones, the other small bearing berries like those of Iuniper.


Cedrus Libani. The great Cedar tree of Libanus.




 The Description.
THe great Cedar is a very big and high tree, not onely exceeding all other resinous trees, and those which beare fruit like vnto it, but in his tallnesse and largenesse farre surmounting all other trees: the body or trunke thereof is commonly of a mighty bignesse, insomuch as foure men are not able to fathome it, as Theophrastus writeth: the barke of the lower part, which proceedeth out of the earth, to the first yong branches or (...), is rough and harsh; the rest which is among the boughes is smooth and glib: the boughes grow forth almost from the bottome, and not farre from the ground, euen to the very top, waxing by degrees lesser and shorter still as they grow higher, the tree bearing the forme or shape of a Pyramide or sharpe pointed sleeple: these compasse the body round about in maner of a circle, and are so orderly placed by degrees, as that a man may clymbe vp by them to the very top as by a ladder: the leaues be small and round like those of the Pine tree, but shorter, and not so sharp pointed; all the cones or clogs are far shorter and thicker than those of the Firre tree, compact of soft, not hard scales, which hang not downewards, but stand vpright vpon the boughes, whereunto also they are so strongly fastned, as they can hardly be plucked off without breaking of some part of the branches, as Bellonius writeth: the timber is extreme hard, and rotteth not, nor waxeth old: there is no wormes nor rottennesse can hurt or take the hard matter or heart of this wood, which is very odoriferous, and somewhat red: Solomon King of the Iewes did therefore build Gods Temple in Ierusalem of Cedarwood: the Gentiles were wont to make their Diuels or Images of this kinde of wood, that they might last the longer.


 The Place.
The Cedar trees grow vpon the snowie mountaines, as in Syria vpon mount Libanus, on which there remaine some euen to this day, saith Bellonius, planted as is thought by Solomon himselfe: they are likewise found on the mountaines Taurus and Amanus, in cold and stony places: the merchants of the factorie at Tripolis told me, that the Cedar tree groweth vpon the declining of the mountaine Libanus, neere vnto the Hermitage by the city Tripolis in Syria: they that dwel in Syria vse to make boats thereof for want of the Pine tree.


 The Time.
The Cedar tree remaineth alwaies greene, as other trees which beare such manner of fruit: the timber of the Cedar tree, and the images and other workes made thereof, seeme to sweat and (...) forth moisture in moist and rainy weather, as do likewise all that haue an oylie iuyce, as (...) witnesseth.


 The Names.
This huge and mighty tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine likewise Cedrus: in English, Cedar, and Cedar tree. Pliny, lib. 24. cap. 5. nameth it Cedrelate, as though he should say, Cedrus (...), (...) Cedrina abies, Cedar Firre; both that it may differ from the little Cedar, and also because it is (...) like to the Firre tree.

The Rosin hath no proper name, but it may be syrnamed Cedrina, or Cedar Rosin.
The pitch which is drawne out of this is properly called (...): yet Pliny writeth, that also the liquor of the Torch Pine is named Cedrium. The best, saith Dioscorides, is fat, thorow shining, and of a strong smell; which being poured out in drops vniteth it selfe together, and doth not remaine seuered.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Cedar is of temperature hot and dry, with such an exquisite tenuitie and subtiltie of parts, that  it seemeth to be hot and dry in the fourth degree, especially the Pitch or Rosin thereof.
There issueth out of this tree a Rosin like vnto that which issueth out of the Fir tree, very sweet  in smell, of a clammy or cleauing substance, the which if you chew in your teeth it will hardly be gotten forth againe, it cleaueth so fast: at the first it is liquid and white, but being dried in the sun it waxeth hard: if it be boiled in the fire an excellent pitch is made thereof, called Cedar Pitch.
The Aegyptians were wont to coffin and embalme their dead in Cedar, and with Cedar pitch, although they vsed also other meanes, as Herodotus recordeth.
The condited or embalmed body they call in shops (...), but very vnfitly; for Mumia among  the Arabians is that which the Grecians call Pissasphalton, as appeareth by Auiccn, cap. 474. and out of Serapio, cap. 393.
Ile that interpreted and translated Serapio was the cause of this error, who translated and (...) Mumia according to his owne fancie, and not after the sence and meaning of his Author Serapio, saying that this Mumia is a compsition made of (...) and Myrrh mingled together with the moisture of mans body.
The gum of Cedar is good to be put in medicines for the eyes, for being anointed therewith it  cleareth the sight, and clenseth them from the Haw and from stripes.
Cedar infused in vineger and put into the eares killeth the wormes therein, and being mingled  with the decoction of Hyssop, appeaseth the sounding, ringing, and hissing of the eares.
If it be washed or infused in vineger, and applied vnto the teeth, it easeth the tooth-ache.
If it be put into the hollownesse of the teeth it breaketh them, and appeaseth the extreme griefe  thereof.
It preuaileth against Angina's, and the inflammation of the Tonsils, if a Gargarisme be made  thereof.
It is good to kill nits and lice and such like vermine: it cureth the biting of the serpent Cerastes, being layd on with salt.
It is a remedie against the poyson of the sea Hare, if it be drunke with sweetwine.
It is good also for Lepers: being put vp vnderneath it killeth all manner of worms, and draweth  forth the birth, as Dioscorides writeth.



CHAP. 40. Of the Pitch tree.

 The Description.
1 PIcea, the tree that droppeth Pitch, called Pitch tree, groweth vp to be a tall, faire, and big tree, remaining alwaies greene like the Pine tree: the timber of it is more red than that of the Pine or Firre: it is set full of boughes not onely about the top, but much lower, and also beneath the middle part of the body, which many times hang downe, bending toward the ground: the leaues be narrow, not like those of the Pine tree, but shorter and narrower, and sharpe pointed like them, yet (...) they blacker, and withall couer the yong and tender twigs in manner of a circle, like those of the Firre tree; but being many, and thicke set, grow forth on all sides, and not onely one right against another, as in the Yew tree: the fruit is scaly, and like vnto the Pine apple, but smaller: the barke of the tree is somewhat blacke, tough and flexible, not brittle, as is the bark of the Firre tree: vnder which next to the wood is gathered a Rosin, which many times issueth (...), and is like to that of the Larch tree.
@ 2 Of this sort (saith Clusius) there is found another that neuer growes high, but remaineth dwarfish, and it carries certaine little nugaments or catkins of the bignesse of a small nut, composed of scales lying one vpon another, but ending in a prickly leafe, which in time opening shew certaine emptie cauities or cels: from the tops of these sometimes grow forth branches set with many short and pricking little leaues: all the shrub hath shorter and paler coloured leaues than the former: I obserued neither fruit nor floure on this, (...) know I whether it carry any. Dalechampius seemes to haue knowne this, and to haue called (...) Pinus Tubulus or Tibulus. @



1 Piceamaior. The Pitch tree.


@ 2 Picea pumila. The dwarfe Pitch tree.




 The Place.
The Pitch tree groweth in Greece, Italy, France, Germanie, and all the cold regions (...) vnto Russia.


 The Time.
The fruit of the Pitch tree is ripe in the end of September.


 The Names.
The Grecians call this Cone tree (...): the Latines, Picea, and not Pinus; for Pinus or the Pine tree, is the Grecians (...), as shall be declared: that (...) is named in Latine Picea, Scribonius Largus testifieth, in his 201 Composition, writing after this manner; Resinae Petuinae, id est, ex Picea arbore, which signifies in English, of the Rosin of the tree Pitys, that is to say, of the Pitch tree. With him doth (...) agree, lib. 16. cap. 10. where he translating Theophrastus his words concerning Peuce and Pitys, doth translate Pitys, Picea, although for Pcuce he hath written Larix, as shall be declared. Pliny writeth thus; Larix vstis radicibus non repullulat: and the Larch tree doth not spring vp againe when the roots are burnt: the Pitch tree springeth vp againe, as it hapned in Lesbos, when the wood Pyrthaeus was set on fire. Moreouer, the wormes Pityocampae are scarce found in any tree but onely in the Pitch tree, as Bellonius testifieth: so that they are not rashly called Pityocampae, or the wormes of the Pitch tree, although most Translators name them (...) crucae, or the the wormes of the Pine trees: and therefore Pitys is sirnamed by Theophrastus, (...), because wormes and magots are bred in it. But forsomuch as the name Pitys is common both to the tame Pine, and also to the Pitch tree, diuers of the late writers do for this cause suppose, that the Pitch tree is named by Thcophrastus, (...) or the wilde Pine tree. This Picea is named in high-Dutch, Schwartz Tannebaum, and (...) Tannebaum, and oftentimes also Jorenholtz; which name notwithstanding doth also agree with other plants: in English, Pitch tree: in low-Dutch, Peck boom.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues, barke, and fruit of the Pitch tree, are all of one nature, vertue, and operation, and of the same facultie with the Pine trees.




CHAP. 41. Of the Pine Tree.

 The Kindes.
THe Pine Tree is of two sorts, according to Theophrastus; the one (...), that is to say, tame, or of the garden; the other (...), or wilde: he saith that the Macedonians do adde a third, which is (...) or barren, or without fruit, that vnto vs is vnknowne: the later writers haue found moe as shall be declared.


Pinus sativa, sive domestica. The tame or manured Pine tree.




 The Description.
THe Pine tree groweth high, and great in the trunk or bodie, which below is naked, but aboue it is clad with a multitude of boughes, which diuide themselues into diuers branches, whereon are set small leaues, verie straight, narrow, somwhat hard and sharp pointed: the wood or timber is hard, heauy, about the heart or middle ful of an oileous liquor, and of a reddish colour: the fruit or clogs are hard, great, and consist of many sound woody scales, vnder which are included certaine knobs, without shape, couered with a woodden shell, like small nuts, wherein are white kernels, long, very sweet, and couered with a thin skin or membrane, that easily is rubbed offwith the fingers; which kernell is vsed in medicine.


 The Place.
This tree groweth of it selfe in many places of Italie, and especially in the territorie of Rauenna, and in Languedock, about Marsiles, in Spain, and in other regions, as in the East countries: it is also cherished in the gardens of pleasure, as well in the Low-countries as England.


 The Time.
The Pine tree groweth greene both winter and Sommer: the fruit it commonly two yeres before it be ripe: wherfore it is not to be found without ripe fruit, and also others as yet verie small, and not come to ripenesse.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine, Pinus, and Pinus (...), Vrbana, or rather Mansueta: in English, tame and garden Pine: of the Macedonians and other Graecians, (...): but the Arcadians name it (...) for that which the Macedonians call (...) the Arcadians name (...), as (...) saith, and so doth the tame Pine in Arcadia, and about Elia change her name: and by this alteration of them it happens that the fruit or Nuts of the Pine tree found in the Cones or Apples, be named in Greeke by Dioscorides, Galen, Paulus, and others, (...), as though they should terme it (...) sructus, or the fruit of the Pine tree.
There is also another (...) in Latine Picca, or the Pitch tree, which differeth much from the Pine tree: but Pytis of Arcadia differeth nothing from the Pine tree, as we haue said.
The fruit or apples of these be called in Greeke (...) and in Latine Coni. notwithstanding Conos is a common name to all the fruits of these kind of trees: they also be named in Latine, Nuces pineae: by (...) in Greeke (...), by Diocles Carystius, (...), which be notwithstanding the fruit or clogges of the tree that (...) nameth (...), or the wilde Pine tree, as Athenaeus saith. It is thought that the whole fruit is called by Galen in his 4. Commentarie vpon Hipocrates Bookes of Diet in sharpe diseases, Strobilos: yet in his 2. booke of the Faculties of Nourishments hee doth not call Conos or the apple by the name of Strobilos, but the nuts contained in it. And in like manner in his seuenth book of the Faculties of Simple medicines; the Pine Apple fruit, saith he, which

they call Coccalus, and Strobilus, as we haue said before, that these are named in Greeke (...). This apple is called in high Dutch, Zyrbel: in low Dutch, Pijn appel: in English, Pine apple, Clogge, and Cone.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The kernels of these nuts do concoct and moderately heate, being in a meane betweene cold and  hot: it maketh the rough parts smooth; it is a remedy against an old cough, and long infirmities of the chest, being taken by it selfe or with hony, or else with some other licking thing.
It cureth the Ptisicke, and those that pine and consume away through the rottennesse of their  lungs: it recouereth strength; it nourisheth and is restoratiue to the bodie.
It yeeldeth a thicke and good iuice, and nourisheth much, yet is it not altogether casie of digestion, and therefore it is mixed with preserues, or boyled with sugar.
The same is good for the stone in the Kidneies, and against frettings of the bladder, and scalding  of the vrine, for it alayeth the sharpnesse, mitigateth paine, and gently prouoketh vrine: moreouer, it increaseth milke and seed, and therefore it also prouoketh fleshly lust.
The whole Cone or Apple being boyled with fresh Horehound, saith Galen, and afterwards boiled  againe with a little hony til the decoction be come to the thicknesse of (...), maketh an excellent medicine for the clensing of the chest and lungs.
The like thing hath Dioscorides; the whole Cones, saith hee, which are newly gathered from the  trees, broken aud boiled in sweet wine are good for an old cough, and consumption of the lungs, if a good draught of that liquour be drunke euery day.
The scales of the Pine apple, with the barke of the tree, do stoppe the laske and the bloudy flixe, they prouoke vrine; and the decoction of the same hath the like propertie.



CHAP. 42. Of the Wilde Pine tree.


1 Pinus syluestris. The wilde Pine tree.


2 Pinus syluestris mugo. The low wilde Pine tree.




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of wilde Pine tree groweth very great, but not so high as the former, being the tame or manured Pine tree; the barke thereof is glib: the branches are spread abroad, beset with long sharpe pointed leaues: the fruit is somewhat like the (...) Pine tree, with some Rosine therein, and sweet of smell, which doth easily open it selfe, and quickely falleth from the tree.
2 The second kinde of wilde Pine tree groweth not so high as the former, neither is the stem growing straight vp, but yet it bringeth forth many branches, long, slender, and so easie to be bent or bowed, that hereof they make Hoops for wine Hogs-heads and Tuns: the fruit of this pine is greater than the fruit of any of the other wilde Pines.
3 The third kinde of wilde Pine tree groweth straight vpright, and waxeth great and high, yet not so high as the other wilde kindes: the branches do grow like the pitch tree: the fruit is long and big, almost like the fruit of the said Pitch tree; wherein are contained smal triangled nuts, like the nuts of the Pine Apple tree, but smaller, and more brittle; in which is contained a kernell of a good taste, like the kernell of the tame Pine apple: the wood is beautiful, and sweet of smell, good to make tables and other workes of.
4 There is another wilde Pine of the mountaine, not differing from the precedent but in stature, growing for the most part like a hedge tree, wherein is the difference.


3 Pinus syluestris montana. The mountaine wilde Pine tree.


4 Pinus montana minor. The smaller wilde Pine tree.


5 This kinde of Pine, called the sea Pine tree, groweth not aboue the height of two men, hauing leaues like the tame Pine tree, but shorter: the fruit is of the same forme; but longer somewhat fashioned like a Turnep: this tree yeeldeth very much Rosine. @ Bauhine iudges this all one with the third. @
6 The sixt kinde of wilde Pine being one of the Sea Pines, groweth like an hedge tree or shrub seldome' exceeding the height of a man; with little leaues like those of the Larch tree, but alwaies continuing with a very little cone, and fine small kernell.
7 The bastard wilde Pine tree groweth vp to a meane height; the trunke or bodie, as also the

5 Pinus maritima maior. The great Sea Pine tree.
6 Pinus syluestris minor. The little Sea Pine Tree.
7 Taedasive pseudopinus. The bastard wilde Pine.
@ 8 Pinaster Austriacus. Dwarfe Pine with vpright Cones.

@ 9 (...) maritimus minor: Dwarfe Sea Pine.
ches and leaues are like vnto those of the manured Pine tree: the onely difference is, that some yeares it resembleth the Pine it selfe; and the other yeares as a wilde hedge tree, varying often, as nature listeth to play and sport her selfe amongst her delights, with other plants of lesse moment: the timber is soft, and not fit for building, but is of the substance of our Birch tree: the fruit is like those of the other wilde Pines, whereof this is a kinde.
@ 8 This dwarfe Austrian Pine (...) not the height of a man, but immediately from the root is diuided and spread abroad into tough, bending, pretty thicke branches, couered ouer with a rough barke: the leaues, as in the former, come two out of one hose, thicker, shorter, blunter pointed, and more greene than the former: the cones or clogs are but small, yet round, and compact, and hang not dowewards, but stand vpright: the root is tough and wood die like other plants of this kinde: It growes on the Austrian and Styrian Alpes. Clusius sets it forth by the name of Pinaster 4. Austriacus.
9 This other Dwarfe is of the same height with the former, with such tough and bending branches, which are neither so thick nor clad with so rough a barke, nor so much spread. The leaues also are smaller, and not vnlike those of the Larix tree, but not so soft, nor falling euery yeare as they do. The cones are little and slender, the kernell small, blackish, and winged as the rest. Clusius found this onely in some few places of the kingdome of Murcia in Spaine, wherefore he calls it, Pinaster 3. Hispanicus. Dodonaeus calls it Pinus maritima minor. @


 The Place.
These wilde Pines doe grow vpon the cold mountaines of Liuonia, Polonia, Noruegia, and Russia, especially vpon the Island called Holland within the Sownd, beyond Denmarke, and in the woods by Narua, vpon the Liefeland shore, and all the tract of the way, being a thousand Wersts, (each Werst containing three quarters of an English mile) from Narua vnto Moscouia, where I haue seene them grow in infinite numbers.


 The Time.
The fruit of these Pine trees is ripe in the end of September: out of all these issueth forth a white and sweet smelling Rosine: they are also changed into Teda, and out of these is boiled through the force of the fire, a blacke Pitch: the Pitch tree and the Larch tree be also sometimes changed into Teda; yet very seldome, for Teda is a proper and peculiar infirmitie of the wilde Pine tree. A tree is said to be changed into Teda, when not onely the heart of it, but also the rest of the substance is turned into fatnesse.


 The Names.
All these are called in Greeke (...): and in Latine Syluestres Pini: of Pliny, Pinastri: Pinaster, saith he in his 16. booke. 10 chapter, is nothing else but Pinus sylvestris, or the wild Pine tree, of a lesser height, and ful of boughes from the middle, as the tame Pine tree in the top, (most of the copies haue falsely) of a maruellous height: they are far deceiued who thinke that the Pine tree is called in Greeke (...), besides the tame Pine which notwithstanding is so called not of all men, but onely of the Arcadians (as we haue said before) (...), all men do name the wilde (...); and therefore Teda, or the Torch Pine, hereof is said to be in Latine not Picea, but Pinea, that is, not the Pitch-tree, but the Pine tree, as Ouid doth planly testifie in his Heroicall Epistles;

Vt vidi, vt perij, nec not is ignibus arsi, Ardet vt admagnos Pinea Teda (...).
Also in (...) 4.
Illic accendit geminas pro lampade Pinus: Hinc Cereris sacris nunc quoque Teda datur.
The same doth Virgill also signifie in the seuenth of his Aeneid.
Ipsainter medias, flag rantem feruida Pinum Sustinet. -- -- -- -- -- --
Where in stead of Flagrantem Pinum, (...) admonisheth vs to vnderstand Teda Pinea. (...), also consenteth with them in the marriage song of Iulia and Mallius.
-- (...) Pineam quate tedam.
And Prudentius in Hymno Cerei Paschalis.
Seu Pinus piceam fert alimoniam.
Moreouer, the herbe Peucedanos, or Horestrong, so named of the likenesse of (...), is called also in Latine Pinastellum, of Pinus the Pine tree: all which things do euidently declare that (...) is called in Latine not Picea, but Pinus.
The first of these wilde kindes may be Idaea Theophrasti, or Theophrastus his Pine tree, growing on mount Ida, if the apple which is shorter were longer: for he nameth two kindes of wilde Pines, the one of mount Ida, and the other the Sea Pine with the round fruit: but we hold the contrarie, for the fruit or apple of the wilde mountaine Pine is shorter, and that of the Sea Pine longer. This may more truly be Macedonum mas, or the Macedonians male Pine, (...) they make two sorts of wilde Pines, the male and the female, and the male more writhed and harder to be wrought vpon, and the female more easie; but the wood of this is more writhed, and not so much in request for workes, as the other, and therefore it seemeth to be the male. This wilde Pine tree is called in high Dutch, Hartzbaum, and (...) Hartzbaum: in Gallia Celtica, Elvo (...): and in Spanish, Pino Carax.
The second wild Pine tree is named commonly of the Italians Tridentinis, and Ananiensibus, (...), and Cirmolo; it seemeth to differ nothing at all from the Macedonians wilde female Pine, for the wood is easie to be wrought on, and serueth for diuers and sundry workes.
The third they call Mugo: this may be named not without cause (...), that is to say, Humilis Pinus, or Dwarfe Pine: yet doth it differ from (...) the Herbe called in English, Ground Pine.
The fourth wilde Pine is named in Greeke (...) in Latine, Maritima; and Marina Pinus: in English, Sea Pine.
That which the Latines call Teda, is named in Greeke (...), and (...): in high Dutch, Kynholtz: it may be termed in English, Torch-pine.
Pliny is deceiued, in that he supposeth the Torch Pine to bee a tree by it selfe, and maketh it the sixth kinde of Cone-tree; as likewise he erreth in taking Larix, the Larch tree, for (...), the Pine Tree. And as Dioscorides maketh so little difference as scarse any, betweene (...) and (...) and supposeth them to be both of one kinde, so likewise he setteth downe faculties common to them both.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The barke of them both, saith he, doth binde; being beaten and applied it (...) Merigals, and  also shallow vlcers and burnings if it be layed on with Litharge and fine Frankincense.
With the Cerote of Myrtles it healeth vlcers in tender bodies: being beaten with Copperas it  staieth tetters, and creeping vlcers: it draweth away the birth and after birth, if it be taken vnder in a fume: being drunke it stoppeth the belly, and prouoketh vrine.
Galen hath almost the same things, but he saith, that the barke of the Pine tree is more temperate  than that of the Pitch tree; the leaues stamped take away hot swellings and sores that come thereof.
Being stamped and boyled in vineger, they asswage the paine of the teeth, if they be washed  with this decoction hot: the same be also good for those that haue bad liuers, being drunke with water or mead.
Of the same operation is likewise the barke of the pine nuts; but Galen affirmeth that the (...)

or apple, although it seeme to be like these is notwithstanding of lesser force, insomuch as it cannot effectually performe any of the aforesaid vertues, but hath in it a certaine biting qualitie, which hurteth.
The Torch Pine cut into small pieces and boiled in vineger, is a remedy likewise against the  tooth-ache if the teeth be washed with the decoction.
Of this there is made a profitable spather or slice to be vsed in making of compound plaisters  and pessaries that ease paine.
Of the smoke of this is made a blacke which serueth to make inke of, and for eating sores in the  corners of eies, and against the falling away of the haire of the (...) lids, and for watering and bleere eies, as Dioscorides teacheth.



Of Rosins.
 The Kindes.
1 OVt of the Pine trees, especially of the wilde kinds, there issueth forth a liquid, whitish, and sweet smelling Rosin, and that many times by it selfe; but more plentifully either out of the cut and broken boughes, or forth of the body when the tree commeth to be a Torch Pine.
2 there issueth also forth of the crackes and chinkes of the barke, or out of the cut boughes, a certaine dry Rosin, and that forth of the Pine Tree or Firre Tree.
There is likewise found a certaine congealed Rosin vpon the cones or apples.
It is called in Latine, Resina: in Greeke, (...): in high Dutch, Hartz: in low Dutch, Herst: in Italian, Ragia: in Spanish, Resina: in English, Rosin.
The first is named in Latine, Liquida Resina: in Greeke, (...), and of diuers, (...), that it to say, issueth out of it selfe: of the Lacedemonians, (...), or Primislua, the first flowing Rosin: and in Cicilia, (...) as Galen writeth in his third booke of medicines according to the kindes: in shops Resina Pini, or Rosin of the Pine tree, and common Rosin. It hapneth oftentimes through the negligent and carelesse gathering thereof, that certaine small pieces of wood, and little stones be found mixed with it: this kinde of Rosin Galen surnameth (...), as though he should say, confused, which being melted and clensed from the drosse becommeth hard and brittle.
The like hapneth also to another liquid Rosin, which after it is melted, boiled, and cooled againe, is hard and brittle, and may likewise be beaten, ground, and searced; and this Rosin is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Fricta, and many times Colophonia, in Greeke, (...): which name is vsed among the Apothecaries, and may stand for an English name; for Galen in his third booke of Medicines according to their kindes saith, that it is called Fricta, and of some Colophonia: that, saith he, is the driest Rosin of all, which some call Fricta, others Colophonia: because in times past, as Dioscorides writeth, it was fetched from Colophon, this being yellow or blacke in comparison of the rest, is white when it is beaten: Pliny in his 14. booke, 20. chapter.
The second Rosin is named in Greeke (...), specially that of the Pitch tree without fatnesse, and that soone waxeth dry, which Galen in his 6. booke of Medicines according to the kindes, calleth properly (...): that which in Asia is made of the Pitch tree being very white, is called Spagas, as Pliny testifieth.
The third is called in Greeke (...): the same is also named (...): this is vnknowne in shops. Yet there is to be sould a certaine dry Rosin, but the same is compounded of the Rosins of the Pine tree, of the cones or clogs, and of the Firre tree mixed altogether, which they call Garipot: this is vsed in perfumes in stead of Frankincense, from which notwithstanding it farre differeth.

 The Temperature and (...).
All the Rosins are hot and dry, but not all after one manner: for there is a difference among  them: they which be sharper and more biting, are hotter, as that which commeth of the cones, being of Rosins the hottest, because it is also the sharpest: the Rosin of the Pitch Tree is not so much biting, and therefore not so hot: the Rosin of the Firre tree is in a meane between them both; the liquid Rosin of the Pine is moister, comming neere to the qualitie and facultie of the Larch Rosin.
The Rosins which are burnt or dried, as Dioscorides testifieth, are profitable in plaisters, and compositions  that ease wearisomenesse; for they do not onely supple or mollifie, but also by reason of the thinnesse of their parts and drynesse, they digest: therefore they both mollifie and wast away swellings, and through the same facultie they cure wearisomnesse, being vsed in compound medicines for that purpose.
The liquid Rosins are very fitly mixed in ointments, commended for the healing vp of greene  wounds, for they both bring to suppuration, and do also (...) and vnite them together.

Moreouer, there is gathered out from the Rosins as from Frankencense, a congealed smoke, called  in Latine Fuligo; in Greeke (...) and in English, Blacke, which serueth for medicines that beautifie the eie lids, and cure the fretting sores of the corners of the eies, and also watering eies, for it drieth without biting.
There is made hereof saith Dioscorides, writing inke, but in our age not that which we write  withall, but the same which serueth for Printers to print their bookes with, that is to say, of this blacke, or congealed smoke, and other things added.


Of Pitch and Tar.
The manner of drawing forth of Pitch.
Out of the fattest wood of the Pine tree changed into the Torch Pine, is drawne Pitch by force of fire. A place must be paued with stone, or some other hard matter, a little higher in the middle, about which there must also be made gutters, into which the liquor shall fall; then out from them other gutters are to be drawne, by which it may be receiued; being receiued, it is put into barrels. The place being thus prepared, the clouen wood of the Torch Pine must be set vpright; then must it be couered with a great number of Fir and Pitch boughes, and on euery part all about with much lome and earth: and great heed must be taken, least there be any cleft or chinke remaining, onely a whole left in the top of the furnace, thorow which the fire may be put in, and the flame and smoke may passe out: when the fire burneth the Pitch runneth sorth, first the thin, and then the thicker.
This liquor is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Pix: in English, Pitch, and the moisture, (...) the same that first runneth is named of Plinie in his 16. booke, 11. chapter, (...): There is boyled in Europe, saith he, from the Torch Pine a liquid Pitch vsed about ships, and seruing for many other purposes; the wood being clouen is burned with fire, and set round about the (...) on euery side, after the manner of making Charcoles: the first liquor runneth thorow the gutter like water: (this in Syria is called Cedrium, which is of so great vertue, as in Aegypt the bodies of dead men are preserued, being all couered ouer with it) the liquor following being now thicker, is made Pitch. But Dioscorides writeth, that Cedria is gathered of the great Cedar tree, and (...) the liquor drawne out of the Torch tree by force of fire, (...): this is, that which the Latines call Pix liquida: the Italians, Pece liquida: in high Dutch, (...) (...): in low Durch, (...): in French, Poix foudire: in Spanish, Pex liquida: certaine Apothecaries, Kitran: and we in English, Tar.
And of this when it is boiled is made a harder Pitch: this is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Arida, or sicca Pix: of diuers, (...): as though they should say, Iterata Pix, or Pitch iterated: because it is boiled the second time. A certaine kinde hereof being made clammie or (...) is named (...): in shops, Pix naualis, or Ship Pitch: in high Dutch, Bach: in low Dutch, Steenpeck: in Italian, Pece secca: in French, Poix seche: in Spanish, Pez seca: in English, Stone Pitch.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Pitch is hot and dry, Tarre is hotter, and stone pitch more drying, as Galen writeth. Tar is good  against inflammations of the almonds of the throte, and the uvula, and likewise the Squincie, being outwardly applied.
It is a remedie for mattering eares with oile of Roses: it healeth the bitings of Serpents, if it be  beaten with salt and applied.
With an equall portion of wax it taketh away foule ilfauoured nailes, it wasteth away swellings  of the kernels, and hard swellings of the mother and fundament.
With barly meale and a boies vrine it consumeth (...), or the Kings euill: it staieth eating vlcers, if it be laid vnto them with brimstone, and the barke of the Pitch Tree, or with branne.
If it be mixed with fine Frankincense, and a cerote made thereof, it healeth chops of the fundament  and feet.
Stone Pitch doth mollifie and soften hard swellings: it ripens and maketh matter, and wasteth  away hard swellings and inflammations of kernels: it filleth vp hollow vlcers, and is fitly mixed with wound medicines.
What vertue Tarre hath when it is inwardly taken we may reade in Dioscorides and Galen, but  we set downe nothing thereof, for that no man in our age will easily vouchsafe the taking.
There is also made of Pitch a congealed smoke or blacke, which serueth (...) the same purposes, as that of the Rosins doth.




CHAP. 43. Of the Firre or Deale Tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Firre tree groweth very high and great, hauing his leaues euer greene; his trunke or body smooth, euen and straight, without ioints or knots, vntill it hath gotten branches; which are many and very faire, beset with leaues, not much vnlike the leaues of the Ewe tree, but smaller: among which come forth floures vpon the taller trees, growing at the bottomes of the leaues like little catkins, as you may see them exprest in a branch apart by themselues: the fruit is like vnto the Pine Apple, but smaller and narrower, hanging downe as the Pine Apple: the timber hereof excelleth all other timber for the masting of ships, posts, rails, deale boords, and sundry other purposes.


1 Abies. The Firre tree.


@ 2 Abies mas. The male Firre tree.


2 There is another kinde of Firre tree, which is likewise a very high and tall tree, and higher than the Pine: the body of it is straight without knots below, waxing smaller and smaller euen to the very top: about which it sendeth forth boughes, foure together out of one and the selfe same part of the body, placed one against another, in manner of a crosse, growing forth of the foure sides of the body, and obseruing the same order euen to the very top: out of these boughes grow others also, but by two and two, one placed right against another, out of the sides, which bend downwards when the other beare vpwards: the leaues compasse the boughes round about, and the branches thereof: they be long, round, and blunt pointed, narrower, and much whiter than those of the Pitch tree, that is to say, of a light greene, and in a manner of a white colour: the cones or clogs be long, and longer than any others of the cone trees, they consist of a multitude of soft scales, they hang downe from the end of the twigs, and doe not easily fall downe, but remaine on the tree a very long time: the kernels in these are small, not greater than the kernels of the Cherrie stone, with a thinne skin growing on the one side, very like almost to the wings of Bees, or great Flies: the timber or substance of the wood is white, and clad with many coats, like the head of an Onion.



@ Abietis ramus cumjulis. A branch with Catkins or floures.




 The Place.
The Firre trees grow vpon high mountains, in many woods of Germany and Bohemia, in which it continueth alwaies greene; it is found also on hils in Italy, France, and other countries; it commeth downe oftentimes into the vallies: they are found likewise in Pruse, Pomerania, Liefeland, Russia, and especially in Norway, where I haue seene the good liest trees in the world of this kinde, growing vpon the rockie and craggie mountaines, almost without any earth about them, or any other thing, sauing a little mosse about the roots, which thrust them selues here and there into the chinkes and cranies of the rockes, and therefore are easily cast downe with any extreme gale of winde. I haue seen these trees growing in Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Lancashire, where they grew in great plenty, as is reported, before Noahs floud: but then being ouerturned and ouerwhelmed haue lien since in the mosses and waterie moorish grounds very fresh and sound vntill this day, and so full of a resinous substance, that they burne like a Torch or Linke, and the inhabitants of those countries do call it Fir-wood, and Firewood vnto this day: out of this tree issueth the rosin called Thus, in English, Frank insence: but from the young Fir trees proceedeth an excellent cleare and liquid Rosin, in taste like to the peelings or outward rinde of the Pomecitron.


 The Time.
The time of the Fir tree agreeth with the Pine trees.


 The Names.
The tree is called in Latine Abies: in Greeke, (...): amongst the Graecians of our time the same name remaineth whole and vncorrupt: it is called in high Dutch, (...) (...), and (...) Thannen baum: in Low Dutch, Witte Dennen boom, or Abel-boom, and Mast-boom: in Italian, Abete: in Spanish, Abeto: in English, Firre-tree, Mast-tree, and Deale-tree. The first is called in rench, du Sap, or Sapin: the other is Suiffe.
The liquid rosin which is taken forth of the barke of the young Firre-trees, is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Lachryma abietis, and Lachryma (...): in the shops of Germany, as also of England, Terebinthina Veneta, or Venice Turpentine: in Italian, Lagrimo: diuers do thinke that Dioscorides calleth it (...), Oleasa Resina, or oile Rosin; but oile Rosin is the same that Pix liquida, or Tar is.
Arida Abietum Resina, or drie Rosin of the Fir trees, is rightly called in Greeke (...), and in Latine, (...) Resina: it hath a sweet smell, and is oftentimes vsed among other perfumes in stead of Frankincense.


 The Temperature.
Thebarke, fruit, and gums of the Fir tree, are of the nature of the Pitch tree and his gums.


 The Vertues.
The liquid Rosin of the Fir tree called Turpentine, looseth the belly, driueth forth hot cholerick  humours, clenseth and mundifieth the kidnies, prouoketh vrine, and driueth forth the stone and grauell.
The same taken with Sugar and the pouder of Nutmegs, cureth the strangurie, staieth the Gonorrhoea  or the inuoluntary issue of mans nature, called the running of the rains, and the white flux in women.
It is very profitable for all green and fresh wounds, especially the wounds of the head: for it healeth  and clenseth mightily, especially if it be washed in Plantaine water, and afterward in Rose water, the yolke of an egge put thereto, with the pouders of Olibanum and Masticke finely searced, adding thereto a little Saffron.




CHAP. 44. Of the Larch Tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Larch is a tree of no small height, with a body growing straight vp: the bark wherof in the nether part beneath the boughes is thicke, rugged, and full of chinks; which being cut in sunder is red within, and in the other part aboue smooth, (...), something whitewithout: it bringeth forth many boughes diuided into other lesser branches, which be tough and pliable. The leaues are small, and cut into many iags, growing in (...) thicke together like tassels, which fall away at the approch of Winter: the floures or rather the first shewes of the cones or fruit be round, and grow out of the tenderest boughes, being at the length of a braue red purple colour: the cones be small, and like almost in bignesse to those of the Cypresse tree, but longer, and made vp of a multitude of thin scales like leaues: vnder which lie small seeds, hauing a thin (...) growing on them very like to the wings of Bees and wasps: the substance of the wood is very hard, of colour, especially that in the midst, somewhat red, and very profitable for workes of long continuance.


1 Laricis ramulus. A branch of the Larch tree.


2 Larix cum Agarico suo. The Larch tree with his Agarick.


It is not true that the wood of the Larch tree tree cannot be set on fire, as Vitruvius reporteth of the castle made of Larch wood, which (...) besieged, for it burneth in chimneies, and is turned into coles, which are very profitable for Smithes, as Matthiolus writeth.
There is also gathered of the Larch tree a liquid Rosin, very like in colour and substance to the whiter hony, as that of Athens or of Spaine, which notwithstanding issueth not forth of it selfe, but runneth out of the stocke of the tree, when it hath been bored euen to the heart with a great and long auger and wimble.
Galen writeth, that there be after a sort two kindes hereof, in his 4. booke of Medicines, according to the kinds, one like vnto Turpentine, the other more sharper than this, hotter, more liquid

of a stronger smell, and in taste bitterer and hotter: but the later is thought not to be the Rosine of the Larch, but of the Fir-tree, which Galen because it is after a sort like in substance, might haue taken for that of the Larch tree.
There groweth also vpon the Larch tree a kinde of Mushrum or excrescence, not such as is vpon other trees, but whiter, softer, more loose and spungie than any other of the Mushrums, and good for medicine, which beareth the name of Agaricus, or Agaricke: I find that Pliny supposeth all the Masticke trees, and those that beare Galls, do bring forth this Agaricum: wherein he was somewhat deceiued, and especially in that he took Glandifera for Conifera, that is, those trees which beare mast or Acornes, for the Pine apple trees: but among all the trees that beare Agaricus, the Larch is the chiefe, and bringeth most plenty of Agarick.


 The Place.
The Larch tree groweth not in Greece, or in Macedon, but chiefely vpon the Alpes of Italy, not far from Trent, hard by the riuers Benacus and Padus; and also in other places of the same mountaines: it is likewise found on hils in Morauia, which in times past was called the countrey of the Marcomans: Fuchsius writeth, that it groweth also in Silesia: others, in Lusatia, in the borders of Poland: it also groweth plentifully in the woods of Gallia Cesalpina.
Pliny hath said somewhat hereof, contradicting the writings of others, in his 16 book, 8 chapter, where he saith, that specially the Acorne trees of France do beare Agaricke, and not only the acorn trees, but the Cone trees also; among which, saith he, the Larch tree is the chiefe that bringeth forth Agaricke, and that not onely in Gallia, which now is called France, but rather in Lumbardy and Piemont in Italy, where there be whole woods of Larch trees, although they be found in some smal quantitie in other countries.
The best Agarick is that which is whitest, very loose and spungie, which may easily be broken, and is light, and in the first taste sweet, hard, and well compact: that which is heauy, blackish, and containing in it little threds as it were of sinewes, is counted pernicious and deadly.


 The Time.
Of all the Cone trees onely the Larch tree is found to be without leaues in the Winter: in the Spring grow fresh leaues out of the same knobs, from which the former did fall. The cones are to be gathered before winter, so soone as the leaues are gone: but after the scales are loosed and opened, the seeds drop away: the Rosine must be gathered in the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine also Larix, in Italian and Spanish, Larice: in high Dutch, Lerchenbaum: in low Dutch Lorkenboom: in French, Melese: in English, Larch tree, and of some Larix tree.
The liquid Rosin is named by Galen also (...): the Latines call it Resina Larigna, or Resina Laricea, Larch Rosin: the Italians, Larga: the Apothecaries, Terebinthina, or Turpentine, and it is sold and also mixed in medicines in stead thereof: neither is that a thing newly done; for Galen likewise in his time reporteth, that the Druggers sold the Larch Rosine in stead of Turpentine: and this may bee done without errour; for Galen himselfe in one place vseth Larch Rosin for Turpentine; and in another, Turpentine for Larch Rosine, in his booke of medicines according to the kindes.
The Agaricke is also called in Greeke (...) and (...): in Latine, Agaricum and Agaricus, and so likewise in shops: the Italians, Spaniards, and other nations do imitate the Greeke word; and (...) English we call it Agaricke.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues, barke, fruit and kernell, are of temperature like vnto the Pine, but not so strong.
The Larch Rosin is of a moister temperature than all the rest of the Rosines, and is withall without  sharpnesse or biting, much like to the right Turpentine, and is fitly mixed with medicines which perfectly cure vlcers and greene wounds.
All Rosins, saith Galen, that haue this kinde of moisture and clamminesse ioined with them, do as  it were binde together and vnite dry medicines, and because they haue no euident biting qualitie, they doe moisten the vlcers nothing at all: therefore diuers haue very well mixed with such compound medicines either Turpentine Rosin, or Larch Rosin: thus far Galen. Moreouer, Larch Rosin performeth all such things that the Turpentine Rosin doth, vnto which, as we haue said, it is much like in temperature, which thing likewise Galen himselfe affirmeth.
Agaricke is hot in the first degree and dry in the second, according to the old writers. It cutteth, maketh thin, clenseth, taketh away obstructions or stoppings of the intrailes, and purgeth also by stoole.
Agaricke cureth the yellow iaundice proceeding of obstructions, and is a sure remedie for cold  shakings, which are caused of thicke and cold humors.
The same being inwardly taken and outwardly applied, is good for those that are bit of venomous  beasts which hurt with their cold poison.

It prouoketh vrine, and bringeth downe the menses: it maketh the body well co loured, driueth  forth wormes, cureth agues, especially quotidians and wandring feuers, and others that are of long continuance, if it be mixed with fit things that serue for the disease: and these things it performes by drawing forth and purging away grosse, cold, and flegmaticke humors, which cause the diseases.
From a dram weight, or a dram and a halfe, to two, it is giuen at once in substance or in pouder: the weight of it in an infusion or decoction is from two drams to fiue.
But it purgeth slowly, and doth somewhat trouble the stomacke; and therefore it is appointed  that Ginger should be mixed with it, or wilde Carrot seed, or Louage seed, or Sal gem, in Latine, Salfossilis.
Galen, as Mesue reporteth, gaue it with wine wherein Ginger was infused: some vse to giue it  with Oxymel, otherwise called syrrup of vineger, which is the safest way of all.
Agaricke is good against the paines and swimming in the head, or the falling Euill, being taken  with syrrup of vineger.
It is good against the shortnesse of breath, called Asthma, the inueterate cough of the lungs, the  ptysicke, consumption, and those that spet bloud: it comforteth the weake and seeble stomacke, causeth good digestion, and is good against wormes.



CHAP. 45. Of the Cypresse tree.


Cupressus satiua and syluestris. The Garden and wild Cypresse tree.



 The Description.
THe tame or manured Cypresse tree hath a long thicke and straight body; whereupon many slender branches do grow, which do not spred abroad like the branches of other trees, but grow vp alongst the body, yet not touching the top: they grow after the fashion of a steeple, broad below, and narrow toward the top: the substance of the wood is hard, sound, well compact, sweet of smell, and somewhat yellow, almost like the yellow Saunders, but not altogether so yellow, neither

doth it rot nor wax old, nor cleaueth or choppeth itself. The leaues are long, round like those of Tamariske, but fuller of substance. The fruit or nuts do hang vpon the boughes, being in manner like to those of the Larch tree, but yet thicker and more closely compact: which being ripe do of themselues part in sunder, and then falleth the seed, which is shaken out with the winde: the same is small, flat, very thin, of a swart ill fauoured colour, which is pleasant to Ants or Pismires, and serueth them for food.
Of this diuers make two kindes, the female and the male; the female barren, and the male fruitfull. Theophrastus reporteth, that diuers affirme the male to come of the female. The Cypresse yeelds forth a certaine liquid Rosin, like in substance to that of the Larch tree, but in taste maruellous sharpe and biting.
The wilde Cypresse, as Theophrastus writeth, is an high tree, and alwaies greene, so like to the other Cypresse, as it seemeth to be the same both in boughes, body, leaues, and fruit, rather than a certaine wilde Cypresse: the matter or substance of the wood is sound, of a sweet smell, like that of the Cedar tree, which rotteth not: there is nothing so crisped as the root, and therefore they vse to make precious and costly workes thereof.
@ I know no difference betweene the wilde and tame Cypresse of our Author, but in the handsomnesse of their growth, which is helped somewhat by art. @


 The Place.
The tame and manured (...) groweth in hot countries, as in Candy, Lycia, Rhodes, and also in the territorie of Cyrene: it is reported to be likewise found on the hills belonging to Mount Ida, and on the hills called Leuci, that is to say white, the tops whereof be alwaies couered with snow. Bellonius denieth it to be found vpon the tops of these hills, but in the bottoms on the rough parts and ridges of the hills: it groweth likewise in diuers places of England where it hath beene planted, as at Sion a place neere London, sometime a house of Nunnes: it groweth also at Greenwich, and at other places, and likewise at Hampsted in the garden of Mr. Wade, one of the Clerkes of her Maiesties priuy Councell.
The wilde kinde of Cypresse tree groweth hard by Ammons Temple, and in other parts of the countrey of Cyrene vpon the tops of mountaines, and in extreme cold countries. Bellonius affirmeth, that there is found a certaine wilde Cypresse also in Candy, which is not so high as other Cypresse trees, nor groweth sharpe toward the top, but is lower, and hath his boughes spred flat, round about in compasse: he saith the body thereof is also thicke: but whether this be Thya, of which Theophrastus and Pliny make mention, we leaue it to consideration.


 The Time.
The tame Cypres tree is alwaies greene; the fruit may be gathered thrice a yeare, in (...) May, and September, and therefore it is syrnamed Trifera.
The wilde Cypres tree is late, and very long before it buddeth.


 The Names.
The tame Cypres is called in Greeke, (...), or (...): in Latine, (...): in shops, Cypressus: in Italian, Cypresso: in French and Spanish, Cipres: in high-Dutch, Cipressenbaum: in lowDutch, Cypresse boom: in English, Cypres, and Cypres tree.
The fruit is named in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Pilulae Cupressi, Nuces Cupressi, and Galbuli: in shops, Nuces Cypressi: in English, Cypres nuts or clogs. This tree in times past was dedicated to Pluto, and was said to be deadly; whereupon it is thought that the shadow thereof is vnfortunate.
The wilde Cypres tree is called in Greeke, (...) or (...), and (...): from this doth differ (...), being a name not of a plant, but of a mortar in which dry things are beaten: Thya, as Pliny writeth, lib. 13. cap. 16. was well knowne to Homer: he sheweth that this is burned among the sweet smells, which Circe was much delighted withall, whom he would haue to be taken for a goddesse, to their blame that call sweet and odoriferous smells, euen all of them, by that name; because he doth especially make mention withall in one verse, of Cedrus and Thya: the copies haue falsly Larix, or Larch tree, in which it is manifest that he spake onely of trees: the verse is extant in the fift booke of Odysses, where he mentioneth, that Mercurie by Iupiters commandement went to Calypsus den, and that he did smell the burnt trees Thya and Cedrus a great way off.
Theophrastus attributeth great honor to this tree, shewing that the roofs of old Temples became famous by reason of that wood, and that the timber thereof, of which the rafters are made is euerlasting, and it is not hurt there by rotting, cobweb, nor any other infirmitie or corruption.


 The Temperature.
The fruit and leaues of the Cypres are dry in the third degree, and astringent.


 The Vertues.
The Cypres nuts being stamped and drunken in wine, as Dioscorides writeth, stoppeth the laske  and bloudy flix, it is good against the spitting of bloud and all other issues of bloud.

They glue and heale vp great vlcers in hard bodies: they safely and without harme soke vp and  consume the hid and secret moisture lying deepe and in the bottome of weake and moist infirmities.
The leaues and nuts are good to cure the rupture, to take away the Polypus, being an excrescence  growing in the nose.
Some do vse the same against (...) and eating sores, mixing them with parched Barley  meale.
The leaues of Cypres boyled in sweet wine or Mede, helpes the strangurie and difficulty of making  water.
It is reported, that the smoke of the leaues doth driue away gnats, and that the clogs do so likewise.
The shauings of the wood laid among garments preserueth them from the moths: the rosin killeth  Moths, little wormes, and magots. 

Our Author in this chapter hath put together two chapters of (...); the one of Cypresse, the other of (...), out of (...) and others. Vid. Pempt. 6. (...). (...). cap. 7 and 8.




CHAP. 46. Of the Tree of Life.


Arhor Vitae. The Tree of Life.



 The Description.
THe tree Tree of Life groweth to the height of a small tree, the barke being of a darke reddish colour: the timber very hard, the branches spreading themselues abroad, hanging down toward the ground by reason of the weakenesse of the twiggie branches surcharged with very oileous and ponderous leaues, casting, and spreading themselues like the feathers of a wing, resembling those of the Sauine tree, but thicker, broader, and more ful of gummie or oileous substance: which being (...) in the hands do yeeld an aromatick, spicie, or gummie sauor, very pleasant, and comfortable; amongst the leaues come forth small yellowish floures, which in my garden fall away without any fruit: but as it hath beene reported by those that haue seene the same, there followeth a fruit in hot regions, much like vnto the fruit of the Cypres tree, but smaller, compact of little and thinne scales closely pact one vpon another, which my selfe haue not yet seene. The branches of this tree laid downe in the earth wil very easily take root, euen like the Woodbinde or some such plant; which I haue often proued, and thereby haue greatly multiplied these trees.


 The Place.
This tree groweth not wilde in England, but it groweth in my garden very plentifully.


 The Time.
It endureth the cold of our Northerne clymat, yet doth it lose his gallant greenes in the winter moneths: it floureth in my garden about May.


 The Names.
Theophrastus and Pliny, as some thinke, haue called this sweet and aromatical tree Thuia, or Thya: some call it (...) Lycia: the new writers do terme it Arbor vitae: in English, the tree of life, I doe not meane that whereof mention is made, Gen. 3. 22.


 The Temperature.
Both the leaues and boughes be hot and dry.


 The Vertues.
Among the plants of the New-found land, this Tree, which Theophrastus calls Thuia, or (...),

is the most principal, and best agreeing vnto the nature of man, as an excellent cordial, and of a very pleasant smell.



CHAP. 47. Of the Yew tree.


Taxus. The Yew tree.



 The Description.
@ IN stead of the description and place mentioned by our Author (which were not amisse) giue me leaue to present you with one much more accurate, sent me by Mr. Iohn Goodyer.
Taxus glandifera bacciferaque. The Yew bearing Acornes and berries.
THe Yew tree that beareth Acornes and berries is a great high tree remaining alwaies greene, and hath vsually an huge trunke or body as big as the Oke, couered ouer with a scabbed or scaly barke, often pilling or falling off, and a yong smooth barke appearing vnderneath; the timber hereof is somewhat red, neere as hard as Box, vniuersally couered next the barke with a thickewhite sap like that of the Oke, and hath many big limmes diuided into many smal spreading branches: the leaues be about an inch long, narrow like the leaues of Rosemary, but smooth, and of a darker greene colour, growing all alongst the little twigs or branches close together, seldome one opposite against another, often hauing at the ends of the twigs little branches composed of many leaues like the former, but shorter and broader, closely compact or ioyned together: amongst the leaues are to be seene at all times of the yeare, small slender buds somewhat long, but neuer any floures; which at the very beginning of the Spring grow bigger and bigger, till they are of the fashion (...) little Acornes, with a white kernell within: after they are of this forme, then groweth vp from the bottomes of the Acornes a reddish matter, making beautiful reddish berries more long than round, smooth on the out side, very clammie within, and of a sweet taste, couering all the Acorne, onely leauing a little hole at the top, where the top of the Acorne is to be seene: these (...), or deuoured by birds, leaue behinde them a littlewhitish huske made of a few scales, appearing like a little floure, which peraduenture may deceiue some, taking it to be so indeed: it seemes this tree, if it were not hindred by cold weather, would alwaies haue Acornes and berries on him, for he hath alwaies little buds, which so soone as the Spring yeelds but a reasonable heate, they grow iuto the forme of Acornes: about the beginning of August, seldome before, you shall finde them turned into ripe berries, and from that time till Christmasse, or a little after, you may see on him both Acornes and red berries.


Taxus tantum florens. The Yew which only floures.
The Yew which onely beareth floures and no berries, is like the other in trunke, timber, barke, and leaues; but at the beginning of Nouember, or before, this tree doth beginne to be very thicke set or fraught on the lower side or part of the twigs or little branches, with small round buds, verie neere as big, and of the colour of Radish seed, and do so continue all the Winter, till about the beginning or middle of Februarie, when they open at the top, sending forth one small sharpe pointall, little longer than the huske, diuided into many parts, or garnished towards the top with many

small dusty things like floures, of the colour of the husks; and if you shall beate or throw stones into this tree about the end of Februarie, or a good space after, there will proceed and fly from these floures an aboundance of dustie smoke. These dusty floures continue on the trees till about haruest, and then some and some fall away, and shortly after the round buds come vp as aforesaid.


 The Place.
These trees are both very common in England: in Hampshire there is good plentie of them growing wilde on the chalkie hills, and in Church-yards where they haue been planted.


 The Time.
The time is expressed in their descriptions. Dec. 19. 1621. Iohn Goodyer. @


 The Names.
This tree is named by Dioscorides, (...): by Theophrastus, (...): but Nicander in his book of Counterpoysons, (...): Galen doth also call it (...): it is named in Latine Taxus: in high-Dutch, Eybenbaum: in low-Dutch, Ibenboom: in Italian, Tasso: in Spanish, Toxo, and Taxo: in French, Yf: in English, Ewe, or Yew tree: in the vnlearned shops of Germany, if any of them remaine, it is called Tamariscus; where in times past they were wont not without great error, to mix the bark hereof in compound medicines, in stead of the Tamariske barke.


 The Temperature.
The Yew tree, as Galen reporteth, is of a venomous qualitie, and against mans nature. Dioscorides writeth, and generally all that heretofore haue dealt in the facultie of Herbarisme, that the Yew tree is very venomous to be taken inwardly, and that if any doe sleepe vnder the shadow thereof it causeth sicknesse and oftentimes death. Moreouer, they say that the fruit thereof being eaten is not onely dangerous and deadly vnto man, but if birds do eat thereof, it causeth them to cast their feathers, and many times to die. All which I dare boldly affirme is altogether vntrue: for when I was yong and went to schoole, diuers of my schoole-fellowes and likewise my selfe did eat our fils of the berries of this tree, and haue not only slept vnder the shadow thereof, but among the branches also, without any hurt at all, and that not one time, but many times. Theophrastus saith, That (...), animalia, Gaza translates them Iumenta, or labouring beasts, do die, if they do eat of the leaues; but such cattell as chew their cud receiue no hurt at all thereby.
Nicander in his book of Counterpoisons doth reckon the Yew tree among the venomous plants, setting downe also a remedie, and that in these words, as Gorraeus hath translated them.

Parce venenata Taxo, quae surgit in Oeta
Abietibus similis, lethoque absumit acerbo
Ni praeter morempleno cratere meraca
Fundere vina pares, cum primum sentiet aeger
Arctari obstructas fauces animaeque canalem.


@ Shun th' poys'nous Yew, the which on Oeta growes,
Like to the Firre, it causes bitter death;
Vnlesse besides thy vse pure wine that flowes
From empty'd cups, thou drinke, when as thy breath
Begins to faile, and passage of thy life
Growes strait. --

Pena and Lobel also obserued that which our Author here affirmes, and dayly experience shewes it to be true, that the Yew tree in England is not poysonous: yet diuers affirme, that in Prouince in France, and in most hot countries, it hath such a maligne qualitie, that it is not safe to sleepe or long to rest vnder the shadow thereof. @



CHAP. 48. Of the Iuniper tree.

 The Kindes.
AMong the Iuniper trees one is lesser, another greater, being a strange and forreine tree: one of these bringeth forth a floure and no fruit; the other fruit and no floures.


 The Description.
1 THe common Iuniper tree groweth in some parts of Kent vnto the stature and bignes of a faire great tree, but most commonly it growes very low like vnto ground Furres: this

1 Iuniperus. The Iuniper tree.
2 Iuniperus maxima. The great Iuniper tree.
@ 3 Iuniperus Alpina minor. Small Iuniper of the Alps.
tree hath a thin bark or rinde, which in hot regions will chop and rend it self into many (...) or pieces: out of which rifts issueth a certaine gum or liquour much like vnto Frankincense: the leaues are very small, narrow, and hard, and somwhat prickly, growing euer green along the branches, thicke together: amongst which come forth round and small berries, greene at the first, but afterward blacke declining to blewnesse, of a good sauor, and sweet in taste, which do wax somwhat bitter after they be dry and withered.
2 The great Iuniper tree comes now and then to the height of the Cypres tree, with a greater and harder lease, and also with a fruit as big as Oliue berries, as Bellonius writeth, of an exceeding faire blew colour, and of an excellent sweet sauor.
@ 3 This exceeds not the height of a cubit, but growes low, and as it were creeps vpon the ground, and consists of sundry thicker and shorter branches than the common kind, tough also, writhen, and hard to breake; 3 leaues alwaies growing at equall distances, as in the common, but yet broader, shorter, and thicker, neither lesse pricking than they, of a whitish greene colour on the inside, and green without, incompasse the tender branches. Clusius, who giues vs this figure and historie, obserued (...) the floure, but the fruit is like that of the (...),

but yet somewhat longer; It growes vpon the Austrian Alpes, and ripens the fruite in August and September. @


 The Place.
The common Iuniper tree is found in very many places, especially in the South parts of England.
Bellonius reporteth, that the greater groweth vpon mount Taurus: Aloisius Anguillara writeth, that it is found on the sea shores of the Ligurian and Adriaticke sea and in Illyricum, bringing forth great berries: and others say that it growes in Prouence of France: it commeth vp for the most part in rough places and neere to the sea, as Dioscorides noteth.


 The Time.
The Iuniper tree floureth in May; the floure whereof is nothing else but as it were a little yellowish dust or powder strowed vpon the boughes. The fruit is ripe in September, and is seldome found either winter or Sommer without ripe and vnripe berries, and all at one time.


 The Names.
The Iuniper tree is called in Greeke (...): the Apothecaries keepe the Latine name Iuniperus: the Arabians call it Archonas and (...): the Italians, Ginepro: in high Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Enebro, (...), and Zimbro: the French men and base Almaines (...): in English, Iuniper tree.
The lesser is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Iuniperus. The great Iuniper Tree is called as some thinke in Greeke (...): in Latine (by Lobel) Iuniperus maximus Illyricus (...) bacca, by reason of the colour of the berries, and may be called in English, blew Iuniper.
The berries are called Grana Iuniperi: in Greeke, (...), although the Tree it selfe also is oftentimes called by the same name (...): it is termed in high Dutch, Krametbeer, (...): in low Dutch, Genevrebesien: in Spanish, Neurinas: in English, Iuniper berries.
The gum of the Iuniper tree is vsually called of the Apothecaries Vernix: in Latine, Lachryma (...): Scrapio nameth it Sandarax and Sandaracha; but there is another Sandaracha among the Grecians, being a kinde of Orpment, which growes in the same minerals wherein Orpment doth, and this doth farre differ from Vernix, or the Iuniper gum. Pliny in his 11. booke, 7. chapter maketh mention also of another Sandaracha, which is called (...) and Cerinthus: this is the meate of Bees whilest they be about their worke.


 The Temperature.
Iuniper is hot and dry, and that in the third degree, as Galen teacheth; the berries are also hot, but not altogether so drie: the gum is hot and dry in the first degree, as the Arabians write.


 The Vertues.
The fruite of the Iuniper tree doth clense the liuer and kidnies, as Galen testifieth: it also maketh  thin clammie and grosse humors: it is vsed in counterpoysons and other wholesome medicines: being ouer largely taken it causeth gripings and gnawings in the stomacke, and maketh the head hot: it neither bindeth nor looseth the belly: it prouoketh vrine.
Dioscorides reporteth, that this being drunke is a remedy against the infirmitie of the chest, coughes, windines, gripings and poisons, and that the same is good for those that be troubled with cramps, burstings, and with the disease called the mother.
It is most certaine that the decoction of these berries is singular good against an old cough, and  against that with which children are now and then extremely troubled, called the Chin cough, in which they vse to rise vp raw, tough and clammy humors, that haue many times bloud mixed with them.
Diuers in Bohemia do take in stead of other drinke, the water wherein those berries haue been  steeped, who liue in wonderfull good health.
This is also drunke against poisons and pestilent feuers, and it is not vnpleasant in the drinking: when the first water is almost spent, the vessell is againe filled vp with fresh.
The smoke of the leaues and wood driueth away serpents, and all infection and corruption of  the aire, which bring the plague, or such like contagious diseases: the iuice of the leaues is laid on with wine, and also drunke against the bitings of the viper.
The ashes of the burned barke, being applied with water, take away scurffe and filth of the  (...).
The powder of the wood being inwardly taken, is pernicious and deadly, as Dioscorides vulgar  copies do affirme; but the true copies vtterly deny it, neither do any of the old writers affirme it.
The fume and smoke of the gum doth stay flegmaticke humors that distill out of the head, and  stoppeth the rheume: the gum doth stay raw and flegmaticke humors that sticke in the stomacke and guts, if it be inwardly taken, and also drunke.
It killeth all maner of wormes in the belly, it staieth the menses, and hemorrhodes: it is commended  also against spitting of bloud; it dryeth hollow (...), and filleth them with flesh, if it be (...) thereon: being mixed with oile of Roses, it healeth chops in the hands and feet.

There is made of this and of oile of Lineseed, mixed together, a liquor called Vernish, which  is vsed to beautifie pictures and painted tables with, and to make iron glister, and to (...) it from the rust.



CHAP. 49. Of the prickly Cedar, or Cedar Iuniper.

 The Kindes:
THe prickly Cedar tree is like to Iuniper, and is called the small or little Cedar, for difference from the great and tall Cedar, which bringeth Cones; and of this there are two kindes, as Theophrastus and Pliny do testifie, that is to say, one of Lycia, and another crimson.


 The Description.
1 THe Crimson or prickly Cedar seemeth to be very like to the Iuniper tree in body and boughes, which are writhed, knotty, and parted into very many wings: the substance of the wood is red, and sweet of smell like that of the Cypresse; the tree is couered ouer with a rugged barke: the leaues be narrow and sharpe pointed, harder than those of Iuniper, sharper and more pricking, and standing thinner vpon the branches: the fruite or berry is sometimes as big as a hasell nut, or, as Theophrastus saith, of the bignesse of Myrtle berries, and being ripe it is of a reddish yellow, or crimson colour, sweet of smell, and so pleasant in taste, as euen the countrey-men now and than do eate of the same with bread.


1 Oxycedrus Phoenicia. Crimson prickly Cedar.


3 Oxycedrus Lycia. Rough Lycian Cedar.


2 The other low Cedar which growes in Lycia is not so high as the former, hauing likewise a writhed body as big as a mans arme, full of boughes; the barke is rough, yellowish without, and red within: the leaues stand thicker, like at the first to those of Iuniper, but yet somewhat shorter, and in the third or fourth yeere thicker, long and round withall, comming neere to the leaues

@ 3 Cedrus Lycia altera. The other Lycian Cedar.
of the Cypres tree, or of the second Sauine, that is, blunt, and not pricking at all, which being bruised betweene the fingers do yeeld a very pleasant smel: so doth one and the selfe same plant bring forth below sharpe and prickly leaues, and aboue thick and blunt ones, as that notable learned Herbarist Clusius hath most diligently obserued: the fruit or berry is round like that of Iuniper, of colour yellow when it is ripe, inclining to a red, in taste somwhat bitter, but sweet of smell.
@ 3 This also hath Cypresse-like leaues, not vnlike those of the last described, yet somwhat thicker and broader: the fruit is also much larger, being as big as Hasell nuts, and of a red or skarlet colour; whence Lobel calleth it Cedrus Phoenicia altera. @


 The Place.
The prickely Cedar with the crimson colour commeth vp higher and greater in certaine places of Italy, Spaine, and Asia, and in other Countries; for that which grows on mount Garganus in Apulia is much higher and broader than those that grow elsewhere, and bringeth forth greater berries, of the bignesse of an hasell nut, and sweeter, as that most diligent writer Bellonius reporteth. Carolus Clusius sheweth, that the prickely Cedar and the Iuniper tree be of so great a growth in diuers places of Spaine, as he hath obserued, as that the body of them is as thicke as a man.
The Lycian Cedar is found in Prouence of France, not far from Massilia, and groweth in a great part of Greece, in Illyricum and Epirum.


 The Time.
Both of them are alwaies greene, and in Winter also full of fruit, by reason that they continually bring forth berries, as when the old do fall new (...) in their places: in the spring grow vp new buds and beginnings of berries: in Autumne they wax ripe the second yeare, as doe the berries of Iuniper.


 The Names.
They are called in Latine, Minores, and Humiles Cedri, little and low Cedars, for difference from the tall and great Cedar which beareth Cones.
The former is named in Greeke, (...), and (...): in Latine, Oxycedrus, and Cedrus Punica: in English, Prickly Cedar, and Crimson Cedar: Pliny syrnameth it Phoenicea, of the crimson colour of the fruit: the Spaniards call this also Enebro, as Clusius testifieth, (...) by the same name which they giue to the Iuniper: wherein likewise they are thought to imitate diuers of the old Writers, who haue not by names distinguished the Iuniper from the Cedar, but haue, as (...) noteth, called them Cedros, Cedar trees; yet with an addition, (...), or prickly Cedar.
The other with the blunt leafe is named by Theophrastus, (...): of Pliny also, Lycia Cedrus: in Prouince of France, (...): diuers name this Sabina, and vse it in stead of Sauine, which they want; as the Apothecaries of Epidaurus, and in diuers cities of Greece, and also in Illyricum and Epirum, as Bellonius testifieth. Some would haue it to be (...), Thya; but Thya, according to (...), is like, not onely in body, leaues, and boughes, but in fruit also, to the Cypresse tree, but the fruit of this is nothing like to the Cypresse Cones.
The fruit of this Cedar is named by Theophrastus, (...), Cedris: notwithstanding Cedrus, as hee himselfe doth also testifie ((...) nameth it Credula) is a certaine little shrub which neuer groweth to a tree.
The gum or liquor which issueth forth of the prickly Cedar is also called Vernix, and is sold in stead thereof.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The little Cedar, as Galen writeth, is hot and dry in a manner in the third degree: the matter or  substance thereof is sweet of smell, like that of Iuniper, and is vsed for perfumes and odoriferous smells together with the leaues.

The berries or fruit of the low Cedar haue the faculties not so strong, as the same Author testifieth, insomuch as that they may also be eaten, yet if they be taken too plentifully, they cause head-ache, and breed heate and gnawings in the stomacke. Yet (...) is a difference between these two Cedar berries; for the crimson ones are not so hot and dry, by (...) they are sweeter and pleasanter to the taste, and therefore they are better to be eaten, and do also yeeld vnto the body a kind of nourishment: but the berries of that of Lycia are biting, hotter and drier also than those of Iuniper, from which they differ especially in the biting qualitie, they bring no nourishment at all, and though a man eate neuer so few of them he shall feele gnawings in his stomacke, and paine in his head.
The Peasants do feed thereon rather to satisfie their (...), than for any delight they haue in  the taste, or the physicall vertues thereof; albeit they be good against the strangurie, and prouoke vrine.



CHAP. 50. Of Sauin.

 The Kindes.
THere be two kindes of Sauin; one like in leafe to Tamariske, the other to the Cypresse tree; whereof the one beareth berries, the other is barren.


1 Sabina sterilis. Barren Sauin.


2 Sabina baccifera. Sauin bearing berries.




 The Description.
1 THe first Sauin, which is the common kind, and best of all knowne in this country, groweth in manner of a low shrub or tree: the stem or trunke whereof is somtimes as big as a mans arme, diuiding it selfe into many branches set full of small leaues like vnto Cypres, or (...), but thicker, and more sharpe or prickely, remaining greene Winter and Sommer, in smell (...) or very strong, barren both of floures and fruit.



@ 3 Sabina baccata altera. The lesser berry-bearing Sauin.


2 The other Sauin is an high tree, as (...) saith, as tall as the Almond tree, and much like to the tame Cypresse tree: the bodie is writhed, thicke, and sometimes of so great a compasse as that it cannot be fathomed; the substance of the wood is red within, as is that of the Iuniper, and of the prickely Cedar: the barke is not very thicke, and it is of a yellowish red: the leaues are of a maruellous gallant greene colour, like to those of the Cypres tree, yet thicker or more in number; in taste bitter, of a spicie smell, and like Rosin: the boughes are broader, and thicke set as it were with wings, like those of the Pitch tree and of the Yew tree: on which grow a great number of berries, very round like those of the little Cedars, which at the first are green, but when they be ripe they are of a blackish blew. Out of the root hereof issueth oftentimes a rosin, which being hard is like to that of the Iuniper tree, and doth also crumble in the chewing.
@ 3 There is another, which differs from the last described onely in that the leaues are smaller and lesse pricking than those of the former, as also the branches lesser: Lobel calls this Sauina baccata altera. @


 The Place.
Both of them grow vpon hills in woods, and in other like vntoiled places, as in Candy, Mysia, and elsewhere. P. Bellonius reporteth that he found them both vpon the tops of the mountaines Taurus, Amanus, and Olympus.
The first is planted in our English gardens almost euery where: the second is planted both by the seed (...) by the slip: the slips must be set in a ground that is meanly moist and shadowie, till they haue taken root: the shrubs which grow of these decline toward the one side, retaining still the nature of the bough: but that Sauin which is planted by the seed groweth more vpright; this in continuance of time bringeth forth seeds, and the other for the most part remaines barren: both these grow in my garden.


 The Time.
They both continue alwaies greene: the one is found to be loden with ripe fruit commonly in Winter, but it hath fruit at all times; for before the old berries fall, new are come vp.


 The Names.
Sauine is called in Greeke (...), or (...): in Latine, Sabina.
The first is commonly called in the Apothecaries shops by the name Sauina: of diuers, (...): the Italians and Spaniards keepe the Latine name: it is called in high-Dutch, Siben baum: in low-Dutch, Sauel boom: in French, Sauenier: in English, common Sauine, or garden Sauine.
Some name the other Cupressus Cretica, or Cypres of Candy, as Pliny saith, lib. 12. cap. 17. making mention of a tree called Bruta: some there are that take this to be altera Sabina, or the second (...), and to be read Bruta for (...), Brathu, by altering of the vowels. For it is described by Plin. li. 12. cap. 17. to be like the Cypresse tree, in these words; They seeke in the mountaine Elimaei the tree Bruta, being like to the broad Cypres tree, hauing white boughes, yeelding a sweet smell when it is set on fire; whereof mention is made with a miracle, in the stories of Claudius Caesar. It is reported that the Parthians do vse the leaues in drinks; that the smell is very like to that of the Cypres tree, and that the smoke thereof is a remedie against other woods. It groweth beyond Pasitigris, neere vnto the towne Sittaca, on mount Zagrus. Thus far Pliny.
The mountaines Elimaei are described by Strabo in the countrey of the Assyrians, next after the mountaine Sagrus aboue the Babylonians; by Ptolomaeus not far from the Persian gulfe: therefore it is hard to say that Bruta is Sabina (...), or the second Sauine, seeing that so great a distance of the place may vndoubtedly cause a difference, and that it is not largely but briefely described. It (...) that Thya mentioned by Theophrastus is more like vnto Sauine: but yet forasmuch as Thya is like in (...) to the Cypres tree, and not to the fruit or berries of the little Cedars, it is also verie

manifest, that the second Sauine is not Thya, neither Vitae arbor, so called of the later Herbarists: it is likewise named by Lobel, Sabina genuina baccifera, atrocaerulea, that is, the true Sauine that beareth berries of a blackish blew colour.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of Sauine, which are most vsed in medicine, are hot and dry in the third degree, and of subtill parts, as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Sauin boyled in Wine and drunke prouoke vrine, bring downe the menses with  force, draw away the after-birth, expell the dead childe, and kill the quicke: it hath the like vertue receiued vnder in a perfume.
The leaues stamped with honey and applied, cure vlcers, stay spreading and creeping vlcers, scoure and take away all spots and freckles from the face or body of man or woman.
The leaues boyled in oyle Oliue, and kept therein, kill the wormes in children, if you anoint  their bellies therewith: and the leaues poudered and giuen in milke or Muscadell do the same.
The leaues dried and beate into fine pouder, and strewed vpon those kindes of excrescences sub praeputio, called Caroles, and such like, gotten by dealing with vncleane women, take them away perfectly, curing and healing them: but if they be inueterate and old, and haue been much tampered withall, it shall be necessarie to adde vnto the same a small quantitie of Auripigmentum in fine pouder, and vse it with discretion, because the force of the medicine is greatly increased thereby and made more corrosiue.



CHAP. 51. Of Tamariske.


1 Tamariscus Narbonensis. French Tamariske.


2 Tamariscus Germanica. Germane Tamariske.




 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Tamariske groweth like a small hedge tree, couered with a reddish barke, hauing many branches set and bedeckt with leaues, much like vnto Heath: among which come forth small mossie white floures declining to purple, which turne into a pappous or downie seed, that flieth away with the winde, as that of Willow doth: the root is wooddie as the roots of other shrubs be, and groweth diuers waies.
2 The Germane Tamariske hath many wooddie branches or shoots rising from the root, with a white bark, hauing his leaues thicker and grosser than the former, and not so finely iagged or cut: The floures are reddish, and larger than the former, growing not vpon foot-stalkes, many thick clustering together, as those of the former, but each a (...) distance from another on the tops of the branches spike fashion, and begin to floure below: which do turne into seed, that is likewise carried away with the winde.


 The Place.
Tamariske groweth by running streames, and many times by riuers that breake forth, and not seldome about fenny grounds, commonly in a grauelly soile, for it best prospereth in moist and stony places: it is sound in Germany, Vindelicia, Italy, Spaine, and also in Greece.
The Tamarisks do also grow in Egypt and Syria, as Dioscorides writeth, and likewise in Tylus an Island in Arabia, as Theophrastus noteth: the wood wherof, saith he, is not weak as with vs in Greece, but strong like (...), or timber, or any other strong thing: this Tamariske Dioscorides doth call (...) that is to say, tame, or planted; and saith that it bringeth forth fruit very like to Galls, in taste rough and binding.
Petrus Bellonius in his second booke of singularities reporteth, that hee saw in Egypt very high Tamarisks and great like other trees, and that sometimes in moist places by riuers sides and many times also in dry and grauelly grounds where no other trees did grow, which now and then did beare hanging on the boughes such a multitude of Galls, that the inhabitants call Chermasel, as being ouer loden, they were ready to breake. Both these grow and prosper well in gardens with vs here in England.


 The Time.
These trees or shrubs floure in May, and in the later end of August, their seed is carried away with the wind.


 The Names.
They are called in Greeke (...): and in Latine also Myrica, and Tamarix: in shops, Tamariscus: of Octautus Horatianus, Murica: Dioscorides maketh that which groweth in Greece and Italy to be (...) orwilde Tamariske: it is named in high Dutch Tamarischen holk, and Pork: in low Dutch, (...), Tamarlschboome: in Italian, Tamarigio: in Spanish, Tamarguira, and Tamariz: in French, Tamaris: in English, Tamariske.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Tamariske hath a clensing and cutting facultie with a manifest drying; it is also somewhat  astringent or binding, and by reason of these qualities it is very good for an hard spleen, being boyled with vineger or wine, either the root or leaues, or tender branches, as Galen writeth.
Moreouer Dioscorides teacheth, that the decoction of the leaues made with wine, doth waste the  spleene, and that the same is good against the tooth-ache, if the mouth be washed therewith: that it bringeth downe the Menses, if the patient sit therein; that it killeth lice and nits, if the parts be bathed therewith.
The ashes of burnt Tamariske hath a drying facultie, and greatly scouring withall, and a little  binding.
The floures and downie seed of the greater Tamariske doth greatly binde, insomuch as it commeth  very neere to the Gall named Galla Omphacitis, but that the roughnesse of taste is more euident in the Gall; the which floures are of an vnequall temperature, for there is ioined to the nature therof a great thinnesse of parts, and clensing facultie, which the Gall hath not as Galen writeth.
These floures we fitly vse (saith Dioscor.) in stead of Gall, in medicines for the eies and mouth:
It is good to stanch bloud, and to stay the laske and womens whites, it helpeth the yellow iaundice, and also cureth those that are bit of the venomous spider called Phalangium; the barke serueth for the same purposes.
The leaues and wood of Tamariske haue great power and vertue against the hardnesse and stopping  of the spleene, especially the leaues being boiled in water, and the decoction drunke, or else (...) in a small vessell of Ale or Beere, and continually drunke: and if it bee drunke forth of a cup or dish made of the wood or timber of Tamariske, is of greater efficacie.




CHAP. 52. Of Heath, Hather, or Linge.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Heath, some greater, some lesser; some with broad leaues, and some narrower: some bringing forth berries, and others nothing but floures.


 The Description.
1 THe common Heath is a low plant, but yet wooddie and shrubby, scarce a cubit high: it bringeth forth many branches, whereupon do grow sundry little leaues somewhat hard and rough, very like to those of Tamariske, or the Cypresse tree: the floures are orderly placed alongst the branches, small, soft, and of a light red colour tending to purple: the root is also wooddie, and creepeth vnder the vpper crust of the earth: and this is the Heath which the Antients tooke to be the right and true Heath.


1 Erica vulgaris, sive Pumila. Common or dwarfe Heath.


@ Erica vulgaris hirsuta. Rough leaued Heath.


There is another Heath which differeth not from the precedent, sauing that this plant bringeth forth floures as white as snow, wherein consisteth the difference: wherefore we may call it Erica pumila alba, Dwarfe Heath with white floures.
2 The great Heath, (which Carolus Clusius at his being in England found in the barren grounds about Windsor, which in his Spanish trauels he maketh the first kinde): groweth to the height of two cubits, seldome higher, full of branches, couered with a blackish barke: whereon are set in very good order by couples, small, rough, square leaues finer than those of Tamariske or Cypresse. The floures inclose the little twiggie branches round about at certaine distances, from the lower part to the top fashioned like little bottles, consisting of foure parts, of a shining purple colour, very beautifull to behold, and the rather to be esteemed because it floureth twise in the yeare: the root is likewise wooddie.



The (...) which our Author gaue in the ninth place by the name of Erica (...) (...) I take to be the (...) (...), 2. of (...) (which you (...) (...) (...) his (...) place) and in stead thereof I haue giuen you our ordinary berry-bearing Heath.

 3 Erica maior flore albo (...). The great Heath with white floures.


4 Erica maior flore purpureo. Great Heath with purple floures.


The (...) which our Author gaue in the ninth place by the name of Erica (...) (...) I take to be the (...) (...), 2. of (...) (which you (...) (...) (...) his (...) place) and in stead thereof I haue giuen you our ordinary berry-bearing Heath.

 5 Erica cruciata. Crossed Heath.


6 Erica Pyramidalis. Steeple Heath.



@ 3 This, saith Clusius, which is the largest that I haue seene, sometimes excceeds the height of a man, very shrubby, hauing a hard and blackish red wood: the leaues are small and short, growing about the branches by foures, of a very a stringent taste: it hath plentiful store of floures growing all alongst the branches, so that somtimes the larger branches haue floures for a foot in length: this floure is hollow and longish, well smelling, white and beautifull. It growes betweene Lisbone and the Vniuersity of Conimbrica in Portugal where it floures in Nouember, December, and Ianuarie. @
The (...) which our Author gaue in the ninth place by the name of Erica (...) (...) I take to be the (...) (...), 2. of (...) (which you (...) (...) (...) his (...) place) and in stead thereof I haue giuen you our ordinary berry-bearing Heath.

 4 Of this kind there is another sort with whitish purple floures, more frequently found than the other sort, which floures are somwhat greater than the former, but in forme like, and flouring at the same time. @ The leaues also are hairy, and grow commonly by foures: the hollow floures grow clustering together at the very tops of the branches, and are to be found in Iuly and August; it growes on diuers heathy places of this kingdome. @
5 Crossed Heath groweth to the height of a cubit and a halfe, full of branches, commonly lying along vpon the ground, of a swart darke colour: whereon do grow small leaues, set at certaine spaces by two vpon one side, and two on the other, opposite, one answering another, euen as doe the leaues of Crosse-wort. The floures in like manner stand alongst the branches Crosse fashion, of a darke ouerworne greenish colour. The root is likewise wooddy, as is all the rest of the plant.
6 This Steeple Heath hath likewise many wooddy braunches, garnished with small leaues which easily fall off from the dryed stalks; among which come forth diuers little mossie greenish floures of small moment. The whole bush for the most part groweth round together like a little cocke of hay, broad at the lower part, and sharp aboue like a Pyramide or steeple, whereof it tooke his name.


7 Erica tenuifolia. Small leafed Heath.


8 Erica tenuifolia caliculata. Challice Heath.


7 This small or thinne leafed Heath is also a low and base shrub, hauing many small and slender shoots comming from the root, of a reddish browne colour; whereupon doe grow verie manie small leaues, not vnlike to them of common Time, but much smaller and tenderer: the floures grow in tufts at certaine spaces, of a purple colour. The root is long and of a wooddie substance. @ The branches of this are commonly whitish, the leaues very green: the floures are smallest at both ends and biggest in the middest, hollow, and of a faire purple colour, which doth not easily decay: it

floures most part of Summer, and growes in many Heathie grounds. @
8 Challice Heath hath also many wooddy branches growing from the roots, slender, of a reddish browne colour, a foot and a halfe high, garnished with very little leaues, lesser than those of Time: the floures grow on the tops and vpper parts of the branches, and be in number, fiue, six or moe, hanging downewards, in fashion long, hollow within like a little tunnell or open cup or challice, of a light purplish colour: the root creepeth and putteth forth in diuers places new springs or shoots.
9 The Heath that bringeth forth berries hath many weake and slender branches of a reddish colour, which trailing vpon the ground do take hold (...) in sundry places, whereby it mightily increaseth: the leaues are somewhat broad, of a thicke and fleshie substance, in taste somthing drying at the first, but afterwards somewhat sharpe and biting the tongue: among which come forth small floures of an herbie colour: which being vaded there succeed small round berries, that at the first are greene, and afterward blacke, being as big as those of Iuniper; wherein is contained purple iuice like that of the Mulberry: within those berries are contained also small three cornered grains: the root is hard, and of a wooddy substance. @ I found this growing in great plenty in Yorkshire on the tops of the hills by Gisbrough, between it and Rosemary-topin (a round hill so called) and some of the people thereabouts told me they called the fruit Crake berries. This is the same that Matthiolus calls Erica Baccifera: and it is the Erica Coris folio 11. of Clusius. @.


@ 9 Erica baccifera procumbens. Heath bearing Berries.


10 Erica baccifera tenuifolia. Small leafed Heath with Berries.


@ 10 This which our Authour figured as you seee in the tenth place (putting the description of the former thereto) hath brittle branches growing some cubit high, couered with a barke blacker than the rest: the leaues are like those of the former, but blacker and smaller, growing about the stalks by threes, of a hottish taste with some astriction. In September and October it carries a fruit on the tops of the branches different from the rest, for it is very beautifull, white, transparent, resembling dusky and vneuen pearles in forme and colour, succulent also, and of an acide taste, commonly containing three little seeds in each berry: in Nouember this fruit becomes dry, and falls away of it selfe. Clusius onely obserued this in Portugall, and at the first sight a far off tooke the white berries to haue been graines of Manna. He calls it Erica Coris folio. 10.
11 I remember (saith Dodonaeus) that I obserued another Heath which grew low; yet sent forth

@ 11 Erica pumila, 3. Dod. Dodonaeus his Dwarfe Heath.
@ 12 Erica ternis per intervalla ramis. Heath with three branches at a ioint.
@ 13 Erica perigrina Lobelij. Lobels strange Heath.
@ 14 Erica Coris folio 7. Clusij: Creeping Dutch Heath.

@ 15 Erica Coris folio. 9. Clusij. Small Austrian Heath.
many wooddy and twiggy branches, hauing vpon them little narrow and longish leaues; on these stalkes spike fashion to the tops of them, yet but on one side, grow elegant redde floures, pointed with blacke. This growes in that tract of Germany which leads from Bohemia to Noremberg on dry and vntilled places, and neere woods. It floures in Aprill.
12 This shrubby Heath is commonly some cubit high, hauing slender branches which come out of the maine stemmes commonly three together; and the leaues also grow in the same order; the tops of the branches are adorned with many floures of a darke purple colour, hollow, round, biggest below, and standing vpon long foot stalks. Clusius found this growing in the vntilled places of Portingale aboue Lisbone, where it floured in December; he calls it Erica (...) folio, 5.
13 Besides all these (saith Lobel, hauing first treated of diuers plants of this kinde) there is a certaine rarer species growing like the rest after the manner of a shrub in pots, in the Garden of Mr. Iohn (...): the leafe is long, and the purple floures, which as far as I remember consisted of foure little leaues apiece, grow on the tops of the branches. I know not whence it was brought, and therfore for (...) rarity I call it Erica peregrina, that is, Strange, or Forreine Heath.
14 This hath many round blackish purple branches some foot or cubit high, lying oft times along vpon the ground: these are beset with many narrow little leaues, almost like those of the third described, yet somewhat longer, commonly growing foure, yet sometimes fiue together, of an astringent taste; the little floures grow on the top of the branches, longish, hollow, and of a light purple colour, comming out of foure little leaues almost of the same colour; when these are ripe and dryed they containe a blackish and small seed; the root is hard, wooddy, and runnes diuers waies; the weake branches also that lie vpon the ground now and then take root againe. Clusius found this growing plentifully in diuers mountanous places of Germany where it floured in Iune, and Iuly.
15 The weake stalkes of this are some foot high, which are set with many small greene leaues growing commonly together by threes; the tops of the branches are deckt with little hollow and longish floures diuided at their ends into foure parts, of a flesh colour, together (...) the foure little leaues out of which they grow, hauing eight blackish little threds in them, with a purplish pointall in the middle. The seed is blacke and small; the root wooddy as in other plants of this kinde. Clusius found this in some mountanous woods of Austria, where it floured in Aprill and May. @


 The Place.
Heath groweth vpon dry mountaines which are hungry and barren, as vpon Hampsteed Heath neere London, where all the sorts do grow, except that with the white floures, and that which beareth berries. @ There are not aboue three or foure sorts that I could euer obserue to grow there. @
Heath with the white floures groweth vpon the downes neere vnto Grauesend.
Heath which beareth berries groweth in the North parts of England, namely, at a place called Crosby Rauenswaith, and in Crag close also in the same countrey: from whence I haue receiued the red berries by the gift of a learned Gentleman called Mr. Iames Thwaites.


 The Time.
These kindes or sorts of Heath do for the most part (...) all the Sommer, euen vntill the last of September.


 The Names.
Heath is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine also Erica: diuers do falsly name it Myrica: in high and low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Erica: in Spanish, Breso Quirro: in French, Bruyre: in English, Heath, Hather, and Linge.



 The Temperature.
Heath hath, as Galen saith, a digesting facultie, consuming by vapors: the floures and leaues are to be vsed.


 The Vertues..
The tender tops and floures, saith Dioscorides, are good to be laid vpon the bitings and stingings  of any venomous beast: of these floures the Bees do gather bad hony.
The barke and leaues of Heath may be vsed for, and in the same causes that Tamariske is vsed.



CHAP. 53. Of Heath of Ierico.


1 Rosa Hiericontea maior. The Heath Rose of Ierico.



 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Heath which of the later writers hath been called by the name Rosa Hiericontea; the coiner spoiled the name in the mint, for of all plants that haue bin written of, there is not any more vnlike vnto the Rose, or any kinde thereof than this plant: what moued them thereto I know not: but thus much of my owne knowledge, it hath neither shape, nature, nor facultie agreeing with any Rose; the which doubtlesse is a kinde of Heath, as the barren soile, and that among Heath, doth euidently shew, as also the Heathie matter wherewith the whole plant is possessed, agreeing with the kindes of Heath in very notable points. It riseth vp out of the ground, of the height of four inches, or an hand breadth, compact or made of sundry hard stickes, (which are the stalkes) clasping or shutting it selfe together into a round forme, intricately weauing it selfe one sticke ouerthwart another, like a little net: vpon which wooddy stickes do grow leaus not vnlike to those of the Oliue tree, which maketh the whole plant of a round forme, and hollow within; among the leaues on the inside grow small mossie floures, of a whitish herbie colour, which
2 Rosa Hiericontea siccata. The Heath Rose of Ierico dried.
turn into little seed, like the seed of Rocket, but lesser: the whole plant is of the substance of heath, and wooddie.
2 The second figure setteth forth the dried plant, as it is brought vnto vs from beyond the seas; which being set into a dish of warme water, for halfe an houre, openeth it selfe in forme, as when it did grow, and taken forth vntill it be drie, returneth shut vp againe as before.


 The Place.
It groweth in the barren grounds of France, and other hot regions, among the Heath and such like plants: it is a stranger in England, yet dried we haue them in great plenty. @ I haue not read nor heard that this grows wilde in France; but Bellonius saith it growes in Arabia deserta: (...) saith it easily grew and flourished many yeares in his garden at Basill. @


 The Time.
The seed being sowne in our cold climate, is sowne in Aprill; it perisheth when it is sprung vp, and bringeth neither floures nor seed.


 The Names.
This kinde of Heath is called Rosa (...), or de Hiericho, the Rose of Ierico: of some, the Rose of Ierusalem, and also Rosa (...): in English, the Heath Rose.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is not any of the antient nor later writers that haue set downe any certaintie of this plant  as touching the temperature and faculties, but onely a bare picture with a slender description.



CHAP. 54. Of the Chaste Tree.


1 Vitex, sive Agnus (...). The Chaste tree.


@ 2 Vitex latiore (...) folio. Chaste tree with cut leaues.




 The Description.
1 VItex, or the Chaste tree, groweth after the manner of a bushie shrub or hedge tree, hauing many twiggie branches, very pliant and easie to be bent without breaking, like to the willow: the leaues are for the most part diuided into fiue or seuen sections or diuisions, much like the leaues of Hemp, whereof each part is long and narrow, very like vnto the willow leafe, but smaller: the floures do grow at the vppermost parts of the branches, like vnto spikie eares, clustering together about the branches, of a light purple or blew colour, and very sweet smel: the fruit is small and round, like vnto the graines or cornes of pepper.
@ 2 Lobel mentions another varietie hereof that differs from the former onely in that it hath broader leaues, and these also snipt about the edges. @


 The Place.
Vitex groweth naturally in Italy, and other hot regions, by water courses and running streames: I haue it growing in my garden.


 The Time.
Vitex beginneth to recouer his last leaues in May, and the floures come forth in August.


 The Names.
@ The Grecians call this shrub (...), and (...): Agnos (i.) (...), Chaste: because, saith Pliny in his 24. booke, 9. Chapter, the Athenian Matrons in their feast called Thesmophoria dedicated to the honour of Ceres, desirous to keepe themselues chaste, doe lay the leaues in their beds vnder them: the Latines name it Vitex, and of diuers it is termed, as wee finde among the bastard and counterfeit names, (...): in Latine, Salix marina, or Salix Amerina, and Piper Agreste: in high Dutch, Schaffmulle, (...): in low Dutch, and also of the Apothecaries, Agnus Castus: the Italians, Vitice, Agno Casto: in Spanish, Gattile casto: in English, Chaste tree, Hempe tree, and of diuers Agnus castus.
@ The name Agnus Castus comes by confounding the Greeke name Agnos with Castus, the Latine interpretation thereof. @


 The Temperature.
The leaues and fruit of Agnus castus are hot and drie in the third degree: they are of very thin parts, and waste or consume winde.


The Vertues.
Agnus Castus is a singular medicine and remedie for such as would willingly liue chaste, for it  withstandeth all vncleannesse, or desire to the flesh, consuming and drying vp the seed of generation, in what sort soeuer it be taken, whether in pouder onely, or the decoction drunke, or whether the leaues be carried about the body; for which cause it was called Castus; that is to say, chaste, cleane, and pure.
The seed of Agnus Castus drunken, driueth away, and dissolueth all windinesse of the stomacke, openeth and cureth the stoppings of the liuer and spleen; and in the beginning of dropsies, it is good to be drunke in wine in the quantitie of a dram.
The leaues stamped with butter, dissolue and asswage the swellings of the genitories and cods, being applied thereto.
The decoction of the herbe and seed is good against pain and inflammations about the matrix, if women be caused to sit and bathe their priuy parts therein: the seed being drunke with Pennyroiall bringeth downe the menses, as it doth also both in a fume and in a pessary: in a Pultis it cureth the head-ache, the Phrenticke, and those that haue the Lethargie are woont to be (...) herewith, oile and vineger being added thereto.
The leaues vsed in a fume, and also strowed, driue away serpents; and beeing layed on doe cure  their bitings.
The seed laied on with water doth heale the clifts or rifts of the fundament; with the leaues, it is  a remedie for lims out of ioint, and for wounds.
It is reported that if such as iourney or trauell do carry with them a branch or rod of Agnus Castus in their hand, it will keep them from Merry-galls, and wearinesse: Diosc.



CHAP. 55. Of the Willow Tree.

 The Description.
1 THe common Willow is an high tree, with a body of a meane thicknesse, and riseth vp as high as other trees doe if it be not topped in the beginning, soone after it is planted; the

barke thereof is smooth, tough, and flexible: the wood is white, tough, and hard to be broken: the leaues are long, lesser and narrower than those of the Peach tree, somewhat greene on the vpper side and slipperie, and on the nether side softer and whiter: the boughes be couered either with a purple, or else with a white barke: the catkins which grow on the toppes of the branches come first of all forth, being long and mossie, and quickly turne into white and soft downe, that is carried away with the winde.


1 Salix. The common Willow.


2 Salix aquatica. The Oziar or water Willow.


2 The lesser bringeth forth of the head, which standeth somewhat out, slender wands or twigs, with a reddish or greene barke, good to make baskets and such like workes of: it is planted by the twigs or rods being thrust into the earth, the vpper part whereof when they are growne vp, is cut off, so that which is called the head increaseth vnder them, from whence the slender twigs doe grow, which being oftentimes cut, the head waxeth greater: many times also the long rods or wands of the higher Withy trees be lopped off and thrust into the ground for plants, but deeper, and aboue mans height: of which do grow great rods, profitable for many things, and commonly for bands, wherewith tubs and casks are bound.
3 The Sallow tree or Goats Willow, groweth to a tree of a meane bignesse: the trunke or body is soft and hollow timber, couered with a whitish rough barke: the branches are set with leaues somewhat rough, greene aboue, and hoarie vnderneath: among which come forth round catkins, or aglets that turne into downe, which is carried away with the winde.
4 This other Sallow tree differeth not from the precedent, but in this one point, that is to say, the leaues are greater and longer, and euery part of the tree larger, wherein is the difference. @ Both those last described haue little roundish leaues like little eares growing at the bottoms of the footstalkes of the bigger leaues, whereby they may bee distinguished from all other Plants of this kinde. @
5 The Rose Willow groweth vp likewise to the height and bignesse of a shrubby tree; the body whereof is couered with a scabbed rough barke: the branches are many, whereupon do grow very many twigs of a reddish colour, garnished with small long leaues, somewhat whitish: amongst which come forth little floures, or rather a multiplication of leaues, ioined together in forme of a



3 Salix Caprearotundi folia. The Goat round leafed Willow.
4 Salix Caprea latifolia. The Goat broad leafed Sallow.
5 Salix Rosea Anglica. The English Rose Willow.
Rose, of a greenish white colour, which doe not only make a gallant shew, but also yeeld a most cooling aire in the heat of Sommer, being set vp in houses, for the decking of the same.
6 The low or base Willow groweth but low, and leaneth weakly vpon the ground, hauing many small and narrow leaues, set vpon limber and pliant branches, of a darke or blackish greene colour: amongst which comeforth long slender stems full of mossie floures, which turne into a light downie substance that flieth away with the winde.
7 The dwarfe Willow hath very small and slender branches, seldome times aboue a foot, but neuer a cubit high, couered with a duskish barke, with very little and narrow leaues, of a greene colour aboue, and on the vpper side, but vnderneath of a hory or ouerworne greenish colour, in bignesse and fashion of the leaues of garden Flax: among which come forth little duskish floures, which doe turne into downe that is carried away with the winde: the root is small and threddy, of the bignesse of a finger, and of a blackish colour.
8 There is another kinde of willow like to the former, and differeth from it in that, the leaues of this kinde are smaller and narrower, as big as the leaues of Myrtle, hauing small knobbie floures of a duskish colour,

6 Salix humilis. The low Willow.
7 Chamaeitea, siue Salix pumila. Thedwarfe Willow.
@ 8 Salix humilis repens. Creeping dwarfe Willow.
which turne into downe that flyeth away with the winde: the root is small and limber, not growing deep, but running along vpon the vpper crust of the earth.


 The Place.
These Willowes grow in diuers places of England: the Rose-Willow groweth plentifully in Cambridge shire, by the riuers and ditches there in Cambridge towne they grow aboundantly about the places called Paradise and Hell-mouth, in the way from Cambridge to Grandchester: I found the dwarfe Willowes growing neere to a (...) or marish ground at the further end of Hampsted heath vpon the declining of the hill, in the ditch that incloseth a small Cottage there, not halfe a furlong from the said house or cottage.


 The Time.
The willowes do floure at the beginning of the Spring.


 The Names.
The Willow tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Salix: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Durch, (...): in Italian, (...), Salcio: in French, Saux: in Spanish, Salgueiro, Salzer, and Sauz: in English, Sallow, Withie, and Willow.

The greater is called in Latine Salix perticalis, common Withy, Willow, and Sallow, especially that which being often lopped sendeth out from one head many boughs: the kinde hereof with the red barke is called of Theophrastus, blacke Withy; and the other, white: Pliny calleth the black Graeca, or Greeke Withie (the red, being the Greeke Withy, saith he, is easie to be cleft) and the whiter, (...).
Theophrastus writeth, that the Arcadians do call the lesser (...) not (...) Pliny also nameth this Helice: both of them do make this to be Salicis tertia species, the third kinde of Sallow: the same is likewise called in Latine, Salix pumila, Salix viminalis, Gallica Salix; and by Columella, Sabina, which he saith that many do terme Amerina: in high-Dutch, (...) (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in English, Osier, small Withy, Twig Withy: Petrus Crescentius nameth it Vincus.


 The Temperature.
The leaues, floures, seed, and barke of Willowes are cold and dry in the second degree, and astringent.


 The Vertues.
The leaues and barke of Withy or Willowes do stay the spitting of bloud, and all other fluxes  of bloud whatsoeuer in man or woman, if the said leaues and barke be boiled in wine and drunke.
The greene boughes with the leaues may very well be brought into chambers and set about the  beds of those that be sicke of feuers, for they do mightily coole the heate of the aire, which thing is a wonderfull refreshing to the sicke Patients.
The barke hath like vertues: Dioscorides writeth, that this being burnt to ashes, and steeped in  vineger, takes away cornes and other like risings in the feet and toes: diuers, saith Galen, doe slit the barke whilest the Withy is in flouring, and gather a certain iuice, with which they vse to take away things that hinder the sight, and this is when they are constrained to vse a clensing medicine of thin and subtill parts.



CHAP. 56. Of the Oliue Tree.


1 Oleasativa. The manured Oliue tree.


2 Oleasyluestris. The wilde Oliue tree.




 The Description.
1 THe tame or manured Oliue tree groweth high and great with many branches, full of long narrow leaues not much vnlike the leaues of Willowes, but narrower and smaller: the floures be white and very small, growing vpon clusters or bunches: the fruit is long and round, wherein is an hard stone: from which fruit is pressed that liquor which we call oyle Oliue.
2 The wilde Oliue is like vnto the tame or garden Oliue tree, sauing that the leaues are something smaller: among which sometimes do grow many prickely thornes: the fruit hereof is lesser than of the sormer, and moe in number, which do seldome come to maturitie or ripenes in somuch that the oile which is made of those berries continueth euer green, and is called Oile Omphacine, or oile of vnripe Oliues.


 The Place.
Both the tame and the wilde Oliue trees grow in very many places of Italy, France, and Spaine, and also in the Islands adioyning: they are reported to loue the sea coasts; for most do thinke, as Columella writeth, that aboue sixty miles from the sea they either dy, or else bring forth no fruit: but the best, and they that do yeeld the most pleasant Oyle are those that grow in the Island called Candy.


 The Time.
All the Oliue trees floure in the moneth of Iune: the fruit is gathered in Nouember or December: when they be a little dried and begin to wrinckle they are put into the presse, and out of them is sqeezed oile, with water added in the pressing: the Oliues which are to be preserued in salt and pickle must be gathered before they be ripe, and whilest they are greene.


 The Names.
The tame or garden Oliue tree is called in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine, Oleasatiua, and Vrbana: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in Italian, Oliuo domestico: in French, Oliuier: in Spanish, Oliuo, and Oliuera: in English, Oliue tree.
The berry is called Oliua: in Greeke also (...): in Spanish, Azcytuna: in French, Dutch, and English, Oliue.
Oliues preserued in brine or pickle are called Colymbades.
Thewilde Oliue tree is named in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Oleasyluestris, Oleaster, Cotinus, Olea Aethiopica: in Dutch, (...) (...): in Italian, Oliuosaluatico: in Spanish, Azcbuche, Azambulheyro: in French, Oliuier sauuage: in English, wilde Oliue tree.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Oliues which be so ripe as that either they fall off themselues, or be ready to fall, which are  named in Greeke, (...), be moderatly hot and moist, yet being eaten they yeeld to the body little nourishment.
The vnripe oliues are dry and binding.
Those that are preserued in pickle, called Colymbades, do dry vp the ouermuch moisture of the  stomacke, they remoue the loathing of meate, stirre vp an appetite; but there is no nourishment at all that is to be looked for in them, much lesse good nourishment.
The branches, leaues, and tender buds of the Oliue tree do coole, dry, and binde, and especially  of the wilde Oliue; for they be of greater force than those of the tame: therefore by reason they be milder they are better for eye medicines, which haue need of binding things to be mixed with them.
The same do stay S. Anthonies fire, the shingles, epinyctides, night wheales, carbuncles, and eating  vlcers: being laid on with honey they take away eschares, clense foule and filthy vlcers, and quench the heate of hot swellings, and be good for kernels in the flanke: they heale and skin wounds in the head, and being chewed they are a remedie for vlcers in the mouth.
The iuyce and decoction also are of the same effect: moreouer, the iuice doth stay all maner of  bleedings, and also the whites.
The iuice is pressed forth of the stamped leaues, with wine added thereto (which is better) or  with water, and being dried in the Sun it is made vp into little cakes like perfumes.
The sweat or oyle which issueth forth of the wood whilest it is in burning healeth tetters, scurfs  and scabs, if they be anointed therewith.
The same which is pressed forth of the vnripe Oliues is as cold as it is binding.
The old oile which is made of sweet and ripe Oliues, being kept long, doth withall become hotter, and is of greater force to digest or waste away; and that oile which was made of the vnripe Oliue, being old, doth as yet retaine some part of his former (...), and is of a mixt faculty, that is to say, partly binding, and partly digesting; for it hath got this digesting or consuming faculty by age, and the other propertie of binding of his owne nature.

The oile of ripe Oliues mollifieth and asswageth paine, dissolueth tumors or swellings, is good  for the stiffenesse of the ioints, and against cramps, especially being mingled according to art, with good and wholesome herbes appropriate vnto those diseases and griefes, as Hypericon, Cammomill, Dill, Lillies, Roses, and many others, which do sortifie and increase his vertues.
The oile of vnripe Oliues, called Omphacinum Oleum, doth stay, represse, and driue away the beginning  of tumors and inflammations, cooling the heate of burning vlcers and exulcerations.



CHAP. 57. Of Priuet or Prim Print.


Ligustrum. Priuet, or Prim Print.



 The Description.
PRiuet is a shrub growing like a hedge tree, the branches and twigs wherofbe straight, and couered with soft glistring leaues of a deepe green colour, like those of Peruincle, but yet longer, greater also than the leaues of the Oliue tree: the floures be white, sweet of smell, very little, growing in clusters; which being vaded there succeed clusters of berries, at the first greene, and when they be ripe blacke like a little cluster of grapes, which yeeld a purple iuice: the root groweth euery way aslope.


 The Place.
The common Priuet groweth naturally in enery wood, and in the hedge rowes of our London gardens: it is not found in the countrey of Polonia and other parts adiacent.


 The Time.
It sloureth in the end of May, or in Iune: the berries are ripe in Autumne or about Winter, which now and then continue all the Winter long; but in the meane time the leaues fall away, and in the Spring new come vp in their places.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine, Ligustrum: in Italian at this day, Guistrico, by a corrupt word drawne from Ligustrum: it is the Grecians (...) and in no wise (...): for Cyprus is a shrub that groweth naturally in the East, and Priuet in the West. They be very like one vnto another, as the descriptions doe declare, but yet in this (...) differ, as witnesseth Bellonius, because the leaues of Priuet do fall away in winter, and the leaues of Cyprus are alwaies greene: moreouer, the leaues of Cyprus do make the haire red, as (...) saith, and (as Bellonius reporteth) do giue a yellow colour: but the leaues of Priuet haue no vse at all in dying. And therefore Pliny, lib. 24. cap. 10. was deceiued, in that he iudged Priuet to be the selfe same tree which Cyprus is in the East: which thing notwithstanding he did not write as hee himselfe thought, but as other men suppose; for, lib. 12. cap. 14. he writeth thus: Some (saith he) affirme this, viz. Cyprus, to be that tree which is called in Italy, Ligustrum; and that (...) or Priuet is that plant which the Grecians call (...); the description doth declare.
Phillyria, saith Dioscorides, is a tree like in bignesse to Cyprus, with leaues blacker and broader than those of the Oliue tree: it hath fruit like to that of the Mastick tree, blacke, something sweet, standing in clusters, and such a tree for all the world is Priuet, as we haue before declared.
Serapio the Arabian, cap. 44. doth call Priuet Mahaleb. There is also another Mahaleh, which is a graine or seed of which Auicen maketh mention, cap. 478. that it doth by his warme and comfortable heate dissolue and asswage paine. Serapio seemeth to intreat of them both, and to containe diuers of the (...) vnder the title of one chapter: it is named in high-Dutch, (...), (...), (...) (...): in low-Dutch, (...), (...): in French, Troesne: in English, Priuet, Primprint, and Print.

Some there be that would haue the berries to be called Vaccinia, and Vaccinium to be that of which Vitruvius hath made mention in his seuenth booke of Architecture or the art of building, chap. 14. of purple colours: after the same manner, saith he, they temper Vaccinium, and (...) milke vnto it do make a gallant purple: in such breuitie of the old writers what can be certainely determined.


 The Temperature.
The leaues and fruit of Priuet are cold, dry, and astringent.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Priuet do cure the swellings, apostumations, and vlcers of the mouth or throat, being gargarised with the iuyce or decoction thereof, and therefore they be excellent good to be put into lotions, to wash the secret parts, and the scaldings with women, cankers and sores in childrens mouthes.



CHAP. 58. Of Mocke-Priuet.


1 Phillyrea angustifolia. Narrow leaued Mock-Priuet.


2 Phillyrea latiore folio. The broader leaued Mock-Priuet.



 The Description.
1 CYprus is a kinde of Priuet, and is called Phillyrea, which name all the sorts or kindes thereof do retaine, though for distinctions sake they passe vnder sundry titles. This plant groweth like an hedge tree, sometimes as big as a Pomegranat tree, beset with slender twiggy boughes which are garnished with leaues growing by couples, very like the leaues of the Oliue tree, but broader, softer, and of a greene colour: from the bosomes of these leaues come forth great bunches of small white floures, of a pleasant sweet smell: which being vaded, there succeed clusters of blacke berries very like the berries of the Alder tree.
2 The second Cyprus, called also Phillyrealatifolia, is very like the former in body, branches,

3 Phillyrea serrata 2. Clusij. The second toothed Priuet of Clusius.
leaues, floures, and fruit; and the difference is this, that the leaues of this plant are broader, but in facultie they are like.
3 This kinde of Priuet riseth vp like an hedge bush, of the height of fiue or six cubits: the branches are long, fragile or brittle, couered with a whitish barke; whereon are set leaues somwhat broad, iagged on the edges like the teeth of a saw, and of a deep green colour: among which come forth the floures, which neither my Author nor my selfe haue seene: the berries grow vpon small footstalks, for the most part three together, being round, and of the bignesse of pepper graines, or Myrtle berries, of a blacke colour when they be ripe.


 The Place.
These plants do grow in Syria neere the city Ascalon, and were found by our industrious Pena in the mountaines neere Narbone and Montpelier in France: the which I planted in the garden at Barn-Elmes neere London, belonging to the right Honourable the Earle of Essex: I haue them growing in my garden likewise.


 The Time.
The leaues shoot forth in the first of the Spring: the floures shew themselues in May and Iune: the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This Priuet is called in Greeke, (...), and in Latine also Cyprus; and may be named in English, Easterlin Priuet, and Mocke-Priuet, for the reason following: they are deceiued who taking Pliny for their Author, do thinke that it is Ligustrum, or our Westerne Priuet, as wee haue shewed in the former chap. it is the Arabians Alcanna, or Henne: and it is also called of the Turks Henne euen at this present time.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of these kindes of Priuet haue a binding qualitie, as Dioscorides writeth.


 The Vertues.
Being chewed in the mouth they heale the vlcers thereof, and are a remedie against inflammations  or hot swellings.
The decoction thereof is good against burnings and scaldings.
The same being stamped and steeped in the iuice of Mullen and laid on, do make the haire red, as Dioscorides noteth. Bellonius writeth, that not only the haire, but also the nether parts of mans body and nailes likewise are coloured and died herewith, which is counted an ornament among the Turks.
The floures being moistned in vineger and applied to the temples asswageth head-ache.
There is also made of these an oile called Olcum Cyprinum, sweet of smell, and good to heate and  supple the sinewes.



CHAP. 59. Of bastard Priuet.

 The Description.
1 THis shrubby tree, called Macaleb, or Mahaleb, is also one of the Priuets: it riseth vp like vnto a small hedge tree, not vnlike vnto the Damson or Bullesse tree, hauing many vpright stalks and spreading branches: whereon do grow leaues not vnlike those of the Phillyrea of Clusius description: amongst which come forth mossie floures of a white colour, and of a perfect

sweet smell, growing in clusters, many hanging vpon one (...), which the Grauer hath omitted: after which come the berries, greene at the first, and blacke when they be ripe, with a little hard stone within, in which lieth a kernell.
2 Gesner and Matthiolus haue set sorth another Macaleb, being also another bastard Priuet. It groweth to a small hedge tree, hauing many greene branches set with round leaues like (...) of the Elme tree, somwhat snipt about the edges: the floures are like those of the precedent: The fruit, or rather the kernell thereof, is as hard as a (...) of Corall, somewhat round, and of a shining blacke colour; which the cunning French Perfumers do bore thorow, making thereof bracelets, chaines, and such like trifling toyes, which they send into England, smeared ouer with some odde sweet compound or other, and they are here sold vnto our curious Ladies and Gentlewomen for rare and strange Pomanders, for great summes of money.


1 Phillyrea arbor, verior Macaleb. Bastard Priuet.


2 Macaleb Gesueri. Corall Priuet.




 The Place.
These trees grow in diuers places of France, as about Tholouse, and sundry other places: they are strangers in England.


 The Time.
The floures bud forth in the Spring: the fruit is ripe in Nouember and December.


 The Names.
This bastard Priuet is that tree which diuers suspect to be that Mahaleb or Macaleb of which (...) writeth, cap. 478. and which also Serapio speaketh of out of Mesue: but it is an hard thing to affirme any certaintie thereby, seeing that Auicen hath described it without markes: notwithstanding this is taken to be the same of most writers, and those of the best: we may call it in English, bastard Priuet, or Corall, or Pomander Priuet, being without doubt a kinde thereof.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Concerning this bastard Priuet we haue learned as yet no (...) thereof in Physicke. The kernels  which are found in the stones or fruit, as they be like in taste to those of Cherries, so be they also answerable to them in temperature; for they are of a te (...) heate, and do gently prouoke vrine, and be therefore good for the stone: more we haue not to write than hath beene spoken in the description.




CHAP. 60. Of the fruitlesse Priuet.

 The Description.
1 THis shrubby bush, called of Pliny and Carolus Clusius, Alaternus, groweth vp to a small hedge tree, in forme like vnto a bastard Priuet; but the leaues are more like those of Ilex, or the French Oke, yet stiffer and rounder than those of Macaleb: amongst which come forth tufts of greenish yellow floures like those of the Lentiske tree: vnder and among the leaues come forth the berries, like those of Laurus Tinus, in which are contained two kernels like to the Acines or stones of the Grape.


1 Alaternus Plinij. Fruitlesse Priuet.


2 Alaternus humilior. The lower fruitlesse Priuet.


2 The second kinde of Alaternus is likewise a fruitlesse kinde of Priuet, hauing narrow leaues somewhat snipt about the edges: from the bosomes whereof come forth small herby coloured floures; which being vaded, there succeedeth the fruit, whereof Auicen speaketh, calling it by the name Fagaras, being a fruit in bignesse and forme like those in shops called Cocculus-indi, and may be the same for any thing that hath been written to the contrarie. This fruit hangeth as it were in a darke ash-coloured skin or huske, which incloseth a slender stiffe shell like the shell of a nut, couered with a thin or blacke filme, whether it be the fruit of this plant it is not censured; notwithstanding you shall finde the figure hereof among the Indian fruits, by the name Fagaras.
@ This hath shorter branches and rounder leaues than the former: the floures are larger and greener; to which succeed fruit clustering together, first greene, then red, and afterwards blacke, and consisting of three kernells: it floures in Februarie and the beginning of March, and growes in sundry places of Spaine. The fruit of this is not the Fagaras, neither doth the Fagaras mentioned by our Author any way agree with the Cocculus Indi of the shops, as shall be shewed hereafter in their fitplces. @


 The Place.
These plants do grow in the shadowie woods of France, and are strangers in England.



 The Time.
The time answereth the rest of the Priuets.


 The Names.
Alaternus of Pliny is the same Phillyrea which Theophrastus hath written of by the name (...), and Bellonius also, lib. 1. cap. 42. of his Singularities, and the people of Candy call it Elaeprinon: the Portugals, Casca: in French, Dalader, and Sangin blanc: in English, barren or fruitlesse Priuet: notwithstanding some haue thought it to beare fruit, which at this day is called Fagaras: with vs, Cocculus-Indi, as we haue said. @ I can by no meanes approue of the English name here giuen by our Author; but iudge the name of Euer-greene Priuet, (giuen it by Mr. Parkinson) to be much more fitting to the thing. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Whether the plant be vsed (...) medicine I cannot as yet learne: the fishermen of Portugall do  vse to seethe the barke thereof in water, with the which decoction they colour their nets of a reddish colour, being very sit for that purpose: the wood also is vsed by Dyers to dye a darke blacke withall.



CHAP. 61. Of the white and blew Pipe-Priuet.


1 Syring a alba. White Pipe.


2 Syring a caerulea. Blew Pipe.



 The Description.
1 THe white Pipe groweth like an hedge tree, or bushy shrub: from the root wherof arise many shoots, which in short time grow to be equall with the old stocke, whereby in little time it increaseth to infinite numbers, like the common English Prim or Priuet, whereof doubtlesse it is a kinde, if we consider euery circumstance: the branches are couered with a rugged gray barke: the timber is white, with some pith or spongie matter in the middle like Elder, but lesser in quantitie. These little branches are garnished with small crumpled leaues of the shape and bignesse of Peare tree leaues, and very like in forme: among which come forth

@ 3 Syringa Arabica. Arabian Pipe.
(...) Balanus Myrepsica, siue Glans vnguentaria. The Oylie Acorne.
the floures, growing in tufts, compact of foure small leaues of a white colour, and of a pleasant sweet smell; but in my iudgement they are too sweet, troubling and molesting the head in very strange manner. I once gathered the floures and laid them in my Chamber window, which smelled more strongly after they had lien together a few houres, with such an vnacquainted sauor, that they awaked me out of my sleepe, so that I could not take any rest till I had cast them out of my chamber. When the floures be vaded then followeth the fruit, which is small, curled, and as it were compact of many little folds, broad towards the vpper part, and narrow towards the stalk, and black when it is ripe, wherin is contained a slender and long seed. The root hereof spreadeth it selfe abroad in the ground, after the manner of the roots of such (...) trees.
2 The blew Pipe groweth likewise in maner of a smal hedge tree, with many shoots rising from the root like the former, as our common Priuet doth, whereof it is a kinde; The branches haue some small quantitie of pith in the middle of the wood, and are couered with a darke blacke greenish barke or rinde. The leaues are exceeding greene, and crumpled or turned vp like the brimmes of an hat, in shape very like vnto the leaues of the Poplar tree: among which come the floures, of an exceeding faire blew colour, compact of many small floures in the forme of a bunch of grapes: each floure is in shew like those of Valeriana rubra Dodonaei, consisting of foure parts like a little star, of an exceeding sweet sauor or smel, but not so strong as the former, When these floures be gone, there succeed flat cods, and somewhat long, which being ripe are of a light colour, with a thinne membrane or filme in the midst, wherein are seeds almost foure square, narrow and ruddy.
@ 3 This (which Clusius setteth forth by the name of Iasminum Arabicum, or Syringa Arabica) groweth some two or three cubits high, diuided into many slender branches, whereon by couples at each ioint stand leaues like those of the first described, but thinner, and not snipt about the edges: on the tops of the branches grow the floures, wholly white, consisting of nine, ten, or twelue leaues set in two rankes: these floures are very sweet, hauing a sent as it were compounded of the Spanish Iasmine, and Orange floures. It is a tender plant, and may be graffed vpon the common Iasmine, whereon it thriues well, and floures most part of the Sommer. It groweth plentifully in Egypt; and Prosper Alpinus is thought to mention this by the name of Sambac Arabum, siue Gelseminum Arabicum. @
4 Glans vnguentaria, or the oylie Acorne, is the fruit of a tree like Tamariske, of the bignesse of an Hasell Nut; out of the kernell whereof, no otherwise than out of bitter Almonds, is pressed an oylie iuyce which is vsed in pretious Oyntments, as Dioscorides (...): neither is it in our time wholly reiected; for the oyle of this fruit mixed with sweet odours serueth to persume

gloues and diuers other things; and is vulgarly knowne by the name of Oyle of Ben.


 The Place.
1. 2. These trees grow not wilde in England, but I haue them growing in my garden in very great plenty.


 The Time.
They floure in Aprill and May, but as yet they haue not (...) any fruit in my garden, though in Italy and Spaine their fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The later Physitians call the first Syringa, or rather (...): that is to say, a Pipe, because the stalks and branches thereof, when the pith is taken out, are hollow like a pipe: it is also many times syrnamed Candida, or white, or Syringa candido slore, or Pipe with a white floure, because it should differ from Lillach, which is sometimes named Syringa coerulea, or blew Pipe: in English, White Pipe.
Blew Pipe the later Physitians, as we haue said, do name Lillach, or (...): of some, Syringa (...), or blew Pipe: most do expound the word Lillach, and call it Ben: Serapio's and the Arabians (...) is Glans vnguentaria, which the Grecians name (...), from which Lillach doth very much differ: among other differences it is very apparant, that Lillach bringeth forth no Nut, howsoeuer (...) doth falsly picture it with one; for it hath only a little cod, the seed whereof hath in it no oile at all. The figure of the Balanus Myrepsica we haue thought good to insert in this chapter, for want of a more conuenient roome.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Concerning the vse and faculties of these shrubs neither we our selues haue found out any thing  (...) learned ought of others.
@ The Balanus Myrepsica taken in the quantitie of a dram, causeth vomit; drunk with Hydromel it purges by stoole, but is hurtfull to the stomacke.
The oile pressed out of this fruit, which is vsually termed oyle of Ben, as it hath no good or pleasing  smell, so hath it no ill sent, neither doth it become rancide by age, which is the reason that it is much vsed by perfumers.
The oile smoothes the skin, softens and dissolues hardnesse, and conduces to the cure of all cold  affects of the sinewes; and it is good for the paine and noise in the eares, being mixed with Goosegrease, and so dropped in warme in a small quantitie. @



CHAP. 62. Of Widow-Waile, or Spurge Oliue.

 The Description.
WIdow-waile is a small shrub about two cubits high. The stalke is of a wooddy substance, branched with many small twigs, full of little leaues like Priuet, but smaller and blacker, on the ends whereof grow small pale yellow floures: which being past, there succeedeth a three cornered berrie like the Tithymales, for which cause it was called Tricoccos, that is, three berried Chamelaea: these berries are greene at the first, red afterward, and browne when they be withered, and containe in them an oylie fatnesse like that of the Oliue, being of an hot and biting taste, and that doe burne the mouth, as do both the leaues and rinde. The root is hard and wooddy.


 The (...).
It is found in most vntilled grounds of Italy and Languedoc in France, in rough and desart places. I haue it growing in my garden.


 The Time.
It is alwaies greene: the seed is ripe in Autumne.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) as though they should say, low or short Oliue tree: the Latines, (...), and Oleastellus, and likewise Citocacium: it is also named of diuers, Oliuella, as Matthiolus (...) saith: it is called in English, Widow-Waile, quia facit viduas.
The fruit is named of diuers, (...): in Latine, Coccus (...): but he is deceiued, saith (...), that nameth the fruit of Spurge-Oliue, Coccus (...): Auicen and (...) call (...), or Spurge Oliue, Mezereon: vnder which name notwithstanding they haue also contained both the Chamaeleons or Carlines; and so haue they confounded Chamelaea or Spurge Oliue with the Carlines, and likewise (...), or Spurge flax.



Chamelaea Arabum Tricoccos. Widow-Waile.




 The Temperature.
Both the leaues and fruit of Spurge-Oliue, as we haue said, are of a burning and extrme hot temperature.


 The Vertues.
The leaues, saith Dioscorides, purge both  flegme and choler, especially taken in pills, so that two parts of Wormewood be mixed with one of Spurge Oliue, and made vp into pils with Mede or honied water. They melt not in the belly, but as many as be taken are voided whole.
Mesue likewise hath a description of pills of the leaues of Mezereon, that is, (...), or Spurge-Oliue (yet Syluius expoundeth it Thymelaea, or Spurge-Flax) but in stead of Wormwood he taketh the outward substance of the yellow Mirobalans and Cepula Mirobalans, and maketh them vp with Tereniabin, that is to say, with Manna and soure (...), which they call Tamarinds, dissolued in Endiue water; and appointeth the same leaues to be first tempered with very strong vineger, and to be dried.
These pills are commended against the  Dropsie, for they draw forth watery humours, but are violent to nature; therfore we must vse them as little as may be. Moreouer, Dioscorides addeth, that the leaues of Spurge Oliue beaten with hony do clense filthy or crusted vlcers.


(...) Germanica, siue Mezereon. Spurge Flax, or the dwarfe Bay.





CHAP. 63. Of Germane Oliue Spurge.

 The Description.
THe dwarfe Bay tree, called of Dutch men Mezereon, is a smal shrub two cubits high: the branches be tough, limber, and easie to bend, very soft to be cut; whereon grow long leaues like those of Priuet, but thicker and fatter. The floures appeare before the leaues, oft times in Ianuarie, clustring together about the stalks at certain distances, of a whitish colour tending to purple, and of a most fragrant and pleasant sweet smel: after come the small berries, green at the first, but being ripe, of a shining red colour, and afterward wax of a dark black colour, of a very hot and burning taste, inflaming the mouth and throat, being tasted, with danger of choking. The root is wooddy.


 The Place and Time.
This plant grows naturally in the moist and shadowy woods of most of the East countries, especially about Meluin in Poland, from whence I haue had great plenty thereof for my garden, where they floure in the first of the Spring, and ripen their fruit in August.


 The Names.
It is vsually called in high-Dutch. Zeilant Zeidelbast, Lenszkraut, and Kellerhals: (...)

Apothecaries of our countrey name it Mezereon, but we had rather call it Chamelaea Germanica: in English, Dutch Mezereon, or it may be called Germane Oliue Spurge. We haue heard, that diuers Italians do name the fruit thereof Piper Montanum, Mountaine Pepper. Some say that (...) or Spurge Laurell is this plant, but there is another Laureola, of which we will hereafter treat: but by what name it is called of the old writers, and whether they knew it or no, it is hard to tell. It is thought to be Cneoron album Theophrasti, but by reason of his breuitie, we can affirme no certainty.
There is, saith he, two kindes of (...), the white and the blacke, the white hath a leafe, long, like in forme to Spurge Oliue: the black is ful of substance like Mirtle; the low one is more white, the same is with smell, and the blacke without smell. The root of both which groweth deepe, is great: the branches be many, thicke, wooddie, immediatly growing out of the earth, or little aboue the earth, tough: wherefore they vse these to binde with, as with Oziars. They bud and floure when the Autumne Equinoctiall is past, and a long time after. Thus much Theophrastus.
The Germane Spurge Oliue is not much vnlike to the Oliue tree in leafe: the floure is sweet of smell: the buds whereof, as we haue written, come forth after Autumne: the branches are wooddy and pliable: the root long, growing deepe: all which shew that it hath great likenesse and affinity with Cneoron, if it be not the very same.


 The Temperature.
This plant is likewise in all parts extreme hot: the fruit, the leaues, and the rinde are very sharpe and biting: they bite the tongue, and set the throte on fire.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Mezereon do purge downeward, flegme, choler, and waterish humours with great  violence.
Also if a drunkard do eat one graine or berry of this plant, hee cannot be allured to drinke any  drinke at that time; such will be the heat of his mouth and choking in the throat.
This plant is very dangerous to be taken into the body, and in nature like to the Sea Tithymale, leauing (if it be chewed) such an heat and burning in the throat, that it is hard to be quenched.
The shops of Germany and of the Low-countries dowhen need require vse the leaues hereof  in stead of Spurge Oliue, which may be done without errour; for this Germane Spurge Oliue is like in vertue and operation to the other, therefore it may be vsed in stead therof, and prepared after the like and selfe-same manner.



CHAP. 64. Of Spurge Flax.


1 Thymelaea. Spurge Flax, or mountaine Widow waile.



 The Description.
SPurge Flax bringeth forth many slender branched sprigs aboue a cubite high, couered round with long and (...) leaues like those of flax, narrower and lesser than the leaues of Spurge Oliue. The floures are white, small, standing on the vpper parts of the sprigs: the fruit is round, greene at the first, but red when it is ripe, like almost to the round berries of the Hawthorne, in which is a white kernel couered with a blacke skinne, very hot and burning the mouth like Mezereon: the root is hard and wooddie.


 The Place.
It groweth in rough mountains, and in vntoiled places in hot regions. It groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
It is greene at any time of the yeare, but the fruit is perfected in Autumne.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) the Syrians, as Dioscorides witnesseth, Apolinon: diuers also Chamelaea, but not properly: but as Dioscorides saith, the leafe is properly called Cneoron, and the fruit Coccos Cnidios; notwithstanding those which Theophrastus calleth Cneora seem to differ from Thymelaea, or Spurge Flax, vnlesse Nigrum Cneoron be Thymelaea for Theophrastus (...)

that there be two kindes of Cneoron; the one white, the other blacke: this may be called in English, Spurge Flax, or mountaine Widow Wayle: the seed of Thymelaea is called in shops, Granum Gnidium.


 The Temperature.
Spurge Flax is naturally both in leaues and fruit extreme hot, biting and of a burning qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The graines or berries, as (...) saith, purge by siege choler, slegme and water, if twenty  graines of the inner part be (...), but t burneth the mouth and throat, wherefore it is to be giuen with fine floure or Barly meale, or in Raisons, or couered with clarified hony, that it may be swallowed.
The same being stamped with Niter and vineger, serueth to annoint those with, which can hardly  sweat.
The leaues must be gathered about haruest, and being dried in the shade, they are to be layed vp  and reserued.
They that would giue them must beat them, and take forth the strings: the quantity of two ounces  and two drams put into wine tempered with water, purgeth and draweth forth watery humors: but they purge more gently if they be boiled with Lentils, and mixed with pot-herbes chopped.
The same leaues beaten to pouder and made vp into (...) or flat cakes, with the iuice of  sower grapes are reserued for vse.
The herbe is an enemy to the stomacke, which also destroyeth the birth (...) it be applied.
Our Author formerly following (...) gaue two (...) and descriptions in this Chapter, but being both of one thing I omitted the (...) (...) (...).




CHAP. 65. Of Spurge Laurell.


(...) (...). Laurell, or Spurge Laurell flouring.


Laureola cum fructu. Laurell with his fruit.




 The Description.
SPurge Laurell is a shrub of a cubit high, of tentimes also of two, and spreadeth with many little boughes, which are tough and lithy, and couered with a thicke rinde. The leaues be long, broad, grosse, smooth, blackish greene, shining, like the leaues of Laurell, but lesser, thicker, and without smell, very many at the top, clustering together. The floures be long, hollow, of a whitish greene, hanging beneath and among the leaues: the berries when they be ripe are blacke, with a hard kernell within, which is a little longer than the seed of Hempe: the pulpe or inner substance is white: the root wooddie, tough, long, and diuersly parted, growing deepe: the leaues, fruit and barke, as wel of the root as of the little boughes, doe with their sharpnesse and burning qualitie bite and set on fire the tongue and throat.


 The Place.
It is found on mountaines, in vntilled, rough, shadowie, and wooddie places, as by the lake of (...) or Geneua, and in many places neere the riuer of Rhene and of the Maze. @ It growes abundantly also in the woods in the most parts of England. @


 The Time.
The floures bud very soon, a little after the Autume Equinoctiall: they are full blown in Winter, or in the first Spring: the fruit is ripe in May and Iune: the plant is alwaies greene, and indureth the cold stormes of winter.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...), of the likenesse it hath with the leaues of the Laurell or Bay tree: in Latine likewise Daphnoides: the later Latinists for the same cause name it Laureola, as though they should say Minor Laurus, or little Laurell. it is called (...), and (...), notwithstanding there is another Chamaedaphne, and another Peplion. This shrub is commonly called in English, Spurge Laurell; of diuers, Laurell or Lowry.
So ne say that the Italians name the berries hereof Piper montanum, or Mountaine Pepper, as also the berries of Dutch Mezereon: others affirme them to bee called in High Dutch also, Zeilant.
It may be (...) his (...): for it is much like to a Mirtle in leafe, it is also a branched plant, tough and pliable, hauing a deep root, without smell, with a blacke fruit.


 The Temperature.
It is like in temperature and facultie to the Germane Spurge Oliue, throughout the whole substance biting and extreme hot.


 The Vertues.
The drie or greene leaues of Spurge Laurell, saith Dioscorides, purgeth by siege flegmaticke humors;  it procureth vomite and bringeth downe the menses, and being chewed it draweth water out of the head.
It likewise causeth neezing; moreouer, fifteene graines of the seed thereof drunke, are a purgation.



CHAP. 66. Of Rose Bay, or Oleander.

 The Description.
1 ROse Bay is a small shrub of a gallant shew like the Bay tree, bearing leaues, thicker, greater, longer and rougher than the leaues of the Almond tree: the floures be of a faire red colour, diuided into fiue leaues, not much vnlike a little Rose: the cod or fruit is long, like (...), or Vincetoxicum, and full of such white downe, among which the seed lieth hidden: the root is long, smooth, and wooddie.
2 The second kinde of Rose bay, is like the first, and differeth in that, that this plant hath white floures; but in other respects it is very like.



1 Nerium, sive Oleander. The Rose Bay.


2 Nerium flore albo. The Rose Bay with white floures




 The Place.
These grow in Italy and other hot regions, by riuers and the Sea side: I haue them growing in my garden.


 The Time.
In my garden they floure in Iuly and August: the cods be ripe afterwards.


 The Names.
This plant is named in Greeke (...), by Nicander, (...): in Latine likewise Nerion, and also Rhododendron, and Rhododaphne, that is to say, Rosea arbor, and (...) Laurus: in shops, Oleander: in Italian, Oleandro: in Spanish, Adelfa, Eloendro, and Alendro: in French, Rosagine: in English, Rose tree, Rose Bay, Rose Bay tree and Oleander.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
This tree being outwardly applied, as Galen saith, hath a digesting facultie: but if it be inwardly  taken it is deadly and poisonsome, not only to men, but also to most kindes of beasts.
The floures and leaues kill dogs, asses, mules, and very many of other foure footed beasts: but if  men drinke them in wine they are a remedy against the bitings of Serpents, and the rather if Rue be added.
The weaker sort of cattell, as sheep and goats, if they drinke the water wherein the leaues haue  been steeped, are sure to die.



CHAP. 67. Of dwarfe Rose Bay.

 The Description.
DWarfe Nerium, or Rose Bay, hath leaues which for the most part are alwaies green, rough, and small, of a pale yellow colour like Box, far lesser than Oleander: the whole plant is of a shrubbie stature, leaning this way and that way, as not able to stand vpright without helpe; his branches are couered and set full of small floures, of a shining scarlet or crimson colour; growing vpon

1 Chamaerhododendros Alpigena. Dwarfe Rose Bay.
the hils as ye go from Trent to Verona, which in Iune and Iuly are as it were couered with a scarlet coloured carpet, of an odoriferous sauor, and delectable aspect, which being (...) there commeth seed and faire berries like Asparagus.


 The Place.
The place and time are expressed in the description.


 The Names.
This may be called in English, Dwarfe Rose Bay of the Alps. I find not any thing extant of the vertues, so that I am constrained to leaue the rest vnto your owne discretion. 

The other plant (...) Author (...) (...) in this chapter in the (...). place by the name of (...), (...) here (...), (...) (...) he set it forth before by the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) and one description, in the 11. and 12. (...) (...), he 8 chap. of (...) 3. (...).




CHAP. 68. Of the Bay or Laurell tree.

 The Description.


Laurus. The Bay tree.


1 THe Bay or Laurell tree commeth oftentimes to the height of a tree of a mean bignesse; it is full of boughes, couered with a greene barke: the leaues thereof are long, broad, hard, of colour greene, sweetly smelling, and in taste somwhat bitter: the floures alongst the boughes and leaues are of a greene colour: the berries are more long than round, and be couered with a black rind or pill: the kernell within is clouen into two parts, like that of the Peach and Almond, and other such, of a browne yellowish colour, sweet of smell, in taste somewhat bitter, with a little sharpe or biting qualitie.
2 There is also a certaine other kinde hereof more like to a shrub, sending forth out of the roots many offsprings, which notwithstanding groweth not so high as the former, and the barkes of the boughes be somewhat red: the leaues be also tenderer, and not so hard: in other things (...) vnlike.
These two Bay trees Dioscorides was not ignorant of; for he saith, that the one is narrow leafed, and the other broader leafed, or rather harder leafed which is more like.


 The Place.
The Laurell or bay tree groweth naturally

in Spaine and such hot regions; we plant and set it in gardens, defending it from cold at the beginning of March especially.
I haue not seene any one tree thereof growing in Denmarke, Sweuia, Poland, Liuonia, or Russia, or in any of those cold countries where I haue trauelled.


 The Time.
The Bay tree groweth greene winter and Sommer: it floureth in the Spring, and the black fruit is ripe in October.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Laurus: in Italian, Lauro: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, Laurus boome: in French, Laurier: in Spanish, Laurel, Lorel, and Loureiro: in English, Laurell, or Bay tree.
The fruit is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Lauri baccae: in high Dutch, Looerbeeren: in low Dutch, Bakeleer: in Spanish, Vayas: in English, Bay berries.
The Poets faine that it tooke his name of Daphne, Lado his daughter, with whom Apollo fell in loue.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Berries and leaues of the Bay tree, saith Galen, are hot and very drie, and yet the berries more  than the leaues.
The barke is not biting and hot, but more bitter, and it hath also a certaine astrictiue or binding  qualitie.
Bay Berries with Hony or Cute, are good in a licking medicine, saith Dioscorides, against the  (...) or Consumption of the lungs, (...) of breathing, and all kinde of fluxes or (...) (...) the chest.
(...) Berries taken in (...), are good against the bitings and stingings of any venomous beast, and against all venome and poison: they clense away the morphew: the iuice pressed out hereof is a remedy for paine of the eares, and deafenesse, if it be dropped in with old wine and oile of Roses: this is also mixed with ointments that are good against wearisomnesse, and that heate and discusse (...) waste away humors.
(...) berries are put into Mithridate, Treacle, and such like medicines that (...) made to refresh  such people as are growne sluggish and dull by meanes of taking opiate medicines, or such as haue any venomous or poisoned quality in them.
They are good also against cramps and drawing together of sinewes.
We in our time do not vse the berries for the infirmities of the lungs, or chest, but minister them  against the diseases of the stomacke, liuer, spleene, and bladder: they warme a cold stomacke, cause concoction of raw humours, stirre vp a decaied appetite, take away the loathing of meat, open the stopping of the liuer and spleene, prouoke vrine, bring down the (...), and driue forth the secondine.
The oile pressed out of these, or drawne forth by decoction, doth in short time take away scabs  and such like filth of the skin.
It (...) them that are beaten blacke and blew, and that be bruised by squats and falls, it remooueth  blacke and blew spots and congealed bloud, and digesteth and wasteth away the humors gathered about (...) grieued part.
Dioscorides saith, that the leaues are good for the diseases of the mother and bladder, if a bath be  made (...) to bathe and sit in: that the greene leaues do gently binde, that being applied, they are good against the stingings of waspes and Bees; that with Barly meale parched and bread, they asswage all kinde of inflammations, and that being taken in drinke they mitigate the paine of the (...) nacke, but procure vomite.
The Berries of the Bay tree stamped with a little Scammonie and Saffron, and laboured in a  mortar with vineger and oile of Roses to the sorme of a liniment, and applied to the temples and (...) of the head, do greatly cease the paine of the Megrim.
It is reported that common drunkards were accustomed to eat in the morning fasting two leaues  thereof against drunkennesse.
The later Physitions doe oftentimes vse to boyle the leaues of Laurell with diuers meats, especially  fishes, and by so doing there happeneth no desire of vomiting: but the meat seasoned herewith becommeth more sauory and better for the stomacke.
(...) barke of the root of the Bay tree, as Galen writeth, drunken in wine prouoketh vrine, breakes  the (...), and driueth forth grauell: it openeth the stoppings of the liuer, the spleene, and all other (...) of the inward parts: which thing also Dioscorides affirmeth, who likewise addeth that it killeth the childe in the mothers wombe.

It helpeth the dropsie and the iaundise, and procureth vnto women their desired sicknesse.
(...) Author here also gaue the two (...) of (...); the (...) by the name of (...), or the male Bay (...), and the (...) (...) (...) name of (...) (...), (...) female Bay: (...) difference in (...) (...) was (...) or none, wherefore I haue (...) one (...).




CHAP. 69. Of the Wilde Bay tree.

 The Description.
1 LAurus Tinus, or the wilde Bay tree, groweth like a shrub or hedge bush, hauing many tough and pliant branches, set full of leaues very like to the Bay leaues, but smaller and more crumpled, of a deepe and shining greene colour: among which come forth tufts of whitish floures, turning at the edges into a light purple: after which follow small (...) of a blew colour, containing a few graines or seeds like the stones or seeds of grapes: the leaues and all the parts of the plant are altogether without smell or sauour.


1 Laurus Tinus. The wilde Bay tree.


2 Laurus (...) (...). The Portingale wilde Bay tree.


2 Tinus Lusitanica groweth verie like to Cornus Foemina, or the Dog-berry tree, but the branches be thicker, and more stiffe, couered with a reddish barke mixed with (...): the leaues are like the former, but larger, hauing many sinewes or vaines running through the (...) like as in the leaues of Sage: the floures hereof grow in tufts like the precedent, but they are of colour (...) declining to purple: the small branches are likewise of a purple colour: the leaues haue no smell (...) all, either good or bad: the berries are smaller than the former, of a blew colour declining to blacknesse.


 The Place.
The wilde Bay groweth plentifully in euery field of Italy, Spain, and other regions, which differ according to the nature and (...) of those countries: they grow in my garden and prosper very well.



 The Time.
The wilde Laurell is euer greene, and may oftentimes be seene most part of the winter, and the beginning of the spring, with the floures and ripe berries growing both at one season.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine (...), and Laurus syluestris: in Greeke, (...): Cato nameth it Laurus syluatica: in Italian, Lauro syluatico: in Spanish, Vua de Perro, otherwise Follado; and of diuers, Durillo: in English wilde Bay.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Pliny nor any other of the Antients haue touched the faculties of this wilde Bay, neither haue we any vnderstanding thereof by the later writers, or by our owne experience.



CHAP. 70. Of the Box Tree.


Buxus. The Box tree.



 The Description.
THe great Box is a faire tree, bearing a great body or trunke: the wood or timber is yellow and very hard, and fit for sundry workes, hauing many boughes and hard branches, beset with sundry small hard green leaues, both winter and Sommer like the Bay tree: the floures are very little, growing among the leaues, of a greene colour: which being vaded there succeed small blacke shining berries, of the bignes of the seeds of Corianders, which are inclosed in round greenish huskes, hauing three feet or (...) (...) a brasse or boiling pot: the root is likewise yellow, and harder than the timber, but of greater beauty, and more fit for dagger hastes, boxes, and such like vses, whereto the trunke or body serueth, than to make medicines; though foolish empericks and women leaches, do minister it against the Apoplexie and such diseases: Turners and Cutlers, if I mistake not the matter, do call this wood Dudgeon, wherwith they make Dudgeon hafted daggers.
There is also a certaine other kinde hereof, growing low, and not aboue halfe a yard high, but it spreadeth all abroad: the branches here of are many and very slender: the leaues bee round, and of a light greene.


 The Place.
Buxus, or the Box tree groweth vpon sundry waste and barren hils in England, and in diuers (...) dens.


 The Time.
The Box tree groweth greene winter and Sommer: it floureth in Februarie and March, and the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...) in Latine, Buxus: in high Dutch, Buchszbaum: in low Dutch, Burboom: in Italian, (...): in English, Box tree.
The lesser may be called (...) and in Latine, Humi Buxus, or Humilis Buxus: in English, dwarf Box, or ground Box, and it is commonly called Dutch Box.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues of the Box tree are hot, drie, and astringent, of an euill and lothsome smell, not vsed in  medicine, but onely as I said before in the description.




CHAP. 71. Of the Myrtle Tree.

 The Description.
1 THe first and greatest Myrtus is a small tree, growing to the height of a man, hauing many faire and pliant branches, couered with a browne barke, and set full of leaues much like vnto the Laurell or Bay leafe, but thinner and smaller, somewhat resembling the leaues of Peruincle, which being bruised do yeeld forth a most fragrant smell, not much inferiour vnto the smell of Cloues, as all the rest of the kindes do: among these leaues come forth small white floures, in shape like the floures of the Cherry tree, but much smaller, and of a pleasant sauour, which do turn into small berries, greene at the first, and afterwards blacke.


1 Myrtus Laurea maxima. The Myrtle tree.


@ 2 Myrtus (...) latifolia. Great Spanish Myrtle.


2 There is also another kind of Myrtus called Myrtus Baetica latifolia, according to Clusius (...) Laurea, that hath leaues also like Bay leaues, growing by couples vpon his pleasant greene branches, in a double row on both sides of the stalkes, of a light greene colour, and somewhat thicker than the former, in sent and smell sweet: the floures and fruit are not much differing from the first kinde.
3 There is likewise another kinde of Myrtus called Exotica, that is strange and not common: it groweth vpright vnto the height of a (...) like vnto the last before mentioned, but that it is (...) with greater plenty of leaues, which do fold in themselues hollow and almost double, broader pointed, and keeping no order in their growing, but one thrusting within another, and as it were crossing one another confusedly; in all other points agreeing with the precedent.
4 There is another sort like vnto the former in floures and branches, but the leaues are smooth, (...) and plaine, and not crumpled or folded at all, they are also much smaller than any of the former. The fruit is in shape like the other, but that it is of a white colour, whereas the fruit of the other is blacke.
5 There is also (...) kinde of Myrtle, called Myrtus minor, or noble Myrtle, as being the

@ 3 Myrtus exotica. Strange Myrtle.@ 4 Myrtus fructu albo. Myrtle with white berries.@ 5 Myrtus minor. The little Myrtle.@ 6 Myrtus Baetica syluestris. Wilde Spanish (...).
chiefe of all the rest (although most common and best knowne) and it groweth like a (...) (...) or hedge bush, very like vnto the former, but much smaller: the leaues are smal and (...), (...) much in shape resembling the leaues of Masticke Time called Marum, but of a fresher greene (...) (...) floures be white, nothing differing from the former sauing in greatnesse, and that sometimes they are more double.
@ 6 This growes not very high, neither is it so shrubby as the former: the branches are small and brittle: the leaues are of a middle bignesse, sharpe pointed, standing by couples in two (...), seldome in foure as the former, they are blackish also and wel smelling. the floure is like that of the rest: the fruit is round, growing vpon long stalks out of the bosomes of the leaues, first greene, then whitish, lastly blacke, of a winy and pleasant taste with some astriction. This growes wilde in diuers places of Portugall, where Clusius found it flouring in October: he calls it Myrtus Baetica (...). @


 The Place.
These kindes of Myrtles grow naturally vpon the wooddy hills and fertill fields of Italy and Spain. @ The two last are nourished in the garden of Mistresse Tuggy in Westminster, and in some other gardens. @


 The Time.
Where they ioy to grow of themselues they floure when the Roses do: the fruit is ripe in (...): in England they neuer beare any fruit.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Myrtus: in the Arabicke tongue, Alas: in Italian, Myrto: in Spanish, Arrayhan: in the Portingale language, Murta, and Murtella: other Nations doe almost keepe the Latine name, as in English it is called Myrtle, or Myrtle tree.
Among the Myrtles that which hath the fine little leafe is surnamed of Pliny, Tarentina; and that which is so thicke and full of leaues is Exotica, strange or forreine. Nigra Myrtus is that which hath the blacke berries: Candida, which hath the white berries, and the leaues of this also are of a lighter greene: Satiua, or the tame planted. One is cherished in gardens and orchards: Syluestris, or the wild Myrtle is that which groweth of it selfe; the berries of this are oftentimes lesser, and of the other, greater. Pliny doth also set downe other kindes; as Patritia, Plebeia, and (...) alis: but what manner of ones they are he doth not declare: he also placeth among the Myrtles, Oxymyrsine, or Kneeholm, which notwithstanding is (...) of the Myrtles, but a thornie shrub.
Pliny in his 14. book, 16. chap. saith, that the wine which is made of the wilde Myrtle tree is called Myrtidanum, if the copie be true. For Dioscorides and likewise Sotion in his Geoponikes report, that wine is made of Myrtle berries when they be thorow ripe, but this is called Vinum Myrteum, or Myrtites, Myrtle wine.
Moreouer, there is also a wine made of the berries and leaues of Myrtle stamped and steeped in Must, or wine new pressed from the grape, which is called, as Dioscorides saith, (...) (...), or wine of Myrtles.
The Myrtle tree was in times past consecrated to Venus. Pliny in his 15. booke, (...). chapter, saith thus, There was an old Alter belonging to Venus, which they now call Murtia.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Myrtle consisteth of contrary substances, a cold earthinesse bearing the preheminence; it  hath also a certaine subtill heat, therefore, as Galen saith, it drieth notably.
The leaues, fruit, buds, and iuice do binde, both outwardly applied and inwardly taken: they stay  the spitting of bloud, and all other issues thereof: they stop both the whites and reds in women, if they sit in a bath made therewith: after which manner and by fomenting also they stay the superfluous course of the hemorrhoides.
They are a remedy for laskes, and for the bloudy flix, they quench the fiery heat of the (...), if  they be laid on with parched Barly meale.
They be also with good successe outwardly applied to all inflammations newly beginning, and  also to new paine vpon some fall, stroke or straine.
They are wholsome for a moist and watery stomacke: the fruit and leaues dried prouoke (...): for the greene leaues containe in them a ceartaine superfluous and hurtfull moisture.
It is good with the decoction herof made with wine, to bathe lims that are out of ioint, and burstings  that are hard to be cured, and vlcers also of the outward parts: it helpeth spreading (...), scoureth away the dandrafe and sores of the head, maketh the haires blacke, and keepeth them

from shedding; withstandeth drunkennesse, if it be taken fasting, and preuaileth against poison, and the bitings of any venomous beast.
There is drawne out of the green berries thereof a iuice, which is dried and reserued for the foresaid  vses.
There is likewise pressed out of the leaues a iuice, by adding vnto them either old wine or raine  water, which must be vsed when it is new made, for being once drie it putrifieth, and as Dioscorides saith, loseth his vertues.



CHAP. 72. Of sweet Willow or Gaule.


Myrtus Brabantica, sive Elaeagnus Cordi. Gaule, sweet willow, or Dutch Myrtle tree.



 The Description.
GAule is a low and little shrub or wooddy plant hauing many brown and hard branches: whereupon doe grow leaues somewhat (...), hard, thicke, and oileous, of an hot sauour or smell somewhat like Myrtus: among the branches come forth other little ones, wherupon do grow many spokie eares or tufts, full of small floures, and after them succeed great store of square seeds clustering together, of a strong and bitter taste. The root is hard, and of a wooddie substance.


 The Place.
This Gaule groweth plentifully in sundry places of England, as in the Ile of Ely, and in the Fennie countries thereabouts, wherof there is such store in that countrey, that they make fagots of it and sheaues, which they call Gaule sheaues, to burne and heat their ouens. It groweth also by Colebrooke, and in sundry other places.


 The Time.
The Gaule floureth in May and Iune, and the seed is ripe in August.


 The Names.
This tree is called of diuers in Latine, Myrtus Brabantica, and Pseudomyrsine; and Cordus calleth it Elaeagnus, Chamaeleagnus, and Myrtus Brabantica. Elaeagnus is described by Theophrastus to be a shrubbie plant like vnto the Chaste tree, with a soft and downie leafe, and with the floure of the Poplar tree; and that which we haue described is no such plant. It hath no name among the old writers for ought we know, vnlesse it be Rhus syluestris (...), or Pliny his wilde Sumach, of which hee hath written in his 24. book, 11 chap. [There is, saith he, a wilde herbe with short stalkes, which is an enemy to poison, and a killer of mothes.] It is called in low Dutch, Gagel: in English, Gaule.


 The Temperature.
Gaule or the wilde Myrtle, especially the seed, is hot and drie in the third degree: the leaues be hot and drie, but not so much.


 The Vertues.
The fruit is troublesome to the brain; being put into beere or aile whilest it is in boiling (which  many vse to do) it maketh the same heady, fit to make a man quickly drunke.
The whole shrub, fruit and all, being laied among clothes, keepeth them from moths and worms.




CHAP. 73. Of Worts or Wortle berries.

 The Kindes.
(...), or Worts, of which we treat in this place, differ from Violets, neither are they esteemed for their floures but berries: of these Worts there be diuers sorts found out by the later Writers.


1 Vaccinia nigra. Blacke Worts or Wortle berries.


2 Vaccinia rubra. Red Worts or Wortle berries.




 The Description.
1 VAccinia nigra, the blacke Wortle or Hurtle, is a base and low shrub or wooddy plant, bringing forth many branches of a cub it high, set full of small leaues of a dark greene colour; not much vnlike the leaues of Box or the Myrtle tree: amongst which come forth little hollow floures turning into small berries, greene at the first, afterward red, and at the last of a blacke colour, and full of a pleasant and sweet iuyce: in which doe lie diuers little thinne whitish seeds: these berries do colour the mouth and lips of those that eate them, with a black colour: the root is wooddy, slender, and now and then creeping.
2 Vaccinia rubra, or red Wortle, is like the former in the manner of growing, but that the leaues are (...) and harder, almost like the leaues of the Box tree, abiding greene all the Winter long: among which come forth small carnation floures, long and round, growing in clusters at the top of the branches: afterwhich succeed small berries, in shew and bignesse like the former, but that they are of an excellent red colour, and full of iuyce, of so orient and beautifull a purple to limne withall, that Indian Lacca is not to be compared thereunto, especially when this iuyce is prepared and dressed with Allom according to art, as my selfe haue proued by experience: the tast is rough and astringent: the root is of a wooddy substance.
3 Vaccinia alba, or the white Wortle, is like vnto the former, both in stalks and leaues, but the berries are of a white colour, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ The figure which our Author here giues in the third place hath need of a better description,

3 Vaccinia alba. The white Worts or Wortle berries.4 Vaccinia Pannonica, (...) Vitis idaea. (...) Wortle berries.5 Vaccinia Vrsi, siue Vua Vrsi apud Clusium. Beare Wortle berries.@ 6 Vitis Idaea folijs subrotundis maior. Great round leaued Wortle berries.
(...) the difference is not onely in the colour of the berries. This differs from the former in forme and bignesse; for it sends forth many stalkes (...) the root, and these three, foure, or (...) cubits high, thicke, and diuided into sundry branches, couered for the most part with a blackish barke: at the beginning of the Spring from the buds at the sides of the branches it sends (...) leaues all horie and hairy vnderneath, and greene aboue: from the midst of these, vpon little foot-stalkes stand clustering together many little floures, consisting of fiue white leaues apiece without smell; and then the leaues by little and little vnfold themselues and cast off their downinesse, and become snipt about the edges. The fruit that succeeds the floures is round, blacke, somewhat like, but bigger than a Haw, full of iuyce of a very sweet taste; wherein lies ten or more longish smooth blackish seeds. It growes vpon the Austrian and Stirian Alps, where the fruit is ripe in August. Clusius calls it Vitis Idaea 3. Pena and Lobel, Amelancher: Gesner by diuers names, as Myrtomalus, Petromelis, Pyrus ceruinus, etc. @
4 Carolus Clusius in his Pannonicke Obseruations hath set downe another of the Wortle (...), vnder the name of Vitis Idaea, which differeth from the other Wortle berries, not onely in stature, but in leaues and fruit also. @ The leaues are long, narrow, sharpe pointed, (...) of veines, a little hairy, and lightly snipt about the edges, greener aboue than below: the fruit growes from the tops of the branches of the former yeare, hanging vpon long foot-stalkes, and being as big as little Cherries, first greene, then red, and lastly blacke, full of iuyce, and that of no vnpleasant taste, containing no kernels, but flat white seeds commonly fiue in number: the stalkes are weake, and commonly lie vpon the ground: (...) found it vpon the Austrian mountaine Snealben, with the fruit partly ripe, and partly vnripe, in August. It is his Vitis Idaea 1. @
5 The same Author also setteth forth another of the Wortle berries, vnder the title of Vua (...), which is likewise a shrubby plant, hauing many feeble branches, whereon grow long leaues blunt at the points, and of an ouerworn green colour: among which, at the tops of the stalks come (...) clusters (...) bottle-like floures of an (...) colour: the fruit followeth, growing (...) in clusters, green at the first, and blacke when they be ripe: the root is of a wooddy substance. @ This is alwaies greene, and the floures are of a whitish purple colour. @
6 @ This differs from the second, in that the leaues are thinner, more full of veines, and whiter (...): the floure is like the common kind, whitish purple, hollow, and diuided into fiue parts: the fruit also is blacke, and like that of the first described. This growes on diuers mountainous places of Germany, where Clusius (...) it, who made it his Vitis Idaea 2. @


 The Place.
These plants prosper best in a lean barren soile, and in vntoiled wooddy places: they are now and then found on high hils subiect to the winde, and vpon mountaines: they grow plentifully in both the Germanies, Bohemia, and in diuers places of France and England; namely in Middlesex on Hampsted heath, and in the woods thereto adioyning, and also vpon the hills in Cheshire called Broxen hills, neere Beeston castle, seuen miles from the Nantwich; and in the wood by Highgate called Finchley wood, and in diuers other places.
The red Wortle berry groweth in Westmerland at a place called Crosby Rauenswaith, where also doth grow the Wortle with the white berry, and in Lancashire also vpon Pendle (...).
@ I haue seene none of these but only the first described, growing vpon Hampsted heath. The white formerly mentioned in the third description, and here againe in the place, seems only a varietie of the second hauing white berries, as far as I can gather by our Author; for it is most certaine, that it is not that which he figured, and I haue described in the third place. @


 The Time.
The Wortle berries do floure in May, and their fruit is ripe in Iune.


 The Names.
VVortle berries is called in high-Dutch, Hepdelbeeren: in low-Dutch, Crakebesien because they make a certaine cracke whilest they be broken betweene the teeth: of diuers, Hauerbesien: the French men, Airelle, or Aurelle, as Iohannes de Choul writeth: and we in England, VVorts, VVhortle berries, Blacke-berries, Bill berries, and Bull-berries, and in some places, VVin-berries.
Most of the shops of Germany do call them Myrtilli, but properly (...): (...) are the (...) of the Myrtle tree, as the Apothecaries name them at this day. This plant hath no name for ought wee can learne, either among the Greekes or antient Latines; for whereas most doe take it to be Vitis Idaea, or the Corinth tree, which Pliny syrnameth (...), it is vntrue; for Vitis Idaea is not only like to the common Vine, (...) is also a kinde of Vine: and (...), who hath made (...) hereof doth call it, without an Epethete, (...), simply, as a little after we wil declare; which without doubt he would not haue done if he had found it to differ from the common Vine: For what things soeuer receiue a name of some plant, the same are expressed with some (...) added to be known to differ from others; as Laurus Alexandrina, Vitis alba, Vitis nigra, Vitis syluestris, and such like.
Moreouer, those things which haue borrowed a name from some plant are like thereunto, if not

wholly, yet either in leafe or fruit, or in some other thing. Vitis alba and nigra, that is, the white and blacke Bryonies, haue leaues and clasping tendrels as hath the common Vine; and clyme also after the same manner: Vitis syluestris, or the wilde Vine, hath such like stalks as the Vine hath, and bringeth forth fruit like to the little Grapes. Laurus Alexandrina, and Chamedaphne, and also Daphnoides, are like in leaues to the Laurell tree: Sycomorus is like in fruit to the Fig tree, and in leaues to the Mulberry tree: Chamaedrys hath the leafe of an Oke; Peucedanus of the Pine tree: so of others which haue taken their names from some other: but this low shrub is not like the Vine either in any part, or in any other thing.
This Vitis Idaea groweth not on the vppermost and snowie parts of mount Ida (as some would haue it, but about Ida, euen the hill Ida, not of Candy, but of Troas in the lesser Asia, which (...) in his fifth booke of Geographie, chap. 3. doth call Alexandri Troas, or (...) his Troy: whereupon it is also aduisedly named of Pliny, lib. 14. cap. 3. Vitis Alexandrina, no otherwise than (...) Laurus is said of Theophrastus to grow there: Laurus, syrnamed (...), and (...) quaedam, or a certaine Fig tree, and (...). that is to say the Vine, are reported, saith he, to grow properly about Ida. Like vnto this Vine are those which Philostratus in the life of Apollonius reporteth to grow in Maeonia, and Lydia, scituated not far from Troy, comparing them to those vines which grow in India beyond Caucasus: The Vines there, saith he, be very small, like as be those that do grow in Maeonia and Lydia, yet is the wine which is pressed out of them of a maruellous pleasant taste.
This Vine which growes neere to mount Ida is reported to be like a shrub, with little twigs and branches of the length of a cubit, about which are grapes growing aslope, blacke, of the bignes of a beane, sweet, hauing within a certaine winie substance, soft: the leafe of this is round, vncut, and little.
This is described by Pliny, lib. 14, cap. 3. almost in the selfe same words: It is called, saith he, Alexandrina vitis, and groweth neere vnto Phalacra: it is short, with branches a cubit long, with a blacke grape of the bignes of the Latines Beane, with a soft pulpe and very little, with very sweet clusters growing aslope, and a little round leafe without cuts.
And with this description the little shrub which the Apothecaries of Germany do call (...) doth nothing at all agree, as it is very manifest; for it is low, scarce a cubit high, with a few short branches not growing to a cubit in length: it doth not bring forth clusters or bunches, nor yet fruit like vnto grapes, but berries like those of the Yew tree, not sweet, but somewhat (...) and astringent; in which also there are many little white flat seeds: the leafe is not round, but more long than round, not like to that of the Vine, but of the Box tree. Moreouer, it is thought that this is not found in Italy, Greece, or in the lesser Asia, for that Matthiolus affirmeth the same to grow no where but in Germanie and Bohemia; so far is it from being called or accounted to be Vitis Idaea or Alexandrina.
The fruit of this may be thought not without cause to be named Vaccinia, sith they are berries; (...) they may be termed of Baccae, berries, Vaccinia, as though they should be called Baccinia. Yet this letteth not that there may be also other Vaccinia's: for Vaccinia is (...) dictio, or a word of diuers significations. Virgil in the (...) booke of his Bucolicks, Eclog. 10. affirmeth, that the written Hyacinth is named of the Latines, Vaccinium, translating into Latine Theocritus his verse which is taken out of his tenth Eidyl.
(...)
Virgil: Et nigrae Violae, sunt and Vaccinia nigra.
Vitruvius, lib. 7. of his Architecture doth also distinguish Vaccinium from the Violet, and sheweth, that of it is made a gallant purple; which seeing that the written Hyacinth cannot do, it must needs be that this Vaccinium is another thing than the Hyacinth is, because it serues to giue a purple dye.
Pliny also, lib. 16. cap. 18. hath made mention of Vaccinia, which are vsed to dye bond-slaues (...) with, and to giue them a purple colour.
But whether these be our (...) or Whortle berries it is hard to affirme, especially seeing that Pliny reckoneth vp Vaccinia amongst those plants which grow in waterie places; but ours grow on high places vpon mountaines subiect to windes, neither is it certainly knowne to grow in Italy. Howsoeuer it is, these our Whortles may be called Vaccinia, and do agree with Plinies and Vitruvius his Vaccinia, because garments and linnen cloath may take from these a purple die.
The red Whortle berries haue their name from the blacke Whortles, to which they be in form very like, and are called in Latine, Vaccinia rubra: in high-Dutch, Rooter Heidelbeere: in low-Dutch, Roode Crakebesien: the French men, Aurelles Rouges: they be named in English

Red Worts, or red Wortle berries. Conradus Gesnerus hath called this plant Vitis Idaea rubris (...): but the growing of the berries doth shew, that this doth farre lesse agree with (...) (...); than the blacke; for they do not hang vpon the sides of the branches as do the black (which deceiued them that thought it to be Vitis Idaea) but from the tops of the sprigs in clusters.
As concerning the names of the other they are touched in their seuerall descriptions.


 The Temperature.
These Vaccinia or Wortle berries are cold euen in the later end of the second degree, and dry also, with a manifest astriction or binding qualitie.
Red Wortle berries are cold and dry, and also binding.


 The Vertues.
The iuyce of the blacke Wortle berries is boyled till it become thicke, and is prepared or kept  by adding hony and sugar vnto it: the Apothecaries call it Rob, which is preferred in all things before the raw berries themselues; for many times whilest they be eaten or taken raw they are offensiue to a weake and cold stomacke, and so far are they (...) binding the belly, or staying the laske, as that they also trouble the same through their cold and raw qualitie, which thing the boiled (...) called Rob doth not any whit at all.
They be good for an hot stomacke, they (...) thirst, they mitigate and allay the heate of hot  burning agues, they stop the belly, stay (...) cure the bloudy flix proceeding of choler, and helpe the felonie, or the purging of choler (...) and downwards.
The people of Cheshire do eate the blacke (...) in creame and milke as in these South parts  we eate Strawberries, which stop and binde the belly, putting away also the desire to vomit.
The red Wortle is not of such a pleasant (...) as the blacke, and therefore not so much vsed to  be eaten; but (as I said before) they make the fairest carnation colour in the world.



CHAP. 74. Of the Marish Worts or Fenne-Berries.


Vaccinia palustria. Marish Worts.



 The Description.
THe Marish Wortle berries grow vpon the bogs in marish or moorish grounds, creeping thereupon like vnto wilde Time, hauing many small (...) and tender stalkes layd almost flat vpon the ground, beset with smal narrow leaues fashioned almost like the leaues of Thyme, but lesser: among which come forth little berries like vnto the common blacke Wortle berrie in shape, but somewhat longer, sometimes all red, and sometimes spotted or specked with red spots of a deeper colour: in taste rough and astringent.


 The Place.
The Marish Wortle growes vpon bogs and such like waterish and fenny places, especially in Cheshire and Staffordshire, where I haue found it in great plenty.


 The Time.
The Berries are ripe about the end of Iuly, and in August.


 The Names.
They are called in high-Dutch, (...); (...): that is to say, Fen-Grapes, or FenBerries, and Marish-worts, or Marish-Berries. Valerius Cordus nameth them Oxycoccon. wee haue called them Vacciniapalustria, or Marish Wortle berries, of the likenesse they haue to the other berries: some also call them Mosse-Berries, or Moore-berries.


 The Temperature.
These Wortle berries are cold and dry, hauing withall a certain thinnesse of parts and substance, with a certaine binding qualitie adioyned.



 The (...).
They take away the heate of burning agues, and also the drought, they quench the furious heate  of choler, they stay vomiting, restore an appetite to meate which was lost by reason of cholericke and corrupt humors, and are good against the pestilent diseases.
The iuice of these also is boyled till it be thicke, with sugar added that it may be kept, which is  good for all things that the berries are, yea and far better. 

I haue brought this Chapter and the next following from the place they formerly held, and seated them here amongst the rest of their (...).




CHAP. 75. Of Cloud-berry.


Vaccinia Nubis. Cloud-berries.



 The Description.
THe Cloud-berrie hath many small threddy roots, creeping farre abroad vnder the vpper crust of the earth, and also the mosse, like vnto Couch-grasse, of an ouerworn reddish colour, set here and there with smal tufts of hairy strings: from which rise vp two small stalks, hard, tough, and of a wooddy substance (neuer more nor lesse) on which doe stand the leaues like those of the wilde Mallow, and of the same (...), full of small nerues or sinewes running in each part of the same: between the leaues commeth vp a stalke likewise of a wooddy substance, whereon doth grow a small floure consisting of fiue leaues, of an herby or yellowish green colour like those of the wilde Auens. After commeth the fruit, greene at the first, after yellow, and the sides next the Sun red when they be ripe; in forme almost like vnto a little heart, made as it were of two, but (...) no more but one, open aboue, and closed together in the bottom, of a harsh or sharpe taste, wherein is contained three or foure little white seeds.


 The Place.
This plant groweth naturally vpon the tops of two high mountaines (among the mossie places) one in (...) called Ingleborough, the other in Lancashire called Pendle, two of the highest mountaines in all England, where the clouds are lower than the tops of the same all Winter long, whereupon the people of the countrey haue called them Cloud-berries, found there by a curious gentleman in the knowledge of plants, called Mr. Hesketh, often remembred.


 The Time.
The leaues spring vp in May, at which time it floureth: the fruit is ripe in Iuly.


 The Temperature.
The fruit is cold and dry, and very astringent.


 The Vertues.
The fruit quencheth thirst, cooleth the stomacke, and allayeth inflammations, being eaten as  Worts are, or the decoction made and drunke. 

My friend M. (...) of (...) receiued a plant hereof out of Lancashire: and by the shape of the (...) I could not iudge it to differ from the (...) (...) described, pag. 1273. neither doe the descriptions much differ in any materiall point: the figures differ more; but I iudge this a very (...).




CHAP. 76. Of shrub Heart-Wort of Aethiopia.

 The Description.
THis kind of (...), being the Aethiopian Sesely, hath blackish stalks of a wooddy substance: this plant diuideth it selfe into sundry other armes or branches, which are beset with (...) sat and (...) leaues, fashioned somewhat like the Wood-binde leaues, but thicker, and

Seseli Aethiopicum srutex. (...) Sesely, or Hart-woort of Ethiopia.
more gummie, approching very neere vnto the leaues of Oleander both in shape and substance, being of a deepe or darke green colour, and of a very good sauour and smell, and continueth greene in my garden both winter and Sommer, like the Bay or Laurell. The floures do grow at the tops of the branches in yellow rundles like the floures of Dill; which being past, there succeedeth a darke or duskie seed resembling the seed of (...), and of a bitter taste. The root is thicke and of a wooddy substance.


 The Place.
It is found both in stony places, and on the sea coasts not farre from Marsilles, and likewise in other places of Languedocke: it also groweth in Ethiopia, in the darke and (...) woods: it groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
It flourisheth, floureth and seedeth in Iuly and August.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latines likewise Aethiopicum Seseli: the Aegyptians, (...) that is, Dogs horrour: in English, Sesely of (...), or Ethiopian Hartwoort.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Sesely of Ethiopia is thought to haue the same faculties that the Sesely of Marsilles hath, whereunto I refer it.



CHAP. 77. Of the Elder tree.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Elders, some of the land, and some of the water or marish grounds; some with very jagged leaues, and others with double floures, as shall be declared.


 The Description.
1 THe common Elder groweth vp now and then to the bignesse of a meane tree, casting his boughes all about, and oftentimes remaineth a shrub: the body is almost all wooddie, hauing very little pith within; but the boughes and especially the young ones which be iointed, are full of pith within, and haue but little wood without: the barke of the body and great armes is rugged and full of chinks, and of an ill fauoured wan colour like ashes: that of the boughes is not very smooth, but in colour almost like; and that is the outward barke, for there is another vnder it neerer to the wood, of colour greene: the substance of the wood is sound, somewhat yellow, and that may be easily cleft: the leaues consist of fiue or six particular ones fastened to one rib, like those of the Walnut tree, but euery particular one is lesser, nicked in the edges, and of a ranke and (...) smell. The floures grow on spokie rundles, which be thin and scattered, of a white colour and sweet smell: after them grow vp little berries, greene at the first, afterwards blacke, whereout is pressed a purple juice, which being boiled with Allom and such like things, doth serue very well (...) the Painters vse, as also to colour vineger: the seeds in these are a little flat, and somewhat long. There groweth oftentimes vpon the bodies of those old trees or shrubs a certaine (...) called Auricula Iudae, or Iewes (...), which is soft, blackish, couered with a skin, somewhat like now and then to a mans eare, which being plucked off and dryed,

shrinketh together and becommeth hard. This Elder groweth euery where, and is the common Elder.
2 There is another also which is rare and strange, for the berries of it are not blacke, but white: this is like in leaues to the former.


1 Sambucus. The common Elder tree.


@ 2 Sambucus fructu albo. Elder with white berries.


3 The jagged Elder tree groweth like the common Elder in body, branches, shootes, (...), floures, fruit, and stinking smell, and differeth onely in the fashion of the leaues, which doth so much disguise the tree, and put it out of knowledge, that no man would take it for a kinde of Elder, vntill he hath smelt thereunto, which will quickely shew from whence he is descended: for these strange Elder leaues are very much jagged, rent or cut euen vnto the middle rib. From the trunke of this tree as from others of the same kinde, proceedeth a certaine fleshie excrescence like vnto the eare of a man, especially from those trees that are very old.
4 This kinde of Elder hath (...) which are white, but the berries redde, and both are not contained in spokie rundles, but in clusters, and grow after the manner of a cluster of grapes: in leaues and other things it resembleth the common Elder, saue that now and then it groweth higher.


 The Place.
The common Elder groweth euery where: it is planted about (...)-burrowes for the shadow of the (...); but that with the white berries is rare: the other kindes grow in like places; but that with the clustered fruit groweth vpon mountaines; that with the jagged leaues groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
These kindes of Elders do floure in Aprill and May, and their fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine and of the Apothecaries, Sambucus: of (...) Salicetus, Beza: in high Dutch, Holunder, Holder: in low Dutch, Ulier: in Italian, Sambuco: in French, Hus and (...): in Spanish, Sauco, Sauch, Sambugueyro: in English, Elder, and Elder tree: that with the white berries diuers would haue to be called Sambucus sylucstris, or wilde Elder, but Matthiolus calleth it Montana, or mountaine Elder.



3 (...) laciniatis folijs. The iagged Elder tree.


4 Sambucus racemosa, vel (...). Harts Elder, or Cluster Elder.




 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen attributeth the like facultie to Elder that he doth to Danewoort, and saith that it is of a  drying qualitie, gluing, and moderatly digesting: and it hath not only these faculties, but others also; for the (...), leaues, first buds, (...), and fruit of Elder, do not only dry, but also heate, and haue withall a purging qualitie, but not without trouble and hurt to the stomacke.
The leaues and tender crops of common Elder taken in some broth or pottage open the belly, purging both slimie flegme and cholericke humors: the middle barke is of the same nature, but stronger, and purgeth the said humors more violently.
The seeds contained within the berries dried are good for such as haue the dropsie, and such as  are too fat, and would faine be leaner, if they be taken in a morning to the quantity of a dram with wine for a certaine space.
The leaues of Elder (...) in water vntill they be very soft, and when they are almost boiled enough  a little oile of sweet Almonds added thereto, or a little Lineseed oile; then taken forth and laid vpon a red cloath, or a piece of scarlet, and applied to the hemorrhoides or Piles as hot as can be suffered, and so let to remaine vpon the part affected, vntill it be somewhat cold, hauing the like in a readinesse, applying one after another vpon the diseased part, by the space of an houre or more, and in the end some bound to the place, and the patient put warme a bed; it hath not as yet failed at the first dressing to cure the said disease; but if the Patient be dressed twice it must needs doe good if the first faile.
The greene leaues pouned with Deeres suet or Bulls tallow are good to be laid to hot swellings  and tumors, and doth asswage the paine of the gout.
The inner and greene barke doth more forcibly purge: it draweth forth choler and waterie humors;  for which cause it is good for those that haue the dropsie, being stamped, and the liquor pressed out and drunke with wine or whay.
Of like operation are also the fresh floures mixed with some kinde of meat, as fried with egges, they likewise trouble the belly and moue to the stoole: being dried they lose as well their purging qualitie as their moisture, and retaine the digesting and attenuating qualitie.

The vinegar in which the dried floures are steeped are wholsome for the stomacke: being vsed  with meate it stirreth vp an appetite, it cutteth and attenuateth or maketh thin grosse and raw humors.
The facultie of the seed is somewhat gentler than that of the other parts: it also moueth the  belly, and draweth forth waterie humors, being beaten to pouder, and giuen to a dram weight: being new gathered, steeped in vineger, and afterwards dried, it is taken, and that effectually, in the like weight of the dried lees of wine, and with a few Anise seeds, for so it worketh without any maner of trouble, and helpeth those that haue the dropsie. But it must be (...) for certaine daies together in a little wine, to those that haue need thereof.
The gelly of the Elder, otherwise called (...) eare, hath a binding and drying qualitie: the infusion  thereof, in which it hath bin steeped a few houres, taketh away inflammations of the mouth, and almonds of the throat in the (...), if the mouth and throat be washed therewith, and doth in like manner helpe the uvula.
Dioscorides saith, that the tender and greene leaues of the Elder tree, with barley meale parched, do (...) hot swellings, and are good for those that are burnt or scalded, and for such as be bitten with a mad dog, and that they glew and heale vp hollow vlcers.
The pith of the young boughes is without qualitie: This being dried, and somewhat pressed or  quashed together, is good to lay vpon the narrow orifices or holes of fistula's and issues, if it be put therein.



CHAP. 78. Of Marish or Water Elder.


1 Sambucus aquatilis, siue palnstris. Marish or water Elder.


2 Sambucus Rosea. The Rose Elder.



 The Description.
1 MArish Elder is not like to the common Elder in leaues, but in boughes: it groweth after the manner of a little tree: the boughes are couered with a barke of an ill fauoured Ash colour, as be those of the common Elder: they are set with ioints by

certaine distances; and haue in them great plenty of white pith, therefore they haue lesse wood, which is white and brittle: the leaues be broad, cornered, like almost to Vine leaues, but lesser and foster: among which come forth spoked rundles which bring forth little floures, the vttermost whereof alongst the borders be greater, of a gallant white colour, euery little one consisting of fiue leaues: the other in the midst and within the borders be smaller, and it floures by degrees, and the whole (...) is of a most sweet smell: after which come the fruit or berries, that are round like those of the common Elder, but greater, and of a shining red colour, and blacke when they be withered.
2 Sambucus Rosea, or the Elder Rose groweth like an hedge tree, hauing many knotty branches or shoots comming from the root, full of pith like the common Elder: the leaues are like the vine leaues; among which come forth goodly floures of a white colour, (...) and dashed here and there with a light and thin Carnation colour, and do grow thicke and closely compact together, in quantitie and bulke of a mans hand, or rather bigger, of great beauty, and sauoring like the floures of the Haw-thorne: but in my garden there groweth not any fruit vpon this tree, nor in any other place, for ought that I can vnderstand.
3 This kinde is likewise an hedge tree, very like vnto the former in stalks and branches, which are iointed and knotted by distances, and it is full of white pith: the leaues be likewise cornered: the floures hereof grow not out of spoky rundles, but stand in a round thicke and globed tuft, in bignesse also and fashion like to the former, sauing that they tend to a deeper purple colour, wherin only the difference consists.


 The Place.
Sambucus palustris, the water Elder, growes by running streames and water courses, and in hedges by moist ditch sides.
The Rose Elder groweth in Gardens, and the floures are there doubled by Art, as it is supposed.


 The Time.
These kindes of Elders do floure in Aprill and May, and the fruit of the water Elder is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The water Elder is called in Latine, Sambucus aquatica, and Sambucus palustris: it is called Opulus, and Platanus, and also Chamaeplatanus, or the dwarfe Plane tree, but not properly: Valerius Cordus maketh it to be Lycostaphylos: the Saxons, saith Gesner, do call it Vua Lupina; from whence Cordus inuented the name (...): it is named in high-Dutch, (...) holder, and (...) holder: in low Dutch, Swelcken, and Swelckenhout: of certaine French men, Obiere: in English, Marish Elder, and Whitten tree, Ople tree, and dwarfe Plane tree.
The Rose Elder is called in Latine, Sambucus Rosea, and Sambucus aquatica, being doubtles a kind of the former water Elder, the floures being doubled by art, as we haue said: it is called in Dutch, (...) Roose: in English, Gelders Rose, and Rose Elder.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Concerning the faculties of these Elders, and the berries of the Water Elder, there is nothing found in any writer, neither can we set downe any thing hereof of our owne knowledge.



CHAP. 79. Of Dane-Wort, Wall-Wort, or Dwarfe Elder.

 The Description.
DAne-wort, as it is not a shrub, neither is it altogether an herby plant, but as it were a Plant participating of both, being doubtles one of the Elders, as may appeare both by the leaues, floures, and fruit, as also by the smell and taste.
Wall-wort is very like vnto Elder in leaues, spoky tufts, and fruit, but it hath not a wooddie stalke; it bringeth sorth only greene stalks, which wither away in Winter: these are edged, and full of ioynts, like to the yong branches and shoots of Elder: the leaues grow by couples, with distances, wide, and consist of many small leaues which stand vpon a thicke ribbed stalke, of which euery one is long, broad, and cut in the edges like a saw, wider and greater than the leaues of the common Elder tree: at the top of the stalkes there grow tufts of white floures tipt with red, with fiue little chiues in them pointed with blacke, which turne into blacke berries like the Elder, in the which be little long seed: the root is tough, and of a good and reasonable length, better for Physicks vse than the leaues of Elder.



Ebulus, siue Sambucus (...). Dane-wort, or dwarfe Elder.




 The Place.
Dane-wort growes in vntoiled places neere common waies, and in the borders of fields: it groweth plentifully in the lane at Kilburne Abbey by London: also in a field by S. Ioans neere Dartford in Kent: and also in the highway at old Branford townes end next London, and in many other places.


 The Time.
The floures are perfected in Sommer, and the berries in Autumne.


 The Names.
It is named in Greeke, (...), that is, humilis Sambucus, or low Elder: it is called in Latine, Ebulus, and Ebulum: in high-Dutch, Attich: in low-Dutch, Adich: in Italian, Ebulo: in French, Hieble: in Spanish, Yezgos: in English, Wall-wort, Dane-wort, and dwarfe Elder.


 The Temperature.
Wall-wort is of temperature hot and drie in the third degree, and of a singular qualitie, which Galen doth attribute vnto it, to wast and consume; and also it hath a strange and speciall facultie to purge by the stoole: the roots be of greatest force, the leaues haue the chiefest strength to digest and consume.


 The Vertues.
The roots of Wall-wort boiled in (...) and  drunken are good against the dropsie, for they purge downwards watery humors.
The leaues do consume and waste away hard swellings if they be applied pultis-wise, or in a fomentation  or bath.
Dioscorides saith, that the roots of Wall-wort doe soften and open the matrix, and also correct  the infirmities thereof, if they be boiled for a bath to sit in; and dissolue the swellings and paines of the belly.
The iuice of the root of Dane-wort doth make the haire blacke.
The yong and tender leafe quencheth hot inflammations, being applied with Barly meale: it  is with good successe laid vpon burnings, scaldings, and vpon the bitings of mad dogs; and with Bulls tallow or Goats suet it is a remedie for the gout.
The seed of Wall-wort drunke in the quantitie of a dram is the most excellent purger of waterie  humors in the world, and therefore most singular against the dropsie.
If one scruple of the seed be bruised and taken with syrrup of Roses and a little Secke, it cureth  the dropsie, and easeth the gout, mightily purging downwards waterish humors, being once taken in the weeke.



CHAP. 80. Of Beane Trefoile.

 The Description.
1 THe first kinde of Anagyris or Laburnum groweth like vnto a small tree, garnished with many small branches like the shoots of Oziars, set full of pale greene leaues, alwaies three together, like the Lotus or medow Trefoile, or rather like the leaues of Vitex, or the Cytisus bush: among which come forth many tufts of floures of a yellow colour, not much vnlike the floures of Broome: when these floures be gone there succeed small flat cods, wherein are contained seeds like Galega or the Cytisus bush: the whole plant hath little or no sauour at all: the root is soft and gentle, yet of a wooddy substance.

2 Stinking Trefoile is a shrub like to a little tree, rising vp to the height of six or (...) cubits, or sometimes higher: it sendeth forth of the stalks very many slender branches; the barke whereof is of a deep greene colour: the leaues stand alwaies three together, like those of (...) or medow Trefoile, yet of a lighter greene on the vpper side: the floures be long, as yellow as gold, very like to those of Broome, two or three also ioined together: after them come vp broad cods, wherein do lie hard fruit like Kidney Beanes, but lesser; at the first white, afterwards tending to a purple, and last of all of a blackish blew: the leaues and floures hereof haue a filthy smell, like those of the stinking Gladdon, and so ranke withall, as euen the passers by are annoied therewith.


1 Anagyris. Beane Trefoile.


2 Anagyris (...). Stinking Beane Trefoile.


@ Of Anagyris there are foure kindes, two with stinking leaues; the one with longish leaues, the other with rounder.
Two other whose leaues do not stinke; the one of these hath sometimes foure or fiue leaues on one stalke, and the leaues are long and large. The other hath them lesser and narrower. @


 The Place.
These grow of themselues in most places of Languedocke and Spaine, and in other countries also by high waies sides, as in the Isle of Candy, as Bellonius writeth: the first I haue in my garden; the other is a stranger in England. @ Master Tradiscant hath two sorts hereof in his garden. @


 The Time.
They floure in Iune, and the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Beane Trefoile is called in Greeke (...), which name remaineth vncorrupt in Candy euen to this day: in Latine also Anagyris, and Laburnum: of the people of Anagni in Italy named Eghelo, which is referred vnto Laburnum, of which Pliny writeth in his 16. booke, 18. chapter. In English, Beane Trefoile, or the Peascod tree.


 The Temperature.
Beane Trefoile, as Galen writeth, hath a hot and digesting faculty.



 The Vertues.
The tender leaues, saith Dioscorides, being stamped and layed vpon cold swellings, do waste away  the same.
They are drunke with Cute in the weight of a dram against the (...) of the lungs and doe  bring downe the menses, the birth, and the afterbirth.
They cure the head-ache being drunke with wine; the iuice of the root digesteth and ripeneth  if the seed be eaten it procureth vomite, which thing, as Matthiolus writeth, the seed not onely of stinking Beane Tresoile doth effect, but that also of the other likewise.



CHAP. 81. Of Iudas Tree.


Arbor Iude. Iudas Tree.



 The Description.
IVdas tree is likewise one of the hedge plants: it groweth vp vnto a tree of a reasonable bignesse, couered with a dark coloured barke, whereon doe grow many twiggie tough branches of a brown colour, garnished with round leaues, like those of round Birthwoort, or Sowbread, but harder, and of a deeper greene colour: among which come forth small floures like those of Peason, of a purple colour, mixed with red, which turn into long flat cods, pressed hard together, of a (...) or wan colour, wherein is contained small flat seeds, like the Lentill, or rather like the seed of Medica, fashioned like a little kidney: the root is great and wooddie.


 The Place.
This shrub is found in diuers prouinces of Spaine, in hedges, and among briers and brambles: the mountaines of Italy, and the fields of Languedocke are not without this shrub: it groweth in my garden.


 The Time.
The floures come forth in the Spring, and before the leaues: the fruit or cods be ripe in Sommer.


 The Names.
It is commonly named in Latine Arbor Iudae: some haue called it Sycomorus, or Sycomore tree, and that because the floures and cods hang downe from the bigger branches: but the right Sycomore tree is like the Fig-tree in fruit, and in leaues to the Mulberrie tree, wherupon it is so named. Others take it to be (...): of which Theophrastus writeth thus, Cercis bringeth forth fruit in a cod; which words are all so few, as that of this no certaintie can be gathered, for therebe more shrubs that bring forth fruit in cods. The French men call it Guainier, as though they should say, Vaginula: or a little sheath: most of the Spaniards do name it Algorouo loco, that is, Siliqua syluestris or fatua, wilde or foolish cod: others, Arbold' amor, for the brauenesse sake: it may be called in English, Iudas tree, for that it is thought to be that whereon Iudas did hang himselfe, and not vpon the Elder tree, as it is vulgarly said.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The temperature and vertues of this shrub are vnknowne, and not found out: for whereas Matthiolus maketh this to be Acacia, by adding falfely thornes vnto it, it is but a surmise.




CHAP. 82. Of the Carob tree, or Saint Iohns Bread.

 The Description.
THe Carob tree is also one of those that beare cods; it is a tree of a middle bignesse, very full of boughes: the leaues long, and consist of many set together vpon one middle rib, like those of the Ash, but euery particular one of them is broader, harder and rounder: the fiuit or long cods in some places are a foot in length, in other places shorter by halfe, an inch broad, smooth, and thick; in which do lie flat and broad seeds: the cods themselues are of a sweet taste, and are eaten of diuers, but not before they be gathered and dried; for being as yet green, though ripe, they are vnpleasant to be eaten by reason of their ill sauoured taste.


Ceratia siliqua, sive Ceratonia. The Carob tree.




 The Place.
This groweth in Apulia, a Prouince of the kingdome of Naples, and also in diuers vntoiled places in Spaine: it is likewise found in India and other countries Eastward, where the cods are so full of sweet iuice as that it is vsed to preserue Ginger and other fruites, as Matthiolus sheweth. Strabo lib. 15. saith, that Aristobulus reporteth how there is a tree in India of no great bignes, which hath great cods, ten inches long, full of hony; Quas qui (...) non facile (...); which thing peraduenture is onely to be vnderstood of the greene cods, and those that are not yet dry: it is very wel known in the coasts of Nicea and Liguria in Italy, as also in all the tracts and coasts of the West Indies, and Virginia. It groweth also in sundry places of Palestine, where there is such plenty of it, that it is left vnto swine and other wilde beasts to seed vpon, as our Acornes and Beech mast. Moreouer, both young and old feed thereon for pleasure and some haue eaten thereof to supply and help the necessary nourishment of their bodies. This of some is called Saint Iohns bread, and thought to be that which is translated Locusts, whereon S. Iohn did feed when he was in the wildernesse, besides the wilde hony whereof he did also eat; but there is small certainty of this: but most certaine that the people of that countrey doe feed vpon these cods, in Greeke called (...): in Latine, Siliquae: but Saint Iohns food is called in Greeke (...): which word is often vsed in the Reuelation written by Saint Iohn, and translated Locusts. Now wee must also remember that this Greeke word hath two seuerall interpretations or significations, for taken in the good part, it signifieth a kinde of creeping creature, or flie, which hoppeth or skippeth vp and down, as doth the grashopper; of which kinde of creatures it was lawfull to eat, Leuit. 11. 22. and Mat. 3. 4. It signifieth also those Locusts which came out of the smoke of the bottomles pit, mentioned Apoc. 9. v. 3. 4. etc. which were like vnto horses prepared for battell. The Hebrew word which the English translators haue turned Grashoppers, Tremelius daresnot giue the name Locust vnto it, but calleth it by the Hebrew name Arbis, after the letters and Hebrew name, saying thus in the note vpon the 22. verse of the 11. chapter of Leuit. These kindes of creeping things neither the Hebrews nor the Historiographers, nor our selues do know what they meane: wherefore we still retaine the Hebrew words, for all the foure kindes thereof: but it is certaine that the East countrey Grashoppers and Locusts were sometimes vsed in meat, as Math. 3. 4. and Marc. 1. 6. Plin lib. 11. Natur. Histor. cap 26. and 29.

Thus far Tremelius and Iunius. By that which hath been said it appeareth what S. Iohn the Baptist fed of, vnder the title Locusts: and that it is nothing like vnto this fruit Ceratia siliqua: I rather take the husks or shells of the fruit of this tree to be the cods or husks whereof the prodigall childe would haue fed, but none gaue them vnto him, though the swine had their fill thereof. These cods being drie are very like beane cods, as I haue often seen. I haue sowne the seeds in my garden, where they haue prospered exceeding well.
@ There is no doubt but the (...) or Siliquae mentioned in Saint Lukes Gospel, Chap. 15. v. 16. were the cods or (...) of this tree. I cannot beleeue that either the fruit of this or the Locusts, were the (...) mentioned in the third chapter of Saint Mat. v. 4. But I am of the opinion of the Greeke Father Isodore Pelusiota, who, lib. 1. Epist. 132. hath these words, (...) etc. That is: The Acrides which Iohn fed vpon are not liuing creatures like to Beetles, as some vnlearnedly suppose, farre be it from vs so to thinke; but they are the tender buds of herbes and plants or trees; neither on the other side is the Meli agrion any herbe so called, but mountaine hony gathered by wilde Bees, etc. @


 The Time.
The Carob tree bringeth forth fruit in the beginning of the Spring, which is not ripe till Autumne.


 The Names.
The Carob tree is called (...): in Latine likewise, Ceratonia: in Spanish, Garouo: in English, Carob tree; and of some, Beane tree, and Saint Iohns Bread: the fruit or cod is named (...): in Latine Siliqua, or Siliqua dulcis: in diuers shops, Xylocaracta: in other shops in Italy, Carobe, or Carobole: of the Apothecaries of Apulia, Salequa: it is called in Spanish, Alfarobas, or Algarovas: and without an article Garouas: in high Dutch, S. Johans (...): that is to say, Sancti Iohan. panis, or S. Iohns Bread, neither is it knowne by any other name in the Low-countries: Some call it in English, Carob.


 The Temperature.
The Carob tree is drie and astringent, as is also the fruit, and containeth in it a certaine sweetnes as Galen saith.


 The Vertues.
The fruit of the Carob Tree, beeing eat when it is greene, doth gently loose the belly; but  beeing dry it is hard of digestion, and stoppeth the belly, it prouoketh vrine, it is good for the stomacke, and nourisheth well, and much better than when it is greene and fresh.



CHAP. 83. Of Cassia Fistula, or Pudding Pipe.

 The Description.
CAssia purgatrix, or Cassia fistula, groweth vp to be a faire tree, with a tough barke like leather, of the colour of Box, whereupon some haue supposed it to take the Greeke name (...), in Latine, Coriaceus: the armes and branches of this are small and limber, beset with many goodly leaues, like those of the Wall-nut tree: among which come forth small floures of a yellow colour, compact or consisting of six little leaues, like the floures of Chelidonium minus, or Pile-woort: after these be vaded, there succeed goodly blacke round, long cods, whereof some are two foot long, and of a wooddy substance: in these coddes are contained a blacke pulpe, very sweet and soft, of a pleasant taste, and seruing to many vses in Physicke, in which pulpe lieth the seed couched in little cels or partitions: this seed is flat and brownish, not vnlike the seed of Ceratia Siliqua, and in other respects very like vnto it also.


 The Place.
This tree groweth much in Egypt, especially about Memphis and Alexandria, and most parts of Barbarie, and is a stranger in these parts of Europe.


 The Time.
The Cassia tree groweth green winter and sommer: it sheddeth his old leaues when new are come, by meanes whereof it is neuer void of leaues: it floureth early in the spring, and the fruit is ripe in Autumne.



Cassia fistula. Pudding Pipe tree.




 The Names.
This tree was vnknowne to the old writers, or so little accounted of, as that they haue made no mention of it at all: the Arabians were the first that esteemed of it, by reason they knew the vse of the pulpe which is found in the Pipes: and after them the later Grecians, as Actuarius and other of his time, by whom it was named (...) that is to say in Latine, Casia nigra. The fruit thereof, saith Actuarius in his fist booke, is like a long pipe, hauing within it a thicke humour or moisture, which is not congealed all alike thorow the pipe, but is separated and diuided with many partitions, being thin wooddy skins. The Apothecaries call it Casia (...), and with a double ss Cassia (...): it is called in English after the Apothecaries word, Cassia fistula, and may also be Englished, Pudding Pipe, because the cod or Pipe is like a pudding: but the old Cassia fistula, or (...) in Greeke, is that sweet and odoriferous barke that is rolled together, after the manner of a long and roundpipe, now named of the Apothecaries Cassia lignea, which is a kinde of Cinamon.


 The Temperature.
The pulpe of this pipe which is chiefely in request, is moist in the later end of the first degree, and little more than temperatly hot.


The Vertues.
The pulpe of Casia (...) extracted with violet water, is a most sweet and pleasant medicine, and  may be giuen without danger to all weak people of what age and sex soeuer they be, yea it may be ministred to women with childe, for it gently purgeth cholcricke humours and slimie flegme, if it be taken in the weight of an ounce.
Cassia is good for such as be vexed with hot agues, pleurisies, iaundice, or any other inflammation  of the liuer, being taken as afore is shewed.
Cassia is good for the reines and kidneies, driueth forth grauell and the stone, especially if it bee  mingled with the decoction of Parsley, and Fennell roots, and drunke.
It purgeth and purifieth the bloud, making it more cleane than before, breaking therewith the  actimonie and sharpnesse of the mixture of bloud and choler together.
It dissolueth all phlegmons and inflammations of the brest, lungs, and the rough artery called  Trachea arteria, easing those parts exceeding well.
Cassia abateth the vehemencie of thirst in agues, or any hot disease whatsoeuer, especially if it be  taken with the iuice of Intybum, Cichoreum, or Solanum, depured according to Art: it abateth also the intemperate heat of the reines, if it be receiued with diureticke simples, or with the (...) on of Licorice onely, and will not suffer the stone to grow in such persons as do receiue and vse this medicine:
The best Cassia for your vse is to be taken out of the most ful, most heauy, and fairest cods, or canes, and those which do shine without, and are full of soft pulpe within; that pulpe which is newly taken forth is better than that which is kept in boxes, by what Art soeuer.
Cassia being outwardly applied, taketh away the roughnesse of the skin, and being laid vpon hot  swellings, it bringeth them to suppuration.
Many singular compounded medicines are made with this Cassia, which here to recite belongs  not to my purpose or history.




CHAP. 84. Of the Lentiske, or Masticke tree.

 The Description.


(...). The Masticke tree.


 The Description.
THe Mastick tree groweth commonly like a shrub without any great body, rising vp with many springs and shoots like the Hasell; and oftentimes it is of the height and bignesse of a meane tree: the boughes thereof are tough, and flexible; the barke is of a yellowish red colour, pliable likewise, and hard to be broken: there stand vpon one rib for the most part 8 leaues, set vpon a middle rib, much like to the (...) of Licorice, but harder, of a deepe greene colour, and oftentimes somewhat red in the brims, as also hauing diuers vains running along of a red colour, and somthing strong of smel: (...) (...) be mossie, and grow in clusters vpon long (...): after them come vp the berries, of the (...) of Vetches, greene at the first, afterwards of a purple colour, and last of all, black, fat, (...) (...), with a hard black stone within; the (...) (...)- of is white, of which also is made (...), as (...) witnesseth: it bringeth forth likewise cods besides the fruit (which may be rather (...) an excrescence, than a cod) writhed like a (...); in which lieth at the first a liquour, and (...) when this waxeth stale, little liuing things like vnto gnats, as in the Turpentine hornes, and in the folded leaues of the Elm tree, There commeth forth of the Mastick tree a Rosin, but dry, called Masticke.


 The Place.
The Masticke tree groweth in many regions, as in Syria, Candy, Italy, Languedocke, and in most Prouinces of Spaine: but the chiefest is in Chios an Island in Greece, in which it is diligently and specially looked vnto, and that for the Masticke sake, which is there gathered from the husbanded Masticke trees by the inhabitants euery yeare most carefully, and is sent from thence into all parts of the world.


 The Time.
The floures be in their pride in the spring time, and the berries in Autumne: the Mastick must be gathered about the time when the Grapes be.


 The Names.
This tree is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Lentiscus: in Italian, Lentisque: in Spanish, (...), and (...): in English, Masticke tree; and of some, Lentiske tree.
The Rosin is called in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine, Lentiscina Resina, and likewise, (...): in shops, (...): in Italian, (...): in high and low Dutch and French also, Mastic: in Spanish, (...), (...), and (...): in English, Masticke.
Clusius writeth, that the Spaniards call the oile that is pressed out of the berries, (...) (...) Mata.


 The Temperature.
The leaues, barke, and gum of the Masticke tree are of a meane and temperate heate, and are drie in the second degree, and somewhat astringent.


 The Vertues.
The leaues and barke of the Masticke tree stoppe the laske, the bloudy flixe, the spitting of 

bloud, the pissing of bloud, and all other fluxes of bloud: (...) are also good against the falling sickenesse, the falling downe of the mother, and comming forth of the fundament.
The gum Masticke hath the same vertue, if it be relented in wine and giuen to be drunke.
Masticke chewed in the mouth is good for the stomacke, staieth vomiting, increaseth (...), comforteth the braines, staieth the falling downe of the rheumes and watery humors, and maketh a sweet breath.
The same infused in Rose water is excellent to wash the mouth withall, to fasten loosete eth, and to comfort the iawes.
The same spred vpon a piece of leather or veluet, and laid plaisterwise vpon the temples, staieth  the rheume from falling into the iawes and teeth, and easeth the paines thereof.
It preuaileth much against vlcers and wounds, being put into digestiues and healing Vnguents.
It draweth flegme sorth of the head gently and without trouble.
It is also vsed in waters which serue to clense and make faire the face with.
The decoction of this filleth vp hollow vlcers with flesh if they be bathed therewith.
It knitteth broken bones, staieth eating vlcers, and prouoketh vrine.



CHAP. 85. Of the Turpentine Tree.


1 Terebint hus. The Turpentine tree.


2 Terebint hus latifolia. The broad leafed Turpentine tree.



 The Description.
1 THe first Turpentine Tree groweth to the height of a tall and faire tree, hauing many long boughes or branches, dispersed abroad, beset with long leaues, consisting of sundry other small leaues, each whereof resembleth the Bay leafe, growing one against another vpon a little stem or middle rib, like vnto the leaues of the Ash tree: the floures be small and reddish, growing vpon clusters or bunches that turne into round berries, which at their beginning are greene, afterwards reddish, but being ripe wax blacke, or of a darke blew colour, clammie, full of fat

and oilous in substance, and of a pleasant sauour: this plant beareth an empty cod, or crooked horne somewhat reddish, wherein are found small flies, wormes or gnats, bred and ingendred of a certaine humorous matter, which cleaueth to the inner sides of the said cods or hornes, which wormes haue no physicall vse at all. The right (...) issueth out of the branches of those trees, if you do cut or wound them, the which is faire and cleere, and better than that which is gathered from the barke of the (...) tree.
2 The second kinde of Turpentine tree is very like vnto the former, but that it groweth not so great: yet the leaues are greater and broader, and of the same fashion, but very like to the leaues of the Pistacia tree. The berries are first (...) a scarlet colour, and when they be ripe of a skie colour. The great horned cods are sharpe pointed, and somewhat (...), consisting as it were of the substance of gristles. And out of those bladders being broken do creepe and come small flies or gnats, bred of a fuliginous excrement, and ingendred in those bladders. The tree doth (...) yeeld his Turpentine by dropping like the former.


 The Place.
These trees grow, as Dioscorides saith, in Iurie, Syria, Cyprus, Africke, and in the Islands called Cyclades. Bellonius reporreth that there are found great store of them in Syria, and Cilicia, and are brought from thence to Damascus to be sold. Clusius saith, that (...) growes of it selfe in Languedocke, and in very many places of Portingale and Spaine, but for the most part like a shrub, and without bearing Turpentiue.
Theophrastus writeth, that it groweth about the hill Ida, and in Macedonia, short, in manner of a shrub, and writhed; and in Damascus and Syria great, in manner of a small tree: he also (...) downe a certaine male Turpentine tree, and a female: the male, saith he, is barren, and the female fruitfull. And of these he maketh the one with a berry red at the first, of the bignesse of a Lentill, which cannot come to ripenes; and the other with the fruit greene at the first, afterwards somewhat of a yellowish red, and in the end blacke, waxing ripe in the spring, of the bignesse of the Grecians Beane, and rosenny.
He also writeth of a certaine Indian Turpentine tree, that is to say, a tree like in boughes and leaues to the right Turpentine tree, but differing in fruit, which is like vnto (...).


 The (...).
The floures of the Turpentine tree come forth in the spring together with the new buds; the berries are ripe in September and October, in the time of Grape gathering. The hornes (...) about the same time.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...), and also many times (...): in Latine, Terebinthus: in Italian, Terebintho: in Spanish, Cornicabra: in French, Terebinte: in English, Turpentine tree: the Arabians call it Botin, and with an article Albotin.
The Rosin is surnamed (...): in Latine, Terebinthina: in high Dutch, Termintijn: in English, Turpentine, and right Turpentine: in the Arabian language Albotia, who name the fruit Granum viride, or greene berries.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The barke, leaues, and fruit of the Turpentine tree do somewhat binde, they are hot in the second  degree, and being greene they dry moderately; but when they are dryed they dry in the second degeee; and the fruit approacheth more neere to those that be dry in the third degree, and also hotter. This is fit to be eaten, as Dioscorides saith, but it hurteth the stomacke.
It prouoketh vrine, helpeth those that haue bad spleenes, and is drunke in wine against the bitings  of the poysonsome spiders called Phalangia.
The Rosin of the Turpentine tree excelleth all other Rosins, according to Dioscorides his opininion: but Galen writeth, that the Rosin of the masticke tree beareth the preheminence, and then the Turpentine.
This Rosin hath also an astringent or binding facultie, and (...) not so much as masticke, but it  hath withall a certaine bitternesse ioyned, by reason whereof it digesteth more than that of the Masticke tree: thorow the same qualitie there is likewise in it so great a clensing, as also it healeth scabs, in his 8. booke of the faculties of simple medicines; but in his booke of medicines according to the kindes, he maketh that of the Turpentine tree to be much like the Rosins of the Larch tree, which he affirmeth to be moister than all the rest, and to be without both sharpnesse and biting.
The fruit of Turpentine prouoketh vrine and stirreth vp fleshly lust.
The Rosine of this tree, which is the right Turpentine, looseth the belly, openeth the stoppings  of the liuer and spleene, prouoketh vrine, and driueth forth grauell, being taken the quantitie of two or three Beanes.

The like quantitie washed in water diuers times vntill it be white, then must be put thereto the  like quantity of the yolk of an egge, and laboured togetheradding thereto by little and little (continually stirring it) a small draught of possit drinke made of white wine, and giuen to drink in the morning fasting, ithelpeth most speedily the Gonorrhaea, or running of the reines, commonly at the first time, but the medicine neuer faileth at the second time of the taking of it, which giues stooles from foure to eight, according to the age and strength of the patient.



CHAP. 86. Of the Frankincense tree.

 The Description.
THe tree from which Frankincense floweth is but low, and hath leaues like the Mastick tree; yet some are of opinion that the leafe is like the leafe of a Peare tree, and of a grassie colour: the rinde is like that of the Bay tree, whereof there are two kindes: the one groweth in mountains and rockie places, the other in the plaine: but those in the plaines are much worse than those of the mountaines: the gum hereof is also blacker, fitter to mingle with Pitch, and such other stuffe to trim ships, than for other vses.


Arbor Thurifera. The Frankincense tree.


Thuris Limpidifolium Lobelij. The supposed leafe of the Frankincense tree.


Theuet in his Cosmographie saith, that the Frankincense tree doth resemble a gummie or rosiny Pine tree, which yeeldeth a iuice that in time groweth hard, and is called Thus, Frankincense, in whom is found sometime certaine small graines like vnto grauell, which they call the Manna of Frankincense.
Of this there is in Arabia two other sorts, the one, the gum wherof is gathered in the Dog daies when the Sun is in Leo, which is white, pure, cleare, and shining. Pena writeth that he hath seene the cleare Frankincense called Limpidum, and yeelding a very sweet smell when it is burnt, but the (...) hath been seldome seene; which the Physition Launanus gaue to Pena and Lobel, together with (...) pieces of the Rosine, which he had of certaine mariners, but he could affirme nothing of certaintie whether it were the leafe of the Frankincense, or of some other Pine tree, yeelding the like (...) or gum. It is, saith he (which doth seldom happen in other leaues) from the lower part or foot of the (...), to the vpper end, as it were doubled, consisting of two thin rindes or coats, with a sheath (...) (...) and a halfe long, at the top gaping open like a hood or fooles coxcombe, and as it were (...) with a helm at, which is a thing seldome seene in a leafe, but is proper to the floures of Napellus,

or Lonchitis, as writers affirme; the other is gathered in the spring, which is reddish, worser than (...) other in price or value, because it is not so well concocted in the heat of the Sunne. The Arabians wound this tree with a knife, that the liquour may flow out more abundantly, whereof some trees yeeld threescore pounds of Frankinsence.


 The Place.
Dioscorides saith it groweth in Arabia, and especially in that quarter which is called Thurifera, the best in that countrey is called (...), and is round, and if it be broken, is fat within, and when it is burned doth quickly yeeld a smel: next to it in goodnes is that which groweth in Smilo, lesser than the other, and more yellow.


 The Time.
The time is already declared in the description.


 The Names.
It is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Thus: in Italian, Incenso: in Dutch, Uueirauch: in Spanish, Encenso: in French, Enceus: in English, Frankincense, and Incense: in the Arabian tongue, (...), and of some few, Cond. r. @ The Rosin carries the same name; but in shops it is called (...), os the Greeke name and article put before it. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It hath, as Dioscorides saith, a power to heate and binde.
It driueth away the dimnesse of the eye-sight, filleth vp hollow (...), it closes raw wounds, staieth  all corruptions of bloud, although it fall from the head.
Galen writeth thus of it; Thus doth heate in the second degree, and drie in the first, and hath some  small astriction, but in the white there is a manifest astriction; the rinde doth manifestly binde and dry exceedingly, and that most certainly in the second degree, for it is of more grosser parts than Frankincense, and not so sharpe, by reason whereof it is much vsed in spitting of bloud, swellings in the mouth, the collicke passion, the flux in the belly rising from the stomacke, and bloudy flixes.
The fume or smoke of it hath a more drier and hotter quality than the Frankincense it selfe, being  dry in the third degree.
It doth also clense and fill vp the vlcers in the eies, like vnto Myrrhe: thus far Galen.
Dioscorides saith, that if it be drunk by a man in health, it driueth him into a frensie: but there are  few Greekes of his minde.
Auicen reporteth that it doth helpe and strengthen the wit and vnderstanding, but the often taking  of it will breed the head-ache, and if too much of it be drunke with wine it killeth.



CHAP. 87. Of Fisticke Nuts.


Pistacia. The Fisticke Nut.



 The Description.
THe tree which beareth Fisticke Nuts is like to the Turpentine tree: the leaues hereof be greater than those of the Masticke (...), but (...) after the same maner, and in like order that they are, being of a faint yellow colour out of a green; the fruit or Nuts do hang by their stalks in clusters, being greater than the Nuts of Pine Apples, and much lesser than Almonds: the husks without is of a grayish colour sometimes reddish, the shell brickle and white; the substance of the kernell greene; the taste sweet, pleasant to be eaten, and something sweet of smell.


 The Place.
Fisticke Nuts grow in Persia, Arabia, Syria, and in India; now they are made free Denizons in Italy, as in Naples and in other Prouinces there.


 The Time.
This tree doth floure in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This Nut is called in Greeke (...) in Athenaeus: Nicander Colophonius in his booke of Treacles nameth it (...): Possidonius nameth it (...): others, (...): the Latines obseruing the same termes, haue named it Pistacion, Bistacion, or Phistacion:

the Apothecaries, Fistici: the Spaniards, Alhocigos, and (...): in Italian, (...) English, Fisticke Nut.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The kernels of the Fisticke Nuts are oftentimes eaten as be those of the Pine (...) (...) of temperature hot and moist; they are not so easily (...), but much easier than (...) (...) the iuice is good, yet somewhat thicke; they yeeld to the body no small nourishment, (...) (...) bodies that are consumed: they recouer strength.
They are good for those that haue the phthisicke, or rotting away of the lungs.
They concoct, ripen, and clense forth raw humours that cleaue to the lights and chest.
They open the stoppings of the liuer, and be good for the infirmities of the (...); they also remoue out of the kidneies sand and grauell; and asswage their paine: they are also good for vlcers.
The kernels of Fisticke nuts condited, or made into (...), with sugar, and eaten, doe procure  bodily lust, vnstop the lungs and the brest are good (...) the shortnesse of breath, and are an excellent preseruatiue medicine being ministred in wine against the bitings of all manner of wilde beasts.



CHAP. 88. Of the Bladder Nut.


Nux vesicaria. The Bladder Nut.



 The Description.
THis is a low tree, hauing diuers young springs growing forth of the root: the substance of the wood is white, very hard and sound; the barke is of a light greene: the leaues consist of fiue little ones, which be nicked in the edges like those of the Elder, but lesser, not so greene nor ranke of smell. It hath the pleasant whitish floures of Bryonie or Labrusca, both in smell and shape, which turne into smal cornered bladders of winter Cherries, called Alkakengie, but of an ouerworne greenish colour: in these bladders are contained two little nuts, and sometimes no more but one, lesser than the Hasell nut, but greater than the Ram Cich, with a wooddie shel and somewhat red: the kernell within is something green; in taste at the first sweet, but afterwards lothsome, and ready to prouoke vomit.


 The Place.
It groweth in Italy, Germany and France; it groweth likewise at the house of sir Walter Culpepper neere Flimmewell in the Weild of Kent, as (...) in the Frier yard without Saint Paules gate in Stamford, and about Spalding Abbey, and in the garden of the right honourable the Lord Treasurer my very good Lord and Master, and by his house in the Strand. It groweth also in my garden, and in the garden hedges of sir Francis Carew neere Croydon, seuen miles from London.


 The Time.
This tree floureth in May, the Nuts be ripe in August and September.


 The Names.
It is commonly called in high Dutch, (...), which signifieth in low Dutch (...): diuers call it in Latine Pistacium Germanicum: we thinke it best to call it Nux vesicaria. (...) in his Epistles doth iudge the Turks (...) and Hebulben to agree with this: Gulielmus (...) affirmeth, Coulcoul to be vsed of diuers in Constantinople for a daintie, especially when they be new brought out of Egypt. This plant hath no old name, vnlesse it be Staphylodendron (...):

forwhich it is taken of the later writers: and Pliny hath written of it in his 16. book, 16. chap. There is also (saith he) beyond the Alpes a tree, the timber whereof is very like to that of white Maple, and is called Staphylodendron, it beareth cods, and in those kernels, hauing the (...) of the Hasel nut. It is called in English, S. Anthonies nuts, wilde Pistacia, or Bladder nuts: the Italians call it (...) Saluaticke: the French men call it Baguenaudes a patre nostres, for that the Friers do vse to make (...) of the nuts.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
These nuts are moist and ful of superfluous raw humours, and therefore they easily procure a readinesse  to vomite, and trouble the stomacke, by reason that withall they be somewhat binding, and therefore they be not to be eaten.
They haue as yet no vse in medicine, yet notwithstanding some haue attributed vnto them some  vertues in prouoking of Venerie.



CHAP. 89. Of the Hasell tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Hasell tree groweth like a shrub or small tree, parted into boughes without ioints, tough and pliable: the leaues are broad, greater and fuller of wrinckles than those of the Alder tree, cut in the edges like a saw, of colour greene, and on the backside more white, the bark is thin: the root is thicke, strong, and growing deep; in stead of floures hang downe catkins, aglets, or blowings, slender, and well compact: afterwhich come the Nuts standing in a tough cup of a greene colour, and iagged at the vpper end, like almost vnto the beards in Roses. The shell is smooth and wooddie: the kernel within consisteth of a white, hard, and sound pulpe, and is couered with a thin skin, oftentimes red, most commonly white; this kernell is sweet and pleasant vnto the taste.


1 Nux Auellana, sive Corylus. The Filberd Nut.


2 Corylus syluestris. The wilde hedge Nut.



2 Corylus syluestris is our hedge Nut or Hasell Nut tree, which is very well knowne, and therefore needeth not any description: whereof there are also sundry sorts, some great, some little, some rathe ripe, some later, as also one that is manured in our gardens, which is very great, bigger than any Filberd, and yet a kinde of Hedge nut: this then that hath beene said shall suffice for HedgeNuts.
@ 3 The small Turky Nut tree growes but low, and the leaues grow without order, vpon the twigs, they are in shape like those of the former, but somewhat longer: the chiefe difference consists in the fruit, which is small, and like an Hasell Nut, but shorter: the huske, wherein somtimes one, otherwhiles more Nuts are contained, is very large, tough, and hard, diuided both aboue and below into a great many iags, which on euery side couer and hold in the Nuts, and these cups are very rough without, but smooth on the inside. (...) first set this (...) (hauing receiued it from Constantinople) by the name of Auellana pumila (...). @


3 Auellana pumila (...) cum suo (...). The Filberd Nut of Constantinople.




 The Place.
The Hasell trees do commonly grow in Woods and in dankish vntoiled places: they are also set in Orchards, the Nuts whereof are better, and of a sweeter taste, and be most commonly red within.


 The Time.
The (...) or aglets come forth very timely, before winter be fully past, and fall away in March or Aprill, so soone as the leaues come forth: the Nuts be ripe in August.


 The Names.
This shrub is called in Latine, Corylus: in Greeke, (...), that is, (...) Pontica, or Ponticke Nut: in high-Dutch, Hasel strauck: in low-Dutch, Haseleer: in English, Hasel tree, and Filberd tree; but the Filberd tree is properly that which groweth in gardens and Orchards, and whose fruit is commonly wholly couered ouer with the huske, and the shell is thinner.
The Nut is named in Latine, Nux Pontica, (...) Nux, (...) Nux: it is also called Nux Praenestina, Nux (...), and commonly Nux auellana, by which name it is vsually knowne to the Apothecaries: in high-Dutch, Hasel Nusz: in low-Dutch, Hasel Noten: in Italian, Nocciuole, (...), (...): in French, (...) and (...): in Spanish, Auellanas: in English, Hasell nut, and Filberd.

These Nuts that haue their skinnes red are the garden and planted Nuts, and the right Pontick Nuts or Filberds: they are called in high-Dutch, Rhurnusz, and Rotnusz: in low-Dutch, Roode Hasel Noten: in English, Filberds, and red Filberds.
The other Nuts which be white are iudged to be wilde.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Hasell Nuts newly gathered, and not as yet dry, containe in them a certaine superfluous moisture, by reason whereof they are windie: not onely the new gathered Nuts, but the dry also, be very hard of digestion; for they are of an earthy and cold essence, and of an hard and sound substance, for which cause also they very slowly passe thorow the belly, therefore they are troublesome and clogging to the stomacke, cause head-ache, especially when they be eaten in too great a quantitie.
The kernells of Nuts made into milke like Almonds do mightily bind the belly, and are good  for the laske and the bloudy flix.
The same doth coole exceedingly in hot feuers and burning agues.
The catkins are cold and dry, and likewise binding: they also stay the lask.
@ The kernels of Nuts rather cause than cure the bloudy flix and lasks, wherefore they are not  to be vsed in such diseases. @



CHAP. 90. Of the Wall-nut tree.


Nux Iuglans. The (...) tree.



 The Description.
THis is a great tree with a thicke and tall body: the barke is somewhat greene, and tending to the colour of ashes, and oftentimes full of clefts: the boughes spread themselues far abroad: the leaues consist of fiue or six fastned to one rib, like those of the Ash tree, and with one standing on the top, which be broader and longer than the particular leaues of the Ash, smooth also, and of a strong smell: the catkins or aglets come forth before the Nuts: these Nuts do grow hard to the stalke of the leaues, by couples, or by three and three; which at the first when they be yet but tender haue a sweet smel, and be couered with a green huske: vnder that is a wooddy shell in which the kernell is contained, being couered with a thin skin, parted almost into foure parts with a woody skin as it were: the inner pulp whereof is white, sweet and pleasant to the tast; and that is when it is new gathered, for after it is dry it becommeth oily and ranck.


 The Place.
The Walnut tree groweth in fields neere common high-wayes, in a fat and fruitfull ground, and in orchards: it prospereth on high fruitfull bankes, it loueth not to grow in waterie places.


 The Time.
The leaues together with the catkins come forth in the Spring: the Nuts are gathered in August.


 The Names.
The tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Nux, which name doth signifie both the tree and the fruit: in high Dutch, Auszbaum: in low-Dutch, Aoote boome, and Aootelaer: in French, (...): in Spanish, Nogueyra: in English, Walnut tree, and of some, Walsh nut tree. The Nut is called in Greeke, (...), that is to say, Nux Regia, or the Kingly Nut: it is likewise named

Nux Inglans, as though you should say Iouis glans, Iupiters Acorne; or Iuvans glans, the helping Acorne: and of diuers, Persica Nux, or the Persian Nut: in high-Dutch, (...) Nusz, and Baumnusz: in low-Dutch, Ookernoten, (...) Noten: In Italian, Noci: in French, Noix: in Spanish, Nuezes, and Nous: in English, Walnut; and of some, Walsh nut.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The fresh kernels of the nuts newly gathered are pleasant to the taste: they are a little cold, and  haue no small moisture, which is not perfectly concocted: they be hard of digestion, and nourish little: they slowly descend.
The dry nuts are hot and dry, and those more which become oily and ranke: these be very hurtfull  to the stomacke, and besides that they be hardly concocted, they increase choler, cause headache, and be hurtfull for the chest, aud for those that be troubled with the cough.
Dry Nuts taken fasting with a fig and a little Rue withstand poyson, preuent and preserue the  body from the infection of the plague, and being plentifully eaten they driue wormes forth of the belly.
The greene and tender Nuts boiled in Sugar and eaten as Suckad, are a most pleasant and delectable  meate, comfort the stomacke, and expell poyson.
The oile of Walnuts made in such manner as oile of Almonds, maketh smooth the hands and  face, and taketh away scales or scurfe, blacke and blew marks that come of stripes or bruises.
Milke made of the kernels, as Almond milke is made, cooleth and pleaseth the (...) of the  languishing sicke body.
With onions, salt, and hony, they are good against the biting of a mad dog or man, if they be  laid vpon the wound.
Being both eaten, and also applied, they heale in short time, as Dioscorides saith, Gangrens, Carbuncles, aegilops, and the pilling away of the haire: this also is effectually done by the oile that is pressed out of them, which is of thin parts, digesting and heating.
The outward greene huske of the Nuts hath a notable binding facultie.
Galen deuised and taught to make of the iuyce thereof a medicine for the mouth, singular good  against all inflammations thereof.
The leaues and first buds haue a certaine binding qualitie, as the same Authour sheweth; yet  there doth abound in them an hot and dry temperature.
Some of the later Physitions vse these for baths and lotions for the body, in which they haue a  force to digest and also to procure sweat.



CHAP. 91. Of the Chestnut tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Chestnut tree is a very great an high tree: it casteth forth very many boughes: the body is thicke, and sometimes of so great a compasse as that two men can hardly fathom it: the timber or substance of the wood is sound and durable: the leaues be great, rough, wrinkled, nicked in the edges, and greater than the particular leaues of the Walnut tree. The blowings or catkins be slender, long, and greene: the fruit is inclosed in round a rough and prickly huske like to an hedge-hog or Vrchin, which opening it selfe doth let fall the ripe fruit or Nut. This nut is not round, but flat on the one side, smooth, and sharpe pointed: it is couered with a hard shell, which is tough and very smooth, of a darke browne colour: the meate or inner substance of the nut is hard and white, and couered with a thin skin which is vnder the shell.
2 The Horse Chestnut groweth likewise to be a very great tree, spreading his great and large armes or branches far abroad, by which meanes it maketh a very good coole shadow. These branches are garnished with many beautifull leaues, cut or diuided into fiue, six, or seuen sections or diuisions, like to the Cink foile, or rather like the leaues of Ricinus, but bigger. The floures grow at the top of the stalks, consisting of foure small leaues like the Cherry blossome, which turne into round rough prickly heads like the former, but more sharpe and harder: the nuts are also rounder. @ The floures of this, saith Clusius (whose figure of them I here giue you) come out of the bosom of the leafe which is the vppermost of the branch, and they are many in number growing vpon prettie long foot-stalkes, consisting each of them of foure white leaues of no great bignesse; the two vppermost are a little larger than the rest, hauing round purple spots in their middles: out of the middle of the floure come forth many yellowish threds with golden pendants. The fruit is contained in a prickly huske that opens in three parts, and it is rounder and not so sharpe pointed as

1 Castanea. Chestnut tree.
2 Castanea Equina cum flore. Horse Chestnut tree in floure.
Castaneae Equinae (...).
@ 3 Castaneae Peruanae fructus.
the ordinary (...), neither (...) (...) coat hath it any peeling within as the other hath, neither is it of so good a taste. @
@ 3 This Americane Chestnut is almost round, but that it is a little flatted on the sides, especially whereas it is fastned to the stalke: the vtter coat is sufficiently thicke, yet brittle, and as it were fungous, of a brownish yellow colour: vnder this are aboundance of small yet stiffe prickles, fast sticking to the shell that containes the kernell: the shell it selfe is brownish, not thick, but tough and hard to breake, smooth and shining on the inside, wherein is contained a kernel of the bignesse and colour of an hares kidney, white within, and sweet in taste like an almond or the common Chestnut. Clusius cals this Castanea Peruana, or Chestnut of Peru; and hee saith hee had it from the famous Geographer Abraham Ortelius, who had it sent him by Benedictus Arias Montanus. The figure is exprest vnder that of the Horse Chestnut. @


 The Place.
The first growes on mountaines and shadowie places, and many times in the vallies: they loue a soft and blacke soile. There be sundry woods of Chestnuts in England, as a

mile and a halfe from Feuersham in Kent, and in sundry other places: in some countries they be greater and pleasanter: in others smaller, and of worse taste.
The Horse Chestnut groweth in Italy, and in sundry places of the East countries. @ It is now growing with Mr. Tradescant at South Lambeth. @


 The Time.
The blowings or aglets come forth with the leaues in Aprill; but the Nuts later, and be not ripe till Autumne.


 The Names.
The Chestnut tree beares the name of the Nut both in Greeke and Latine: in high-Dutch Kestenbaum, and Kastanibaum: in low-Dutch, Castaniboom: in French, Castaignier: in (...), Chestnut tree.
The Nut is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Castanea, Iouis glans, Sardinia glans: in high-Dutch Kesten: in low-Dutch, Castanien: in Italian, Castagne: in French, Chastaigne: in Spanish, (...), Castanas: in English, Chestnut: the greater Nuts be named of the Italians, Marroni: of the (...) men and of diuers base Almaines, Marons.
The Horse Chestnut is called in Latine, Equina Castanea: in English, Horse Chestnut, for that the people of the East countries do with the fruit thereof cure their horses of the cough, shortnesse of breath, and such like diseases.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Our common Chestnuts are very dry and binding, and be neither hot nor cold, but in a mean betweene  both: yet haue they in them a certaine windinesse, and by reason of this, vnlesse the shell be first cut, they skip suddenly with a cracke out of the fire whilest they be rosting.
Of all the Acornes, saith Galen, the Chestnuts are the chiesest, and doe onely of all the wilde  (...) yeeld to the body commendable nourishment; but they slowly descend, they be hardly concocted, they make a thicke bloud, and ingender winde: they also stay the belly, especially if they be eaten raw.
Being boiled or rosted they are not of so hard digestion, they more easily descend, and are lesse  windy, yet they also make the body costiue.
Some (...), that of raw Chestnuts dried, and afterwards turned into meale, there is made a  kinde of bread: yet it must needs be, that this should be dry and brittle, hardly concocted, and (...) slow in passing thorow the belly; but this bread may be good against the laske and bloudy flix.
An Electuarie of the meale of Chestnuts and hony is very good against the cough and spitting  of bloud.
The barke of the Chestnut tree boiled in wine and drunke, stops the laske, the bloudy flix, and  all other issues of bloud.



CHAP. 92. Of the Beech tree.

 The Description.
THe Beech is an high tree, with boughes spreading oftentimes in manner of a circle, and with a thicke body hauing many armes: the barke is smooth: the timber is white, hard, and verie profitable: the leaues be smooth, thin, broad, and lesser than those of the blacke Poplar: the (...) or blowings be also lesser and shorter than those of the Birch tree, and yellow: the fruit or Mast is contained in a huske or cup that is prickly, and rough bristled, yet not so much as that of the Chestnut: which fruit being taken forth of the shells or vrchin husks, be couered with a soft and smooth skin like in colour and smoothnesse to the Chestnuts, but they be much lesser, and of another forme, that is to say, traingled or three cornered: the kernell within is sweet, with a certaine astriction or binding qualitie: the roots be few, and grow not deepe, and little lower than vnder the turfe.


 The Place.
The Beech tree loueth a plaine and open countrey, and groweth very plentifully in many (...) and desart places of Sussex, Kent, and sundry other countries.


 The Time.
The Beech floureth in Aprill and May, and the fruit is ripe in September, at what time the Deere do eate the same very greedily, as greatly delighting therein; which hath caused forresters and huntsmen to call it Buck-mast.



Fagus. The Beech.




 The Names.
The tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Fagus: in high-Dutch, Buchbaum, or Buch: in low-Dutch, Bukenboom: in Italian, Faggi: in Spanish, Haia, Faia, and Fax: in French, Fan, or Hestre: in English, Beech tree, Beech-mast, and Buck-mast.
The fruit is called in Latine, (...) Fagi: in Greeke, (...): in low-Dutch, Bueken nootkens: in French, Faine: in English, Beech-mast. Dioscorides reckons the Beech among the Acorne trees; and yet is the mast nothing at all like to an Acorne. Of Theophrastus it is called Oxya: of Gaza, Sciscina.
Pliny also makes mention of this tree, but vnder the name of Ostrya (if so be in stead of Ostrya we must not reade Oxya) lib. 13. ca. 21. It bringeth forth (saith he, meaning Greece) the tree Ostrys, which they likewise call ostrya, growing alone among (...) stones, like to the Ash tree in barke and boughes, with leaues like those of the Peare tree, but somewhat longer and thicker, and with wrinkled cuts which runne quite thorow, with a seed like in colour to a Chestnut, and not vnto barley: the wood is hard and firme, which being brought into the house there followes hard trauell of childe and miserable deaths, as it is reported; and therefore it is to be forborne, and not vsed as fire wood, if Plinies copies be not corrupted.


 The Temperature.
The leaues of Beech do coole: the kernell of the Nut is somwhat moist.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Beech are very profitably applied vnto hot swellings, blisters, and excoriations;  and being chewed they are good for chapped lips, and paine of the gums.
The kernels or mast within are reported to ease the paine of the kidneyes proceeding of the  stone, if they be eaten, and to cause the grauell and sand the easier to come forth. With these, mice and Squirrels are greatly delighted, who do mightily encrease by feeding thereon: Swine also be fatned herewith, and certaine other beasts: also Deere do feed thereon very greedily: they be likewise pleasant to Thrushes and Pigeons.
Petrus Crescentius writeth, That the ashes of the wood is good to make glasse with.
The water that is found in the hollownesse of Beeches cureth the naughty scurfe, tetters, and  scabs of men, horses, kine, and sheepe, if they be washed therewith.



CHAP. 93. Of the Almond tree.

 The Description.
THe Almond tree is like to the Peach tree, yet is it higher, bigger, of longer continuance: the leaues be very long, sharpe pointed, snipt about the edges like those of the Peach tree: the floures be alike: the fruit is also like a peach, hauing on one side a cleft, with a soft skin without, and couered with a thin cotton; but vnder this there is none, or very little pulp, which is hard like a gristle not eaten: the nut or stone within is longer than that of the peach, not so rugged, but smooth; in which is contained the kernel, in taste sweet, and many times bitter: the root of the tree groweth deepe: the gum which soketh out hereof is like that of the peach tree.
@ There are diuers sorts of Almonds, differing in largenes and taste: we commonly haue three or foure sorts brought to vs, a large sweet Almond, vulgarly termed a Iordan almond; and a lesser, called a Valence Almond: a bitter Almond of the bignesse of the Valence almond, and somtimes another bitter one lesse than it. @



Amygdalus. The Almond tree.




 The Place.
The natural place of the Almond is in the hot regions, yet we haue them in our London gardens and orchards in great plenty.


 The Time.
The Almond floureth betimes with the Peach: the fruit is ripe in August.


 The Names.
The tree is called is Greek, (...): in Latine, (...): in French, Amandier: in English, Almond tree.
The fruit is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Amygdalum: in shops, Amygdala: in high-Dutch, Mandel: in low-Dutch, Amandelen: in Italian, Mandole: in Spanish, Almendras, Amelles, and (...): in French, Amandes: in English, Almond.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Sweet Almonds when they be dry be moderatly  hot; but the bitter ones are hot and dry in the second degree. There is in both of them a certaine fat and oily substance, which is drawne out by pressing.
Sweet Almonds being new gathered are  pleasant to the taste, they yeeld some kind of nourishment, but the same grosse and earthy, and grosser than those that be dry, and not as yet withered. These do likewise slowly descend, especially being eaten without their skins; for euen as the huskes or branny parts of corne doe serue to driue downe the grosse excrements of the belly, so doe likewise the skins or husks of the almonds: therefore those that be blanched do so slowly descend, as that they do withall binde the belly; whereupon they are giuen with good successe to those that haue the laske or the bloudy flix.
There is drawne out of sweet Almonds, with liquor added, a white iuice like milke, which ouer  and besides that it nourisherth, and is good for those that are troubled with the laske and bloudie flix, it is profitable for those that haue the pleurisie and spit vp filthy matter, as Alexander Trallianus witnesseth: for there is likewise in the Almonds an opening and concocting qualitie, with a certaine clensing faculty, by which they are medicinable to the chest and lungs, or lights, and serue for the raising vp of flegme and rotten humors.
Almonds taken before meate do stop the belly, and nourish but little; notwithstanding many  excellent meates and medicines are therewith made for sundry griefes, yea very (...) and wholsome meates, as Almond butter, creame of Almonds, marchpane, and such like, which dry and stay the belly more than the extracted iuyce or milke; and they are also as good for the chest and lungs.
They do serue also to make the Physicall Barley water, and Barley Creame, which are giuen  in hot Feuers, as also for other sicke and feeble persons, for their further refreshing and nourishments.
The oile which is newly pressed out of the sweet Almonds is a mitigater of paine and all maner  of aches. It is giuen to those that haue the pleurisie, being first let bloud; but especially to those that are troubled with the stone of the kidnies; it slackens the passages of the vrine, and maketh them glib or slipperie, and more ready to suffer the stone to haue free passage: it maketh the belly soluble, and therefore it is likewise vsed for the collicke.
It is good (...) women that are newly deliuered; for it quickly remoueth the throwes which remaine  after their deliuery.
The oile of Almonds makes smooth the: hands and face of delicat persons, and clenseth the skin  from all spots, pimples, and lentils.
Bitter Almonds doe make thinne and open, they remoue stoppings out of the liuer and spleene, therfore they be good against paine in the sides: they make the body soluble, (...) (...), (...)

downe the menses, helpe the strangurie, and clense forth of the chest and lungs clammie humors: if they be mixed with some kinde of looch or medicine to licke on: with starch they stay the spitting of bloud.
And it is reported that fiue or six being taken fasting do keepe a man from being drunke.
These also clense and take away spots and blemishes in the face, and in other parts of the body;  they mundifie and make cleane foule eating vlcers.
With hony they are laid vpon the biting of mad dogs; being applied to the temples with vineneger  or oile of Roses, they take away the head-ache, as Dioscoriaes writeth.
They are also good against the cough and shortnesse of winde.
They are likewise good for those that spit bloud, if they be taken with the fine floure of Amylum.
There is also pressed out of these an oile which prouoketh vrine, but especially if a few scorpions  be drowned, and steeped therein.
With oile it it singular good for those that haue the stone, and cannot easily make water but  with extremitie of paine, if the share and place betweene the cods and fundament be anoynted therewith.
Dioscorides saith, that the gum doth heate and binde, which qualities notwithstanding are not  perceiued in it.
It helpeth them that spit bloud, not by a binding facultie, but thorow the clamminesse of his  substance, and that is by closing vp of the passages and pores, and so may it also cure old coughes, and mitigate extreame paines that proceed of the stone, and especially take away the sharpenesse of vrine, if it be drunke with Bastard, or with any other sweet potion, as with the decoction of Licorice, or of Raisons of the sunne. The same doth likewise kill tetters in the outward parts of the bodie (as Dioscorides addeth) if it be dissolued in vineger.



CHAP. 94. Of the Peach tree.

 The Kindes.
@ THere are diuers sorts of Peaches besides the foure here set forth by our Author, but the trees do not much differ in shape, but the difference chiefely consists in the fruit, whereof I will giue you the names of the choice ones, and such as are to be had from my friend Mr. Millen in Old-street, which are these; two sorts of Nutmeg Peaches; The Queenes Peach; The Newington Peach; The grand Carnation Peach; The Carnation Peach; The Blacke Peach; the Melocotone; the White; The Romane; The Alberza; The Island Peach; Peach du Troy. These are all good ones. He hath also of that kinde of Peach which some call Nucipersica or Nectorins, these following kindes; the Roman red, the best of fruits; the bastard Red; the little dainty green; (...) yellow; the white; the russet, which is not so good as the rest. Those that would see any fuller discourse of these may haue recourse to the late worke of Mr. Iohn Perkinson, where they may finde more varieties, and more largely handled, and therefore not necessarie for me in this place to insist vpon them. @


 The Description.
1 THe Peach tree is a tree of no great bignesse: it sendeth forth diuers boughes, which be so brittle, as oftentimes they are broken with the weight of the fruit or with the winde. The leaues be long, nicked in the edges, like almost to those of the Walnut tree, and in taste bitter: the floures be of a light purple colour. The fruit or Peaches be round, and haue as it were a chinke or cleft on the one side; they are couered with a soft and thin downe or hairie cotton, being white without, and of a pleasant taste; in the middle whereof is a rough or rugged stone, wherein is contained a kernell like vnto the Almond; the meate about the stone is of a white colour. The root is tough and yellowish.
2 The red Peach tree is likewise a tree of no great bignesse: it also sendeth forth diuers boughes or branches, which be very brittle. The leaues be long, and nicked in the edges like to the precedent. The floures be also like vnto the former; the fruite or Peaches be round, of a red colour on the outside; the meate likewise about the stone is of a gallant red colour. These kindes of Peaches are very like to wine in taste, and therefore maruellous pleasant.
3 Persica praecocia, or the d'auant Peach tree is like vnto the former, but his leaues are greater and larger. The fruit or Peaches be of a russet colour on the one side, and on the other side next vnto the sun of a red colour, but much greater than the red Peach: the stones whereof are like vnto the former: the pulpe or meate within is of a golden yellow colour, and of a pleasant taste.



Persicaalba. The white Peach.


4 Persica lutea, or the yellow Peach tree, is like vnto the former in leaues and floures: his fruit is of a yellow colour on the (...), and likewise on the inside, harder than the rest, in the middle of the Peach is a wooddy, hard, and rough stone, full of crests and gutters, in which doth lie a kernell much like to that of the Almond, and with such a like skin: the substance within is white, and in taste something bitter. The fruit hereof is of greatest pleasure, and best taste of all the other of his kinde; although there be (...) this day diuers other sorts that are of very good taste, not remembred of the ancient, or set downe by the later writers, whereof to speake particularly, would not be greatly to our pretended purpose, considering we hasten to an end.
@ 5 There is also kept in some of our choise gardens a kind of Peach which hath a very double and beautiful floure, but it is seldome succeeded by any fruit; they call this, Persica flore pleno, The double blossomed Peach. @


 The Place.
They are set and planted in gardens and vineyards: I haue them all in my garden, with many other sorts.


 The Time.
The Peach tree soone commeth vp: it beares fruit the third or fourth yeere after it is planted, and it soone decaieth, and is not of (...) continuance; it floureth in Aprill, or a little while after that the leaues appeare, and hath his fruit ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Peach tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Malus Persica, and Persica: in high Dutch, Persichboum: in low Dutch, Perse boom: in French, Perscher: in English, Peach tree.
The fruit, as Galen testifieth, is named (...), and (...) also without any addition: in Latine, Malum Persicum, and Persicum. in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, Persen: in Italy, Pesche: in Spanish, Pexegos: in French, Pisches: in English, Peach.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Peaches be cold and moist, and that in the second degree; they haue a juice and also a substance  that doth easily putrifie, which yeeldeth no nourishment, but bringeth hurt, especially if they be eaten after other meates; for then they cause the other meates to putrifie. But they are lesse hurtfull if they be taken first; for by reason that they are moist and slippery, they easily and quickly descend; and by making the belly slippery, they cause other meates to slip downe the sooner.
The kernels of the Peaches be hot and dry, they open and clense; they are good for the stoppings  of the liuer and spleene.
Peaches before they be ripe do stop the laske, but being ripe they loose the belly, and ingender  naughty humors, for they are soone corrupted in the stomacke.
The leaues of the Peach tree do open the stopping of the liuer, and do gently loosen the belly: and being applied plaisterwise vnto the nauell of young children, they kill the (...), and driue them forth.
The same leaues boiled in milke, do kill the wormes in children very speedily.
The same being dried, and cast vpon greene wounds, cure them.
The floures of the Peach tree infused in warme water for the space of ten or twelue houres, and  strained, and more floures put to the said liquor to infuse after the same manner, and so iterated six or eight times, and strained again, then as much sugar as it will require added to the same liquor and boiled vnto the consistence or thicknes of a syrrup, and two spoonefulls hereof taken, doth so singularly well purge the belly, that there is neither Rubarbe, Agaricke, nor any other purger comparable vnto it; for this purgeth downe waterish humors mightily, and yet without griefe or trouble, either to the stomacke, or lower parts of the body.

The kernell within the Peach stone stamped small, and boiled with Vineger vntill it be brought  to the forme of an ointment, is good to restore and bring again the haire of such as be troubled with the Alopecia.
There is drawne forth of the kernels of Peaches, with Peniroyall water, a iuice like vnto milke, which is good for those that haue the Apoplexy: if the same be oftentimes held in the mouth it draweth (...) water and recouereth the speech.
The gum is of a meane temperature, but the substance thereof is tough and clammy, by reason  whereof it dulleth the sharpnes of thin humors: it serueth in a looch or licking medicine for those that be troubled with the cough, and haue rotten lungs, and stoppeth the spitting and raising vp of bloud, and also stayeth other fluxes.



CHAP. 95. Of the Aprecocke or Abrecocke tree.


1 Armeniaca malus maior. The greater Aprecocke tree.


2 Armeniaca malus minor. The lesser Aprecocke tree.



 The Description.
1 THis tree is greater than the Peach tree, and hath a bigger body, it lasteth longer, (...) if it be grafted or inoculated: the leaues hereof are broad, and sharpe pointed, like those of blacke Poplar, but lesser, and comming more neere to the leaues of birch, (...) in the edges: the floures are somewhat white: the fruit round like a peach, yellow within and without, in which doth lie a browne stone, nothing rough at all as is that of the Peach, shorter also, and lesser, in which is included a sweet kernell.
2 We haue another sort of Aprecocke, whose trunk or body is equall with the other in greatnesse, it is like (...) in leaues and brittle branches: his time of flouring, flourishing, and manner of growing accordeth: the only point wherein they differ is, that this tree bringeth forth lesse fruit, and not so good in taste; in euery other respect it is like.
@ Of this also Mr. Parkinson hath set forth diuers varieties; and my forementioned friend Mr. Millen hath these fiue sorts; the common, the long and great, the Muske, the Barbary, and the early Aprecocke. @



 The Place.
These trees do grow in my garden, and now adaies in many other gentlemens gardens throughout all England.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish in Aprill, and their fruit is ripe in Iuly.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Malus Armeniaca: in English, Abrecocke tree, and Aprecocke tree.
The fruit is named (...), and of diuers (...), or (...), which be words corrupted from the Latine; for Praecox in Latine is diuers times called Praecoquum: it is named Malum Armeniacum, and commonly Armeniacum: it is called in high-Dutch, Molletteu Mollelin, S. Iohans Pfersing: in low-Dutch, Uroege (...), Auant Persen: in Italian, (...), Bacoche, Grisomele, Moniache: in French, Abricoz: in Spanish, Aluarcoques, (...) as, and Albercocs: in English, Abrecocke, and of some, Aprecocke, and Aprecox.
Galen seemeth to make a difference betweene Praecocia and Armeniaca, in his booke of the (...) of nourishments, preferring Praecocia before Armeniaca; yet he doth confesse that both of them be called Armeniaca: others pronounce them Armenia with foure syllables. And in his booke of the saculties of simple medicines he affirmeth, that both the fruit and the tree are called (...): diuers of the later Physitions do between these also make a difference, saying, that the greater ones and those that are grasted be Armeniaca (which the French men call Auant Perses) and the lesser Praecocia: in French, Abricoz.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Aprecocks are cold and moist in the second degree, but yet not so moist as Peaches, for which  cause they do not so soone or easily putrifie; and they are also more wholesome for the stomacke, and pleasant to the taste; yet do they likewise putrifie, and yeeld but little nourishment, and the same cold, moist, and full of excrements: being taken after meate they corrupt and putrifie in the stomacke; being first eaten before other meate they easily descend, and cause the other meates to passe downe the sooner, like as also the Peaches do.
The kernell within the same is sweet, and nothing at all like in facultie to that of the Peach.
The vertues of the leaues of this tree are not as yet found out.



CHAP. 96. Of Pomegranat tree.

 The Kindes.
AS there be sundry sorts of Apples, Peares, Plums, and such like fruits; so there are two sorts of Pomegranates, the garden and the wilde, and a third sort which is barren and fruitles: the fruit of the garden Pomegranat is of three sorts; one hauing a soure iuyce or liquour; another hauing a very sweet and pleasant liquor, and the third the taste of Wine: of the wilde also there be two sorts, and the difference betweene them is no more than betwixt crabs and weildings, which are both wilde kindes of Apples: therefore the description of the garden Pomegranat shal suffice (...) the rest.


 The Description.
1 THe manured Pomegranat tree groweth vp to the height of a hedge tree, being seuen or eight cubits high, hauing many pliant and twiggy branches, very limber, tough, and of a browne colour: whereon are set very many leaues in shape like those of the Priuet, but more like those of the Myrtle tree, of a bright shining greene colour tending to yellownesse: amongst which there stand certaine sharpe thornes confusedly set, and likewise hollow floures like vnto the hedge Rose, indented on the edges like a starre, of a Carnation colour, and very single: after which commeth the fruit, couered with a hard barke, of an ouerworne purplish colour, full of graines and kernels, which after they be ripe are of a gallant crimson colour, and ful of iuyce, which differeth in taste according to the soile, clymat, and countrey where they grow; some be sweet, others soure, and the third are in a middle betweene them both, hauing the taste of Wine.



1 Malus Granata, siue Punica. The Pomegranat tree.


2 Malus Punica syluestris. The wilde Pomegranat.


Balaustia, siue Pleni flores Gran. syl. The double floures of wild Pomegranat.


@ 2 The wilde Pomegranat tree is like the other in leaues and twiggy branches, but it is more prickly and horrid: of this there are two sorts, the one hauing such floures and fruit as the tame Pomgranat; the other bearing floures very double, as may appeare by the figure, which wither and fall away, leauing no fruit behind them, as the double floured Cherry doth, and diuers other herbes and trees also; and it is altogether barren of fruit: of this Dioscorides makes sundry sorts, differing in colour: one is white, saith he; another yellowish red, and a third sort of the colour of the Rose: this with red floures is best knowne among the Apothecaries.


 The Place.
Pomegranats grow in hot countries toward the South, in Italy, Spaine, and chiefely in the kingdome of Granado, which is thought to be so named of the great multitude of Pomgranats, which be commonly called Granata they grow in a number of places also without manuring: yet being manured they prosper better; for in gardens, vineyards, orchards, and other like husbanded grounds they come vp more cheerefully: I haue recouered diuers yong trees hereof, by sowing of the seed (...) grains, of the height of three or foure cubits, attending Gods leisure for floures and fruit.


 The Time.
The Pomegranate floureth in the moneths of May and Iune: the fruit is ripe in the end of August.



 The Names.
The Pomegranate tree is called in Latine, Malus Punica: in Greeke, of the Athenians, (...), and (...), as Galen saith: in English, Pomegranate tree: the fruit is also named (...), or (...): in Latine, Malum Punicum: in shops, Malum, or Pomum Granatum: in high Dutch, Granatopffel: in low Dutch, Gratappel: in Italian, (...), and Pomo Granato: in Spanish, Granadas, and Romanas: in French, Pommes Granades: in English, Pomegranate.
The floure of the fruitfull Pomegranate tree is called of the Grecians, (...): which is notwithstanding properly the cup of the floure: the Latines name it also Cytinus.
The floure of the wilde and barren Pomegranate tree is called (...): the Apothecaries doe likewise terme it Balaustium.
The pill or rinde of the Pomegranate which is so much in vse, is named in Greeke (...): in Latine, Malicorium, and Sidium: in shops it is called Cortex granatorum, or Pomegranate Pill.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The iuicie grains of the Pomegranate are good to be eaten, hauing in them a meetly good iuice: they are wholesome for the stomacke, but they all containe in them a thin and small nourishment, or none at all.
The sweet ones be not so cold as the rest, but they easily cause hot swellings to arise, and they  are not so much commended for agues.
The soure ones, and especially if they be withall something harsh, doe euidently coole, dry, and  something binde.
They are good for the heart burne, they represse and stay the ouermuch vomiting of choler, called the Felonie: they are a remedie against the bloudy flixe, aptnesse to vomite, and vomite it selfe.
There is made of the iuice of these soure Pomegranats a fyrrup, which serueth for the same purposes, and is also many times very profitable against the longing of women with childe, vnlesse the coldnesse of the stomacke be a hinderance thereunto.
The seeds of the graines, and especially of the sower Pomegranat, being dried, do likewise coole  and binde.
They stop the flix, stay vomiting, and stanch the spitting vp of bloud, they strengthen the stomacke.
Of the same effect be the floures, both of the tame and wilde Pomegranate tree, being like to the  seeds in temperature and vertues.
They fasten the teeth, and strengthen the gums, if the same be washed therewith.
They are good against burstings that come by falling downe of the guts, if they be vsed in plaisters  and applied.
The rinde or pill is not onely like in facultie to the seeds, and both the sorts of floures, but also  more (...); for it cooleth and (...) more forceably; it bringeth downe the hot swellings of the almonds in the throat, (...) vsed in a gargarisme or a lotion for the throat, and it is a singular remedy for all things that need cooling and binding.
Dioscorides writeth, that there is also gathered a iuice out of both those sorts of floures, which is  very like in facultie and vertue to Hypocistis, as the same Author affirmeth.
The blossomes of the tame and wilde Pomegranates, as also the rinde or shell thereof made into  pouder, and drunke in red wine, or boyled in red wine, (...) the decoction drunke, is good against the bloudy flix, and all other issues of bloud; yea it is good for women to sit ouer, and bathe themselues in the decoction hereof: these foresaid blossomes and shels are good also to put into restraining pouders, for the stanching of bloud in wounds.
The seeds or stones of Pomegranats dried in the Sun, and beaten to pouder, are of like operation  with the floures: they stop the laske and all issues of bloud in man or woman, being taken in the manner aforesaid.



CHAP. 97. Of the Quince Tree.

 The Kindes.
COlumella maketh three kindes of Quinces, Struthia, Chrysomeliana, and (...), but what manner ones they be hee doth not declare, notwithstanding wee finde diuers sorts differing as well in

forme, as taste and substance of the fruit, wherof some haue much core and many kernels, and others (...).


Malus Cotonca. The Quince tree.




 The Description.
THe Quince tree is not great, but groweth low, and many times in maner of a shrub: it is couered with a rugged barke, which hath on it now and then certaine scales: it spreadeth his boughes in compasse like other trees; about which stand leaues somewhat round, like those of the common Apple tree, greene and smooth aboue, and vnderneath soft and white: the floures be of a white purple colour: the fruit is like an apple, saue that many times it hath certaine embowed and swelling diuisions: it differeth in fashion and bignesse; for some Quinces are lesser and round trust vp together at the top with wrinkles, others longer and greater: the third sort be after a middle manner betweene both; they are all of them set with a thin cotton or freeze, and be of the colour of gold, and hurtfull to the head by reason of their strong smell; they all likewise haue a kinde of choking taste: the pulp within is yellow, and the seed blackish, lying in hard skins, as doe the kernels of other apples.


 The Place.
The Quince tree groweth in gardens and orchards, and is planted oftentimes in hedges and fences belonging to gardens and vineyards: it delighteth to grow on plaine and euen grounds, and somewhat moist withall.


 The Time.
These apples be ripe in the fall of the leafe, and chiefely in October.


 The Names.
The tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Malus Cotonea: in English, Quince tree.
The fruit is named (...): Malum Cotoneum, Pomum Cydonium, and many times, Cydonium, without any addition; by which name it is made known to the Apothecaries: it is called in high Dutch, Quitten, Quittenopfell, or Kuttenopffel: in low Dutch, Queappel: in Italian, Mele cotogne: in Spanish, Codoyons, Membrilhos, and Marmellos: in French, Pomme de coing: in English, Quince.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Quinces be cold and dry in the second degree, and also very much binding, especially when they  be raw: they haue likewise in them a certaine superfluous and excrementall moisture, which will not suffer them to lie long without rotting: they are seldom eaten raw: being rosted or baked they be more pleasant.
They strengthen the stomacke, stay vomiting, stop lasks, and also the bloudy flix.
They are good for those that spit vp bloud, or that vomit bloud; and for women also that haue too  great plenty of their monethly courses.
Simeon Sethi writeth, that the woman with childe, which eateth many Quinces during the time  of her breeding, shall bring forth wise children, and of good vnderstanding.
The Marmalade, or Cotiniate, made of Quinces and sugar, is good and profitable for the strengthening  of the stomacke, that it may retaine and keepe the meat therein vntill it be perfectly digested: it likewise stayeth all kindes of fluxes, both of the belly and other parts, and also of bloud: which Cotiniate is made in this manner:
Take faire Quinces, pare them, cut them in pieces, and cast away the core, then put vnto euery  pound of Quinces a pound of sugar, and to euery pound of sugar a pinte of water: these must bee boiled together ouer a still fire till they be very soft, then let it be strained or rather rubbed through a strainer, or an hairy sieue, which is better, and then set it ouer the fire to boile againe, vntill it be

stiffe, and so box it vp, and as it cooleth put thereto a little Rose water, and a few graines of Muske, well mingled together, which will giue a goodly taste vnto the Cotiniat. This is the way to make Marmalade:
Take whole Quinces and boile them in water vntill they be as soft as a scalded codling or apple, then pill off the skin, and cut off the flesh, and stampe it in a stone morter; then straine it as you did the Cotiniate; afterward put it into a pan to drie, but not to seeth at all: and vnto euery pound of the flesh of Quinces, put three quarters of a pound of sugar, and in the cooling you may put in rose water and a little Muske, as was said before.
There is boiled with Quinces oile which therefore is called in Greeke Melinon, or oile of Quinces, which we vse, saith (...), so oft as we haue need of a binding thing.
The seed of Quinces tempered with water, doth make a (...), or a thing like (...), which  being held in the mouth, is maruellous good to take away the roughnesse of the tongue in hot burning seuers.
The same is good to be layed vpon burnings or scaldings, and to be put into clisters against the  bloudy flix; for it easeth the paine of the guts, and alaieth the sharpnesse of biting (...).
Many other excellent, dainty and wholesome confections are to be made of Quinces, as ielly of  Quinces, and such odde conceits, which for breuitie sake I do now let passe.



CHAP. 98. Of the Medlar Tree.

 The Kindes.
THere are diuers sorts of Medlars, some greater, others lesser: some sweet, and others of a (...) harsh taste: some with much core, and many great stony kernels, others fewer: and likewise one of Naples called Aronia.


1 Mespilus sativa. The manured Medlar.


@ 2 Mespilus sativa altera. The other Garden Medlar.





 The Description.
1 THe manured Medlar tree is not great, the body whereof is writhed, the boughes hard, not easie to be broken: the leaues be longer, yet narrower than those of the apple tree, darke, greene aboue, and somewhat whiter and hairy below: the floures are white and great, hauing (...) leaues a piece: the fruit is small, round; and hath a broad compassed nauell or crowne at the top: the pulpe or meat is at the first white, and so harsh or choking, that it cannot be eaten before it become soft; in which are contained fiue seeds or stones, which be flat and hard.
@ 2 There is another which differeth from the last described, in that the leaues are longer and narrower, the stocke hath no prickles vpon it: the fruit also is larger and better tasted: in other respects it is like to the last described. This is the Mespilus fructu prestantiore of Tragus, and Mespilus Domestica of Lobel. @
3 The Neapolitane Medlar tree groweth to the height and greatnesse of an Apple tree, hauing many tough and hard boughes or branches, set with sharp thornes like the white Thorne, or Hawthorne: the leaues are very much cut or (...) like the Hawthorne leaues, but greater, and more like Smallage or Parsley, which leaues before they fal from the tree do wax red: among these leaues come forth great tufts of floures of a pale herby colour: which being past, there succeed small long fruit, lesser than the smallest Medlar, which at the first are hard, and greene of colour, but when they be ripe, they are both soft and red, of a sweet and pleasant taste: wherein is contained three small hard stones, as in the former, which be the kernels (...) seeds thereof.


3 Mespilus Aronia. The Neapolitane Medlar.


@ 4 Chamaemespilus. Dwarfe Medlar.


4 There is a dwarfe kinde of Medlar growing naturally vpon the Alpes, and hils of Narbone, and on the rocks of Mount Baldus nigh Verona, which hath been by some of the best learned esteemed for a kinde of Medlar: others, whose iudgements cannot stand with truth or probability, haue supposed it to be (...), of the Alpes: this dwarfe Medlar groweth like a small hedge tree, of four or fiue cubits high, bearing many smal twiggie wands or crops, beset with many slender leaues green aboue, and of a skie colour vnderneath, in shew like to a dwarfe Apple tree, but the fruit is

very like the Haw, or fruit of the white Thorne, and of a red colour. @ The floures come forth in the Spring three or foure together, hollow, and of an herbie colour, it growes in diuers places of the Alpes: it is the Chamaemespilum of the Aduers. and the Chamaemespilus Gesneri, of Clusius. @


 The Place.
The Medlar trees do grow in Orchards, and oftentimes in hedges (...) Briars and Brambles; being grafted in a white Thorne it prospereth wonderfull well, (...) bringeth forth fruit twise or thrise bigger than those that are not grafted at all, almost as great as little apples: we haue diuers sorts of them in our Orchards.


 The Time.
It is very late before Medlars be ripe, which is in the end of October, but the floures come forth timely enough.


 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke by Theophrastus (...): in Latine, Mespilus: in high Dutch, Nespelbaum: in low Dutch, Mispelboome: in French, (...): in English, Medlar tree.
The Apple or fruit is named in Greeke, (...): in Latine likewise, Mespilum: in high Dutch, (...), in low Dutch, Mispele: in Italian, Nespolo: in French, Nefsle: in Spanish, Nesperas: in English, Medlar.
Dioscorides affirmeth, that this Medlar tree is called (...), and of diuers, Sitanion: Galen also in his booke of the faculties of simple medicines nameth this Epimelis, which is called, as he saith, by the countrey men in Italy, Vnedo, and groweth plentifully in Calabria; for vnder the name of Mespilus, or Medlar tree, he meaneth no other than Tricoccus, which is also named Aronia.
The Neapolitane Medlar tree is called in Greeke (...) and (...): Galen calleth it Epimelis.
The fruit hereof is called Tricoccos of the three graines or stones that it hath: they of Naples call it Azarolo: and we may name it in English, three graine Medlar, or Neapolitane Medlar, or Medlar of Naples.


 The Temperature.
The Medlars are cold, drie, and astringent; the leaues are of the same nature: the dwarfe Medlar is dry, sharpe, and astringent.


 The Vertues.
Medlars do stop the belly, especially when they be greene and hard, for after that they haue been  kept a while, so that they become soft and tender, they doe not binde or stop so much, but are then more fit to be eaten.
The fruit of the three grain Medlar, is eaten both raw and boiled, and is more wholesome for the  stomacke.
These Medlars be oftentimes preserued with sugar or hony: and being so prepared they are pleasant  and delightfull to the taste.
Moreouer, they are singular good for women with childe: for they strengthen the stomacke, and  stay the lothsomnesse thereof.
The stones or kernels of the Medlars, made into pouder and drunke, doe breake the stone, expell  grauell, and procure vrine.



CHAP. 99. Of the Peare tree.

 The Description.
TO write of Peares and Apples in particular, would require a particular volume: the stocke or kindred of Peares are not to be numbred: euery country hath his peculiar fruit: my selfe knows one curious in grasfing and planting of fruits, who hath in one piece of ground, at the point of three score sundry sorts of Peares, and those exceeding good, not doubting but if his minde had been to seeke after multitudes, he might haue gotten together the like number of those of worse kinds: besides the (...) of those that be wilde, experience sheweth sundry sorts: and therefore I thinke it not amisse to set downe the figures of some few with their seuerall titles, as well in Latine as English, and one generall description for that, that might be said of many, which to describe apart, were to send an owle to Athens, or to number those things that are without number.
@ Our Author in this chapter gaue eight figures with seuerall titles to them, so I pluckt a peare from each tree, and put his title to it, but not in the same order that he obserued, for hee made the Katherine peare tree the seuenth, which I haue now made the first, because the figure expresses the whole tree. @



 The generall description.
THe Peare tree is for the most part higher than the Apple tree, hauing boughes not spread abroad, but growing vp in height: the body is many times great: the timber or wood it selfe is very tractable or easie to be wrought vpon, exceeding fit to make moulds or prints to be grauen on, of colour tending to yellownesse: the leafe is somewhat broad, finely nicked in the edges, greene aboue, and somewhat whiter vnderneath: the floures are white: the Peares, that is to say, the fruit, are for the most part long, and in forme like a Top; but in greatnes, colour, forme, and tast very much differing among themselues; they be also couered with skins or coats of sundry colours: the pulpe or meat differeth, as well in colour as tast: there is contained in them kernels, blacke when they be ripe: the root groweth strait downe with some braunches running aslope.


Pirus superba, siue Katherina. The Katherine Peare tree.


1 Pyra Praecocia. The Ienneting Peare.


2 Pyra Iacobaea. Saint Iames Peare.


3 Pyrum regale. The Peare royall.


4 Pyrum Palatinum. The Burgomot Peare.


5 Pyrum Cydonium. The Quince peare.


6 Pyrum (...). The Bishops peare.


7 Pyrum hyemale. The Winter peare.




 The Place.
The tame Peare trees are planted in Orchards, as be the apple trees, and by grafting, though vp on wilde stockes, come much varietie of good and pleasant fruits. All these before specified, and many sorts more, and those most rare and good, are growing in the ground of Master Richard (...), a most cunning and curious graffer and planter of all manner of rare fruits, dwelling in a small village neere London called Twicknam; and also in the ground of an excellent graffer and painfull planter, Mr. Henry Banbury, of Touthill street neere Westminster, and likewise in the ground of a diligent and most affectionate louer of plants Mr. Warner neere Horsey downe by London, and in diuers other grounds about London. @ Most of the best peares are at this time to be had with Mr. Iohn Millen in Old-street, in whose nursery are (...) be found the choisest fruits this kingdom yeelds. @


 The Time.
The floures do for the most part come (...) in Aprill, the leaues afterwards: all peares are not ripe at one time: some be ripe in Iuly, others in August, and diuers in September and later.


 The Names.
The tame or Orchard peare tree is called in Greeke (...), or with a double (...): in Latine, (...)

vrbana, or Cultiua: of Tarentinus in his Geoponikes (...): in high Dutch, (...), in low Dutch, Peerboom: in French, Porrier.
The Peare or fruit it selfe is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Pyrum: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Pere: in French, Poyre: in Spanish, Peras: in English, Peare.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Leauing the diuers and sundry surnames of Peares, let vs come to the faculties which the Physitions  ought to know; which also varie according to the differences of their tasfes: for some Peares are sweet, diuers fat and vnctuous, others soure, and most are harsh, especially the wilde peares, and some consist of diuers mixtures of tastes, and some hauing no taste at all, but as it were a waterish taste.
All Pears are cold, and all haue a binding qualitie and an earthie substance: bur the Choke pears  and those that are harsh be more earthie, and the sweet ones lesse: which substance is so full of superfluous moisture in some, as that they cannot be eaten raw. All manner of Peares doe binde and stop the belly, especially the Choke and harsh ones, which are good to be eaten of those that haue the laske and the bloudy flix.
The harsh and austere (...) may with good successe be laied vpon hot swellings in the beginning, as may be the leaues of the tree, which do both binde and coole.
Wine made of the iuice of peares called in English, Perry, is soluble, purgeth those that are not  accustomed to drinke thereof, especially when it is new; notwithstanding it is as wholsome a drink being taken in small quantitie as wine; it comforteth and warmeth the stomacke, and causeth good digestion.



CHAP. 100. Of the wilde Peare tree.

 The Kindes.
AS there be sundry kindes of the manured Peares, so are there sundry wilde; wherof to write apart were to small purpose: therefore one description with their seuerall titles shall be sufficient for their distinctions.


Pyrum strangulatorium (...). The great Choke peare.




 The generall Description.
THe wilde Peare tree grows likewise great, vpright, full of branches, (...) the most part Pyramides like, or of the fashion of a steeple, not spread abroad as is the Apple or Crab tree: the timber of the trunke or body of the tree is very firme and sollid, and likewise smooth, a wood very fit to make diuers sorts of instruments of, as also the hafts of sundry tooles to worke withal; and likewise serueth to be cut into many kindes of moulds, not only such prints as these figures are made of, but also many sorts of pretty toies, for coifes, brest-plates, and such like, vsed among our English gentlewomen: the branches are smooth, couered with a blackish barke, very fragile or easie to break, whereon do grow leaues, in some greater, in other lesser: the floures are like those of the manured Pear tree, yetsome whiter than others: the fruit differ not in shape, yet some greater than others; but in taste they differ among themselues in diuers points, some are sharpe, soure, and of an austere taste; some (...) pleasant, others harsh and bitter, and some of such a choking taste, that they are not to be eaten of hogs and wild beasts, much lesse of men: they also differ in colour, euery circumstance whereof to distinguish apart would greatly enlarge our volume, and bring to the Reader small (...) or (...).



1 Pyrum strangulatorium maius. The great Choke peare:


2 Pyrum strangulatorium minus. The small Choke peare.


3 Pyrus syluestris. The wilde hedge Peare tree.


4 Pyrus syluestris minima. The wilde Crab peare tree.


5 Pyrus pedicularia. The Lowsie wilde peare.


6 pyrus Coruina. The Crow peare tree.




 The Place.
The wilde peares grow of themselues without manuring in most places, as woods, or in the borders of fields, and neere to high waies.


 The Time.
The time of wilde peares answereth the tame or manured peare, notwithstanding for the most part they are not ripe much (...) Winter.


 The Names.
The wilde peare tree is called in Latine, Pyrus syluestris and Pyraster: in Greeke, (...) by which name both the fruit and tree are knowne. Peares haue diuers (...) among the antient Writers, and specially in Pliny, in his 15. booke, 15. chapter, none of which are knowne to the later Writers (or not desired:) euery citie or euery countrey haue names of themselues, and peares haue also diuers names according to to the places.


The Temperature.
All peares are of a cold temperature, and the most part of them of a binding qualitie and an earthie substance.


 The Vertues.
The vertues of the wilde peares are referred vnto the garden peares as touching their binding facultie, but are not to be eaten, because their nourishment is little and bad.



CHAP. 101. Of the Apple tree.

 The Kindes.
THe Latine name Malus reacheth far among the old Writers, and is common to many trees, but we will briefely first intreat of Mali, properly called Apple trees, whose stocke or kindred is so infinite, that we haue thought it not amisse, to vse the same order or method with Apples that wee haue done with peares; that is, to giue them seuerall titles in Latine and English, and one generall description for the whole.


 The Description.
THe Apple tree hath a body or truncke commonly of a meane bignesse, not very high, hauing long armes or branches, and the same disordered: the barke somewhat plaine, and not (...) rugged: the leaues bee also broad, more long than round, and finely nicked in the edges. The floures are whitish tending vnto a blush colour. The fruit or Apples doe differ in greatnesse, forme, colour, and taste; some couered with a red skinne, others yellow or greene, varying infinitely

according to the soyle and climate, some very great, some little, and many of a middle sort; some are sweet of taste, or something soure; most be of a middle taste betweene sweet and soure, the which to distinguish I thinke it impossible; notwithstanding I heare of one that intendeth to write a peculiar volume of Apples, and the vse of them; yet when he hath done what hee can (...), hee hath done nothing touching their seuerall kindes to distinguish them. This that hath beene said shall suffice (...) our Historie.
@ Our Author gaue foure figures more out of (...), with these titles. 3. (...) reginale, the Queening or Queene of Apples. 5 Platomela sive Pyra aestiua: The Sommer Pearemaine. 6 (...) sive Pyra hyemalia: the Winter Pearemaine.


1 Malus Carbonaria. The Pome Water tree.


2 Malus Carbonaria longo fructu. The Bakers ditch Apple tree.




 The Place.
The tame and graffed Apple trees are planted and set in gardens and orchards made for that purpose: they delight to grow in good and fertile grounds: Kent doth abound with apples of most sorts. But I haue seene in the pastures and hedge-rows about the grounds of a worshipful gentleman dwelling two miles from Hereford called Master Roger Bodnome, so many trees of all sorts, that the seruants drinke sor the most part no other drinke but that which is made of Apples; The quantity is such, that by the report of the Gentleman himselfe, the Parson hath for tithe many hogsheads of Syder. The hogs are fed with the fallings of them, which are so many, that they make choise of those Apples they do eat, who will not taste of any but of the best. An example doubtles to be followed of Gentlemen that haue land (...) liuing: but enuie saith, the poore wil break down our hedges, and we shall haue the least part of the fruit) but sorward in the name of God, graffe, set, plant and nourish vp trees in euery corner of your grounds, the labour is small, the cost is nothing, the commoditie is great, vour selues shall haue plenty, the poore shall haue somewhat in time of want to relieue their necessitie, and God shall reward your good mindes and diligence.


 The Time.
They bloom about the end of Aprill, or in the beginning of May. The forward apples be ripe about the Calends of Iuly, others in September.



 The Names.
The Apple tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Malus and (...): in high Dutch, Opffelbaum: in low Dutch, Appelboom: in French, (...): in English, Apple-tree.
The Grecians name the fruit (...): the Latines, Malum or Pomum: in high Dutch, Opfell: in low Dutch, Appel: in French and Spanish, Mansanas: in English, Apple.


 The Temperature.
All Apples be of temperature cold and moist, and haue ioined with them a certaine excrementall or superfluous moisture: but as they be not all of like coldnesse, so neither haue they like quantitie of superfluous moisture. They are soonest rotten that haue greatest store of moisture, and they may be longer kept in which there is lesse store: for the abundance of excrementall moisture is the cause why they rot.
Sweet Apples are not so cold and moist, which being rosted or boyled, or otherwise kept, retaine or keepe the soundnesse of their pulpe.
They yeeld more nourishment, and not so moist a nourishment as do the other Apples, and doe not so easily passe through the belly.
Soure Apples are colder and also moister: the substance or pulpe of these when they be boiled doth run abroad, and retaineth not his soundnesse: they yeeld a lesser nourishment, and the same raw and cold.
They do easily and speedily passe through the belly, and therefore they do mollifie the belly, especially being taken before meat.
Harsh or Austere Apples being vnripe, are cold; they ingender grosse bloud, and great store of winde, and often bring the Collicke.
Those Apples which be of a middle taste containe in them oftentimes two or three sorts of tasts, and yet do they retaine the faculties of the other.


 The Vertues.
Rosted Apples are alwaies better than the raw, the harm whereof is both mended by the fire, and  may also be corrected by adding vnto them seeds or spices.
Apples be good for an hot stomacke: those that are austere or somewhat harsh doe strengthen a  weake and feeble stomacke proceeding of heat.
Apples are also good for all inflammations or hot swellings, but especially for such as are in  their beginning, if the same be outwardly applied.
The iuice of Apples which be sweet and of a middle taste, is mixed in compositions of diuers  medicines, and also for the tempering of melancholy humours, and likewise to mend the qualities of medicines that are dry: as are Serapium expomis Regis Saporis, Confectio Alkermes, and such like compositions.
There is likewise made an ointment with the pulpe of Apples and Swines grease and Rose water, which is vsed to beautifie the face, and to take away the roughnesse of the skin, which is called in shops Pomatum: of the Apples whereof it is made.
The pulpe of the rosted apples, in number foure or fiue, according to the greatnesse of the Apples, especially of the Pome-water, mixed in a wine quart of faire water, laboured together vntill it come to be as apples and Ale, which wee call Lambes Wooll, and the whole quart drunke last at night, within the space of an houre, doth in one night cure those that pisse by droppes with great anguish and dolour; the strangurie, and all other diseases proceeding of the difficultie of making water; but in twise taking it, it neuer faileth in any: oftentimes there happeneth with the foresaid diseases the Gonorrhaea, or running of the Raines, which it likewise healeth in those persons, but not generally in all; which my selfe haue often proued, and gained thereby both crownes and credit.
The leaues of the tree do coole and binde, and be also counted good for inflammations, in the  beginning.
Apples cut in pieces, and distilled with a quantitie of Camphere and butter-milke, take away  the markes and scarres gotten by the small pockes, being washed therewith when they grow vnto their state and ripenesse: prouided that you giue vnto the patient a little milk and Saffron, or milk and mithridate to drinke, to expell to the extreme parts that venome which may lie hid, and as yet not seene.




CHAP. 102 Of the Wilding or Crab tree.

 The Kindes.
LIke as there be diuers manured Apples, so are there sundry wilde Apples, or Crabs, whereof to write apart were to small purpose, and therefore one description shall (...) for the rest.


Malus syluestris. The wilding or Crab tree.




 The generall Description.
THere be diuers wilde Apple trees not husbanded, that is to say, not (...); the fruit whereof is harsh and binding: for by (...) both Apples and Peares become more milde and pleasant. The crab or wilding (...) growes oftentimes to a reasonable greatnesse, equall with the Apple tree: the wood is hard, firme, and sollid; the barke rough; the branches or boughes many; the floures and fruit like those of the apple tree, some red, others white, some greater, others lesser: the difference is known to all, therefore it shall suffice what hath been said for their seuerall distinctions: we haue in our London gardens a dwarfe kinde of sweet Apple, called Chamaemalus, the dwarfe apple tree, or Paradise apple, which beareth apples very timely without grafting.
@ Our Author here also (out of Tabernamontanus) gaue foure figures, whereof I onely retaine the best, with their seueral titles. 1 Malus syluestris rubens. The great wilding or red Crab tree: 2 Malus syluestris alba. The white wilding or Crab tree: 3 Malus syluestris (...). The smaller Crab tree: 4 Malus duracina syluestris. The choking leane Crab-tree. @


 The Place.
The Crab tree groweth wilde in woods and hedge rowes almost euery where.


 The Time.
The time answereth those of the garden.


 The Names.
Their titles doth set forth their names in Latine and English.


 The Temperature.
Of the temperature of wilde apples hath beene sufficiently spoken in the former Chapter.


 The Vertues.
The iuice of wilde Apples or crabs taketh away the heate of burnings, scaldings, and all inflammations: and being laid on in short time after it is scalded, it keepeth it from blistering.
The iuice of crabs or Veriuice is astringent or binding, and hath withall an abstersiue or clensing  qualitie, beeing mixed with hard yeest of Ale or Beere, and applied in manner of a cold ointment, that is, spread vpon a cloth first wet in the Veriuice and wrung out, and then laid to, taketh away the heat of Saint Anthonies fire, all inflammations what soeuer, healeth scab'd legs, burnings and scaldings wheresoeuer it be.




CHAP. 103. Of the Citron, Limon, Orange, and Assyrian Apple trees.

 The Kindes.
THe Citron tree is of kindred with the Limon tree, the Orange is of the same house or stocke, and the Assyrian Apple tree claimeth a place as neerest in kinred and neighbourhood: whereore I intend to comprehend them all in this one chapter.


 The Description.
1 THe Citron tree is not very great, hauing many boughes or branches, tough and pliable, couered with a greene barke: whereon do grow greene leaues, long, somewhat broad, very smooth, and sweet of smell like those of the Bay tree: among which come forth (...) and there certaine prickles, set far in sunder: from the bosome whereof come forth smal floures, consisting of siue little leaues, of a white colour tending to purple, with certaine threds like haires growing in the middle: the fruit is long, greater many times than the Cucumber, often lesser, and not much
1 Malus medica. The Pome Citron tree.
2 Malus Limonia. The Limon tree.
greater than the Limon: the barke or rinde is of a light golden colour, set with diuers (...) or bumps, and of a very pleasant smell: the pulpe or substance next vnto it is thick, white, hard, (...) a kinde of aromaticall or spicie smell, almost without any taste at all: the softer pulpe within that is not so firme or solid, but more spungie, and full of a sower iuice, in which the seed lieth hid, (...) and thicker than a graine of Barley.
2 The Limon tree is like vnto the Pome Citron tree in growth, thorny branches, and (...) of

a pleasant sweet smell, like those of the Bay-tree: the floures hercof are (...) than those of the Citron tree, and of a most sweet smell: the fruit is long and thicke, lesser than the (...) Citron: the rinde is yellow, somewhat bitter in taste, and sweet of smell: the pulpe is white, more in quantitie than that of the Citron, respecting the bignes; in the middle part whereof is (...) more soft spungic pulpe, and fuller of soure juice: the seeds are like those of the Pome Citron.
3 The Orenge tree groweth vp to the height of a small Peare tree, hauing many (...) boughes or branches, like those of the Citron tree: the leaues are also like those of the Bay-tree, @ but that they differ in this, that at the lower end next the stalke there is a lesser lease made almost after the vulgar figure of an heart, whereon the bigger leafe doth stand, or is fastned: (...) and they are of a sweet (...): the floures are white, of a most pleasant sweet smell also: the fruit is round like a ball, euery circumstance belonging to the forme is very well knowne to all; the taste is soure, sometimes sweet, and often of a taste betweene both: the seeds are like those of the Limon.


3 Malus (...). The Orange tree.


4 Malus Assyria. The Assyrian Apple tree.


4 The Assyrian Apple tree is like vnto the Orange tree: the branches are like: the leaues are greater: the floures are like those of the Citron tree: the fruit is round, three times as big as the Orange: the barke or peeling is thicke, rough, and of a pale yellow colour, wherein appeare often as it were small clifts or crackes: the pulpe or inner substance is full of iuice, in taste sharpe, as that of the Limon, but not so pleasant: the seeds are like those of the Citron.


 The Place.
The Citron, Limon, and Orange trees do grow especially on the sea coasts of Italy, and on the Islands of the Adriaticke Turrhence, and also Aegaean Seas, and likewise on the maine land, neer vnto meeres and great lakes: there is also great store of them in Spaine, but in places especially ioining to the sea, or not farre off: they are also found in certaine prouinces of France which lie vpon the midland sea. They were first brought out of Media, as not onely (...) writeth, but also the Poet Virgil affirmeth in the second book of his Georgickes, writing of the Citron tree after this maner:

Media fert tristes succos, (...) (...)
Felicis mali, quo non praesentius vllum,
Pocula si (...) (...) (...) (...),

Miscueruntque herbas, and non innoxiaverba,
Auxilium venit, ac membris agit atra venena.
Ipsaingens arbos, faciesque simillima Lauro;
Et, si non alium late iactaret odorem,
Laurus erit; folia haud vllis labentia ventis;
Flos apprime tenax. Animas and olentia (...)
Orafouent illo, and senibus medicantur anhelis.


The Countrey Media beareth iuyces sad,
And dulling tastes of happy Citron fruit,
Than which, no helpe more present can be had,
If any time stepmothers worse than brute
haue poyson'd pots, and mingled berbs of sute
With hurtfull charmes: this Citron fruit doth chase
Blacke venome from the body in euery place.
The tree it selfe in growth is large and big,
And very like in shew to th'Laurell tree;
And would be thought a Laurell, leafe and twig,
But that the smell it casts doth disagree:
The floure it holds as fast as floure may be:
Therewith the Medes a remedie do finde
For stinking breaths and mouthes a cure most kinde,
And helpe old men which hardly fetch their winde.



 The Time.
These trees be alwaies greene, and do, as Pliny saith, beare fruit at all times of the yere, some falling off, others waxing ripe, and others newly comming forth.


 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Malus Medica, and Malus Citria: in English, Citron tree, and Pomecitron tree.
The fruit is named in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Malum Medicum, and Malum Citrium: and Citromalum. Aemilyanus in Athenaeus sheweth, that Iuba King of Mauritania hath made mention of the Citron, who saith that this Apple is named among them, Malum Hespericum: Galen denieth it to be called any longer Malum Medicum, but Citrium; and saith, that they who call it Medicum do it to the end that no man should vnderstand what they say: the Apothecaries call these apples Citrones: in high-Dutch, Citrin opffell, Citrinaten: in low-Dutch, Citroenen: in Italian, Citroni, and Cedri: in Spanish, Cidras: in French, Citrons: in English, Citron Apple, and Citron.
The second kinde of Citron is called in Latine, Limonium Malum; in shops, Limones: in French, Limons: in low-Dutch, Limonen: in English, Limon, and Lemon.
The third is named in Latine, Malnm anarantium or Anerantium: and of some Aurantium: of others, Aurengium, of the yellow colour of gold: some would haue them called Arantia, of Arantium, a towne in Achaia or Arania, of a countrey bearing that name in Persia: it is termed in Italian Arancio: in high-Dutch, Pomeranken: in low-Dutch, Araengie Appelen: in French, Pommes d'Orenges: in Spanish, Naransas: in English, Orenges.
The fourth is named of diuers, Pomum Assyrium, or the Citron of Assyria, and may be Englished Adams Apple, after the Italian name; and among the vulgar sort of Italians, Lomie, of whom it (...) also called Pomum Adami, or Adams Apple; and that came by the opinion of the common rude people, who thinke it to be the same Apple which Adam did eate of in Paradise, when he transgressed Gods commandment; whereupon also the prints of the biting appeare therein, as they say: but others say that this is not the Apple, but that which the Arabians do call Musa or Mosa, whereof Auicen, cap. 395. maketh mention: for diuers of the Iewes take this for that through which by eating, Adam offended, as Andrew Theuet sheweth.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
All these fruits consist of vnlike parts, and much differing in facultie.
The rindes are sweet of smell, bitter, hot, and dry.
The white pulpe is cold, and containeth in it a grosse iuice, especially the Citron.
The inner substance or pap is soure, as of the Citrons and Limons, cold and dry, with thinnesse  of parts.
The seed because it is bitter is hot and dry.
The rinde of the Pomecitron is good against all poysons, for which cause it is put into treacles  and such like confections.

It is good to be eaten against a stinking breath, for it maketh the breath sweet; and being so taken  it comforteth the cold stomacke exceedingly.
The white, sound, and hard pulpe is now and then eaten, but very hardly concocted, and ingendreth  a grosse, cold, and phlegmaticke iuyce; but being condite with sugar, it is both (...) in taste, and easie to be digested, more nourishing, and lesse apt to obstruction and binding or stopping.
Galen reporteth, that the inner iuice of the Pomecitron was not wont to be eaten, but it is now  vsed for sauce; and being often vsed, it represseth choler which is in the stomacke, and procures appetite: it is excellent good also to be giuen in vehement and burning feuers, and against all pestilent and venomous or infectious diseases: it comforteth the heart, cooleth the inward parts, cutteth, diuideth, and maketh thin, grosse, tough, and slimy humors.
Of this foresaid sharpe iuice there is a syrrup ptepared, which is called in shops, Syrupus de (...) Citri, very good against the foresaid infirmities.
Such a sirrup is also prepared of the sharpe iuice of Limons, of the same quality and operation, so that in stead of the one, the other will serue very well.
A dozen of Orenges cut in slices and put into a gallon of water, adding thereto an ounce of  Mercurie sublimate, and boiled to the consumption of the halfe, cureth the itch and manginesse of the body.
Men in old time (as (...) writeth in his fourth booke) did not eate Citrons, but were  contented with the smell, and to lay them amongst cloathes, to preserue them from Moths.
As often as need required they vsed them against deadly poysons; for which thing they were  especially commended euen by Virgils verses, which we haue before alledged.
Athenaeus, lib. 3. hath extant a story of some that for certaine notorious offences were condemned  to be destroyed of Serpents, who were preserued and kept in health and safetie by the eating of Citrons.
The distilled water of the whole Limons, rinde and all, drawne out by a glasse Still, takes away  tetters and blemishes of the skin, and maketh the face faire and smooth.
The same being drunke prouoketh vrine, dissolueth the stone, breaketh and expelleth it.
The rinde of Orenges is much like in facultie to that of the Citrons and Limons, yet it is so  much the more hot as it is more biting and bitter.
The inner substance or soure pap which is full of iuice is of like facultie, or not much inferiour  to the facultie of the pap of Citrons or Limons; but the sweet pap doth not much coole or drie, but doth temperatly heate and moisten, being pleasant to the taste: it also nourisheth more than doth the soure pap, but the same nourishment is thin and little; and that which is of a middle tast, hauing the smacke of wine, is after a middle sort more cold than sweet, and lesser cold than soure: the sweet and odoriferous floures of orenges be vsed of the perfumers in their sweet smelling ointments.
Two ounces of the iuice of Limons, mixed with the like quantitie of the spirit of wine, or the  best Aqua vitae (but the spirit of wine rectified is much better) and drunk at the first approch of the fit of an ague, taketh away the shaking presently: the medicine seldome faileth at the second time of the taking thereof perfectly to cure the same; but neuer at the third time, prouided that the (...) be couered warme in a bed, and caused to sweat.
There is also distilled out of them in a glasse still, a water of a maruellous sweet smell, which being  inwardly taken in the weight of an ounce and a halfe, moueth sweat, and healeth the ague.
The seed of all these doth kill wormes in the belly, and driueth them forth: it doth also mightily  resist poyson, and is good for the stinging of scorpious, if it be inwardly taken.
Those which be called Adams Apples are thought to be like in faculties to the soure iuyce, especially of the Limons, but yet they be not so effectuall.



CHAP. 104. Of the Cornell tree.

 The Description.
THe tame Cornell tree groweth somtime of the height and bignesse of a smal tree, with a great number of springs: it is couered with a rugged barke: the wood or timber is very hard and dry, without any great quantity of sap therein: the leaues are like vnto the Dog berry leaues, crumpled rugged, and of an ouerworne colour: the floures grow in small bunches before any leaues do appeare, of colour yellow, and of no great value (they are so small) in shew like the floures of the

Cornus mas. The male Cornel tree.
Oliue tree: which being vaded, there come small long berries, which at the first bee greene, and red when they be ripe; of an austere and harsh taste, with a certaine sourenesse: within this berry is a small stone, exceeding hard, white within like that of the Oliue, wherunto it is like both in the fashion and oftentimes in the bignesse of the fruit.


 The Place.
This groweth in most places of Germanie without manuring: it (...) not wild in England. (...) yet there be sundry trees of them growing in the gardens of such as loue rare and dainty plants, whereof I haue a tree or two in my garden.


 The Time.
The tame Cornell tree floureth sometime in February, and commonly in March, and afterwards the leaues come forth as an vntimely birth: the berries or fruit (...) (...) in August.


 The Names.
The Grecians call it (...): the Latines. Cornus: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch Cornoele boom: the (...), Corniolo: in French, Cornillier: in (...), Cornizolos: in English, the Cornell tree, and the Cornelia tree; of some, long Cherrie tree.
The fruit is named in Latine, Cornum: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, Cornoele: in Italian, Cornole: in English, Cornel berries and (...) Cherries.
This is Cornus mas Theophrasti, or Theophrastus his male Cornell tree; for he setteth downe two sorts of the Cornell trees, the male and the female: he maketh the wood of the male to be sound, as in this Cornell tree; which we both for this cause and for others also haue made to be the male. The female is that which is commonly called Virga sanguinea, or Dogs berry tree, and Cornus (...), or the wilde Cornell tree, of which we will treat in the next Chapter following.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The fruit of the Cornell tree hath a very harsh or choking taste: it cooleth, drieth, and bindeth  yet may it also be eaten, as it is oftentimes.
It is a remedie against the laske and bloudy flix, it is hurtfull to a cold stomacke, and increaseth  the rawnesse thereof: the leaues and tender crops of the tree are likewise of an harsh and choking taste, and do mightily dry.
They heale greene wounds that are great and deepe, especially in hard bodies, but they are not  so good for small wounds and tender bodies, as Galen writeth.



CHAP. 105. Of the female Cornell or Dog-Berry tree.

 The Description.
THat which the Italians call Virga sanguinea, or the bloudy Rod, is like to the Cornel tree, yet it groweth (...) into a tree, but remaineth a shrub: the yong branches thereof are iointed, and be of an obscure red purple: they haue within a white spongie pith like that of (...), but the old stalks are hard and stiffe, the substance of the which is also white, and answerable to those of the Cornell tree: the leaues are also like, the middle rib whereof as also the brittle foot-stalkes are somewhat reddish: at the top whereof stand white floures in spoky rundles, which turne into

Cornus foemina. The Dog-berry tree.
greene at the first, and of a shining black colour when they be ripe, in taste vnpleasant, and not cared for of the birds.


 The Place.
This shrub groweth in hedges and bushes in euery countrey of England.


 The Time.
The floures come forth in the Spring in the moneth of Aprill: the berries are ripe in Autumne.


 The Names.
The Italians do commonly call it Sanguino, and Sanguinello: (...) Crescentius termes it Sanguinus; and Matthiolus, Virga sanguinea: (...), lib. 24. cap. 10. hath written a little of Virga (...): Neither is Virga Sanguinea, saith hee, counted more happy; the inner barke whereof doth breake open the scarres which they before haue healed. It is an hard thing, or peraduenture a rash part, to (...) by these few words, that Pliny his Virga Sanguinea is the same that the Italian Sanguino is. This is called in highDutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...) Cornoelle, that is to say, Cornus (...), or wilde Cornell tree: and in French, Cornellier (...): in English, Hounds tree, Hounds berry, Dogs berry tree, Pricke-Timber: in the North countrey they call it Gaten tree, or Gater tree; the berries whereof seem to be those which Chaucer calleth Gater berries: Valerius Cordus nameth it (...), that is to say, Falsa or Spuria Cornus, false or bastard Cornell tree: this seemeth also to be Theophrastus his (...), or Cornus foemina, female Cornell tree. This hath little branches hauing pith within, neither be they hard nor sound, like those of the male: the fruit is (...), that is, not fit to be eaten, and a late fruit which is not ripe till after the Autumne Aequinoctiall; and such is the wilde Cornell tree or Gater tree, the yong and tender branches whereof be red, and haue (as wee haue written) a pith within: the fruit or (...) be vnpleasant, and require a long time before they can be ripe.


 The Temperature.
The berries hereof are of vnlike parts; for they haue some hot, bitter, and clensing, and very many cold, dry, harsh, and binding, yet they haue no vse in medicine.


 The Vertues.
Matthiolus writeth, that out of the berries first boiled, and afterwards pressed, there issueth an  oyle which the (...) countrey people do vse in lamps: but it is not certaine, nor very like, that the barke of this wilde Cornell tree hath that operation which Pliny reporteth of Virga Sanguinea; for he saith, as we haue already set downe, that the inner barke thereof doth break and lay open the (...) which they before haue healed.



CHAP. 106. Of Spindle tree or Pricke-wood.

 The Description.
1 PRickewood is no high shrub, of the bignesse of the Pomegranat tree: it spreadeth (...) with his branches: the old stalks haue their barke somewhat white; the new and those that be lately growne be greene, and foure square: the substance of the wood is hard, and mixed with a light yellow: the leaues be long, broad, slender, and soft: the floures be white, many standing vpon one foot-stalke, like almost to a spoked rundle: the fruit is foure square, red, and containing foure white seeds, euery one whereof is couered with a yellow coat, which being taken off giueth a yellow die.



1 Euonymus Theophrasti. English Prick-timber tree.


2 Euonymus latifolius. Broad leafed Spindle tree,


3 Euonymus Pannonicus. Hungarie Spindle tree.


2 This other sort of Euonymus groweth to the forme of an hedge tree, of a meane bignesse, the trunke or body whereof is of the thicknesse of a mans leg, couered with a rough or scabbed barke of an ouerworn russet colour. The branches thereof are many, slender, and very euen, couered with a greene barke whilest they be yet young and tender; they are also very brittle, with some (...) in the middle like that of the Elder. The leaues are few in number, full of nerues or (...) dispersed like those of Plantaine, in shape like those of the Pomecitron tree, of a (...) smell and bitter taste: amongst which come forth slender footstalks very long and naked, whereon do grow small floures consisting of foure small leaues like those of the (...) tree, but lesser, of a white colour tending to a blush, with some yellownesse in the middle: after commeth the fruit, which is larger than the former, and as it were winged, parted commonly into foure, yet somtimes into (...) parts; and opening when it is ripe, it sheweth the white graines filled with a yellow (...). The root is tough and wooddy, (...) it selfe farre abroad vnder the vpper crust of the earth.

3 The same Author setteth forth another sort which he found in the mountaines of Morauia and Hungary, hauing a trunke or stocke of the height of three or foure cubits, couered with a bark greene at the first, afterward sprinkled ouer with many blacke spots: the boughes are diuided toward the top into diuers small branches, very brittle and easie to breake, whereon are placed leaues by couples also, one opposite to another, somewhat snipt about the edges, in shape like those of the great Myrtle, of an astringent taste at the beginning, after somewhat hot and bitter: amongst which come forth small floures standing vpon long naked foot-stalkes, consisting of foure (...) leaues of a bright shining purple colour, hauing in the middle some few spots of yellow: after commeth the fruit, foure cornered, not vnlike to the common kinde, of a spongious substance, and a gold yellow colour: wherein is contained not red berries like the other, but blacke, very like to those of Fraxinella, of a shining blacke colour like vnto burnished horne; which are deuoured of birds when they be (...), and the rather because they fall of themselues out of their huskes, otherwise the bitternesse of the husks would take away the delight.


 The Place.
The first commeth vp in vntoiled places, and among shrubs, vpon rough bankes and heapes of earth: it serueth also ostentimes for hedges in fields, growing amongst Brambles and such other Thornes.
The other sorts Carolus Clusius sound in a wood of Hungarie beyond the riuer Drauus, and also vpon the mountaines of Morauia and other places adiacent.


 The Time.
The floures appeare in Aprill: the fruit is ripe in the end of August, or in the moneth of September.


 The Names.
Theophrastus calleth this shrub (...), and describeth it in his third booke of the Historie of (...): diuers also falsly reade it Anonymos: Petrus Crescentius calleth it Fusanum, because spindles be made of the wood hereof; and for that cause it is called in high-Dutch, (...), yet most of them (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Fusano: in French, (...), and (...) (...): in English, Spindle tree, Prick-wood, and Prick-timber.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
This shrub is hurtfull to all things, as Theophrastus writeth, and namely to Goats: hee saith the  fruit hereof killeth; so doth the leaues and fruit destroy Goats especially, vnlesse they scoure as wel (...) as downwards: if three or foure of these fruits be giuen to a man they purge both by (...) and stoole.



CHAP. 107. Of the blacke Aller tree.

 The Description.
THe blacke Aller tree bringeth forth from the root straight stalkes diuided into diuers branches: the outward barke whereof is blacke, and that next to the wood yellow, and giueth a colour as yellow as Saffron: the substance of the wood is white and brittle, with a reddish pith in the midst: the leaues be like those of the Alder tree, or of the Cherry tree, yet blacker, and a little rounder: the floures be somewhat white: the fruit are round berries, in which appeare a certaine rift or chinke, as though two were ioined together, at the first greene, afterwards red, and last of all blacke: in this there be two little stones: the root runneth along in the earth.


 The Place.
The Aller tree groweth in moist woods and copses: I found great plenty of it in a wood a mile from Islington, in the way from thence toward a small village called Harnsey, lying vpon the right hand of the way; and in the woods at Hampsted neere London, and in most woods in the parts about London.


 The Time.
The leaues and floures appeare in the beginning of the Spring; and the berries in Autumne.


 The Names.
This shrub is called (...), or blacke Alder: and by others, Frangula: Petrus (...) (...) it Auornus: in low (...), (...), and oftentimes (...), because boies make for themselues arrowes (...): in (...) Dutch, (...): it is called in English, blacke (...) (...); and of diuers (...) pricke tree.



Alnus nigra, siue Frangula. The blacke Aller tree.




 The Temperature.
The inner barke of the blacke Aller tree is of a purging and dry qualitie.


 The Vertues.
The inner barke hereof is vsed of diuers  country men, who drink the infusion thereof when they would be purged: it purgeth thicke phlegmaticke humors, and also cholericke, and not only by the stoole, but many times also by vomit, not without great trouble and paine to the stomacke: it is therefore a medicine more fit for clownes than for ciuill people, and rather for those that seed grossely, than for dainty people.
There be others who affirme that the dried  barke is more gentle, and causeth lesser paine: for the greene bark (say they) which is not yet dried containeth in it a certaine superfluous moisture which causeth gripings and vomitings, and troubles the stomacke.
The same barke being boiled in wine or  vineger makes a lotion for the tooth (...); and is commended against scabs and (...) nesse of the skin.
The leaues are reported to be good (...) for cattell, especially for kine, and to cause them to yeeld good store of milke.



CHAP. 108. Of the Seruice tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Seruice tree groweth to the height and bignesse of a great tree, charged with many great armes or boughes which are set with sundry small (...), garnished with many great leaues somewhat long like those of the Ash: the floures are white, and stand in clusters, which turne into small browne berries somewhat long, which are not good to be eaten vntill they haue lien a while, and vntill they be soft like the Medlar, (...) it is like in taste and operation.
2 The common Seruice tree groweth likewise to the height of a great tree with a straight body of a brownish colour, full of branches, set with large displayed leaues like the Maple or the White-Thorne, sauing that they are broader and longer: the floures are white, and grow in tufts; which being fallen, there come in place thereof small round berries, browne vpon one side and reddish toward the Sun, of an vnpleasant taste in respect of the former: in which are contained little blackish kernels.


 The Place.
These trees are found in woods and groues in most places of England: there be many smal (...) thereof in a little wood a mile beyond Islington from London: in Kent it groweth in great aboundance, especially about Southfleet and (...). @ The later of these I haue seene growing wilde in diuers places, but not the former in any place as yet. @


 The Time.
They floure in March, and their fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke, (...), and (...): in Latine, Sorbus: in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in French, Cormier: in English, Seruice tree, and of some after the Latines, Sorbe tree.



1 Sorbus. The Seruice tree.


2 Sorbus terminalis. Common Seruice tree.


The common Seruice tree is named of Pliny, Sorbus torminalis: in high-Dutch, (...), (...), and (...) (...): in English, Common Seruice tree.
The berries or fruit of the Seruice tree is called (...), or (...): in Latine, Sorbum: in high Dutch, (...), (...): in low-Dutch, (...): in Italian, Sorbe, and Sorbole: in French, (...) in Spanish, (...), and Sorbas: in English, Seruice; of some, Sorbe Apple.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Seruice berries are cold and binding, and much more when they be hard, than when they are milde and (...): in some places they are quickly soft, either hanged in a place which is not altogether cold, or laid in (...) or chaffe: those Seruices are eaten when the belly is too soluble, for they (...) the same; and if they yeeld any nourishment at all, the same is very little, grosse, and cold; and  therefore it is not expedient to eate of these or other-like fruits, nor to vse them otherwise than in medicines.
These do stay all manner of fluxes of the belly, and likewise the bloudy flixe; as also vomiting: (...) (...) bleeding if they be cut and dried in the sunne before they be ripe, and so reserued for (...) these we may vse diuers waies according to the manner of the greife and grieued part.



CHAP. 109. Of the Ash tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Ash also is an high and tall tree: it riseth vp with a straight body, now and then of no small bignesse, now and then of a middle size, and is couered with a smooth bark: the wood is white, smooth, hard, and somewhat rough grained: the tender branches hereof and such as be new growne vp are set with certaine ioints, and haue within a white and spongie pith: but the old boughes are wooddy throughout, and be without either ioints or much pith: the leaues are long and winged, consisting of many standing by couples, one right against another vpon one rib or stalke, the vpermost of all excepted, which standeth alone; of which euery particular one is long, broad, like to a Bay leafe, but softer, and of a lighter greene, without any sweet

smell, and nicked round about the edges: out of the yonger sort of the boughes, hard to the (...) on of the leaues, grow sorth hanging together many long narrow and flat cods, as it were like almost to diuers birds tongues, where the seed is persected, which is of a bitter taste: the roots be many, and grow deepe in the ground.


Fraxinus. The Ash tree.




 The Place.
The Ash doth better prosper in moist places, as about the borders of (...) and Riuer sides, than in dry grounds.


 The Time.
The leaues and keyes come forth in Aprill and May, yet is not the seed ripe before the fall of the leafe.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke, (...), and of diuers, (...): in Latine, Fraxinus: in highDutch, (...), (...), and (...): in low-Dutch, (...), and (...): in Italian, Frassino: in French, Fresne: in Spanish, Fresno, Fraxino, and Freixo: in English, Ash tree.
The fruit like vnto cods is called of the Apothecaries, Lingua Auis, and Lingua Passerina it may be named in Greeke, (...): yet some would haue it called (...) Others make Ornus or the wilde Ash to be called Orneoglossum: it is (...) in English, Ash keyes, and of some, Kite-keyes.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues and bark of the Ash tree are dry  and moderatly hot: the seed is hot and dry in the second degree.
The iuice of the leaues or the leaues (...) being applied, or taken with wine, cure the (...) of vipers, as Dioscorides saith.
The leaues of this tree are of so great vertue (...) (...), as that they dare not so much as  touch the morning and euening shadowes of the (...), but shun them afar off, as Pliny reports, li. 16. cap. 13. He also affirmeth, that the serpent being penned in with boughes layd round about, will sooner run into the fire, if any be there, than come neere the boughes of the Ash: and that the Ash doth floure before the Serpents appeare, and doth not cast his leaues before they be gon againe.
We write (saith he) vpon experience, that if the serpent be set within the circle of a fire and the  boughes, the serpent will sooner run into the fire than into the boughes. It is a wondersull (...) in nature, that the Ash should floure before these serpents appeare, and not cast his leaues before they begon againe.
Both of them, that is to say the leaues and the barke, are reported to stop the belly: and being  boiled with vineger and water, do stay vomiting, (...) they be laid vpon the stomacke.
The leaues and barke of the Ash tree boiled in wine and drunk, do open the stopping of the (...) and spleene, and do greatly comfort them.
Three or foure leaues of the Ash tree taken in wine each morning from time to time, doe (...) those (...) that are fat, and keepeth them from feeding which do begin to wax fat.
The seed or Kite-keyes of the Ash tree prouoke vrine, increase naturall seed, and stirre vp (...) lust, especially being poudred with nutmegs and drunke.
The wood is profitable for many things, being exalted by Homers commendations, and (...) speare, as Pliny writeth. The shauings or small pieces thereof being drunke are said to be pernicious and deadly, as Dioscorides affirmeth.
The Lee which is made with the Ashes of the barke cureth the white scurse, and such other (...) roughnesse of the skin, as Pliny testifieth.




CHAP. 110. Of the wilde Ash, otherwise called Quicke-Beame or Quicken tree.


Sorbus syluestris, siue Fraxinus Bubula. The Quicken tree, wilde Ash, or wilde Seruice tree.



 The Description.
THe wilde Ash or Quicken Tree Pena setteth forth for the wilde Seruice: this tree groweth seldome or neuer to the stature and height of the Ash tree, notwithstanding it growes to the bignes of a large tree: the leaues be great and long, and scarcely be discerned from the leaues of the Seruice tree: the floures bee white, and sweet of smell, and grow in tusts, which do turne into round berries, greene at the first, but when they be ripe of a deepe red colour, and of an vnpleasant taste: the branches are as full of iuice as the Osiar, which is the cause that boyes doe make Pipes of the barke thereof as they doe of Willowes.


 The Place.
The wilde Ash or Quicken tree groweth on high mountaines, and in thicke high woods in most places of England, especially about Namptwich in Cheshire, in the Weilds of Kent, in Suffex and diuers other places.


 The Time.
The wild Ash floures in May, and the berries are ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Latines call this tree Ornus, and oftentimes Syluestris Fraxinus, or wilde Ash: and it is also Fraxini species, or a kinde of Ash; for the Grecians (as not only Pliny writeth, but also Theophrastus) hath made two kindes of Ash, the one high and tall, the other lower: the high and tall one is Fraxinis vulgaris, or the common Ash; and the lower Ornus, which also is named (...), or (...) Fraxinus, mountaine Ash; as the other, (...), or field Ash; which is also named (...), or as Gaza translateth it, Bubula Fraxinus, but more truly Magna Fraxinus, or great Ash; for the syllable (...) (...) a signe of bignesse: this Ornus or great Ash is named in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch, (...), or (...), of diuers, (...): in French, Fresne sauuage: in English, Wilde Ash, Quicken tree, Quick-beame tree, and Wicken tree. Matthiolus makes this to be Sorbus syluestris, or wilde Seruice tree.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Touching the faculties of the leaues, barke, or berries, as there is nothing found among the old, so is there nothing noted among the later writers: but Pliny seemeth to make this wilde Ash like in faculties to the common Ash; for lib. 16. cap. 13. where he writes of both the Ashes, hee saith, that the common Ash is Crispa, and the mountaine Ash Spissa: and sorthwith he addeth this: The Grecians write, that the leaues of them do kill cattell, and yet hurt not those that chew their cud; which the old writers haue noted of the Yew tree, and not of the Ash tree. Pliny was deceiued by the ncerenesse of the words (...) and (...) is the Yew tree, and (...) the Ash tree: so that hee hath falsly attributed that deadly facultie to the Ash tree, which doth belong to the Yew tree.
The leaues of the wilde Ash tree boiled in wine are good against the paine in the sides, and the  stopping of the liuer, and asswage the bellies of those that haue the tympanie and dropsie.
Benedictus Curtius Symphoryanus is deceiued in the historie of Ornus, when he thinketh out of Virgils Georgicks, that Ornus hath the floure of the Peare tree; for out of Virgils verses no such thing at

all can be gathered: for he in intreateth not of the forms of trees, but of the graffing of diuers into others, vnlike and differing in nature; as of the graffing of the Nut tree into the Strawberry tree; the Apple into the Plane tree, the Beech into the Chestnut tree; the Peare into the wilde Ash or (...)-beame tree, the Oke into the Elme tree: and in this respect hee writeth, that the Plane tree bringeth forth an Apple, the Beech tree a Chestnut; the wilde Ash tree bringeth forth the white floure of the Peare tree, as is most manifest out of Virgils owne words, after this manner, in the second booke of his Georgicks:

Inseritur vero ex foetu nucis Arbutas horrida,
Et steriles Platani malos gessere valentes,
Castaneae Fagos: Ornus incanuit albo
Flore Pyri, glandemque sues fregere sub Vlmis.


The Tree-Strawb'ry on Walnuts stocke doth grow,
And barren Planes faire Apples oft haue borne;
Chestnuts, Beech-Mast; the Quicken tree doth shew
The Peares white floure; and (...) oft times th' Acorn
Haue gathered vnder Elmes. --




CHAP. 111. Of Coriars Sumuch.


1 Rhus Coriaria. Coriar Sumach.


2 Rhus Myrtifolia. Wil de or Myrtle Sumach.



 The Description.
1 (...) Sumach groweth vp vnto the height of a hedge tree, after the manner of the Flder tree, bigger than Dioscorides reporteth it to be, or others, who affirme that Rhus groweth two cubits high: whose errors are the greater: but this Rhus is so like to the

Seruice tree in shape and manner of grow ing, that it is hard to know one from the other; but that the leaues are soft and hairy, hauing a red sinew or rib thorow the midst of the leafe: the floures grow with the leaues vpon long stems clustering together like cats taile, or the catkins of the nut tree, but greater, and of a whitish green colour: after which come clusters of round berries, growing in bunches like grapes,
2 Pliny his Sumach, or the Sumach of Plinies description, groweth like a small hedge tree, hauing many slender twiggie branches, garnished with little leaues like Myrtus, or rather like the leaues of the Iuiube tree; among which come forth slender mossie floures, of no great account or value, which bring forth small seeds, inclosed within a cornered case or huske, fashioned like a spoon: the trunke or body of both these kindes of Sumach being wounded with some iron Instrument, yeeldeth a gum or liquour.


 The Place.
Sumach groweth, as Dioscorides saith, in stony places: it is found in diuers mountaines and woods in Spaine, and in many places on the mount Apennine in Italy, and also neere vnto Pontus. Archigenes in Galen, in the 8. book of medicines according to the places affected, sheweth, that it groweth in Syria, making choice of that of Syria.


 The Time.
The floures of Sumach come forth in Iuly, the seed with the berries are ripe in Autumne.


 The Names.
This is called in Greeke (...) Rhus, saith Pliny, hath no Latine name; yet Gaza after the signification of the Greeke word, faineth a name, calling it Fluida: the Arabians name it Sumach: the Italians, Sumacho: the Spaniards, Sumagre: in low Dutch, by contracting of the word they cal it (...) or (...): in English, Sumach, Coriars Sumach, and Leather Sumach: the leaues of the shrub be called (...): in Latine, Rhus coriaria, or Rhoe.
The seed is named Eruthros: and (...): in Latine, Rhus Culinaria, and Rhus obsoniorum: in English, Meat Sumach, and Sauce Sumach.


 The Temperature.
The fruit, leaues, and seed hereof do very much binde, they also coole and drie: drie they are in the third degree, and cold in the second, as Galen teacheth.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Sumach boyled in wine and drunken, do stop the laske, the inordinate course of  womens sicknesses, and all other (...) issues of bloud.
The seed of Sumach eaten in sauces with meat, stoppeth all manner of fluxes of the belly, the  bloudy flix, and all other issues, especially the white issues of women.
The decoction of the leaues maketh haires blacke, and is put into stooles to fume vpward into  the bodies of those that haue the Dysenterie, and is to be giuen them also to drinke.
The leaues made into an ointment or plaister with hony and vineger, staith the spreading nature  of Gangraenes and Pterygia.
The drie leaues sodden in water vntill the decoction be as thicke as hony, yeeld forth a certaine  oilinesse, which performeth all the effects of Licium.
The seed is no lesse effectuall to be strowed in pouder vpon their meats which are Coeliaci or Dysenterici.
The seedes pouned, mixed with honie and the powder of Oken coles, healeth the Hemorthoides.
There issueth out of the shrub a gum, which being put into the hollownesse of the teeth, taketh  away the paine, as Dioscorides writeth.



CHAP. 112. Of red Sumach.

 The Description.
1 THese two figures are of one and the selfe same plant; the first sheweth the shrub being in floure: the other when it is full floured with the fruit growne to ripenesse, notwithstanding some haue deemed them to be of two kindes, wherein they were deceiued.
@ This excellent and most beautifull plant Coggygria (beeing reputed of the Italians and the Venetians for a kind of Rhus or Sumach, because it is vsed for the same purposes whereto Rhus serueth

and therein doth farre excell it) is an hedge plant growing not aboue the height of foure or fiue cubits, hauing tough and pliant stalks and twiggie branches like to Oziers, of a brown colour. The leaues be round, thick, and stiffe like the leaues of Capparis, in colour and sauor of Pistacia leaues, or Terebinthus; among which ariseth a small vpright sprig, bearing many smal clustering little greenish yellow floures, vpon long and red stalks. After which sollow small reddish Lentill-like seeds that carry at the tops a most fine woolly or flockie tuft, crisped and curled like a curious wrought silken fleece, which curleth and foldeth it selfe abroad like a large bush of haires.


1 Coggygria Theophrasti. Venice Sumach.


and or


Cotinus Coriarius Plinij. Red Sumach.




 The Place.
Coggygria groweth in Orleans neere Auignion, and in diuers places of Italy, vpon the Alpes of Styria, and many other places. It groweth on most of the hils of France, in the high woods of the vpper Pannonia or Austria, and also of Hungaria and Bohemia.


 The Time.
They floure and flourish for the most part in Iuly.


 The Names.
The first is called Coggygria, and Coccygria in English, Venice Sumach, or Silken Sumach; of Pliny, Cotinus, in his 16. booke, 18. chapter. There is, saith he, on mount Apennine a shrub which is called Cotinus adlineamenta modo Conchylij colore insignis, and yet Cotinus is (...), or Olea syluestris, the wilde Oliue tree, from which this shrub doth much differ; and therfore it may rightly be called Cotinus Coriaria. Diuers would haue named it Scotinus, which name is not found in any of the old writers. The Pannonians do call it Farblauff: it is also thought that this shrub is (...) Plinij, of which in his 13. booke, 22. chapter he writeth in these words: Coggygria is also like to Vnedo in leafe, not so great; it hath a property to loose the fruit with downe, which thing happeneth vnto no other tree.


 The Temperature.
The leaues and slender branches together with the seeds are very much binding, cold and drie as the other kindes of Sumach are.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Coggygria, or Silken Sumach, are sold in the markets of Spaine and Italy for great 

summes of money, vnto those that dresse Spanish skinnes, for which purpose they are verie excellent.
The root of Cotinus, as Anguillara noteth, serueth to die with, giuing to wooll and cloth a reddish  colour, which Pliny knew, shewing that this shrub (that is to say the root) is (...) modo Conchylij colore insignis.



CHAP. 113. Of the Alder Tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Alder tree or Aller, is a great high tree hauing many brittle branches, the barke is of a browne colour, the wood or timber is not hard, and yet it will last and indure verie long vnder the water, yea longer than any other timber whatsoeuer: wherefore in the fenny and soft marish grounds they do vse to make piles and posts thereof, for the strengthening of the walls and such like. This timber doth also serue very well to make troughes to conuey water in stead of pipes of Lead. The leaues of this tree are in shape somewhat like the Hasell, but they are blacket and more wrinckled, very clammie to handle, as though they were sprinckled with honie. The blossome or floures are like the aglets of the Birch tree: which being vaded, there followeth a scaly fruit closely growing together, as big as a Pigeons egge, which toward Autumne doth open, and the seed falleth outand is lost.


1 Alnus. The Alder tree.


@ 2 Alnus hirsuta. Rough leaued Alder.


@ 2 Clusius and Bauhine haue obserued another kinde of this which differs from the ordinary, in that it hath larger and more cut leaues, and these not shining aboue, but hoary vnderneath: the (...), as also the rough heads are not so large as those of the former: the barke also is whiter. Clusius makes it his Alnus altcra: and Bauhine, his Alnus (...), or folio incano. @



 The Place.
The Aller or Alder tree delighteth to grow in low and moist waterish places.


 The Time.
The Aller bringeth sorth new leaues in Aprill, the fruit whereof is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Alnus: Petrus Crescentius nameth it (...): it is called in high Dutch, (...) and (...): in low Dutch, (...) and (...): in Italian, Alno: in French, Aulne: in English, Alder and Aller.


 The Temperature.
The leaues and barke of the Alder tree are cold, drie, and astringent.


 The Vertues.
The leaues of Alder are much vsed against hot swellings, vlcers, and all inward (...), especially of the Almonds and kernels of the throat.
The barke is much vsed of poore countrey Diers, for the dying of course cloth, cappes, hose, and  such like into a blacke colour, whereunto it serueth very well.



CHAP. 114. Of the Birch tree.


Betula. The Birch tree.



 The Description.
THe common Birch tree waxeth likewise a great tree, hauing many bough es (...) with many small rods or twigs, very limber and pliant: the barke of the young twigs and branches is plaine, smooth, and full of sap, in colour like the Chestnut; but the rind of the body or trunk is hard without, white, rough, and vneuen, full of chinkes or creuises: vnder which is found another fine barke, plaine, smooth, and as thin as paper which heretofore was vsed in stead of paper, to write vpon, before the making of paper was knowne: in Russia and these cold regions it serueth in stead of tiles and slate to couer their houses withall: this tree beareth for his floures certaine aglets like the Hasell tree, but smaller, wherein the seed is contained.


 The Place.
This common Birch tree grows in woods, fenny grounds, and mountaines, in most places of England.


 The Time.
The catkins or aglets do first appeate, and then the leaues, in Aprill or a little later.


 The Names.
Theophr astus calleth this tree in Greeke, (...): diuers, (...): others (...): it is named in Latine, (...): diuers also write it with a double ll Betulla, as some of (...) copies haue it: it is called in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in Italian, Betula: by them of Trent, Bedallo: in French, Bouleau: in English, Birch tree.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Concerning the medicinable vse of the Birch tree, (...) his parts, there is nothing extant either in the old or new writers.
This tree, saith Pliny in his 16-booke, 18. chapter, Mirabili candore and tenuitate terribilis (...) virgis: for (...) times past the Magistrates roddes were made heereof: and in our time also the Schoolemasters and parents do terrifie their children with rods made of Birch.
It serueth well to the decking vp of houses, and banquetting roomes, for places of pleasure, and (...) of streets in the crosse or gang weeke, and such like.




CHAP. 115. Of the Hornebeame, or Hard beame Tree.


Betul us, sive Carpinus. The Hornebeame tree.



 The Description.
BEtulus, or the Hornebeam tree grows great, and very like vnto the Elme, or Wich (...) tree, hauing a great body: the wood or timber whereof is better for arrowes and shafts, pulleies for mills, and such like deuises, than Elme or Wich Hazell; for in time it waxeth so hard, that the toughnesse and hardnesse of it may be rather compared vnto horn than vnto wood, and therefore it was called Hornebeame, or Hardbeame: the leaues hereof are like the Elme, sauing that they be tenderer: among those hang certaine triangled things, vpon which be found knaps, or little heads of the bignesse of Ciches, in which is contained the fruit or seed: the root is strong and thicke.


 The Place.
Betulus or the Hornebeame tree growes plentifully in Northamptonshire, also in Kent by Grauesend, where it is commonly taken for a kinde of Elme.


 The Time.
This tree doth spring in Aprill, and the seed is ripe in September.


 The Names.
The Hornebeam tree is called in Greek (...) which is as if you should say Coniugalis, or belonging to the yoke, because it serueth well to make (...) of, in Latine, Iuga, yokes wherewith oxen are yoked together, which are also euen at this time made thereof, as witnesseth Benedictus Curtius Symphorianus, and our selues haue sufficient knowledge thereof in our owne country; and therefore it may be Englished Yoke Elme. It is called of some, Carpinus and Zugia: it is also called Betulus, as if it were a kinde of Birch, but my selfe better like that it should be one of the Elmes: in high Dutch, Ahorne: in French, Carne: in Italian, Carpino: in English, Hornebeame, Hardbeame, Yoke Elme, and in some places, Witch hasell.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
This tree is not vsed in medicine, the vertues are not expressed of the Antients, neither haue wee  any certaine experiments of our owne knowledge more than hath beene said for the vse of Husbandrie.



CHAP. 116. Of the Elme tree.
@ OVr Author onely described two Elmes, and those not so accurately but that I thinke I shall giue the Reader content, in exchanging them for better receiued from Mr. Goodyer; which are these.
Vlmus vulg (...) folio lato scabro. The common Elme.
1 THis Elme is a very great high tree, the barke of the young trees, and boughes of the Elder, which are vsually lopped or shred, is smooth and very tough, and, wil strip or pil from the wood a great length without breaking: the bark of the body of the old trees as the trees grow in bignesse, teares or rents, which makes it very rough. The innermost wood of the tree is of reddish

yellow or brownish colour, and curled, and after it is drie, very tough, hard to cleaue or rent, whereof aues of Carts are most commonly made: the wood next the barke, which is called the sap, is white, Before the leaues come sorth the floures appeare, about the end of March, which grow on the (...) or branches, closely compacted or thrust together, and are like to the chiues growing in the (...) of most floures, of a reddish colour: afterwhich come flat seed, more long than broad, not much vnlike the garden Arach seed in forme and bignesse, and doe for the most part fall away before or shortly after the leaues spring forth, and some hang on a great part of the Sommer: the leaues grow on the twigges, of a darke, greene colour; the middle size whereof are two inches broad, and three inches long, some are longer and broader, some narrower and shorter, rough or harsh in handling on both sides, nickt or indented about the edges, and many times crumpled, hauing a nerue in the middle, and many smaller nerues growing from him: the leafe on one side of the nerue is alwaies longer than on the other. On these leaues oftentimes grow blisters or small bladders, in which at the spring are little wormes, about the bignesse of Bed-fleas. This Elme is common in all parts of England, where I haue trauelled.
Vlmus minor folio angusto scabro.
The Narrow leaued Elme.
2 This tree is like the other, but much lesser and lower, the leaues are vsually about two inches and a halfe long, and an inch or an inch and a quarter broad, nickt or indented about the edges, and hath one side longer than the other, as the first hath, and are also harsh or rough on both sides, the
1 Vlmus vulgatiss. folio lato scabro. The common Elme tree.
@ 2 Vlmus minor folio augusto scabro. The narrow leaued Elme.
barke or rinde will also strip as the first doth: hitherto I haue not obserued either the floures or seed, or blisters on the leaues, nor haue I had any sight of the timber, or heard of any vse thereof. This kinde I haue seene growing but once, and that in the hedges by the high way as I (...) betweene Christ Church and Limmington in the New Forrest in Hampshire,

about the middle of September 1624. from whence I brought some small plants of it, not a foot in length, which now, 1633. are risen vp ten or twelue foot high, and grow with me by the first kinde, but are easily to be discerned apart, by any that will looke on both.


@ 3 Vlmus folio latissimo scabro. Witch Hasell, or the broadest leaued Elme.


4 Vlmus folio glabro. Witch Elme, or smooth leaued Elme.


Vlmus folio latissimo scabro.
Witch Hasell, or the broadest leaued Elme.
3 This groweth to be a very great tree, and also very high, especially when he groweth in moods amongst other trees: the barke on the outside is blacker than that of the first, and is also very tough, so that when there is plenty of sap it will strip or peele from the wood of the boughes from the one end to the other, a dozen foot in length or more, without breaking, whereof are often made cords or ropes: the timber hereof is in colour neere like the first; it is nothing so firme or strong for naues of Carts as the fruit is, but will more easily cleaue; this timber is also couered with a white sappe next the barke: the branches or young boughes are grosser and bigger, and do spread themselues broader, and hang more downewards than those of the first; the floures are nothing but chiues, very (...) those of the first kind: the seed is also like, but something bigger: the leaues are much broader and longer than any of the kindes of Elme, vsually three or foure inches broad, and fiue or six inches long, also rough or harsh in handling on both sides, snipt or indented about the edges, neere resembling the leaues of the Hasell: the one side of the leaues are also most commonly longer than the other, also on the leaues of this Elme are sometimes blisters or bladders like those on the first kinde. This prospereth and naturally groweth in any soile moist or dry, on high hills, and in low vallies in good plenty in most places in Hampshire, wher it is commonly called VVitch Hasell. Old men affirme, that when long boughes were in great vse, there were very many made of the wood of this tree, for which purpose it is mentioned in the statutes of England by the name of VVitch Hasell, as 8. El. 10. This hath little affiaitie with (...), which in Essex is called VVitch Hasell.

Vlmus folio glabro.
VVitch Elme, or smooth leauen Elme.
4 This kinde is in bignesse and height like the first, the boughes grow as those of the VVitch Hasell doe, that is hanged more downewards than those of the common Elme, the barke is blacker than that of the first kinde, it will also peele from the boughes: the floures are like the first, and so are the seeds: the leaues in forme are like those of the first kinde, but are smooth in handling on both sides. My worthy friend and excellent Herbarist of happy memorie Mr. William Coys of Stubbers in the parish of Northokington in Essex told me, that the wood of this kinde was more desired for naues of Carts than the wood of the first. I obserued it growing very plentifully as I rode between Rumford and the said Stubbers, in the yeere 1620. intermixed with the first kinde, but easily to be discerned apart, and is in those parts vsually called VVitch Elme. @

 The Place.
The first kinde of Elme groweth plentifully in all places of England. The rest are set forth in their descriptions.


 The Time.
The seeds of the Elme sheweth it selfe first, and before the leaues; it falleth in the end of Aprill, at what time the leaues begin to spring.


 The Names.
The first is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Vlmus: in high Dutch, (...) holtz, (...), (...): in low Dutch, Oimen: in French, Orme, and Omeau: in Italian, Olmo. in Spanish, Vlmo: in English, Elme tree.
The seed is named by Plinie and Columella, Samera. The little wormes which are found with the liquor within the small bladders be named in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Culices, and Muliones.
The other Elme is called by Theophrastus, (...); which Gaza translateth Montiulmus or mountaine Elme. Columella nameth it Vernacula, or Nostras Vlmus, that is to say, Italica, or Italian Elme: it is called in low Dutch, Herseleer, and in some places, Heerenteer.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The leaues and barke of the Elme be moderately hot, with an euident clensing facultie; they  haue in the chewing a certaine clammie and glewing qualitie.
The leaues of Elme glew and heale vp greene wounds, so doth the barke wrapped and swadled  about the wound like a band.
The leaues being stamped with vineger do take away scurffe.
Dioscorides writeth, that one ounce weight of the thicker barke drunke with wine or water purgeth  flegme.
The decoction of Elme leaues, as also of the barke or root, healeth broken bones very speedily, if they be fomented or bathed therewith.
The liquor that is found in the blisters doth beautifie the face, and scoureth away all spots, freckles, pimples, spreading tetters, and such like, being applied thereto.
It healeth greene wounds, and cureth ruptures newly made, being laid on with Spleenwoort and  the trusse closely set vnto it.



CHAP. 117. Of the Line or Linden Tree.

 The Description.
1 THe female Line or Linden tree waxeth very great and thicke, spreading forth his branches wide and farre abroad, being a tree which yeeldeth a most pleasant shadow, vnder and within whose boughes may be made braue sommer houses and banqueting arbors, because the more that it is surcharged with weight of timber and such like, the better it doth flourish. The barke is brownish, very smooth, and plaine on the outside, but that which is next to the timber is white, moist and tough, seruing very well for ropes, trases, and halters. The timber is whitish, plaine and without knots, yea very soft and gentle in the cutting or handling. Better gunpouder is made of the coles of this wood than of VVillow coles. The leaues are greene,

smooth, shining and large, somewhat snipt or toothed about the edges: the floures are little, whitish, of a good sauour, and very many in number, growing clustering together from out of the middle of the leafe: out of which proceedeth a small whitish long narrow leafe: after the floures succeed cornered sharpe pointed Nuts, of the bignesse of Hasell Nuts. This tree seemeth to be a kinde of Elme, and the people of Essex about Heningham (wheras great plenty groweth by the way sides) do call it broad leafed Elme.


1 Tilia faemina. The female Line tree.


2 Tilia mas. The male Line tree.


2 The male Tilia or Line tree groweth also very great and thicke, spreading it selfe far abroad like the other Linden tree: his bark is very tough and pliant, and serueth to make cords and halters of. The timber of this tree is much harder, more knottie, and more yellow than the timber of the other, not much differing from the timber of the Elme tree: the leaues hereof are not much vnlike luy leaues, not very greene, somewhat snipt about the edges: from the middle whereof come forth clusters of little white floures like the former: which being vaded, there succeed small round pellets, growing clustering together, like Iuy berries, within which is contained a little round blackish seed, which falleth out when the berry is ripe.


 The Place.
The female Linden tree groweth in some woods in Northampton shire; also neere Colchester, and in many places alongst the high way leading from London to Henningham, in the countie of Essex.
The male Linden tree groweth in my Lord Treasurers garden at the Strand, and in sundry other places, as at Barn-elmes, and in a garden at Saint Katherines neere London. @ The female growes in the places here named, but I haue not yet obserued the male. @


 The Time
These trees floure in May, and their fruit is ripe in August.


 The Names.
The Linden tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Tilia: in high Dutch, Linden, and Lindenbaum: in low Dutch, Linde, and Lindenboom: the Italians, Tilia: the Spaniards, Teia: in French, Tilet and Tilieul: in English, Linden tree, and Line tree.



 The Temperature.
The barke and leaues of the Linden or Line tree, are of a temperate heat, somewhat drying and astringent.


 The Vertues.
 The leaues of Tilia boiled in Smithes water with a piece of Allom and a little honey, cure the sores in childrens mouthes.
 The leaues boiled vntill they be tender; and pouned very small with hogs grease, and the pouder of Fenugrecke and Lineseed, take away hot swellings and bring impostumes to maturation, being applied thereto very hot.
 The floures are commended by diuers against paine of the head proceeding of a cold cause, against dissinesse, the Apoplexie, and also the falling sicknesse, and not onely the floures, but the distilled water thereof.
 The leaues of the Linden (saith Theophrastus) are very sweet, and be a fodder for most kinde of cattle: the fruit can be eaten of none.



CHAP. 118. Of the Maple tree.


@ 1 Acer maius. The great Maple.


@ 2 Acer minus. The lesser Maple.



 The Description.
THe great Maple is a beautifull and high tree, with a barke of a meane smoothnesse: the substance of the wood is tender and easie to worke on; it sendeth forth on euery side very many goodly boughes and branches, which make an excellent shadow against the heate of the Sun; vpon

which are great, broad, and cornered leaues, much like to those of the Vine, hanging by long reddish stalks: the floures hang by clusters, of a whitish greene colour; after them commeth vp long fruit fastened together by couples, one right against another, with kernels bumping out (...) to the place in which they are combined: in all the other parts flat and thin like vnto parchment, or resembling the innermost wings of grashoppers: the kernels be white and little.
2 There is a small Maple which doth oftentimes come to the bignes of a tree, but most commonly it groweth low after the maner of a (...): the barke of the young shoots hereof is likewise smooth; the substance of the wood is white, and easie to be wrought on: the leaues are cornered like those of the former, slippery, and fastened with a reddish stalke, but much lesser, very like in bignes, and smoothnes to the leafe of Sanicle, but that the cuts are deeper: the floures be as those of the former, greene, yet not growing in clusters, but vpon spoked roundles: the fruit standeth by two and two vpon a stem or foot-stalke.


 The Place.
The small or hedge Maple groweth almost euery where in hedges and low woods.
The great Maple is a stranger in England, only it groweth in the walkes and places of pleasure of noble men, where it especially is planted for the shadow sake, and vnder the name of Sycomore tree.


 The Time.
These trees floure about the end of March, and their fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...): in Latine, Acer: in English, Maple, or Maple tree.
The great Maple is called in high Dutch, (...), and (...): the French men, Grand Erable, and Plasne abusiuely, and this is thought to be properly called (...): but they are far deceiued that take this for Platanus, or the Plane tree, being drawne into this errour by the neerenesse of the French word; for the Plane tree doth much differ from this. @ This is now commonly (yet not rightly) called the Sycomore tree. And seeing vse will haue it so, I thinke it were not vnfit to call it the bastard Sycomore. @
The other is called in Latine, Acer minor: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...): in French, Erable: in English, small Maple, and common Maple.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
What vse the Maple hath in medicine we finde nothing written of the Grecians, but Pliny in his  14. booke, 8. chapter affirmeth, that the root pouned and applied, is a singular remedy for the paine of the liuer. Serenus Sammonicus writeth, that it is drunke with wine against the paines of the (...).

Si latus immeritum morbo tentatur acuto,
Accensum tinges lapidem stridentibus vndis.
Hinc bibis: aut Aceris radicem tundis, and vna.
(...) vino capis: hoc praesens medicamen habetur.


Thy harmelesse side if sharpe disease inuade,
In hissing water quench a heated stone:
This drinke. Or Maple root in pouder made,
Take off in wine, a present med'cine knowne.




CHAP. 119. Of the Poplar tree.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers trees vnder the title of Poplar, yet differing very notably, as shall be declared in the descriptions, whereof one is the white, another the blacke, and a third sort set downe by (...), which is the Aspe, named by him Lybica; and by Theophrastus, (...): likewise there is another of America, or of the Indies, which is not to be found in these regions of Europe.



 The Description.
1 THe white Poplar tree commeth soone to perfection, and groweth high in short time, full of boughes at the top: the barke of the body is smooth, and that of the boughes is likewise white withall: the wood is white, easie to be cleft: the leaues are broad, deeply gashed, and cornered like almost to those of the Vine, but much lesser, smooth on the vpper side, glib, and somwhat greene; and on the nether side white and woolly: the catkins are long, downy, at the first of a purplish colour: the roots spread many waies, lying vnder the turfe, and not growing deepe, and therefore it happeneth that these trees be oftentimes blowne downe with the winde.


1 Populus alba. The white Poplar tree.


2 Populus nigra. The blacke Poplar tree.


2 The black Poplar tree is as high as the white, and now and then higher, oftentimes fuller of boughes, and with a thicker body: the barke thereof is likewise smooth, but the substance of the wood is harder, yellower, and not so white, fuller of veines, and not so easily cleft: the leaues be somwhat long, and broad below towards the stem, sharp at the point, and a little snipt about the edges, neither white nor woolly, like the leaues of the former, but of a pleasant greene colour: amongst which come forth long aglets or catkins, which do turne into clusters: the buds which shew themselues before the leaues spring out, are of a reasonable good sauour, of the which is made that profitable ointment called Vnguentum Populeon.
3 The third kinde of Poplar is also a great tree: the barke and substance of the wood is somewhat like that of the former: this tree is garnished with many brittle and tender branches, set full of leaues, in a manner round, much blacker and harder than the blacke Poplar, hanging vpon long and slender stems, which are for the most part stil wauering, and make a great noise by being beaten one to another, yea though the weather be calme, and scarce any winde blowing; and it is knowne by the name of the Aspen tree: the roots hereof are stronger, and grow deeper into the ground than those of the white Poplar.
4 This strange Poplar, which some do call Populus rotundifolia, in English, the round leafed Poplar of India, waxeth a great tree, bedect with many goodly twiggie branches, tough and limmer like

3 Populus Libyca. The Aspen tree.
4 Populus Americana. The Indian Poplar tree.
@ 5 Populus alba folijs minoribus. The lesser leaued white Poplar.
the Willow, full of ioints where the leaues do grow, of a perfect roundnesse, saue where it cleaueth or groweth to the stalk: from the bosoms or corners of these leaues come forth small aglets, like vnto our Poplar, but smaller: the leafe is thick, and very like the leaues of Arbor Iudae, but broader, of an astringent taste, somewhat heating the mouth, and saltish.
5 There is also another sort of Poplar which groweth likewise vnto a great tree, the branches whereof are knotty and bunched forth as though it were full of scabs or sores: the leaues come forth in tufts most commonly at the end of the boughes, not cut or iagged, but resembling the leaues of that Atriplex called Pes Anserinus; in colour like the former, but the aglets are not so closely packed together, otherwise it is like.


 The Place.
These trees doe grow in low moist places, as in medowes neere vnto ditches, standing waters and riuers.
The first kinde of white Poplar groweth not very common in England, but in some places here and there a tree: I found many both small and great growing in a low medow

turning vp a lane at the farther end of a village called Black-wall, from London; and in Essex at a place called Ouenden, and in diuers other places.
The Indian Poplar groweth in most parts of the Islands of the West Indies.


 The Time.
These trees do bud forth in the end of March and beginning of Aprill, at which time the buds must be gathered to serue for Vnguentum Populeon.


 The Names.
The white Poplar is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Populus alba: of diuers, Farfarus, as of Plant us in his Comedie Penulus, as you may see by his words set downe in the chap. of Colts-foot, pag. 813.
It is called in high-Dutch, Poppelbaum, Meisz Alberbaum: in low-Dutch, Abeel, of his horie or aged colour, and also Abeelboome; which the Grammarians doe falsly interpret Abies, the Firre tree: in Italian, Popolo nero: in French, Peuplier blanc, (...), (...), or Aubeau: in English, white Poplar tree, and Abeell, after the Dutch name.
The second is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Populus nigra: by Petrus Crescentius, Albarus: in high-Dutch, Aspen: in low-Dutch, Populier: in Italian, Popolo nero: in French, Peuplier noir: in Spanish, (...) (...): in (...), Poplar tree, blacke Poplar, and Pepler. The first or new sprung buds whereof are called of the Apothecaries, Oculi (...), Poplar buds: others chuse rather to call it Gemma Populi: some of the Grecians name it (...): whereupon they grounded their error, who rashly supposed that those rosenny or clammy buds are not to be put or vsed in the composition of the ointment bearing the name of the Poplar, and commonly called in English, Popilion and Pompillion, but the berries that grow in clusters, in which there is no clamminesse at all.
They are also as far deceiued, who giuing credit to Poets fables, do beleeue that Amber (...) of the clammy rosin falling into the riuer Poo.
The third is called of diuers, Populus tremula, which word is borrowed of the French men, who name it Tremble: it also receiued a name amongst the low Countrey men, from the noise and ratling of the leaues, viz. Rateeler: this is that which is named of Pliny, Libyca and by Theophr. (...): which Gaza calleth (...) mont ana: in English, Aspe, and Aspen tree, and may also be called Tremble, after the French name, considering it is the matter whereof womens tongues were made, (as the Poets and some others report) which seldom cease wagging.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The white Poplar hath a clensing facultie, saith Galen, and a mixt temperature, consisting of a  waterie warme essence, and also a thin earthy substance.
The barke, as (...) writeth, to the weight of an ounce (or as others say, and that more truly, of little more than a dram) is a good remedie for the Sciatica or ache in the huckle bones, and for the strangurie.
That this barke is good for the Sciatica, Serenus Sammonicus doth also write:

Saepius occultus victa coxendice morbus
Perfurit, and gressus diro (...) moratur:
Populus alba dabit medicos de cortice potus.


An hidden disease doth oft rage and raine,
The hip ouercome and vex with the paine,
It makes with vile aking one tread slow and shrinke;
The barke of white Poplar is helpe had in drunke.

The same barke is also reported to make a woman barren, if it be drunke with the kidney of a  Mule, which thing the leaues likewise are thought to perform, being taken after the floures or reds be ended.
The warme iuice of the leaues being dropped into the eares doth take away the paine thereof.
The rosin or clammy substance of the blacke Poplar buds is hot and dry, and of thin parts, (...) and mollifying: it is also fitly mixed acopis and malagmatis: the leaues haue in a manner the like operation for all these things, yet weaker, and not so effectuall, as Galen teacheth.
The leaues and yong buds of blacke Poplar doe asswage the paine of the gout in the hands or  feet, being made into an ointment with May butter.
The ointment made of the buds is good against all inflammations, bruses, squats, falls, and such  like: this ointment is very well knowne to the Apothecaries.
Paulus Aegineta teacheth to make an oile also hereof, called Aegyrinum, or oile of blacke Poplar.




CHAP. 120. Of the Plane tree.


Platanus. The Plane tree.



 The Description.
THe Plane is a great tree, hauing very long and farre spreading boughes casting a wonderfull broad shadow, by reason wherof it was highly commended and esteemed of among the old Romans: the leaues are cornered like those of Palma Christi, greater than Vine leaues, and hanging vpon little red foot-stalkes: the floures are small and mossie, and of a pale yellowish colour: the fruit is round like a ball, rugged, and somewhat hairy; but in Asia more hairy and greater, almost as big as a Walnut: the root is great, dispersing it selfe far abroad.


 The Place.
The Plane tree delighteth to grow by springs or riuers: Pliny reports that they were wont to be cherished with wine: they grew afterward (saith he) to be of so great honour (meaning the Plane trees) as that they were cherished and (...) with wine: and it (...) found by experience that the same is very comfortable to the roots, and wee haue alreadie taught, that trees desire to drinke wine. This tree is strange in Italy, it is no where seene in Germany, nor in the low-Countries: in Asia it groweth plentifully: it is found also in Candy, growing in vallies, and neere vnto the hill Athos, as Petrus Bellonius in his Singularities doth declare: it groweth in many places of Greece, and is found planted in some places of Italy, for pleasure rather than for profit. My seruant William Marshall (whom I sent into the Mediterranean sea as Surgeon vnto the Hercules of London) found diuers trees hereof growing in Lepanto, hard by the sea side, at the entrance into the towne, a port of Morea, being a part of Greece, and from thence brought one of those rough buttons, being the fruit thereof. @ There are one or two yong ones at this time growing with Mr. Tradescant. @
The Plane trees cast their leaues in Winter, as Bellonius testifieth, and therefore it is no maruel that they keepe away the Sun in Sommer, and not at all in Winter: there is, saith Pliny, no greater commendation of the tree, than that it keepeth away the Sunne in Sommer, and entertaineth it in Winter.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke, (...): and likewise in Latine Platanus: it beareth his name of the bredth: the French mens Plasne doth far differ from this, which is a kind of Maple: this tree is named in English, Plane tree.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Plane tree is of a cold and moist essence, as Galen saith: the greene leaues are good to be  (...) vpon hot swellings and inflammations in the beginning.
Being boiled in wine they are a remedie for the running and the watering of the eyes, if they be  applied.
The barke and balls do dry: the barke boiled in vineger helpeth the tooth-ache,
The fruit of the Plane tree drunke with wine helpeth the bitings of mad dogs and serpents, and  mixed with hogs grease it maketh a good ointment against burning and scalding.
(...) The burned barke doth mightily dry, and scoureth withall; it remoueth the white scurfe, and (...) moist vlcers.

The dust or downe, saith Galen, that lieth on the leaues of the tree is to be taken heed of, for if  it be drawne in with the breath, it is offensiue to the winde-pipe by his extreme drinesse, and making the same rough, and hurting the voice, as it doth also the sight and hearing, if it fall into the eyes or eares. Dioscorides doth not attribute this to the dust or downe of the leaues onely, but also to that of the balls.



CHAP. 121. Of the Wayfaring Tree.


Lantana, siue Viburnum. The Wayfaringtree.



 The Description.
THe Wayfaring mans tree growes vp to the height of an hedge tree, of a mean bignes: the trunke or body thereof is couered with a russet barke: the branches are long, tough, and easie to be bowed, and hard to be broken, as are those of the Willow, couered with a soft whitish barke, whereon are broad leaues thicke and rough, sleightly indented about the edges, of a white colour, and somewhat hairy whilest they be fresh and green; but when they begin to wither and fall away, they are reddish, and set together by couples one opposit to another. The floures are (...), and grow in clusters: after which come clusters of fruit of the bignesse of a pease, somewhat flat on both sides, at the first greene, after red, and blacke when they be ripe: the root disperseth it selfe far abroad vnder the vpper crust of the earth.


 The Place.
This tree groweth in most hedges in rough and stony places, vpon hils and low woods, especially in the chalky grounds of Kent about Cobham, Southfleet, and Grauesend, and in all the tract to Canturbury.


 The Time.
The floures appeare in Sommer: the berries are ripe in the end of Autumne, and new leaues come forth in the Spring.
This hedge tree is called Viurna of Ruellius: in French, Viorne, and Viorna: in Italian, Lantana: it is reputed for the tree Viburnum, of which Virgil maketh mention in the first Eclog, where hee commendeth the city Rome for the loftinesse and statelinesse thereof, aboue other Cities, saying, that as the tall Cypres trees do shew themselues aboue the low and shrubby Viorn, so doth Rome aboue other cities lift vp her head very high; in these verses:

Verum haec tantum alias inter cuput exulit vrbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.


But this all other cities so excels,
As Cypresse, which 'mongst bending Viornes dwels.

@ I iudge Viburnum not to be a name to any particular plant, but a generall name to all low and bending shrubs; amongst which this here described may take place as one. I enquired of a countrey man in Essex, if he knew any name of this: he answered, it was called the Cotton tree, by reason of the softnesse of the leaues. @


 The Temperature.
The leaues and berries of Lantana are cold and dry, and of a binding qualitie.



 The Vertues.
The decoction of the leaues of Lantana is very good to be gargled in the mouth against al swellings  and inflammations thereof, against the scuruie and other diseases of the gums, and fastneth loose teeth.
The same boiled in lee doth make the haires blacke if they be bathed or washed therewith, and  suffered to dry of it selfe.
The berries are of the like facultie, the pouder whereof when they be dried stay the laske, all issues  of bloud, and also the whites.
It is reported, that the barke of the root of the tree buried a certaine time in the earth, and afterwards  boiled and stamped according to art, maketh good Bird-lime for Fowlers to catch Birds with.



CHAP. 122. Of the Beade tree.


1 Zizypha candida. The Beade tree.


@ 2 Zizypha Cappadocica. The Beade tree of Cappadocia.



 The Description.
1 THis tree was called Zizypha candida by the Herbarists of Montpellier; and by the Venetians and Italians, Sycomorus, but vntruly: the Portugals haue termed it Arbor Paradizo: all which and each whereof haue erred together, both in respect of the fruit and of the whole tree: some haue called it Zizypha, though in facultie it is nothing like; for the taste of this fruit is very vnpleasant, virulent, and bitter. But deciding all controuersies, this is the tree which (...) calleth Azederach, which is very great, charged with many large armes, that are garnished with twiggie branches, set full of great leaues consisting of sundry small leaues, one growing right opposite to another like the leaues of the Ash tree or Wicken tree, but more deepely cut about the edges like the teeth of a saw: among which come the floures, consisting of fiue small blew leaues layd abroad in manner of a starre: from the middest whereof groweth forth a small hollow cup

resembling a Chalice: after which succeedeth the fruit, couered with a brownish yellow shel, very like vnto the fruit of Iuiubes (whereof Dodonaeus in his last edition maketh it a kinde) of a (...) bitter, and vnpleasant taste, with a six cornered stone within, which being drawne on a string, serueth to make Beades of, for want of other things.
2 (...) Cappadocica groweth not so great as the former, but is of a meane stature, and full of boughes: the barke is smooth and euen, and that which groweth vpon the trunke and great boughes is of a shining scarlet colour: out of these great armes or boughes grow slender twigges, white and soft, which are set full of whitish leaues, but more white on the contrarie or backe part, and are like to the leaues of Willow, but narrower and whiter: amongst these leaues come forth small hollow yellowish floures, growing at the ioints of the branches, most commonly three together, and of a pleasant sauour, with some few threds or chiues in the middle thereof. After which succeedeth the fruit, of the bignesse and fashion of the smallest Oliue, white both within and without, wherein is contained a small stone which yeeldeth a kernell of a pleasant taste, and very sweet.


 The Place.
Matthiolus writeth, that Zizyphus candida is found in the cloisters of many monasteries in Italy; (...) saith that it groweth in many places in Venice and Narbon; and it is wont now of late to be planted and cherished in the good liest orchards of all the low-Countries.
Zizyphus Cappadocica groweth likewise in many places of Italy, and specially in Spaine: it is also cherished in gardens both in Germany and in the low-Countries. @ It groweth also here in the garden of Mr. Iohn Parkinson. @


 The Time.
These trees floure in Iune in Italy and Spain; their fruit is ripe in September; but in Germany and the low-Countries there doth no fruit follow the floures.


 The Names.
Zizyphus candida Auicen calleth Azederach, or as diuers read it, Azederaeth: and they name it, saith he, in Rechi, Arbor Mirobalanorum, or the Mirobalane tree, but not properly, and in Tabrasten and Kien, and Thihich. The later writers are far deceiued in taking it to be the Sycomore tree; and they as much, that would haue it to be the Lote or Nettle tree: it may be named in English, Bead tree, for the cause before alledged.
The other is altera species Zizyphi, or the second kinde of Iuiube tree, which Columella in his ninth booke and fourth chap. doth call Zizyphus alba, or white (...) tree, for difference from the other that is syrnamed Rutila, or glittering red. Pliny calleth this (...) Cappadocica, in his (...) booke, ninth chapter, where he entreateth of the honour of Garlands, of which he saith there be two sorts, whereof some be made of floures, and others of leaues: I would call the floures (saith he) brooms, for of those is gathered a yellow floure, and Rhododendron, also Zizypha, which is called Cappadocica. The (...) of these are sweet of smell, and like to Oliue floures. Neither doth Columella or Pliny vn (...) take this for Zizyphus, sor both the leaues and floures grow out of the tender and yong sprung twigs, as they likewise do out of the former: the floures are very sweet of smel, and cast their sauor far abroad: the fruit also is like that of the former.


 The Temperature.
Auicen writing and intreating of Azadaraeth, saith, that the floures thereof be hot in the third degree, and dry in the end of the first.
Zizyphus Cappadocica is cold and dry of complexion.


 The Vertues.
The floures of Zizyphus, or Azadaraeth open the obstructions of the braine.
The distilled water thereof killeth nits and lice, preserueth the haire of the head from falling, especially being mixed with white wine, and the head bathed with it.
The fruit is very hurtfull to the chest, and a troublesome enemie to the stomacke; it is dangerous, and peraduenture deadly.
Moreouer, it is reported, that the decoction of the barke and of Fumitorie, with Mirobalans added, is good for agues proceeding of flegme.
The iuice of the vppermost leaues with honey is a remedie against poison.
The like also hath Rhasis: the Beade tree, saith he, is hot and dry: it is good for stoppings of  the head; it maketh the haire long; yet is the fruit thereof very offensiue to the stomacke, and oftentimes found to be pernitious and deadly.
Matthiolus writeth, that the leaues and wood bringeth death euen vnto beasts, and that the (...) (...) is resisted by the same remedies that Oleander is.
(...) Cappadocica preuaileth against the diseases aforesaid, but the decoction thereof is verie  (...) (...) (...) whose water scaldeth them with the continuall issuing thereof, as also (...) such as haue the running of the reines and the exulcerations of the bladder and priuy parts.

A looch or licking medicine made thereof or the syrrup, is excellent good against spitting of  bloud proceeding of the distillations of sharpe or salt humors. 

The (...) that formerly was in the second place, was (...) the narrow leaued kinde of (...) (...), which you shall finde in the second place of the (...) (...) (...) (...).




CHAP. 123. Of the Lote, or Nettle tree.


Lotus arbor. The Nettle tree.



 The Description.
THe Lote whereof we write is a tree as big as a Peare tree, or bigger and higher: the body and armes are very thicke; the barke whereof is smooth, of a gallant green colour tending to blewnesse: the boughes are long, and spread themselues all about: the leaues be like those of the Nettle, sharpe pointed, and nicked in the edges like a saw, and dasht here and there with stripes of a yellowish white colour: the berries be round, and hang vpon long stalkes like Cherries, of a yellowish white colour at the first, and afterwards red, but when they be ripe they be somewhat blacke.


 The Place.
This is a rare and strange tree in both the Germanies: it was brought out of Italy, where there is found store thereof, as Matthiolus testifieth: I haue a small tree thereof in my garden. There is likewise a tree thereof in the garden vnder London wall, sometime belonging to Mr. Gray, an Apothecary of London; and another great tree in a garden neere Coleman street in London, being the garden of the Queenes Apothecarie at the impression hereof, called Mr. Hugh Morgan, a curious conseruer of rare simples. The Lote tree doth also grow in Africke, but it somewhat differeth from the Italian Lote in fruit, as Pliny in plaine words doth shew in his thirteenth booke, seuenteenth chapter. That part of Africke, saith he, that lieth towards vs, bringeth forth the famous Lote tree, which they call Celtis, and the same well knowne in Italy, but altered by the soile: it is as big as the Peare tree, although Nepos Cornelius reporteth it to be shorter: the leaues are full of fine cuts, otherwise they be thought to be like those of the Holme tree. There be many differences, but the same are made especially by the fruit: the fruit is as big as a Beane, and of the colour of Saffron, but before it is thorow ripe, it changeth his color as doth the Grape. It growes thicke among the boughes, after the manner of the Myrtle, not as in Italy, after the manner of the Cherry; the fruit of it is there so sweet, as it hath also giuen a name to that countrie and land, too hospitable to strangers, and forgetfull of their owne countrey.
It is reported that they are troubled with no diseases of the belly that eate it. The better is that which hath no kernell, which in the other kinde is stony: there is also pressed out of it a wine, like to a sweet wine; which the same Nepos denieth to endure aboue ten daies, and the berries stamped with Alica are reserued in vessels for food. Moreouer we haue heard say, that armies haue been fed therewith, as they haue passed too and fro thorow Africke. The colour of the wood is blacke: they vse to make flutes and pipes of it: the root serueth for kniues hafts, and other short workes: this is there the nature of the tree: thus farre Pliny. In the same place he saith, that this renowmed tree doth (...) about Syrtes and (...): and in his 5. booke, 7. chapter he sheweth that there is not far from the lesser Syrtis, the Island Menynx, surnamed Lotophagitis, of the plenty of Lote trees.

Strabo in his 17. booke (...), that not onely Menynx, but also the lesser Syrtis is said to be (...): first, saith he, lieth Syrtis a certaine long Island by the name Cereinna, and another lesser, called Circinnitis; next to this is the lesser Syrtis, which they call Lotophagitis Syrtis: the compasse of this gulfe is almost 1600. furlongs; the bredth of the mouth 600. By both the capes there be Islands ioined to the maine land, that is, Circinna and Menynx, of like bignesse: they thinke that Menynx is the countrey of the Lotophagi, or those that feed of the Lote trees; of which (...) Homer maketh mention, and there are certaine monuments to be seen, and (...) Altar, and the fruit is selfe, for there be in it great plenty of Lote trees, whose fruit is wonderful sweet: thus saith Strabo.
This Lote is also described by Theophrastus; in his (...) booke he saith, that there be very many kindes, which be seuered by the fruit: the fruit is of the bignes of a beane, which when it waxeth ripe doth alter his colour as grapes do: the fruit of which the Lotophagi do eate is sweet, pleasant, harmeles, and wholesome for the belly, but that is (...) which is without kerneis, and of this they make their wine.
This Lote tree, as the same Author (...), is by nature euerlasting: as for example, the Lote trees whereof Pliny hath written in his 16. booke, 44. chapter. At Rome, saith he, the Lote tree in Lucinas court, how much elder it was than the church of the citie, built in the yeere which was without magistrates, 469. it is vncertaine: there is no doubt but that it was elder, because Lucina bare the name of that Lucus or groue. This is now about 450. yeeres old. That is elder which is surnamed Capillata, or hairie; because the haire of the vestall virgins was brought vnto it: but the other Lote tree in Vulcans church, which Romulus built by the victory of tenths is taken to be as old as the citie, as Massurius witnesseth.


 The Time.
They lose their leaues at the first approch of winter; and recouer them againe in Aprill: the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine by Pliny, Celtis: in Italian, Perlaro: by those of Trent, Bagolaro: and in English, Lote tree, and Nettie tree.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Lote tree is not greatly binding as Galen saith, but of thin parts, and of a drying nature.
The decoction of the wood beaten small, being either drunke or vsed clisterwise, is a remedy  for the bloudy flix; and for the whites and reds.
It stoppeth the laske, and maketh the haire yellow, and as Galen addeth, keepeth haires from  falling.
The shiuers or small pieces thereof, as the same Author alleageth, are boiled sometimes in water, sometimes in wine, as need shall require.



CHAP. 124. Of Italian wood of Life, or Pocke wood, vulgarly called Lignum vitae.

 The Description.
1 ITalian Lignum vitae, or Wood of Life, groweth to a faire and beautifull tree, hauing a straight and vpright body, couered ouer with a smooth and darke greene barke, yeelding forth many twiggy branches, set forth of goodly leaues, like those of the Peare tree, but of greater beautie, and somewhat broader: among which commeth forth the fruit, growing close to the branches, almost without stalkes: this fruit is round, and at the first greene, but blacke when it is ripe, as big as Cherries, of an excellent sweet taste when it is dried: but this is not the Indian Lignum sanctum, or Guaiacum, whereof our bowles and physicall drinkes be made, but it is a bastard kind therof, first planted in the common garden at Padua, by the learned Fallopius, who supposed it to be the right Guaiacum.
@ 2 The leaues of this are longer and narrower than the former, but firme also and nervous like as they are; the fruit is in shape like Sebestens, but much lesse, of a blewish colour when it is ripe, with many little stones within; the taste hereof is not vnpleasant. Matthiolus calls this Pseudolotus; and Tabernamontanus, Lotus Africana: whose figure our Author in the last chapter saue one gaue vnfitly for the Zizyphus Cappadocica. @


 The Place.
(...) Patauinum groweth plentifully about Lugdunum, (...) Lions in France: I planted it in

the garden of Barne. Elmes neere London two trees: besides, there groweth another in the garden of Mr. Gray an Apothecarie of London, and in my garden likewise.


1 Guaiacum Patauinum latifolium. Broad leafed Italian Wood of life.


2 Guaiacum Patauinum angustifol. Narrow leafed Italian Guaiacum.




 The Time.
It floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
Guaiacum Patauinum hath been reputed for the Lotus of Theophrastus: in English it is called the bastard Meuynwood.
@ This hath no affinitie with the true Indian Guajacum which is frequently vsed in medicine. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
@ The fruit of this is thought to be of the same temper and qualitie with that of the Nettletree. @



CHAP. 125. Of the Strawberry tree.

 The Description.
THe Strawberry tree groweth for the most part low, very like in bignesse to the Quince tree (whereunto Dioscorides compareth it.) The body is couered with a reddish barke, both rough and scaly: the boughes stand thicke on the top, somewhat reddish: the leaues bee broad, long, and smooth, like those of Bayes, somewhat nicked in the edges, and of a pale greene colour: the floures grow in clusters, being hollow and white, and now and then on the one side somewhat of a purple colour: in their places come forth certaine berries hanging downe vpon little long stems like vnto Strawberries, but greater, without a stone within, but onely with little seeds, at the first greene, and when they be ripe they are of a gallant red colour, in taste somewhat harsh, and in a manner without any relish; of which Thrushes and Black-birds do feed in Winter.



Arbutus. The Strawberry tree.




 The Place.
The Strawberry tree groweth in most Countries of Greece, in Candy, Italy, and Spaine, also in the vallies of the mountaine Athos, where, being in other places but little, they become great huge trees, as P. Bellonius writeth. Iuba also reporteth, that there be in Arabia of them fifty cubits high. They grow only in some few gardens with vs.


 The Time.
The Strawberry tree floureth in Iuly and August, and the fruit is ripe in September, after it hath remained vpon the tree by the space of an whole yeare.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greek, (...): in Latine, Arbutus: in English, Strawberry tree, and of some, Arbute tree.
The fruit is named in Creeke, (...), or as others reade it, (...): in Latine, Memaecylum, and Arbutus; and Pliny calleth it Vnedo: Ground Strawberries (saith he) haue one body, and Vnedo, much like vnto them, another body, which onely in apple is like to the fruit of the earth: The Italians call this Strawberry Albatro the Spaniards, Madrono, Medronheyro, and Medronho: in French, Arboutes, Arbous: It may be termed in English, Tree Strawberry.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The fruit of the Strawberry tree is of a cold temperature, hurting the stomacke, and causing  head-ache; wherefore no wholesome food, though it be eaten in some places by the poorer sort of people.



CHAP. 126. Of the Plum tree.

 The Kindes.
TO write of Plums particularly would require a peculiar volume, and yet the end not to be attained vnto, nor the stocke or kindred perfectly knowne, neither to be distinguished apart: the number of the sorts or kindes are not knowne to any one countrey: euery Clymat hath his owne fruit, far different from that of other countries: my selfe haue three score sorts in my garden, and all strange and rare: there be in other places many more common, and yet yearely commeth to our hands others not before knowne, therefore a few figures shall serue for the rest. @ Let such as require a larger historie of these varieties haue recourse to the oft mentioned Worke of Mr. Parkinson: and such as desire the things themselues may finde most of the best with Mr. Iohn Millen in Old street. @


 The Description.
1 THe Plum or Damson tree is of a meane bignesse: it is couered with a smooth barke: the branches are long, whereon do grow broad leaues, more long than round, nicked in the edges: the floures are white: the Plums do differ in colour, fashion, and bignes, they all consist of pulpe and skin, and also of kernell, which is shut vp in a shell or stone. Some Plums are of a blackish blew, of which some be longer, others rounder, others of the colour of yellow wax, diuers of a crimson red, greater for the most part than the rest. There be also green Plums, and withall very long, of a sweet and pleasant taste: moreouer, the pulpe or meate of some is (...), and easilier separated from the stone: of other-some it is moister, and cleaueth faster: our common Damson is knowne to all, and therefore not to be stood vpon.



1 Prunus Domestica. The Damson tree.


2 Prunus Mirobalana. The Mirobalane Plum tree.


3 Prunus Amygdalina. The Almond Plum tree.


5 Prunus syluestris. The Sloe tree.



2 The Mirobalan Plum tree groweth to the height of a great tree, charged with many great armes or boughes, which diuide themselues into small twiggy branches, by means whereof it yeeldeth a goodly and pleasant shadow: the trunke or body is couered with a finer and thinner barke than any of the other Plum trees: the leaues do somewhat resemble those of the Cherry tree, they are very tender, indented about the edges: the floures be white: the fruit is round, hanging vpon long foot-stalkes pleasant to behold, greene in the beginning, red when it is almost ripe, and being full ripe it glistereth like purple mixed with blacke: the flesh or meate is full of iuice pleasant in taste: the stone is small, or of a meane bignesse: the tree bringeth forth plenty of fruit euery other yeare.
3 The Almond Plum groweth vp to the height of a tree of a meane bignesse: the branches are long, smooth, and euen: the leaues are broad, somthing long, and ribbed in diuers places, with small nerues running through the same: the floures are white, sprinkled with a little dash of purple scarcely to be perceiued: the fruit is long, hauing a cleft downe the middle, of a browne red colour, and of a pleasant taste.
4 The Damascen Plum tree groweth likewise to a meane height, the branches very brittle; the leaues of a deepe green colour: the fruit is round, of a blewish blacke colour: the stone is like vnto that of the Cherry, wherein it differeth from all other Plums.
5 The Bullesse and the Sloe tree are wilde kindes of Plums, which do vary in their kind, euen as the greater and manured Plums do. Of the Bullesse, some are greater and of better taste than others. Sloes are some of one taste, and some of others, more sharpe; some greater, and others lesser; the which to distinguish with long descriptions were to small purpose, considering they be all and euery of them knowne euen vnto the simplest: therefore this shall suffice for their seueral descriptions.


 The Place.
The Plum trees grow in all knowne countries of the world: they require a loose ground, they also receiue a difference from the regions where they grow, not only of the forme or fashion, but especially of the faculties, as we will forthwith declare.
The Plum trees are also many times graffed into trees of other kindes, and being so ingraffed, they faciem parent is, succum adoptionis, vt Plinius dicit, exhibent.
The greatest varietie of these rare Plums are to be found in the grounds of Mr. Vincent Pointer of Twicknam, before remembred in the Chap. of Apples: although my selfe am not without some, and those rare and delicate.
The wilde Plums grow in most hedges through England.


 The Time.
The common and garden Plum trees do bloome in April: the leaues come forth presently with them: the fruit is ripe in Sommer, some sooner, some later.


 The Names.
The Plumme tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Prunus: in high- Dutch, (...): in low- Dutch, (...): in Spanish, Ciruelo: in French, Prunier: in English. Plum tree?
The fruit is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Prunum: in high-Dutch, (...): in lowDutch, (...): in Italian and French, Prune: in Spanish, Prunas: in English, Prune, and Plum. These haue also names from the regions and countries where they grow.
The old Writers haue called those that grow in Syria neere vnto Damascus, Damascena Pruna: in English, Damsons, or Damaske Prunes: and those that grow in Spain, Hispanica, Spanish Prunes or Plums. So in our age we vse to call those that grow in Hungarie, Hungarica, or Pannonica, Plums of Hungarie: some, Gallica Pruna, or French Prunes. of the country of France. Clearcus Peripateticus saith, that they of Rhodes and Sicilia do call the Damaske Prunes Brabula.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Plummes that be ripe and new gathered from the tree, what sort soeuer they are of, do moisten  and coole, and yeeld vnto the body very little nourishment, and the same nothing good at all: for as Plummes do very quickly rot, so is also the iuice of them apt to putrifie in the body, and likewise to cause the meate to putrifie which is taken with them: onely they are good for those that would keepe their bodies soluble and coole; for by their moisture and slipperinesse they do mollifie the belly.
Dried Plums, commonly called Prunes, are wholsomer, and more pleasant to the stomack, they  yeeld more nourishment, and better, and such as cannot easily putrifie. It is reported, saith Galen in his booke of the faculties of Nourishments, that the best doe grow in Damascus a city of Syria; and next to those, they that grow in Spaine: but these doe nothing at all binde, yet diuers of the Damaske Damson Prunes very much; for Damaske Damson Prunes are more astringent, but they of Spaine be sweeter. Dioscorides saith, that Damaske Prunes dried do stay the belly; but Galen (...), inhis books of the faculties of simple medicines, that they do manifestly loose the belly,

yet lesser than they that bee brought out of Spaine; being boiled with Mead or (...) water, which hath a good quantitie of honey in it, they loose the belly very much (as the same Authour saith) although a man take them alone by themselues, and much more if the Mead be supped after them. We most commend those of Hungarie being long and sweet; yet more those of Morauia the chiefe and principall citie in times past of the Prouince of the Marcomans: for these after they be dried, that the waterie humour may be consumed away, be most pleasant to the taste, and do easily without any trouble so mollifie the belly, as that in that respect they go beyond Cassia and Manna, as Thomas Iordanus (...).
The leaues of the Plum tree are good against the swelling of the Vuula, the throat, gums, and kernels  vnder the throat and iawes; they stop the rheume and falling downe of humors, if the decoction thereof be made in wine, and gargled in the mouth and throat.
The gumme which commeth out of the Plum-tree doth glew and fasten together, as Dioscorides saith.
Being drunke in wine it wasteth away the stone, and healeth Lichens in infants and young children;  if it be layed on with vineger, it worketh the same effects that the gum of the Peach and cherrie tree doth.
The wilde Plums do stay and binde the belly, and so do the vnripe plummes of what sort soeuer, whiles they are sharpe and sower, for then are they astringent.
The iuice of Sloes doth stop the belly, the lask and bloudy flix, the inordinat course of womens  termes, and all other issues of bloud in man or woman, and may very well be vsed in stead of Acatia, which is a thornie tree growing in Aegypt, very hard to be gotten, and of a deere price, and therfore the better for wantons; albeit our Plums of this countrey are equall vnto it in vertues.



CHAP. 127. Of Sebesten, or the Assyrian Plum.


Sebestenae, Myxa, sive Myxara. Assyrian Plums.



 The Description.
SEbestines are also a kinde of Plums: the tree whereof is not vnlike to the Plum tree, sauing it groweth lower than the most of the manured Plum trees; the leaues be harder and rounder; the floures grow at the tops of the branches consisting of fiue small white leaues, with pale yellowish threds in the middle, like those of the Plum tree: after followeth the fruit like to little Plummes, fastened in little skinny cups, which when they be ripe are of a greenish black colour, wherein is contained a small hard stone. The fruit is sweet in taste, the pulpe or meat is very tough and clammie.


 The Place.
The Sebesten trees grow plentifully in Syria and Egypt; they were in times past forreine and strange in Italy, now they grow almost in euery garden, being first brought thither in Plinie his time. Now do the Sebesten trees, saith he, in his 15. booke, 18. chapter, begin to grow in Rome, among the Seruice trees.


 The Time.
The time answereth the common Plums.


 The Names.
Pliny calleth the tree Myxa, it may bee suspected that this is the tree which Matron Paradus in his Atticke banket in (...) doth call (...), but we cannot certainely affirme it, and especially because diuers haue (...) deemed thereof. The berry or fruit is named

Myxon and Myxarion, neither haue the Latines any other name. The Arabians and the Apothecaries do call it Sebesten: which is also made an English name: we may call it the Assyrian Plum.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Sebestens be very temperately cold and moist, and haue a thicke and clammie substance; therefore  they nourish more than most fruits do, but withall they easily stop the intrailes, and stuffe vp the narrow passages, and breed inflammations.
They take away the ruggednesse of the throat and lungs, and also quench thirst, being taken in a  looch or licking medicine, or prepared any other kinde of way, or else taken by themselues.
The weight of ten drams, or of an ounce and a halfe of the pap or pulpe hereof being inwardly taken, doth loose the belly.
There is also made of this fruit a purging Electuarie, but such an one as quickly mouldeth, and  therefore it is not to be vsed but when it is new made.



CHAP. 128. Of the Indian Plums, or Mirobalans.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers kinds of Mirobalans, as Chebulae, Belliricae, Emblicae, etc. They likewise grow vpon diuers trees, and in countries far distant one from another, and Garcias the Portugall Physition is of opinion, that the fiue kindes grow vpon fiue diuers trees.


Myr. flaua,


Myr. (...).


(...) (...).


Myr. chepula


Myr. (...)




 The Description.
1 THe first of the Mirobalan trees, called Chebulae, is a shrubbie tree altogether wilde (which the Indians doe call Aretca:) in stature not vnlike to the Plum tree; the branches are many, and grow thicke together, whereon are set leaues like those of the Peach tree. The fruit is greater than any of the rest, somwhat long, fashioned like a peare.
2 This second kinde of Mirobalan, called Flaua, or Citrina, which some do call Aritiqui, but the common people of India, Arare, groweth vpon a tree of meane stature, hauing many boughes standing finely in order, and set full of leaues like vnto the Seruice tree.
3 The third kinde of Mirobalans, called Emblicae, the Indians doe call Amiale, which grow vpon a tree of mean stature, like the former, but the leaues are very much iagged, in shape like the leaues of Ferne, but that they be somewhat thicker: the Indians do not put the fruit hereof vnto physicall vses, but occupie it for the thickening and tanning of their leather in stead of Rhus, or Coriars Sumach, as also to make inke and bletch for other purposes.
4 Mirobalani Belliricae, called of the Sauages Gotni, and Guti, groweth vp to a meane stature, garnished with leaues like vnto Laurell or the Bay tree, but somewat lesser, thinner, and of a pale greene colour.
5 The (...) kinde of Mirobalans is called Indicae, which the Indians do call Rezannale; it groweth vpon a tree of meane stature, or rather vpon a shrub or hedge plant, bearing leaues like the Willow, and a fruit eight square. There is a fift kinde, the tree whereof is not mentioned in Authors.


 The Place and Time.
The last foure kindes of Mirobalans do grow in the kingdome of Cambaia: they grow likewise in Goa, Batecala, Malanor, and Dabul: the Kebula in Bisnager, Decan, Guzarate, and Bengala, and many other places of the East Indies. The time agreeth with other fruits in those countries.


 The Names.
Those which we haue said to be yellow, the (...) of those countries where they grow doe

call (...) Arare; those that be blacke they call Rezennale; the Bellericae, Gotim; the Chebulae, (...); the Emblicae are called Aretiqui.


 The Temperature.
All the kindes of Mirobalans are in taste astringent and sharpe like vnto the vnripe Sorbus or Seruice berries, and therefore they are of complexion cold and drie.


 The Vertues.
The Indians vse them rather to bind than purge; but if they dovse them for a purge, they vse the  decoction of them, and vse them much conserued in sugar, and especially the Chebulae; the yellow and blacke be good that way likewise.
The yellow and Bellericae taken before meat, are good against a laske, or weake stomacke, as Garcias writeth.
The yellow and blacke, or Indicae, and the Chebulae, purge lightly, if two or three drams be taken, and draw superfluous humors from the head.
The yellow, as some write, purge choler, Chebulae flegme, Indicae melancholie, and strengthen the  inward parts, but rosted in the embers, or otherwise wasted, they drie more than they purge.
There are two sorts especially brought into these parts of the world conserued, the Chebulae, and  of them the best are somewhat long like a small Limon, with a hard rinde and black pith, of the tast of a conserued Wall-nut; and the Bellericae, which are round and lesser, and tenderer in eating.
Lobel writeth, that of them the Emblicae do meanly coole, some do drie in the first degree, they  purge the stomacke of rotten flegme, they comfort the braine, the sinewes, the heart, and liuer, procure appetite, stay vomite, and coole the heat of choler, helpe the vnderstanding, quench thirst, and the heate of the intrailes: the greatest and heauiest be the best.
They purge best, and with lesser paine, if they be laid in water in the Sun vntill they swell, and sod  on a soft fire, and after they haue sod and be cold, preserued in foure times so much white honey, put to them.
Garcias found the distilled water to be right profitable against the French disease, and such like  insections.
The Bellericae are also of a milde operation, and do comfort, and are cold in the first degree, and  (...) in the second: the others come neere to the Emblicae in operation. 

I haue in this chapter contented my selfe with the expressing of the fruits out of Clusius and (...), and (...) the figures of the three Mirabalan (...), which (...) gaue (...) out of (...); because I iudge them rather drawne by fancy than by the (...) (...).




CHAP. 129. Of the Juiube tree.


Iuiube Arabu, sive Ziziphus Dodonaei. The Iuiube tree.



 The Description.
THe Iuiube tree is not much lesser than (...) candida, hauing a wreathed trunke or body, and a rough barke full (...) rifts or cranies, and stiffe branches, beset with strong and hard prickles; from whence grow out many long twigs, or little stalkes, halfe a foot or more in length, in shew like Rushes, limmer, and (...) bowing themselues, and very (...) like the twigges of Spartum: about which come (...) leaues one aboue another, which are somewhat long, not very great, but hard and tough like to the leaues of Peruinca or Peruinckle; and among these leaues come forth pale and mossie little floures: after which succeed long red well tasted sweet berries as big as Oliues (of a meane quantity) or little Prunes, or smal Plums, wherin there are hard round stones, or in which a small kernell is contained.


 The Place.
There be now at this day Iuiube trees growing in very many places of Italy, which in times past were newly brought thither out of (...), and that about Pliny his time, as he himselfe hath written in his 17. book, 10. chap.


 The Time.
It (...) in Aprill, at which time the seeds or stones are to be set or sowne for increase.



 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke (...) and (...) with Iota in the second syllable: in Latine likewise, Zizyphus; and of Petrus Crescentius, (...): in English, Iuiube tree.
The fruit or Plums are named in Greeke (...), (...): Galen calleth them (...), as (...) plainely sheweth in his 369. chapter, intreating of the Iuiube, in which be set downe those things that are mentioned concerning Serica in Galens books of the faculties of Nourishments: in Latine likewise Zizypha and Serica: in shops, Iuiubae: in English, Iuiubes.


 The Temperature.
Iuiubes are temperate in heate and moisture.


 The Vertues.
The fruit of the Iuiube tree eaten is of hard digestion, and nourisheth very little; but being taken  in syrrups, electuaries, and such like confections, it appeaseth and mollifieth the roughnesse of the throat, the brest and lungs, and is good against the cough, but exceeding good for the reines of the backe, and kidneies and bladder.



CHAP. 130. Of the Cherrie Tree.

 The Kindes.
THe antient Herbarists haue set down foure kindes of Cherrie trees, the first is great and wilde; the second tame or of the garden: the third, whose fruit is (...): the fourth is that which is called in Latine Chamaecerasus, or the dwarfe Cherrie tree. The later writers haue found diuers (...) more, some bringing forth great fruit, others lesser; some with white fruit, some with blacke, others of the colour of blacke bloud, varying infinitely according to the climate and countrey where they grow.


1 Cerasus vulgaris. The common English Cherrie tree.


3 Cerasus Hispanica. The Spanish Cherrie tree.





 The Description.
1 THe English Cherrie tree groweth to an high and great tree, the body whereof is of a meane bignesse, which is parted aboue into very many boughes, with a barke somewhat smooth, and of a browne crimson colour, tough and pliable: the substance or timber is also browne in the middle, and the outward part is somewhat white. The leaues be great, broad, long, set (...) veines or nerues, and sleightly nicked about the edges: the floures are white, of a mean bignes, consisting of fiue leaues, and hauing certaine threds in the middle, of the like colour: the Cherries be round, hanging vpon long stems or foot-stalks, with a stone in the midst which is couered with a pulpe or soft meat; the kernell thereof is not vnpleasant to the taste, though somewhat bitter.
2 The Flanders Cherry tree differeth not from our English Cherrie tree in stature or forme of leaues or floures; the difference consisteth in this, that this tree bringeth forth his fruit sooner, and greater than the other: wherefore it may be called in Latine, Cerasus precox, sive Belgica.


5 Cerasus Serotina. Late ripe Cherrie tree:


6 Cerasus vno pediculo plura. The Cluster Cherrie tree.


3 The Spanish Cherrie tree groweth vp to the height of our common Cherrie tree: the wood or timber is soft and loose, couered with a whitish scalie barke: the branches are knottie, greater and fuller of substance than any other Cherry tree: the leaues are likewise greater and longer than any of the rest, in shape like those of the Chestnut tree: the floures are like the others in forme, but whiter of colour: the fruit is greater and longer than any, white for the most part all ouer, except those that stand in the hottest place where the Sun hath some reflexion against a wall: they are also white within, and of a pleasant taste.
4 The Gascoine Cherrie tree groweth very like to the Spanish Cherry tree in stature, floures, and leaues: it differeth in that it bringeth forth very great Cherries, long, sharpe pointed, with a certaine hollownesse vpon one side, and spotted here and there with certaine prickles of purple colour as small as sand: the taste is most pleasant, and excelleth in (...).
5 The lateripe Cherry tree groweth vp like vnto our wilde English Cherry tree, with the like

7 Cerasus multiflora fructus edens. The double floured Cherry tree bearing fruit.8 Cerasus multiflora pauciores fructus edens. The doule floured barren Cherry tree.9 Cerasus auium nigra and racemosa. Birds Cherry, and blacke Grape Cherry tree.10 Cerasus racemosarubra. Red Grape Cherry tree.
leaues, branches, and floures, sauing that they are sometimes once doubled: the fruit is small, round, and of a darke bloudy colour when they be ripe, which the French-men gather with their (...), and hang them vp in their houses in bunches or handfulls against winter, which the Physitians do giue vnto their patients in hot and burning seuers, being first steeped in a little warme water, that causeth them to swell and plumpe vp as full and fresh as when they did grow vpon the tree.
6 The Cluster Cherry-tree differeth not from the lastdescribed either in leaues, branches, or (...): the floures are also like, but neuer commeth any one of them to be double. The fruit is round, red when they be ripe, and many growing vpon one stem or footstalke in clusters, like as the Grapes do. The taste is not vnpleasant, although somewhat soure.
7 This Cherrie-tree with double floures growes vp vnto a small tree, not vnlike to the common Cherrie-tree in each respect, sauing that the flours are somewhat doubled, that is to say, three (...) foure times double; after which commeth fruit (though in small quantitie) like the other common Cherrie.
8 The double floured Cherrie-tree growes vp like vnto an hedge bush, but not so great nor high as any of the others; the leaues and branches differ not from the rest of the Cherrie-trees. The floures hereof are exceeding double, as are the floures of Marigolds, but of a white colour, and smelling somewhat like the Hawthorne floures; after which come seldome or neuer any fruit, although some Authors haue said that it beareth sometimes fruit, which my selfe haue not at any time seen; notwithstanding the tree hath growne in my garden many yeeres, and that in an excellent good place by a bricke wall, where it hath the reflection of the South sunne, fit for a tree that is not willing to beare fruit in our cold climat.


11 Cerasus nigra. The common blacke Cherry-tree


12 Chamaecerasus. The dwarfe Cherry-tree.


9 The Birds Cherry-tree, or the blacke Cherry-tree, that bringeth forth very much fruit vpon (...) branch (which better may be vnderstood by sight of the figure, than by words) springeth vp (...) an hedge tree of small stature, it groweth in the wilde woods of Kent, and are there vsed for (...) to graft other Cherries vpon, of better taste, and more profit, as especially those called the Flanders Cherries: this wilde tree growes very plentifully in the North of England, especially at a (...) called Heggdale, neer vnto Rosgill in (...), and in diuers other places about (...) (...), and there called Hegberrie-tree: it groweth likewise in Martome Parke, (...)



miles from Blackeburne, and in Harward neere thereunto; in Lancashire almost in euery hedge: the leaues and branches differ not from those of the wilde Cherry-tree: the floures grow alongst the small branches, consisting of fiue small white leaues, with some greenish and yellow thrums in the middle: after which come the fruit, greene at the first, blacke when they be ripe, and of the bignesse of Sloes; of an harsh and vnpleasant taste.
10 The other birds Cherry-tree differeth not from the former in any respect, but in the colour of the berries; for as they are blacke; so on the contrary, these are red when they be ripe, wherein they differ.
11 The common blacke Cherry-tree growes vp in some places to a great stature: there is no difference betweene it and our common Cherry-tree, sauing that the fruit hereof is very little in respect of other Cherries, and of a blacke colour.
12 The dwarfe Cherry-tree groweth very seldome to the height of three cubits: the (...) or body small, couered with a darke coloured blacke: whereupon do grow very limber and pliant twiggy branches: the leaues are very small, not much vnlike to those of the Priuite bush: the floures are small and white: after which come Cherries of a deepe red colour when they be ripe, of taste somewhat sharpe, but not greatly vnpleasant: the branches laid downe in the earth, quickly take root, whereby it is greatly increased.
My selfe with diuers others haue sundry other sorts in our gardens, one called the Hart Cherry, the greater and the lesser; one of a great bignesse, and most pleasant in taste, which we call Luke Wardes Cherry, because he was the first that brought the same out of Italy; another we haue called the Naples Cherry, because it was first brought, into these parts from Naples: the fruit is very great, sharpe pointed, (...) like a mans heart in shape, of a pleasant taste, and of a deepe blackish colour when it is ripe, as it were of the colour of dried bloud.
We haue another that bringeth forth Cherries also very greatb, igger than any Flanders Cherrie, of the colour of Iet, or burnished horne, and of a most pleasant taste, as witnesseth Mr. Bull, the Queenes Maiesties Clockemaker, who did taste of the fruit (the tree bearing onely one Cherry, which he did eate; but my selfe neuer tasted of it) at the impression hereof. We haue also another, called the Agriot Cherry, of a reasonable good taste. Another we haue with fruit of a dun colour, tending to a watchet. We haue one of the dwarffe Cherries, that bringeth forth fruit as great as most of our Flanders Cherries, whereas the common sort hath very small Cherries, and those of an harsh taste. These and many sorts more we haue in our London gardens, whereof to write particularly would greatly enlarge our volume, and to small purpose: therefore what hath been said shall suffice. @ I must here (as I haue formerly done, in Peares, Apples and other such fruites) refer you to my two friends Mr. Iohn Parkinson, and Mr. Iohn Millen, the one to furnish you with the history, and the other with the things themselues, if you desire them. @


 The Time.
The Cherrie-trees bloome in Aprill; some bring forth their fruit sooner; some later: the red Cherries be alwaies better than the blacke of their owne kinde.


 The Names.
The Cherry-tree is called in Greeke, (...): and also in Latine, Cerasus: in high-Dutch: (...): in low-Dutch, (...), and (...): in French, Cerisier: in English, Cherry-tree.
The fruit or Cherries be called in Greeke, (...), and (...): and in Latine likewise, Cerasa: in English, Cherries: the Latine and English names in their seuerall titles shall suffice for the rest that might be said.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The best and principall Cherries be those that are somewhat sower: those little sweet ones  which be wilde and soonest ripe be the worst: they containe bad juice, they very soon putrifie, and do ingender ill bloud, by reason whereof they do not onely breed wormes in the belly, but troublesome agues, and often pestilent feuers: and therefore in well gouerned common wealths it is carefully prouided, that they should not be sold in the markets in the plague time.
Spanish Cherries are like to these in faculties, but they do not so soone putrifie: they be likewise  cold, and the iuice they make is not good.
The Flanders or Kentish Cherries that are through ripe, haue a better juice but watery, cold  and moist: they quench thirst, they are good for an hot stomacke, and profitable for those that haue the ague: they easily descend and make the body soluble: they nourish nothing at all.
The late ripe Cherries which the French-men keep dried against winter, and are by them  called Morclle, and we after the same name call them Morell Cherries, are dry, and do somewhat binde; these being dried are pleasant to the taste, and wholesome for the stomacke, (...) as Prunes be, and do stop the belly.

Generally all the kindes of Cherries are cold and moist of temperature, although some more  cold and moist than others: the which being eaten before meat doe soften the belly very gently, they are vnwholsome either vnto moist and rheumaticke bodies, or for vnhealthie and cold stomackes.
The common blacke Cherries do strengthen the stomack, and are whole somer than the red Cherries, the which being dried do stop the laske.
The distilled water of Cherries is good for those that are troubled with heate and inflammations  in their stomackes, and preuaileth against the falling sicknesse giuen mixed with wine.
Many excellent Tarts and other pleasant meats are made with Cherries, sugar, and other delicat  spices, whereof to write were to small purpose.
The gum of the Cherrie tree taken with wine and water, is reported to helpe the stone; it may do  good by making the passages slippery, and by tempering and alaying the sharpnesse of the humors; and in this maner it is a remedy also for an old cough. Dioscorides addeth, that it maketh one well coloured, cleareth the sight, and causeth a good appetite to meat.



CHAP. 131. Of the Mulberrie tree.


1 Morus. The Mulberrie tree.


2 Morus alba. The white Mulberrie tree.



 The Description.
1 THe common Mulberie tree is high, and ful of boughes: the body wherof is many times great, the barke rugged; and that of the root yellow: the leaues are broad and sharp pointed, something hard, and nicked on the edges; in stead of floures, are blowings or (...), which are downie: the fruit is long, made vp of a number of little graines, like vnto a blackeBerrie, but thicker, longer, and much greater, at the first greene, and when it is ripe blacke, yet is the (...) (whereof it is full) red: the root is parted many waies.

2 The white Mulberrie tree groweth vntill it be come vnto a great and goodly stature, almost as big as the former: the leaues are rounder, not so sharpe pointed, nor so deeply snipt about the edges, yet sometimes sinuated or deeply cut in on the sides, the fruit is like the former, but that it is white and somewhat more tasting like wine.


 The Place.
The Mulberry trees grow plentifully in Italy and other hot regions, where they doe maintaine great woods and groues of them, that there Silke wormes may feed thereon. The Mulberry tree is fitly set by the slip; it may also be grafted or inoculated into many trees, being grafted in a white Poplar, it bringeth forth white Mulberies, as Beritius in his Geoponickes reporteth. These grow in sundry gardens in England.


 The Time.
Of all the trees in the Orchard the Mulberry doth last bloome, and not before the cold weather is gone in May (therefore the old Writers were wont to call it the wisest tree) at which time the Silke wormes do seeme to reuiue, as hauing then wherewith to seed and nourish them selues, which all the winter before do lie like small graines or seeds, or rather like the dunging of a flesh (...) vpon a glasse, or some such thing, as knowing their proper time both to performe their duties for which they were created, and also when they may haue wherewith to maintaine and preserue their owne bodies, vnto their businesse aforesaid.
The berries are ripe in August and September. Hegesander in Athenaeus affirmeth, that the Mulberie trees in his time did not bring forth fruit in twentie years together, and that so great a plague of the gout then raigned and raged so generally, as not onely men, but boies, wenches, eunuchs, and women were troubled with that disease.


 The Names.
This tree is named in Greeke (...), and (...): in Latine, Morus: in shops, Morus Celsi: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) boom: in French, Meurier: in English, Mulberry tree.
The (...) is called (...), and (...): in Latine, Morum: in shops, Morum Celsi: in high Dutch (...): in Italian, Moro: in French, Meure: in Spanish, (...) and Mores: in English, Mulberry.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Mulberries being gathered before they be ripe, are cold and dry almost in the third degree, and do  mightily binde; being dried they are good for the laske and bloudy flix, the pouder is vsed in meat, and is drunke with wine and water.
They stay bleedings, and also the (...); they are good against inflammations or hot swellings of  the mouth and iawes, and for other inflammations newly beginning.
The ripe and new gathered Mulberries are likewise cold and be ful of iuice, which hath the taste  of wine, and is something drying, and not without a binding qualitie: and therefore it is also mixed with medicines for the mouth, and such as helpe the hot swellings of the mouth, and almonds of the throat; for which infirmities it is singular good.
Of the iuice of the ripe berries is made a confection with sugar, called Diamorum: that is, after  the manner of a syrrup, which is exceeding good for the vlcers and hot swellings of the tongue, throat, and almonds, or Vuula of the throat, or any other malady arising in those parts.
These Mulberries taken in meat, and also before meat, do very speedily passe through the belly, by reason of the moisture and slipperinesse of their substance, and make a passage for other meats, as Galen saith.
They are good to quench thirst, they stir vp an appetite to meat, they are not hurtfull to the stomacke, but they nourish the body very little, being taken in the second place, or after meat, for although they be lesse hurtfull than other like fruits, yet are they corrupted and putrified, vnlesse they speedily descend.
The barke of the root is bitter, hot and drie, and hath a scouring facultie: the decoction hereof  doth open the stoppings of the (...) and spleen, it purgeth the belly, and driueth forth wormes.
The same bark being steeped in vineger helpeth the tooth ache: of the fame effect is also the decoction  of the leaues and barke, saith Dioscorides, who sheweth that about haruest time there issueth (...) of the root a iuice, which the next day after is found to be hard, and that the same is very good against the tooth-ache; that it wasteth away Phyma, and purgeth the belly.
Galen saith, that there is in the leaues and first buds of this tree a cerraine middle facultie, both  to binde and scoure.




CHAP. 132. Of the Sycomore tree.


Sycomorus. The Sycomore tree.



 The Description.
THe Sycomore tree is of no small height, being very like to the mulberie tree in bignesse and shew, as also in leafe: the fruit is as great as a Fig, and of the same fashion, very like in iuice and taste to the wilde Fig, but sweeter, and without any grains or seeds within, which groweth not forth of the tender boughes, but out of the body and great old armes very fruitfully: this tree hath in it plenty of milkie iuice, which so soon as any part is broken or cut, doth issue forth.


 The Place.
It groweth, as Dioscorides writeth, very plentifully in Caria and Rhodes, and in sundry places of Egypt, as at the great Cayre or Alkaire, and in places that doe not bring forth much wheat, in which it is an helpe, and sufficeth in stead of bread and corne when there is scarsitie of victuals. Galen writeth, that he (...) a plant of the Sycomore tree like to the wilde Fig tree, fruit and all.


 The Time.
It bringeth forth (...) three or foure times in one yeare, and oftner if it be (...) with an iron knife, or other like instrument.


 The Names.
This tree is called in Greeke, (...), of the Fig tree and the Mulbery tree: in Latine, Sycomorus: (...) Celsus nameth it backward Morosycos: the Egyptians of our time do call it Ficus (...), or Pharao his Fig tree, as witnesseth Bellonius: and it is likewise termed Ficus Aegyptia, Egyptian Fig tree, and also Morus Aegyptia, or Egyptian Mulberrie tree. We cal it English, Sycomore tree after the Greek and Latine, and also Mulberry Fig tree, which is the right Sycomore tree, and not the great Maple, as we haue said in the chapter of the Maple.
The fruit is named in Greeke Sycomoron, and in Italian, Sycomoro and Fico d'Egitto.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The fruit of the Sycomore tree hath no sharpnesse in it at all, as Galen saith. It is somwhat sweet  in raste, and is of temperature moist after a sort, and cold as be Mulberries.
It is good, saith Dioscorides, for the belly; but it is (...), that is, without any nourishment, and  troublesome to the stomacke.
There issueth forth of the barke of this tree in the beginning of the Spring, before the fruit appeareth, a liquour, which being taken vp with a spunge, or a little wooll, is dried, made vp into fine cakes, and kept in gallie pots: this mollifieth, closeth wounds together, and dissolueth grosse humours.
It is both inwardly taken and outwardly applied against the bitings of serpents, hardnesse of the  milt or spleene, and paine of the stomacke proceeding of a cold cause: this liquor doth very quickly putrifie.




CHAP. 133. Of the Fig tree.

 The Description.
1 THe garden Fig tree becommeth a tree of a meane slature, hauing many branches full of white pith within, like Elderne pith, and large leaues of a darke greene colour, diuided into sundry sections or diuisions. The fruit commeth out of the branches without any floure (...) all that euer I could perceiue, which fruit is in shape like vnto Peares, of colour either whitish, or somewhat red or of a deep blew, full of small graines within, of a sweet and pleasant taste; which beeing broken before it be ripe, doth yeeld most white milk, like vnto the kindes of Spurge, and the leaues also beeing broken doe yeeld the like liquour; but when the Figges be ripe, the iuice thereof is like honie.


1 Ficus. The Fig tree.


@ 2 Chamaeficus. The dwarfe Fig tree.


2 The dwarfe Fig-tree is like vnto the former in leaues and fruit, but it neuer groweth aboue the height of a man, and hath many small shoots comming from the roots, whereby it greatly increaseth.
There is also another wilde kinde, whose fruit is neuer ripe; Theophrastus nameth it Erincos; (...) Caprificus.


 The Place.
The Fig trees do grow plentifully in Spain and Italy, and many other countries, as in England; where they beare fruit, but it neuer commeth to kindely maturitie, except the tree be planted vnder an hot wall, whereto neither North, nor Northeast windes can come.


 The Time.
The dwarfe Fig tree groweth in my garden, and bringeth forth ripe and very great fruit in the moneth of August, of which Figs sundry persons haue eaten at pleasure.
In England the Fig trees put not forth their leaues vntill the end of May, where oftentimes the fruit commeth forth before the leaues appeare.



 The Names.
The Fig tree is called in Greeke, (...), and of diuers, for difference sake betweene it and the wild Fig tree, (...): in Latine, Ficus, and Ficus satiua, and Vrbana: in high Dutch, Feygenbaum: in low-Dutch, Uijgheboom: in French, Figuier: in Italian, Fico: in Spanish, Higuera: in English, Fig tree.
The fruit is named in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Ficus: and the vnripe fruit, (...): in Latine, Grossus: that which is dried is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Carica: in high-Dutch, Feygen: in low-Dutch, Uijghen: in French, Figues: in Italian, Fichi: in Spanish, Higos: in (...), Fig: the little seeds which are found in them are named by Galen, (...), Cechramides.


 The Temperature.
The greene Figs new gathered are somewhat warme and moist: the dry and ripe Figs are hot almost in the third degree, and withall sharpe and biting.
The leaues also haue some sharpnesse, with an opening power, but not so strong as the iuice.


 The Vertues.
The dry Figs do nourish better than the greene or new Figs; notwithstanding they ingender  not very good bloud, for such people as do feed much thereon doe become low sie.
Figs be good for the throat and lungs, they mitigate the cough, and are good for them that be  short winded: they ripen flegme, causing the same to be easily spet out, especially when they be sodden with Hyssop, and the decoction drunke.
Figges stamped with Salt, Rew, and the kernels of Nuts withstand all poyson and corruption  of the aire. The King of Pontus, called Mithridates, vsed this preseruatiue against all venom and poyson.
Figs stamped and made into the forme of a plaister with wheat meale, the pouder of Fenugreek, and Lineseed, and the roots of marish Mallowes, applied warme, do soften and ripen impostumes, phlegmons, all hot and angry swellings and tumors behinde the eares: and if you adde thereto the roots of Lillies, it ripeneth and breaketh Venerious impostumes that come in the flanke, which impostume is called Bubo, by reason of his lurking in such secret places: in plaine English termes they are called (...).
Figs boiled in Wormwood wine with some Barly meale are very good to be applied as an implaister  vpon the bellies of such as haue the dropsie.
Dry Figges haue power to soften, consume, and make thinne, and may be vsed both outwardly  and inwardly, whether it be to ripen or soften impostumes, or to scatter, dissolue, and consume them.
The leaues of the Fig tree do waste and consume the Kings Euill, or swelling kernells in the  throat, and do mollifie, waste, and consume all other tumors, being finely pouned and laid thereon: but after my practise, being boiled with the roots of marish Mallowes vntill they be soft, and so incorporated together, and applied in forme of a plaister.
The milky iuyce either of the figs or leaues is good against all roughnesse of the skinne, lepries, spreading sores, tetters, small pockes, measels, pushes, wheales, (...), lentiles, and all other spots, scuruinesse, and deformitie of the body and face, being mixed with (...) meale and applied: it doth also take away warts and such like excrescences, if it be mingled with some fattie or greasie thing.
The milke doth also cure the tooth-ache, if a little lint or cotton be wet therein, and put into the  hollownesse of the tooth.
It openeth the veines of the hemorrhoids, and looseneth the belly, being applied to the fundament.
Figs stamped with the pouder of Fenugreeke, and vineger, and applied plaisterwise, doe ease  the intollerable paine of the hot gout, especially the gout of the feet.
The milke thereof put into the wound proceeding of the biting of a mad dog, or any other venomous  beast, preserueth the parts adioyning, taketh away the paine presently, and cureth the hurt.
The greene and ripe Figs are good for those that be troubled with the stone of the kidneyes, for  they make the conduits slipperie, and open them, and do also somewhat clense: whereupon after the eating of the same, it hapneth that much grauell and sand is conueyed forth.
Dry or barrell Figs, called in Latine Caricae, are a remedie for the belly, the cough, and for old  infirmities of the chest and lungs: they scoure the kidnies, and clense forth the sand, they mitigate the paine of the bladder, and cause women with child to haue the easier deliuerance, if they feed thereof for certaine dayes together before their time.
Dioscorides saith, that the white liquor of the Fig tree, and iuice of the leaues, do curdle milke as  rennet doth, and dissolue the milke that is cluttered in the stomacke, as doth vineger.
It bringeth downe the menses, if it be applied with the yolke of an egge, or with yellow wax.




CHAP. 134. Of the prickly Indian Fig tree.


Ficus Indica. The Indian Fig tree.


Fructus. The fruit.



 The Description.
THis strange and admirable plant, called Ficus Indica, seemes to be no other thing than a multiplication of leaues, that is, a tree made of leaues, without body or boughes; for the leafe set in the ground doth in short space take root, and bringeth out of it selfe other leaues, from which do grow others one after another, till such time as they come to the height of a tree, hauing also in the meane season boughes as it were comming from those leaues, sometimes more, otherwhiles sewer, as Nature list to bestow, adding leafe vnto leafe, whereby it occupieth a great piece of ground: these leaues are long and broad, as thicke as a mans thumbe, of a deepe greene colour, set full of long, slender, sharpe, and whitish prickles: on the tops of which leaues come forth long (...) not vnlike to those of the manured Pomegrenat tree, of a yellow colour: after which commeth the fruit like vnto the common Fig, narrow below, and bigger aboue, of a greene colour, and stuffed full of a red pulpe and iuice, staining the hands of them that touch it, as do the Mulberries, with a bloudy or sanguine colour: the top of which Figs are inuironed with certaine scaly leaues like a crowne, wherein are also contained small graines that are the seeds: the which being sowne, do bring forth plants round bodied, like vnto the trunke of other trees, with leaues placed thereon like the other; which being set in the ground bring forth trees of leaues, as we haue shewed.
@ Vpon this plant in some parts of the West Indies grow certain excrescences, which in continuance of time turn into Insects; and these out-growings are that high prized Cochenele wherwith they dye colours in graine. @


 The Place.
This plant groweth in all the tract of the East and West Indies, and also in the countrey (...), now called Virginia, from whence it hath beene brought into Italy, Spaine, England, and other countries: in Italy it sometimes beareth fruit, but more often in Spaine, and neuer as yet in England, although I haue bestowed great pains and cost in keeping it from the iniury of our cold (...).

It groweth also at S. Crux and other places of Barbary, and also in an Island of the Mediterranean sea, called Zante, about a day and nights sailing with a meane winde from Petrasse a port in Morea, where my seruant William Marshall (before remembred) did see not only great store of those trees made of leaues, but also diuers other round bodied plants of a woody substance: from whence he brought me diuers plants thereof in tubs of earth, very fresh and greene, which flourished in my garden at the impression hereof.


 The Time.
These plants do grow greene and fresh both Winter and Sommer, by the relation of my foresaid seruant: notwithstanding they must be very carefully kept in these countries from the extremitie of Winter.


 The Names.
This is thought to be the plant called of Pliny, (...); whereof he hath written, lib. 21. ca. 17. in this manner: About Opuns is the herbe Opuntia, to mans taste sweet, and it is to be maruelled, that the root should be made of the leaues, and that it should so grow. Opuns is a city neere vnto Phocis in Greece, as Pausanias, Strabo, and Pliny testifie: but it is commonly called in Latine, Ficus Indica: of the Indians, Tune, and Tunas, and also Anapallus, as testifieth Bellonius: in (...), Indian Fig tree.
There is a certaine other described for the Indian Fig tree, by Theophrastus, lib. 4. which Pliny, lib. 12. cap. 5. doth eloquently expresse almost in the same words, but (...) into Latine, whereof we intend to speake in the next chapter.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
We haue no certaine instruction from the Antients, of the temperature of faculty of this plant, or of the fruit thereof: neither haue we any thing whereof to write of our owne knowledge, more than that we haue heard reported of such as haue eaten liberally of the fruit hereof, that it changed their vrine to the colour of bloud; who at the first sight thereof stood in great doubt of their life, thinking it had been bloud, whereas it proued afterwards by experience to be nothing but the tincture or colour the vrine had taken from the iuice of the fruit, and that without all hurt or griefe at all.
It is reported of some, that the iuice of the fruit is excellent good against vlcers of long continuance.
@ Cochenele is giuen alone, and mixed with other things, in maligne diseases, as pestilent feuers  and the like, but with what successe I know not. @



CHAP. 135. Of the arched Indian Fig tree.

 The Description.
THis rare and admirable tree is very great, straight, and couered with a yellowish bark tending to tawny: the boughes and branches are many, very long, tough, and flexible, growing very long in short space, as do the twigs of Oziars, and those so long and weake, that the ends thereof hang downe and touch the ground, where they take root and grow in such sort, that those twigs become great trees: and these being growne vp vnto the like greatnesse, doe cast their branches or twiggy tendrels vnto the earth, where they likewise take hold and root; by meanes wherof it commeth to passe, that of one tree is made a great wood or desart of trees, which the Indians do vse for couerture against the extreme heate of the Sun, wherewith they are grieuously vexed: some likewise vse them for pleasure, cutting downe by a direct line a long walke, or as it were a vault, through the thickest part, from which also they cut certaine loope-holes or windowes in some places, to the end to receiue thereby the fresh coole aire that entreth thereat, as also for light, that they may see their cattell that feed thereby, to auoid any danger that might happen vnto them either by the enemie or wilde beasts: from which vault or close walke doth rebound such an admirable echo or answering voice, if one of them speake vnto another aloud, that it doth resound or answer againe foure or fiue times, according to the height of the voice, to which it doth answer, and that so plainly, that it cannot be knowne from the voice it selfe: the first or mother of this wood or desart of trees is hard to be knowne from the children, but by the greatnesse of the body, which three men can scarsely (...) about: vpon the branches whereof grow leaues hard and wrinckled, in shape like those of the Quince tree, greene aboue, and of a whitish hoary colour vnderneath, whereupon the Elephants delight to feed: among which leaues (...) forth the fruit, of the bignes of a mans thumbe, in shape like a small Fig, but of a sanguine or bloudy colour, and of a sweet tast,

but not so pleasant as the Figs of Spaine; notwithstanding they are good to be eaten, and withall very (...).


Arbor ex Goa, siue Indica. The arched Indian Fig tree.




 The Place.
This wondrous tree groweth in diuers places of the East Indies, especially neere vnto Goa, and also in Malaca: it is a stranger (...) most parts of the world.


 The Time.
This tree keepeth his leaues green (...) and Sommer.


 The Names.
This tree is called of those that haue trauelled, Ficus Indica, the Indian Fig; and Arbor Goa, of the place where it groweth in greatest plenty: we may call it in English, the arched Fig tree.
@ Such as desire to see more of this Fig tree, may haue recourse to Clusius his Exoticks, lib. I. cap. I. where he shewes it was mentioned by diuers antient Writers, as Q. Curtius, lib. 9. Plin. lib. 12. ca. 5. Strabo, lib. 5. and (...). Hist. Plant. lib. 4. cap. 5. by the name of Ficus Indica. @


 The Temperature and Vertues.
We haue nothing to write of the temperature or vertues of this tree, of our owne knowledge: neither haue wee receiued from others more, than that the fruit hereof is generally eaten, and that without any hurt at all, but rather good, and also nourishing.



CHAP. 136. Of Adams Apple tree, or the West-Indian Plantaine.

 The Description.
WHether this plant may be reckoned for a tree properly, or for an herby Plant, it is disputable, considering the soft and herby substance whereof it is made; that is to say, when it hath attained to the height of six or seuen cubits, and of the bignesse of a mans thigh, notwithstanding it may be cut downe with one stroke of a sword, or two or three cuts with a knife, euen with as much ease as the root of a Radish or Carrot of the like bignesse: from a thicke fat threddy root rise immediately diuers great leaues, of the length of three cubits and a halfe, sometimes more, according to the soile where it groweth, and of a cubit and more broad, of bignes sufficient to wrap a childe in of two yeares old, in shape like those of Mandrake, of an ouerworn green colour, hauing a broad rib running thorow the middle thereof: which leaues, whether by reason of the extreme hot scorching Sun, or of their owne nature, in September are so dry and withered, that there is nothing thereof left or to be seene but onely the middle rib. From the middest of these leaues riseth vp a thicke trunke, whereon doth grow the like leaues, which the people do cut off, as also those next the ground, by meanes whereof it riseth vp to the height of a tree, which otherwise would remaine a low and base plant. This manner of cutting they vse from time to time, vntill it come to a certaine height, aboue the reach of the Elephant, which greedily seeketh after the fruit. In the middest of the top among the leaues commeth sorth a soft and fungous stumpe, whereon do grow diuers apples in forme like a small Cucumber, and of the same bignesse, couered

with a thin rinde like that of the Fig, of a yellow colour when they be ripe: the pulpe or substance of the meate is like that of the Pompion, without either seeds, stones, or kernels, in tast not greatly perceiued at the first, but presently after it pleaseth, and entiseth a man to eat liberally thereof, by a certaine entising sweetnes it yeelds: in which fruit, if it be cut according to the length (saith myne Author) oblique, transuerse, or any other way whatsoeuer, may be seen the shape and forme of a crosse, with a man fastned thereto. My selfe haue seene the fruit, and cut it in pieces, which was brought me from Aleppo in pickle; the crosse I might perceiue, as the forme of a spred-Egle in the root of Ferne; but the man I leaue to be sought for by those that haue better eyes and iudgment than my selfe.


Musa Serapionis. Adams Apple tree.


Musae Fructus. Adams Apple.


@ Aprill 10. 1633. my much honored friend Dr. Argent (now President of the Colledge of Physitions of London) gaue me a plant he receiued from the Bermuda's: the length of the stalke was some two foot; the thicknesse thereof some seuen inches about, being crested, and full of a soft pith, so that one might easily with a knife cut it asunder. It was crooked a little, or indented, so that each two or three inches space it put forth a knot of some halfe inch thicknesse, and some inch in length, which incompassed it more than halfe about; and vpon each of these ioints or knots; in two rankes one aboue another, grew the fruit, some twenty, nineteene, eighteene, etc. more or lesse, at each knot: for the branch I had, contained nine knots or diuisions, and vpon the lowest knot grew twenty, and vpon the vppermost fifteene. The fruit which I receiued was not ripe, but greene, each of them was about the bignesse of a large Beane; the length of them some fiue inches, and the bredth some inch and halfe: they all hang their heads downewards, haue rough or vneuen ends, and are fiue cornered; and if you turne the vpper side downward, they somewhat resemble a boat, as you may see by one of them exprest by it selfe: the huske is as thicke as a Beanes, and will easily shell off it: the pulpe is white and soft: the stalke whereby it is fastned to the knot is verie short, and almost as thicke as ones little finger. This stalke with the fruit thereon I hanged vp in my shop, were it became ripeabout the beginning of May, and lasted vntil Iune: the pulp or meat was very soft and tender, and it did eate somewhat like a Muske-Melon. I haue giuen you the figure of the whole branch, with the fruit thereon, which I drew as soone as I receiued it, and it is marked with this figure 1. The figure 2. sheweth the shape of one particular fruit, with the lower

side vpwards. 3. The same cut through the middle long wayes. 4. The same cut side wayes. I haue been told (but how certaine it is I know not) that the floures which precede the fruit are bell-fashioned, and of a blew colour. I could obserue no seed in the fruit; it may be it was because it had been cut from the stocke so long before it came to (...). This Plant is found in many places of Asia, Africke, and America, especially in the hot regions: you may find frequent mention of it amongst the sea voyages to the East and West Indies, by the name of Plantaines, or Platanus, Bannanas, Bonnanas, Bouanas, Dauanas, Poco, etc. some (as our Author hath said) haue iudged it the forbidden fruit; other-some, the Grapes brought to Moses out of the Holy-land. @


Musae fructus exactior Icon. An exacter figure of the Plantaine fruit.




 The Place.
This admirable tree groweth in Egypt, Cyprus, and Syria, neere vnto a chiefe city there called Alep, which we call Aleppo, and also by Tripolis, not far from thence: it groweth also in Canara, Decan, Guzarate, and Bengala, places of the East Indies.


 The Time.
From the root of this tree shooteth forth yong springs or shoots, which the people take vp and plant for the increase in the Spring of the yeare. The leaues wither away in September, as is aboue said.


 The Names.
It is called Musa by such as trauell to Aleppo: by the Arabians, Musa Maum: in Syria, Mose: The Grecians and Christians which inhabit Syria, and the Iewes also, suppose it to be that tree of whose fruit Adam did taste; which others thinke to be a ridiculous fable: of Pliny, Opuntia.
It is called in the East Indies (as at Malauar where it also groweth) Palan: in Malayo, Pican: and in that part of Africa which we call Ginny, Bananas: in English, Adams Apple tree.


 The Temperature.
Dioscorides and Serapio iudge, that it heateth in the end of the first degree, and moistneth in the end of the same.


 The Vertues.
The fruit hereof yeeldeth but little nourishment: it is good for the heate of the breast, lungs, and bladder: it stoppeth the liuer, and hurteth the stomacke if too much of it be eaten, and procureth

loosenesse in the belly: whereupon it is requisit for such as are of a cold constitution, in the eating thereof to put vnto it a little Ginger or other spice.
It is also good for the reines, or kidnies, and to prouoke vrine: it nourisheth the childe in the mothers  wombe, and stirreth to generation.



CHAP. 137. Of the Date tree.


Palma. The Date tree.


Palmarum fructus and flores cum Elate. The fruit and floures of the Date tree.



 The Description.
THe Date tree groweth very great and high: the body or trunke thereof is thicke, and couered with a scaly rugged barke, caused by the falling away of the leaues: the boughes grow onely on the top, consisting of leaues set vpon a wooddy middle rib like those of Reeds or Flags: the inner part of which rib or stalke is soft, light, hollow, and spongie. Among the leaues come forth the floures included in a long skinny membrane, as it were a sheath or hose, like that which couereth the Floure de-Luce before it be blowne, which being opened of it selfe, white floures start forth, standing vpon short and slender foot-stalkes, which are fastened with certaine small filaments or threddy strings like vnto little branches: after which spring out from the same branches the fruit or Dates, which be in fashion long and round, in taste sweet, and many times somewhat harsh, of a yellowish red colour; wherein is contained a long hard stone, which is in stead of kernell and seed; the which I haue planted many times in my Garden, and haue growne to the height of three foot: but the first frost hath nipped them in such sort, that soone after they perished, notwithstanding my industrie by couering them, or what else I could doe for their succour.


 The Place.
The Date trees grow plentifully in Africa and Egypt; but those which are in Palestina and

Syria be the best: they grow likewise in most places of the East and West Indies, where there be (...) sorts, as well wilde, as tame or manured.


 The Time.
The Date tree is alwaies green, and floureth in the Spring time: the fruit is ripe in September, and being then gathered they are dried in the Sunne, that they may be the better both (...) into other countries far distant, as also (...) from rotting at home.


 The Names.
The tree is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Palma: in English, Date tree.
The fruit is named in Greeke, (...): that is to say, Glans Palmarum, or the fruit of the (...) trees: and by one word, (...): in Latine, Palmula: in shops, Dactylus: in high-Dutch, Dattelen: in low-Dutch, Dadelen: in Italian, Dattoli: in French, Dattes: in Spanish, Tamaras, and Dattiles: in English, Date.
The cod or sheath wherein the floures and Dates are wrapped, is called (...): and of some, (...)


 The Temperature and Vertues.
All manner of Dates whatsoeuer are hard of digestion, and cause head-ache: the worser sort be  those that be dry and binding, as the Egyptian Dates; but the soft, moist, and sweet ones are lesse hurtfull.
The bloud which is ingendred of Dates in mans body is altogether grosse, and somewhat clammy: by these the liuer is very quickly stopped, especially being inflamed and troubled with some hard swelling: so is the spleene likewise.
The Dates which grow in colder regions, when they cannot come to perfect ripenesse, if they be  eaten too plentifully, do fill the body full of raw humors, ingender winde, and oft times cause the leprosie.
The drier sorts of Dates, as Dioscorides saith, be good for those that spet bloud, for such as haue  bad stomacks, and for those also that be troubled with the bloudy flix.
The best Dates, called in Latine Caryotae, are good for the roughnesse of the throat and lungs.
There is made hereof both by the cunning Confectioners and Cookes, diuers excellent cordiall, comfortable, and nourishing medicines, and that procure lust of the body very mightily.
They do also refresh and restore such vnto strength as are entring into a consumption, for they  strengthen the feeblenesse of the liuer and spleene, being made into conuenient broths, and physicall medicines directed by a learned Physitian.
Dry Dates do stop the belly, and stay vomiting, and the wambling of womens stomackes that  are with childe, if they be either eaten in meates or otherwise, or stamped and applied vnto the stomacke as a pectorall plaister.
The ashes of the Date stones haue a binding qualitie, and emplastick facultie, they heale pushes  in the eyes, Staphylomata, and falling away of the haire of the eye lids, being applied together with Spikenard: with wine it keepeth proud flesh from growing in wounds.
The boughes and leaues do euidently binde, but especially the hose, that is to say, the sheath (...) case of the floures: and therefore it is good to vse these so oft as there is need of binding.
The leaues and branches of the Date tree do heale greene wounds and vlcers, refresh and coole  hot inflammations.
Galen in his booke of Medicines according to the kindes mentioneth a composition called Diapalma, which is to be stirred with the bough of a Date tree in stead of a spature or a thing to stirre with, for no other cause than that it may receiue thereby some kinde of astriction or binding force.



CHAP. 138. Of the wilde Date trees.

 The Description.
1 THeophrastus maketh this plant to be a kinde of Date tree, but low and of small growth, seldome attaining aboue the height of a cubit: on the top whereof shoot forth for the most part long leaues like those of the Date tree, but lesser and shorter; from the sides whereof breakes forth a bush of threddy strings: among which riseth vp small branches garnished with clusters of white floures, in which before they be opened are to be seene vnperfect shapes of leaues, closely compassed about with an innumerable sort of thin skinny hulls; which rude shapes with the floures are serued vp and eaten at the second course among other iunkets, with a little salt and pepper, being pleasant to the taste. @ The stalke is about the thicknes of ones

1 Palmites, siue Chamaerriphes. The little wilde Datc tree.
2 Palmapinus, siue Palma conifera. The wilde Date tree bearing (...)
@ Fructus Palmapini. The fruit of the Cone-Date.
little finger, here and there set with a few crooked pricks: the leaues within some handfull or two of the stalke are cut vp and made into little besomes, which are sold in many glasse shops here in London. @
2 The wilde Date tree that brings forth cones or key-clogs, is of most trauellers into the Indies thought to be barren of Dates, except sometimes it yeeldeth forth some small berries like vnto Dates, but dry, and nothing worth. This tree groweth to the height and bignesse of a low tree; the trunke or body whereof is soft, of a fungous or pithy substance, vnfit for building, as is the manured Date tree: the branch it selfe was brought vnto vs from the Indies, dry and void of leaues, wherefore we must describe the leaues by report of the bringer. The branches (saith my Author) are couered ouer with long flaggie leaues, hanging downe of a great length like those of the Date tree: the branches are also couered with a scaly or scabbed barke, verie rough, one scale or plate lying ouer another, as tiles vpon a house: thc fruit growes at the end of the branches, not vnlike a great Pine Apple cone, couered ouer with a skinne like the Indian Nut: wherein is contained a shel, within which shell lieth hid an acorn or long

(...) of an inch long, and sometimes longer, (...) hard to be broken, in taste like the (...); which the sauage people do grate and stampe to pouder to make them bread.


 The Place.
Theophrastus saith the first growes in Candy, but much more plentifully in Cilicia, and are now found in certaine places of Italy by the sea side, and also in diuers parts of Spaine.
The other hath been found by trauellers into the West Indies, from whence haue bin brought the naked branches with the fruit.


 The Time.
The time answereth that of the manured Date tree.


 The Names.
The little Date tree or wilde Date tree is named of Theophrastus, (...): in Naples, Cephaglione: in Latine commonly Palmites. That which is found in the midst of the yong springs, and is vsed to be eaten in banquets, is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Palmae cerebrum, the brain of the Date tree.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen supposeth that the brain of the Date tree consisteth of sundry parts, that is to say, of a certaine  waterie and warme substance, and of an earthy and cold; therefore it is moist and cold, with a certaine astriction or binding qualitie.
Being taken as a meat it ingendreth raw humors and winde, and therefore it is good to be (...) with pepper and salt.



CHAP. 139. Of the drunken Date tree.


Areca, siue Faufel. The drunken Date tree.



 The Description.
THe drunken Date tree, which Carolus Clusius calleth Faufel, is an Indian tree of a great bignes, the timber whereof is very soft and spongious, exceeding smooth and plaine vnto a great

height, not possible to be climbed vp; and therefore the Indians for their easier ascending vp, at some distances do tie round about the tree certaine wyths or ropes made of the barkes of trees, as may be perceiued by the figure, whereby very easily they go vp and downe to gather the fruit at their pleasure. The top of the tree is diuided into sundry branches, in substance like to the great cane; whereupon do grow faire flaggie leaues like those of the Palme or Date tree, whereof doubtlesse this is a wilde kinde: from the bottome of which branches commeth forth fruit in long bunches like traces of Onions, couered with a soft pulpe like vnto the Wall-nut, rough, and (...) full of haire of a yellowish colour, and like the dried Date when it is ripe: within which huske is contained fruit like vnto the Nutmeg, but greater, very hard, and striped ouer with red and white veines, or sinues.


 The Place, Time, and Names.
This Date tree, which the Arabians call Faufel, that is by interpretation, Auellana Indica, the Indian Nut or Filberd, Auicen and Scrapio call Filfel, and Fufel. It groweth in the East Indies in diuers and sundry places, as in Malauar, where vulgarly it is called Pac; and of the Nobles and Gentlemen, Areca: which name is vsed amongst the Portugals which dwell in those Indies: in Guzarate and Decan it is called Cupare: in Zeilan, Poaz: in Malaca, (...): in Cochin, (...): in English, the drunken Date tree, which name we haue coined from his qualitie, because the fruit maketh those drunke that eate thereof.


 The Temperature.
It is cold and dry in the second degree.


 The Vertues.
The fruit of Areca before it be ripe is reckoned amongst the stupefactiue or a stonishing medicines;  for whosoeuer eateth thereof waxeth drunke, because it doth exceedingly amase and astonish the senses.
When the Indians are vexed with some intolerable ache or paine, or must of necessitie endure  some great torment or torture, then do they take of this fruit, whereby the rigor of that pain which otherwise they should feele, is very much mitigated.
The iuice of the fruit of Areca doth strengthen the gums, fasten the teeth comfort the stomack, stay vomiting and loosenesse of the belly: it doth also purge the body from congealed or clotted bloud gathered within the same.



CHAP. 140. Of the Indian Nut tree.

 The Description.
1 THe Grecians haue not known, but the Arabians haue mentioned this Indian Nut tree, the body whereof is very great, smooth and plaine, void of boughes or branches, of a great height; wherefore the Indians do wrap ropes about the body thereof, as they doe vpon the tree last described, for their more ease in gathering the fruit: the timber whereof is verie spongie within, but hard without, a matter fit to make their Canoos and boats of: on the top of the tree grow the leaues like those of the Date tree, but broad, and sharpe at the point as thornes, whereof they vse to make needles, bodkins, and such like instruments, wherewith they sow the sailes of their ships, and do such like businesse: among these leaues come forth clusters of floures like those of the Chestnut tree, which turne into great fruit of a round forme, and somwhat sharp at one end; in that end next vnto the tree is one hole, somtimes two bored through: this Nut or fruit is wrapped in a couerture, consisting of a substance not vnlike to hempe before it be beaten soft: there is also a (...) and gentler stuffe next vnto the shell, like vnto Flax before it be made soft: in the middle whereof is contained a great Nut couered with a very hard shell, of a browne colour before it be polished, afterward of a blacke shining colour like burnished horne: next vnto the shell vpon the inside there cleaueth a white cornelly substance firme and sollid, of the (...) and taste of a blanched Almond: within the cauitie or hollownes thereof is contained a most delectable liquor like vnto milke, and of a most pleasant taste.
2 We haue no certaine knowledge from those that haue trauelled into the Indies, of the tree which beareth this little Indian Nut; neither haue we any thing of our owne knowledge, more, than that we see by experience that the fruit hereof is lesser, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ The other, expressed in the same table with the former, by the name of Mehenbethene, Clusius receiued it by the same name from (...) of Padua: yet it doth not (as hee saith) well agree with the description; and he rather approues of their opinion who refer it to the (...) vnguentaria,

1 Nux Indica arbor. The Indian Nut tree.
Nux Indica. The Indian Nut.
2 Nucula Indica. The little Indian Nut.
(...). 3
or Ben. It is some inch long, of a triangular figure, with a hard and wooddy shel: which broken, shewes three cells or partitions, in each whereof is contained a long kernell white and sweet. @


 The Place.
This Indian Nut groweth in some places of Africa, and in the East Indies, and in all the Islands of the West Indies, especially in Hispaniola, Cuba, and Saint Iohns Island, and also vpon the continent by Carthagena, Nombre de Dios, and Panama, and in Virginia, otherwise called Norembega, part of the same continent, for the most part neere vnto the sea side, and in moist places, but it is seldome found in the vplandish countries.


 The Time.
It groweth greene Winter and Sommer.


 The Names.
The fruit is called in Latine, Nux Indica: of the Indians, Cocus: of the Portugals that dwell in the East Indies, Cocco, taken from the end, wherein are three holes representing the head of a Monkie: Serapio and Rhasis do call this tree Iaralnare, idest, Arborem Nuciferam, the tree bearing Nuts: of (...), Glauci al hend: of the vulgar people, Maro, and the fruit Narel; which name Narel is common among the Persians and Arabians: it is called in Malauar, Tengamaran: the ripe fruit, (...); and the greene fruit. Eleri: in (...) it is called Lanhan: in Malaio, Triccan: and the Nut, (...).
The distilled liquor is called Sula; and the oile that is made thereof, Copra.


 The Temperature.
It is of a meane temper betwixt hot and cold.



 The Vertues and vse.
The Indians do vse to cut the twigs and tender branches toward the euening, at the ends whereof  they haue bottle gourds, hollow canes, and such like things, fit to receiue the water that droppeth from the branches thereof, which pleasant liquor they drinke in stead of wine; from the which is drawne a strong and (...) Aqua Vitae, which they vse in time of need against all manner of sicknesses; of the branches and boughes they make their houses; of the trunk or body of the tree, ships and boates; of the hempon the outward part of the fruit, they make ropes and cables; and of the siner stuffe, sailes for their ships.
Likewise they make of the shell of the Nut, cups to drinke in, which we likewise vse in England, garnished with siluer for the same purposes. The kernell serueth them for bread and meat; the milkie iuice doth serue to coole and refresh their wearied spirits: out of the kernel when it is stamped, is pressed a most precious oile, not onely good for meat, but also for medicine, wherewith they annoint their feeble lims after their tedious trauell, by meanes whereof the ache and paine is mitigated, and other infirmities quite taken away proceeding of other causes.



CHAP. 141. Of the Dragon Tree.


1 Draco arbor. The Dragon tree.


Draconis fructus. The Dragon tree fruit.



 The Description.
THis strange and admirable tree groweth very great, resembling the Pine tree, by reason it doth alwaies flourish, and hath his boughes or branches of equal length and bignesse, which are bare and naked, of eight or nine cubits long, and of the bignesse of a mans (...): from the ends of which do shoot out leaues of a cubit and a halfe long, and full two inches broad, somewhat thicke, and raised vp in the middle, then thinner and thinner like a two edged sword: among which come forth little mossie floures, of small moment, and turne into berries, of the bignesse of Cherries, of a yellowish

colour, round, light and bitter, couered with a threesold skin or filme, wherein is to be seene, as (...) and diuers other report, the forme of a Dragon, hauing a long necke or gaping mouth; the ridge or backe armed with sharpe prickles, like the Porcupine; it hath also a long taile, and foure feet, very easie to be discerned: the figure of it we haue set forth vnto you according to the greatnesse thereof, because our words and meaning may be the better vnderstood, and also the (...) of the tree in his full bignesse, because it is impossible to be expressed in the figure: the trunke or body of the tree is couered with a rough barke, very thin, and (...) to be opened or wounded with any small toole or instrument; which being so wounded in the Dog daies, bruised or bored, doth yeeld forth drops of a thicke red liquour, which of the name of the tree are called Dragons teares, or Sanguis Draconis, Dragons bloud: diuers haue doubted whether the liquour or gummie iuice were all one with Cinnabaris of Dioscorides (not meaning that Cinaber made of Quicksiluer) but the receiued opinion is, they differ not, by reason their qualitie and temperature worke the like effect.


 The Place.
This tree groweth in an Island which the Portugals call Madera, and in one of the Canarie Islands, called Insula Portus Sancti; and as it seemeth it was first brought out of Africke, although some are of a contrary opinion, and say, that it was first brought from Carthagena, in America, by the Bishop of the same Prouince.


 The Time.
The time of his growing we haue touched in the description, where wee said that it flourisheth and groweth greene all the yeare.


 The Names.
The names haue beene sufficiently spoken of in the description and in their seuerall titles.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
@ The Sanguis Draconis which is thought to proceed from this tree hath an astringent faculty, and is with good successe vsed in the ouermuch flowing of the courses, in fluxes, Dysenteries, spitting of bloud, fastening loose teeth, and such other affects which require astriction.
Smiths also vse it to varnish ouer their workes to giue them a sanguine colour, and keep them  from rust. @



CHAP. 142. Of the Sassafras, or Ague tree.

 The Description.
THe Sassafras tree grows very great, much like vnto the Pine tree: the trunke or body is straight, smooth, and void of boughes, of a great height: it is couered with a two fold grosse rinde, the vppermost of the colour of ashes, that next the wood of a tawnie colour: on the top come forth many goodly branches, like those of the Palme tree, whereon doe grow greene leaues, somewhat like those of the Fig tree, of a sweet smell when they be greene, but much sweeter when they be dry, declining to the smell of Fenell, with much sweetnesse in taste: they are greene Winter and Sommer, neither bearing fruit nor floures, but is altogether barren as it is said: the roots are grosse, conformable to the greatnesse of the tree, of a tawnie colour, dispersing themselues far abroad vnder the vpper crust of the earth, by meanes whereof they are often cast downe with meane blasts of winde.
@ The wood of the tree is very strong, hard and brittle, it hath not so strong and a pleasant smell as (...) of the root, neither is it in such vse. The leaues are of two sorts, some long and smooth, and not snipt about the edges: other-some, and those chiefely on the ends of the branches, are deeply gashed in, as it were diuided into three seuerall parts. I haue giuen the figure of a branch taken from a little tree, which grew in the Garden of Master Wilmote at Bow, who died some few yeares agoe. @


 The Place.
This tree groweth in the most parts of the West Indies, especially about the cape of Florida Wingandico, and Virginia, otherwise named Norembega.


 The Time.
It flourisheth and keepeth greene Winter and Sommer.



Svssafras. The Sassafras tree.




 The Names.
The Spaniards and French men haue named this tree, Sassafras: the Indians in their tongue, (...): for want of an English name we are contented to call it the Ague tree, of his vertue in healing the Ague.


 The Temperature.
The boughes and branches hereof are hot ct dry in the second degree; the rinde is hotter, (...) that it entreth into the third degree of heate and drinesse, as is manifestly perceiued in the decoction.


 The Vertues.
The best of all the tree is the root, and that  worketh the best effect, the which hath the rinde cleauing very fast to the inner part, and is of colour tawnie, and much more sweet of smell than all the tree and his branches.
The rinde tasteth of a more sweet smell  than the tree; and the water being sod with the root is of greater and better effects than any other part of the tree, and is of a more sweet smell, and therefore the Spaniards vse it, for that it worketh better and greater effects.
It is a tree that groweth neere vnto the sea, and in temperate places that haue not much drouth, nor moisture. There be mountaines growing full of them, and they cast forth a most sweet smell, so that at the beginning when they saw them first, they thought they had been trees of Cinnamon, and in part they were not deceiued: for that the rinde of this tree hath as sweet a smell as Cinamon hath, and (...) imitate it in colour and sharpnesse of taste, and pleasantnesse of smell: and so the water that is (...) of it is of a most sweet smell and taste, as the Cinamon is, and procureth the same (...) and (...) as Cinamon doth.
The wood hereof cut in smal pieces and boiled in water, to the colour of Claret wine, and drunk  for certaine daies together helpeth the dropsie, remoueth oppilation or stopping of the liuer, cureth quotidian and tertian agues, and long feuers.
The root of Sassafras hath power to comfort the liuer, and to free from oppilations, to comfort  the weake and feeble stomacke, to cause good appetite, to consume windinesse, the (...) cause of cruditie and indigestion, stay vomiting, and make sweet a stinking breath.
It prouoketh vrine, remoueth the impediments that doe cause barrennesse, and maketh women  apt to conceiue.



CHAP. 143. Of the Storax tree.

 The Description.
THe Storax tree groweth to the height and bignesse of the Quince tree: the trunke or bodie is couered with a barke or rinde like vnto the Birch tree: the branches are small and limmer, whereon do grow leaues like those of the Quince tree, greenish aboue, and whitish vnderneath: among which come forth white floures, like those of the Orange tree, of an vnpleasant smell: after commeth the fruit or berries, standing vpon long and slender footstalks, couered ouer with a little woollinesse, of the bignesse of a bladder nut, and of the same colour; wherein is contained small

Styrax arbor. The Storax tree.
seed, whereunto also cleaue certaine (...) teares, bearing the name of the tree, and which issue from the trunk or body when it is wounded.


 The Place.
This tree groweth in diuers places of France, Italy and Spaine, where it bringeth forth little or no gum at all: it groweth in Iudaea, Pamphylia, Syria, Pisidia, Sidon, and many other places of Iurie or Palestine, as also in diuers Islands in the Mediterranean sea, namely Cyprus, Candy, Zant, and other places, where it bringeth forth his gummy liquour in full perfection of sweetnesse, and also in great plenty, where it is gathered and put into great Canes or Reeds, whereof as some deeme it took the name Calamita; others deeme oft he leaues of Reeds wherein they wrap it: hereof I haue two small trees in my garden, the which I raised of seed.


 The Time.
It floureth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.


 The Names.
This tree, as may be gathered by some, was called Styrax, by reason of that gum or liquour which droppeth out of the same, being like vnto the hollow pipes of Ise, that hang at the eaues of houses in Winter, called Styria, or of the Canes or the leaues of Reeds spoken of before: in Latine, Storax Calamitae: in English, Storax, which is kept in Canes or the leaues of Reeds: there floweth from some of these trees a (...) gummie liquor, which neuer groweth naturally hard, but remaineth alwaies thinne, which is called liquid Styrax, or Storax.


 The Temperature.
The gum of this tree is of an heating, mollifying, and concocting qualitie.


 The Vertues.
It helpeth the cough, the falling downe of rheumes and humours into the chest, and hoarsnesse  of the voice: it also helpeth the noise and sounding of the eares, preuaileth against Strumas, or the Kings euill, nodes on the nerues, and hard swellings proceeding of a cold cause: it preuaileth also against all cold poisons, as Hemlocks and such like.
Of this gum there are made sundry excellent perfumes, pomanders, sweet waters, sweet bags, and sweet washing balls, and diuers other sweet chaines and bracelets, whereof to write were impertinent to this historie.



CHAP. 144. Of the Sorrowfull tree or Indian Mourner.

 The Description.
ARbor tristis, the sad or sorrowfull tree waxeth as big as an Oliue tree, garnished with many goodly branches, set full of leaues like those of the Plum tree: among which come forth most odoriferous and sweet smelling floures, whose stalkes are of the colour of Saffron, which flourish and shew themselues onely in the night time, and in the day time looke withered and with a mourning cheere: the leaues also at that time shrinke in themselues together, much like a tender plant that is frost bitten, very sadly lumping, lowring, and hanging downe the head, as though it loathed the light, and could not abide the (...) of the Sun. I should but in vain lose labour in repeating a foolish fansie of the Poeticall Indians, who would make fooles beleeue, that this tree was once a faire daughter of a great Lord or King, and that the Sun was in loue with her, with other toies which I

Arbor tristis. The sorrowfull tree.
omit. @ The floures are white, somewhat like those of Iasmine, but more double, and they are of a very sweet smell: there succeed them many little cods, containing some six seeds a piece somewhat like those of Stramonium. @


 The Place, Time, and Names.
This tree groweth in the East Indies, especially in Goa, and Malayo: in Goa it is called Parizataco: in Malayo, Singadi: in Decan, Pul: of the Arabians, Guart: and of the Persians and Turkes, Gul: in English, the Sad or Sorrowfull tree, or the Indian mourner. The time is specified in the description.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
We haue no ceartaine knowledge of the  temperature hereof, neuerthelesse we read that the Indians do colour their (...) and meates with the stalkes of the floures hereof in stead of Saffron, or whatsoeuer that they desire to haue of a yellow colour.
It is reported, that if a linnen cloth be steeped  in the distilled water of the floures; and the eyes bathed and washed therewith, helpeth the itching and paine therof, and staieth the humours that fall downe to the same.
There is made of the splinters of the wood  certaine tooth-pickes, and many pretty toies for pleasure.



CHAP. 145. Of the Balsam tree.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of trees from which do flow Balsames, very different one from another, not onely in forme, but also in fruit, liquour, and place of growing; the which to distinguish would require more time and trauell than either our small time wil affoord, or riches for our maintenance to discouer the same in their naturall countries: which otherwise by report to set downe certaine matter by incertainties, would discredit the Author, and no profit shall arise thereby to the Reader: notwithstanding we wil set downe so much as we haue found in the workes of some trauellers, which best agree with the truth of the historie.


 The Description.
1 THere be diuers trees growing in the Indies, whose fruits are called by the name of the fruit of the Balsam tree: among the rest this whose figure we haue set forth vnto your view, we our selues haue seene and handled; and therefore the better able to describe it. It is a fruit very crooked, and hollowed like the palme of an hand, two inches long, halfe an inch thicke, (...) with a thicke smooth (...), of the colour of a drie Oken leafe; wherein is contained a kernell (of the same length and thicknesse, apt to (...) said shell or rinde) of the substance of an Almond; of the colour of ashes, fat, and oilie; of a good smell, and very vnpleasant in taste.
2 The wood we haue dry brought vnto vs from the Indies for our vse in Physicke (a small description may serue for a dry sticke) neuerthelesse wee haue other fruits brought from the Indies, whose figures are not set forth, by reason they are not so well knowne as desired; whereof one is of the bignes of a Wal-nut, somewhat broad on the vpper side, with a rough or rugged shell, vneuen, blacke of colour, and full of a white kernell, with much iuice in it; of a pleasant taste and smell, like the oile of Mace: the whole fruit is exceeding light, in respect of the quantitie or bignesse, euen as

it were a piece of Corke; which notwithstanding sinketh to the bottome when it falleth into the water, like as doth a stone.


1 Balsamifructus. The fruit of the Balsam tree.


@ 3 Balsamum Alpini cum Carpobalsamo. The Balsam tree with the fruit.


 This tree, saith Garcias, that beareth the fruit Carpobalsamum, is also one of the Balsam trees: it groweth to the height and bignesse of the Pomegranate tree, garnished with very many branches: whereon do grow leaues like those of Rue, but of colour whiter, alwaies growing greene: amongst which come forth floures, whereof we haue no certaintie: after which commeth forth fruit like that of the Turpentine tree, which in shoppes is called Carpobalsamum, of a pleasant smell; but the liquour which floweth from the wounded tree is much sweeter: which liquour of some is called Opobalsamum.
@ Prosper Alpinus hath writ a large Dialogue of the Balsam of the Antients, and also figured and deliuered the historie thereof in his booke De Plant. Aegypti, cap. 14. whether I refer the curious I haue presented you with a slip from his tree, and the Carpobalsamum (...) forth by our Author, which seemes to be of the same plant. The leaues of this are like to those of Lentiscus, alwaies greene, and winged, growing three, fiue, or seuen fastened to one foot-stalke; the wood is gummie, reddish, and well smelling: the floures are small and (...) like those of Acatia, growing vsually three nigh together: the fruit is of the shape and bignesse of that of the Turpentine tree, containing yellow and well smelling seeds, filled with a yellowish moisture like honey, their taste is bitterish, and somwhat biting the tongue. @
Of these Balsam trees there is yet another sort: the fruit whereof is as it were a kernell without a shell, couered with a thin skin straked with many veines, of a browne colour: the meat is firm and solid, like the kernell of the Indian Nut, of a white colour, and without smell, but of a grateful tast; and it is thought to be hot in the first degree, or in the beginning of the second.
There be diuers sorts more, which might be omitted because of tediousnesse: neuerthelesse I wil trouble you with two speciall trees worthy the noting: there is, saith my Author, in America a great tree of monstrous hugenesse, beset with leaues and boughes euen to the ground; the trunke wherof is couered with a twofold bark, the one thick like vnto Corke, and another thin next to the tree: from betweene which barks doth flow (the vpper barke being wounded) a white Balsam like vnto teares

or drops, of a most sweet sauour, and singular effects, for one drop of this which thus (...) out of the tree, is worth a pound of that which is made by decoction: the fruit hereof is small in respect of the others; it seldome exceedeth the bignes of a Pease, of a bitter taste, inclosed in a narrow huske, of the length of a finger, something thin, and of a white colour; which the Indians do vse against head-ache: which fruit of most is that we haue before described, called Carpobalsamum.
It is also written, that in the Island called Hispaniola; there groweth a small tree, of the height of two men, without the industry of man, hauing stalkes or (...) of the colour of ashes; whereon do grow greene leaues, sharpe at both ends, but more greene on the vpper side than on the lower; hauing a middle rib somewhat thicke and standing out; the foot-stalkes whereon they grow are somewhat reddish: among which leaues commeth fruit growing by clusters, as long as a mans hand, fingers and all: the stones or graines in the fruit be few, and greene; but growing to rednesse more and more as the fruit waxeth ripe. From the which is gathered a juice after this manner: they take the young shootes and buds of the tree, and also the clusters of the fruit, which they bruise, and boile in water to the thickenesse of hony, which being strained, they keepe it for their vses.
They vse it against wounds and vlcers; it stoppeth and stancheth the bloud; maketh them cleane; bringeth vp the flesh, and healeth them mightily, and with better successe than true Balsame. The branches of the tree being cut, do cast forth by drops a certaine cleare water, more worth than Aqua vitae, most wholesome against wounds, and all other diseases proceeding from cold causes, if it be drunken some few daies together.


 The Place.
These trees grow in diuers parts of the world, some in Aegypt, and most of those countries adiacent: there groweth of them in the East and West Indies; as trauellers in those parts report.


 The Time.
These trees for the most part keepe greene winter and Sommer.


 The Names.
Balsame is called in Greeke, (...): in Latine also Balsamum: of the Arabians Balseni, Balesina, and Belsan: in Italian, Balsamo: in French, Baume.
The liquor that floweth out of the tree when it is wounded, is called Opobalsamum: the wood (...): the fruit Carpobalsamum: and the liquor which naturally floweth from the tree in Aegypt Balsamum.


 The Temperature.
Balsame is hot and dry in the second degree, with astriction.


 The Vertues.
Naturall Balsame taken in a morning fasting, with a little Rosewater or wine, to the quantitie  of fiue or six drops, helpeth those that be asthmatike, or short of winde: it preuaileth against the paines of the bladder, and stomacke, and comforteth the same mightily; and also amendeth a stinking breath; and takes away the shaking fits of the quotidian (...), if it be taken two or three times.
It helpeth consumptions, clenseth the barren wombe, especially being annointed vpon a pessary, or mother suppositorie, and vsed.
The stomacke being annointed therewith, digestion is helped thereby; it also preserueth the  stomacke from obstructions and windinesse; it helpeth the hardnesse of the spleene; easeth the griefes of the reines and belly, proceeding of cold causes.
It also taketh away all manner of aches, proceeding of cold causes, if they be annointed therewith;  but more speedily, if a linnen cloth be wet therein, and laid thereon: vsed in the same manner, it dissolueth hard tumors, called (...); and strengthneth the weake members.
The same refresheth the braine, and comforteth the parts adioining, it helpeth the palsie, convulsions, and all griefes of the sinewes, if they be annoitned therewith.
The maruellous effects that it worketh in new and greene wound, were heere too long to set  downe, and also superfluous; considering the skilfull Chirurgion whom it most concerneth, doth know the vse thereof; and as for the beggerly Quacksaluers, Runnagates, and knauish Mountibanks, we are not willing to instruct them in things so far aboue their reach, capacitie and worthinesse.



CHAP. 146. Of a kinde of Balme, or Balsame Tree.

 The Description.
THis tree which the people of the Indies do call Molli, groweth to the bignesse of a great tree, hauing a trunke or body of a darke greene colour, sprinkled ouer with many ash coloured

spots: the branches are many, and of very great beautie; whereupon do grow leaues not vnlike to those of the Ash-tree, consisting of many small leaues, set vpon a middle rib; growing narrower euer towards the point, euery particular one jagged on the sides like the teeth of a saw; which being plucked from the stem, yeeldeth forth a milkie juice; tough and clammie, (...) like the bruised leaues of Fenell, and as it seemeth in taste somewhat astringent: the (...) grow in clusters vpon the twiggie branches, like those of the Vine a little before the grapes be formed: after followeth the fruit or berries, somewhat greater than Pepper cornes, of an oilic substance, greene at the first, and of a darke reddish colour when they be ripe. @ The first of the sigures was taken from a tree, only of three yeeres growth, but the latter from a tree come to his full growth, as it is affirmed in Clusius his Cur. Poster. It differs only in that the leaues of the old trees are not at all snipt or diuided on the edges. @


1 Molli, siue Molly Clusij, and Lobelij. The Balsame tree of Clusius and Lobels description.


@ 2 Molle arboris adult ae ramus. A branch of the old tree of Molle.




 The Place.
This tree, saith a learned Physition called Ioh. (...), doth grow in the King of Spaine his garden at Madryll, which was the first that euer he did see: since which time, Iohn Ferdinando Secretary vnto the foresaid king did shew vnto the said Fragosus in his owne 'garden a tree so large, and of such beautie, that he was neuer satisfied with looking on it, and meditating vpon the vertues thereof. Which words I haue receiued from the hands of a famous learned man, called Mr. (...) Browne, Dr. in Physicke, and Physition to the Queenes (...), at the impression hereof; faithfully translated out of the Spanish tongue, without adding or taking any thing away.
They grow plentifully in the vales and low grounds of Peru, as all affirme that haue trauelled to the VVest Indies; as also those that haue described the singularities thereof. My selfe with diuers others, as namely Mr. Nicholas Lete, a worshipfull Merchant of the Citie of London; and also a most skilfull Apothecary, Mr. Iames Garret, who haue receiued seeds hereof from the right Honorable the Lord Hunsdon, Lord high Chamberlaine of England, worthy of triple honour for his care in getting, as also for his curious keeping rare and strange things brought from the farthest parts of the world; which seedes we haue sowne in our gardens, where they haue brought forth plants of a foot high; and also their beautifull leaues: notwithstanding our care, (...),

and industry, they haue perished at the first approch of winter, as not being able by reason of their tendernesse to indure the cold of our Winter blasts.


 The Time.
As touching the time of his flourishing, and bringing his fruit to maturitie, we haue as yet no certaine knowledge, but is thought to be greene both VVinter and Sommer.


 The Names.
This most notable (...) is called by the Indian name Molle: of some, Molly, and Muelle, taken from his tender softnesse, as some haue deemed: it may be called the Fennell tree, or one of the Balme, or Balsam trees.


 The Temperature.
This tree is thought to be of an astringent or binding qualitie; whereby it appeares besides the hot temperature it hath, to be compounded of diuers other faculties.


 The Vertues.
The Indians vse to seeth the fruit or berries hereof in water, and by a speciall skill they haue in  the boiling, do make a most wholesome wine or drinke, as also a kind of vineger, and sometimes hony; which are very strange effects, these three things being so contrary in taste.
The leaues boiled, and the decoction drunke, helpeth them of any disease proceeding of a cold  cause.
The gum which issueth from the tree, being white like vnto Manna, dissolued in milke, taketh  away the web of the eics, and cleareth the sight, being wiped ouer with it.
The barke of this tree boiled, and the legs that be swolne and full of paine, bathed and washed  with the decoction diuers times, taketh away both infirmities in short space.
This tree is of such estimation among the Indians, that they worship it as a god, according vnto  their sauage rites and ceremonies: much like as Pliny reporteth of Homers Moly, the most renowned of all plants, which they had in old time in such estimation and reuerence, that as it is recorded, the gods gaue it the name of Moly, and so writeth Ouid:

Pacifer huic dederat florem Cyllenius album,
Moly vocant Superi, nigraradice tenetur.

If any be desirous to see more hereof, they may reade a learned discourse of it set forth in the Latine  tongue, by the learned Lobel, who hath at large written the historie thereof, dedicated vnto the right Honourable, the Lord Chamberlaine, at the Impression hereof, faithfully ouerseene and examined by the learned Physition before remembred, Mr. Doctor Browne, and his censure vpon the same. @ Together with Lobels reply, who iudged this plant (and not without good reason) to be a kinde of the true Balsam of the Antients, and not much different from that set forth by Prosper Alpinus, whereof I haue made mention in the foregoing chapter. @



CHAP. 147. Of the Canell, or Cinnamon tree.

 The Description.
1 THe tree which hath the Cinnamon for his barke is of the stature of an Oliue tree: hauing a body as thick as a mans thigh, from which the Cinnamon is taken; but that taken from the smaller branches is much better: which branches or boughes are many, and very straight; wheron do grow beautifull leaues, in shape like those of the Orenge tree, and of the colour of the Bay leafe (not as it hath been reported) like vnto the leaues of flags or floure de-Luce: among these pleasant leaues and branches come forth many faire white floures, which turne into round blacke fruit or berries, of the bignesse of an Hasell Nut, or the Oliue berry, and of a blacke colour; out of which is pressed an oile, that hath no smell at all vntill it be rubbed and chafed betweene the hands: the trunke or body with the greater armes or boughes of the tree are couered with a double or twofold barke, like that of Suber, the Corke tree: the innermost whereof is the true and pleasant Cinnamon, which is taken from the tree, and cast vpon the ground in the heate of the Sunne; through the heate

Canellae folium, Bacillus, and Cortex. The leafe, barke, and trunke of the Cinnamon tree.
thereof it turneth and foldeth it selfe round together, as wee daily see by viewing the thing it selfe: this tree being thus peeled, recouereth a new barke in the space of three yeares, and is then ready to be disbarked as afore. That Cinnamon which is of a palecolour hath not been well dried in the Sunne: that of a faire browne colour is best; and that which is blackish, hath been too much dried, and also hath taken some wet in the time of drying.
@ 2 Besides the Cinnamon vulgarly knowne and vsed, there is another sort which also is commonly receiued for the Cassia of Dioscorides and the Antients. Now this differs from the former in that it is of a redder colour, of a more hard, sollid, and compact substance, commonly also thicker, and if you chew it, more clammy and viscous: the taste and smell are much like Cinnamon, yet not altogether so strong as that of the best Cinnamon. There is much controuersie in late Writers concerning both the true Cinnamon, and Cassia of the Antients: the which I haue not time nor space here to mention, much lesse to insist vpon: I haue obserued that both the Cinnamon and Cassia that we haue are couered ouer with a rough grayish barke, like that of an Oke or other such tree, which is cleane scraped off, and taken away before it be brought to vs. @


 The Place.
The chiefest places where the trees doe grow that beare Cinnamon, are Zeilan, and Malauar: but those of Zeilan are the best: they grow in other of the Molucca Ilands, as Iaoa, or Iaua, the greater and the lesse, and also in Mindanoa, for the most part vpon mountaines.


 The Time.
The Cinnamon tree groweth green winter and Sommer, as do all the other trees of the Moluccaes, and East Indies for the most part: the boughes whereof are cut off at seasonable times, by the expresse commandement of the King of the Country; and not before he hauc appointed the time.
There hath beene some controuersie among writers concerning the tree whose bark is Cassia, and that tree that beareth Cinnamon, making them both one tree: but that opinion is not to be receiued: for there is a great difference betweene them, as there is betwixtan Oke, and a Chestnut tree; for the tree whose barke is Cassia, is doubtlesse a bastard kinde of Canell, or Cinnamon: in shew it is very like, but in sweetnesse of smell and other circumstances belonging to Cinnamon, farre inferiour.


 The Names.
Cinnamon is called in Italian Canella: in Spanish, Canola: in French, Canelle: in high Dutch, Zimmet coezlin: the Grecians, (...) the Latines likewise Cinnamomum: the Arabians, Darseni, and as some say, Querfaa, others, Querfe: in Zeilan, Cuurde: in the Island Iaua they name it Cameaa: in Ormus, Darchini (i.) (...) Chinense, the wood of China: in Malauar, Cais mains, which in their tongue signifieth Dulce (...), Sweet wood: in English, Cinnamome, Cinnamon, and Canell. The other is called Cassia, and Cassia lignea.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Dioscorides writeth, that Cinnamon hath power to warme, and is of thinne parts: it is also drie

and astringent, it prouoketh vrine, cleareth the eies, and maketh sweet breath.
The decoction bringeth downe the menses, preuaileth against the bitings of venomous beasts' the inflammation of the intestines and reines.
The distilled water hereof is profitable to many, and for diuers infirmities, it comforteth the  (...), cold, and feeble stomacke, easeth the paines and frettings of the guts and intrailes proceeding of cold causes, it amendeth the cuill colour of the face, maketh sweet breath, and giueth a most pleasant taste vnto diuers sorts of meats, and maketh the same not onely more pleasant, but also more wholesome for any bodies of what constitution soeuer they be, notwithstanding the binding qualitie.
The oile drawne chimically preuaileth against the paines of the brest, comforteth the stomacke, breaketh windinesse, causeth good digestion, and being mixed with some honie, taketh away spots from the face, being annointed therewith.
The distilled water of the floures of the tree, as Garcias the Lusitanian Physition writeth, excelleth  far in sweetnesse all other waters whatsoeuer, which is profitable for such thingsas the barke it selfe is.
Out of the berries of this tree is drawn by expression, as out of the berries of the Oliue (...), a certaine  oyle, or rather a kinde of fat like butter, without any smell at all, except it bee made warme, and then it smelleth as the Cinnamon doth, and is much vsed against the coldnesse of the sinewes all paines of the ioints, and also the paines and distemperature of the stomacke and breast.
To write as the worthinesse of the subiect requireth, would aske more time than we haue to bestow  vpon any one plant; therefore these few shall suffice, knowing that the thing is of great vse among many, and knowne to most.
@ Cassia vsed in a larger quantitie serueth well for the same purposes which Cinnamon  doth. @



CHAP. 142. Of Gum Lacke and his rotten tree.


Lacca cum suis bacillis. Gum Lacke with his staffe or sticke.



 The Description.
THe tree that bringeth forth that excremental substance called Lacca, bothin the shops of Europ and elsewhere, is called of the Arabians, Persians and Turkes, Loc (...), as who should say, Lacca of Sumutra: some which haue so termed it, haue thought that the first plentie thereof came from Sumutra, but herein they haue (...), for the abundant store thereof came from Pegu, where the inhabitants therof do cal it Lac, and others of the same Prouince, Trec: the history of which tree, according to that famous Herbarist Clusius is as followeth. [There is in the countrey of Pegu and Malabar, a great tree, whose leaues are like them of the Plum tree, hauing many small twiggie branches; when the trunk or body of the tree waxeth old, it rotteth in sundry places, wherein do breed certain great Ants or Pismires, which continually work and labour in the time of Haruest and (...) against the penurie of Winter: such is the diligence of those Ants, or such is the nature of the tree wherein they harbour, or both, that they prouide for their winter sood, a lumpe or masse of substance, which is of a crimson colour, so beautifull and so faire, as in the whole World the like is not seene, which serueth not onely to physicall, vses but is a perfect and costly colour for Painters, called by vs, Indian Lack. The Pismires (as I said) worke out this colour, by sucking the substance or matter of Lacca from the tree, as Bees do make honie and wax, by sucking the matter

thereof from all herbes, trees, and floures, and the inhabi tants of that country, do as diligently seek for this Lacca, as we in England and other countries seeke in the woods for honie; which Lacca after they haue found, they take from the tree, and dry it into a lump; among which sometimes there come ouer some sticks and pieces of the tree with the wings of the Ants, which haue fallen among it, as we daily see.
@ The Indian Lacke or Lake which is the rich colour vsed by Painters, is none of that which is vsed in shops, nor here figured or described by Clusius, wherefore our Author was much mistaken in that he here confounds together things so different; for this is of a resinous substance, and a faint red colour, and wholly vnfit for Painters, but vsed alone and in composition to make the best hard sealing wax. The other seemes to be an artificiall thing, and is of an exquisite crimson colour, but of what it is, or how made, I haue not as yet found any thing that carries any probabilitie of truth. @


 The Place.
The tree which beareth Lacca groweth in Zeilan and Malauar, and in other parts of the East Indies.


 The Time.
Of the time we haue no certaine knowledge.


 The Names.
Indian Lacke is called in shops Lacca: in Italian, Lachetta: Auicen calleth it Luch: Paulus and Dioscorides, as some haue thought, Cancamum: the other names are expressed in the description.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Lack or Lacca is hot in the second degree, it comforteth the heart and liuer, openeth obstructions, expelleth vrine, and preuaileth against the dropsie.
There is an artificiall Lack made of the scrapings of Brasill and Saffron, which is vsed of Painers, and not to be vsed in Physicke as the other naturall Lacca.



CHAP. 149. Of the Indian leafe.


Tamalapatra. The Indian leafe.



 The Description.
TAmalapatra, or the Indian leafe grows vpon a great tree like the Orenge tree, with like leaues also, but broader, a little sharp pointed, of a greene glistering colour, and three small ribs running through each leafe, after the manner of Ribwort, wherby it is easie to be known: it smelleth somewhat like vnto Cloues, but not so strong as Spikenard or Mace (as some haue deemed) nor yet of so sub till and quick a sent as Cinnamon. There was sent or added vnto this figure by Cortusus a certaine fruit like vnto a small Acorn, with this inscription, Fructus Canellae, the fruit of the Canell tree, which may be doubted of, considering the description of the forenamed tree holden generally of most to be perfect.


 The Place.
The Indian leafe groweth not fleeting vpon the water like vnto Lens palustris, as Dioscorides and Pliny do set downe, (though learned and painfull writers) but is the leafe of a great tree, a branch whereof wee haue set forth vnto your view, which groweth in Arabia and Cambaya, far from the water side.


 The Time.
Of the time we haue no certain knowledge, but it is supposed to be green winter and sommer.



 The Names.
Tamalapatra is called of the Indians in their mother tongue, especially of the Arabians, (...) Indi, or Ladegi Indi, that is, Folium Indicum, or Indum, the Indian leafe: but the Mauritanians doe call it Tembul. The Latines and Grecians following some of the Arabians, haue called it Malabathrum.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The Indian leafe is hot and dry in the second degree, agreeing with Nardus in temperature, or as  others report with Mace: it prouoketh vrine mightily, warmeth and comforteth the stomacke, and helpeth digestion.
It preuaileth against the pin and web in the eyes, the inflamed and waterie eyes, and all other infirmities  of the same.
It is laid among cloathes, as well to keepe them from moths and other vermine, as also to giue  vnto them a sweet smell.



CHAP. 150. Of the Cloue tree.


Caryophylli veri Clusij. The true forme of the Cloue tree.



 The Description.
THe Cloue tree groweth great in forme like vnto the Bay tree, the trunke or bodie whereof is couered with a russet barke: the branches are many, long, and very brittle, whereupon do grow leaues like those of the Bay tree, but somewhat narrower: amongst which come the floures, white at the first, after of a greenish colour, waxing of a darke red colour in the end: which floures are the very cloues when they grow hard: after when they be dried in the Sunne they become of that dusky black colour which we dayly see, wherein they continue. For those that wee haue in estimation are beaten downe to the ground before they be ripe, and are suffered there to lie vpon the ground vntill they bee dried throughly, where there is neither grasse, weeds, nor any other herbes growing to hinder the same, by reason the tree draweth vnto it selfe for his nourishment all the moisture of the earth a great circuit round about, so that nothing can there grow for want of moisture, and therfore the more conuenient for the drying of the Cloues. Contrariwise, that grosse kinde of Cloues which hath beene supposed to be the male, are nothing else than fruit of the same tree tarrying there vntill it fall downe of it selfe vnto the ground, where by reason of his long lying, and meeting with some raine in the mean season, it loseth the quick taste that the others haue. Some haue called these Fusti, whereof we may English them Fusses. Some affirme that the floures hereof surpasse all other floures in sweetnesse when they are greene; and hold the opinion, that the hardned floures are not the Cloues themselues, (as wee haue written) but thinke them rather to be the seat or huske wherein the floures doe grow: the greater number hold the former opinion. And further, that the trees are increased without labour, graffing, planting, or other industrie, but by the falling of the fruit, which beare fruit within eight yeares after they be risen vp, and so continue bearing for an hundred yeares together, as the inhabitants of that countrey do affirme.


 The Place.
The Cloue tree groweth in some few places of the Molucca Islands, as in Zeilan, Iaua the greater and the lesse, and in diuers other places.



 The Time.
The Cloues are gathered from the fifteenth of September vnto the end of Februarie, not with hands, as we gather Apples, Cherries, and such like fruit, but by beating the tree, as Wall-nuts are gotten, as we haue written in the description.


 The Names.
The fruit hereof was vnknowne to the antient Grecians: of the later writers called (...): in Latine also Caryophyllus, and Clavus: in French, Clou de Gyrofle: the Mauritanians, Charhumfel: in Italian, Carofano: in high-Dutch, Nagel: in Spanish, Clauo de especia: of the Indians, Calasur: in the Molucca's, Changue: of the Pandets, Arumfel, and Charumfel: in English, Cloue tree, and Cloues.


 The Temperature.
Cloues are hot and dry in the third degree.


 The Vertues.
Cloues strengthen the stomacke, liuer, and heart, helpe digestion, and prouoke vrine.
The Portugall women that dwell in the East Indies draw, from the Cloues when they bee yet  greene, a certaine liquor by distillation, of a most fragrant smell, which comforteth the heart, and is of all cordials the most effectuall.
Cloues stop the belly: the oile or water thereof dropped into the eyes, sharpens the sight, and  clenseth away the cloud or web in the same.
The weight of foure drams of the pouder of Cloues taken in milke procureth the act of generation.
There is extracted from the Cloues a certaine oile or rather thicke butter of a yellow colour;  which being chafed in the hands smelleth like the Cloues themselues, wherewith the Indians do cure their wounds and other hurts, as we do with Balsam.
The vse of Cloues, not onely in meat and medicine, but also in sweet pouder and such like, is  sufficiently knowne: therefore this shall suffice. 

There were formerly three figures in this chapter: wherefore I omitted two as impertinent.




CHAP. 151. Of the Nutmeg tree.


1 Nux Muscata rotunda, siue foemina. The round or female Nutmeg.


2 Nux Myristica oblonga, fiue (...). The longish or male Nutmeg.





Nux Moschatacum sua Maci. The Nutmeg with his Mace about him.



 The Description.
1 THe tree that beareth the Nutmeg and the Mace is in forme like to the Peare tree, but the leaues of it are like those of the Bay or Orenge tree, alwaies greene on the vpper side, and more whitish vnderneath; among which come forth the Nut and Mace as it were the floures. The Nut appeareth first, compassed about with the Mace, as it were in the middle of a single rose, which in processe of time doth wrap and inclose the Nut round on euery side: after commeth a huske like that of the Wall-nut, but of an harder substance, which incloseth the Nut with his Mace as the Wall-nut husk doth couer the Nut, which in time of ripenesse doth cleaue of it selfe as the Wall-nut huske doth, and sheweth his Mace, which then is of a perfect crimson colour, and maketh a most goodly shew, especially when the tree is well laden with fruit: after the Nut becommeth dry, the Mace likewise gapeth and forsaketh the Nut, euen as the first huske or couerture, and leaues it bare and naked, as we all do know; at which time it getteth to it selfe a kinde of darke yellow colour, and loseth that braue crimson dye which it had at the first.
@ 2 The tree which carrieth the male Nutmeg (according to Clusius) thus differs from the last described: the leaues are like those of the former in shape, but much bigger, being sometimes a foot long, and three or foure inches broad; their common length is seuen or eight inches, and bredth two and a halfe: they are of a whitish colour vnderneath, and greene and shining aboue. The Nuts also grow at the very ends of the branches, sometimes two or three together, and not onely one, as in the common kinde. The Nut it selfe is also larger and longer: the Mace that incompasses it is of a more elegant colour, but not so strong as that of the former.
I can scarse beleeue our Authors assertion in the foregoing description, that the Nut appeareth first, compassed about with the Mace as it were in the middest of a single Rose, etc. But I rather thinke they all come forth together, the Nutmeg, Mace, the greene outward huske and all, iust as we see Wall-nuts do, and onely open themselues when they come to full maturitie. In the third figure you may see exprest the whole manner of the growing of the Nutmeg, together with both the sorts of Nutmegs taken forth of their shells. @


 The Place.
The Nutmeg tree groweth in the Indies, in an Island especially called Banda, and in the Islands of Molucca, and in Zeilan, though not so good as the first.


 The Time.
The fruit is gathered in September in great aboundance, all things being common in those countries.


 The Names.
The Nutmeg tree is called of the Grecians, (...): of the Latines, Nux (...), and Nux Myristica: in Italian, Noce Moscada: in Spanish, Nuez de escetie: in French, Noix Muscade: in high-Dutch, Moschat Nurz: of the Arabians, Leuzbane, or Gianziban: of the countrey people where they grow, Palla: The Maces, Bunapalla. In Decan the Nut is called Iapatri, and the Maces, Iaifol: of Auicen, Iausiband, (i.) Nux Bandensis. The Maces he calleth Befbase: in English, Nutmeg.


 The Temperature.
The Nutmeg, as the Mauritanians write, is hot and dry in the second degree complete, and somwhat astringent.


 The Vertues.
Nutmegs cause a sweet breath, and amend those that do stink, if they be much chewed and holden  in the mouth.

The Nutmeg is good against freckles in the face, quickneth the sight, strengthens the belly and  feeble liuer; it taketh away the swelling in the spleene, stayeth the laske, breaketh winde, and is good against all cold diseases in the body.
Nutmegs bruised and boiled in Aqua vitae vntill they haue wasted and consumed the moisture, adding thereto of Rhodomel (that is, honey of Roses) gently boiling them, being strained to the forme of a syrrup, cure all paines proceeding of windie aud cold causes, if three spoonfulls be giuen fasting for certaine dayes together.
The same bruised and boyled in strong white wine vntill three parts be sodden away, with the  roots of Mother-wort added thereto in the boyling, and strained: this liquor drunke with some sugar cureth all gripings of the belly proceeding of windinesse.
As touching the choice, there is not any so simple but knoweth that the heauiest, fattest, and fullest  of iuice are the best, which may easily be found out by pricking the same with a pinne or such like.



CHAP. 152. Of the Pepper Plant.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Pepper, that is to say, white, blacke, and long Pepper, one (...) and longer than the other; and also a kinde of Ethiopian Pepper.


1 Piper nigrum. Blacke Pepper.


2 Piper album. White Pepper.




 The Description.
1 THe Plant that beareth the (...) Pepper groweth vp like a Vine among bushes and brambles where it naturally groweth; but where it is manured it is sowne at the bottome of the tree Faufel and the Date trees, whereon it taketh hold, and clymbeth vp euen to the top, as doth the Vine, ramping and taking hold with his clasping tendrels of any other

thing it meeteth withall. The leaues are few in number, @ growing at each ioint one, first on one side of the stalke, then on the other, like in shape to the long vndiuided leaues of luy, but thinner, sharpe pointed, and sometimes so broad, that they are foure inches ouer, but most commonly two inches broad, and foure long, hauing alwaies fiue pretty large nerues running alongst them. The fruit grow clustering together vpon long stalks, which come forth at the ioints against the leaues, as you may see in the figure: the root (as one may coniecture) is creeping; for the branches that lie on the ground do at their ioints put forth new fibres or roots. We are beholden to Clusius for this exact figure and description, which he made by certaine branches which were brought home by the Hollanders from the East Indies. The curious may see more hereof in his Exotickes and notes vpon Garcias. @


I haue omitted in this chapter (...) (...) (...) (...), which was formerly here.

 3 Piper longum. Long Pepper.


4 Piper Aethiopicum, siue Vita longa. Pepper of Ethiopia.


2 The Plant that brings white Pepper is not to be distinguished from the other plant, but only by the colour of the fruit, no more than a Vine that beareth blacke Grapes, from that which bringeth white: and of some it is thought, that the selfe same plant doth sometimes change it selfe from black to white, as diuers other plants do. @ Neither Clusius, nor any other else that I haue yet met with, haue deliuered vs any thing of certaine, of the plant whereon white Pepper growes: Clusius only hath giuen vs the manner how it growes vpon the stalkes, as you may see it here exprest @.
There is also another kinde of Pepper, seldome brought into these parts of Europe, called Piper Canarium: it is hollow within, light, and empty, but good to draw flegme from the head, to helpe the tooth-ache and cholericke affects.
3 The tree that beareth long Pepper hath no similitude at all with the plant that brings black and white Pepper: some haue deemed them to grow all on one tree, which is not consonant to truth, for they grow in countries far distant one from another, and also that countrey where there is blacke Pepper hath not any of the long Pepper; and therefore Galen following Dioscorides, were together both ouerseen in this point. This tree, saith Monardes, is not great, yet of a wooddy substance, dispersing here and there his clasping tendrels, wherewith it taketh hold of other trees and such other things as do grow neere vnto it. The branches are many and twiggie, whereon growes the fruit, consisting of many graines growing vpon a slender foot-stalke, thrust or compact close

@ 5 Piper Caudatum. Tailed Pepper.
together, greene at the first, and afterward blackish; in taste sharper and hotter than common blacke Pepper, yet sweeter, and of better taste. @ For this figure also I acknowledge my selfe beholden to the learned and diligent Clusi us, who caused it to be drawne from a branch of some foot in length, that he receiued from Dr. Lambert Hortensius, who brought it from the Indies. The order of growing of the leaues, and fruit is like that of the blacke; but the joints stand somewhat thicker together, the leafe also doth little differ from that of the blacke, onely it is thinner, of a lighter greene, and (as (...) thought) hath a shorter foot-stalke, the veines or nerues also were lesse imminent, more in number, and run from the middle rib to the sides, rather than alongst the leafe. @
4 This other kinde of Pepper brought vnto vs from Aethiopia, called of the country where it groweth, Piper Aethiopicum: in shops, Amomum, and also Longa Vita. It groweth vpon a small tree, in manner of an hedge bush, whereupon grow long cods in bunches, a finger long, of a browne colour, vneuen, and bunched or puft vp in diuers places, diuided into fiue or six lockers or cels, each whereof containeth a round seed somewhat long, lesser than the seeds of Paeony, in taste like common Pepper, or Cardamomum, whose facultie and temperature it is thought to haue, whereof we hold it a kinde.
5 Another kinde of Pepper is sometimes brought, which the Spaniards do call Pimenta de (...), that is, Pepper with a taile: it is like vnto Cubebes, round, full, somewhat rough, blacke of colour, and of a sharpe (...) taste, like the common Pepper, of a good smell: it groweth by clusters vpon small stems or stalkes, which some haue vnaduisedly taken for Amomum. The King of Portingal forbad this kinde of Pepper to be brought ouer, for feare least the right Pepper should be the lesse esteemed, and so himselfe hindered in the sale thereof.


 The Place.
Blacke and white Pepper grow in the kingdome of Malauar, and that very good; in Malaca also, but not so good; and also in the Islands Sunde and Cude: there is great store growing in the kingdome of China, and some in Cananor, but not much.
Pepper of Aethiopia groweth in America, in all the tract of the country where Nata and Carthago are situated. The rest hath been spoken of in their seuerall descriptions. The white Pepper is not so common as the blacke, and is vsed there in stead of salt.


 The Time.
The plant riseth vp in the first of the spring; the fruit is gathered in August.


 The Names.
The Grecians, who had best knowledge of Pepper, do call it (...): the Latines, Piper: the Arabians, Fulfel and Fulful: in Italian, Pepe: in Spanish, Pimenta: in French, Poiure in high-Dutch, (...): in English, Pepper.
That of Aerhiopia is called, Piper Aethiopicum, Amomum, Vita longa, and of some, Cardamomum, whereof we hold it to be a kinde. I receiued a branch hereof at the hands of a learned Physition of London, called Mr. Steuen Bredwell, with his fruit also.


 The Temperature.
The Arabians and Persian Physitians iudge, that Pepper is hot in the third degree.
But the Indian Physitians which for the most part are Emperickes, hold that Pepper is cold, as almost all other spice, which are hot indeed: the long Pepper is hot also in the third degree, and as we haue said, is thought to be the best of all the kindes.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides and others agreeing with him, affirme, that Pepper resisteth poison, and is good to  be put in medicaments for the eies.

All Pepper heateth, prouoketh vrine, digesteth, draweth, disperseth, and clenseth the dimnesse  of the sight as Dioscorides noteth.



CHAP. 153. Of bastard Pepper, called Betle, or Betre.


Betle, siue Betre. Bastard Pepper.



 The (...).
THis plant climeth and rampeth vpon trees, bushes, or whatsoeuer else it meeteth withall, like vnto the Vine, or the blacke Pepper, whereof some hold it for a kinde. The leaues are like those of the greater Bindeweed, but somewhat longer, of a dustie colour, with diuers veines or ribs running through the same. The fruit groweth among the leaues, very crookedly writhed, in shape like the taile of a Lyzard, of the taste of Pepper, yet very pleasant to the palate.


 The Place.
It groweth among the Date trees, and (...), in most of the Molucca Islands, especially in the marrish grounds.


 The Time.
The time answereth that of Pepper.


 The Names.
This hath been taken for the Indian leafe, but not properly: of most it is called Tembul, and Tambul: in Malauar (...): in Decan, Guzarat, and Canam it is called Pam: in Molaio, Siri.


 The Vse and Temperature.
The leaues chewed in the mouth are of a bitter taste, whereupon (saith Garcias) they put thereto some Areca and with the lime made of oyster shels, whereunto they also adde some Amber Griece, Lignum Aloes, and such like, which they stampe together, making it into a paste, which they role vp into round balls, keepe dry for their vse, and carry the same in their mouthes vntill by little and little it is consumed; as when we carry sugar-Candy in our mouthes, or the iuice of Licorice; which is not onely vnto the seely Indians meate, but also drinke in their tedious trauels, refreshing their wearied spirits; and helping memory: which is esteemed among the Empericke Physitions, to be hot and dry in the second degree. @ Garcias doth not affirme that the Indians eate it for meate, or in want of drinke, but that they eate it after meate, and that to giue the breath a pleasant sent, which they count a great grace, so that if an inferiour person that hath not chewed Betre, or some such thing, come to speak with any great man, he holds his hand before his mouth lest his breath should offend him. @



CHAP. 154. Of Graines, or Graines of Paradise.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Graines, some long, others Peare fashion; some greater; and others lesser.



 The Description.
@ THe first figure hereof setteth forth vnto your view the cod wherein the hot spice lieth, which we call Graines: in shops, Grana Paradisi: it groweth, by the report of the Learned, vpon a low herby plant: the leaues are some foure inches long, and three broad, with somewhat a thicke middle rib, from which run transuerse fibres; they much in shape resemble those of Cloues. The fruit is like a great cod or huske, in shape like a Fig when it groweth vpon the tree, but of colour russet, thrust full of small seeds or graines of a darke reddish colour (as the Figure sheweth which is diuided) of an exceeding hot taste.


Cardamomi genera. The kindes or sorts of Graines.


(...) manus vulg


Caxdamomum manus vulg.


The other sorts may be distinguished by the sight of the picture, considering the onely difference consists in forme.


 The Place.
Graines grow in Ginny, and the Cardamones in all the East Indies, from the port of Calecute vnto Cananor; it groweth in Malauar, in Ioa, and in diuers other places.


 The Time.
They spring vp in May, being sowne of seed, and bring their fruit to ripenesse in September.


 The Names.
Graines are called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Cardamomum: of the Arabians, Corrumeni: of diuers Gentiles, Dore: of Auicen, Saccolaa quebir (i.) magnum: the other, Saccolaa ceguer (i.) minus. It is called in Malauar, Etremelli: in Zeilan, Encal: in Bengala, Guzarat, and Decan, Hil, and (...). The first and largest sort are called of some, Mileguetta, and Milegetta: in English, Grains, and Graines of Paradice.


 The Temperature.
Auicen writeth, that Saccolaa, Cardamomum, or Grana Paradisi, are hot and dry in the third degree, with astriction.


 The Vertues.
The Graines chewed in the mouth draw forth from the head and stomacke waterish and pituitous  humors.
They also comfort and warme the weake, cold, and feeble stomacke, helpe the ague, and rid the  shaking fits, being drunke with Sacke.




CHAP. 155. Of Yucca or Jucca.


Yucca, siue Iucca Peruana. The root whereof the bread Casaua or Cazaua is made.



 The Description.
THe Plant of whose root the Indian bread called Cazaua is made, is a low herbe consisting onely of leaues and (...): it hath neither stalke, floures, nor fruit, that I can vnderstand of others, or by experience of the plant it selfe, which hath growne in my garden foure yeares together, and yet doth grow and prosper exceedingly; neuerthelesse without stalke, fruit, or floures, as aforesaid. It hath a very great root, thicke and tuberous, and verie knobby, full of iuice somewhat sweet in taste, but of a pernicious qualitie, as saith my Author: from which root riseth vp immediately forth of the ground very many leaues ioyned vnto the head of the root in a round circle; the which are long, of the length of a cubit, hollowed like a gutter or trough, verie smooth, and of a greene colour, like that of Woade: the edges of the leaues are sharpe like the edge of a knife, and of a browne (...): the point of the leafe is a prick as sharp as a needle, which hurteth those that vnaduisedly passe by it: the leafe with aduised eye viewed is like vnto a little (...), or such like boat: they are also very tough hard to break, and not easie to cut, except the knife be very sharpe.
@ Lobel in the second part of his Aduersaria largely describes and figures this plant; and there hee affirmes hee wrot a description (the which he there sets downe) for our Author; but he did not follow it, and therefore committed these errours: First, in that hee saith it is the root whereof Cazaua bread was made; when as Lobel in his description said he thought it to be Alia species a Yucca Indica ex qua panis communis fit. Secondly, in that he set downe the place out of the Historia Lugd. (who tooke it out of Theuet) endeauouring by that meanes to confound it with that there mentioned, when as he had his from Mr. Edwards his man. And thirdly, (for which indeed he was most blame-worthy, and wherein he most shewed his weakenesse) for that hee doth confound it with the Manihot or true Yuicca, which all affirme to haue a leafe like that of hemp, parted into seuen or more diuisions: and also in that he puts it to the Arachidna of Theophrastus, when as he denies it both floure and fruit; yet within some few yeares after our Author had set forth this Worke it floured in his garden.
This some yeares puts forth a pretty stiffe round stalke some three cubits high, diuided into diuers vnequall branches carrying many pretty large floures, shaped somewhat like those of Fritillaria, but that they are narrower at their bottomes: the leaues of the floure are six: the colour on the inside white, but on the out side of an ouerworne reddish colour from the stalke to the middest of the leafe; so that it is a floure of no great beautie, yet to be esteemed for the raritie. I saw it once floure in the garden of Mr. Wilmot at Bow, but neuer since, though it hath been kept for many yeares in sundry other gardens, as with Mr. Parkinson and Mr. Tuggy. This was first written of by our Author; and since by Lobel and Mr. Parkinson, who keepe the same name, as also Bauhine, who to distinguish it from the other calls it Yucca folijs Aloes. @


 The Place.
This plant groweth in all the tract of the Indies, from the Magellane straights vnto the cape of Florida, and in most of the Islands of the Canibals, and others adioyning, from whence I had that plant brought me that groweth in my garden, by a seruant of a learned and skilfull Apothecary of Excester, named Mr. Tho. Edwards.



 The Time.
It keepeth greene both Winter and Sommer in my garden, without any couerture at all, notwithstanding the iniurie of our cold clymat.


 The Names.
It is reported vnto me by Trauellers, that the Indians do call it in some parts, Manihot, but generally Yucca and Iucca: it is thought to be the plant called of Theophrastus, Arachidna; and of Pliny, Aracidna.


 The Temperature.
This plant is hot and dry in the first degree, which is meant by the feces or drosse, when the poisonous iuice is pressed or strained forth, and is also dry in the middle of the second degree.



CHAP. 156. Of the fruit Anacardium, and Caious, or (...).

 The Description.
THe antient writers haue been very briefe in the historie of Anacardium: the Grecians haue touched it by the name of (...), taking the name from the likenesse it hath of an heart both in shape and colour, called of the Portugals that inhabit the East Indies, Faua de Malaqua, the bean of Malaca; for being greene, and as it hangeth on the tree, it resembleth a Beane, sauing that it is much bigger: but when they be dry they are of a shining blackish colour, containing between the outward rinde and the kernell (which is like an Almond) a certaine oile of a sharpe causticke or burning qualitie, called Mel Acardinum, although the kernell is vsed in meates and sauces, as we do Oliues and such like, to procure appetite.


Anacardium. The Beane of Malaca.


Caious. The kidney Beane of Malaca.


The other fruit groweth vpon a tree of the bignesse of a Peare tree: the leaues are much like to those of the Oliue tree, but thicker and fatter, of a feint greene colour: the floures are white, consisting of many small leaues much like the floures of the Cherry tree, but much doubled, without smell: after commeth the fruit (according to Clusius, of the forme and magnitude of a goose egge, full of iuice; in the end whereof is a nut) in shape like an Hares kidney, hauing two rindes, between which is contained a most hot and sharp oile like that of Anacardium, whereof it is a kind.
The Beane or kernell it selfe is no lesse pleasant and wholsome in eating, than the Pistacia, or Fisticke nut, whereof the Indians do eate with great delight, affirming that it prouoketh Venerie, wherein is their chiefest felicitie. The fruit is contained in long cods like those of Beans, but greater: neere vnto which cods commeth forth an excrescence like vnto an apple, very yellow, of a good smell, spongious within, and full of iuice, without any seeds, stones, or graines at all, somewhat sweet in taste, at the one end narrower than the other, Peare fashion, or like a little bottle, which hath bin reputed of some for the fruit, but not rightly; for it is rather an excrescence, as is the oke Apple.


 The Place.
The first growes in most parts of the East Indies, especially in Cananor, Calecute, Cambaya, and Decan. The later in Brasile.



 The Time.
These trees floure and flourish Winter and Sommer.


 The Names.
Their names haue been touched in their descriptions. The first is called Anacardium, of the likenesse it hath with an heart: of the Arabians, Balador: of the Indians, Bibo.
The second is called Caious, and is thus written, Caious, and Caius: of some, Caiocus.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The oile of the fruit is hot and dry in the fourth degree, it hath also a causticke or corrosiue qualitie: it taketh away warts, breaketh apostumes, preuaileth against leprie, alopecia, and (...) the paine of the teeth, being put into the hollownesse thereof.
The people of Malauar do vse the said oile mingled with chalke, to marke their cloathes or any  other thing they desire to be coloured or marked, as we do vse chalke, okar, and red marking stones, but their colour will not be taken forth againe by any manner of art whatsoeuer.
They also giue the kernell steeped in whay to them that be asthmaticke or short winded; and  when the fruit is yet green they sticke the same so steeped against the wormes.
The Indians for their pleasure will giue the fruit vpon a thorne or some other sharpe thing, and  hold it in the flame of a candle, or any other flame, which there will burne with such crackings, lightnings, and withall yeeld so many strange colours, that it is great pleasure to the beholders which haue not seene the like before.



CHAP. 157. Of Indian Morrice Bells, and diuers other Indian Fruits.


The figures were transposed.

 1 (...) Theueti. Indian Morrice Bels.


The figures were transposed.

 2 Fructus Higuero. Indian Morosco bels.



 The Description.
THis fruit groweth vpon a great tree of the bignesse of a Peare tree, full of branches, garnished with many leaues which are alwaies greene, three or foure fingers long, and in bredth two: when the branches are cut off there issueth a milky iuice not (...) to the fruit in his venomous

qualitie. The trunke or body is couered with a grayish barke: the timber is white and soft, not fit to make fire of, much lesse for any othervse; for being cut and put to the fire to burne, it yeeldeth sorth such a loathsome and horrible stinke, that neither man nor beast are able to endure it: wherefore the Indians haue no vse thereof, but onely of the fruit, which in shape is like the Greeke letter (...) of the bignesse of a Chestnut, and couered with a most hard shell, wherein is contained a kernel of a most venomous and poysonsome qualitie, wherewith the men being angry with their wiues, do poyson them, and likewise the women their husbands: they likewise vse to dip or anoint and invenome their arrowes therewith, the more speedily to dispatch their enemies. Which kernell they take forth with some conuenient instrument, leauing the shell as whole as may be, not touching the kernell with their hands because of its venomous qualitie, which would spoile their hands, and sometimes take away their life also. In which shells they put some little stones, and tye them vpon strings (as you may perceiue by the figure) which they dry in the Sunne, and after tye them about their legs, as we do bells, to set forth their dances, and Morosco Matachina's, wherein they take great pleasure, by reason they thinke themselues to excell in those kindes of dances. Which ratling sound doth much delight them, because it setteth forth the distinction of sounds, for they tune them and mix them with great ones and little ones, in such sort as we doe chimes or bells.
2 There is also another sort hereof, differing onely in forme; they are of the like venomous qualitie, and vsed for the same purpose. @ The fruit of Higuerro is like that of a gourd in pulpe, and it may be eaten: the shape of the fruit is round, whereas the former is three cornered. @


 The Place.
These do grow in most parts of the West Indies, especially in some of the Islands of the Canibals, who vse them in their dances more than any of the other Indians. @ You may see these vpon strings as they are here figured, amongst many other varieties, with (...). Iohn Tradescant at South Lambeth. @


 The Time.
We haue no certaine knowledge of the time of flouring or bringing the fruit to maturitie.


 The Names and Vse.
We haue sufficiently spoken of the names and vse hereof, therefore what hath beene said may suffice.



CHAP. 158. Of the vomiting and purging Nuts.


1 Nuces vomicae. Vomiting Nuts.


1 Nuces purgantes. Purging Nuts.




 The Description.
1 AVicen and Serapio make Nux vomica, and Nux (...), to be one, whereabout there hath been much cauelling; yet the case is plaine, if the text be true, that the (...) Apple's Nux Methel Of the tree that beareth the fruit that is called in shops (...) vom (...) Nux Methel, we haue no certaine knowledge: some are of opinion, that the fruit is the (...) (...) (...) herbe, and not the nut of a tree: and therefore since the case among the learned resteth (...) (...) (...) leaue the rest that might be said to a further consideration. The fruit is round, flat, like a little (...) of a russet ouerworne colour, fat and firme, in taste sweet, and of such an (...) (...), that it is (...) possible to stampe it in a mortar to powder; but when it is to be vsed, it must be grated or scraped with some instrument for that purpose.
2 There be certaine Nuts brought from the Indies, called purging Nuts, of their qualitie in purging grosse and filthie humors, for want of good instruction from those that haue trauelled the Indies, we can write nothing of the tree it selfe: the Nut is somewhat long, ouall, or in shape like an egge, of a browne colour: within the shell is contained a kernell, in taste sweet, and of a purging facultie.


 The Place and Time.
These Nuts do grow in the desarts of Arabia, and in some places of the East Indies: we haue no certaine knowledge of their springing, or time of maturitie.


 The Names.
(...) affirmeth the vomiting Nut to be of a poisonous qualitie, cold in the fourth degree, hauing a stupifying nature, and bringeth deadly sleepe.


 The Vertues.
Of the Physicall vertues of the vomitting Nuts we thinke it not necessarie to write, because the  danger is great, and not to be giuen inwardly, but mixed with other compositions, and that very curiously by the hands of a faithfull Apothecarie.
The pouder of the Nut mixed with some flesh, and cast vnto crowes and other rauenous fowles, doth kill and so dull their sences at the least, that you may take them with your hands.
They make also an excellent sallet, mixed with some meat or butter, and laied in the garden  where cats vse to scrape to burie their excrements, spoyling both the herbes and also seeds new sowne.



CHAP. 159. Of diuers sorts of Indian fruits.

 The Kindes.
THese fruits are of diuers sorts and kinds, wherof we haue little knowledge, more than the fruits themselues, with the names of some of them: therefore it shall (...) to set forth vnto your view the forme onely, leauing vnto Time, and those that shall succeed, to write of them at large, which in time may know that, that in this time of infancie is vnknowne.
@ OVr Authour formerly in this Chapter set forth diuers figures of Indian fruits, and amongst the rest Beritinus, Cacao, Cocci Orientales, Buna, (...), (...), etc. but he gaue but onely three descriptions, and these either false or to no purpose; wherefore I haue omitted them, and in this chapter giuen you most of these fruits which were formerly figured therin, together with an addition of sundry other out of Clusius his Exotickes, whose figures I haue made vse of, and here giuen you all those which came to my hands, though nothing so many as are set sorth in his Exotickes; neither, if I should haue had the figures, would the shortnesse of my time nor bignesse of the booke (being already growne to so large a volume) suffer mee to haue inserted them; therefore take in good part those I here giue, together with the briefe histories of them.


 The Description.
1 THe first and one of the best knowne of these fruits, are the Cubibae, called of the Arabian Physitions Cubibe and Quabeb; but of the vulgar, Quabebochini; in Iaoa where they plentisully grow, (...): the other Indians, (the Malayans excepted) call them Cubas sini, not for that they grow in China, but because the Chinois vse to buy them in Iaoa and Sunda, and so carry them to the other ports of India. The plant which carries this fruit hath leaue

1 Cubibae. Cubibs.2 Cocci Orientales. Cocculus Indi.cubibeCocci.3 Fagara.4 Mungo.5 Buna.@ 6 Amomum verum.@ 7 Amomum spurium.@ 8 Vmomis.9 Beritinus.@ 10 Nuces insanae. Mad Nuts.
like those of pepper, but narrower, and it also windes about trees like as Iuy or Pepper doth: the fruit hangs in clusters, like as those we call red Currans, and not close thrust together in bunches, as grapes: the fruit or berries are of the bignesse of Pepper cornes, wrinckled, and of a brownish colour: they are of a hot and biting aromaticke taste, and oft times hollow within, but if theybe not hollow, then haue they a pretty reddish smooth round seed vnder their rough vtter huske; each of these berries commonly hath a piece of his foot-stalke adhering to it. It is reported that the Natiues where it growes first gently boile or scald these berries before they sell them, that so none (...) may haue them, by sowing the seeds. Some haue thought these to haue beene the Carpesium of the Antients; and other-some haue iudged them the seeds of Agnus Castus, but both these opinions are erronious.
These are hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree; wherefore they are good against the  cold and moist affects of the stomacke and flatulencies: they helpe to clense the breast of tough and thicke humours; they are good for the spleene, for hoarsnesse and cold affects of the wombe, chewed with Masticke, they draw much slegmaticke matter from the head, they heat and comfort the braine. The Indians vse them macerated in wine to excite venerie.
2 The Plant which carries this fruit is vnknowne, but the berrie is well knowne in shoppes by the name of Cocculus Indicus some call them Cocci Orientales: others, Cocculae Orientales: some, as Cordus for one, thinke them the fruit of Solanum furiosum: others iudge them the fruit of a Tithymale, or of a Clematis. These berries are of the bignesse of Bay berries, commonly round, and growing but one vpon a stalke; yet sometimes they are a little cornered, and grow two or three clustering together: their outer coat or shell is hard, rough, and of a brownish duskie colour: their inner substance is very oily, of a bitter taste.
They are vsed with good successe to kill lice in childrens heads, being made into pouder and so  strowed amongst the haire. They haue also another faculty which our Author formerly set downe in the chapter of Alaternus (where he confounded these with Fagaras) in these words, which I haue there omitted, to insert here;
In England we vse the fruit called Cocculus Indi in pouder mixed with flower, hony, and crummes  of bread to catch fish with, it being a numming, soporiferous, or sleeping medicine, causeth the fish to turne vp their bellies, as being sencelesse for a time.
3 Fagara is a fruit of the bignesse of a Chich-pease couered with a thin coat of a blackish ash colour, vnder which outer coat is a slender shell containing a sollid kernell, involued in a thin and blacke filme. The whole fruit both in magnitude, forme, and colour is so like the (...) Indus last described, that at the first sight one would take it to be the same. Auicen mentions this in his 266. Chap. after this manner. What is Fagara? It is a fruit like a Chich, hauing the seed of (...), and in the hollownesse is a blacke kernell as in (...), and it is brought out of Sofale.
He places it amongst those that heate and dry in the third degree and commends it against the coldnesse of the stomacke and liuer, it helps concoction, and bindes the belly.
4 This which Clusius thinkes to be Mungo (which is vsed in the East Indies about Guzarat and Decan for prouender for horses) is a small fruit of the bignesse of Pepper, crested, very like Coriander seed, but that it is bigger and blacke, it is of a hot taste.
5 Buna is a fruit of the bignesse of Fagara, or somewhat bigger or longer, of a blackish ash colour, couered with a thin skin, furrowed on both sides longwise, whereby it is easily diuided into two parts, which containe each a kernell longish and flat vpon one side, of a yellowish colour, and acide taste. They say that in Alexandria they make a certaine very cooling drinke hereof. Rauwolfius in his iournal seemes to describe this fruit by the name of Bumu: and by the appellation, forme, and faculties; he thinkes it may be the Buncho of Auicen, and Buncha of Rhasis, to Almansor. Clusius.
6 This is a kind of Cardamome: and by diuers it is thought to be the true Amomum of the Antients, and to this purpose Nicholas Marogna, a Physition of Verona, hath written a treatise which is set forth at the later end of Pona's description of Mount Baldus, to which I refer the curious: these cods or berries (whether you please to call them) grow thicke clustering together, they are round, and commonly of the bignesse of a cherry: the outer skin is tough, smoother, whiter, and lesse crested than that of the Cardamome: within this filme lye the seeds clustering together, yet with a thin filme parted into three, the particular seeds are cornered, somewhat smoother and larger than those of Cardamomes, but of the same aromaticke taste, and of a browne colour. Their temperature and faculties may be referred to those of Cardamomes.
7. 8. This with the next ensuing are by Clusius set forth by the names I here giue you them, though (as he saith) neither of them agree with the Amomum of Dioscorides, they were only branches set thicke with leaues, hauing neither any obseruable smell or taste: they were sent to the learned and diligent Apothecarie Walarandus Donrez of Lyons, from Ormuz the famous Mart and port town in the Persian Bay.
9 Those that accompanied the renowned Sir Francis Drake in his voyage about the World,

11 Cacao. Small Cocoes.12 (...), Quince Dates.@ 13 (...), Arara. Orukoria. Cropiot.@ 14 (...). Tree Melon.@ 15 (...): The Pinia, or Pine Thistle.
light vpon a certaine desert Island, wherein grew many very tall trees, and looking for something amongst these to refresh themselues, amongst others they obserued some bigger than Okes, hauing leaues like those of the Bay tree, thicke and shining, not snipt about the edges; their fruit was longish like to the small (...) of the Ilex or Holme Oke, but without any cup; yet couered with a thin shell of an ash colour, and somtimes blacke, hauing within it a longish white kernell wrapped in a thin (...), being without any manifest taste; They when they found it, though much opprest with hunger, yet durst not taste thereof, least it should haue been poisonous: but afterwards comming to the Island Beretina, not far from this, they found it to abound with these trees, and learned that their fruit was not poisonous, but might be eaten. Wherupon afterwards they in want of other victuals, boiled some as they do Pease, and ground others into floure, wherewith they made puddings. They found this tree also in the Moluccoes.
10 The first expressed in this table is the mad Plum, or as Clusius had rather terme it the Mad Nut; for he calls them (...), or Insanae Nuces. The Hollanders finding them in their return from the East Indies, and eating the kernels, were for a time distracted, and that variously, according to the particular temperature of each that ate of them; as you may see in Clusius Exot. lib. 2. Cap. 26. This was round, little more than two inches about, with a shell not thicke, but sufficiently strong, brownish on the out side, and not smooth, but on the inside of a yellowish colour and smooth, containing a membranous stone or kernell couered with a black pulp, in form and bignesse not much vnlike a Bullas or Sloe, hauing a large white spot on the lower part whereas it was fastened to the stalke: vnder the pulpe lay the kernell, somewhat hard, and of an ash colour: the foot-stalke was short and commonly carried but one fruit, yet sometimes they obserued two growing together: the tree wheron this fruit grew was of the bignesse of a Cherry tree, hauing long and narrow leaues like those of the Peach tree: the other fruit figured in the 2. place was of a brownish yellow colour, somwhat bigger, but not vnlike a small Nut, and inch long, and somwhat more about, smaller below, and bigger aboue, and as it were parted into foure, being very hard and sollid. Of this see more in the fourteenth place.
11 The Cacoa is a fruit well knowne in (...) parts of America; for they in some places vse it in stead of money, and to make a drinke, of which, though bitter, they highly esteeme: the trees which beare them are but small, hauing long and narrow leaues, and will onely grow well in places shadowed from the Sun. The fruit is like an Almond taken out of his husk, and it is couered with a thin blacke skin, wherein is contained a kernell obliquely diuided into two or three parts, brownish, and distinguished with ash coloured veines, of an astringent and vngratefull taste.
12 This which Clusius had from Cortusus, for the fruit of Bdellium, is thought to be the Cuci of Pliny, and is the Cuciophera of Matthiolus, and by that name our Author had it in this Chapter. The whole fruit is of the bignesse of a Quince, and of the same colour, with a sweet and fibrous flesh, vnder which is a nut of the bignesse of a large Walnut or somewhat more, almost of a triangular form, bigger below, and smaller aboue, well smelling, of a darke ash colour, with a very hard shell, which broken there is therein contained a hard kernell of the colour and hardnesse of marble, hauing a hollownesse in the middle, as much as may containe a Hasell Nut.
13 In this table are foure seuerall fruits described by Clusins Exot. lib. 2. c. 21. The first is called Baruce, and is said to grow vpon a high tree in Guyana called Hura: it consisted of many Nuts of some inch long, strongly fastened or knit together, each hauing a hard wooddy shell, falling into two parts, containing a round and smooth kernell couered with an ash coloured silme.
They say the natiues there vse this fruit to purge and vomite.
The second called Arara growes in Kaiana, but how, it is not knowne: it was some inch long, couered with a skin sufficiently hard and blacke, fastened to a long and rugged stalke that seemed to haue carried more than one fruit: the kernell is blacke, and of the bignesse of a wilde Oliue.
The natiues vse the decoction hereof towash maligne vlcers, and they say the kernell will loose  the belly.
The third named Orukoria is the fruit of a tree in Wiapock, called Iuruwa, they vse this to cure their wounds, dropping the iuice of the fruit into them. This fruit is flat almost an inch broad, and two long, but writhen like the cod of the true Cytisus, but much bigger, very wrinckled, of an ash colour, containing a smooth seed.
The fourth called Cropiot is a small and shriuelled fruit, not much vnlike the particular ioints of the Aethiopian pepper.
The sauages vse to take it mixed amongst their Tabaco to asswage head-ache: there were diuers  of them put vpon a string (as you may see in the figure) the better to dry them.
14 This which by Clusius and Lobel is thought to be the Guanabanus mentioned by Scaliger Exerc. 281. part. 6. is a thicke fruit some foot and halfe long, couered with a thicke and hard rinde, freezed ouer with a soft downinesse, like as a Quince is, but of a greenish colour, with some veines, or rather furrowes running alongst it, as in (...): the lower end is somewhat sharp: at the vpper end it is

fastened to the boughes, with a firme, hard, and fibrous stalke: this fruit containes a whitish pulpe, which the Ethiopians vse in burning seuers to quench the thirst, for it hath a pleasant tartnesse: this dried becomes friable, so that it may be brought into pouder with ones fingers, yet retaineth its aciditie: in this pulp lye seeds like little Kidneis, or the seeds of the true (...), of a black shining colour, with some fibres comming out of their middles: these sowne brought forth a plant hauing leaues like the Bay tree, but it dyed at the approch of Winter. Clus.
15 Ananas Pinias, or Pine Thistle is a plant hauing leaues like the Aizoon aquaticum, or water
@ 16 Fabae Aegyptiae affinis.@ 17 Coxco Cypote. Amygdalae Peruanae: Almonds of Peru.@ 18 Buenas Noches.@ 19 Fructus tetragonus. The square Coco.@ 20 Arboris laniferae siliqua. A cod of the wooll-bearing tree.
Sengreene, somewhat sharpe and prickly about the edges: the stalke is round, carrying at the top therof one fruit of a yellowish colour when it is ripe, of the bignes of a Melon, couered with a (...) rinde: the smell is gratefull, so newhat like that of the Malocotone: at the top of the fruit, and sometimes below it come forth such buds as you see here presented in the figure, which they set in the ground and preserue the kind by in stead of seed: the meat of this fruit is sweet and very pleasant of taste, and yeelds good nourishment; there are certaine small fibres in the meat thereof, which though they do not offend the mouth, yet hurt they the gums of such as too frequently feed thereon.
16 The forme of this is somewhat strange, for it is like a large Poppy head cut off nigh the top: the substance thereof was membranous and wrinckled, of a brownish colour, very smooth: the circumference at the top is about nine inches, and so it growes smallerand smaller euen to the stalke, which seems to haue carried a floure whereto this fruit succeeded: the top of the fruit was euen, and in it were orderly placed 24. cauities, in each whereof was contained a little Nut like an Acorn almost an inch long, and as much thick; the vpper part was of a brownish colour, and the kernel within was rank and all mouldy. Clusius could learne neither whence this came, nor how it grew, but with a great deale of probability thinks it may be that which the Antients described by the name of Faba Aegyptia.
17 The former of these two Clusius receiued by the name of Coxco Cypote, that is the Nut Cypote: It is of a dusky browne colour, smooth, and shining, but on the lower part of an ash colour, rough, which the Painter did not well expresse in drawing the figure. The 2. hee receiued by the name of Almendras del Peru, (i.) Almonds (...) Peru: the shell was like in colour and substance to that of an almond, and the kernell not vnlike neither in substance nor taste: yet the forme of the shell was different, for it was triangular, with a backe standing vp, and two sharp sides, and these very rough.
18 This was the fruit of a large kind of Convolvulus which the Spaniards called Buenas noches, or Goodnight, because the floures vse to (...) as soone as night came. The seeds were of a sooty colour as big as large Pease, being three of them contained in a skinny three cornered head. You may see more hereof in Clusius, Exot. lib. 2. cap. 18.
19 This is the figure of a square fruit which Clusius coniectures to haue been some kind of Indian Nut or Coco: it was couered with a smooth rinde, was seuen inches long, and a foot and halfe about, being foure inches and a halfe from square to square.
20 About Bantam in the East Indies growes a tall tree sending forth many branches, which are set thicke with leaues long and narrow, bigger than those of Rosemary: it carries cods six inches long, and fiue about, couered with a thin skin, wrinckled and sharp pointed, which open themselues from below into fiue parts, and are full of a soft woolly or Cottony matter, wherewith they stuffe cushions, pillowes and the like, and also spin some for certaine vses: amongst the downe lye blacke seeds like those of Cotton, but lesse, and not fastened to the downe.
21 This which Clus calls Palma (...) (...), or the Bag Date, because it carries the figure of an Hippocras bag, was found in a desart Island in the Antlantick ocean, by certaine Dutch mariners who obserued whole woods thereof: these bags were some of them 22. or more inches long, and some seuen inches broad in the broadest place, strongly woue with threds crossing one another, of a brownish yellow colour. These sachels (as they report who cut them from the tree) were filled with fruit of the bignesse of a Walnut huske and all: within these were others, as round as if they had bin torned, and so hard that you could scarce breake them with a hammer: in the midst of these were white kernels, tasting at the first (...) like pulse, but afterwards bitter like a Lupine.
22. The tree which carries this rough cod is very large, as I haue been told by diuers: some who saw it in Persia, and others that obserued it in Mauritius Island. Clusius also notes that they haue bin brought from diuers places: the cod is some three inches long, and some two inches broad, of a duskie red colour, and all rough and prickly: in these cods are contained one, two or more round nuts or seeds of a grayish ash colour, hauing a little spot on one side, where they are fastened to the cod they are exceeding hard, and difficult to breake, but broken they shew a white kernel very bitter and vnpleasant of taste. I haue seen very many and haue some of these, and some haue offered to sel them sor East Indian Beazor, whereto they haue some small resemblance, though nothing in facultie like them (if I may credit report, which I had rather do than make tryall) for I haue been told by some that they are poisonous; and by others, that they strongly procure vomit.
(...). The long cod expressed in this figure is called in the East Indies (as Clusius was told) Kaye (...), it was round, the thicknesse of ones little finger, and six inches long: the (...) was thick, black, hard and wrinckled, and it contained a hard pulpe of a sowrish taste, which they affirm was eatable.
The other was a cod of some inch and halfe long, and some inch broad, membranous, rough, and of a brownish colour, sharp pointed, and opening into two parts, and distinguished with a thin (...) into foure cels, wherein were contained (...) Peare fashioned little berries, hauing golden spots especially in the middles. This growes in Brasile, and as Clusius was informed was called (...).
24 In the second place of the tenth figure and description in this chapter you may finde the

@ 21 Palma saccifera. The Sachell Date.
@ 22 Lobus (...). Beazor Nuts.
@ 23 Kaie baka. (...).
@ 24 Nucula Indica racemosa. The Indian, or rather Ginny Nut.

@ 25 Fructus (...). Scalie fruits.
@ 26 Fructus alij Exotici. Other strange fruits.
@ 26 Fructus (...) Exotici. Other strange fruits.
single Nut here figured, described, and set forth; but this figure better expresses the manner of growing therof: for first it presents to the view the nuts in their outer husks growing close together, then the single nuts in and out of their husks, and lastly their kernell: the shell of this nut containes in it a certaine oilie substance, somwhat resembling the oile of sweet almonds: the tree whereof this nut is the fruit growes in Ginny, and is much vsed by the people there, for they presse a liquour forth of the leaues, or else boile them in water, and this serues them in stead of wine and beare, or at least for a common drink, of the fruit they make bread of a very sweet and pleasant taste.
25 These scaily fruits are set forth by Clusius, Exot. l. 2 c. 3. The first was three inches long and two inches about, and had in it a longish hard sollid kernell, with many veines dispersed ouer it, and such kernels are somtimes polished, whereby they become white, and then their blacke veines make a fine shew, which hath giuen occasion to som e (...) s to put them to saile for rare and precious stones.
The second was small, round and scaily, and the scailes turned their points downwards towards the stalke.
The third was also scaily, of the bignesse of a Walnut in his huske, with the scailes very orderly placed, and of a brownish colour: it had a kernel which ratled in it when it was shaken.
26 The first of the two in the former table was brought from Ginny, it was of the bignesse and shape of a plum, two inches long, and one and halfe broad, of a thicke fungous substance, somewhat wrinckled, and blackish on the outside, and within containing a certaine whitish insiped friable pulpe, wherein lay a few small seeds.
The second was some inch and halfe long, an inch thicke, couered with an ash coloured skin, composed within of many fibres almost like the huske of the Nut Faufell, at the lower end it stood in a double cup, and it was sharp pointed

at the vpper end: in this skin was contained a kernell, or rather nut, blacke, hard, and very wrinckled not much vnlike to that of Faufell, whereto I refer it as a kinde thereof. These two are treated of by Clusius, Exot. lib. 2. c. 23.
The first of the second table (wherein are contained foure figures) was of a round forme, yet a little flat on one side, distinguished vnder the blacke and shining coat wherewith it was couered, with furrowes running euery way, not vnlike to the Nut Faufell taken forth of his couer: the inner pulpe was hard and whitish, first of a salt, and then of an (...) ingent taste.
The second of these was an inch long, but rather the kernell of a fruit, than a fruit it selfe; it was round except at the one end, and all ouer knobby (though the picture expresse not so much) there was also some shew of a triangular forme at each end.
The third was two inches and a halfe long, and in the broadest part some inch and more broad: it was somewhat crooked, the backe high and rising, the top narrow, and the lower part sharp pointed, of an ash colour with thicke and eminent nerues running alongst the back from the top to the lower part, exprest with such art as if they had been done by some curious hand: it seemed to haue bin couered ouer with another (...), but it was worne off by the beating of the waues of the sea vpon the shore.
The fruit Cunane figured in the fourth place of this table, was two inches long, and an inch broad at the head, and so smaller by little and little, with a back standing out, smooth, black, and shining, hauing three holes at the top, one aboue, and two below: they said it grew vpon a smal tree called Morremor, and was yet vnripe, but when it was ripe it would be as big again, and that the natiues where itgrew (which was as I take it about Wiapock) rost it vpon the coles, and eate it against the headache. Clusius sets forth these foure in his Exot. l. 2. c. 22. he describes Cunane cap. 21. @



CHAP. 160. Of Sun-Dew, Youth woort, Ros Solis.


1 Ros Solis folio rotundo. Sun-Dew with round leaues.


2 Ros Solis folio oblongo. Sun-Dew with longish leaues.




 The Description.
1 SVn-Dew is a little herb, and groweth very low, it hath a few leaues standing vpon (...) stems, very small, something round, a little hollow, and like an eare picker, hairy and reddish as be also the stems, hauing dew and moisture vpon them at the driest time of the yeare, and when the Sun shineth hottest euen at high noone; and a moneth after there spring vp little stalks, a hand breadth high, on which stand small whitish floures: the roots are very slender, and like vnto haires.
2 The second kinde is like vnto the former, in stalks and floures, but larger, and the leaues are longer, and not so round, wherein consisteth the difference.


 The Place.
They grow in desart, sandie and sunny places, but yet waterie, and seldome other-where than among the white marish mosse which groweth on the ground and also vpon bogs.


 The Time.
Sun-Dew flourisheth in Sommer, it floureth in May or Iune: it is to be gathered when the weather is most dry and calme. The distilled water hereof that is drawne forth with a glasse still, is of a glittering yellow colour like gold, and coloureth siluer put therein like gold.


 The Names.
It is called in Latine, Ros Solis: of diuers, Rorella: it is named of other, Salsi Rosa, of the dew which hangeth vpon it, when the Sun is at the hottest: it is called in high Dutch, Sondaw, and Suidaw: in low Dutch, Loopichecruit, which in English signifieth Lustwoort, because sheepe and other (...), if they do but onely taste of it, are prouoked to lust. It is called in English, Sun-Dew, Ros Solis. Youth-woort: in the Northern parts, Red Rot, because it rotteth sheepe; and in Yorkeshire, Moore grasse.


 The Temperature.
It is a (...) or causticke herbe, and very much biting, being hot and drie in the fourth degree.


 The Vertues.
The leaues being stamped with salt do exulcerate and raise blisters, to what part of the body soeuer  they be applied.
The later Physitions haue thought this herbe to be a rare and singular remedie for all those that  be in a consumption of the lungs, and especially the distilled water thereof: for as the herbe doth keep and hold fast the moisture and dew, and so fast, that the extreme drying heate of the Sun cannot consume and waste away the same: so likewise men thought that herewith the naturall and radical humidity in mens bodies is preserued and cherished. But the vse therof doth otherwise teach, and reason sheweth the contrarie: for seeing it is an extreme biting herb, and that the distilled water is not altogether without this biting qualitie, it cannot be taken with safety: for it hath also bin obserued, that they haue sooner perished that vsed the distilled water hereof, than those that abstained from it, and haue followed the right and ordinarie course of diet.
Cattell of the female kinde are stirred vp to lust by eating euen of a small quantity: which thing  hath greatly (...) their vain opinion, without sence or reason; for it doth not moue nor prouoke cattell to lust, for that it increaseth the substance of the seed, but because through his sharp and biting qualitie it stirreth vp a desire to lust, which before was dulled, and as it were asleepe.
It strengthneth and nourisheth the body, especially if it be distilled with wine, and that liquour  made thereof which the common people do call Rosa Solis.
If any be desirous to haue the said drinke effectuall for the purposes aforesaid, let them lay the  (...) of Rosa Solis in the spirit of wine, adding thereto Cinnamon, Cloues, Maces, Ginger, Nutmegs, Sugar, and a few graines of Muske, suffering it so to stand in a glasse close stopt from the aire, and set in the Sun by the space of ten daies, then straine the same, and keep it for your vse.



CHAP. 161. Of Mosse of trees.

 The Description.
TRee Mosse hath certaine things like haires, made vp as it were of a multitude of slender leaues, now and then all to be iagged, hackt, and finely carued, twisted and interlaced one in another, which (...) fast to the barkes of trees, hanging downe from the bodies: one of this kinde is more

(...) quernus. The Mosse of the Oke and of other trees.
slender and thin, another more thicke, another shorter, another longer; all of them (...) the most being of a whitish colour, yet oftentimes there is a certaine one also which is blacke, but lesser and thinner: the most commendable of them all, as Pliny saith, be those that are whitish, then the reddish, and lastly such as be blacke.


 The Place.
This Mosse is found on the Oke tree, the white and blacke Poplar tree, the Oliue tree, the (...) tree, the Apple tree, the Peare tree, the Pine tree, the wilde Pine tree, the Pitch tree, the Firre tree, the Cedar tree, the Larch tree, and on a great sort of other trees. The best, as (...) saith, is that of the Cedar tree, the next of the Poplar, in which kinde the white and the sweet smelling Mosse is the chiefest; the blackish sort is of no account. Matthiolus writeth, that in Italy that Mosse is sweet which groweth on the Pine tree, the Pitch tree, the Fir tree, and the Larch tree, and the sweetest that of the Larch tree.


 The Time.
Mosse vpon the trees continueth all the yeare long.


 The Names.
It is called of the Grecians (...) of the Latins, Muscus: the Arabians and some Apothecaries in other countries call it Vsnea: in high Dutch, Mosz in low Dutch, Mosch: the French men, Lu Mousch: the Italians, Musgo: in Spanish, Musco de los arbores: in English, Mosse, tree Mosse, or Mosse of trees.


 The Temperature.
Mosse is somewhat cold and binding, which notwithstanding is more and lesse according vnto the nature and facultie of that tree on which it groweth, and especially of his barke: for it taketh vnto it selfe and also retaineth a certaine propertie of that barke, as of his breeder of which hee is ingendred: therefore the Mosse which commeth of the Oke doth coole and very much binde, besides his owne and proper facultie, it receiueth also the extreme binding quality of the Oke barke it selfe.
The Mosse which commeth of the Cedar tree, the Pine tree, the Pitch tree, the Fir tree, the Larch tree, and generally all the Rosine trees are binding, and do moreouer digest and soften.


 The Vertues.
Serapio saith, that the wine in which Mosse (...) been steeped certain daies, bringeth sound sleep, strengtheneth the stomacke, staieth vomiting, and stoppeth the belly.
(...) writeth, that the decoction of Mosse is good for women to sit in, that are troubled  with the whites; it is mixed with the oile of Ben, and with oiles to thicken them withall.
It is fit to be vsed in compositions which serue for sweet perfumes, and that take away wearisomnesse;  for which things that is best of all which is most sweet of smell.



CHAP. 162. Of ground Mosse.

 The Kindes.
THere groweth also on the supersiciall or vppermost part of the earth diuers Mosses, as also vpon rocks and stony places, and marish grounds, differing in forme not a little.


 The Description.
1 THe common Mosse groweth vpon the earth, and the bottome of old and antient trees, but specially vpon such as grow in shadowie woods, and alsoat the bottom of shadowy

1 Muscus (...) vulgaris, Common ground Mosse.
2 Muscus (...) scoparius, Beesome ground Mosse.
3. 4. Muscus capillaris, siue Adianthuni aureum (...) and minus. Goldilockes or golden Maiden-haire the bigger and lesse.
hedges and ditches, and such like places: it is very well knowne by the softnesse and length thereof, being a mosse most common, and therefore needeth not any further description.
2 Beesome Mosse, which seldome or neuer is found but in bogs and marish places, yet sometimes haue I found it in shadowie dry ditches, where the Sun neuer sheweth his face: it groweth vp (...) a cubit high, euery particular leafe consisting of an innumerable sort of hairy threds set vpon a middle rib, of a shining blacke colour like that of Maiden-haire, or the Capillare Mosse Adianthum (...), whereof it is a kinde.
3 This kinde of Mosse, called Muscus capillaris, is seldome found but vpon bogs and moorish places, and also in some shadowie dry ditches where the Sun doth not come. I found it in great aboundance in a (...) ditch vpon the left hand neere vnto a gate that leadeth from Hampsted

5 Muscus (...) floridus. Flouring branched Mosse.
heath toward Highgate; which place I haue shewed vnto diuers expert Surgeons of London, in our wandering abroad for our farther knowledge in Simples. This kind of Mosse, the stalkes thereof are not aboue one handfull high, couered with short haires standing very thicke together, of an obscure yellow green colour; out of which stalkes spring vp sometimes very fine naked stems, somewhat blacke, vpon the tops of which hang as it were little graines like wheat cornes. The roots are very slender and maruellous fine.
@ Of this Adiamhum aureum there are three kindes, different onely in magnitude, and that the two bigger haue many hairie threds vpon their branches, when as the least hath onely three or foure close to the root; and this is the least of plants that I euer yet saw grow. @
4 Of this there is also another kinde altogether lesser and lower. This kind of mosse groweth in moist places also, commonly in old mossie and rotten trees, likewise vpon rocks, and oftentimes in the chinks and crannies of stone walls.
5

The figure formerly in the first place (...) of the Muscus (...) of (...) being a small kinde of Muscus (...). The (...) and sixth were both of (...); and so of the two descriptions I haue made one more accurate, and (...) the (...) figure.

 There is oftentimes found vpon old Okes and Beeches, and such like ouer-grown trees, a kinde of Mosse hauing many slender branches, which diuide themselues into other lesser branches; whereon are placed confusedly very many small threds like haires, of a greenish ash colour: vpon the ends of the tender branches sometimes there commeth forth a floure in shape like vnto a little buckler or hollow Mushrom, of a whitish colour tending to yellownes, and garnished with the like leaues of those vpon the lower branches.


6 Muscus Pyxidatus. Cup or Chalice Mosse.


6 Of this Mosse there is another kinde, which Lobel in his Dutch Herbal hath set forth vnder the title of Muscus Pyxtdatus, which I haue Englished, Cup Mosse or Chalice Mosse: it groweth in the most barren dry and grauelly ditch bankes, creeping flat vpon the ground like vnto Liuerwort, but of a yellowish white colour: among which leaues start vp here and there certaine little things fashioned like a little cup called a Beaker or Chalice, and of the same colour and substance of the lower leaues, which vndoubtedly may be taken for the floures: the pouder of which Mosse giuen to children in any liquor for certaine dayes together, is a most certaine remedie against that (...) malady called the Chin-cough.
7 There is likewise found in the shadowie places of high mountaines, and at the foot of old

and rotten trees, a certaine kinde of Mosse in face and shew not vnlike to that kinde of Oke Ferne called Dryopteris. It creepeth vpon the ground, hauing diuers long branches, consisting of many small leaues, euery particular lease made vp of sundry little leaues, set vpon a middle rib one opposite to another.


7 Muscus Filicinus. Mosse Ferne.


8 Muscus corniculatus. Horned or knagged Mosse.


9 Muscus denticulatus. Toothed Mosse.


8 There is found vpon the tops of our most barren mountaines, but especially were sea Coles are accustomed to be digged, stone to make iron of, and also where ore is gotten for tinne and lead, a certaine small plant: it riseth forth of the ground with many bare and naked branches, diuiding themselues at the top into sundry knags like the forked hornes of a Deere, euery part whereof is of an ouerworne whitish colour.
@ Our Author formerly gaue another figure and description of this plant, by the name of Holosteum petroeum, which I haue omitted, thinking this the better. Tragus, Lonicerus, and (...) referre this to the Fernes, and the last of them calleth it Filix (...) corniculata: Pena and Lobel made it their Holostium (...): (...) calls it Adianthum (...), scu furcatum. @
9 There is found creeping vpon the ground a certaine kinde of Mosse at the bottom of Heath and Ling, and such like bushes growing vpon barren mountaines, consisting as it were of scales made vp into a long rope or cord, dispersing it selfe far abroad into sundry branches, thrusting out

here and there certain roots like threds, which take hold vpon the vpper crust of the earth, whereby it is sent and dispersed far abroad: the whole plant is of a yellowish greene colour.
10 This other kinde of Mosse is found in the like places: it also disperseth it selfe far abroad, and is altogether lesser than the precedent, wherein consists the difference.


10 Muscus minor denticulatus. Little toothed Mosse.


11 Muscus clauatus, siue Lycopodium. Club Mosse, or Wolfe claw Mosse.


The figure formerly in the first place (...) of the Muscus (...) of (...) being a small kinde of Muscus (...). The (...) and sixth were both of (...); and so of the two descriptions I haue made one more accurate, and (...) the (...) figure.

 12 Muscus clauatus folijs (...). Heath Cypres.


11 There is likewise another kinde of Mosse, which I haue not elsewhere found than vpon Hampsted heath, neere vnto a little cottage, growing close vpon the ground amongst bushes and brakes, which I haue shewed vnto diuers Surgeons of London, that haue walked thither with me for their further knowledge in Simples, who haue gathered this kinde of Mosse, wherof some haue

13 Muscus ex cranio humano. Mosse growing vpon the skull of a man.
made them hat-bands, girdles, and also bands to tye such things as they had before gathered, for the which purpose it most fitly serued; some pieces whereof are six or eight foot long, consisting as it were of many hairie leaues set vpon a tough string, very close couched and compact together, from which is also sent forth certaine other branches like the first: in sundry places there be sent down fine little strings, which serue in stead of roots, wherewith it is fastened to the vpper part of the earth, and taketh hold likewise vpon such things as grow next vnto it. There spring also from the branches bare and naked stalkes, on which grow certaine (...) as it were like the catkins or blowings of the Hasell tree, in shape like a little club (...) the reede Mace, sauing that it is much lesser, and of a yellowish white colour, very well resembling the claw of a Wolfe, whereof it tooke his name; which knobby katkins are altogether barren, and bring forth neither seed nor floure.


@ 14 Muscus parvus stellaris. Small Heath Mosse.


@ 12 This, whose figure in the former edition was by our Author vnfitly put for Lauander Cotton (hauing more regard to the title of the figure in Tabernamontanus, than to see whether it were that which he there described) is no other than a kinde of Muscus clauatus, or Club-Mosse. It is thought to be the Selago mentioned by Pliny, lib. 25. cap. 11. Tragus and some others call it Sauina (...): (...) and (...), Chamaecyparissus: but Bauhine the most (...) nameth it Muscus clauatus folijs (...): and Turner not vnfitly in English, Heath Cypresse. This is a low plant, and keepes greene Winter and Sommer: the leaues are like those of Cypresse, bitter in taste, but without smell: it carries such (...) or catkins as the former, and those of a yellowish colour: it is found growing in diuers wooddy mountainous places of Germanie, where they call it (...) (...), or wilde Sauine. @
13 This kinde of Mosse is found vpon the skulls or bare scalps of men and women, lying long in charnell houses or other places, where the bones of men and women are kept together: it groweth very thicke, white, like vnto the short mosse vpon the trunkes of old Okes: it is thought to be a singular (...) against the falling Euill and the Chin-cough in children, if it be poudered, and (...) giuen in sweet wine for certaine daies together.
@ 14 Vpon diuers heathy places in the moneth of May is to be found growing a little short Mosse not much in shape different from the first described, but much lesse, and parted at the top into star-fashioned heads. (...) calls this, Muscus in Ericetis (...). @



 The Place.
Their seuerall descriptions set forth their naturall places of growing.


 The Time.
They flourish especially in the Sommer moneths.


 The Names.
Goldilocke is called in high-Dutch, Widertodt, golden Wedertodt, Iung Urauwen har: in low-Dutch, Gulden Wederdoot: Fuchsius nameth it Polytrichon Apuleij, or Apuletus his Maiden-haire, neuerthelesse Apuleius Maiden-haire is nothing else but Dioscorides his Trichomanes, called English Maiden-haire; and for that cause wee had rather it should be (...) Muscus capillaris, or hairy Mosse. This is called in English, Goldilockes: it might also be termed Golden Mosse, or Hairy Mosse.
Wolfes claw is called of diuers Herbarists in our age, Muscus terrestris: in high-Dutch, Beerlay, Surtelkraut, Seilkraut: in low-Dutch, Wolfs clauwen; whereupon wee first named it Lycopodium, and Pes Lupi: in English, Wolfes foot, or Wolfes claw, and likewise Club-Mosse. Most shops of Germanie in former times did falsly terme it Spica celtica: but they did worse, and were very much too blame, that vsed it in compound medicines in stead of Spica celtica, or French Spikenard: as touching the rest, they are sufficiently spoken of in their descriptions.


 The Temperature.
The Mosses of the earth are dry and astringent, of a binding qualitie, without any heate or cold.
Goldilocks and the Wolfes clawes are temperate in heate and cold.


 The Vertues.
 The Arabian Physitians do put Mosse amongst their cordiall medicines, as fortifying the stomacke, to stay vomit, and to stop the laske.
 Mosse boiled in Wine and drunke stoppeth the spitting of bloud, pissing of bloud, the termes, and bloudy flix.
 Mosse made into pouder is good to stanch the bleeding of greene and fresh wounds, and is a great helpe vnto the cure of the same.
 Wolfes claw prouoketh vrine, and as Hieronymus Tragus reporteth, wasteth the stone, and driueth it forth.
 Being stamped and boyled in wine and applied, it mitigateth the paine of the gout.
 Floting wine, which is now become slimie, is restored to his former goodnesse, if it be hanged in the vessell, as the same Author testifieth.



CHAP. 163. Of Liuerwort.

 The Description.
1 LIuerwort is also a kinde of Mosse which spreadeth it selfe abroad vpon the ground, hauing many vneuen or crumpled leaues lying one ouer another, as the scales of Fishes do, greene aboue, and browne vnderneath: amongst these grow vp small short stalkes, spred at the top like a blasing starre, and certaine fine little threds are sent downe, by which it cleaueth and sticketh fast vpon stones, and vpon the ground, by which it liueth and flourisheth.
2 The second kinde of Liuerwort differeth not but in stature, being altogether lesse, and more smooth or euen: the floures on the tops of the slender stems are not so much laid open like a star; but the especiall difference consisteth in one chiefe point, that is to say, this kinde being (...) in a pot, and set in a garden aboue the ground, notwithstanding it spitteth or casteth round about the place great store of the same fruit, where neuer any did grow before.
@ Of this sort which is small, and oftentimes found growing in moist gardens among Beareseares, and such plants, when they are kept in pots, there are two varieties, one hauing little stalkes some inch long, with a starre-fashioned head at the top: the other hath the like tender stalke, and a round head at the top thereof. @
3 This is found vpon rockes and stony places, as well neere vnto the sea, as further into the land: it groweth flat vpon the stones, and creepeth not far abroad as the ground Liuerwort doth, it only resteth it selfe in spots and tufts set here and there, of a dusty russet colour aboue, and blackish vnderneath: among the crumpled leaues rise vp diuers small stems, whereupon do grow little starlike floures of the colour of the leaues: it is often found at the bottom of high trees growing vpon

1 Hepatica terrestris. Ground Liuer-wort.
2 Hepatica (...) and (...). Small Liuer-wort with starry and round heads.
3 Hepatica petraea. Stone Liuerwort.
high mountaines, especiall in shadowie places.


 The Place.
This is often found in shadowy and moist places, on rocks and great stones layd by the highway, and in other common paths where the Sun beams do seldome come, and where no traueller frequenteth.


 The Time.
It brings forth his blasing stars and leaues oftentimes in Iune and Iuly.


 The Names.
It is called of the Grecians, (...): of the Latines, Lichen: and of some, (...), that is to say, Muscus, or Mosse, as (...) witnesseth: it is named in shops Hepatica, yet there (...) also many other herbes named (...), or Liuer-worts, for difference whereof this may fitly be called Hepatica (...), or Stone Liuer-wort, hauing taken that name from the Germanes, who call this Liuerwort, Steyn Leberkraut: and in low-Dutch, Steen Leuercrupt: in English, (...).


 The Temperature.
This Stone Liuerwort is of temperature cold and dry, and somewhat binding.


 The Vertues.
It is singular good against the inflammations of the liuer, hot and sharpe agues, and tertians which proceed of choler.

Dioscorides teacheth, that Liuer-wort being applied to the place stancheth bleeding, takes away all inflammations, and that it is good for a tetter or ring-worme, called in Greeke, (...): and that it is a remedie for them that haue the yellow iaundice, euen that which commeth by the inflammation of the liuer; and that furthermore it quencheth the inflammations of the tongue.



CHAP. 164. Of Lung-wort, or wood Liuer-wort, and Oister-greene.


1 Lichen arborum. Tree Lung-wort.


2 Lichen marinus. Sea Lung-wort, or Oister-greene.



 The Description.
1 TO Liuerwort there is ioyned Lung-wort, which is also another kinde of Mosse, drier, broader, of a larger size, and set with scales: the leaues hereof are greater, and diuersly folded one in another, not so smooth, but more wrinckled, rough and thicke almost like a Fell or hide, and tough withall: on the vpper side whitish, and on the nether side blackish or dusty, it seemeth to be after a sort like to lungs or lights.
2 This kinde of sea Mosse is an herby matter much like vnto Liuer-wort, altogether without stalke or stem, bearing many greene leaues, very vneuen or crumpled, and full of wrinkles, and somwhat broad, not much differing from leaues of crispe or curled Lettuce: this groweth vpon rockes within the bowels of the sea, but especially among oisters, and in greater plenty among those Oisters which are called Wall-fleet Oisters: it is very well knowne euen to the poore Oister-women which carry Oisters to sell vp and downe, who are greatly desirous of the said mosse for the decking and beautifying of their Oisters, to make them sell the better. This mosse they doe call Oistergreene.
@ 3 The branches of this elegant plant are some handfull or better high, spred abroad on euerie side, and only consisting of sundry single roundish leaues, whereto are fastned somtimes one,

sometimes two or more such leaues, so that the whole plant consists of branches made vp of such round leaues, fastned together by diuers little and verysmal threds: the lower leaues which stick fast to the rockes are of a brownish colour, the other of a whitish or a light greene colour, smooth and shining. This growes vpon rockes in diuers parts of the Mediterranean. Clusius setteth it forth by the name of Lichen Marinus; and he receiued it from Imperato by the name of Sertuloria: and Cortusus had it from Corsica, by the title of Corallina latifolia; and he called it Opuntia marina, hauing reference to that mentioned by Theophrast. lib. 1. cap. 12. Hist. Plant. @


@ 3 Lichen marinus rotundifolius. Round leaued Oister-weed.


4 Quercus marina. Sea Oke or Wracke.


@ 4 Quercus (...) varietas: A varietie of the sea Oke or Wrack.


4 There is also another sort of sea Weed found vpon the drowned rockes, which are naked and (...) (...) water at euery tyde. This sea Weed groweth vnto the rocke, fastned vnto the same at one

end, being a soft herby plant, very slipperie, insomuch that it is a hard matter to stand vpon it without falling: it rampeth far abroad, and here and there is set with certaine puft vp tubercles or bladders, full of winde, which giueth a cracke when it is broken: the leafe it selfe doth somewhat resemble the Oken leafe, whereof it tooke his name Quercus marina, the sea Oke: of some, Wracke, and Crow Gall. His vse in physicke hath not beene set sorth, and therefore this bare description may suffice.


@ 5 Quercus marina secunda. Sea Thongs.


@ 6 Quercus marina tertia. The third sea Wracke.


@ Of this Quercus marina, or Fucus, there are diuers sorts, whereof I will giue you the figures and a briefe historie: the first of these is onely a varietie of the last described, differing there-from in the narrownesse of the leaues, and largenesse of the swolne bladders.
5 This growes to the length of fiue or six foot, is smooth and membranous, being some halfe fingers bredth, and variously diuided, like wet parchment or leather cut into thongs: this hath no swolne knots or bladders like as the former; and is the Fucus marinus secundus of Dodonaeus.
6 This Wracke or sea weed hath long and flat stalkes like the former, but the stalks are thicke set with swolne knots or bladders, out of which sometimes grow little leaues, in other respects it is not vnlike the former kindes. Dodonaeus makes this his Fucus marinus 3.
7 The leaues of this other Wracke, which Dodonaeus makes his Fucus marinus quartus, are narrower, smaller, and much diuided; and this hath either none or very few of those swollen bladders which some of the former kindes haue.
8 This, which Lobel calleth Alga marina, hath iointed blacke branched creeping roots of the thicknesse of ones finger, which end as it were in diuers eares, or hairy awnes, composed of whitish hairy threds somewhat resembling Spikenard: from the tops of those eares forth leaues, long, narrow, soft, and grasse-like, first greene, but white when they are dry. It growes in the sea as the former. They vse it in Italy and other hot countries to packe vp glasses with, to keepe them from breaking.
9 Of this Tribe are diuers other plants; but I will onely giue you the history of two more, which I first obserued the last yeare, going in company with diuers London Apothecaries to finde Simples, as farre as Margate in the Island of Tenet; and whose figures (not before extant that I know of) I first gaue in my Iournall or enumeration of such plants as we there and in other places found. The first of these by reason of his various growth is by Bauhine in his Prodromus distinguished

into two, and described in the second and third places. The third he calls Fucus longissimo, latissimo, crassoque folio, and this is marked with the figure 1. The second he calls Fucus arboreus polyschides; and this you may see marked with the figure 2. This sea Weed (as I haue said) hath a various face, for sometimes from a fibrous root, which commonly groweth to a pibble stone, or fastened to a rocke, it sendeth forth a round stalke seldome so thicke as ones little finger, and about some halfe foot in length, at the top whereof growes out a single leafe, sometimes an ell long, and then it is about the bredth of ones hand, and it ends in a sharpe point, so that it very well resembles a two edged sword. Sometimes from the same root come forth two such fashioned leaues, but then commonly they are lesser. Otherwhiles at the top of the stalke it diuides it selfe into eight, nine, ten, twelue, more or fewer parts, and that iust at the top of the stalke, and these neuer come to that length that the single leaues do. Now this I iudge to be the Fucus polyschides of Bauhine. That these two are not seuerall kindes I am certaine; for I haue marked both these varieties from one and the same root, as you may see them here exprest in the figure. At Margate where they grow they call them sea Girdles, and that name well befits the single one; and the diuided one they may call Sea Hangers, for if you do hang the tops downewards, they doe reasonable well resemble the old fashioned sword-hangers. Thus much for their shape: now for their colour, which is not the same in all; for some are more greene, and these can scarce be dried; other-some are whitish, and these do quickly dry, and then both in colour and substance are so like parchment, that such as know them not would at the first view take them to be nothing else. This is of a glutinous substance, and a little saltish taste, and diuers haue told me they are good meate, being boiled tender, and so eaten with butter, vineger, and pepper.


@ 7 Quercus marina quaria. Iagged Sea Wracke.


@ 8 Alga. Grasse Wracke.


10 This which I giue you in the tenth place is not figured or described by any that as yet I haue met with; wherefore I gaue the figure and description in the forementioned Iournall, which I will here repeate. This is a very succulent and fungous plant, of the thicknesse of ones thumbe; it is of a darke yellowish colour, and buncheth forth on euerie side with many vnequall tuberosities or knots: whereupon Mr. Thomas Hickes being in our companie did fitly name it Sea ragged Staffe. We did not obserue it growing, but found one or two plants thereof some foot long apiece.



@ 9 Facus phasganoides and polyschides. Sea Girdle and Hangers.


@ 10 Fucus spongiosus nodosus. Sea ragged Staffe.


@ 11 Conferua. Hairy Riuerweed.


11 In some slow running waters is to be found this long greene hairy weed, which is thought to be the Conferua of Pliny: it is made vp onely of long hairy greene threds, thicke thrummed together without any particular shape or fashion, but only following the current of the streame. @


 The Place.
It groweth vpon the bodies of old Okes, Beech, and other wilde trees, in darke and thick woods: it is oftentimes found growing vpon rocks, and also in other shadowie places.


 The Time and Names.
It flourisheth especially in the Sommer moneths.
It taketh his name Pulmonaria of the likenesse of the forme which it hath with lungs or lights, called in Latine (...), of some, Lichen: it is called in high-Dutch, (...): in low-Dutch (...): in French, Herbe a Poulmon: in English, Lung-wort, and wood Liuerwort.


 The Temperature.
This seemeth to be cold and dry.



 The Vertues:
It is reported that shepheards and certaine horseleeches do with good successe giue the pouder  hereof with salt vnto their sheepe and other cattell which be troubled with the cough, and be broken winded.
Lungwoort is much commended of the learned Physitions of our time against the diseases of  the lungs, especially for the inflammations and vlcers of the same, being brought into pouder, and drunke with water.
It is likewise commended for bloudy and greene wounds, and for vlcers in the secret parts, and  also to stay the reds.
Moreouer, it stoppeth the bloudy flix, and other flixes and scourings, either vpwards or downewards, especially if they proceed of choler: it stayeth vomiting, as men say, and it also stoppeth the belly.
Oister greene fried with egges and made into a tansie and eaten, is a singular remedy for to streng  then the weaknesse of the backe.



CHAP. 165. Of Sea Mosse, or Coralline.

 The Kindes.
THere be diuers sorts of Mosse, growing as well within the bowels of the sea, as vpon the rocks, distinguished vnder sundry titles.


1 Muscus marinus, sive Corallina alba. White Coralline, or sea Mosse.


@ 2 Muscus marinus albidus. White sea Mosse.


3 Corallina Anglica. English Coralline.





 The Description.
1 THis kinde of Sea Mosse hath many small stalkes finely couered or set ouer with small leaues, very much cut or iagged, euen like the leaues of Dill, but hard, and of a stonie substance.
2 The second is much like vnto the former, yet not stony, but more finely cut, and growing more vpright, branching it selfe into many diuisions at the top, growing very thicke together, and in great quantitie, out of a piece of stone, which is fashioned like an hat or small stonie head, wherby it is fastened vnto the rocks.
3 This third kinde of sea mosse is very well knowne in shops by the name Corallina; it yeeldeth forth a great number of shoots, in shap much like vnto Corall; being full of small branches dispersed here and there, diuersly varying his colour, according to the place where it is found, beeing in some places red, in othersome yellow, and of an herby colour; in some gray, or of an ash colour, and in othersome very white.
4 The fourth kinde of Sea Mosse is somewhat like the former, but smaller, and not so plentiful where it groweth, prospering alwaies vpon shels, as of Oysters, Muscles, and Scallops, as also vpon rolling stones, in the bottome of the water, which haue tumbled downe from the high cliffes and rocks, notwithstanding the old prouerbe, that rolling stones neuer gather Mosse.


4 Corallina minima. The smallest Coralline.


5 Muscus Corallinus, sive Corallina montana. Corall Mosse, or mountaine Coralline.


5 There is found vpon the rocks and mountaines of France, bordering vpon the Mediterranean sea, a certaine kinde of Coralline, which in these parts hath not been found: it groweth in manner like vnto a branch of Corall, but altogether lesser, of a shining red colour, and of a stony substance.
@ I know not what our Author meant by this description; but the plant which here is figured out of Taber namontanus (and by the same title he hath it) is of a Mosse growing vpon Hampstead heath, and most such places in England: it growes vp some two or three inches high, and is diuided into very many little branches ending in little threddy chiues: all the branches are hollow, and of a very light whitedry substance, which makes it somewhat to resemble Coralline, yet is it not stony at all. @
6 There is also found vpon the rocks neere vnto Narbone in France, and not far from the sea, a

6 Fucus marinus tenuifolius. Fenell Coralline, or Fenell Mosse.@ 7 Fucus-ferulaceus. Sea Fenell.@ 8 Fucus tenuifolius alter. Bulbous sea Fennell.@ 9 Muscus marinus (...). Branched Sea Mosse.
kinde of Coralline. it groweth vp to the forme of a small shrub, branched diuersly; whereon doe grow small grasse-like leaues, very finely cut or iagged, like vnto Fennel; yet are they of a stony substance, as are the rest of the Corallines; of a darke russet colour.
@ 7 This growes also in the like places, hauing many small long Fennell-like diuided leaues vpon stalks some foot long, with some swelling eminences here and there set in the diuisions of the leaues: this is by (...) called by the name I here giue you it.
8 This also hath fine cut leaues like those of Fennell, but much lesse and shorter, of a faire green colour: these grow vp from round tuberous roots, which together with the fibres they send forth are of a blackish colour: the stalks also are tuberous and swolne, as in other plants of this kind. It growes in the sea with the former. Dodonaeus calls this Fucus marinus virens tenuifolius.
9 This kinde of sea Mosse growes some foure or more inches long, diuided into many branches, which are subdiuided into smaller, set with leaues finely iagged, like those of Cammomill; at first soft, flexible, and transparent, greene below, and purplish aboue; being dried, it becommeth rough and fragile, like as Coralline. It growes in the Mediterranean sea.
10 This Sea Mosse is a low little excrescence, hauing somewhat broad cut leaues growing many from one root: in the whole face it resembles the mosse that grows vpon the branches of Okes and other trees, and is also white and very like it, but much more brittle. This by Dodonaeus is called (...) Marinus tertius.


@ 10 Muscus marinus 3. Dod. Broad leafed Sea mosse.


@ 11 Abies marina Belgica, Clus. Clusius his Sea Firr.


11 Vpon the rocks and shels of sea fishes are to be found diuers small plants, hauing resemblance to others that grow vpon the land; and Clusius saith, vpon the coast of the Low countries he obserued one which very much resembled the Fir-tree, hauing branches growing orderly on both sides, but those very brittle and small, seldome exceeding a handfull in height, and couered as it were with many small scales. He obserued others that resembled Cypresse trees, and other branches that resembled Tameriske or heath. @



 The Place.
These Mosses grow in the sea vpon the rocks, and are oftentimes found vpon Oister shels, Muskell shells, and vpon stones: I found very great plenty thereof vnder Reculuers and Margate, in the Isle of Thanet; and in other places alongst the sands from thence vnto Douer.


 The Time.
The time answereth the other Mosses, and are found at all times of the yeare.


 The Names.
Sea Mosse is called in Greeke (...) in Latine, Muscus marinus: of the Apothecaries, Italians, and French men, Corallina: in Spanish, Malharquiana yerua: in high Dutch, (...): in low Dutch, (...) (...): in English, Sea Mosse, and of many Corallina, after the Apothecaries word, and it may be called Corall Mosse. The titles distinguish the other kindes.


 The Temperature.
Corallina consisteth, as Galen saith, of an earthie and waterish essence, both of them cold: for by his taste it bindeth, and being applied to any hot infirmitie, it also euidently cooleth: the earthie essence of this Mosse hath in it also a certaine saltnesse, by reason whereof likewise it drieth mightily.


 The Vertues.
Dioscorides commendeth it to be good for the gout which hath need to be cooled.
The later Physitions haue found by experience, that it killeth wormes in the belly; it is giuen to  this purpose to children in the weight of a dram or thereabouts.
That which cleaueth to Corall, and is of a reddish colour, is of some preferred and taken for the  best: they count that which is whitish, to be the worser. Notwithstanding in the French Ocean, the Britain, the low countrey, or else in the Germane ocean sea, there is scarce found any other than the whitish Coralline, which the nations neere adioyning do effectually vse.



CHAP. 166. Of Corall.


1 Corallium rubrum. Red Corall.


2 Corallium nigrum, sive (...). Blacke Corall.





3 Corallium album. White Corrall.


4 Corallium album alterum. The other white or yellow Corrall.


@ 5 Coralloides albicans. Whitish bastard Corall.



 The Description.
1 ALthough Corrall be a matter or substance, euen as hard as stones; yet I thinke it not amisse to place and insert it here next vnto the mosses, and the rather (...) that the (...) (...) do shew themselues, as well in the maner of their growing, as in their place (...) (...), like vnto the Mosses. This later age wherein we liue, hath sound moe kindes hereof (...) (...) (...) knowne or mentioned among the old writers. Some of these Corrals grow in the (...) (...) (...) (...), or stony matter; others in a straight forme, with crags and ioints, such as we see by experience: the which for that they are so well knowne, and in such request for Physicke, I will not (...) to describe; only this remember, that there is some Corrall of a pale yellow colour, as there be (...) red, and some white.
2 The blacke Corrall groweth vpon the rocks neere to the sea about Massilia, in manner of (...) former; herein differing from it, in that this is of a shining blacke colour, and very smooth, growing vp rather like a tree, than like a shrub
3 The white Corrall is like to the former, growing vpon the rocks neere the sea, and in the (...) parts of England, about Saint Michaels mount; but the branches hereof are smaller, and (...) (...), finelier dispersed into a number of branches, of a white colour.



@ 6 Coralloides rubens. Reddish bastard Corall.


7 Spongia marina alba. White Spunge.


@ 8 Spongia infundibuli forma. Funnell fashioned Spunge.


@ 9 Spongia ramosa, Branched Spunge.


4 The fourth and last groweth also vpon the Westerne rocks of the sea, and in the place aforenamed, and varieth his colour, sometimes waxing white, sometimes yellow, and sometimes red.
@ 5 This growes vp with many branches some two or three handfulls high; the inner part is a hard wooddy substance, which is couered ouer with a white and hard stony matter, so that it much resembleth white Corall, but that it is neither so thicke, hard, nor smooth, but is rough

and bends easily without breaking, which Corall will not do. (...) calls this Corallina alba, it growes in the Mediteranian sea, and vpon the Coasts of Spaine.
6 This in all respects is like the last described, the colour excepted, which is a darke red, and therefore better resembles the red Corall. Clusius refers both these to the Quercus marina mentioned by Theophr (...), Hist. plant. lib. 7. cap. 4. @
7 There is found growing vpon the rockes neere vnto the sea, a certaine matter wrought together, of the fome or froth of the sea, which we call spunges, after the Latine name, which may very fitly be inserted among the sea Mosses, whereof to write at large would greatly increase our volume, and little profit the reader, considering we hasten to an end, and also that the vse is so well knowne vnto all: therefore these few lines may serue vntill a further consideration, or a second Edition. @ Spunges are not like the Alcyonium, that is, an accidentall matter wrought together of the froth of the sea, as our Author affirmes, but rather of a nobler nature than plants, for they are said to haue sence, and to contract themselues at the approach of ones hand that comes to cut them vp, or for feare of any other harme-threatning object, and therefore by most writers they are referred to the (...) which some render Plantanimalia, that is, such as are neither absolute plants, nor liuing creatures, but participate of both: they grow of diuers shapes and colours vpon the Rockes in the Mediterranian, as also in the Archipelago, or Aegean sea.
8 Clusius obserued one yet adhering to the stone whereon it grew, which in shape resembled a funnell, but in substance was like another Spunge.
9 There is also to be found vpon our English coast a small kinde of spunge cast vp by the sea, and this is also of different shapes and colour, for the shape it is alwaies diuided into sundry branches, but that after a different manner; and the colour is oft times brownish, and (...) gray or white. Lobel makes it Conferuae marinae genus. @


 The Place.
The place of their growing is sufficiently spoken of in their seuerall descriptions.


 The Time.
The time answereth the other kindes of sea Mosses.


 The Names.
Corallium rubrum is called in English, red Corrall. Corallium (...), blacke Corrall. Corallium album, white Corrall.


 The Temperature.
Corrall bindeth, and meanely cooleth: it clenseth the scars and spots of the eies, and is very effectuall against the issues of bloud, and caseth the difficultie of making water.


 The Vertues.
Corrall drunke in wine or water, preserueth from the spleene; and some hang it about the  neckes of such as haue the falling sickenesse, and it is giuen in drinke for the same purpose.
It is a soueraigne remedy to drie, to stop, and stay all issues of bloud whatsoeuer in man or woman, and the dysentery.
Burned Corrall drieth more than when it is vnburned, and being giuen to drinke in water, it  helpeth the gripings of the belly, and the griefes of the stone in the bladder.
Corrall drunke in wine prouoketh sleepe: but if the patient haue an ague, then it is with better  successe ministred in water, for the Corrall cooleth, and the water moistneth the body, by reason whereof it restraineth the burning heate in agues, and represseth the vapours that hinder sleepe.



CHAP. 167. Of Mushrumes, or Toadstooles.

 The Kindes.
SOme Mushrumes grow forth of the earth; other vpon the bodies of old trees, which differ altogether in kindes. Many wantons that dwell neere the sea, and haue fish at will, are very desirous for change of diet to feed vpon the birds of the mountaines; and such as dwell vpon the hills or champion grounds, do longe after sea fish; many that haue plenty of both, do hunger after the earthie excrescences, called Mushrumes: whereof some are very venomous and full of poison, others not so noisome; and neither of them very wholesome meate; wherefore for the auoiding of the venomous qualitie of the one, and that the other which is lesse venomous may be discerned from it, I haue thought good to set forth their pictures with their names and places of growth. @ Because the booke is already grown too voluminous, I will only giue you the figures of such as my Author hath here mentioned, with some few others, but not trouble you with any more history, yet distinguish betweene such as are eatable, and those that be poysonous, (...) at least not to be eaten; for the first figured amongst the poysonous ones, is that we call Iewes-eare, which hath nopoysonous facultie in it. Clusius (all whose figures I could haue here giuen you) hath written a peculiar tract of these bastard plants, or excrescences, where such as desire it may finde them susficiently discoursed of. @



1 Fungi vulgatissimi esculenti. Common Mushrums to be (...).





 The Description.
1 GRound Mushrums grow vp in one night, standing vpon a thicke and round stalke, like vnto a broad hat or buckler, of a very white colour vntil it begin to wither, at what time it loseth his faire white, declining to yellownesse: the lower side is somewhat hollow, set or decked with fine gutters, drawne along from the middle centre to the circumference or round edge of the brim.
2 All Mushroms are without pith, rib, or veine: they differ not a little in bignesse and colour, some are great, and like a broad brimmed hat; others smaller, about the bignesse of a siluer coine called a doller: most of them are red vnderneath; some more, (...) lesse; others little or nothing red at all: the vpper side which beareth out, is either pale or whitish, or else of an ill fauored colour like ashes (they commonly call it Ash colour) or else it seemeth to be somewhat yellow.
There is another kinde of Mushrums called Fungi parui lethales galericulati: in English, deadly Mushrums, which are fashioned like vnto an hood, and are most venomous and full of poison.
There is a kinde of Mushrum called Fungus (...) laethalis, that is also a deadly Mushrum, fashioned like a little buckler.
There is another kinde of Mushrum, which is also most venomous and full of poison, bearing also the shape of a buckler, being called Fungus venenatus Clyptiformis: in English, the stinking venomous Mushrom.


2 Fungi tethales, aut saltem non esculenti. Poyson Mushrums, or at the least such as are not vulgarly (...).


The Mushrums or Toodstooles which grow vpon the trunkes or bodies of old trees, very much resembling Auricula Iudae, that is Iewes eare, do in continuance of time grow vnto the substance of wood, which the Foulers do call Touchwood, and are for the most halfe circuled or halfe round, whose vpper part is somewhat plaine, and sometime a little hollow, but the lower part is plaited or pursed together. This kinde of Mushrum the Grecians do call (...) and is full of venome or poison as the former, especially those which grow vpon the Ilex, Oliue, and Oke trees.
There is likewise a kinde of Musbrum called Fungus Fanaginosus, growing vp in moist and shadowie woods, which is also venomous, hauing a thicke and tuberous stalke, an handfull high, of a duskish colour; the top whereof is compact of many small diuisions, like vnto the hony combe.



Fungus sambucinus, sive Auricula (...). Iewes eares.


Fungi lethales, (...) non esculenti. Poysonous Mushrums.



There is also found another, set forth vnder the title Fungus virilis penis arecti forma, which wee English, Pricke Mushrum, taken from his forme.
3 Fungus orbicularis, or Lupi crepitus, some do call it Lucernarum fungus: in English, Fusse balls, Pucke Fusse, and Bulfists, with which in some places of England they vse to kill or smolder their Bees, when they would driue the Hiues, and bereaue the poore Bees of their meat, houses, and liues: these are also vsed in some places where neighbours dwell far asunder, to carry and reserue fire from place to place, whereof it tooke the name, Lucernarum Fungus: in forme they are very round, sticking and cleauing vnto the ground, without any stalks or stems; at the first white, but afterward of a duskish colour, hauing no hole or breach in them, whereby a man may see into them, which being troden vpon do breath forth a most thin and fine pouder, like vnto smoke, very noisome and hurtfull vnto the eies, causing a kinde of blindnesse, which is called Poor-blinde, or Sand-blinde.


Fungi lethales, sive non esculenti. Poisonous Mushrums.


There is another kinde of Fungus, or Mushrum, which groweth in moist medowes, and by ditch sides, fiue or six inches high, couered ouer with a skin like a piece of sheepes leather, of a russet colour; which being taken away there appeareth a long and white stumpe, in forme not much vnlike to an handle, mentioned in the title, or like vnto the white and tender stalke of Aron, but greater: this kinde is also full of venome and poison.
There is likewise a kinde of Mushrum, with a certaine round excrescence, growing within the earth; vnder the vpper crust or face of the same, in dry and grauelly grounds in Pannonia and the Prouinces adioining which do cause the ground to swel, and be full of hils like Mole-hils. The people where they grow, are constrained to dig them vp and cast them abroad like as we do Mole-hils. spoiling their grounds, as Mole-hils are hurtfull vnto our soile: these haue neither stalks, leaues, fibres nor strings annexed or fastened vnto them, and for the most part are of a reddish colour, but within of a whitish yellow: the Grecians haue called this tuberous excrescence, Idna, and the Latines Tubera: the Spaniards do call them Turmas de (...): in English (...) may call them Spanish Fusse bals.


 The Place.
Mushrums come vp about the roots of trees, in (...) places of medowes, and Ley Land newly

Fungus fauiginosus. Hony-comb'd Mushrome.
Fungus Virilis Penis effigie. Pricke Mushrom.
Tubera terrae. Fusse-balls, or Puckfists.
turned; in woods also where the ground is sandy, but yet dankish: they grow likewise out of wood, forth of the rotten bodies of trees, but they are vnprofitable and nothing worth. Poisonsome Mushroms, as Dioscorides saith, groweth where old rusty iron lieth, or rotten clouts, or neere to serpents dens, or roots of trees that bring forth venomous fruit. Diuers esteeme those for the best which grow in medowes, and vpon mountaines and hilly places, as Horace saith, lib. ser. 2. satyr. 4.

-- pratensibus optima fungis
(...), alijs male creditur.


The medow Mushroms are in kinde the best,
It is ill trusting any of the rest.




 The Time.
Diuers come vp in Aprill, and last not till May, for they flourish but whilest Aprill continues: others grow later, about August; yet all of them after raine, and therefore they are (...) one yere sooner, and another later. Mushroms, saith Pliny, grow in shoures of raine: they come of the slime of trees, as the same Author affirmeth.


 The Names.
They are called in Latine, Fungi: in Greeke, (...): in Italian, Fonghi: in Spanish, Hungos, Cugumenos: in French, (...), which word the low-Countrey men also vse, and call them Campernoellen: in high-Dutch, Schwemme, (...): in English, Mushroms, Toad-stooles, and Paddock-stooles.
The Mushroms that come vp in Aprill are called in Latine of some, Spongiolae: of the Italians, (...): and in high-Dutch, Morchel.
They that are of a light red are called of some Boleti, among the later ones which rise and fall away in seuen dayes. The white, or those which be somewhat yellow, are called in Latine, Suilli: which the later Physitions name Porcini, or Swine Mushroms. Suilli, saith Pliny, are dried, being hanged vpon rushes, which are thrust through them. The dry ones are in our age also eaten in Bohemia and Austria: they that grow by the roots of Poplar trees are called of the Latines, Populnei, Poplar Mushroms.
Puffes-fists are commonly called in Latine, Lupi crepit us, or Wolfes fists: in Italian, Vescie de Lupo: in English, Puffes-fists, and Fusse-balls in the North. Pliny nameth them Pezicae, as though he should say, flat.
Tree Mushroms be called in Greeke, (...): in Latine, Fungi arborum, and Fungi arborei: in English, tree Mushroms, or Touch-wood: in high-Dutch also Schwemme. They are all thought to be poisonsome, being inwardly taken. Nicander writeth, that the Mushroms of the Oliue tree, the Ilex tree, and of the Oke tree bring death.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
Galen affirmes, that they are all very cold and moist, and therefore do approch vnto a venomous  and murthering facultie, and ingender a clammy, pituitous, and cold nutriment if they be eaten. To conclude, few of them are good to be eaten, and most of them do suffocate and strangle the eater. Therefore I giue my aduice vnto those that loue such strange and new fangled meates, to beware of licking honey among thornes, lest the sweetnesse of the one do not counteruaile the sharpnesse and pricking of the other.
Fusse-balls are no way eaten: the pouder of them doth dry without biting: it is fitly applied to  merigalls, kibed heeles, and such like.
In diuers parts of England where people dwell farre from neighbours, they carry them kindled  with fire, which lasteth long: whereupon they were called Lucernarum Fungi.
The dust or pouder hereof is very dangerous for the eyes, for it hath been often seen, that diuers  haue been pore-blinde euer after, when some small quantitie thereof hath been blowne into their eyes.
The countrey people do vse to kill or smother Bees with these Fusse-balls, being set on fire, sor  the which purpose it fitly serueth.
@ The fungous excrescence of the Elder, commonly called a Iewes eare, is much vsed against  the inflammations and all other sorenesses of the throat, being boiled in milke, steeped in beere, vineger, or any other conuenient liquor. @



CHAP. 168. Of great Tooth-wort, or Clownes Lung-wort.

 The Description.
1 THere is often found among the Mushroms a certaine kinde of excrescence consisting of a jelly or soft substance, like that of the Mushroms, and therefore it may the more fitly be here inserted: it riseth forth of the ground in forme like vnto Orobanche, or the Broome-Rape, and also in substance, hauing a tender, thicke, tuberous, or mis-shapen body, consisting as it were of scales like teeth (whereof it tooke his name) of a dusty shining colour tending to purple. The stalke riseth vp in the middle garnished with little gaping hollow floures like those of Satyrion; on the outside of an ouerworne whitish colour: the whole plant resembleth a rude forme of that

gellie, or slimie matter, found in the fields, which we (...) the falling of stars: the root is small and tender.
2 There is also another sort hereof found, not differing from the precedent: the chiefe difference consisteth in that, that this plant is altogether lesser; @ and hath a root diuersly diuaricated like Corall, white of colour, full of juice, and without any fibres annexed thereto @; in other respects like.


1 Dentaria maior Mathioli. Great Toothwoort, or Lungwoort.


2 Dentaria minor. Little Lungwoort.




 The Place.
These plants do grow at the bottome of Elme trees, and such like, in shadowie places: I found it growing in a lane called East-lane, vpon the right hand as ye go from Maidstone in Kent vnto Cockes Heath, halfe a mile from the towne; and in other places thereabout: it doth also grow in the fields about Croidon, especially about a place called Groutes, being the land of a worshipfull Gentleman called Mr. Garth: and also in a wood in Kent neere Crayfoot, called Rowe, or Roughhill: (...) groweth likewise neere Harwood in Lancashire, a mile from Whanley, in a wood called Talbot banke.


 The Time.
They flourish in May and Iune.


 The Names.
There is not any other name extant, more than is set forth in the description.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
There is nothing extant of the faculties hereof, either of the ancient or later writers: neither haue we any thing of our owne experience; onely our countrie women do call it (...), and do vse it against the cough, and all other imperfections of the lungs: but what benefit they reape thereby I know not; neither can any of iudgement giue me further instruction thereof.



CHAP. 166. Of Saunders.

 The Kindes.
THe ancient Greekes haue not knowne the sorts of Saunders: Garcias and others describe three, Album, Rubrum, and Pallidum: which in shops is called Citrinum.



 The Description.
1 THe Saunders tree groweth to the bignesse of the Walnut-tree, garnished with many goodly branches; whereon are set leaues like those of the Lentiske tree, alwaies greene; among which come forth very faire floures, of a blew colour tending to blacknesse; after commeth the fruit of the bignesse of a Cherry, greene at the first, and blacke when it is ripe; without taste, and ready to (...) downe with euery little blast of winde: the timber or wood is of a white colour, and a very pleasant smell.
2 There is likewise another which groweth very great, the floures and fruit agree with the other of his kinde: the wood is of a yellowish colour, wherein consisteth the difference.
@ 3 The third fort which wee call Red-Saunders is a very hard and sollid wood, hauing little or no smell, the colour thereof is very red, it groweth not in those places where the other grow, neither is the forme of the tree described by any that I know of, it is frequently vsed to colour sauces, and for such like vses. @


 The Place.
The white and yellow Saunders grow naturally, and that in great aboundance, in an Island called Timor, and also in the East-Indies beyond the riuer Sanges or rather Ganges, which the Indians call Hanga, and also about Iaua, where it is of better odour than any that groweth elsewhere.
The red Saunders growes within the riuer Ganges, especially about Tanasarim, and in the marrish grounds about Charamandell: Auicen, (...), and most of the Mauritanians call it by a corrupt name, Sandal: in Timor, Malaca, and in places neere adioyning, Chandama: in Decan and Guzarate, (...): in Latine, Sandalum and (...), adding thereto for the colour album, flauum, or (...), and rubrum, that is, white, yellow, and red Saunders.


 The Time.
These trees which are the white and yellow Saunders grow (...) Winter and Sommer, and are not one knowne from another, but by the Indians themselues, who haue taken very certaine notes and markes of them, because they may the more speedily distinguish them when the Mart commeth.


 The Names.
Their names haue been susficiently spoken of in their descriptions.


 The Temperature.
@ Yellow and white Saunders are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. The (...) Saunders are not so hot. @


 The Vertues.
The Indians do vse the decoction made in water, against hot burning agues, and the ouermuch  flowing of the menses, Erisipelas, the gout, and all inflammations, especially if it be mixed with the (...) of Nightshade, Housleeke, or Purslane.
The white Saunders mixed with Rose water, and the temples bathed therewith, ceaseth the  paine of the megrim, and keepeth backe the flowing of humours to the eies.
Auicen affirmeth it to be good for all passions of the hart, and maketh it glad and merry, and  therefore good to be put in collises, iellies, and all delicate meates which are made to strengthen and reuiue the spirits.
@ Red Saunders haue an astrictiue and strengthning facultie, but are not cordiall as the other  two, they are vsed in diuers medicines and meates both for their facultie and pleasing red colour which they giue to them. @



CHAP. 170. Of Stony wood, or wood made Stones.

 The Description.
AMong the wonders of England this is one of great admiration, and contrarie vnto (...) reason and capacitie, that there should be a kinde of wood alterable into the hardnesse of a stone called Stonie wood, or rather a kinde of water, which hardneth wood and other things, into the nature and matter of stones. But we know that the workes of God are

(...) Lapideum, siue in Lapides conuersum. Stonie wood, or wood made stones.
wonderfull, if we doe but narrowly search the least of them, which we dayly behold; much more if we turne our eyes vpon those that are seldome seene, and knowne but of a few, and that of such as haue painfully trauelled in the secrets of Nature. This strange alteration of nature is to be seene in sundry parts of England and Wales, through the qualities of some waters and earth, which change such things into stone as do fall therein, or which are of purpose for triall put into them. In the North part of England there is a Well neere vnto Knaesborough, which will change any thing into stone, whether it be wood, timber, leaues of trees, mosse, leather gloues, or such like. There be diuers places in Bed ford shire, Warwickshire, and Wales, where there is ground of that qualitie, that if a stake be driuen into it, that part of the stake which is within the ground will be a firme and hard stone, and all that which is aboue the ground retaineth his former substance and nature. Also my selfe being at Rougby (about such time as our fantasticke people did with great concourse and multitudes repaire and run headlong vnto the sacred Wells of Newnam (...), in the edge of Warwickshire, as vnto the water of life, which could cure all diseases) I went from thence vnto these Wells, where I found growing ouer the same a faire Ash tree, whose boughes did hang ouer the spring of water, whereof some that were seare and rotten, and some that of purpose were broken off, fell into the water, and were all turned into stones. Of these boughes or parts of the tree I brought into London, which when I had broken in pieces, therein might be seene, that the pith and all the rest was turned into stones; yea many buds and flourings of the tree falling into the said water, were also turned into hard stones, still retaining the same shape and fashion that they were of before they were in the water. I doubt not but if this water were proued about the hardning of some Confections Physicall, for the preseruation of them, or other special ends, it would offer greater occasion of admiration for the health and benefit of mankinde, than it doth about such things as already haue been experimented, tending to very little purpose.



CHAP. 171. Of the Goose tree, Barnacle tree, or the tree bearing Geese.


Britannicae Conchae anatiferae. The breed of Barnacles.




 The Description.
HAuing trauelled from the Grasses growing in the bottome of the fenny waters, the Woods, and mountaines, euen vnto Libanus it selfe; and also the sea, and bowels of the same, wee are arriued at the end of our Historie; thinking it not impertinent to the conclusion of the same, to end with one of the maruells of this land (we may say of the world.) The historie whereof to set forth according to the worthinesse and raritie thereof, would not only require a large and peculiar volume, but also a deeper search into the bowels of nature, than my intended purposewil (...) me to wade into, my sufficiencie also considered; leauing the historie thereof rough hewen, vnto some excellent men, learned in the secrets of nature, to be both fined and refined: in the mean space take it as it falleth out, the naked and bare truth, though vnpolished. There are found in the North parts of Scotland and the Islands adiacent, called Orchades, certain trees whereon do grow certaine shells of a white colour tending to russet, (...) are contained little liuing creatures: which shells in time of maturitie do open, and out of them grow those little liuing things, which falling into the water do become fowles, which we call (...); in the North of England, brant Geese; and in Lancashire, tree Geese: but the other that do (...) (...) the land perish and come to nothing. Thus much by the writings of others, and also from the mouths (...) people of those parts, which may very well accord with truth.
But what our eyes haue seene, and hands haue touched we shall declare. There is a small Island in Lancashire called the Pile of Foulders, wherein are found the broken pieces of old and bruised ships, some whereof haue been cast thither by shipwracke, and also the trunks and bodies with the branches of old and rotten trees, cast vp there likewise; whereon is found a certaine spume or froth that in time breedeth vnto certaine shels, in shape like those of the Muskle, but sharper pointed, and of a whitish colour: wherein is contained a thing in forme like a lace of silke finely wouen as it were together, of a whitish colour, one end whereof is fastned vnto the inside of the shell, euen as the fish of Oisters and Muskles are: the other end is made fast vnto the belly of a rude masse or Iumpe, which in time commeth to the shape and (...) of a Bird: when it is perfectly formed the shell gapeth open, and the first thing that appeareth is the foresaid lace or string; next come the legs of the bird hanging out, and as it groweth greater it openeth the shell by degrees, til at length it is all come forth, and hangeth onely by the bill: in short space after it commeth to full maturitie, and falleth into the sea, where it gathereth feathers, and groweth to a fowle bigger than a Mallard, and lesser than a Goose, hauing blacke legs and bill or beake, and feathers blacke and white, spotted in such manner as is our Mag-Pie, called in some places a Pie-Annet, which the people of Lancashire call by no other name than a tree Goose: which place aforesaid, and all those parts adioyning do so much abound (...), that one of the best is bought for three pence. For the truth hereof, if any doubt, may it please them to repaire vnto me, and I shall satisfie them by the testimonie of good witnesses.
Moreouer, it should seeme that there is another sort hereof; the historie of which is true, and of mine owne knowledge: for trauelling vpon the shore of our English coast betweene Douer and Rumney, I found the trunke of an old rotten tree, which (with some helpe that I procured by Fishermens wiues that were there attending their husbands returne from the sea) we drew out of the water vpon dry land: vpon this rotten tree I found growing many thousands of long crimson bladders, in shape like vnto puddings newly filled, before they be sodden, which were very cleere and shining; at the nether end whereof did grow a shell fish, fashioned somewhat like a small Muskle, but much whiter, resembling a shell fish that groweth vpon the rockes about Garnsey and Garsey, called a Lympit: many of these shells I brought with me to London, which after I had opened I found in them liuing things without forme or shape; in others which were neerer come to ripenes I found liuing things that were very naked, in shape like a Bird: in others, the Birds couered with soft downe, the shell halfe open, and the Bird ready to fall our, which no doubt were the Fowles called Barnakles. I dare not absolutely auouch euery circumstance of the first part of this history, concerning the tree that beareth those buds aforesaid, but will leaue it to a further consideration; howbeit that which I haue seene with mine eyes, and handled with mine hands, I dare confidently auouch, and boldly put downe for veritie. Now if any will obiect, that this tree which I saw might be one of those before mentioned, which either by the waues of the sea or some violent wind had been ouerturned, as many other trees are; or that any trees falling into those seas about the Orchades, will of themselues beare the like fowles, by reason of those seas and waters, these being so probable coniectures, and likely to be true, I may not without preiudice gainesay, or indeauour to (...).
@ The Barnakle, whose fabulous breed my Author here sets downe, and diuers others haue

also deliuered, were found by some Hollanders to haue another originall, and that by egges, as other Birds haue: for they in their third voyage to (...) out the North-East passage to China, and the Molucco's, about the eightieth degree and eleuen minutes of Northerly latitude, found two little Islands, in the one of which they found aboundance of these Geese sitting vpon their egges, of which they got one Goose, and tooke away sixty egges, etc. Vide Pontani, (...) and vrb. (...). Hist. lib. 2. cap. 22. Now the shells out of which these birds were thought to fly, are a kinde of (...) marinus; and thus Fabius Columna, in the end of his Phytobasanos, writing piscium aliquot historia, iudiciously proues: to whose opinion I wholly subscribe, and to it I refer the Curious. His asseueration is this: Conchas vulgo Anatiferas, non esse fructus terrestres, neque ex ijs Anates oriri; sed (...) marinae speciem. I could haue said somthing more hereof, but thus much I thinke may serue, (...) with that which Fabius Columna hath written vpon this point. @


 The Place.
The borders and rotten plankes whereon are found these shels wherein is bred the Barnakle, are taken vp in a small Island adioyning to Lancashire, halfe a mile from the maine land, called the Pile of Foulders.


 The Time.
They spawne as it were in March and Aprill; the Geese are formed in May and Iune, and come to fulnesse of seathers in the moneth after.
And thus hauing through Gods assistance discoursed somewhat at large of Grasses, Herbes, Shrubs, Trees, and Mosses, and certaine Excrescences of the earth, with other things moe, incident to the historie thereof, we conclude and end our present Volume, with this wonder of England. For the which Gods name be euer honored and praised.


FINIS.




AN APPENDIX OR ADDITION OF certaine Plants omitted in the former Historie.

The Preface.
HAuing run through the Historie of Plants gathered by Mr. Gerrard, and much enlarged the same both by the addition of many Figures and histories of Plants not formerly contained in it, and by the amending and encreasing the historie of sundry of those which before were therein treated of; I finde that I haue forgotten diuers which I intended to haue added in their fitting places: the occasion hereof hath beene, my many businesses, the troublesomenesse, and aboue all, the great expectation and hast of the Worke, whereby I was forced to performe this task within the compasse of a yeare. Now being constant to my first resolution, I here haue, as time would giue me leaue, and my memorie serue, made a (...) collection and addition (though without method) of such as offered themselues vnto me; and without doubt there are sundrie others which are as fitting to be added as those; and I should not haue been wanting, if time would haue permitted me to haue entred into further consideration of them. In the meane time take in good part those that I haue here presented to your view.


CHAP. 1. Of the Maracoc or Passion-floure.

 The Description.
THis Plant, which the Spaniards in the West Indies call Granadilla, because the fruit somewhat resembles a Pomegranat, which in their tongue they term Granadas, is the same which the Virginians call Maracoc. The Spanish (...) for some imaginarie resemblances in the floure, first called it Flos (...), the Passion floure, and in a counterfeit figure, by adding what was wanting, they made it as it were an Epitome of our Sauiours Passion: thus (...) persons semper sibi somnium fingunt. Bauhine desirous to refer it to some stock or kindred of formerly knowne plants, giues it the name of Clematis trifolia: yet the floures and fruit pronounce it not properly belonging to their Tribe; but Clematis being a certaine genericke name to all wooddy winding plants, this as a species may come vnder the denomination, though little in other respects participating with them. The roots of this are long, somewhat like, yet thicker than those of Sarsa parilla, running vp and downe, and putting vp their heads in seuerall places: from these roots rise vp many long winding round stalkes, which grow two, three, soure, or more yards high, according to the heate and seasonablenesse of the yeare and soile whereas they are planted: vpon these stalkes grow many leaues diuided into three parts, sharpe pointed, and snipt about the edges: commonly out of the bosomes of each of the vppermost leaues there groweth a clasping tendrell and a floure: the floure growes vpon a little foot-stalke some two inches long, and is of a longish cornered forme, with fiue little crooked hornes at the top, before such time as it open it selfe, but opened, this longish head diuides it selfe into ten parts, and sustaines the leaues of the (...), which are very many, long, sharpe pointed, narrow, and orderly spred open one by another, (...) lying straight, others crooked: these leaues are of colour whitish, but thicke spotted with a (...) colour, and towards the bottome it hath a ring of a perfect Peach colour, and aboue and (...) it a white circle, which giue a great grace to the floure; in the middest whereof rises an (...), which parts it selfe into foure or fiue crooked spotted hornes, with broadish heads: from

the midst of these rises another roundish head which carries three nailes or hornes, biggest aboue, and smallest at their lower end: this floure with vs is neuer succeeded by any fruit, but in the West Indies, whereas it naturally growes, it beares a fruit, when it is ripe of the bignesse and colour of Pomegranats, but it wants such a ring or crown about the top as they haue; the rinde also is much thinner and tenderer, the pulpe is whitish, and without taste, but the liquor is somwhat tart: they open them as they do egges, and the liquor is supped off with great delight, both by the Indians and Spaniards, (as Monardus witnesseth) neither if they sup off many of them shall they find their stomack opprest, but rather their bellies are gently loosned. In this fruit are contained many seeds somwhat like Peare kernells, but more cornered and rough.


Clematis trifolia, siue Flos Passionis. The Maracoc or Passion-floure.


This growes wilde in most of the hot countries of America, from whence it hath been brought into our English gardens, where it growes very well, but floures only in some few places, and in hot and seasonable yeares: it is in good plenty growing with Mistresse Tuggy at Westminster, where I haue some yeares seene it beare a great many floures.



CHAP. 2. Of Ribes or red Currans.

 The Description.
1 THe plant which carries the fruit which we commonly terme red Currans, is a shrubbie bush of the bignesse of a Gooseberry bush, but without prickles: the wood is soft and white, with a pretty large pith in the middle: it is couered with a double barke, the vndermost, being the thicker, is greene, and the vppermost, which sometimes chaps and pills off, is of a brownish

colour, and smooth: the barke of the yongest shoots is whitish and rough: the leaues, which grow vpon footstalkes some two inches long, are somewhat like Vine leaues, but smaller by much, and lesse cornered, being cut into three, and sometimes, but seldomer, into fiue parts, somwhat thicke, with many veines running ouer them, greener aboue than they are below: out of the branches in Spring time grow stalkes hanging downe some six inches in length, carrying many little greenish floures, which are succeeded by little red berries, cleare and smooth, of the bignesse of the Whortle berries, of a pleasant tart taste. Of this kinde there is another, onely different from this in the fruit, which is twice so big as that of the common kind.
2 The bush which beares the white Currans is commonly straighter and bigger than the former: the leaues are lesser, the floures whiter, and so also is the fruit, being cleare and transparent, with a little blackish rough end.


1 Ribes vulgaris fructu rubro. Red Currans.


2 Ribes fructu albo. White Currans.


3 Besides these there is another, which disfers little from the former in shape, yet grows somwhat higher, and hath lesser leaues: the floures are of a purplish green colour, and are succeeded by fruit as big againe as the ordinary red, but of a stinking and somewhat loathing sauour: the leaues also are not without this stinking smell.


 The Place, Time, and Names.
None of these grow wild with vs, but they are to be found plentifully growing in many gardens, especially the two former, the red and the white.
The leaues and floures come forth in the Spring, and the fruit is ripe about Midsommer.
This plant is thought to haue been vnknowne to the antient Greekes: some thinke it the Ribes of the Arabian Serapio. Fuchsius, Matthiolus, and some other deny it; notwithstanding Dodonaeus affirmes it: neither is the controuersie easily to be decided, because the Author is briefe in the description thereof, neither haue we his words but by the hand of a barbarous Translator. Howeuer the shops of late time take it (the faculties consenting thereto) for the true Ribes, and of the fruit hereof prepare their Rob de Ribes. (...) calls it Ribesium, grossularia rubra, and Grossularia transmarina; and they are distinguished into three sorts, Rubra, Alba, Nigra (...), (...), white, and blacke Currans: the Germans call them S. (...) traubell, or traublin, and S. (...) (...): the Dutch, (...) ouer Zee: the Italians, Vuetta rossa: the French, Groisseles, (...) (...) (...): the Bohemians, (...) S. (...): the English, Red Currans: yet must they not be confounded

with those Currans which are brought from Zant, and the continent adioyning thereto, and which are vulgarly sold by our Grocers; for they are the fruit of a small Vine, and differ much from these.


The Temperature and Vertues.
The berries of red Currans, as also of the white, are cold and dry in the end of the second degree, and haue some astriction, together with tenuitie of parts.
They extinguish and mitigate feuerish heates, represse choler, temper the ouer-hot bloud, resist  putrefaction, quench thirst, helpe the deiection of the appetite, stay cholericke vomitings and scourings, and helpe the Dysenterie proceeding of an hot cause.
The iuice of these boiled to the height of honey, either with or without sugar (which is called  Rob de Ribes) hath the same qualities, and conduces to the same purposes.



CHAP. 3. Of Parsley Breake-stone, and bastard Rupturewort.


1 Percepier Anglorum Lob. Parsley Breake-stone.


2. Polygonu^ Herniariae facie. Bastard Rupture-wort.



 The Description.
1 I Thought it was not altogether inconuenient to (...) these two Plants together in one Chapter; first, because they are (...) one stature; and secondly, taken (...) of one and the (...) History of Plants, to wit, the (...) of (...) and Lobel.
The first of these, which the Authors of the (...) set sorth by the name of (...), (and rather assert, than affirme to be the Scandix of the Antients) is by (...) called Scandix minor: and by (...) Columna, (...) montana minima: it hath a small wooddy yellowish fibrous root, (...) which rise vp one, two, or more little stalks, seldome exceeding the height of an handfull, and these are round and hairy, and vpon them grow little roundish leaues, like the tender leaues of Cheruill, but hairy, and of a whitish green colour, fastned to the stalkes with short foot-stalkes, and hauing little eares at their setting on: the floures are small, greene, and fiue cornered, many clustering together at the setting on of the leaues: the seed is small, smooth, and yellowish: the stalks of this plant grow sometimes vpright, and otherwhiles they lean on the ground: it is to be found vpon diuers dry and barren grounds, as in Hide Parke, Tuthill fields, etc. It floures in May, and ripens the feed in Iune and Iuly. It seemes by the Authors of the Aduersaria, that in the West countrey about Bristow they call this Herbe Percepier; but our herbe women in Cheapside know it by the name of Parsley Breakestone.
This is hot and dry, and of subtil parts: it vehemently and speedily  moues vrine, and by some is kept in pickle, and eaten as a sallad.
The distilled water is also commended to be effectuall to moue  vrine, and clense the kidnies of grauell.
2 The historie of this, by the forementioned Authors, Aduers. pag. 404. is thus set forth vnder this title, Polygonium Herniariae folijs and facie, perampla radice (...): Neither (say they) ought this to be despised by such as are studious of the knowledge of Plants; for it is very little knowne, being a very small herbe lying along vpon the ground, and almost ouerwhelmed or couered with the grasse, hauing little branches very full of ioints: the little leaues and seeds are whitish, and very like those of Herniaria or Rupture-wort: the whole plant is white, hauing a very small and mossie floure: the root is larger than the smalnesse of the plant seemeth to require, hard, branched, diuersly turning and winding, and therefore hard to be plucked vp: the taste is dry and hottish. It growes vpon a large Plaine in Prouince, betweene the cities Arles and Selon. Thus much Pena and Lobel. I am deceiued, if some (...) yeares agone I was not shewed this plant, gathered in some part of this kingdome, but where, I am not able to (...).




CHAP. 4. Of Heath Spurge and Rocke Rose

 The Description.
1 THese Plants by right should haue followed the historie of Thymelaea, for in shape and facultie they are not much vnlike it. The first is a low shrub, sending from one root many branches of some cubit long, and these bending, flexible, and couered with an outer blackish barke, which comprehends another within, tough, and which may be diuided into fine threds: the leaues are like those of Chamaelea, yet lesser, shorter and thicker, a little rough also, and growing about the branches in a certaine order: if you chew them they are gummie, bitter at the first, and afterwards hot and biting: the floures grow amongst the leaues, longish, yellowish, and diuided at the end into foure little leaues: the fruit is said to be like that of Thymaelea, but of a blackish colour, the root is thicke and wooddie. It growes frequently in the kingdome of Granado and Valentia in Spaine, it floures in March and Aprill. The Herbarists there terme it Sanamunda, and the common people, Mierda-cruz, by reason of the purging facultie.


1 Sanamunda 1. Clus. Heath Spurge.


2 Sanamunda 2. Clus. The second Heath Spurge.


2 The other is a shrub some cubit high, hauing tough flexible branches couered with a dense and thick barke, which, the outward rinde being taken away, ouer all the plant, but chiefely next the root, may be drawn into threds like Flax or Hemp: the vpper branches are set with thick, short, fat, rough sharp pointed leaues, of somwhat a saltish taste at the first, afterwards of a hot and biting taste: the floures are many, little and yellow: the root is thicke and wooddie like as that of the former: this growes vpon the sea coast of Spaine, and on the mountaines nigh Granado, where they call it Sanamunda, and the common people about Gibraltar call it Burhalaga, and they only vse it to heat their ouens with. It floures in Februarie. Anguillara called this, Empetron: Caesalpinus, (...), and in the Historia Lugd, it is the Cneoron nigrum Myconi: Sesamoides minus: Dalcchampij, and Phacoides, Oribasij (...).

3 This is bigger than either of the two former, hauing whiter and more flexible branches, whose barke is vnmeasurably tough and hard to breake: the vpper branches are many, and those very downie, and hanging downe their heads, set thicke with little leaues like Stone-crop, and of the like hot or burning facultie: the floures are like those of the former; sometimes greenish, otherwhiles yellow: Clusius did not obserue the fruit, but saith, it floured at the same time with the former, and grew in all the sea coast, from the Straits of Gibralter, to the Pyrenaean mountaines. Alfonsus Pantius called this Cneoron: Lobel and (...) call it Erica Alexandrina.


3 (...) 3. Clus. The third Heath Spurge.


4 Cneoron (...). Rocke Rose.


4 This also may not vnfitly bee ioined to the former, for it hath many tender flexible tough branches commonly leaning or lying along vpon the ground, vpon which without order grow leaues greeene, skinny, and like those of the true Thymelaea; at first of an vngratefull, and afterwards of a bitter taste, yet hauing none or very little acrimony (as far as may be perceiued by their taste:) the floures grow vpon the tops of the branches six seuen or more together, consisting of foure little leaues of a reddish purple colour, very beautifull and well smelling, yet offending the head if they be long smelt vnto: these are succeeded by small berries, of colour white, containing a round seed, couered with an ash coloured skin. The root is long, of the thickenesse of ones little finger, sometimes blackish, yet most commonly yellowish, tough, and smallest at the top where the branches come forth. It floures in Aprill and May, and ripens the fruit in Iune: it floures sometimes thrice in the yeare, and ripens the fruit twise; for Clusius affirmes that twise in one yeare he gathered ripe berries from one and the same plant. It growes plentifully vpon the mountainous places of Austria about Vienna; whither the countrey women bring the floures to the market in great plenty to sell them to deck vp houses: it grows also in the dry medowes by Frankford on the Moene, where there is obserued a variety with white floures. Matthiolus would haue this to be the Cneoron album of Theophrastus: Cordus calls it Thymelaea minor: it is the Cneoron alterum Matthioli, and Oleander syl. (...) Myconi, in the Hist. Lugd. The Germans call it Stein Roselin: and wee may call it Rocke Rose, or dwarfe Oleander.
5 This plant by Bauhine is called Cneorum album folio oleae argenteo (...): and by Dalechampius, Cneorum album, which hath been the reason I haue put it here, although Caesalpinus, Imperatus, and Plateau,

who sent it to Clusius, would haue it to be and cal it Dorycnium: It is a shrubby herb sending from one root many single stalkes some halfe cubit or better high: the leaues which grow vpon the stalkes without order, are like those of the Oliue, but somewhat narrower, and couered ouer with a soft siluer-like downinesse: at the top of the stalks grow many floures clustering together, of the shape of those of the lesser Bindeweed, but white of colour. This growes wilde in some parts of Sicily, whence Caesalpinus calls it Dorychnium ex Sicilia.


5 Cneorum album folijs argenteis. White Rocke Rose.


Chamaebuxus flore Coluteae. Bastard dwarfe box.




 The Temperature and Vertues.
The three first are very hot, and two first  haue a strong purging facultie, for taken in the weight of a dram with the decoction of Cicers they mightily purge by stoole, both flegme, choller, and also waterish humours, and they are often vsed for this purpose by the Countrey people in some parts of Spaine.
The faculties of the rest are not knowne, nor written of by any as yet.



CHAP. 5. Of Bastard dwarfe Box.

 The Description.
THis which Clusius for want of a name calls Anonymos flore Coluteae Gesner called Chamaebuxus: to which (...) addes flore Coluteae; and Besler in his hortus Eystettensis, agreeable to the name I haue giuen it in English, calls it Pseudochamaebuxus. It is a small plant hauing many creping wooddy tough roots, here and there sending forth small fibers; from these arise many tough bending branches some span long, hauing thicke sharpe pointed greene leaues, almost like those of Boxe, and these grow vpon the stalks without any order, and when you first chew them they are of an vngratefull taste, afterwards bitter and hot; at the tops of the branches, do come forth amongst the leaues three or foure longish floures, for the most part without smell; yet in some places they smell sweet, like as some of the Narcisses; they consist of three leaues apiece; two whereof are white, and spread abroad as wings, a whitish little hood couering their lower ends: the third is wrapt vp in forme of a pipe, with the end hollow and crooked, and

this is of a yellow colour, which by age oft times becomes wholly red: after those floures succeed cods, broad and flat, little lesse than those of the broad leaued Thlaspi, and greene of colour, rough, and in each of these cods are commonly contained a couple of seeds, of the bignes of little Chichlings, of a blackish ash colour, rough, and resembling a little dug.
This is sometimes found to vary, hauing the two winged leaues yellow or red, and the middle one yellow:


 The Place.
It floures in Aprill and May, and ripens the seed in Iune; it growes vpon most of the Austrian and Stirian Alpes, and in diuers places of Hungarie. It is neither vsed in Physicke, nor the faculties thereof in medicine knowne.



CHAP. 6. Of Winged Bind weed, or Quamoclit


Quamoclit, sive Conuoluulus Pennatus. Winged Windeweed.



 The Description.
THe first that writ of and described this plant was (...), and that by the name of Gelsiminum rubrum alterum: after him Camerarius gaue a description and figure therof in his Hortus Medicus, by the name of Quamoclit: and after him Fabius Columna both figured and described it more accurately, whose description is put to the figure of it (we here giue) in Clus. his Curaeposteriores. It is so tender a plant that it will not come to any perfection with vs, vnlesse in extraordinary hot yeres, and by other artificiall helps, wherefore I will borrow the description thereof out of Fabius Columna. This exoticke plant, saith he, cannot more fitly be referred to any kinde, than to the family of the (...), or Bindweeds, for in the nature and whole habit it is almost like them, excepting the shape of the winged leaues: it is stored with lesse milk: the flours are long, hollow, but parted into fiue at the top, of a pleasing red colour, with streaked lines or folds, standing vpon long stalkes one or two together comming out of the bosomes of the leaues at each ioint of the branches, and they haue in them fiue yellowish pointalls; then succeeds a longish fruit standing in a scaly cup, ending in a sharp pointall, and couered with a tough skin, as that of the common Convoluulus, but lesser, hauing within it foure longish blacke hard seedes, of a biting taste. The leaues grow alternately out of the ioints of the purple winding branches, being winged and finely diuided, twise as small as the common Rheseda, of a darke greene colour, but the young ones are yellowish, first hauing a few diuisions, but afterwards more, till they come to haue thirteen on a side, and one at the top: but the lower ones are oft times forked: by reason of the great plenty of leaues and flouring stalks or branches, winding themselues about artificiall hoops, crossings, or other fashioned workes of Reeds, or the like, set for winding herbs to clime vpon, it much delights the eie of the beholder, and is therefore kept in pots in gardens of pleasure. The seed sowne in the beginning of the Spring growes vp in Iune, and the first leaues resemble the winged fruit of the Maple: it floures in the end of August, and ripens the seed in the end of September.




CHAP. 7. Of the sensitiue Herbe.


Herbamimosa. The sensitiue berbe.


(...) exactior icon. A perfect figure thereof.



 The Description.
THis which I here call the sensitiue herbe, is that which Christopher a Costa sets forth by the name of Herba mimosa, or the Mocking herbe, because when one puts his hand thereto it forthwith seemes to wither and hang downe the leaues; but when you take it away againe it recouers the pristine greenesse and vigor. I wil here giue you that which Acosta writes thereof, and the figure and historie which Clusius giues in his notes vpon him; and also another figure better expressing the leaues and manner of growing. There is found (saith Acosta) in some Gardens another plant some fiue handfuls long, resting vpon the neighbouring shrubs or walls, hauing a slender stalke of a fresh greene colour, not very round, set at certaine spaces with small and pricking thornes: the leaues are not vnlike the former, [That is, the Herba viua, which in condition is little different from this] being somewhat lesser than those of the female Ferne. It loues to grow in moist and stony places, and is called Herbamimosa, for the reason formerly giuen. The nature hereof is much different from that of Arbor tristis for euery night at Sun-set it as it were withers and dries, so that one would thinke it were dead, but at Sun-rise it recouers the former vigor, and by how much the Sun growes hotter, by so much it becomes the greener, and all the day it turnes the leaues to the Sun.
This plant hath the smell and taste of Liquorice, and the leaues are commonly eaten by the Indians against the cough, to clense the chest, and cleare the voice: it is also thought good against the paines of the kidneies, and to heale greene wounds. Thus much Acosta.
Now, saith Clusius, the leaues of many plants, especially pulses, vse to contract or shrinke vp their leaues in the night time. Now I receiued a dry plant, which was sent to me by the name of Herbamimosa, by Iames Garret in the end of October, 1599, which he writ he had of the right Honourable the Earle of Cumberland, who returning from Saint Iohn de Puerto rico in the West Indies, brought it put in a pot with some earth, but could not preserue it aliue. But I caused the figure of that dried plant to be expressed as well as it might, so to fit it to the description following, made also by the dried plant. This plant which was wholly drie and without leaues had a single root, and that not thick, but hard and wooddy, with few fibres, from whence arose three or foure short stalks, which straight diuided themselues into slender branches, which spread themselues round about vpon the ground, at each ioint putting forth many long and slender fibres, like as in the branches of the common Woodbinde, which lye vpon the ground: these branches were a cubit long, and sometimes more, round, tough, with some prickles, broader at their setting on, as you may see in the common bramble, yet lesser, fewer, and lesse firme; these againe were diuided into other more slender branches set with many little prickles, out of whose ioints betwixt two little leaues grew forth foot-stalks, bedeckt with their little leaues, which were many, set in order, with other to answer to them on the other side, but hauing no single leafe at the end: they were tender and green, not vnlike the little leaues of Acacia, and these (at their first comming out) couered with a thin whitish hairines, as I gathered by a little branch retaining the foot-stalke and leaues thereon (which he sent with the former) and it had also some fibres comming forth thereof. He also added to the former two little heads, which growing vpon the same plant, he writ he receiued of the

forementioned right Honorable Earle, with some branches yet retaining the leaues. These little heads consisted of many slender, narrow, and as it were prickly little leaues; amongst which lay hid round seeds, smooth, blacke, and somewhat swoln in the middle: the floures I saw not, neither know (...) whether they were brought with the rest: but whether the leaues of this plant being green, and yet growing on the ground, do wither at the approch of ones hand, as Christopher A Costa writes, and for that cause imposes the name thereon, they best know who haue seene the greene and yet growing plant: for the faculties you may haue recourse to that which A Costa hath set downe. Thus much out of Clusius.
Novemb. 7. 1632. I being with Mr. Iob Best at the Trinity house in Ratcliffe; among other varicties, he shewed me a dry plant hereof, which I heedfully obserued, and carefully opening out some of the fairest leaues, which (as also the whole plant besides) were carelesly dried, I found the leaues grew vsually some dozen or more on a foot-stalke, iust as many on one side as on the other; and they were couered ouer with a little downines, which standing out on their edges made them look as if they had bin snipt about the edges, which they were not: also I found at euery ioint two little hooked prickles, and not two little leaues or appendices at the setting on of the foot-stalks, but three or foure little leaues, as the rudiment of a yong branch, comming forth at the bosom of each footstalk: the longest branch (as far as I remember) was not aboue a span long; I then drew as perfect a figure as I could of the perfectest branch therof, drawing as (...) as I could the leaues to their ful bignesse, the which I here present you withall. There are two figures formerly extant, the one this of (...), which I here giue you, and the other in the 18. booke, and 144 chap. of the Hist. Lug which is out of A Costa, and this seems to be so far different from that of Clusius, that Bauhine in his Pinax saith, (...) notis suis in Acostam diuer sam plane figuram proposuit, herbam minosam nominans: but he did not wel consider it, for if he had, he might haue found these so much different, thus far to agree; they both make the branches prickly and weak: the leaues many on one rib, one opposite to another without an odde one at the end: but Clusius figures the leaues so close together, that they seem but one leafe, and Acosta makes them too far a sunder, and both of them make them too sharp pointed; Clus. made his be taken from a dried plant, and Acosta I iudg made his by the Idaea thereof which he had in his memorie, and after this manner, if my iudgement faile me not, are most of the figures in him exprest: but of this enough, if not too much.



CHAP. 8. Of the Staffe tree, and euer-greene Priuet.


1 Celastrus Theophrasti. The staffe tree.


2 Phillyrea 1. Clus. Clusius his 1. Mocke-Priuet.




 The Description.
1 THe history and figure of this tree are set forth in Clusius his Curae poster and there it is asserted to be the (...), or (...) of Theophrastus; for by diuers places in Theophrastus there collected, it is euident, that his Celastus was euer greene, grew vpon very high and cold mountaines, yet might be transplanted into plaine and milder places, that it floured exceeding late and could not perfect the fruit by reason of the nigh approch of winter, and that it was fit for no other vse but to make staues on for old men.
Now this tree growes but to a small height, hauing a firme and hard body, diuiding it selfe at the top into sundry branches, which being yonge are couered with a greene barke, but waxing old with a brownish one; it hath many leaues, growing alwaies one against another, and thicke together, of a deepe shining greene aboue, and lighter vnderneath, keeping their verdure both Winter and Sommer: they are of the bignesse of those of (...), not snipt about the edges, but onely a little nickt, when they are yet yong; at the top of the tenderest branches among the leaues, vpon footstalkes of some inch long, grow fiue or six little floures consisting commonly of fiue little leaues of a yellowish greene colour, and these shew themselues in the end of Autumne, or the beginning of Winter, and also in the beginning of the Spring; but if the Sommer be cold and moist it shewes the buds of the sloures in October; the fruit growes on a short stalke and is a berry of the bignesse of the Myrtle, sirst green, then red, of the colour of that of Asparagus, and lastly blacke when it is withered: the stone within the berry is little, and as it were three cornered, conteining a kernell couered with a yellow filme. Where this growes wilde I know not, but it was first taken notice of in the publike Garden at the Vniuersitie of Leyden, from whence it was brought into some few gardens of this Kingdome.
2 The first Phyllyria of Clusius, may fitly be refer'd to the rest of the same tribe and name described formerly in the 59. chapter of the the third booke. It growes somewhat taller than the Scarlet Oke, and hath branches of the thicknesse of ones thumbe or somewhat more, and those couered with a greene barke marked with whitish spots; the leaues somewhat resemble those of the Scarlet Oke, but greater, greener, thicker, somewhat prickley about the edges, of an astringent taste, but not vngratefull. The floure thereof Clusius did not see, the fruit is a little blacke berry, hanging downe out from the bosome of the leaues, and conteining a kernell or stone therein. It growes wilde in many wilde places of Portugale, where they call it Azebo.
The temperature and vertues are refer'd to those set downe in the formerly mentioned chapter.



CHAP. 9. Of Mocke-Willow.


Speiraea Theophrasti, Clus. Mocke-Willow.



 The Description.
THis Willow leaued shrub, which Clusius coniectures may be refer'd to the Speiraea mentioned by Theophrastus, lib. 1. cap. 23. histplant. I haue named in English, Mocke-Willow, how fitly I know not; but if any will impose a fitter name I shall be well pleased therewith; but to the thing it selfe. It is a shrub, (saith Clusius) some two cubits high, hauing slender branches or twigs couered ouer with a reddish barke, whereon grow many leaues without order, long, narrow, like those of the Willow, snipt about the edges, of a light green aboue, and of a blewish greene vnderneath, of a drying taste conjoyned with some bitternes. The tops of the branches for some fingers length carry thicke spikes of small floures clustering together, and consisting of fiue leaues apiece, out of whose middle come forth many little threds of a whitish red or flesh colour, together with the floure, hauing no (...)

smell, but such as is in the floure of the Oliue tree; these floures fading there succeed small fiue cornered heads, which comming to full maturitie containe a small and yellowish dusty seed: it floures in Iuly, and ripens the seed in the end of August. Clusius had this plant from Fredericke (...) Physition to the Duke of Briga, and that from Briga in Silesia, and he (as I said) refers it to the (...) of Theophrastus, which he reckons amongst the shrubs that carry spike fashioned floures.
This is not vsed in medicine, nor the Temperature and faculties thereof as yet knowne.



CHAP. 10. Of the Strawberry-Bay.


Adrachne Theophrasti. The Strawberry-Bay.



 The Description.
THe figure and history of this were sent by Honorius Bellus out of Candy to (...), from whom I haue it. It is that which Theophrastus calls Adrachne or (as most of the printed bookes haue it) Andrachne, but the former seemes the righter, and is the better liked by (...), lib. (...). cap. 22. At this day in Candy where it (...) growes, it is called Adracla. It is rather a shrub than a tree, delighting in rockie and mountanous places, and keeping greene VVinter and Sommer, hauing leaues so like those of Bayes, that they are distinguishable only by the smell, which these are destitute of. The barke of the bole and all the branches is so smooth, red and shining, that they shew like branches of Corall, this barke crackes or breakes off in Sommer, and pills off in thinne fleakes, at which time it is neither red nor shining but in a meane betweene yellow and ashcolour. It hath floures twice in a yeere like as the Arbutus, or Strawberry tree, and that so like it, that you can scarse know the one from the other; yet this differs from it in that it growes onely in the mountaines, hath not the leaues jagged, neither a rough barke; the wood hereof is very hard, and so brittle that it will not bend, and they vse it to burne and to make whorles for their womens spindles. Theophrastus reckons vp this tree amongst those which die not when their barkes are taken off, and are alwaies greene, and retaine their leaues at their tops all winter long: which to be so Honorius Bellus obserued. Bellonius also obserued this tree in many places of Syria.
The fruit in Temperature, as in shape, is like that of the Stawberry-tree.



CHAP. 11. Of the Cherry-Bay.

 The Description.
THe Cherry-bay is one of the euergreen trees: it rises vp (...) an indifferent height, and is diuided into sundry branches, couered ouer with a swart green barke: that of the yonger shoots is wholly

green, the leaues alternately ingirt the branches, and they are long, smooth, thick, green, and shining, snipt also lightly about the edges: when the tree is growne to some height, at the tops of the branches amongst the leaues of the former yeares growth, vpon a sprig of some fingers length, it puts forth a great many little white floures, consisting of fiue leaues a piece, with many little chiues in them: these floures quickly fall away, and the fruit that succeeds them is a berry of an ovall figure, of the bignesse of a large Cherry or Damson, and of the same colour, and of a sweet and pleasant
Laurocerasi flos. The Cherry-bay in floure.
(...) fructus. The Cherry-bay with the fruit.
taste, with a stone in it like to a Cherry stone. This floures in May, and ripens the fruit in August or September: it was first sent to Clusius from Constantinople, and that by the name of Trabison curmasi. 1. Trapezuntina dactylus, the Date of Trapeson; but it hath no affinitie with the Date. (...) refers it to the second Lotus mentioned by Theophrastus, hist. plant. lib. 4. cap. 4. but therewith it doth not agree. Clusius and most since, cal it fitly Laurocerasus, or (...) folio Laurino. It is now got into many of our choise English gardens, where it is well respected for the beauty of the leaues and their lasting or continuall greenenesse.
The fruit hereof is good to be eaten, but what physicall vertues the tree or leaues thereof haue, it is not yet knowne.



CHAP. 12. Of the Euer-greene Thorne.
THis plant which Lobel and some other late writers haue called by the name of Pyracantha, is the Oxyacantha mentioned by Theophrastus, lib. 1. cap. 15. lib. 3. cap. 4. hist. plant. among the euer green trees, and I thinke rather this than our white Thorn to be the Oxyacantha of (...), lib. 1. c. 123. and certainely it was no other than this Thorne which Virgil makes mention of by the name of Acanthus, lib. 2. (...). in these words, (...) semper frondentis Acanthi. That is, And the berries of the (...)-greene Thorn.



Oxyacantha Theophrasti. The Euer-greene Thorne.



 The Description.
THis growes vp like a bush, vnlesse you keepe it with (...), and then it will (...) time grow to the (...) of a smal tree, as the Hawthorne, whereto it is of affinitie, (...) the wood is white and hard, like it, and couered ouer with the like barke; but the leaues are somwhat like those of the Damson tree, longish, sharp pointed, and snipt about the edges: and they grow alongst the branches, without any order, yet sometimes they keep this maner of growing: at each knot, where commonly there is a sharpe prickle, growes out one of the larger leaues, which may be some inch and halfe long, and some three quarters of an inch broad: then vpon the prickle, and at the comming out therof are three or soure, more or lesse, much smaller leaues: now these leaues are of a (...) and shining green aboue, but paler vnderneath, and they keep on al the yeare: At the ends, and oft times in the middles of the branches come forth clusters or vmbels of little whitish blush coloured floures, consisting of fiue leaues apiece, with some little chiues in their middles: then follow clusters of berries, in shape, taste, and bignesse like those of the Hawthorne, and of the same, but much more orient and pleasing colour, and containing in (...) the like seed: now these berries hang long vpon the tree, and make a gallant shew amongst the greene leaues, and chiefely then, when as the Autumne blasts haue depriued other trees of their wonted verdure. This floures in May and Iune, and ripens the fruit in September and October: it growes wilde in sundry places of Italy, and Prouince in France, but is kept in gardens with vs, where it is held in good esteeme for his euer greenesse and pliablenesse to any worke or forme you desire to impose vpon him.
The fruit haue the same faculties that are formerly attributed to Hawes, in the foregoing booke, pag. 1328. and therefore I will not here repeat them.



CHAP. 13. Of the Aegyptian Nap, or great (...) tree.

 The Description.
THis tree, which for his leaues and manner of growing I thinke may fitly be referred to the Iuiubes tree, is of two sorts; that is, the one prickly, and the other not prickly, in other respects they are both alike, so that one figure and historie may serue for them both; which I will giue you (...) of Clusius, who receiued this figure together with a description thereof from Honorius Bellus, and also added therto that which Prosper Alpin. hath written of it in his 5. chap. de Plant. Aegypt. It grows to the height of an indifferent Peare-tree, and the bodie and branches thereof are couered with a whitish ash coloured barke: the leaues are like those of the Iuiubes tree, two inches long, and one broad, with three nerues running alongst them; of a deepe shining greene aboue, and more whitish vnderneath: and they grow alternately vpon the branches: and at their comming forth grow (...) of little white floures hanging vpon single long foot-stalks: after these followes the fruit like vnto a small Apple, of the bignesse for the most part of a large Cherry, and sometimes as big as a VValnut, of a sweet taste, containing therein a kernell or stone like that of an Oliue. It beares (...) twise a yeare, (...) it hath ripe fruit both in the Spring and sall; yet the vernall fruit seldom comes to good,

Oenoplia non spinosa. The great Iuiubes tree.
by reason of the too much moisture of the season, which causes it to become worme-eaten. The Thorny kinde is described by Alpinus, who rightly iudges it the Connarus of (...), but the figure he giues is not very accurate. That which wants prickles growes (as well as the prickly one) in Aegypt and Syria, as also in the city Rhetimo in Candy, whither it was brought out of Syria.
The historie of both these trees is in Serapio by the name of Sadar: but he, according to his custome confounds it with the Lotus of Dioscorides, from which it very much differs. Bellonius in his second booke, and 79. chap. of his Obseruations, reckons vp Napeca amongst the trees that are alwaies greene: which is true, in those that grow in Egypt and Syria; but false in such as grow in Candy. That tree in Aegypt and Syria is called Nep, or Nap. Alpinus calls it Paliurus Athenaet, or Nabca (...), thinking it (as I formerly said) the Connarus mentioned in the 14. booke of Athenaeus his Deipnosophists.


 The Vertues out of Alpinus. 
The fruit is of a cold and dry facultie, and the vnripe ones are frequently vsed to strengthen the stomacke, and stop lasks: the iuice of them being for this purpose either taken by the mouth, or injected by clyster: of the same fruit dried and macerated in water, is made an infusion profitable against the relaxation and (...) of the guts.
The decoction or infusion of the ripe dried fruit, is of a very frequent vse against all pestilent feuers: for (...) affirme that this fruit hath a wonderfull efficacie against venenate qualities, and putrifaction, and that it powerfully streng  thens the heart.
Also the iuice of the perfectly ripe fruit is very good to purge choler forth of the stomacke and first veines: and they willingly vse an infusion made of them in all putride feuers to (...) their heate or burning.



CHAP. 14. Of the Persian Plum.

 The Description.
1 THis tree is thought by Clusius (to whom I am beholden for the historie and figure) to be the (...) arbor mentioned by Pliny and (...), but he somewhat doubts whither it be that which is mentioned by Theophrastus. Dioscorides also, (...) and Strabo make mention of the Persea arbor, and they all make it a tree alwaies greene, hauing a longish fruit shut vp in the shell and coat of an Almond: with which how this agrees you may see by this description of Clusius.
This tree (saith he) is like to a Peare tree, spreading it selfe far abroad, and being alwaies green, hauing branches of a yellowish green colour. The leaues are like those of the broadest leaued Baytree, greene aboue, and of a grayish colour vnderneath, firm, hauing some nerues running (...), of a good taste and smell, yet biting the tongue with a little astriction. The floures are like those of the Bay, growing many thicke together, and consist of six small whitish yellow leaues. The fruit at the first is like a Plum, and afterwards it becomes Peare fashioned, of a blacke colour, and pleasant taste: it hath in it a heart (...) kernell, in taste not vnlike a Chesnut, or sweet Almond. I found it flouring in the Spring, and I vnderstood the fruit was ripe in Autumne, by the relation of (...).

Persea arbor. The Persian Plum.
Iohn Placa, Physition and Professor of (...), who shewed me the tree growing in the garden of a Monasterie a mile from Valentia, brought thither, as they say, out of America, and he said they called it (...): but the Spaniards who haue described America giue this name to another tree. But diuers yeares after, I vnderstood by the most learned Simon de Tovar, a Physition of Ciuil, who hath the same tree in his garden, with other exoticke plants, that it is not called Mamay, but Aguacate. Thus much out of Clusius; where such as are desirous, may finde more largely handled the question, whither this be the Persea of the Antients or no? Rariorum plan. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.



CHAP. 15. Of Gesners wilde Quince.

 The Description.


Cotonaster Gesneri. Gesners wilde Quince


THe shrub which I here figure out of Clusius, is thought both by him and others, to be the Cotonastrum or Cidonago, mentioned by Gesner in his Epistles, lib. 3. pag. 88. It hath branches some cubit long, tough, and bare of leaues in their lower parts, couered with a blacke barke: and towards the tops of the branches grow leaues somewhat like those of Quinces: of a darke greene aboue, and whitish vnderneath, snipt about the edges: at the tops of the branches grow vsually many floures, consisting of fiue purplish coloured leaues a piece, with some threddes in their middles: these decaying, vnder them grow vp red dry berries without any pulp or iuice, each of them containing foure triangular seeds. Clusius found this flouring in Iune vpon the tops of the Austrian Alpes, and he questions whether it were not this which Bellonius found in the mountains of Candy, and called Agriomaelea, lib. 1. cap. 17. This is not vsed in Physicke, nor the faculties thereof knowne.




CHAP. 16. Of Tamarindes.


Tamarindus. The Tamarinde.


Tamarindi siliqua. The cod of the Tamarinde.



 The Description.
TAmarinds, which at this day are a medicine frequently vsed, and vulgarly knowne in shops, were not knowne to the antient Greekes, but to some of the later, as Actuarius, and that by the name of Oxyphoenicae, that is, soure Dates, drawne as it may seeme from the Arabicke appellation, Tamarindi, that is, Indian Date: but this name is vnproper, neither tree nor fruit being of any affinitie with the Date, vnlesse the Arabicke Tamar be a word vsed in composition for fruits of many kindes, as the Greeke (...), the Latine Malum, and Apple with vs in English; for we call the Cone of the Pine, and excrescence of the Oke leafe, by the name of Pine Apple, and Oke Apple. But how soeuer it be, it is no matter for the name, whether it be proper or no, if so be that it serue to distinguish the thing from others, and we know what is denoted by it. In Malauar they call it Puti: in Guzarat, Ambili, by which name it is knowne in most parts of the East Indies. This tree is thus described by Prosper Alpinus, de Plant. Aegypti, cap. 10. The Tamarind (saith he) is a tree of the bignesse of a Plum tree, with many boughes and leaues like those of the Myrtle, many standing vpon one rib [one against another, with a single one at the end:] it carrieth white floures very like those of the Orange tree: out of whose middle comes forth foure white and very slender threds: after these come thicke and large cods, at first greene, but when they are ripe of an ash colour; and within these are contained thicke, hard, brownish, cornered seeds, and a blacke acide pulpe. These trees grow in some few gardens of Egypt, whither they haue bin brought out of Arabia and Ethiopia. This plant hath this strange qualitie that the leaues alwaies follow the Sun, and when it sets they all contract themselues, and open out themselues againe at the rising thereof; and there is obserued to be such force in this motion, that they closely shut vp and hold their cods (if any be on the tree) and then at the rising of the Sun they forgoe them againe. But I haue obserued this folding vp of the leaues to be common to diuers other Egyptian plants, as Acatia, (...), (...), and Sesban. Thus much (...) of Alpinus.

The figure I here giue in the first place, out of Lobel, is of a plant some six moneths old, arisen of a seed: and such by sowing of seeds I haue seene growing in the garden of my deceased friend Mr. Tuggy, but they still died at the first approch of Winter. The other figure expresses the cods, and some of the seeds apart, taken forth of the cods: now the cods are neuer brought whole to vs, but the vtter rindes are taken off, and the strings or nerues that runne alongst the cods: the pulpe and seeds in it are close thrust together, and so are brought to vs in pots and such like vessels.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
The fruit or pulpe of Tamarindes is cold and dry in the third degree: it is of good vse in cholericke  diseases, as burning Feuers, Tertians, and the like: it is a lenitiue and very gently purging medicine and therefore vsed to be put into medicines seruing to that purpose.
They vse (saith Alpinus) the leaues of Tamarindes to kill wormes in young children; and also  their infusion or decoction to loosen the belly: the leaues are acide, and not vnpleasant vnto the taste.
The Arabians preserue the small and yet greene cods of this tree, as also the ripe ones, either  with sugar, or the honey boiled out of the fruit of the Carob tree: they also mix the pulpe with sugar, which trauellers carry with them in their iournies through the desart places of (...), wherewith they being dry or ouerheated, may quench their thirst, coole and refresh themselues, and also euacuate many hot humors by stoole.
In pestilent and all other burning putrid feuers they drinke the water with sugar, wherein a good  quantitie of Tamarinds haue been infused; for it is a drinke very pleasant to such as are thirsty by reason of too much heate, for it powerfully cooles and quenches thirst.
They are also vsed in all putrid feuers caused by cholericke and adust humors, and also against  the hot distempers and inflammations of the liuer and reines, and withall against the Gonorrhaea.
Some also commend them against obstructions, the dropsie, iaundice, and the hot distempers  of the Spleene: they conduce also to the cure of the itch, scab, leprosie, tetters, and all such vlcerations of the skin which proceed of adust humors.
They are not good for such as haue cold stomacks, vnlesse their coldnesse be corrected by putting  to them Mace, Anise seeds, Squinanth, or such like.



CHAP. 17. Of the Mamoera, the Male and Female.

 The Description.
THe historie of these two trees, together with the figures I here giue you, are in the Curae Posteriores of Clusius, from whence I will take as much as concernes their history, and briefely here giue it you.
That of the Poet (saith he) is most true, Non omnis fert omnia tellus: for I thinke there is no prouince to be found, which produces not some peculiar plant not growing in other regions, as they can testifie who haue trauelled ouer forrein countries, especially if they haue applied themselues to the obseruation of plants. Amongst such I thinke I may reckon that honest and courteous man Iohn Van Vfele, who returning out of that part of America called Brasile, shewed me in the yeare 1607. a booke, wherein he in liuely colours had exprest some plants and liuing creatures: for as he told me, when he purposed to trauell he learned to paint, that so he might expresse in colours, for his memorie and delight after he was returned home, such singularities as he should (...) abroad. Now amongst those which hee in that booke had expressed, I obserued two very singular, and of a strange nature, whose figures without any difficultie he bestowed vpon me, as also the following historie.
These two trees, whose figures you see here exprest, are of the same kinde, and differ only in sex; for the one of them, to wit the male, is barren, and only carries floures, without any fruit; but the female onely fruit, and that without floure: yet they say they are so louing, and of such a nature, that if they be set far asunder, and the female haue not a male neere her, shee becomes barren, and beares no fruit: of which nature they also say the Palme is.
Now the bole or trunke of that tree which beares the fruit is about two foot thicke, and it groweth some nine foot high before it begin to beare fruit; but when it hath acquired a iust magnitude, then shall you see the vpper part of the tree laden with fruit, and that it will be as it were thicke

girt about therewith for some nine foot high more: the fruit is round and globe-fashioned, of the shape and magnitude of a small gourd, hauing when it is ripe a yellowish pulpe, which the inhabitants vse to eate to loosen their bellies: this fruit contains many kernels of the bignes of a smal pease, blacke and shining, of novse that he could learne, but which were cast away as vnnecessary: the leaues come forth amongst the fruit, growing vpon long foot-stalkes, and they in shape much resemble the Plane tree or great Maple.


Mamoera mas. The male Dug tree.


Mamoera (...). The female Dug tree.


What name the Brasilians giue it he could not tell, but of the Portugals that dwelt there it was called Mamoera, and the fruit Mamaon, of the similitude I thinke they haue with dugs, which by the Spaniards are called (...) and Tetas.
There is no difference in the forme of the trunke or leaues of the male and female, but the male only carries floures hanging downe, clustering together vpon long stalks like to the floures of Elder, but of a whitish yellow colour, and these vnprofitable, as they affirme.
Both these trees grow in that part of America wherein is scituate the famous Bay called by the Portugals, Baya de todos los (...), lying about thirteene degrees distant from the Equator towards the Antarticke pole.



CHAP. 18. Of the Cloue-Berry Tree.

 The Description.
I Must also abstract the historie of this out of the Works of the learned and diligent Clusius, who sets it forth in his Exoticks, lib. 1. cap. 17. in the next chapter after Cloues.
I put (saith he) the description of this fruit next after the historie of Cloues, both for the

Amomum quorundam, forte Garyophyllon Plinij. The Cloue-berry tree.
affinitie of smell it hath with Cloues, as also for another cause, which I will shew hereafter. Iames Garret in the yeare 1601 sent me from London this round fruit, commonly bigger than Pepper cornes, yet some lesse, wrinkled, of a brownish colour, sufficiently fragile; which opened, I found contained a seed round, black, which might be diuided into two parts, of no lesse aromaticke taste and smell than the fruit it selfe, and in some sort resembling that of Cloues: it growes in bunches or clusters, as I coniectured by many berries which yet kept their stalks and two or three which stucke to one little stalke: to these were added leaues of one form, but of much different bignes, for some of them were seuen inches long, and three broad; some onely fiue inches long, and two and a half broad; others did not exceed 3 inches in length, and these were not two inches broad; and some a so were much lesse and narrower than these, especially those that were found mixed with the berries, differing according to the place in the boughes or branches which they possest. I obserued none among them which had snipt leaues, but smooth, with many small veines running obliquely from the middle rib to the sides, with their points now narrower, otherwhiles broader, and roundish: they were of a brownish ash colour, of a sufficient acride taste: the branches which were added to the rest were slender, quadrangular, couered with a barke of an ash colour, and those were they of a yeares growth; for those that were of an after growth were brownish, and they had yet remaining the prints where the leaues had growne, which for the most part were one against another, and these also were of an acride taste, as well as the leaues, and of no vngratefull smell.
I receiued the same fruit some yeares before, but without the stalks, and with this question propounded by him which sent it, An Amomum? And certainly the faculties of this fruit are not very much vnlike those which Dioscorides attributes to his Amomum; for it hath an heating astrictiue and drying facultie, and I thinke it may performe those things whereto Dioscorides, Lib. 1. Cap. 14. saith his is good; yet this wanteth some notes which he giues vnto his, as the leaues of Bryonie, etc.
But I more diligently considering this Exoticke fruit, finde some prime notes which do much moue me (for I will ingenuously professe what I thinke) to iudge it the Garyophyllon of Pliny; for he, Hist. Nat. lib. 12. cap. 7. after he hath treated of Pepper addes these words: [There is besides in the Indies a thing like to the Pepper corne, which is called Garyophyllon, but more great and fragil: they affirme it growes in an Indian groue; it is brought ouer for the smels sake.] Though this description be briefe and succinct, neither containes any faculties of the fruit it selfe, yet it hath manifest notes, which, compared with those which the fruit I here giue you possesse, you shal find them very like; as comparing them to Pepper cornes, yet bigger and more fragile, as for the most part these berries are: their smell is also very pleasing, and comming very neere to that of Cloues, and for the smells sake only they were brought ouer in Plinies time. I found, this fruit being chewed made the breath to smell well: and it is credible, that it would be good for many other purposes, if triall were made.




CHAP. 19. Of Guaiacum, or Indian, Pock-wood.


Guaiaci arboris ramulus. A branch of the Guaiacum tree.



 The Description.
GVaiacum, which some call Lignum Sanctum: others, Lignum vitae, is a well kown wood, though of a tree nknown, or at least not certainly knowne; for this figure which I here giue you out of Clusius, was gotten, and the historie framed as you shall heare by his own words, taken out of his Scholia vpon the 21 Chapter of Monardus. About the beginning (saith he) of the yeare 1601. I receiued from Peter Garret a branch of a foot long, which he writ was giuen him by a certaine Surgeon lately returned from America, for a branch of the tree Guaiacum: which if it be a branch of the true Guaiacum, then hath Nicolas Monardus sleightly enough set downe the historie of this tree. I thus described this branch which was sent me.
This branch was a foot long, very writhen, and distinguished with many knots, scarse at the lower end equalling the thicknesse of a writing pen or goose quil, hauing an hard and yellowish wood, and a wrinkled barke o an ash colour: at the vpper end it was diuided into slender branches, whereof some yet retained their leaues, and other some the floures and the rudiment of the fruit: the leaues, or more truly the wings or foot-stalkes of the leaues grew vpon slender branches one against another, each winged leafe hauing foure or (...) little leaues, alwaies growing by couples one against other, as in the Masticke tree; and these were thickish, round, and distinguished with many veines, which by reason of their drinesse (as I obserued) would easily fall off, leauing the footstalks naked, and onely retaining the markes whereas the leaues had beene. In the knots of the vpper branches there grew as it were swellings, out of which together grew six, eight, ten, or more slender foot-stalkes, some inch long, each carrying a floure not great, consisting of six little leaues (but whether white, yellow, or blew, I could not by reason of the drinesse iudge:) out of the middle of the floure grew many little threds, and in some the rudiment of the fruit began to appeare, hauing two cels, almost shaped like the seed-vessell of the common Shepheards purse.
Thus much Clusius, who afterwards receiued the fruit from two or three, but the most perfect from the learned Apothecarie Iohn Pona of Verona: they are commonly parted into two parts or cels, yet he obserued one with three: he found longish stones in them almost like those of Euonymus, and they consisted of a very hard and hairy substance like to that of the Date stones, containing a smooth kernel of a yellowish colour.
Now will I giue you the descriptions of Monardus: then, what I haue obserued my selfe of this wood, which I must confesse is very little, yet which may giue some light to the ignorant. Of this wood (saith Monardus) many haue written many waies, saying that it is either Ebonie, or a kinde of Box, or calling it by some other names. But as it is a new kinde of tree, not found in these regions, or any other of the whole world described by the Antients, but only those of late discouered; so this shall be a new tree to vs: howeuer it be, it is a large tree of the bigues of the Ilex, ful of branches, hauing a great matrix or blackish pith, the substance of the wood being harder than Ebonie: the barke is thicke, gummie or fat, and when the wood is dry falleth easily off: the leaues are smal and hard: the floure yellow: the which is followed by a round follid fruit, containing in it seeds like those of the Medlar.
It growes plentifully in the Isles of Sancto Domingo,

Another kinde of this was afterwards found in the Island of S. Iohn de Puerto rico, neere to the former: it is also like the last described, but altogether lesse, and almost without matrix or pith, smelling stronger, and being bitterer than the former, which being left, this is now in vse, and of the wondrous effects it is called Lignum sanctum; neither without desert, being (experience giuing testimonie) it excells the other: yet both their faculties are admirable in curing the French disease, and therefore the water or decoction of both of them are drunke, either mixed together, or seuerally, both for the cure of the forementioned disease, as also against diuers other affects. Thus much for Monardus his description.
The wood which is now in vse with vs is of a large tree, whose wood is very heauy, sollid, and fit to turne into bowles or the like, and all that I haue yet seene hath been wholly without matrix or pith, and commonly it is of a darke brownish colour, somewhat inclining to yellow, hauing a ring of white ingirting it next to the barke; I haue obserued a tree whose diametre hath been two foot and a quarter, to haue had as little or lesse of this white wood as one whose diameter was thirteene inches; and this which was thirteene inches had only a white circle about it of one inch in bredth: I thinke the yonger the tree is, the bigger the white circle is: the best wood is dense, heauy, brownish, leauing a quicke and biting taste in the decoction, as also his smell and colour. The barke of this wood is also dense and heauy, of a hard substance and yellowish colour within, but rough and greenish, or else grayish without, and of somewhat a bitterish taste. Thus much for the description of the wood and his barke. Now let me say somewhat briefely of the temperature and qualities.


The Temperature and Vertues.
It is iudged to be hot and dry in the second degree: it hath a drying, attenuating, dissoluing, and  clensing facultie, as also to moue sweat, and resist contagion and putrefaction.
The decoction of the barke or wood of Guajacum, made either alone or with other ingredients, as shall be thought most fit for the temper and age of the Patient, is of singular vse in the cure of the French Poxes, and it is the most antient and powerfull antidote that is yet known against that disease. I forbeare to specifie any particular medicine made thereof, because they are wel enough knowne to all to whom this knowledge belongs, and they are aboundantly set downe by all those that haue treated of that disease.
It also conduceth to the cure of the dropsie, Asthma, Epilepsie, the diseases of the bladder and  reines, paines of the ioints, flatulences, crudities, and lastly all chronicall diseases proceeding from cold and moist causes: for it oftentimes workes singular effects whereas other medicines little preuaile.
It doth also open the obstructions of the liuer and spleene, warmes and comforts the stomacke  and all the intrals, and helps to free them of (...) grosse viscous matter which may be apt to breed diseases in them.



CHAP. 20. Of the Guayaua, or Orange-Bay.

 The Description.
SImon de Touar sent Clusius a branch of the tree which the Spaniards call Guayauas, from which he drew this figure, and thus describes it. This branch (saith Clusius) whose vpper part together with the fruit I caused to be drawne, was some foot long, foure square, alternately set with leaues growing by couples, being foure inches long, and one and a halfe or two broad, of the forme of Bay leaues, very firme, hauing a swelling rib running alongst the lower side, with veins running obliquely from thence to the sides, of an ash or grayish colour beneath, but smooth aboue, with the veines lesse appearing; which broken, though old, yet retained the smell of Bay leaues, and also after some sort the taste: the fruit was smooth, yet shriueled, because peraduenture it was vnripe, of the bignesse of a small apple, longish, blackish on the out side like a ripe plum, but within full of a reddish pulpe, of an acide taste; and in the middle were many whitish seeds of the bignesse of Miller, (...) those that are in Figs.
Nicolas Monardus (as he is turned into Latine by Clusius) thus giues vs the historie of Guayauas, in his sixty sourth Chapter. It is a tree, saith he, of an indifferent bignesse, and hath spreading branches, the leafe of the Bay, and a white floure, like that of the Orange, yet somewhat bigger,

Guayavae arboris ramus. The Orange-Bay.
and well smelling; it easily growes, wheresoeuer it be sowne, and so spreds and creepes that it is accounted as a weed, for it spoiles the grasse of many pastures, with the too much spreading as brambles do; the fruit is like to our apples, of the bignesse of those the Spaniards call Camuesas, green at the first, and of a golden colour when they be ripe, with their inner pulpe white, and sometimes red; diuided: it hath foure cells, wherein lie the seeds, like those of the Medlers, very hard, of a brownish colour, wholly stony, without kernell and taste.
The fruit is vsually eaten, the rinde being  first taken off; it is pleasing to the palate, wholesome and easie of concoction; being greene it is good in fluxes of the belly, for it powerfully bindes; and ouer, or throughly ripe it looseth the belly; but betweene both, that it is neither too greene, nor ouer-ripe, if rosted, it is good both for sound and sicke; for so handled it is wholesommer, and of a more pleasing taste; that also is the better which is gathered from domesticke and husbanded trees. The Indians profitably bathe their swolne legges in the decoction of the leaues; and by the same they free the spleene from obstruction. The fruit seemes to be cold, wherefore they giue it rosted to such as are in feuers. It growes commonly in all the VVest Indies. Thus much Monardus.



CHA. 21. Of the Corall tree.

 The Description.
THe same last mentioned Simon de Touar a learned and prime Physition of Ciuill sent Clusius three or foure branches of this tree, from whence he framed this history and figure. He writ (saith Clus.) that this tree grew in his garden, sprung vp of seeds sent from America, which had the name of Corall imposed on them, by reason the floures were like Corall, but he did not set downe there shape; writing onely this in his letter: That he had two little shrubs, which had borne floures, and that the greater of them bore also cods full of large beanes, but in the extreme Winter, which they had the yeere before, he lost not onely that tree, and others sprung vp of Indian seed, but also many other plants. Now seeing that this tree carries coddes, I coniecture the floures were in forme not vnlike to those of Pease, or of the tree called Arbor Iudae, but of another colour, to wit, red like Corall, especially seeing that in the catalogue of his garden which hee sent me the yeere before, he had writ thus [Arbor Indica dicta Coral, ob eius florem similem Corallo, etc. that is, An Indian tree called Corrall, by reason of the floure like to Corrall, whose leaues are very like those of the Arbor Iudae, but this hath thornes, which that wants.] And verily the branches which he sent (for he writ he sent the branches with the leaues, but the tree brought (...) some twice or thrice as bigge) had leaues not much vnlike those of Arbor Iudae, but fastened to a shorter footstalke and growing one against another, with a single one at the end of the branch, which was here and there set with sharpe and crooked prickles; but whether these branches are onely the stalkes of the leaues, or perfect branches, I doubt, because all that hee sent had three leaues apiece; I could easily persuade my selfe, that they were onely leaues, seeing the vpper part ended in one leafe; and the lower end of one among the rest, yet shewed the place where it seemed it grew to the bough. But I affirme nothing, seeing there was none whereof I could inquire, by

Coral arboris ramus. A branch of the Corall tree.
reason of his death who sent them m e, which hapned shortly after; yet I haue made the forme of the leaues with the manner as I coniectured they grow, to be delineated in the figure which I here giue you. (...) Matthiolus in his last edition of his Commentaries vpon Dioscorides would haue (...) this, by the Icon of his first Acacia, which is prickly, and hath leaues resembling those of (...) (...), I know not; but if he would haue expressed this tree, the painter did not well play his part.
After that Clusius had set forth thus much of this tree in his Hist. (...) (...). the learned Dr. Castaneda a Physition also of Ciuill certified me, saith he, that the floures of this tree grow thicke together at the tops of (...) branches, ten, twelue, or more hanging vpon short foot-(...), growing out of the same place: whose figure he also sent, but so rudely drawne, that I could not thereby haue come to any knowledge of the floures, but that (...) therewith sent me two dried floures, by which I partly gathered their form. Now these flours were very narrow, 2. inches long or more, consisting of three leaues, the vppermost of which much exceeded the 2. narrow ones on the sides both in length and breadth, and it was doubled; but before the floure was opened it better resembled a horne or cod, than a floure, and the lower end of it stood in a short green cup, in the middest of the floure vnder the vpper leafe that was folded, but open at the top; there came forth a smooth pointall, diuided at the top into nine parts or threds, who se ends of what colour they were, as also the threds, I know not, because I could not gather by the dry floure, whose colour was quite decayed, and the picture it self expressed no separation of the leaues in the floure, no forme of threds, but onely the floures shut, and resembling rather cods than floure, sand those of a deepe red colour. But if I could haue seen them fresher, I should haue been able to haue giuen a more exact description: wherefore let the reader take in good (...) that which I haue here (...). Thus much Clusius.



CHAP. 22. Of the sea Lentill.

 The Description.
SOme call this Vna marina, and others haue thought it the Lenticula marina of Serapio, but they are deceiued, for his Lenticula marina described in his 245. chapter, is nothing else than the Muscus marinus or Bryon thalassion, described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 99. as any that compares these two places together may plainely see.
1 The former of these hath many winding stalkes, whereon grow short branches set thick with narrow leaues like those of Beluidere, or Besome flax, and among these grow many skinny, hollow, empty round berries of the bignesse and shape of Lentills, whence it takes the name: this growes in diuers places of the Mediterranian and Adriaticke seas.
2 This differs little from the former, but that the leaues are broader, shorter, and snipt about the edges. But this being in probabilitie the Sargazo of Acosta, you shall here what he saies thereof. In that famous and no lesse to be feared nauigation del Sergazo (for so they which saile into the Indies call all that space of the Ocean from the 18. to the 34. degree of Northerly latitude) is seen a deepe and spatious sea couered with an (...) called Sarguazo, being a span long, wrapped with the tender branches as it were into balls, hauing narrow and tender leaues some halfe inch long,

1 Lenticula marina angustifolia. Narrow leaued Sea Lentill.
2 Lenticula marina serratis (...). Cut leaued Sea Lentill.
much snipt about the edges, of colour reddish, of taste insipide, or without any sensible biting, but what is rather drawne from the salt water, than naturally inherent in the plant. At the setting on of each leafe growes a seed round like a pepper corne, of a whitish colour, and sometimes of white and red mixed, very tender when as it is first drawne forth of the water, but hard when it is dried, but by reason of the thinnesse very fragile, and full of salt water: there is no root to be obserued in this plant, but only the marks of the breaking off appeares; and it is likely it (...) in the deepe and sandy bottome of the sea, and hath small roots; yet some are of opinion that this herb is plucked vp and carried away by the rapide course of waters that fall out (...) many Islands into the Ocean. Now the Master of the ship wherein I was did stiffely maintaine this opinion; and in the sailing here we were becalmed; but as far as euer wee could see wee saw the sea wholly couered with this plant, and sending down some yong Sailers which should driue the weeds from the ship, and clense the water, we plainly saw round heapes thereof rise vp from the bottom of the sea where by sounding we could finde no bottome.
This plant pickled with salt and vineger hath the same tast as Sampier, and may be vsed in stead  thereof, and also eaten by such as saile, in place of Capers. I willed it should be giuen newly taken forth of the sea, to Goats which we carried in the ship, and they fed vpon it greedily.
I found no faculties thereof; but one of the Sailers troubled with a difficultie of making water, casting out sand and grosse humors, ate thereof by chance both raw and boiled, onely for that the taste thereof pleased him: (...) a few dayes hee told to me that he found great good by the eating thereof, and he tooke some of it with him, that so he might vse it when he came ashore. Hitherto A Costa.




CHAP. 23. Of the Sea Feather.


Myriophyllum marinum. The Sea Feather.



 The Description.
THis elegant plant, which Clusius receiued from Cortusus by the name of Myriophyllum Pelagicum, is thus described by him: As much (saith hee) as I could coniecture by the picture, this was some cubit high, hauing a straight stalke, sufficiently slender, diuided into many branches, or rather branched leaues, almost like those of Ferne, but far finer, bending their tops like the branches of the Palme, of a yellowish colour: the top of the stalk adorned with lesser leaues, ended in certaine scales or cloues framed into a head; which are found to containe no other seed than tender plants already formed, in shape like to the old one: which falling, sinke to the bottome of the sea, and there take root and grow, and so become of the same magnitude as the old one from whence they came. The stalke is fastned with most slender and more than capillarie fibres, in stead of a root, not vpon rocks and Oister shells, as most other sea plants are, but vpon sand or mud in the bottome of the sea: this stalke when it is drie is no lesse brittle than glasse or Coralline; but greene and yet growing it is as tough and flexible as Spartum or Matweed.


 The Place.
It groweth in the deepest streames of the Illyrian sea, whence the Fishermen draw it forth with hooks and other instruments which they call Sperne. The whole plant, though dried, retains the faculties.


 The Names.
The Italian Fishermen call it Penachio delle Ninfe, and Palma de Nettuno: some also, Scettro di Nettuno.


 The Vertues.
They say it is good against the virulent bites of the Sea serpents, and the venomous stings or  prickes of Fishes.
Applied to small greene wounds it cures them in the space of 24 houres.
Cortusus writ, that he had made triall thereof for the killing and voiding of wormes, and that he  found it to be of no lesse efficacie than any Coralline, and that giuen in lesse quantitie.



CHAP. 24. Of the Sea Fan.

 The Description.
THis elegant shrub groweth vpon the rockes of the sea (where it is sometimes couered with the water) in diuers places; for it hath been brought both from the East and West Indies, and as I haue been informed it is to be found in great plenty vpon the rocks at the Burmuda Isles. Clusius

Frutex marinus reticulatus. Sea Fan.
calls it Frutex Marinus elegantissimus, and thinkes it may be referred to the Palma Marina of Theophrastus. Bauhine hath referred it to the Corallina's, calling it Corallina cortice reticulato maculoso purpurascente. It growes vp somtimes to the height of three foot, hauing a stalke some handfull or two high before it part into branches: then is it diuided into three, foure, or more branches, which are subdiuided into infinite other lesser strings, which are finely interwouen and ioyned together as if they were netted, yet leauing sometimes bigger, otherwhiles lesser holes: and these twiggy branches become smaller and smaller, the farther they are from the root, and end as it were in smal threds: these branches grow not vp on euerie side, as in other plants, but flat one besides another, so that the whole plant resembles a fan, or a cabbage leafe eaten full of holes; yet somtimes vpon the sides come forth other such fanne-like branches, some bigger, some lesse, sometimes one or two, otherwhiles more. The inner substance of this Sea-Fan is a blackish tough, and hard wood, and it is all couered ouer with a rough (...)-like stony matter, of a reddish or purplish colour, and this you may with your naile or a knife scrape off (...) the smooth and blacke wood.
I know no vse of this, but it is kept for the beauty and raritie thereof, by many louers of such curiosities, amongst which for the rarenesse of the structure this may hold a prime place.



CHAP. 25. Of China, and Bastard China.

 The Description.
THis root which is brought from the remotest parts of the world, and is in frequent vse with vs, hath not been knowne in Europe little aboue fourescore and ten yeares: for Garcias ab Orta the Portugall Physition writes, That he came to the first knowledge thereof in the East Indies, in the yeare 1535, and that by this meanes, as he relates it: It hapned (saith he) that about that time a merchant in the Isle Diu told the noble gentleman Sr. Mart. Alfonso de (...) my Patron, by what meanes he was cured of the French Poxes, which was by a certaine root brought from China; whose faculties he much extolled, because such as vsed it needed not obserue so strict a diet as was requisit in the vse of Guajacum, but should onely abstaine from Beefe, Porke, Fish, and crude fruits; but in China they do not abstaine from fish, for they are there great gluttons. When the report of this root was divulged abroad, euery man wonderfully desired to see and vse it, because they did not well like of the strict dyet they were forced to obserue in the vse of Guajacum. Besides, the inhabitants of these countries, by reason of their idle life are much giuen to gluttony. About this time the China ships arriue at Malaca, bringing a small quantitie of this root for their owne vse. But this little was sought for with such earnestnesse, that (...) gaue an excessiue rate for it; but afterwards the Chinois bringing a greater quantitie, the price fell, and it was sold verie cheape. From this time Guajacum began to be out of vse, and banished the Indies, as a Spaniard that would famish the Natiues. Thus much Garcias concerning the first vse thereof in the East Indies.

1 The China now in vse is a root of the largenesse of that of the ordinarie Flag, or Iris palustris, and not much in shape vnlike thereto, but that it wants the rings or circles that are imprinted in the other: the outer coat or skin of this root is thin, sometimes smooth, otherwhile rugged, of a brownish red colour, and not to be separated from the substance of the root, which is of an indifferent firmenesse, being not so hard as wood, but more sollid than most roots which are not of shrubs or trees: the colour is sometimes white, with some very small mixture of rednesse; otherwhiles it (...) a greater mixture of red, and some are more red than white: it is almost without tast, yet that it hath is dry, without any bitternesse or acrimonie at all. The best is that which is indifferently ponderous, new, firme, not worme-eaten, nor rotten, and which hath a good and fresh colour, and that either white, or much inclining thereto. The plant whose root this is (if we may beleeue Christopher A Costa) hath many small prickly and flexible branches, not vnlike the Smilax aspera, or the prickly Binde-weed: the biggest of these exceedeth not the thickenesse of ones little finger. The leaues are of the bignesse of those of the broad leaued Plantaine: the roots are as large as ones hand, sometimes lesse, sollid, heauy, white, and also sometimes red, and many oft times growing together.


1 China vulgaris Officinarum. True China.


2 Pseudo-China. Bastard China.


It groweth aboundantly in the territorie of China, and is also found in Malabar, Cochin, Cranganor, Coulan, Tanor, and other places.
The Chinois call it Lampatan: in Decan they call it Lampatos: in Canarin, Bouti: the Arabians, Persians, and Turks terme it Choph-China.
2 This other root, whose figure you see here exprest, was sent from London to Clusius in the yeare 1591, by Iames Garret, being brought out of Wingandecaow, or Virginia, with this inscription, Chinae species, A kinde of China. Clusius caused this figure thereof to be drawne, and thus describeth it. This root (saith hee) was very knotty, and formed with out-growings, or bunches standing out, of a reddish colour, and it yet retained at the top some part of the stalke, being somwhat like vnto that of Smilax aspera, or common rough Binde-weed, hard, wooddy, and full of veines, as the stalks of Smilax aspera: the substance of the root was also reddish, as the root of the common Flagge, at the first of a (...) taste, it being old, (for so it was when I receiued it)

and then drying. Now I iudge this the same that the writer of the Virginian Historie mentions in his chapter of roots, and saith, it was broughtinto England for China, though the Natiues knew no vse thereof: but they vse another root very like China, which they call Tsinaw, of which beeing cut, beaten, and pressed out with water, they draw a iuice wherewith they make their bread. Thus much Clusius, to whose words I thinke it not amisse to adde that which Mr. Thomas Hariot (who was the writer of the Virginian historie, here mentioned by Clusius) hath set downe concerning this thing.
Tsinaw (saith he) is a kinde of root much like vnto that which in England is called the China root, brought from the East Indies. And we know not any thing to the contrarie but that it may be of the same kinde. These roots grow many together in great clusters, and doe bring forth a Brier stalk, but the leafe in shape is far vnlike: which being supported by the trees it groweth neeerest vnto, wil reach or clime to the top of the highest. From these roots whilest they be new or fresh, being chopt into small pieces and stampt, is strained with water a iuice that maketh bread, and also beeing boiled, a very good spoonemeat in manner of a gelly, and is much better in taste, if it be tempered with oyle. This Tsinaw is not of that sort which by some was caused to be brought into England for the China root; for it was discouered since, and is in vse as is aforesaid; but that which was brought hither is not yet knowne, neither by vs, nor by the inhabitants, to serue for any vse or purpose, although the roots in shape are very like. Thus much Hariot.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
China is thought to be moderately hot and drie: the (...) thereof made alone or with other  things, as the disease and Symptomes shal require, is much commended by Garcias, for to cure the French pox, but chiefely that disease which is of some standing: yet by most it is iudged lesse powerfull than (...), or Sarsaparilla.
It attennates, moues sweat, and dries, and therefore resists putrifaction: it strengthens the liuer, helpes the dropsie, cures maligne vlcers, scabbes, and lepry. It is also commended in Consumptions.
The decoction of this root, saith Garcias, besides the diseases which haue communitie with the  Poxe, conduces to the cure of the Palsie, Gout, Sciatica, schirrous and oedematous tumours. It also helps the Kings-euill. It cureth the weakenesse of the stomacke, the inueterate head-ache, (...) stone and vlceration of the bladder; for many by the vse of the decoction hereof haue beene cure which formerly receiued help by no medicine.



CHAP. 26. Of Costus.

 The (...).
THis simple medicine was briesely described by Dioscorides, who mentions three indes thereof, but what part of a plant, whether root, wood, or fruit, he hath not exprest: but (...) may probablely coniecture it is a root, for that he writes toward the end of the Chapter where (...) treats thereof, (...). 1. cap. 15. that it is adulterated by mixing therewith the roots of Helenium (...); now a root cannot well be adulterated but with another. Also Pliny, lib. 12. cap. 12. (...) it a root; but neither any of the antient or moderne Writers haue deliniated the plant, (...) (...) root should be this (...). (...) makes three sorts, as I haue said: the Arabian being the (...); which was white, light, strong, and well smelling: the Indian, which was large, light, and (...): the Syrian; which was heauie, of the colour of Box, and strong smelling. Now Pliny makes (...) kindes, the blacke, and the white, which he saith is the better; so I iudge his blacke to be the Indian of Dioscorides, and his white, the Arabian. Much agreeable to these (but whether the same or no, I do not determine) are the two roots whose figures I here present to your view, and they are called by the names of (...) dulcis (I thinke they should haue said odoratus) and Costus amarus.
1 The first of these, which rather from the small, than taste, is called sweet, is a pretty large root, light, white, and well smelling, hauing the smell of Orris, or a violet, but somewhat more quick and (...), especially if the root be fresh, and not too old: it is oft times diuided at the top into two, three, or more parts, from whence seuerall stalks haue growne, and you shall somtimes obserue vpon some of them pieces of these stalks some two or three inches long, of the thickenesse of ones

little finger, crested, and filled with a soft pith, like as the stalks of Elder, or more like those of the Bur-docke: the taste of the root is bitter, with some acrimonie, which also Dioscorides requires in his, for he saith, the taste should be biting and hot; thus much for the first, being (...) dulcis of the shoppes.


1 Costus Indicus sive odoratus. Indian or sweet smelling Costus.


2 Costus Officinarum Lobelij. Bitter Costus.


2 The second, which is the Costus amarus, and it may be the Indian of Dioscorides, and Niger of Pliny, (...) root blacke both within and without, light, yet very dense. It seemes to be of some large root, (...) (...) it is brought ouer cut into large pieces, of the bignesse of ones finger, sometimes bigger some (...) lesse, which it seemes is for the more conuenient drying thereof, for a large root, vnlesse it be (...) into pieces can scarcely be wel dried: the taste of this is bitter, somewhat clammy and ingrate: (...) smell is little or none.
There are (...) other roots which haue been set forth by late writers for Costus, but because they are neither in (...), knowne here with vs, nor more agreeable to the descriptions of the Antients, I hastening to an (...), am willing to passe them ouer in silence.


 The Temperature and Vertues out of the Antients.
It hath a heating (...) attenuating facultie, and therefore was vsed (...) oile to annoint the bodie  against the cold fits of (...), the Sciatica, and when it was needfull to draw any thing to the superficies of the body.
It is also conuenient to moue vrine, to procure the termes, to help strains, convulsions, or cramps  and paines in the sides; and by reason of the bitternesse it kills wormes.
It is good to be drunke against the bite of the viper: against paines of the chest, and windinesse  of the stomacke taken in Wine with Worme-wood: and it is vsed to be put into sundrie Antidotes.




CHAP. 27. Of Drakes root, or Contra-yerua.

 The Description.
THat root which of late is knowne in some shops by the Spanish name Contra-yerua, is the same which Clusius hath set forth by the title of Drakena radix: wherefore I will giue you the historie of Clusius, and thereto adde that which Monrdus writes of the Contra-yerua. For though Bauhine, and the Author of the Historia Lugdunensis seeme to make these different, yet I finde that both Clusius his figure and historie exactly agree with the roots sent vs from Spaine by that title, wherefore I shall make them one, till some shall shew me how they differ: and Clusius seemes to be of this minde also, who desired but the degree of heate which Monardus giues these, and that is but the second degree: now these haue no taste at the first, vntill you haue chewed them a pretty while, and then you shall finde a manifest heate and acrimonie in them, which Clusius did also obserue in his.
In the yeare (saith Clusius) 1581. the generous Knight Sir Francis Drake gaue me at London certain roots, with three or foure Peruvian Beazor stones, which in the Autumne before (hauing finished his voyage, wherein passing the Straights of Magellan, he had encompassed the World) he had brought with him, affirming them to be of high esteeme amongst the Peruvians: now for his sake that bestowed these roots vpon me, I haue giuen them the title Drakena radix, or Drakes root, and haue made them to be expressed in a table, as you may here see them.


1 (...). Contra-yerua.


2 (...) Drakenae affinis. Another sort of Contra-yerua.


These roots were for the most part some halfe inch thick, longish, now and then bunching out into knots and vnequall heads, and their tops looked as if they were composed of thicke scales, almost like those of the Dentaria enneaphyllos; blackish without, wrinckled, and hard, because dried: their inner part was white; they had slender fibres here and there growing out of them, and some more thicke and large, hard also and tough, at which hung other knots: I obserued no manifest smel they had, but found them to haue a taste somewhat astringent, and drying the tongue at the first; but being long chewed, they left a quicke and pleasing acrimonie in the mouth.
It seemed to haue great affinitie with the Radix S. (...), whereof Nic. Monardus speakes in his booke of the Simple Medicines brought from the West Indies: but seeing N. Eliot (who accompanied

Sr. Fran. Drake in that voyage, said, that the Spaniards in Peru had them in great request; and they could not easily be got of them, and that he had learned by them, that the leaues were present poison, but the root an antidote, and that not only against the same poison, but also against other; and that it strengthned the heart and vitall faculties, if it were beaten to pouder, and taken in the morning in a little wine; and giuen in water, it mitigated the heat of Feuers. By reason of these faculties it should much agree with the Radix Contra-(...), whereof Monardus writes in the same booke: yet in these I required the aromaticke taste and degree of heate, which he attributes vnto these roots. Thus much Clus.
From Charcis a Prouince of Peru, saith Monard. are brought certaine roots very like the roots of  Iris, but lesse, and hauing the smell of Fig leaues. The Spaniards that liue in the Indies call them Contra-yerua, as if you should say an Antidote against poison; because the pouder of them taken in white Wine is a most present remedy against all poison of what kinde soeuer it be (only sublimate excepted, whose malignitie is onely extinguished by the drinking of milke) it causes them to bee cast vp by vomite, or euacuated by sweat. They also say that Philtres or amorous potions are cast forth by drinking this pouder. It also killeth wormes in the belly. The root chewed hath a certain aromaticke taste ioined with acrimony; wherefore it seemes hot in the second degree. Thus farre Monardus.
2 Clusius Exot. l. 4. c. 11. being the next after Drakena radix, describes this root, whose figure I giue you in the 2. place, and that by the same title as it is here set forth. These roots, saith he, seemed somwhat like the Drakena radix which were found in the great ship which brought backe the Viceroy from the East Indies, and was taken by the English: for they were tuberous, and as much as one may gather by their forme, crept vpon the surface of the earth, hauing vpon them many haires and fibres, and being of a sooty colour, yet somewhat inclining to yellow, dying the spittle in chewing them, and being bitter: they as yet retained foot-stalks of the leaues, but of what fashion they were no man can easily guesse. But it was likely they were of great vse among the Indians, seeing that the Vice-roy brought them together with other precious medicines growing in the East Indies, Iames Garret sent this to Clusius with the little plant dryed, whose figure you see exprest by it.



CHAP. 28. Of Lignum Aloes.


Lignum Aloes vulgare.



 The Description.
IT is a question whether the Agallochum described in the 21. c. l. 1 of Dioscorides be the same which the later Greeks and shops at this time call Xyloaloe, or Lignum Aloes, many make them the same: others, to whose opinion I adhere, make them differerent, yet haue, not the later, shew what Agallochum should bee, which I notwithstanding will do; and though I doe not now giue you my arguments, yet I will point at the things, and shew positiuely my opinions of them.
The first and best of these is that which some call Calumbart: others, Calumba, or (...): this is of high esteem in the Indies, and seldom found but amongst the Princes, and persons of great qualitie; for it is sold oft times for the weight in gold; I haue not seen any therof but in beads; it seemes to be a whiter wood than the ordinary, of a finer graine, not so subiect to rot, and of a more fragrant smell, and but light.
The second sort, which is vsually brought ouer, and called in shops by the name of Lignum Aloes, is also a precious and odoriferous wood, especially burnt: the stickes of this are commonly knotty and vnsightly: some parts of them being white, soft, and doted: othersome, dense;

blackish, or rather i ntermixt with blacke and white veines, but much more blacke than white, and this put to the fire will sweat out an oily moisture, and burnt, yeeld a most fragrant odour. This I take to be the true Xyloaloc of the late Greekes; and the Agalugen of Auicen; and that they call Palo d Agula in the Indies.
The third is a wood of much lesse price than the former: and I coniecture it might well be substituted for Thus: and this I take to be the Agallochum of Dioscorides; the Lignum Aloes (...) of Garcias; and Agula braua of Linscoten. It is a firme and sollid wood, somewhat like that of the Cedar, not subiect to rot or decay: the colourthereof is blackish, especially on the out-side; but on the in-side it is oft times brownish and speckled, containing also in it an oilie substance, and yeelding a sweet and pleasing smell when it is burnt, but not like that of the two former: the taste also of this is bitterer than that of the former: and the wood (though dense and sollid) may be easily cleft long-waies; it is also a farre hand somer and more sightly wood than the former, hauing not many knots in it.
Garcias ab Orta thus describes the tree that is the Lignum Aloes (I iudge it's that I haue set forth in the second place:) it is (saith he) like an Oliue tree, sometimes larger: the fruit or floure I could not yet see, by reason of the difficulties and dangers whic ha re to be vndergone in the accurate obseruation of this tree (Tigers frequently there seeking their prey.) I had the branches with the leaues brought me from Malaca. Now they say that the wood new cut downe hath no fragrant odour, nor till it be dried: neither the smell to be diffused ouer the whole matter of the wood, but in the heart of the tree; for the barke is thicke, and the matter of the wood without smell. Yet may I not denie, but the barke and wood putrifying that oilie and fat moisture, may betake it selfe to the heart of the tree, and make it the more odoriferous: but there is no need of putrifaction to get a smell to the Lignum Aloes: for there are sundry so expert and skilfull in the knowledge thereof, that they will iudge of that which is new cut downe, whither it will be odoriferous or no. For in all sorts of wood some are better than othersome: thus much out of Garcias; where such as are desirous may see more vpon this subiect.


 The Temperature and Vertues.
It is of temperature moderate ly hot and dry, and also of somewhat subtill parts. Chewed it  makes the breath smell sweet, and burnt it is a rich perfume.
Taken inwardly it is good to helpe the stomack that is too cold and moist, as also the weak liuer.
It is commended likewise in dysenteries and pleurisies: and put also into diuers Cordiall medicines  and Antidotes as a prime ingredient.



CHAP. 29. Of Gedwar.


1 Gedwar aut, Geiduar.


2 Zedoariae exactior icon. A better figure of Zedoary.




 The Description.
IN the Chapter of Zedoarie (which I made the 28. of the first booke) I might fitly haue giuen you this historie of (...), which is thought to be that described by Auicen, lib. 2. c. 734. and a kinde of Zedoarie: Garcias saith, Gedwar is at a high rate, and not easily to be found, vnlesse with the Indian Mountibanks and juglers, which they call Iogues, which goe vp and downe the countrey like Rogues, and of these the Kings and Noblemen buy (...): it is good for many things, but chiefely against poisons, and the bites and stings of venomous creatures. Now Clusius in his Auctarium at the end thereof giues this figure, with the following historie.
1 Because Garcias, saith he, cap. 42. l. 1. Aromatum hist. treating of (...) writes, that Auicen calls it Gedwar; and saith that it is of the magnitude of an Acorne, and almost of the same shape, I in my notes at the end of that chapter affirmed that it was not knowne in Europe, and hard to be knowne. But in the yeare 1605, Iohn Pona sent me from Verona together with other things two roots written on by the name of Gedwar verum. They were not much vnlike a longish Acorne, or (that I may more truly compare them) the smaller bulbs of an Asphodil, or Anthora: the one of them was whole and not perished: the other rotten and broken, yet both of them very hard and sollid, of an ash colour without, but yellowish within, which tasted, seemed to possesse a heating facultie and acrimonie.
But although I can affirm nothing of certaintie of this root, yet I made the figure of the wholler of them to be exprest in a table, that so the forme might be conceiued in ones minde more easily, than by a naked description. Let the Studious thanke Pona for the knowledge hereof. Thus much Clusius.
2 In the 28 chapter of the first booke I gaue the figure of Zodoarie out of Clusius, hauing not at that time this figure of Lobel, which presents to your view both the long and the round, with the manner how they grow together, being not seuerall roots, but parts of one and the same.



CHAP. 30. Of Rose-wood.


Aspalathus albicans torulo citreo. White Rose-wood.


Aspalathus rubens. Reddish Rose-wood.




 The Description.
BOth these as also some other woods are referred to the Aspalathus described by Dioscorides, l. 1. c. 19. But the later of these I take to be the better of the two sorts there mentioned. The first of them is whitish without, hauing a yellowish or citrine coloured round in the middle: the taste is hottish, and smell somewhat like that of a white-Rose.
The other hath also a small ring of white, next the thicke and rugged barke, and the inner wood is of a reddish colour, very dense, sollid and firme, as also indifferent heauy: the smell of this is also like that of a Rose, whence they vulgarly call it Lignum Rhodium, Rose-wood, rather than from Rhodes the place where the later of them is said to grow.


 The Faculties out of Dioscorides.
It hath a heating facultie with astriction, whence the decoction thereof made in wine is conuenient  to wash the vlcers of the mouth, and the eating vlcers of the priuities and such vnclean sores as the Ozaena (a stinking vlcer in the nose so called.)
Put vp in a pessarie it drawes forth the childe, the decoction thereof stayes the loosenesse of the  belly, and drunke it helpes the casting vp of bloud, the difficultie of making water, and windinesse.
AT the end of this Appendix I haue thought good to giue you diuers descriptions of Plants, which I receiued from my often mentioned friend Mr. Goodyer, which also were omitted in their fitting places, partly through haste, and partly for that I receiued some of them after the printing of those chapters wherein of right they should haue been inserted. They are most of them of rare and not written of plants, wherefore more gratefull to the curious.
Hicracium stellatum Boelij.
THis plant is in round, hairy, straked, branched stalks, and long, rough, blunt indented leaues like to Hieracium (...), but scarce a foot high: the floures are also yellow three times smaller: which past, there succeed long crooked slender sharpe pointed cods or huskes, neere an inch long, spreading abroad, star-fashion, wherein a long seed is contained: this hath no heads or woolly down like any of the rest, but onely the said crooked coddes which doe at the first spread abroad. The root is small, threddie, full of milkie iuice, as is also the whole plant and it perisheth when the seed is ripe.


Hieracium medio nigrum flore maiore Boelij.
This hath at the first spreading vpon the ground many long, narrow, green, smooth leaues bluntly indented about the edges, like those of Hieracium falcatum, but smaller: amongst which rise vp three, foure, or more, small, smooth, straked round stalks, diuided into other branches, which grow longer than the stalks themselues leaning or trayling neere the ground: the floures grow on the tops of the stalks, but one together, composed of many pale yellow leaues, the middle of each floure being of a blackish purple colour.


Hieracium medio nigrum flore minore Boelij:
This is altogether like the last before described in stalkes and leaues: the floures are also of a blackish purple in the middle, but they are three times smaller.


Hieracium lanosum
There groweth from one root three, foure or more round vpright soft cottonie stalks, of a reasonable bignesse, two foot high, diuided into many branches, especially neere the top, whereon groweth at each diuision one broad sharpe pointed leafe, diuided into corners, and very much crumpled, and also very soft cottonie and woolly, as is the whole plant: the floures are small, double, of a pale yellow colour, very like those of (...) repens, growing clustering very many together at the tops of the stalkes and branches, forth of small round soft cottonie heads: these foure plants grew from

seed which I receiued from Mr. Coys, 1620. and I made these descriptions by the Plants the 22. of August, 1621.


Blitum spinosum: est Beta Cretica semine aculeato Baubini Matth. pag. 371.
This sendeth forth from one root many round greene strailing, ioynted, small branches, about a foot long: the leaues are of a light greene colour, and grow at euery ioint one, somewhat like the leaues of great Sorrell, but they are round topped without barbes or eares below, or any manifest taste or smell, very like the leaues of Beets, but much smaller: the floures grow clustering together about the ioints, and at the tops of the branches small and greenish, each floure containing fiue or six very small blunt topped leaues, and a few dustie chiues in the middle: which past, there commeth great prickly shriuelled seed, growing euen close to the root, and vpwards on the ioints, each seed hauing three sharpe prickes at the top growing side-waies, which indeed may be more properly called the huske; which huske in the in-side is of a darke reddish colour, and containeth one seed in forme like the seed of Flos Adonis, round at the lower end, and cornered towards the top, and sharp pointed, couered ouer with a darke yellowish skin; which skin pulled away, the kernell appeareth yellow on the outside, and exceeding white within, and will with a light touch fall into very small pouder like (...).


Geranij Baeticae species Boelij.
This hath at the beginning many broad leaues, indented about the edges, somwhat diuided, like those of Geranium Creticum, but of a lighter greene colour, and smaller: amongst which grow vp many round hairy kneed trailing branches, diuided into many other branches, bearing leaues like the former, but smaller, and no more diuided. The floures are smal like those of Geranum (...), but of a deeper reddish colour, each floure hauing fiue small round topped leaues: after followeth small long hairie seed, growing at the lower end of a sharpe pointed beak like that of Geranium Moschatum: the whole plant perisheth when the seed is ripe.
Boelius a Low-countrey-man gathered the seeds hereof in Baetica a part of Spaine, and imparted them to Mr. William Coys, a man very skilfull in the knowledge of Simples, who hath gotten plants thereof, and of infinite other strange herbes, and friendly gaue me seeds hereof, and of many other, Anno, 1620.


Antirrhinum minus flore Linariae luteum inscriptum.
This hath at the first many very small, round, smooth branches from one root, trayling on the ground, about foure or fiue inches long, set with many small greene short sharp pointed leaues, like those of Serpillum, but that these are longer, smooth, and three or foure growing opposite one against another: amongst which rise vp fiue or six, sometimes ten or twelue vpright round smooth little stalks a cubit high, diuided into branches bearing small long smooth greene leaues, growing without order, as narrow as the vpper leaues of Oenanthe Angustifolia: at the toppes of the stalks and branches grow clustering together fiue six or more small yellow floures, flouring vpwards, leauing along spike of very small huskes, each huske hauing a small line or chinke as though two huskes were ioined together, the one side of the huske being a little longer than the other, wherein is contained exceeding small blackish seed. The root is very short, small, and white, with a few threds, and perisheth at winter.
This plant is not written of that I can finde. I receiued seed thereof from Mr. William Coys often remembred.


Linaria minor aestiua.
The stalkes are round, smooth, of a whitish greene colour, a foot high, weake, not able to stand vpright: whereon grow long narrow sharpe pointed leaues, most commonly bending or turning downewards. The floures grow in spikes at the toppes of the branches, yet not very neere together, and are (...) small and yellow, with a small tayle: the seed of this plant is small, flat, and of a blackish gray colour, inclosed in small round huskes, and you shall commonly haue at one time floures and ripe seed all on a stalke. The whole plant is like to the common Linaria, but that it is a great deale lesser, and the floures are six times as small, and perish at Winter. I also receiued seeds thereof from Mr. William Coys.



Scorpioides multiflorus (...).
This Plant is in creeping branches and leaues like the common Scorpioides bupleuri folio: the floures are also alike, but a little bigger, and grow foure or fiue together on one foot-stalke: the cods are rougher, and very much turned round, or folded one within another: in all things else alike.


Scorpioides siliquacrassa Boelij.
This is also like the other in creeping branches and leaues: the floures are something bigger than any of the rest, and grow not aboue one or two together on a foot-stalk: the (...) are crooked, without any rough haire, yet finely checkquered, and seuen times bigger than any of the rest, fully as big as a great Palmer-worme, wherein is the difference: the seed is almost round, yet extending somewhat in length, almost as big as small field Peason, of a browne or yellowish colour. This also perisheth when the seed is ripe. Sept. 1. 1621.
Silibum minus flore nut ante Boelij.
This Thistle is in stalkes and leaues much smaller than our Ladies Thistle, that is to say, The stalkes are round, straked, so newhat woolly, with narrow skinny prickly edges three or foure (...) high, diuided into many branches, whereon grow long leaues, deeply diuided, full of white milkelike streakes and sharpe prickles by the edges: the floures grow on the tops of the stalks and branches, forth of small heads, commonly turning downwards, of the bignesse of an Oliue, set with very small slender sharpe pricks, containing nothing but small purple chiues, spreading abroad like those of Iacea, with some blewish chiues in the middle: the seed followeth, inclosed in downe, and is small and grayish like the seed of other Thistles, but it is as clammy as Bird-lime. The whole plant perisheth at Winter, and reneweth it selfe by the falling of his seed. I finde not this written of. It was first gathered by Boclius in Spaine, and imparted vnto Mr. William Coys, who friendly gaue me seeds thereof.
Aracus maior Baeticus Boelij.
It hath small weake foure square streaked trailing branches, two foot high, lesser, but like those of Fetches, whereon grow many leaues without order, and euery seuerall leafe is composed of six, seuen, or more small sharpe pointed leaues, like those of Lentils, set on each side of a middle rib, which middle rib endeth with clasping tendrels: the floures grow forth of the bosomes of the leaues, but one in a place, almost without any foot-stalkes at all, like those of Vetches, but of a whitish colour, with purple streakes, and of a deeper colour tending to purple towards the nailes of the vpper couering leaues: after which follow the cods, which are little aboue an inch long, not fully so big as those of the wilde beane, almost round, and very hairy: wherein is contained about 4 peason, seldom round, most commonly somewhat flat, and sometimes cornered, of a blackish colour, neere as big as field peason, and of the taste of Fetches: the whole herbe perisheth when the seed is ripe. This plant Boelius sent to Mr. William Coys, who hath carefully preserued the same kind euer since, and friendly imparted seeds thereof to me in Anno 1620.
Legumen pallidum Vlissiponense, Nonij (...).
This plant is very like, both in stalks, leaues, and cods, to Aracus (...) Baeticus, but the floures of this are of a pale yellow or Primrose colour, and the whole herbe smaller, and nothing so hairy. It perisheth also when the seed is ripe. I receiued the seeds likewise from Mr. Coys.
Vicia Indica (...) albo. Pisum Indicum Gerardo.
This Vetch differeth not in any thing at all, either in stalkes, leaues, cods, fashion of the floures, or colour thereof, from our common manured Vetch, but that it groweth higher, and the fruit is bigger and rounder, and of a very cleare white (...), more like to peason than Vetches. Mr. Gerrard was wont to call this Vetch by the name of Pisum Indicum, or Indian Pease, gotten by him after the publishing of his Herball, as Mr. Coys reported to me. But the said Mr. Coys hath in my iudgment more properly named it Vicia fractu albo (...) which name I thought most fit to call it by, onely adding Indica to it, from whence it is reported to haue been gotten. Iul. 30. 1621.
Astragalus marinus Lusitanicus Boelij.
This hath fiue, six, or more round straked reddish hairy stalks or branches, of a reasonable bignesse, proceeding from one root, sometimes creeping or leaning neere the ground, and sometimes standing vpright, a cubit high, with many greene leaues, set by certaine distances, out of order like those of Glaux vulgaris, but lesser, euery (...) being composed of fourteen or more round topped

leaues, a little hairy by the edges, set on each side of a long middle rib, which is about nine or ten inches in length, without tendrels: the floures grow forth of the bosomes of the leaues, neere the tops of the stalkes, on long round streaked hairy foot-stalkes, of a very pale yellow colour, like those of Securidacaminor, but bigger, growing close together in short spikes, which turne into spikes of the length of two or three inches, containing many small three cornered cods about an inch long, growing close together like those of Glaux vulgaris, each cod containing two rowes of small flat foure cornered seeds, three or foure in each row, of a darke yellowish or leadish colour, like to those of Securidaca minor, but three or foure times as big, of little taste: the root is small, slender, white, with a few threds, and groweth downe right, and perisheth when the seed is ripe. I first gathered seeds of this plant in the garden of my good friend Mr. Ioh. Parkinson an Apothecary of London, Anno 1616.
Fabaveterum serratis (...) Boelij.
This is like the other wilde Beane in stalks, floures, cods, fruit, and clasping tendrels, but it differeth from it in that the leaues hereof (especially those that grow neere the tops of the stalks) are notched or indented about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The root also perisheth when the seed is ripe. The seeds of this wilde Beane were gathered by Boelius a Low-country man, in Baetica a part of Spaine, and by him sent to Mr. William Coys, who carefully preserued them, and also imparted seeds thereof to me, in Anno 1620. Iul. 31. 1621.
Pisum maculatum Boelij.
They are like to the small common field Peason in stalkes, leaues, and cods; the difference is, the floures are commonly smaller, and of a whitish greene colour: the Peason are of a darke gray colour, spotted with blacke spots in shew like to blacke Veluet; in taste they are also like, but somewhat harsher. These peason I gathered in the garden of Mr. Iohn Parkinson, a skilfull Apothecarie of London; and they were first brought out of Spaine by Boelius a low-Countrey man.
Lathyrus aestivus flore (...). Iuly. 28. 1621:
This is like Lathyris latiore folio (...), in stalks, leaues, and branches, but smaller: the stalks are two or three foot long, made flat with two skins, with two exceeding small leaues growing on the stalks, one opposite against another: betweene which spring vp flat foot-stalks, an inch long, bearing two exceeding narrow sharpe pointed leaues, three inches long: betweene which grow the tendrels, diuided into many parts at the top, and taking hold therwith: the floures (...) smal, and grow forth of the bosomes of the leaues, on each foot-stalk one floure, wholly yellow, with purple strakes. After each floure followeth a smooth cod, almost round, two inches long, wherein is contained seuen round Peason, somewhat rough, but after a curious manner, of the bignesse and taste of field Peason, and of a darke sand colour.
Lathyrus aestivus Baeticus flore caeruleo Boelij.
This is also like Lathyris (...) folio Lobelij, but smaller, yet greater than that with yellow flours, hauing also adioining to the flat stalkes, two eared sharpe pointed leaues, and also two other slender sharpe pointed leaues, about foure inches long, growing on a flat foot-stalke, beetweene them, an inch and a halfe long, and one tendrel between them diuided into two or three parts: the floures are large, and grow on long slender foure-square foot-stalkes, from the bosomes of the leaues, on each foot-stalk one: the vpper great couering leafe being of a light blew, and the lower smaller leaues of a deeper blew: which past there come vp short flat cods, with two filmes, edges, or skins on the vpper side, like those of Eruilia Lobelij, containing within foure or fiue great flat cornered Peason, bigger than field Peason, of a darke sand colour.
Lathyrus aestivus edulis Baeticus flore albo Boelij.
This is in flat skinny stalks, leaues, foot-stalks, and cods, with two skins on the vpper side, and in all things else like the said Lathyrus with blew floures; only the floures of this are milk white: the fruit is also like.
Lathyrus aestivus flore miniato.
This is also in skinnie flat stalks and leaues like the said Lathyris latiore folio, but far smaller, not three foot high: it hath also small sharp pointed leaues growing by couples on the stalke, between which grow two leaues, about three inches long, on a flat foot-stalk half an inch long: also between those leaues grow the tendrels: the floures are coloured like red lead, but not so bright, growing on

smooth short foot-stalks, one on a foot-stalke: after which follow cods very like those of the common field peason, but lesser, an inch and a halfe long; containing foure, fiue, or sixe cornered Peason, of a sand colour, or darke obscure yellow, as big as common field peason, and of the same taste.
Lathyrus palustris Lusitanicus Boelij
Hath also flat skinnie stalks like the said Lathyrus latiore folio, but the paire of leaues which grow on the stalke are exceeding small as are those of Lathyrus (...) luteo, and are indeed scarce worthie to be called leaues: the other paire of leaues are about two inches long, aboue halfe an inch broad, and grow (...) betweene those small leaues, on flat foot-stalks, an inch long: betweene which leaues also grow the tendrels: the floures grow on foot-stalks which are fiue inches long, commonly two on a foot-stalke, the great vpper (...) leaues being of a bright red colour, and the vnder leaues are somewhat paler: after commeth flat cods, containing seuen or eight small round peason, no bigger than a Pepper corne, gray and blacke, spotted before they are ripe, and when they are fully ripe of a blacke colour, in taste like common Peason: the stalks, leaues, foot-stalkes and coddes are somwhat hairy and rough.
Lathyrus aestivus dumetorum Baeticus Boelij
Hath also flat skinnie stalks like the said Lathyrus latiore folio, but smaller, and in the manner of the growing of the leaues altogether contrarie. This hath also two small sharp pointed leaues, adioyning to the stalke: betweene which groweth forth a flat middle rib with tendrels at the top, hauing on each side (not one against another) commonly rhree blunt topped leaues, sometimes three on the one side, and two on the other, and sometimes but foure in all, about an inch and a halfe long: the floures grow on foot-stalks, about two or three inches long, each foot-stalk vsually bearing two floures, the great couering leafe being of a bright red colour; and the two vnder leaues of a blewish (...) colour: afterwhich follow smooth cods, aboue two inches long, containing, fiue, sixe, or seuen smooth Peason, of a browne Chestnut colour, not round, but somewhat flat, more long than broad, especially those next both the ends of the cod, of the bignesse and taste of common field peason.
Iuniperus sterilis.
This shrub is in the manner of growing altogether like the Iuniper tree that beareth berries, only the vpper part of the leaues of the youngest and tenderest bowes and branches are of a more reddish greene colour: the floures grow forth of the bosoms of the leaues, of a yellowish colour, which neuer exceed three in one row, the number also of each row of leaues: each floure is like to a small bud, more long than round, neuer growing to the (...) of a quarter of an inch, being nothing else but very small short crudely chiues, very thicke and close thrust together, fastened to a very small middle stem, in the end turning into small dust, which flieth away with the winde, not much vnlike that of Taxus sterilis: on this shrub is neuer found any fruit. 15. Maij. 1621.
WHen the last sheets of this worke were on the Presse, I receiued a Letter from from Mr. Roger Bradshaghe, wherein he sent me inclosed a note concerning some plants mentioned by our Author which I haue thought fitting here to impart to the Reader: he writes not who it was that writ them, wherefore I cannot acquaint you with his name, but thanke him, though vnknowne, for his desire to manifest the truth, and satisfie our doubts in these particulars.
BEcause you write that Gerards Herbal is vpon a review, I haue thought good to put you in mind what I haue obserued touching some plants which by him are affirmed to grow in our Northern parts: first the plant called Pirola, which he saith groweth in (...), I haue made search for it the space of twentie yeares, but no such is to be heard of.
Sea Campion with a red floure was told him groweth in Lancashire: no such hath euer bin seen by such as dwell neere where they should grow.
White Fox-gloues grow naturally in Lansdale, saith he, it is very rare to see one in Lansdale.
Garden Rose he writes groweth about Leiland in Glouers field wilde: I haue learned the truth from those to whom this Glouers field did belong, and I finde no such thing, only aboundance of red wilde poppie, which the people call Corne-rose is there seene.
White Whortles, as he saith, grow at Crosby in Westmerland, and vpon Wendle hill in Lancashire: I haue sought Crosbie very diligently for this plant and others which are said to grow there, but none could I finde, nor can I heare of any of the countrey people in these parts, who dayly are labouring vpon the mountains where the VVortle berries abound, that any white ones haue

been seene, sauing that those which Gerard calls red Whortles, and they are of a very pale white green till they be full ripe, so as when the ripe ones looke red, the vnripe ones looke white.
Cloud-(...) assuredly is no other than Knout berrie.
Heskets Prim-rose groweth in Clap-dale. If Mr. Hesket found it there it was some extraordinary luxurious floure, for now I am well assured no such is there to be seene, but it is onely cherished in our gardens.
Gerard saith many of these Northerne plants do grow in Cragge close. In the North euery town and village neere any craggie ground both with vs and in Westmerland haue closes so called, wherby Gerards Cragge close is kept close from our knowledge.
Chamaemorus, seu Vaccinia nubis. Knot, or Knout-berrie, or Cloud-berrie.
THis Knot, Knout or Cloud-berrie (for by all these names it is knowne to vs in the North, and taketh these names from the high mountaines whereon it groweth, and is perhaps, as Gerard saith, one of the brambles, though without any prickles) hath roots as small as packe thred, which creepe far abroad vnder the ground, of an ouerworne red colour, here and there thrusting more fastly in to the mossie hillockes tufts of small threddie strings, and at certaine (...) putting vp small stalks rather tough than wooddy, halfe a foot high, somthing reddish below: on which do grow two or three leaues of a reasonable sad green colour, with foot-(...) an inch long, one aboue another without order: the highest is but little, and seldome well spread open; they are something (...), crispie, full of nerues in euery part, notched about the edges, and with some foure gashes a little deeper than the rest, whereby the whole leafe is lightly diuided into fiue portions. On the top of the stalk commeth one floure consisting of foure, sometimes of fiue leaues apiece, very white and tender, and rather crumpled than plaine, with some few short yellow threds in the midst: it standeth in a little greene husk of fiue leaues, out of which when the floure fades, commeth the fruit, composed of diuers graines like that of the bramble, as of eight, ten or twelue, sometimes of (...), and perhaps through some mischance but of three or two, so ioined, as they make some resemblance of a heart, from whence (it may be) hath grown that errour in Gerard of diuiding this plant into, kinds: (...) fruit is first witish greene, after becommeth yellow, and reddish on that side next the Sun.
It groweth naturally in a blacke moist earth or mosse, whereof the countrie maketh a fewel we call Turfe, and that vpon the tops of wet fells and mountains among the Heath, mosse, and brake: as about Ingleborow in the West part of York-shire, on Graygreth a high fell on the edge of Lancashire, on Stainmor such a like place in Westmerland, and other such like high places.
The leaues come forth in May, and in the beginning of Iune the floures: (...) fruit is not ripe till late in Iuly.
The berries haue a harsh and something vnpleasant taste.

THis worke was begun to be printed before such time as we receiued all the figures from beyond the Seas, which was the occasion I omitted these following in their fitting places: but thinking it not fit to omit them wholly, hauing them by me, I wil giue you them with their titles, and the reference to the places wherto they belong.

* In August last whiles this worke was in the Presse, and drawing to an end, I and Mr. William Broad were at Chissel-hurst with my oft mentioned friend Mr. George Bowles, and going ouer the heath there I obserued this small Spartum whose figure I here giue, and whereof you shall find mention, in the place noted vnder the title of the figure; but it is not there described, for that I had not seen it, nor could finde the description therof in any Author, but in Dutch, which I neither had nor vnderstood. Now this little Matweed hath some small creeping stringy roots: on which grow somwhat thick heads, consisting of three or foure leaues, as it were wrapt together in one skin, biggest below, and so growing smaller vpwards, as in Schaenanth, vntill they grow vp to the height of halfe an inch, then these rushie greene leaues (whereof the longest scarce exceeds two inches) breake out of these whitish skins wherein they were wrapped, and lye along vpon the ground, and amongst these growes vp a small grassie stalke, some handfull or better high, bending backe the top, which carries two rowes of small chaffie seeds. It is in the perfection about the beginning of August.
FINIS.





Cyperus Indicus, siue Curcuma. Turmericke. Pag. 33. Lib. 1. (...). (...)


Iuncus minor capitulis Equiseti. Club-Rush. Pag. 35. Lib. 1. (...). 29. (...) (...).


* Spartum nostras parvum Lobelij. Heath Mat-weed. Pag. 41. lib. 1. (...). 34. the (...).


(...) flores. The floures of (...) Hay. Pag. 43. (...) 1. (...). (...). the (...).





