


THE MOTIVES, which hath induced mee, and may happilie encourage such as haue intention to bee Vnder-takers with Mee in the plantation of New GALLOWAY in AMERICA.

MOTIVE I.
AS the chiefe and primarie end of mans creation is the Worshippe of GOD; so shall the first, and speciall motive of my proceeding be the advancement of his Glorie, and that by the propagation of the Gospell of IESVS CHRIST amongst an Heathen people, where Christianitie hath not beene knowne, nor the worshippe of the true GOD. Where can bee selected a more excellent subject, than to cast downe the Altars of Devills, and to raise vp the Altar of CHRIST: to forbidde the Sacrifice of men, that they may offer vp the Sacrifices of contrite Spirites.
Is it not a determined Trueth, that the Gospell of Iesus Christ should bee preached to all the Worlde (Heaven and Earth shall passe away, but GODS Worde shall not passe away). And is it not as certaine a Conclusion amongst all the Divines, that these are the latter Dayes, wherein we live, well knowne by the signes that were to come before, sette downe by God himselfe in his sacred Worde, and for the most part alreadie manifested? And hath not Gods

all-seeing Providence begunne as first by discoverie, and next by plantation of so hudge and so waste a tract, more commonlie, than properlie called the New Worlde; vnknowne but within this 60. yeeres, except by a glimpse, to make appeare the progresse of his divine Providence, how hee will haue the seede of his worke to bee sowne amongst them; Then doth it not belonge vnto vs to prosecute his worke; and as by merchandizing and trade wee buy at them the pearles of the Earth; wee ought to communicate vnto them the pearles of Heaven.
The time hath never beene so apparent as now, vnder our most gratious and Soveraigne Lord, King CHARLES, whose generous and gratious goodwill by encouragement to the same, hath manifested the same since hee receaved the Crowne, to bee the selected instrument to atchieue it.
Then should not that Heroicke, and illustrious disposition in Him, whom wee see so prompt to bee still in action, both incite, and invite to so noble designes all such as would shunne the imputation of idlenesse to imitate His foot-steppes.
Is it vnlawfull for vs to come to them? No; it is the duetie of Christianitie in vs, to behold the imprinted footsteppes of GODS glorie in everie Region vnder Heaven; and to them, against the Law of Nations, to violate a peaceable Stranger, or to deny vs harbour.
Is it vnlawfull for vs to trade with them? No, vnlesse Salomon should bee condemned of sending for Golde to Ophir; Abraham for making a league with Abimelech, and all Christendome for having commerce with Turkes, and miscreants.
Nor neither is it vnlawfull that wee possesse part of their Lands, and dwell with them, and defend our selves from them, because there is no other moderate, and mixt course, to bring them to conversion, but by daylie conversation, where wee may see the Life, and learne the Languages

each of others: and because there is towne sufficient in the Land, (as Sichem said) for them, and vs; the extent of an 100. myles beeing scarce peopled with 500 inhabitants: and chieflie because (as Pharaoh gaue Goshen, to Israel, ere Ephron sold his caue to Abraham) they have solde to our people their Lands for copper (which they more esteme of, than money) to inherite and inhabite:, as Paspehay and Powhatan, two our there greatest Kinges to these our Colonies in Virginia; and chieflie (as it is written by Captaine Iohn Smith, a worthie actour in the businesse) when Captaine Newport was desired by Powhatan at Worowacomaco, to come from Iames towne in Virginia, where hee was, as a place vnwholesome, and to take possession of another whole Kingdome, which hee gave vnto him.
If any scrupulous conscience will impute, that yet wee can possesse no further limites, than was alloted by composition, and that fortitude without justice, is but the firebrand of iniquitie. Let him know that Plato defineth it to bee no injustice, to take a sword out of the hand of a madde man. And Saint Augustine hath allowed, for a lawfull offensiue warre that revengeth injuries, and wherein the whole Divines in Europe, although contraverting farre in other things, yet in this they all agree, that it is lawfull. That the Church of Rome allowe it. The Spaniard, and Portugalles large and ample territories and kingdomes in the 15. Provinces of Mexico, Nueua Hispanna, Nueua Gallicia, etc. beare witnesse. And for the Church of England, their Bermudes, Virginian, and New England conquesse and colonies affirme it. And the Church of Geneva in the yeere 1555. determined in a Synode (where Calvin was president) to sende Peter Rochier, and William Quadrigarius, vnder a French Captaine to Brasilia, althogh they were supplanted by the Cardinall of Loraine, and the treacherie of their false Captaine.

When therefore it is so sweete a smelling Sacrifice to propagate the name of Iesus Christ: if wee haue any graine of faith or zeale in Religion, let vs seeke to convert these poore Savages to knowe Christ, and humanitie. Let Religion bee the first aime of our hopes, and other thinges shall bee cast vnto vs. Our Names shall bee registred to posteritie with a glorious Title; These are the men whom GOD hath raised to augment the state of their Countrie, and to propagate the Gospell of Iesus Christ.
The same GOD that hath ordained three Kingdomes vnder the Scepter of our gratious King CHARLES, will not bee wanting to adde a fourth, if wee would dissolve that frostie ycienesse which chilleth our zeale, and maketh vs cold in the action.


MOTIVE II.
 AND next to the Worshippe of my GOD, is the service of my Prince, and native Countrie: which is the second end that I haue propounded vnto my selfe, by inlarging these Dominions whereof I am a Subject: a duetie moste proper to all the true and loyall Lieges, whensoever by so lawfull and easie meanes it may bee atchieved.
What is so truelie sutable with honour and honestie, as to gaine to our native Mother-Countrie a Kingdome to attend her? Wherein can the taste of true vertue, and magnanimitie bee more sweete and pleasant, than in planting, and building a foundation for thy posteritie; gotte from the rude earth by Gods blessing, and thine owne industrie, without prejudice to any? What more conducing

to that mysticall bodie politicke, whereof thou art a member, than for to finde imployment for those that are idle, because they knowe not what to doe? Posteritie shall remember thee for it, and remembring, ever honour that remembrance with praise.
Consider what was the beginninges, and endinges of the Monarchies of the Chaldeans, the Persians, the Graecians and the Romans, but this one rule: what was it they would not doe for the Common-wealth or there mother Citie? for example: Rome, what made her such a Monarchesse, but only the adventures of her youthe, not in ryots at home, but in dangers abroad? and their justice, and judgment, out of their own experience when they grewe aged. What was their ruine and hurt, but this: their excesse of idlenesse, want of experience, hypocriticall seeming goodnesse, and growing onlie formall Temporists; so that what their Predecessours gotte in many yeeres, they lost in few dayes: these by their paines and laboures became Lordes of the Worlde, they by their ease and vyces became slaves to their servants.
Then, who would live at home idle (or think in him selfe any worth to live) onlie to eate, drinke, and sleepe, and so to die? or by consuming that careleslie, which their predecessours hath got worthilie? or by vsing that miserablie, that maintained vertue honestlie? or, for beeing descended noblie, pyne with the vaine vaunt of Kinred in penurie? or (to maintaine a sillie show of braverie) toyle out the heart, soule, and time baselie, by shiftes, trickes, cardes, or dyce? or by relating newes of others actions, sharke heere or there for a Dinner or Supper? deceiving his friends by faire promises and dissimulation, in borrowing where hee never intendeth to pay? offending the Lawes, surfeting with excesse, burthening his Countrie, abusing himselfe, despairing in want, and then cousening his kinred? although it is seene what honoures

the World hath yet, and what affluence of all things; for such as will seeke, and worthilie deserue them. Heere were courses for Gentle-men, (and such as would bee so reputed) more suting their qualities, than begging from their Princes generous disposition the labours of his other subjects.
It woulde bee a Historie of a large volume to recite the adventures of the Spaniards and Portugalles, their constant resolutions, with such incomparable honour, so farre beyond beliefe in their discoveries, and plantations, as may well condemne vs of too much imbecillitie, floth, and negligence. And yet the authours of these new inventions were helde as ridiculous at that time: as now are others that doe but seeke to imitate their vnparalelled vertues.
And though wee see daylie their mountaines of wealth (sprung from the plants of their generous indevoures) yet is our incredulitie, and vntowardnesse such, and so great, that either ignorantlie wee beleeve nothing; or so curiouslie contest, to prevent wee know not what future events; that so wee either neglect, or oppresse, or discourage both our selves, and others, that might both as easilie and would as willinglie attempt and embrace the like.
Who seeth not, what is the greatest good of the Spaniard, but these newe conclusions, in searching these vnknowne partes of this vnknowne Worlde: by which meanes hee diveth even into the verie secreetes of all his Neighboures, and the most part of the Worlde.
And when the Portugalles and Spaniards had found the East and West Indies, how manie did condemne them-selves that did not accept of that honest offer of noble Columbus, who vpon the neglect of England, to whom it was first offered; brought them to it: perswading them-selves the Worlde had no such places, as they had found: and yet ever since wee finde, they still haue found newe

Lands, newe Nations, new trades, and still daylie doe finde; both in Asia, Africa, Terra incognita, and America: so that their is neither Souldiour, nor Mechanicke from the Lord, to the begger, but these parts affoord them all employment, and discharge their native Soyle of so manie thousands of all sorts, that else by their sloath, pryde and imperfections, woulde longe ere this haue troubled their neighboures, or haue eaten the pryde of Spaine it selfe.
And seeing further, for all they have, they cease not still to search for that, which yet they neither haue, nor knowe not ^ it is strange that wee shoulde bee so dull, as not maintaine that which wee haue, and pursue that, which wee knowe.
I am sure that manie would take it in an evill part to be abridged of the titles and honours of their predecessours: when if but truelie they would judge themselves: looke howe inferiour they are to their noble vertues, so much they are vnworthie of their honours, and livings: which never were ordained for showes and shadowes, to maintaine idlenesse and sloath, but to make them more able to abound in honour by heroicall deedes of action, judgement, pietie and vertue.
What was it they would not doe both in purse and person for the good of the Common-weale? and may not this bee a motive for vs to set out such as may bee spared of our kindred in such generous designes. Religion aboue all things should move (especiallie the Cleargie) if wee were religious, to showe our faith by our workes, in converting these poore savages to the knowledge of GOD. Honour might move the Gentrie, valiant and industrious; the hope and assurance of wealth, all: if wee were such, as wee would seeme, and desire to bee accompted.
Or bee wee so farre inferiour to other Nations, or our Spirites so farre dejected from our ancient Predecessoures

or our minds so vpon spoyle, pyracie, or other villanieas to serve the Portugale, Spaniard, Dutch, French, or Turk, (as to the great hurte of Europe too manie doe) rather than our GOD, our King, our Countrie, and our selves? excusing our idlenesse, and our base complaints by want of imployment? when heere is such choyce of all sortes, and for all degrees in this plantation.
So let these answere such questionlesse questions, that keepe vs backe from imitating the worthinesse of their brave spirits, that advanced themselves from poore Souldiers, to great Captaines, their posteritie to great Lords, their King to bee one of the greatest Potentates on Earth, and the fruits of their labours, his greatest glorie, power, riches and renowne.

MOTIVE III. AND as I haue spoken of two principall causes that hath induced mee; The third of my ends may happilie bee no lesse forcible to encourage all such, whose education, spirits and judgments, wants but onlie the purse to prosecute the same with mee, and that is the private and particulare gaine, that may bee got by so lawfull and easie meanes: whereof it is more than admirable, that such should either bee so wilfullie ignorant, or so negligently carelesse as not to bee moved to imbrace, and speciallie, such imployment as may search out commodities, to live happilie, plentifullie, and at ease.Ought not everie man to regard, aswell to inlarge his patrimonie, as that hee bee not chargeable to others, so

farre as hee may by his vertue and industrie, in a lawfull and honest manner attaine vnto. Is not a lawfull search for such commodities, to bee preferred to an idle sloathfulnesse? and an honorable policie in a lawfull plantation abroad, before vnlawfull monopolies, and wrangling suites of Law, by neighbour against neighbour at home, impoverishing thy selfe, and thy native Countrie, whereof thou oughtest to bee a more profitable member?May not the fortunate successe of the plantation of Ireland, so fresh and recent to all, whence so great commodities are brought both to England, and Scotland, and whereby the Countrie it selfe is enriched, and wee so benefited, bee inticements to induce vs to the like. The verturous, and generous Spirites of resolute Gentlemen, vnder-takers of this plantation, haue raised their fortunes worthie of honour; and by his Majesties favour, their vertues rewarded with the titles of Earles, Vice-Countes Lords, Barronets, and Knights, according to their qualities, and his Majesties pleasure. The meaner sort, such as artisanes, labourers of the ground, the greater part whereof, were knowne to haue scarce a competent meanes to defraye the charges of their passage thither, now promoted to bee Gentlemen, and of great meanes. And why may not time produce as great effects to vertue, in others who shall follow her pathes with resolution: where as good occasions are are offered, in a climate more temperate, a Soyle more fertile, and farre exceeding in greater commodities?And last, to shake off the difficulties, and impedimentes that may bee objected: as the dangerousnesse of Sea, the bariennesse of the Soyle, and the vnwholesomenesse of the climate; all which discouragements might astonishe some with feare, and to thinke our expensses, and paines vnprofitable; when as our endes shall bee vnpossible.

I haue therefore heere taken a view that you may generallie knowe and learne, what the Countrie is, and her commodities: the temperature of the climate: nature of the natives: and the easinesse of the passage; all which I shall briefly runne over; only to remove from before your feete the stumbling blocks of impossibilitie that may affright vs.The Countrie it is called by the name of Cape Briton, now New Galloway: new, not in respect of the discoverie thereof, which to the judgment of men of knowledge and vnderstanding is not new, but old; for the much hath been written thereof, yet new, not olde, because of our new vndertaking of that plantation. It is situated betwixt the degrees of 45. and 57. an Yland within the Sea, but vpon the maine, severed by the distance of foure leagues in some parts, of two or three at other parts: and at others, lesse.The Yland is in length some 120. myles, and in breadth 80. myles or thereby: standing South-east, and North-west to New Scotland; vvhere the great river Canada ingorgeth her selfe in the maine Ocean. Harbours there bee exceeding good on all sides, in most part vvhereof are ancorage for shippes of all burthen. Yles there be about over-grovvn vvith good timber of diverse sorts of vvood; all as yet not discovered, except the Yle Sablon, vvhich is full of vvoodes and vvilde beastes, but vvithout any people. The Land is vvatered by foure maine rivers, full of Salmond, and diverse other sortes of fishes. It hath plentie of springes of svveete vvaters. Tovvards the North-east, Mountanous: and tovvard the South-west Caimpainge: promising as rich entralles as anie other Kingdome to whom the Sunne is no nearer neighbour. The ground in it self so fertile and good as may equalize any of the Kingdomes that lyeth in the hight of 45. 46. 47. Onlie this advantage I find in nature, that they haue above this: they are bewtified by the long labour and diligence of industrious people and airt: and this is only as God made it, when he created the world, vncultured, planted and manured by men of industry, judgme^t and experience.
The commodities which we shal reape from thence shall be great, for the Sea shall sweeten our labours with her benefites, as the Land, and the Land aswell as the Sea. The Sea shall reach vs vp her Whale, her turbot, her sturgion, cod, haddocke, small ling, makkerell, herring, mullet, pearch, Ecle, crab, lobster, muskle, wilk, oyster, and infinite others. Fish is the maine Staple, from whence is to be extracted, a present commoditie to produce the rest: which howsoever it may seeme meane and base, yet it is the Myne, and the Sea is the source of these silvered streames of all these vertues, which hath made the Hollanders, the miracle of industrie, and patterne of perfection for these affaires: and the benefite of fishing, is that Primum mobile, that turneth all their Spheare to this hight of plentie, strength, honour, and admiration.The ground it will yeeld vs an admired varietie; some wee shall haue that are merchantable, which, by the serving for ordinarie necessars of the planters and inhabitants, may yeeld a superplus sufficient, by way of traffick and exchange with other nations, to enriche our selves the provyders; such as flaxe, hempe, which the Soyle doth yeeld of it self not planted. For pitch, tarre, rozen and turpentine, there bee these kind of trees there, which yeeld them aboundantlie. Sassafras, called by the natives, winauk, a kind of wood of sweet smell, and of rare vertues in Physick. The Vine, it groweth there wild. Oyle there may be there of two sortes: one of walnuts; and another of berries, like the ackornes, which the natives vse. Furres of manie and diverse kinds; such as the matterne, the otter. the black foxe, the luzernes, Deere skins, bevers, wildcat, and manie others. Sweet gummes of diverse kinds, and many other Apothecarie drugges. Dyes of diverse sortes: such as shoemake, for blacke: the seede of an hearbe called vasebur, and a litle small roote called chappacor, for red: and for blew, the her be woad, a thing of great vent and vse at home for Dyers, and many other commodities merchantable, which by planting may bee raised.
(...)
and in our coastings at home wee are subject vnto.
And now last, it resteth I speake a worde of the nature of the people, in so farre as you maye knowe, how litle they are to bee feared, in respect of troubling our inhabiting and planting.
They are a people so fewe, so poore, so base, so incivile, and so savage, as wanting both multitude, power, or ai^^^ to harme vs. They are cloathed with loose mantles, made of Deere skinnes, casten rounde about their middles, the rest of their bodie all naked, of such stature onelie as wee are heere, having no edge tooles, nor weapons of yron, nor steele to offende vs, neither knowe they how to make anie, nor howe to vse them.
These weapons which they have, are onelie Bowes made of Hazell, and arrowes of reedes: flat edged truncheons also of vvood, about a yarde long: neither haue they anie thing to defende themselves, but targes made of barkes, and some armour made of stickes vvickered together vvith threed. In number they are verie fewe, in twentie myles, scarce threescore people. Townes in the countrie are verie rare, and small: containing fewe inhabitants: and hee is a Viroan, or great Lord, that hath the government of one towne. There houses are litle, made of small poles, and fast at the toppes in round forme, in moste parte covered with barkes. If there shoulde fall out anie Warres betwixt vs and them, what fight coulde there bee, wee having advantages against them, so manie manner of wayes: it maye bee easilie imagined, by our discipline, our strange weapons, especiallie, our Ordinance great, and small. And by the experience that others hath had of them there, in places more populous than this of ours: where the taking of them-selves to their heeles, was their best defence against them.

So seeing you maye perceive, what the Countrie is, and how situated? the aire how temperate, and wholesome? the Soyle how fertile, and what affluence it doeth yeelde of commoditie? the natives how both so fewe, and so harmelesse? and the passage, howe so easie, and so frequentlie experimented? I hope there remaineth no cause, whereby the action should bee misliked.
Thus referring my relation to your favourable constructions: the successe of the action to Him, who is to bee acknowledged the Author and Governour, not onlie of this, but of all thinges else: and these my subsequent Offers, which I have freelie, and willinglie granted, as helpes, and furtherances for your encouragement to so good a Worke; yee maye pervse, and onelie imbrace as you shall thinke your selves disposed.






DREAD GOD 1625



THE OFFERS to bee granted to the Adventurers in the new plantation of CAPE BRITON, now called by the name of New Galloway in AMERICA, BY LOCHINVAR.

ARTICLE 1.
For Ministers.
THAT the blessing of GOD may accompanie vs in our indevoures; without whose gracious, and mercifull assistance, wee can not have happie, nor prosperous successe in our affaires. For the Ministers of the Worde of God; such as shall bee the factours of CHRIST for the gaine of Soules: and to propagate his Trueth: and enlighten those that are captivate in Ethnicke darknesse: and for the vse, and exercise of true Religion amongest our selves; I doe willinglie, and freelie graunt and offer as followeth,1. Their passage from Scotland vnto the said Land of New Galloway shall bee free vnto them, without payment of any fraught, either for themselves,

their wiues, and children, if they anie haue, and their necessare houshold stuffe: which all shall bee transported thither vnto them, into mine owne Shippes, and vpon mine owne charges.2. They shall haue their entertainment of mee, their wiues, and children as saide is, in their whole passage on the waye thither.3. For their maintenance, and their foresaids beeing there: I shall giue them entertainment for the space of the first three yeeres, in during the infancie of our Church there: and howe soone it shall please GOD that our number bee increased, that our Companies maye bee divided in Paroches, that then a competent meanes shall be alloted vnto each Minister in his severall charge, as shall bee found expedient for their places.4. For their assistance in such things as belongeth vnto them in their callings: I shall haue a speciall care to see, that such reverence, and respect be had vnto them, as appertaineth vnto their place and calling: and shall see such goode order, as by them shall bee sette downe for reformation of life, and manners, duelie obeyed and performed, by causing the transgressours, and contemners of the same bee severelie punished.


ARTICLE II.
THAT everie one of such as shall bee vndertakers, shall giue his oath of alledgeance: and shall all conforme themselves in Religion, according to his Majesties

Lawes, and manner professed within the Kingdome of Scotland.


ARTICLE III.
For Gentlemen, and others vndertakers: what I shall bee obliged to performe vnto them.
ITEM, for the helpes, and furtherances of so generous, and well-disposed vndertakers as shall willinglie vnder-goe the hazard, and imbrace the enterpryse: I shall performe the particulars in everie point vnto them, as followeth,1. For their passages: everie vnder-taker shall bee transported, himselfe, his wife, children, and servants, his whole houshold stuffe, and their provision of victualles for their intertainment, such as meale, malt, beefe, etc. and such as they shall please to provide to sustaine them for a whole yeere: Together with as much cornes, as they shall bee able to sowe vpon their Lands, the first yeere: and that all, and together passage free, into mine Shippes, from Scotland vnto the said countrie of New Galloway.2. Beeing thither by GODS mercifull assistance, and providence transported, to bee established and placed in the Land: each man according to his qualitie, as followeth: The landed Gentleman vndertaker, shall haue his Landes granted vnto him in fee, and heritage to himselfe, and his successours for ever, to bee holden of mee, my heires, and successoures in New Galloway, in

manner as they holde their Lands in Scotland of our Soveraigne Lord, the King his Majestie, either by feaw, wairde, or blansh, and shall grant the same vnto them in quantitie, according to everie one of their qualities and meanes. And for tennants, and farmorers, their landes shall bee granted vnto them in Lace, everie one of them to have three Life-rents, and a nyneteene yeere Tacke thereafter, conforme to their power, and meanes, and performance of the conditions of the rent after mentioned.3. And further more that their helpes, and furtherances maye haue a competent time to establishe them-selves in their estates, and that their meanes may the better increase: each vndertaker of the plantation of New Galloway shall bee free from the payment of any duetie for his Landes, for all and whole the space of the first three yeeres.4. For their assurance of a securitie, and peaceable quietnesse in the possession of their Landes in New Galloway, whereof they bee vndertakers: I shall finde sufficient caution, and suretie vnto each one of them within the Shyre where hee dwelleth in Scotland, that whatsoever his goods or geare thither transported, and placed vpon the ground of the saids Landes, shall bee taken from him by violence, of the natives, or forraine Nations, that the double thereof shall bee payed and refounded againe vnto him in Scotland, or to his heires, executours, or assignayes.
5. And for artisanes and craftes-men, such as Taylors, Shoe-makers, Smyths, Wrights, Websters, Wakers, Millers, etc. their passages shall bee made free vnto them without the payment of anie fraught; and likewise the rents of their lands shall bee free vnto them, induring their owne lifetimes: and for their successours, they shall bee kept in the case, and estate of tenants and farmorers, and shall haue their Laces of their Lands granted vnto them, as is set downe in the Article for Tennants.


ARTICLE IIII.
What the Vnder-takers shall performe vnto mee.
FOR the whole duetie of my Landes, charges, and expensses to bestowed by mee in my shipping and other provision: I shall bee contented to receive from everie one of the said vndertakers, the thirteenth parte of that increase, and commoditie, which their Lands shall bee made worthie vnto them in the said plantation: And that I shall not require to bee payed vnto mee in moneyes, but only in such commodities, as the Soyle shall affoord: such as cornes, fishes, furres, etc.

AND last, I desire that all such, as shall imbrace the foresaids offers, may come vnto mee before the first day of December next, and giue vp their names, and a note of such things as they desire to bee carried with them, whereby I may provide for them, conforme to my preceeding offers, and they received everie one, and placed according to the order as they first come: so that all thinges may bee duelie provyded, and had in readinesse against the due time and season of setting out.
(...)
sense, and feeling out of mine owne experience, howe I see the estate of the Kingdome.
Then (Worthie Countriemen) let vs lay these two things in the ballance, and judge vpon them: whether it is better for vs to goe there, where wee may haue to live in in a fruitfull Soyle, and wholesome, in all commodities abounding to our contentments, beeing onlie a litle industrious, and painefull? than to live heere at home as Runnagates, vnanswerable to GOD, the King, the Lawes, to all reason, and conscience: to bee captivate as slaves, and cast in loathsome Prisons, to satisfie with our persons, when our goods hath failed vs: and especiallie, when wee haue wronged our best and kindest friendes, who out of their loves hath engaged themselves, to be distressed, and imprisoned for vs, which shoulde bee a greater griefe vnto vs, than our owne imprisonments.
And then shall wee disdaine plantation: which to enterprise is so honourable; to prosecute so possible: to purchase so lawfull, and when attained, so profitable? No, whosoever shall reason against the same, especially such as are in distresse, may well bee reputed, either the Bastard of generositie, or the nursling of simplicitie, or the abject of frugalitie: and shall either become for ever, the prostitute of infamie, or consecrated to perpetuall oblivion: and when hee is dead, his actions, his meanes, his name and all, shall die with himselfe; and if hee shall ever happen to bee remembred, that remembrance shall onelie bee in ignominie, as the Wretch of his Countrie, the Curse of his Kinred: and an vnthrist for himselfe.
But I speake not to such a crew, whose basenesse I knowe cannot climbe to surmount the meanest imagined difficultie, that may arise. I speake to such noble Spirites and generous mindes, in whom doeth shine the light of knowledge to discerne the differences betweene a base securitie and honourable actions, vice and vertue, stupiditie,

and true worth: and who in end shall not misse to rejoyce in the enjoying the fruits of their labours in themselves, and their names to bee honoured with a perpetuall remembrance.
And if wee would studie to bee remembred in our posterities, heere is offered the occasion to insert vs in the bookes of memorie: for if wee would portion our second children in a plantation, and such as in nature wee are bound to helpe, and advance: both shall wee bee remembred in their ever-living successions, throughout all ensueing ages: and they provyded in a competent beeing and meanes for them-selves, and theirs, and to bee thereafter proffitable for their King and Countrie: which is better, than either to be kept at home baselie, and short of that which is beseeming their birth, and qualitie: or to bee sent to the service of the Warres of forraine Princes, and to bee cutted away by the sword, and then never more againe remembred: and for so small meanes, as thereby yee can furnish themselves both in rayment, and foode.
Imbrace then the honours of plantation. Doe wee dreame of difficulties? then knowe; that it is out of the greatest difficulties, that spring the greatest honours: and it is that Knight-hood, which is gotten vnder the banner of a King, and in the Fieldes which is most honourable; and not that, which wee acquire by our moneyes; as the most part is now a-dayes. And that our actions may both renowne vs, and beget vs moneyes, wee may see in the examples that I haue sette before your eyes, both of forraine nations, and of our own Countriemen, in their late plantations of Ireland, their estates now, their dignities, their honours, their credite, and their riches: and what they were knowne to haue beene before.
But these I leave to your judgments: onelie now, to make an end, I must entreate thee (Noble and courteous

Reader) to excuse my freenesse in this my homelie discourse, which I perswade my selfe the generous minde will allowe of: and for the base, the simple and the vitious; I doe not care for their censure, onelie I wishe it were a spurre to drawe them to more vertue. As for the rudenesse of my speach, I hope none will except, wherein I professe no airt, if simplie I publish my good meaning and earnest affection to so goode a Worke* And wherein their is defect in mee; I hope the purpose shall bee better inlarged by him, whose Pen is more than knowne to bee famous, the principall Actor in the businesse, and to whom I principallie dedicate this my treatise: and to bee seconded by the vertues of these the Noblemen, and these worthilie honoured Gentle-men, the Knights Baronets, Vnder-takers oft o faire designes: so that nowe I cease with my penne, but never with my Sword to doe them service for the advancement of so good a Worke.

FINIS.

