
AN EXPOSITION OR COMMENTARIE ON ECCLESIASTES.

CHAPTER I.


Verse 1.
The words of the PREACHER, the Sonne of DAVID, King in Ierusalem.

The Inscription. IN this Treatise of Solomon, two things are to be considered. First, the Title or Inscription, layd downe in this Verse. Secondly, the Substance, Subiect or Matter thereof, from Verse 2. to the end of the Booke.
The Words of the Preacher. The Author is not simply named, but described, I. By the person that hee taketh vpon him at this time, the Preacher, not the Politician* not handling matter of mans outward state, but of his spirituall state* teaching Mortification, or the abnegation of himselfe, and the carnall consideration and vsage of all things on the one side, and the subiection of himselfe, and all things with him

to God onely in feare, and obedience on the other side. This word Coheleth, translated the Preacher, is of the feminine gender, signifying properly an Assembly or Congregation; figuratiuely, a Function or Office in the Church: And it is translated of the Greekes. ECCLESIASTES, a Preacher, or one speaking in the Church: Or it may signifie (as here it doth) a person revnited or reconciled to the Church; and so^t is a note of a penitentiarie teaching others out of his owne experience of standing, falling, rising.
This reconciled Penitent, Church man, or Preacher, is notified by foure names in the Scripture, viz Solomon, that is, Peaceable, 1 Chron. 22. 9. Iedidiah, that is, Beloued of the Lord* 2 Sam. 12. 25 Lemuel, that is Him that appertayneth to God, Prou. 31. 1. Coheleth, in this place.
II. He is described by his relatiue, or parentage, Sonne of Dauid. An argument to moue attention, and more serious consideration of that which is spoken, and to procure beneuolence. Dauid of Dod, ami^us, dilectus.For Dauid his father feared God, and was beloued of God and the people, whereof hee tooke his name.
III. By his dignity, or office, King. An argument to moue docility, and awfull regard, drawne from the dignity and authority of the person, and duty of the hearers. His office is explicated by the obiect thereof, vnderstood in the next word, viz. the people of God in Ierusalem.
IIII. By the place of his habitation, in Ierusalem. Ierusalem, the Sacrarie, Chappell, or Treasure-house of wisedome, the Fountaine of wisedome, the onely place of Gods worship and speciall presence: And therefore a King excelling all other Kings of the earth, which are but meere worldly politicians, not sanctified, not guided by diuine wisedome, but ignorant of the glory of God, which is the end that Kings should onely ayme at.



Verse 2.
Vanitie of Vanities, saith the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is vanitie.

The Proposite. THe maine purpose of Solomon in this booke, is, to shew wherein the blessed estate, and happie condition of man

in this vale of miserie consisteth. Which seeing that it is not to be found in the world* I meane, out of the Church, the wise-men of the world are of so different, yea contrary opinions among themselues, and all aberre from the truth, because being in darkenesse, they neither know God nor themselues, neither what is good, nor what is ill for man in this vaine life. Againe, they lay downe this for a ground or principle, that there is a Summum bonum, or felicitie, by the wisedom, and endeauour of man to be found in the things of the world: But this ground being false, all their buildings must needes fall downe to the ground. But Solomon here by the speciall instruction and direction of the spirit of God, layeth downe such a felicity as the world by their wisedome, could not comprehend. The briefe summe whereof is this; Feare God, and keepe his Commandements, or in a word, faithfull The Theme or Question.obedience is the chiefe good. This is the Theme, or question, as appeares by the conclusion of all, Chapter 12. 13. Now the argument of confirmation is thus framed: Principall Syllogisme.

Prop.Either is the feare of God and obedience to his lawes the chiefe good, or else it is to be found in, and by the things of this world, which wee call the goods of the body, the goods of the minde, the goods of fortune, or outward goods.
Assum.But it is not to be found in and by these things.
Concl.Therefore is the feare of God, and obedience to his lawes, the chiefe good.

The Proposition is euident, the Assumption is to be proued. Prossyllogisme, i. A reason confirming the Principall.

Prop. If all be vanity most vaine, then there is no felicitie, or chiefe good to be found in the things of the world.
Assum. But all things are vanity most vaine:
Concl. Therefore, etc.

And so he proceedeth forward in the handling of this argument to the end of the booke, which hee concludeth, Chap. 12. 8. So that this verse is a Prossyllogisme, or reason added to the principall; in the handling whereof the whole body of this booke consisteth. Hebraismus.Vanitie of vanities. An hebrew phrase of speech. They expresse the comparatiue often by a preposition, and the superlatiue by doubling of the

same word, which noteth excellency or perfection. As if hee should say, all things are most vaine, or vanity it selfe. It is first amplified by a repetition, wherein the adiunct is put for the subiect, to signifie the certainty of this fundamentall truth, which is Epiz^uxis*figured as an ingemination, or redoubling of the same sound, more vehemently to moue the affections. Secondly confirmed by testimony, the dignity whereof dependeth on the office of the speaker. The Preacher faith it, therefore beleeue it. Aged men are to be heard with reuerence, Iob 32. 6. 7. I am young, and yee are very old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not shew you mine opinion. I said, dayes should speake, and the multitude of yeares should shew wisedome. Conuerts are to be greatly regarded, Acts 22. 19. 20. So Paul argueth. Surely they will receiue my testimony, for they know that I imprisoned, and beat in euery Synagogue them that beleeued on thee: And Preachers especially, Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lippes should preserue knowledge, and they should seeke the Law at his mouth. So Osee. 4. 4. Therefore is Solomon to be beleeued, being wise, aged, experienced. By vaine, is meant imperfect, vncertaine, transitory, voyd of contentation, full of griefe, fruitlesse, to no end, nothing. Briefely, both man and all things with man are naught, and come to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6. We speake wisedome among them that are perfect, yet not the wisedome of this world, nor the Princes of this world, that come to naught. What hath man than to glory in but in the Crosse of Christ, whereby he is dead to the world, and the world to him? as Paul saith. Man therefore, and whatsoeuer is within him, without him, about him, proceedeth from him, is most vaine, euen nothing, Phil 3. 8. till hee be a new creature, and all things renued with him, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Henceforth we know no man after the flesh, yea though we haue knowne Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, be is a new creature: old things are passed away, behold, all things are become new.




Verse 3.
What profit hath a man of all his labour which hee taketh vnder the Sunne?

Epilogisme, A Reason confirming the reason of a Reason. THe Epilogisme confirming the Prossyllogisme. All things are most vaine, because man can reape no profit, no contentation of minde, no quietnesse of heart of all the endeauours, cares, labours of body and minde, wherewith in vaine he wearieth himselfe all the dayes of his life. The argument is figured by a communication or question, to intimate the certaine and infallible truth thereof: For both the ignorant and the wise, euen euery man that commeth into the World, is wholly carried with an opinion of an earthly felicity; to the obtaining whereof, there is, as he iudgeth, an aptitude in man, and a possibility in the things of the World. The most learned and wisest placed it, some in diuine contemplation without the word of God, some in morall vertue onely, some in vertue and worldly prosperity together, some in riches, some in honour, some in one thing, some in another. And euery man feeling manifold miseries, troubles, and wants, wherewith he is compassed and filled, doth imagine to himselfe a possibility of deliuery and freedome on the one side, and an happy enioying of the contrary good on the other side. Ah that I were freed once from this, or that; if I had but this, or that; I could doe this, or that; I would euen desire no more; I should thinke my selfe happy, etc. doth euery man imagine. Hereupon hee beginneth to buckle himselfe to his worke, to gather his wits together, to bestirre his stumps, and either rusheth violently forward, as the Horse rusheth into the battaile; or else he proceedeth warily, wisely, fundamentally, as they that spend all in searching out the Philosophers stone, but neuer finde it. Of those Zophar, one of Iobs kinsmen saith; Iob 11. 12. Vaine man would be wise, though man be borne like a wild Asses Colt. The reasons of this vaine proiect, are
First, because man cannot looke beyond the world; he is confined within the limits of the Spheres, hee is in bondage vnder the curse; his phronema, mens, or purest wisedome, is

nothing else but lust, or brutality. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. All that is in this world, as the lust of the flesh* the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life* is not of the Father, but of the world* But man knoweth not this his misery, and how than shall hee know the right way to be rid out of it? So than euery natural man is a foole. Rom. 1. 22. A beast; Ier. 10. 14. A wild Asses colt; Iob 11. 12.
Secondly, being but a foole, a beast, a wild Asse, hee looketh on the glory, the riches, and the beauty of the world, and iudgeth according to the outward appearance thereof, neither considering the vanity that is in himselfe, nor that which is in the creatures: For Sathan taketh away his heart, and bewitcheth him with the pleasant shewes of that which is not. So he set the World before the eyes of Christ, in a glorious shew or vision, to rauish him with the loue thereof: So he set before the eyes of our first Parents a better and happier state, than that wherein God had placed them. Thus he doth with euery man; 2 Cor. 4. 4. He is the God of this world, blinding the eyes of men with the shew of a worldly glory and felicity, that the true glory and felicity of the Gospell might not appeare to them, but rather seeme ignominious, base, and contemptible: That he ex^olleth, and preferreth, this he debaseth, and suppresseth by all meanes, as we see how he worketh in and by his instruments, worldly minded men. The like to this we see in the flickering painted Harlot, who by her subtle shewes, lookes, gestures, glaunces, rauisheth the young man hee knoweth not with what vehement fancies. Amor tollit de cardine mentem. He looketh at her, he longeth after her, he dreameth on her, shee is as an Angell in his fancie; the full possession of her is his felicity: But when hee findeth by experience that this felicity is nothing but the stocks, poxe, and gallowes, shee is now a loathsome carrion, and as a scab'd vlcerous iade, and a limme of the Diuell to company with.
Whence commeth this delusion? First, it ariseth out of mans owne vaine heart, and is cherished by Satans fotures. The sicke and weakly, thinketh the strong and healthfull happy. The deformed, admireth the beautifull. The poore

blesseth the rich. The ignorant and base, admire the honourable, and men of authority and power. The pleasant seate, sumptuous buildings, gorgeous apparrell, delicious fare, proud attendance, variable delights and pleasures of the rich, rauish the minde of him that lacketh these. He lookes on these, and pineth, iudging according to the outward appearance. Sed latet anguis in herba. Hee considereth not the vanity, and sorrow of this splendide misery, this beautifull Harlot. It is like a beautifull picture drawne with white and red colours in sackcloth, which afarre off is very louely, but neere by it is like the filthy matter of a sore or wound, purulent rottennesse, or the backe of a galled Horse. No man euer yet found any constant contentation in any state: yet may his outward appearance deceiue others, and anothers him.
Secondly, therefore this delusion ariseth from the vaineglorie and pompe of the world, deceiuing, and being deceiued. It is the common corruption of man to pride, to boast, to set forth himselfe, to blesse himselfe, as Iob saith; to colour and couer his vanitie from others, to draw them into admiration of him, and to be admired of others is his ioy and delight: For their false testimony of his happinesse mitigateth, rather blindeth the sight of his vanitie, or miseries from himselfe, (for of those doth euery carnall man desire to be insensible, that he may more freely reioyce, and solace himselfe in the flesh.) Who is the happy man? saith Craesus to Solon. Euery one flattered him, and if this Philosopher had done the like, he would euen haue runne madde, and rusht, as Alexander did, out of mankinde into the ranke of the gods. To what purpose did Ezechiah shew all the treasures of his Kingdome to the Embassadours of the King of Babel? Esay 39. 2. And what one man almost in the world hauing friends come to his house, doth not the like? See an example hereof in Haman, Hest. 5. 10. 11, 12. Wee would all seeme to haue this imagined worldly happinesse, faine would we blesse our selues, and be admired of others: But we are but proud bankerupts, gentlemen to day, festiuall and gorgeous, and to morrow beggars, and cast into prison. All is

but the crackling of thornes vnder a pot, a great flame, a loud noyse, light ashes, follie, vanitie, nothing. To conclude, euery naturall man imagineth that profit, yea, jithron, durable profit, is to be found and wrought out by wit and labour in the world. There is a felicity to be had, and all mens study is to find out the right way to attaine it: He thinketh his game to be good, if hee can but rightly play his cards. If but one poore tradesman hath gotten goods together, and through the increase of a small stocke, hath at length made a great purchase, and left it to his heire, who still increaseth it, and putteth his sonne to the Innes of Court, etc. whereby he becommeth a gentleman, and so forward, than are all beggars in hope. This one example serueth to cut off all despaire, and impossibility; yea, prouoketh a thought of the like proiect, that lyeth dead in the bottome of the braine. But if the world beginne to runne a little on the beggars side, his hope is presently kindled, thought ariseth after thought, and calleth vp this dead proiect, his bloud riseth, his pulses begin to beate, as he that hath found a purse full of gold, he stirres about, his heart panteth, his minde is in the top of the world, why may he not be a Tamerlane? But of Gods Kingdome and glorie there is no thought at all in him. Doth any man doubt of this that I say? Why doe men so study, and breake their braines night and day for preferment? Why do they so weary themselues with heaping vp riches? Why doe they so climbe to honors? And why doe they euen sell their soules and bodies to the Diuell, to obtaine worldly prerogatiues, if there were no profit, no contentation, no felicity in them? Surely they doe not thinke that they are filling a bottomelesse tub, but fore-cast great profit, pleasure, and contentment of minde to arise of their labours hereafter; which thing the rich man, Luke 12. vainely boasted of. Psal. 49. 11. Their inward thought is, (the vaine imagination of euery carnall heart) that their houses shall continue for euer, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands after their own names. Euery man knowes that he shall die, yet hee laboureth and striueth, and putteth off from day to day, as though hee should liue for euer. The Diuell so bewitcheth him, yea, stealeth

away his heart, that hee knoweth, and neuer thinketh what he knoweth; he beleeueth, and doubteth: Therefore saith Dauid, Lord teach me to number my dayes, that I may applie my heart to wisedome. The manifold glaunces, ejaculations, and fancies that lust suggesteth, and Sathan ingesteth into the minde of man, are strange and wonderfull: But it is more strange, that contrary to the truth, which he heareth, seeth, knoweth, they should carry him away, at least make him a mindlesse, dreaming, vnprofitable wanderer, like a feather in the winde, without all resolution. The case is common: A foole hath alwayes a knaue attending on him; hee heareth his friend truely counselling, and carefully admonishing, he knoweth him to be without deceit; yet the knaue whom he suspecteth and feareth, carrieth him away. A foole is bound to his lust, the diuell and the knaue worke vpon the lust, which hee calleth humouring, and so catch the foole.



Verse 4.
One generation passeth away, and another generation commeth: but the earth abideth for euer.

THe vnprofitablenesse of all the studies, endeauours and labours of man, whereby he enquireth and searcheth, deuiseth and plotteth continually to finde out a felicity or happy rest, is argued by the instable, transitorie, variable, vncertaine condition, and circular course, both of mankinde and of the world, with all the creatures, their effects and euents. The World with all his creatures is Gods engine, for his owne vse, created in perfection of beauty, wherein God shewed forth his incomprehensible wisedome and goodnesse to the view of Angels and men: But through the disobedience of man, for whose seruice, vnder God, all things were made, the curse was layd vpon him, as a iust iudgement, and vpon all creatures with him. For in that it is said, Thou shalt surely dye, Gen. 2. 17. There is the curse or corruption of the Soule: And where it is said, Cursed be the earth for thy sake, Genes. 3. 17. Here is the corruption of the whole

engine, with all the creatures. Now this curse or corruption* is want of created vigour and strength, ataxie, and anomie, disorder, iniquitie, confusion, and in one word, Vanitie: So that all this vniuerse is a masse of vanitie, mortalitie. And who can bring a cleane thing out of filthinesse? saith Iob. Who can worke felicitie out of miserie? blessednesse out of cursednesse? profit out of losse? constancie out of instabilitie? strength out of weakenesse? ioy out of sorrowe? soundnesse out of corruption and rottennesse? life out of death? This thing all men striue to doe, because they neither know the vanitie that is in themselues, nor that which is in the creatures. But they doe nothing else but heape vanitie vpon vanitie, as hee that struggleth in the mire, and medleth with pitch.
One generation passeth away, etc. The words are a Prosepilogisme, or reason confirming the former, dr^wne from the fleeting and corruptible state of man, and all worldly things, according to Solomons common obseruation of all things in the world. The reason may be framed thus:

Propos. If both man and all things with man be inconstant, transitorie, vncertaine, mutable, corruptible, then are all mens studies and labours vnprofitable and fruitlesse, yeelding no sound contentation, or quiet.
Assump. But both man, and all things with man are of this condition.
Conclus. Therefore there remaynes nothing, no contentation, no sound or durable good wherein to rest, to man of all his labours.

The Proposition is manifest. The Assumption is confirmed by an Induction grounded on obseruation, which is a reason by many particulars proouing and concluding an vniuersall, against which there cannot any one particular be obiected. This induction is of all superiour and inferiour parts of the world, to wit, of Man, the centre of the world, Verse 4. and of the circumference, to wit, of the Sunne, Moone, Starres, Heauens, verse 5. of the windes, verse 6. of riuers, verse 7. Nec in caeteris contrarium est videre, and of all things, verse 8. both simples and compounds, vniuersall causes, and their effects.
One generation passeth, etc. The first particular. Not onely particular men doe vanish away through some extraordinary diseases, or outward casualties, and their states also, but euen whole generations successiuely, yea the most healthfull, strong, and sound are dissolued againe into their dust, and so is the most firmely setled state dispersed and brought to nothing by an vnchangeable decree. All things were created of the earth, and to the earth they returne againe.
But the earth abideth for euer. The vanitie of mankinde is illustrated by a comparison of the vnlike. Man vanisheth away suddenly as, a flower in the spring, but the earth, more vile than man, lasteth euer. The earth is as it were a Stage, whereon euery man in his generation acteth his part, and afterward departeth with all his pompe and crackle neuer to be seene againe, nor remembred any more. Abideth euer, that is to say, in comparison of the perishing generations of all things, which rise and fall, ebbe and flow continually. Otherwise it selfe also shall melt with feruent heat, and be purged with fire. By euer, is meant till the end of all things: Earth is put for all the elements by the figure Synecdoche, and for the heauens also. The whole engine shall be changed, Psal. 102. 25. 26. 2 Pet. 3. 10. Therefore man hath no profit of all his labour, the fruit of all his contentious endeauours is a meere nothing. For by reason of this inconstancie, and fluxibility of himselfe, and all things, he doth but lay his foundation on the floods. He vanisheth away in his studies, and perisheth in his labours, as a Snayle. His life is but a continuall dying or passage to death, and his workes are like himselfe. When we looke vpon the earth, let vs remember our birth and buriall. Our bodies, names and workes shall be all alike, euen as the dust blowne into the sea with the winde, and as the smoake vanished in the ayre. Finally, we are more vile than the earth, for it is permanent, but we are most fraile, and neuer abide in one stay, but hasten like a Post-man to our end.




Verse 5.
The Sunne also ariseth, and the Sunne goeth downe, and hasteth to the place where he arose.

THe second particular. As the generations of man* for whom all other things were made, are not durable, neyther are the things of man, his counsels, and acts durable, but new generations differing from the former succeede: so likewise the Heauens, the Sunne and other Starres are restlesse in their motions, and changeable in their courses; so that when we looke vpon the Sunne, or but open our eyes to behold the light, we may cleerely see the Sunne acting before our eyes, as it were on the stage of the firmament, the vnstedfast condition and perishing state of man, hauing his circular motion, after the similitude of the heauens, yea, and also caused by the heauens, which are second causes or vniuersall instruments of God for the foture of all things, both elements and elementarie bodies, and in that respect may well be called the basis or firmament of the world. But contrarily by accident, that is, by reason of corruptibilitie, weaknesse, want of vigour in the creature, and in man aboue the rest, which is the effect of the curse denounced, Gen. 3. they are the consumers, and destroyers of all things. For as the Sunne is the generall instrument, or most remote cause of generation and preseruation, (Sol et homo generat hominem, saith Aristotle,) so by accident it corrupteth, and destroyeth all things, and that both by his diurnall and annuall reuolution, to wit, from East to West, from South to North, causing Day and Night, Summer and Winter, with other seasons of the day and yeare.
To conclude: The life of man as concerning his bodily state, is a continuall passage from the wombe whence it issueth, to the graue into which it falleth, as the Sunne seemeth to rise out of the earth, and to descend into the earth; and man in his issue or progenie may be said to returne circularly againe, with the Sunne, out of the earth, out of the wombe into the horizon, into the world. Againe, concerning his outward state, he hath his ascending, and descending,

birth, and buriall with the Sunne. For there is no constancie of any state, or kindred, though one continue longer than another, as the Oake out-liueth the Ashe, and the Ashe the Willow, yet all dye, and vanish in their time: For the Lord raiseth vp the poore out of the dust, and the needy out of the dunghill, that hee may set him with Princes, Psal. 113. Againe. Psal. 107. 40. He poureth contempt vpon Princes, and causeth them to wander in the wildernesse, where there is no way, 1 Sam. 2. 7. He maketh poore, and maketh rich, hee bringeth lowe, and lifteth vp. So that with the Sunne there is a double motion of mankinde; one of life, which is diurnall, and another of state, which is annuall, I meane, the house, or kingdome of longest continuance. Lastly, in this certaine and stedfast motion there is nothing but vncertaintie, and vnstedfastnesse, therefore no felicitie but vanitie.



Verse 6.
The winde goeth toward the South, and turneth about vnto the North; it whirleth about continually, and the winde returneth againe according to his circuits.

THe third particular. As the Sunne is wheeled about with restlesse motion, so are the windes also whirled about according to their manifold circuits. The former wee see, this we heare, and feele, which teach vs to see, heare, and feele our vanity, vnlesse we be sencelesse. The wind is a neerer instructer, beating on our faces, and sounding in our eares, yea, piercing into our eares and heads, to awake our dull spirits, to cause vs remember what we are, what our workes are, and what our end, and their end is. So that vnlesse we be in a dead sleepe, drunke with sencelesse carnality, we cannot but remember the brittlenesse of our bodies, the incertainty of our liues, the instability of our states, and all things with vs running in their circuits; as the windy exhalations ascending out of the earth to the region of the cloudes, are from thence flung backe by contrary and discordant qualities, and so run circularly in the aire from South to North, or from what places soeuer they arise, towards the same places againe. Vaine therefore are earthly wise men,

that thinke their houses shall continue for euer, and call their lands by their owne names, as Dauid saith. But why doe they so labour in the winde? Because a brutish man knoweth not, neither doth a foole vnderstand that God hath subdued all things to mutability, and vanity, that in him onely wee might seeke for durable riches, and the true and euerlasting felicity.



Verse 7.
All the Riuers runne into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full: vnto the place from whence the Riuers come, thither they returne againe.

THe fourth particular. Not onely the winds arise, make a noyse for a little season, and then die, after which others arise againe in like sort; but the waters also are circularly carried, by perpetuall ingresse and regresse, into the seate, and from the seate of waters, the Sea. As the Sea is the receptacle of fresh waters, so doe her salt waters re*passe through the veines, and conduit pipes of the earth, strained and qualified by diuers Mines, and tempers of mould of magneticall nature, which appeareth in this, that the Sea is not filled. For the earth thirsteth for moisture, and attracteth from the Sea, as the hand, fingers, toes, and all members doe blood from the liuer, by many net-like veines ramified all ouer, which breake through the breasts of porose and rocky hilles, through clefts of quarries, and so runne downe into the Sea, from whence they came: Whereof arose that speech, He that knoweth not the way to the Sea, let him seeke for a Riuer to be his guide. As it is no maruell that the bloud should ascend out of the liuer to the higher parts of the body; no more wonder is it, that the waters should spring out of the high mountaines, as milke doth out of womens breasts, seeing that the earth, nay, whole nature is magneticall, or alchymisticall. Wee maruell not that bloud and milke should be sweete, though we eate salt meats, and as little cause haue we to maruell at the other. The Fishes of the Sea are fresh, not salt; for the Sea is their element, as the earth is to her creatures: And when a creature beginneth to resemble his element,

it is a token of dissolution, as when blew* greene, yellow colours, etc. beginne to appeare in the flesh, which we call earthly, and dead colours. So springs and torrents are the fruits of the Sea, or rather the Sea is the aliment of the earths body, which conuerteth her salt waters into milke, for the nourishing of all that spring out of her wombe. Or, whether it be, as Aristotle thinketh, that the waters are conuerted into liquid, or rorid ayre, which is suckt in of the earth, by her magneticall thirst, and congealed into many dispersed small droppes, as moisture attracted through the porose and supple bladder becommeth a torrent of vrine: which vapours gathering together in the veines of the earth, for that purpose ordained of God, breake forth of the hilles. But according to the former doctrine, these drops are rather euaporated and sweat out from those veines, to sustaine and moisten the rootes of vegetables in the vpper parts of the earth. As for the attraction of liquid ayre, dewes, and raines, the earth hath her Systolen, and Diastolen, her dilatation and constriction, which wee call the breath in liuing creatures, shee continually draweth in, and sendeth out. Liuing creatures also are not onely fedde by the roote of the stomach, but by the ayre drawne in, and sent forth by the breath, which is temperature of the hearts heate, nutritiue of the animall and vitall spirits. and purgatiue of vnnaturall vapours. As the humours haue their purgatiue passages, so haue the spirits. The eare is a purgatiue vessell, as well as the instrument of hearing; and so of the other senses. To conclude, which way soeuer this passage of Riuers is, they returne from whence they came; and such a circular motion is there of man, and all humane things: Therefore in this world there is no firme ground for man to build vpon; But the securest man, and the surest state shall be dissolued, dispersed, and brought to naught: Wherefore let euery wise man build vpon the Rocke Iesus Christ, and his worke shall remaine for euer.




Verse 8.
All things are full of labour, man cannot vtter it: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with hearing.

A Generall conclusion of all the particulars. As the generations of men, the heauens, the windes, the waters, are restlesse; so are all things in their kindes inconstant, transitory, fleeting. They trauaile in paine with man, they groane vnder the burden of corruption with him; and their disorder, enmity, infirmity, misery, corruption, vanity, sheweth forth to man that he is euen such like; yea, his condition is worse then theirs: For whatsoeuer is within man, is without him; and whatsoeuer is without him, is within him. So that wheresoeuer he turneth his eyes, he may behold his vanity. The plasme, or vessell of mans soule, is his brutall nature, which we call the body, which is the centre of the world, or vnion of the whole, or an vniuersall nature, wherein all particulars are vnited. For doe we not see how euery creature is the Chaos to his seede, as the matter whence it first ariseth and issueth, and the seede againe is the Chaos of the creature that ariseth, and issueth thereout, whose members, as Dauid saith, are fashioned day by day, when as yet there was none of them? Psal. 139. 16. Therefore of man there is a twofold Anatomy, one of his body into members, another of his bodily nature into cosmicall parts or natures, whereof he is termed the little world. As man hath a similitude, and proportion of members with all liuing creatures, so hath he also of their natures, and is an vnion or mixture of their natures. So that man is the text, and euery word in this text hath his Glosse, or Common-Place, to wit, some creature to explicate and manifest it. He that would know the worke of the Spirit in the simples, the heauens and elements, might know it in the compounds, and how one compound is of like, or vnlike conditure* affected, and disaffected to another, kinde vnto kinde, and kindes among themselues. All things in their creation were placed in subordinate order, both in themselues, and in respect of others; but by the curse was that dissolued, and contrary ataxie, or disorder, and confusion brought vpon

them. To proceede, the creatures of one element haue the proportion, and similitude of the creatures of another element, and is the same as neere as the matter, and condition of the element will affoord. And euery element hath his degrees of creatures, whereof one commeth neerer to mans nature, than another; and one is more particular and vniuersall than another: but all are full of enmity, impotency, misery, vanity. Therefore in the creatures a man may behold his condition, his qualities, his shame, his brutishnesse, his misery, his vanity. For being the most compound, and vniuersall nature, he is subiect to most corruptions, infirmities, diseases, paines, aches, yea, to all the vanities, and miseries of all the creatures, but yet according to the manner of his vnion or mixture, whereby he is indiuiduated, and differenced from all. Hence it is that naturall men in the Scriptures are compared to beasts. For this brutality is mans nakednesse; Gen. 3. 7. shewing forth it selfe most in those parts. When a man keepeth himselfe in his spirit, his nakednesse is couered; when he breaketh forth into passions, yeelding to his brutall plasme, id est, vessell or body, his shame is discouered: but when his spirit seeketh to satisfie it in the lusts thereof, as Epicures doe, he is a very beast, and worse than a beast. For a beast is but his plasme, his vessell is himselfe, but man hath a spirit to gouerne his vessell, to couer his shame, of which he is termed a man. But mans naturall spirit is false, a dissembler,
an ignorant, impotent, vaine. It couereth shame indeed, but with a net, nay, with a menstrous cloth. For as he cannot abide to be likened to a beast, so he striueth to make himselfe glorious, and by dignifying his person, and beautifying his body, and by disguising and masking his bestiality, to beget and maintaine in the minds of men a reuerend and diuine estimation of him. This is indeede necessary for all men to doe, as the light of nature teacheth, and for Princes and Gouernours especially; yet cannot the Blackmoore change his skinne, nor the Leopard his spots. Yea, in seeking to couer shame, he most of all layeth it open, (not knowing so much) as our apparell now adayes, and the putting on thereof doth testifie; and in seeking to auoide brutality, and to

be as a God in the eyes and mindes of men, hee most of a l runneth into brutalitie, and becommeth a Leuiathan, Behemoth, the most beastlie of all men. It is the spirit of God that renueth, not couering, but taking away shame, not disguising, masking, and colouring, but transforming. Christ was not naked, nor ashamed: In him are we built vp new againe, our leprosie cleansed, and the workes of the Deuill are dissolued; He that is in him, neede not be ashamed of any thing, though the world count it shame to be in him, Rom. 1. 16. Shamelesse carnals know not their shame, namely, that their glorie and boasting is bruitishnesse, and deuillishnesse.
All things are full of labour. By things, hee meaneth, 1. All Creatures. 2. All Actions and humaine affaires, whereby hee striueth for this imaginary happinesse, like a foole, a madde man, a wilde Asses colt. By Labour, he meaneth the sphericall motion, the instability of things rising, decaying fading, fainting, falling, fraile, and impotent; vncertaine, and corruptible, inordinate, and full of enuy, one against another, and all against man; and those that are in some sort obedient and seruiceable to man, are full of crossenes, auknes, and vncertainty, and so are men among themselues, in all their courses and actions. As there is no bond of loue, so there can be no coordination or co-working of things together for mans good, nor of men among themselues for their owne good. All is rents, ragges, and distractions: Euery thing is for it selfe, and euery man is for himselfe, as a ragge or peece rent out of a garment, or limbe cut off, imagining a felicitie to himselfe, but by this meanes running into Gods curse, and mans hatred. Euery man striueth to make a concurrence, or to bring in a confluence of all things, qu^ potest, to the extent of his power, yea, to turne the world about to his priuate intended proiect of happie contentation, with remouing all obstacles out of his way: But it is too heauy a masse for the wilde Asse, too difficult a matter for the ouer-reaching foole, that by violence, and subtiltie striueth to rush or steale into Paradise againe. But against euery hill there is a dale, God hath set aduersitie ouer-against prosperitie, euery thing is crosse, and peruerse, and runneth out into

extremities, quite out of created harmonie, and concord. There can no happie contentation be at all obtained indeed, but by their reconciliation, soliditie and constancie. But that can neuer be in state of corruption, all things are so vnconstant, crosse, and fraile, yea, so rotten, like an old house, or corrupt body, that one part being repaired, another falleth downe, and one soare being cured, two breake out in another place. Hee therefore that laboureth to make this apt concurrence of things to obtaine his imagined happinesse, doth but goe about to gather together wilde beasts of all sorts, that runne out on euery side, and being with infinite labour gotten together, will deuoure one another, or else all set vpon him; and to bring many men together to effect a worke, that are at variance among themselues, and all opposite to him.
Concerning humaine affaires, they are full of alterations and changes. Common-wealths, priuate states, publike businesses, domesticall workes, and actions, are full of inconstancie, vncertaintie, crossenesse, trouble and griefe. Such crossenesse is there in euery thing, so manifold euents contrarie to mans intendments, that the best gamester hath commonly the worst lucke: And euen those things, whereof mans wisedome and prouidence seeme to haue most power and command, doe fluctuate vpon vncertaine issues, in so much that he is altogether vncertaine, whether his intents shall succeede at all, and how, and whether they shall turne to his benefit, or hinderance, to the raising vp of himselfe, or ouerthrow of himselfe, and that which to day hee hath resolutely determined, is to morrow through vnknowne occurences changed and quite disanulled. To conclude: Of all these vanities, there is a constant reuolution.
Man cannot vtter it. An illustration by a comparison of the Lesse. The reuolution, instabilitie, vncertaintie, and vanitie of man in himselfe, in his estate, in all his wayes, and imaginations, and also of the creatures with him, is more than man by word or writing is able to expresse. How vncertaine, and vnknowne are the ordinances of Heauen? And who hath set the dominion thereof in the earth? Iob

38. 33. Who can foretell the seasons of the yeare by the variable configurations of the starres? Yet hath God set them for times, and seasons. And one vnseasonable Summer, or Winter, Seed time or haruest, turneth all mens states vpside downe, inriching one, and impouerishing another. Now the seede rotteth with too much moisture; than both grasse and graine is scorched with heat, and how slipperie is monie, and cattle vncertaine? Man and his estate therefore standing vpon such foundations is altogether instable, and vncertaine. And how sure a foundation is that of the windes and the waters? Yet the Marriner must apply and commit himselfe to them, he must obey them. Whether he shall returne home againe he knoweth not, nor when, nor which way, whether poore or rich. And whether the Sea, or Land be the safer habitation hee cannot determine. As the water swalloweth vp, so the fire deuoureth, danger is euery where. The continent is inconstant, as the waters. For the earth is full of darkenesse, and cruell habitations. All the foundations of the earth are out of course. High-wayes, bye-wayes, and hedges are full of robbers, wilde beasts, and serpents. A man is safe no where: One lyeth in waite for his tongue, another for his purse, another for his body. Againe, things profitable, and good in their kinde sometimes afford no profit to the owner, and sometimes hurt. Contrarily, things of least account, and that are as it were made for euill, doe a man the most good. What is good, what ill for a man, by all his wisedome he cannot certainly know, no not for a moment, and blinde hope is doubtfull and fearefull. Whence then is ioy and full contentation? How long could it last if a man had it? The heathen shewed forth this instabilitie and vncertaintie of mans estate, in their card-play, and dice-play. For these playes are nothing but a sportfull imitation of Gods prouidence, vnder the names of chaunce and fortune, with a wise disposing of those chances for the most good, and least losse, that fortune dealeth. The best play, so the best course, hath oft times the worst euent, and contrarily. So chancefull, changeable, and vncertaine are all worldly things.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the eare filled with hearing. The former comparise figured by a gradation. Man can neither vtter by voyce, nor by his owne obseruation perceiue, nor by relation of others attaine to the depth of Gods wisedome in his workes, nor yet of the corruption that is in them. Although the wisest, and most exercised in the contemplation of the creatures, and humane affaires striue neuer so much to satisfie his curiositie in searching out the vnknowne paths of God in all things, yet can he neuer finde it out, nor comprehend in minde the firme foundation of God in such infinite contingencies, casualties, inconstancies, appearances, disparences, courses, and recourses of all things: Yea, the counsels of God are so deepe, and his waies past finding out, that man imagineth that there is no knowledge, nor gouernement at all, or that he swayeth great matters onely, which maketh him so trust to his owne wisedome and prouidence, and thereby to worke out this happinesse conceiued in his vaine minde. Moreouer, the frailety of all creatures in themselues, and mischieuous dispositions one against another, and all against man, are infinite. Euery thing is but a Lyon in the grate, their obedience is outward
compulsion, not inward affection, as in their creation. But the frailty of mans body, instabilitie of his estate, the malice of his heart, the wickednesse of his actions against God and man, are wonderfull, his inuentions are innumerable. The wicked subtilties of a woman in insnaring the foolish, and the madnesse of fooles is endlesse, Salomon saith that hee could not comprehend it, Chapter 7. God onely is able to deliuer a man. The miseries, troubles, disquietnesse, vexations of man, in the best common-wealth, are manifold and great. Euery one is suspitious, and afraid of other, the hearts of men are so deceitfull, their simulations, and dissimulations so many, and their dispositions so variable. All things are carried by extremity, neither doth reason rule, nor good affection moue. And this is a common deceit in euery one, in euery matter to make an alledgement, and shew of reason, and good will, when it is nothing but the awe of the Magistrate, or some other compulsion, or that one may make

vse of another for the time. In which case euery one loueth himselfe, but neuer one another. Mischiefe, enuy, and destruction is in the heart of euery one naturally. And a politicke regiment is a grate for wilde beasts, euery one hauing an habitation by himselfe, and Lawes are iron chaynes for madde men: If the chaynes were broken, and the grate broken vp, we should be as wilde beasts in a forrest. How many headie beasts are there, craftie Foxes, subtle Serpents, that by monie, fauour, and all deuices seeke to wrest, and cracke these chaynes? How many violent and moody beasts, rushing against the sides of the grate, making the house to shake in the parts, and sometimes in the whole, euer waiting, watching, wishing, trying now and then to breake all open? This is the qualitie of euery wilde thing in hold. Surely if a man looke into the spirits of men, in their dealings and dissemblings, hee shall not onely see a forrest of beasts and serpents, but an hell of wickednesse and miseries. All is selfeloue and hatred: hence commeth such feare and snatching; For otherwise men would not so much care in whose possession the goods of the world were, seeing the reasonable, wise, liberall, louing, and right dispensation thereof according to the law of nature, and of Christ. Thus it was for a little while, Acts 4. 34. 35. but that festiuall day lasted not long, nay rather it lasteth still among the faithfull, to the worlds end. But that is another argument. Here wee speake of the condition of the darke and euill world, and the imaginarie deceitfull good thereof without Christ.
To conclude: Hee that looketh on the frailty of man, and all the creatures with him, the interchangeable course of all things and states, and considereth the depth of causes, and reason of things, shall be forced to seeke for felicitie, durable rest, or happy contentment, somewhere else than in the confused, disordered, transitory World: For all is vanitie, nothing, to none end, like the actions of a foole, and talke of a man in his dreame. This secret God reuealeth to his secret ones: As for the men of the world, they will be wise, great, glorious, and doe great matters; they heare, they see, they listen, they study, and striue, imagining that by a further

and deeper reach they shall finde good: For they are wilde asses colts. As the Spartanes indigitating or deifying Alexander, at his command, contrary to their owne liking, wrote; Because Alexander will be a god, let him be a god: So I write; Because these will be wise, will be great, will be glorious, will be what they will be; then let them be so. But Alexander dyed like a man, in the flower of his age: euen so there is more hope of a foole, than of one of these wise (mad) ones. To conclude: As the soule of man working especially by the organs of eye and eare, cannot finde perfect contentation in things and times absent; neither euer shall it doe in time to come, for all things past, and to come are the same in their kindes, as the seasons of the yeere are the same for euer: So that there is no possibility that the soule should be satisfied and filled with good in worldly things, through the ministery of the chiefest senses, but rather with irkesomnesse, wearinesse and loathsomnesse.



Verse 9.
The thing that hath beene, it is that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing vnder the Sunne.

AN amplification of the Argument, or former Induction, figured by a Prolepsis, or preuention of an Obiection secretly framed in the foolish heart, which is a wild, roauing, groundlesse imagination, or euill suggestion of a possibilitie to obtaine a durable felicitie, or happy rest, in a full, firme and solid state. It is mans ignorance and presumption to striue for that, which neuer any yet had, and to doe that which neuer was done before: Hee is all for nouelties and wonders. To be the onely one is euery mans desire, and to this point doe all his soaring thoughts aspire: Euery man will needs try his wit and strength in finding out the means to this worldly blisse, that none euer yet felt himselfe entirely to enioy: Such courses hee deuiseth to take, so farre to trauaile, such curious inuentions to finde out, as neuer yet any did. Euery man in his kinde and wayes striueth, as it were, to finde out the stone that shall turne iron into gold, till all

his wit and siluer be spent, and at the last hee bringeth forth winde: It was but the crackling of thornes vnder a pot. Parturiunt montes, exit ridiculus Mus. With these mountanous imaginations and windie thoughts Solomon here meeteth.
The thing that hath beene, is that which shall be, etc. Both the things that haue beene, and the deedes that haue beene done, are euen the same that now are, and are done, and so shall be hereafter. And there is no new thing vnder the Sunne. An amplification by the contrary denyed, to take away doubting, and to inculcate the certaine truth thereof. Vnder the Sunne. That is, worldly or humaine things, or deeds. There is a circular reuolution of all things, counsels, deeds, euents, as well as of the spheres of heauen, windes and riuers. There is a rising, falling, ascending, descending, appearance, disparence of all things. Let the profoundest speculatist, or curious practitioner, turne the edge of his wit which way he will to finde out some new thing, the like whereof was neuer yet knowne, nor heard, yet sure it is, the same things haue beene, and the same deedes were done of old, and they are nothing but the circular reuolutions of the former. The heart of man is the same that it hath beene of old, and produceth such effects good or euill; it cannot alter it owne kinde, but is wheeled about in it owne sphere. Some haue sought for a felicity in the studies of Wisdome; some in riches and sensuall pleasures; some in Honour, pompe and magnificence: but no man euer yet found contentment in his present estate, without mixture of griefe, griefe accompanying it, or sorrow following him hard at heeles. Many haue thought, and thinke others happy, but none euer yet found himselfe happy. Suos quisque patimur manes. If none euer yet reaped profit of his endeauours and labours, neither then shall euer any doe it now, or hereafter. Euery man complayneth of the present state of the world, and saith, it was neuer so bad, but it is not worse, nor yet better then it hath beene, neither shall it be otherwise. The same complaints and discontent hath beene, and shall be, in all generations. If a man liue neuer so long, hee shall neither see nor heare other things then heretofore haue beene, neither is it in his

power to alter or mend any thing; for the world is nothing but an alteration of alterations in it selfe. A man hath no more command of it, than the Sea men hath of the windes. Some violent and hautie spirits haue striuen forcibly for the full fruition of an earthly happinesse, but hauing obtained their desires, that seemed so beautifull a farre off* they found themselues no whit the better, but rather worse, yea, nearest to miserie, whereof they thought to rid themselues for euer. Therefore it is better to sit still, than to rise and fall; to liue in obscuritie, than to be a publique spectacle of follie, as the most subtile and violent workers of old haue beene, and so shall they be still. Euery man hath great hopes, as of old, neither can he be disswaded from this vanity, till old age bring him to see, by long experience, this reuolution of all things, and then beginnes he to dispaire and to be weary. He is full of teastinesse, anger, and impatience when he seeth nothing but vanitie, follie and madnesse in men.
It may be obiected. If there be such a constant reuolution of all things, then there is a certaine knowledge of all things to be had, and a fore-knowledge of things to come, which a man may attaine to, and so obtaine contentation of minde in the speculation of diuine wisedome, in the frame and gouernement of the world, and in this sort to be vnited vnto God by communication of his secret counsell, is a felicitie. I answere, the particular or indiuiduall things, and actions, with their proper circumstances, are now, and neuer were before, nor shall be againe, but the things and actions in their kinde, and nature, and intent, are the same that were of old. They are the same in substance, but differenced by circumstances, or indiuiduall properties, and so is generation from generation, Father from Sonne, Man from Man, Summer from Summer, Winter from Winter, Yeare from Yeare, Day from Day: For that figure, face, or rather countenance of the heauens which is to day, shall neuer be againe, or, the essence of all things in their kindes is the same, but their existences, whereby a thing of the same kinde is this, and not that, are without number: And in this respect may a man say that there are infinite worlds.

Man cannot vtter it, nor conceiue it in minde, as was said before.



Verse 10.
Is there any thing, whereof it may be said, See, this is new? It hath beene already of old time, which was before vs.

A Confirmation of the answere. There was neuer yet any man that could say, this thing, or action in the substance, nature, kinde, or intent thereof is new. Such a thing was neuer thought, said, nor done, plotted nor effected. This proposition is figured by a communication, to signifie the certaine truth thereof. The argument is drawne from all the Specialls denyed to deny the Generall. The argument may be framed thus.

Prop. If there neither be nor shall be any one thing new, which hath not beene of old, then all things that now are, and shall be, haue beene of old.
Assum. But the antecedent, or former part is true:
Concl. Therefore the Consequent or latter part is true also.

For if we shall recount from the creation till this present day, and consider all the Saints, and Sinners, with their words and workes, the manner of their liuing, and behauiour in all things, both towards God and man, mentioned in the Scriptures, wee shall see none other things then wee now see, and shall see with our eyes, and heare with our eares. Though there be not the same degrees, measures, or extents, yet there is the same spirit, will, desire, endeauour, conceit of minde, and actuall performance, Qua data porta ru^nt, as power is giuen, and way lyeth open, etc. To exemplifie this that I haue said. The old Saints and Martyrs are all departed this life, and their personall workes done on earth are ceased with them, and so it is to be said of the wicked also: but the natures and kindes of both, with all their words and workes, are yet liuing, and liuelily acted now in the world, and shall be, as they were then. Christ is enuyed, persecuted, tempted, mocked, crucified to the worlds end, not in his owne person, but in his Ministers and other members. For, saith Christ, If they haue called the Master of the house

Belzebub, much more them of his houshold? Againe; All these things will they doe vnto you for my names sake: yet shall they not know so much. Moreouer, the same iudgements of God doe now fall on the wicked, but they acknowledge them not, nor apply them; Ier. 5. 3. because they are brutish and foolish; Psal. 92. 6. and also the same blessings and deliuerances on the godly, that did in old time, and the godly that are exercised and depend on the Word know it; Zach. 11. 11.
All blessings and curses were but casualties, chances, lucks, naturall effects, and euents, to them that beleeued not, nor applied the Sermons of the Prophets; which caused Ieremie to complaine, Thou hast stricken them, but they haue not grieued; thou hast consumed them, but they haue refused to receiue correction. They hardened their faces, and refused to returne. And why? because they will not acknowledge such things to come of the Lord for sinne; but they, and we sticke in the second causes, we cannot goe beyond the cloudes, windes, starres, etc. therefore neither are we thankfull to him for his benefits. And if we Ministers were gifted with speciall reuelations as the Prophets were, who would beleeue vs more now than they did then the Prophets? And though our prophecies were fulfilled in their eyes, yet would they not so apply them. The same things come to passe now that did then, though they be not now fore-told in such sort; and should haue done so than, though they had not beene foretold, (for both the nonage and rudenesse of the Iewes required such speciall reuelations) and the people with all their sayings and doings are now that were then. Thankefull obedience procureth the same blessings; contempt and rebellion bring the same punishments and corrections, though they bee not prophesied: For wee neede no new prophesies nor miracles, seeing that the old are sufficient, (vnlesse God should send a new Gospell.) We are the same people, and such are our words, workes, and behauiours; and so is God the same God, not partiall, not vnequall: Wherefore if the old preuaile not, neither will the new. If we want wisedome and grace to applie the old, wee would acknowledge

the new, no otherwise than the Iewes the old people did; Ier. 5. 3. Well, prophesies by speciall reuelation and miracles are ceased, but all things prophesied or taught by the Prophets, and the efficacy of miracles* are still the same. The Scriptures set forth the state of the World for the substance, nature, and condition thereof, to the Worlds end, and endureth throughout all generations, which are the same, and so is it the same, and to be preached to all generations. There is no man, good, or bad, no thought, word, or worke, but there may hee see himselfe, his workes, and thoughts of his heart plainely depeinted forth. It is accomplished, and fulfilled in euery generation; but the eyes of the wicked are holden. Therefore if there were new prophesies, new miracles, yea, a new Bible, it should be but the same, that which now is, in the nature, kinde, substance, and scope thereof, differing onely in respect of circumstances. To conclude. All things whatsoeuer a man can particularize, are the same, that haue beene; the same I say, Specie, in kind or nature, not numero, the very selfe-same without indiuiduall or circumstantiall difference.
Here then is wisedome to discerne the times and seasons, and to apply after-things rightly to the former, or rather to behold things past in those that are present; but that is hidden from most mens eyes, and it is giuen to few to behold that which they heare, and reade of, though it be neuer so plainely acted before their eyes; yea, and he is euen now acting it himselfe. There i^ nothing in the written Word, but it extendeth in some sort to euery man, though man be a foole, and a beast, and will haue nothing to concerne him, but what he lusteth. So are we blinded with Sathan, and bewitched with our brutish lusts, that in hearing we vnderstand not, and in seeing perceiue not. A iust iudgement of God on the wicked, which hate the truth, and embrace lies. How many professing the name of Christ, beleeuing in God, children of Abraham, (as they say, and imagine) are indeed the very Princes, Priests, Pharises, and commons of the Iewes, that heard, saw, toucht, talkt much of Christ, and with Christ, but yet heard him not, saw him not? etc. They look^

for Elias to come, but he was already come, and they did vnto him whatsoeuer they would. He was already come, not in his owne person, but in spirit, and power. The Iewes that were garnishing the Sepulchers of the Prophets, whom their Fathers murdered, would haue murdered the same Prophets if they had beene than liuing, and preached as in the dayes of their Fathers; and they did indeede murther them all in the great Prophet, the Son of God; Math. 23. Therefore saith Salomon, The wise mans eyes are in his head, but the foole perceiueth nothing of all that is before him. Therefore they that are now liuing, with their words, and workes, are the same that were of old. Happy, yea, thrice happy, are the eyes that can see this, and the heart that can vnderstand it: but that is not giuen to all. The obstinate being conuicted of a deede condemned of old, may say, it is a wrong indeede, it is vniust, I must confesse, etc. but it must be so, it cannot be remedied, etc. Againe, they that doe such and such things, haue good reasons for it, etc. I answer, it must be so indeede, and such reasons must goe currant, and preuaile: sor offences must be as they haue beene of old; but woe be to him by whom the offence commeth, as it was saide of olde. And they had also as good reasons in former times for their musts, as wee haue now for our musts, and euen the same. Woe be to them that say, we must doe thus, and this, or else, etc. I must doe this, or that; or else I cannot liue, etc. So the Princes, Priests, Pharises, Commons, must crucifie Christ, for their owne security, and preseruation of the Temple, City, and worship of God, (here are good reasons.) So Iudas must betray his Master, because he must haue money. Pilate must be partiall, and doe iniustice for fauour, or feare of the Iewes, though he knew the innocent and iust to be persecuted of enuie, and should haue giuen iudgement rather against his false accusers, and aided, and protected him with his power, and garrison of Souldiers, countenanced him and his doctrine, and all that fauoured him; and contrarily disgraced, and weakened euery aduersary: he should haue obeyed the submonitions of his owne conscience; but that the wicked must not do, because they haue reasons to the contrary.

The Israelites must follow the wayes of Ieroboam, contrary to the voices of all the Prophets, and so must an infinite number now adayes be crosse, and hatefull to all their teachers, contrary to the submonition of their consciences, because they haue reasons which many are ashamed to vtter. The Iewes must be Church-robbers, purloyning, and alienating tithes, because they had good reasons for it, such as we haue for our Church-robberies: But he that must steale, must be hanged, notwithstanding his good reasons; so the wicked must doe wickedly, because he cannot liue else, or not liue so, or so well as he desires, because he must be damned. Hell fire must burne, therefore it must haue fuell.



Verse 11.
There is no remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come, with those that shall come after.

AN explication of the confirmation, figured also by a Prolepsis. Ob. But there are now many things, the like whereof wee neuer heard before: And wee reade of many things, that haue beene said, and done, that now are not, neither are likely to be hereafter. Ans. That is but our ignorance. For time consumeth all things: Euery particular thing perisheth, and euery deede vanisheth, but yet in such sort as I said before. Therefore when an olde thing is renued, or clothed with other circumstances, we obserue it not, we perceiue it not, no not when we are euen doing and saying that which wee know to haue beene done and said of olde, no more then Iudas knew himselfe to be Achitophel, and Dauid vtterly condemned himselfe in another; 2 Sam. 12. 5. The Pope knoweth not himselfe to be Caiphas, nor the Iesuites that they are Pharises. The Pharises knew not themselues to be the very same with their Fathers, to speake and doe euen the same things; neither knew they Christ to be Zacharie, or Elias, hauing the same, yea, a greater spirit, and power; Mathew 23. 29. 30. See their madnesse. They condemned their Fathers, and iustified themselues, because they built the Tombes of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of

the righteous, and say, if they had beene in the dayes of their Fathers, they would not haue beene partakers with them in the bloud of the Prophets. True iwis, if Moses had beene there, they would haue shewed themselues tender-hearted Wolues. For Iohn 9. 28. They were Moses Disciples, not Christs; and yet is Moses fulfilled in him, and Moses commanded them to heare him. Abraham reioyced in spirit to see his day* Iohn 8. 56. and they boast themselues to be his children, Verse 39. But if Abraham should haue beene raised from the dead, (as was Lazarius, or as Diues would haue had one risen from the dead to warne his brethren) to haue accompanied Christ in preaching and teaching these his children; they would haue done the same to their Father Abraham, and to Moses, that they did to him. They would haue crucified both Abraham, Moses, and Elias with him, as the Pope would doe Peter now. They boast that God is their Father, verse 41. but God was now among them, not in maiesty and terrour, as he appeared in Mount Sinai to their Fathers at the giuing of the Law, but incarnate, appearing in their owne nature, humble and meeke, teaching them all things in mildest manner, with sufficient testimony of his God-head: yea, euidently shewing forth the maiesty and power of his God-head, whereof themselues were conuicted. What blinded them thus? what deceiued them? what bewitched them? Euen their lusts. They were full of pride, couetousnesse, enuy; in a word, carnally minded, hauing a shew of religion and deuotion, in doing the outward letter of the Law, and strictly obseruing their owne ceremonies and traditions, thereby deluding the people, and themselues also; but what the spirituall intendment of the Scriptures was, they were altogether ignorant. Faith in Christ their Redeemer, and the deniall of themselues, the world, the flesh, and the deuill, was farre from them. They could not goe before an earthly felicity, a fleshly happinesse, therefore they looked for a worldly redeemer of their states from vnder the power of the Romanes, etc. Their deuotion was but a maske of worldly craftinesse, policie, and deuillishnesse, to blinde the people with, and themselues

also. The people groaned vnder their burden, and in hope of liberty thronged in such multitudes after Christ; but when such fleshly hopes failed, Iudas betrayed him, and they cryed, Crucifie him, away with him, (hee is not for our profit) to please their deuout tyrants againe, whom they had displeased in following him. Behold the condition of these brutish hypocrites. They follow and flatter the Preacher of the Gospell. Ioh. 6. 25* 26. 27. Not beleeuing and humbling themselues, as Mary did, but like rebellious belly-gods, Papists, to set vp a Pope against their King. For when they found him to be a spirituall King, Shepheard, Redeemer, they persecuted him with deadly hatred, and had rather be vnder any tyrant, than vnder his spirituall regiment. The Gospell is the most grieuous burthen that can be borne, and the Preacher thereof the greatest tormenter. Ah, that Papists, common-Protestants, Libertines could lay these things to heart! How many stand vp at Creed, but fight against the Gospell! How many receiue the signe of the Crosse in their foreheads, but fight vnder the deuils banner! How many make a vowe to God in Baptisme, but cast the payment thereof vpon their sureties, like brutish ding* thrifts, running out like Cham, and Cain, and deuils, foorth of Christs presence, which in spirit cry out against their teacher, What haue we to doe with thee, art thou come to torment vs before the time?
To conclude. All that is, and shall be done, hath beene done of old, but wee know not so much. Shortnesse of life is a great cause thereof: For few men liue so long to see the reuolution or circular course of many things. And some things and states are of longer continuance than others. Moreouer, this kinde of obseruation, most profitable to man is neglected of most* but the wise obseruer can fore-tell many things to come, or neerely ayme at them. Furthermore, the remembrance of things past dyeth with the present generation, and a wonder lasteth but nine dayes, and but a few memorable things are deriued to the next, which also vanish more and more out of their mindes, and at length remaine with very few, vanishing as a sound or loud noyse

by little and little, and as a bird of the ayre vanisheth out of sight. In like sort, all things, now said, and done in this present generation of the world, shall in future ages be forgotten, and the like also may be said of all things in ages to come, in respect of ages following them. To conclude: Seeing that man, and all things with him are so vnstable, and changeable, there can no good remaine to man of all his labours, no contentation of minde, no quietnesse of conscience. He must seeke that else-where: For his foundation here, shall be but laid on the sands, and his buildings shall be but the Tower of Babel, and fall downe like the Tower of Siloam, on the head of the builder. Therefore all is vanity.
If any man thinke that this following is the more naturall analysis of this former part of the Chapter, I easily yeeld to it. The first verse containeth the inscription of the booke. The second verse containeth the Theme or generall proposition. The third verse containeth the principall argument, which is confirmed by two reasons in this chapter. The first is drawne from the instabilitie of man dying, verse 4. illustrated first by a comparison of the earth standing and remaining, verse 4. end. Secondly, by a comparison of the Sun, Windes, Riuers, rising, falling, and returning backe againe, which man doth not, verse 5. 6. 7. To which purpose Catullus.the Poet saith.

Soles occidere, and redire possunt:
Nobis cum semel occidit breuis lux,
Nox est perpetua vna dormienda.


The heauenly Lamps doe As it seemeth to them that stand on the w^st^rne, and easterne shore.fall into the gulfe,
And issue forth againe out of the deepe:
When our swiftstarre of life is vanished,
It nere returnes, in death we euer sleepe.

And to the same purpose Iob saith, There is hope of a tree, if it be cut downe, that it will sprout againe, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease, though the root thereof waxe olde in the earth, and the stocke thereof dye in the ground, yet through the sent of waters it will budde, etc. But man dyeth and wasteth away, yea, man giueth vp the ghost, and where is hee? Iob 14. 7. 8. 9. 10.

The windes also are rowled in their circuits, and the riuers keepe their constant reuolution, they returne backe againe.
The second reason is drawne from the instability of all creatures, states, and humaine affaires, illustrated by a comparise of the lesse, which is figured by a gradation, verse 8. amplified by a prolepsis, verse 9. confirmed, verse 10.



Verse 12.
I the Preacher, was King ouer Israel, in Ierusalem.

HEere beginneth the latter part of the Chapter, wherein Solomon sheweth that he found not onely by obseruation, but also by experience in the studies of wisedome, that all things are but vanity and vexation of spirit, both the things themselues, and mans wisedome and knowledge of the things also. All things are instable, fraile, and full of corruption, no sure thing can be built vpon them, no felicity can proceede out of vanity, no perfection out of imperfection. For the curse is on man* and on all things with man, therefore there must needs such like effects proceede from them. For a cleane thing cannot come out of filthinesse, Iob 14. 4.
His purpose is to shew that hee made search in the best things, wherein there was appearance of any good, which man most desired and admired. And first he beganne with wisedome, which of all other things being meerely transitory, is the flower. For as for other things they are not so preeminent, because fooles, and beasts may be partakers thereof as well as the wise, to wit, riches, honours, friends, pleasures, beauty, strength; but wisedome is proper to the wise onely, by which a man is a man, and commeth neerest to the diuine nature: Therefore true happines was likelyest to be found in wisedome.
The argument whereby he confirmeth the vnprofitablenesse of humaine wisedome, and things seeming good, is drawne from the testimonie of his experimentall knowledge of things subiect to knowledge and science, in the rest of this chapter, and of things subiect to mans bodily vse, chap. 2. The things subiect to knowledge are eyther naturall with

their causes, properties, effects, or else morall, both good and euill, both wisedome, madnesse, and follie. The testimonie of experimentall knowledge hee declareth and proueth to be firme and good by two arguments. The first is drawne from the person searching out the knowledge of things by obseruation and experience, verse 12. Secondly, from his diligent trauaile therein. Of this trauaile, First, hee propoundeth his counsell, verse 13. Secondly, he declareth the effect thereof. Thirdly, he expoundeth both his reuiew; and determination or iudgement thereof, verse 14 His determination he confirmes by a reason, verse 15. All is figured by a prolepsis, verse 16. 17. and concluded, verse 17. which is confirmed, verse 18.
The first argument confirming the certaintie of his experimentall knowledge, is drawne from the condition of his person, (King) and therefore of farthest extent, and reach, of de^pest apprehension, and largest comprehension, as he that on an high hill seeth farthest, and comprehendeth most. Men of priuate state are but of priuate, straight, and and particular wits, experienced, and exercised in few and inferiour things, and also disturbed many waies. But a King is as the Sunne, comprehending all things, superiour, and inferiour within the compasse of his sight, and is eleuated* as I may say, aboue the troubled regions of the Aire, (all things being placed vnder him) and free from all obstacles in a firmely established and peaceable common-wealth, as this of Israel now was: In a word, hee is Gods vice-gerent, the neerest attendant to him, of his priuie counsell, euer in presence and sight, on whose hand, as I may say, the great King leaneth. Dauid was a man of warre, but God gaue Solomon peace with all nations, and all nations were seruiceable to him: Wherefore? The more freely to liue in ease, and fleshly pleasure? To doe as brethren doe oft times falling at variance among themselues for want of an outward aduersarie, against whom they may ioyne in vnitie of contention? Or that the members of the body should deuoure and consume one another for want of matter to worke vpon from the stomacke? No such thing: For that is bruitish

and ethnicall: But he gaue him peace that hee might build him an house, a glorious house. Hee gaue him wisedome with peace, to gouerne his people prudently, and to teach them the feare of the Lord, to stablish the whole worship of God in perfection, according to the Law. To glorifie the Lord in erecting his house, and stablishing his worship, that the beauty of both might be an astonishment to the nations, that the God of Israel might be glorified in all the earth.
To conclude, his Kingly office is amplied by the subiect, or obiect (Israel) the people of God, and therefore the most excellent, and glorious King. Lastly, by the place, (in Ierusalem) Ierusalem the citie of God, the beauty of holinesse, the paradise of the world renewed, the ioy of the whole earth. Now being a King, hee wanted no meanes to attaine to knowledge, neither authority to enquire and demaund the opinions, and iudgements of others, nor ability to get and vse all meanes requisite for exquisite knowledge.



Verse 13.
And I gaue my heart to seeke and search out by wisedome, concerning all things that are done vnder heauen: this sore trauaile hath God giuen to the sonnes of men, to be exercised therewith.

THe second Argument, confirming the certainty of his experience drawne from his diligent trauaile and accurate endeauour. As hee wanted not power and ability to procure and vse all meanes; so neither wanted hee desire and diligence: For hee gaue himselfe wholly, not onely to seeke by wisedome to know things, but to search out by obseruation and tryall, according to wisedome, the causes, properties, and effects, and the reason of all things that are, and are done vnder heauen. But this hee did not in pride and curiositie, but in modesty, accordingly as he found himselfe gifted of God, 1 King. 4. 33. For God is the father of lights, the gifts of his spirit are lights shining in darkenesse. Wisedome is with God, and proceedeth out from the throne of God, which whosoeuer wan^eth can neuer attaine to the true knowledge of him, because his worldly heart is full of darknesse.

For God hath subdued all things vnder vanity, which the blinde world knoweth not, or but dreamingly noteth, (which maketh flesh and bloud so proud) from which no man can rid himselfe, striue hee neuer so much, but rather doth still, as the proud curious heritickes did, encrease vanity, errour, and folly, as the hydropical body by thirsting and striuing to quench thirst by drinking, doth increase the discase, and in the end destroy it selfe. The heathen kept neither meane nor measure in the curious and ambitious search of the wisedome of God in the world, and his secret counsell in the vse of his creatures: But for as much as the end of their endlesse labours was not the glory of God, euen subiection to him in feare and thankefull obedience, but their owne vaine-glory, praise, pleasure, foolishnesse, impietie, they found not that which they sought for: For a foole, saith Solomon seeketh wisedome and findeth it not, but wearieth himselfe in a Labyrinth; and so became vaine in their worldly imaginations. Wherefore because they sought to know God out of his Church, and to assume the glory thereof to themselues by returning their owne eyes, and the eyes of men after them, to exalt and magnifie them; as hee that seeketh praise by the curious description of a cunning worke, but forgetteth, yea despiseth the workeman himselfe, and because they thought and sought to comprehend the infinite maiestie and wisedome of God, in the creation and gouernment, by humane capacitie, and trauaile, without the Spirit and Word of God, therefore were they blinded, like the Sodomites seeking Lots doore, groping all their life after that which they could neuer finde, attaining onely to so much as serued to quicken the worme of their dead consciences to make them inexcusable.
Furthermore, as God hath by a generall decree in the beginning laid sore trauell on man to humble his pride thereby, in so much that nothing can be gotten without great labour since the fall; so neither can he attaine to the knowledge of wisedome without diligence: For the gift is indeed freely giuen of God, but we must receiue it by the appointed meanes. Therefore although hee granted the request of

Solomon, in giuing a wise and vnderstanding heart aboue all that were before him, or after him, yet he applyed himselfe to the study and contemplation of all things, and to finde out the secrets of Gods wisedome by carefull obseruation, and experience. So that in the studies of knowledge, there is great affliction both of body and minde: First, because some neuer attaine to true wisedome, but fall into vaine imaginations, and manifold errours, and so when they thinke to be wise, they become fooles. The iust iudgement of God on their proud presumption, Rom. 1. 22. Of those kinds of studies these wordes of Solomon may be vnderstood, This sore trauaile hath God giuen, etc. Secondly, they that are mooued, and directed by the spirit of God to the right end, and so attaine to wisedome, are greatly humbled with infinite toyle as well as the husbandman; and in the end see nothing but vanity, euen matter of griefe, both in the things that are knowne, and in the knowledge it selfe. For they are still as farre from contentation and peace of conscience, as euer they were. For no worldly thing can make a man happy. So that although a man had all knowledge, without Christ it is nothing; Paul esteemed it but losse and dung, Phil. 3. Of this wisedome, I rather thinke the words to be vnderstood.



Verse 14.
I haue seene all the workes that are done vnder the Sunne, and behold, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

IN the former verse he propounded his counsell, in the applying of himselfe to get knowledge and experience, not of some things, but of all things. Here he declareth the successe or effect thereof. I haue seene all the workes, etc. I haue indeede by the gift of God obtained that vnderstanding which I sought for: For I haue seene it with mine eyes, I haue read it in the Booke of Nature, the holy Spirit of wisedome instructing, and directing me. God hath giuen me a right and true discerning of all that I haue seene, and discoursed on, by sanctified reason. Euery man heareth and seeth as well as Solomon, but no man rightly discerneth ought,

but by the reuelation of the Spirit. For a man is a beast by his owne knowledge, a foole, darkely led, deceiued by Satan, and such like are his obseruations. If a man looke on the fairest letters, and cannot reade, what is he the better? Solomon attained not to this height of wisedome by reading of the naturall and morall Treatises of the Aegyptians, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Gimnosophists, discoursing by imagination vpon other mens workes, and culling sentences out of them, to make a shew of that which was not in him; wherein indeede many excellent things are buried, as in darke and confused Mines, (yet but wilde fruit, proceeding from the wilde Oliue) out of which notwithstanding a diuine and sanctified spirit can extract good matter, and conuert it into the right nature and vse thereof, as it may be Solomon did, some may thinke; but the Kings of Israel were to be exercised in the Booke of the Law onely, not in Ethnicall vanities, which commonly we call learning. What their wisedome was, the Prouerbes, the Canticles, the Sonne of Sirach, the Booke of Wisedome, make manifest, which differ much from ethnicall morall Treatises, which are the wilde fruits of wilde trees, and wilde ones are most addicted to them; such lippes, such lettuce. But Solomon saw with his eyes, and rightly conceiued in minde what hee saw, by the speciall illumination of the Spirit of God, which gaue such a plentifull blessing to his holy endeauours, that he became famous for his wisedome among all the wise men, and Kings of the earth; who were desirous to heare of the wisedome which God put in his heart; 1 King. 10. 24. So that euen his seruants were counted happy, that attended on him, and heard his wisedome.
Here wee note that there is twofold learning or knowledge in a man; the one is obtained by reading of mens bookes, the other by reading in the Bookes of God. The former kinde of wisedome is imitation, which we commonly call learning: It is gotten by imagination and strength of memory: It is a talkatiue learning, which a man relateth from the mouth of another, not from an vnderstanding heart. A parable is harsh in a fooles mouth, and so is learning. He

hath not, as our Sauiour saith, Radicem vel semen in s^ipso, Roote, or seede in himselfe, hewants the seede or principles of that whereof he talketh in himselfe. It is therefore but speculatiue and childish, and as it were an artificiall or painted complexion, whereof a man boasteth, vainely pust vp in his ignorant minde. Hi volunt se primos omnium rerum esse, nec sunt: but the other is modest and humble. For it is gotten by reading in the Bookes of God. Yet a^ the Booke of the Word being sealed vp, or clasped, affoordeth no knowledge; Esay 29. 11. no more doe the creatures, when our eyes are held. The creatures sound out the maiesty, power, wisedome, iustice, goodnesse, mercy, glory of God; as also the corruption, folly, shame, vanity, and misery of man. For in them he may see his nakednesse, his curse. But the foole perceiueth nothing of all that is before him: Hee neither beholdeth the glory of God in them with praise and feare, nor his owne nakednesse, and brutishnesse with shame. If God open our eyes and eares, yea, giue life vnto ou^ dead senses, vnfolding this booke vnto vs; then shall we be able to reade in this booke, the Spirit shall bring all things to our remembrance, (we heare and see confusedly in a slumber, and vnperfectly, as children) and shall gine vs ripe vnderstanding in all things, both to behold the reuerend and glorious wisedome of God in his workmanship, as Dauid saith; I am fearefully and wonderfully made, and his secret counsell, with his goodnesse in the vse of those his vessels, and the effect, and vse of that vanity that is in them.
In one generation may a man obserue, and know euen by sight, all things whatsoeuer haue beene taught by word or writing, diuine or humane, since the beginning of the world, forasmuch as all things are the same in their circular courses. But if a man be not guided by the Spirit, his obseruations are but superstitious, and false rules, his readings erroneous, yea, though he hath read all Bookes, and hath not roote or seede in himselfe, he is but in a maze tossed too and fro, hearing and seeing as in a dreame: In a word, he wants wisedome, he hath no learning. Wherefore men must not presume aboue their gift, nor runne before they be called; but

worke according to their talent.
And behold, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit. After that he had trauelled for knowledge, and obtained knowledge; now thirdly he taketh a reuiew, or reflection in his minde thereof, to consider what benefit or fruit redounded, or might redound to him thereby, and with all presently determineth the case most plaine and euident. And] when I had sought, and searched, and knowne what I could; Behold] marke, consider, and remember what I say, All is vanity] both knowledge, and things knowne, euery thing was empty of good, full of euill, I had nothing but labour for trauell. After that Solomon had knowne all things, not by their shadowes and pictures, namely, by reading bookes, and relation of voice; but seene with his owne eyes, and things seene most affect and please: yet he found no profit of this his labour, no contentation, no happy rest. Why? Because all was but vanity and vexation of spirit, or the feeding of the soule with winde. The Hebrew word signifieth either in differently; He got nothing but labour for his trauaile, and griefe for his care. Contrarily, he that drinketh the waters of life, his thirst shall be quenched; Iohn 4. and he that eateth the bread of life, his hunger shall be satisfied; Iohn 6. There is the true and euerlasting foode of the soule, which onely giueth contentation, that foolish man so greedily else-where seeketh for, but neuer findeth.



Verse 15.
That which is crooked, cannot be made straight: and that which is wanting, cannot be numbred.

A Reason why hee found no contentation, no profit by the diligent search of wisedome, drawne from the subiect or obiect thereof, the things themselues, which were not in mans power, and prouidence, nor reformable by his wisedome, but in the hand of God; Chap. 3. 11. and Chap. 7. 13. For in all the parts of the World, in all liuing creatures, chiefly in man, and ciuill states, there is nothing but corruption, enmity, vanity, misery. The creatures, and man himselfe, the successe and euent of things and businesses, are

crooked, peruerse, confused. If a man labour to build vp some sure worke vpon the creatures, it is a vaine trauaile, and brings forth vexation. For they are fraile, weake, imperfect; they decay, alter, perish, and are subiect to innumerable infirmities and casualties, which crookednesse no man can remedy. To speake more fundamentally, euery thing in nature is peruerse, and disordered, one thing is distracted from another, the vnity of the whole engine is dissolued, the vniforme subordination disioynted by sedition, all things transuerse and peruerse, euery thing enuiously eying, and destroying another, through the poyson of enmity that is in them, as if the parts of the body should fall at oddes, euery thing following a corrupt inclination and inordinate affection of it owne; neither can they be brought into the right frame of subordinate vnity, of m^tuall duty, and loue one to another, and all to man, or man to man, and man to God, by any power or wisedome of man. The creatures in their kindes are all selfe-loue, pride, cruelty, pernicious, and dangerfull one to another, and all to man, and man to man. They are miserable in themselues, and adde misery one to another through enmity and mischiefe. Some reconciliation I grant, is made among some of the creatures one with another, and with man, by the wisedome and labour of man, taming and teaching them, and so also is there some reconciliation of men among themselues in a politicke gouernement* but the best vnity, and vniformity, is imperfect, weake, crooked, full of corruption, vanity, and misery. No felicity can be built thereon, no contentation can be found therein.
To proceede, as all things are thus crooked in their kinds, so is man more crooked then the rest. His minde is depraued, full of blindnesse; his passions or affections are inordinate; his body is subiect to innumerable diseases. It is the corrupt vessell or instrument of a more corrupt soule: Yea, mans crookednesse is an vnion or mixture of the crookednesses of all the creatures. This crookednesse can hee neuer make straight by all his wisedome, which is crooked it selfe. All humane science cannot giue one sparke of true light, nor rid the soule from one drop of poison, wherewith it is infected*

The bloud of Christ onely must purge it. The wisest Philosophers, Naturalists, and Moralists, when they had done all they could, yet their crookednesse remained in them. The ciuilest and best theefe is but a theefe: What was Alexander but a theefe? And the ciuilest and fairest conditioned whore is but a whore: The whore Flora, deifyed by the Romanes, and honoured with festiuall dayes, was but a beastlie sade. What else can the truth make of these two persons? Such like indeede differ much from the rude, vnmannerly, and sauage people, yet are they beasts as well as they. The flesh of Iezabell was but dogges meat, and the bloud, the royall bloud of Ahab, dogges drinke. No better was the corps of Iehoiakim, Ie^. 22. 19. then the carkeise of an Asse.
Moreouer, from this crookednesse of the creatures, and of man, proceede many crosses, vnluckinesse, innumerable dangers, many misfortunes and casualties in euery best course that the wisest can take, and so is all his labour lost, there remaineth no fruit to him, but griefe and vexation. Therefore in the best composed state of things there is naught but deformitie, imperfection, weakenesse, want of vigour and strength, diseases, infirmities, sicknesses, strange casualties, suddaine misfortunes, vntimely deaths, which all creatures, with man, are subiect vnto. Againe, the best ordered state, or common-wealth is full of wants, full of superfluities and running into extremities on both hands, full of cruelties, of oppressions, and partiall dealings, and that of fauour, enuie, reuenge* Vnworthy persons are preferred and honoured, the best-deseruing are deiected, vice is graced and inri^hed, vertue is discountenanced and suppressed. In principall matters there is negligence, carelessenesse, remissenesse: In trifles there is much curiosity and contentions; Iudgement is deferred, lawes are distorted, and such like things, without number, which it is as hard for any Prince by wisedome and power to reforme, as to regenerate or restore whole nature againe vnto her first integrity. If we consider the state and condition of the creatures themselues, and one towards another, the defectiuenesse, crookednesse, crossenesse of all things, with their euents and

casualties, wee shall finde it to be vnpossible to lay any ground-worke thereon, whereupon to erect an happie estate.
To conclude: Seeeing that a wise man in the aboundance of knowledge seeth nothing but peruersenesse and weakenesse, the one whereof cannot be reformed, the other not helped, neither of them remedyed, hee reapeth no ioy, no comfort by such sights, but anger, disquietnesse, griefe, and hath satisfied his desire, and expectation of happy rest no more then he that eateth and drinketh winde to satisfie the bodies appetite, when the one is fatted, the other shall be contented.



Verse 16.
I communed with mine owne heart, saying, Loe, I am come to a great estate, and haue gotten more wisedome then all they that haue beene before me in Ierusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisedome and knowledge.

AN amplification of the confirmation handled, Verse 12. 13. 14. 15. by a comparison of all Kings that raigned before him in Ierusalem, figured by a Prolepsis, thus: Thou maist haplie be deceiued in this matter, through partiall conceit of extraordinary wisedome, and therefore hauing but an ouerly consideration of things, and being blinded with the vaile of the common imperfections of things, and follies of vulgar people, and distempered Princes, hast not rightly beheld to what happie state, and contentation a man may attaine in this life by the right and perfect vnderstanding of things and by the prouident and prudent carriage of himselfe in all things, etc. Ans. Neither the dulnesse of apprehension, nor the weakenesse of iudgement, nor want of diligence haue beene any let to me in this search. For I haue not attempted this of pride, nor spoken it of arrogance, as puft vp with a vaine imagination of wisedome, but I haue vnpartially communed with mine owne heart, and haue found that as God hath giuen mee riches and power; so also hath he giuen me wisedome and knowledge of all secrets, aboue all the Kings that raigned before mee in this treasurie of wisedome, Ierusalem, the City of the great King: Neither

doe I deceiue my selfe with the ouerly discourse of manifold imaginations, and groundlesse conclusions, but my heart hath seene great wisedome and knowledge, I haue fundamentally obserued and had the ocular experience of things, their natures, causes, properties, effects, vses, etc.



Verse 17.
And I gaue my heart to know wisedome, and to know madnesse, and folly: I perceiued that this also is vexation of Spirit.

A Continuation of the same answere. As I perceiued in my heart that I had receiued of God a greater measure of discerning, and sensible insight aboue others, so according to my vttermost ability, I diligently exercised my selfe in searching out, yea following the euen tract and way of wisedome in her workes, so farre forth as man is able to apprehend, and comprehend her. Consequently by the rule of wisedome I examined the wisedomes, doctrines, and instructions of men, euen the manifold, ^arring, and repugnant opinions of men, and the proud errours of contentious men, who greedily affecting the admiration of their wits do by intruding themselues into things aboue their re^ch bewray great ignorance, foolishnesse and madnesse both in naturall things, and matter of estate: I perceiued that this also is vexation of spirit. A conclusion of his former reu^iw, determination or iudgement, Vers. 14. To conclude, as I by wisedome sought out the knowledge of naturall things, and found that all was nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit: so haue I more then that sought out, examined, and tryed the vnderstanding of morall things, good, and euill, and I find as before, that this is also full of vexation; Wisedome on the one side being incomprehensible, and the consideration of such men, their opinions, and doings being wearisome and grieuous to the spirit on the otherside, yea, their madnesse is endlesse.




Verse 18.
For in much wisedome is much griefe: and he that increaseth knowledge, increaseth sorrow.

A Reason why that seeking after knowledge, both of wisedome and folly, there is no contentation of minde, but vexation of spirit. For the further that a man searcheth into the bottome of things, to giue fuller satisfaction to his heart, the more griefe he findeth, and sorrow is increased with knowledge: For,
First, the accurate search, and discussing by examination and iudgement of that which is fought, is a great affliction to body and minde.
Secondly, when a man hath done what he can, hee hath onely attained to the sight of that great darkenesse of ignorance that is in him, Chap. 7. 23. 24. which he thinking by study to expell, doth more increase it, that is, hee more and more seeth into what a deepe dungeon, hee and all men are fallen by the sinne of Adam.
Thirdly, it is difficult, troublous, full of intricate questions, and distracting doubts, endlesse, and withall transitory. It is neither perfectiue of him that hath it, nor perfectiue of other men, or their matters.
Fourthly, the more that a wise man knoweth, hee still more, more and more beholdeth greater corruption, vanity, folly, madnesse, and misery, wherewith his spirit is discomforted, and grieued, his heart is heauy, his minde dispairefull. So that he is farther off from happinesse then the ignorant, that knoweth nothing. For he worketh and eateth, and drinketh and sleepeth soundly, he is without care, he is heartily merry, and so is strong and healthfull.
Fiftly, when a man hath transcended common capacities, his darke parables, instructions, and counsels, of many shall be had in contempt, of others hee shall be enuyed, and his wisdome shall be but the white of a But to be shot at, of some he shall be suspected, and suppressed, for Princes are suspicious of the godly-wise-learned, I thinke because their rudenesse and nakednesse lies open to their iudicious eyes; which

made Nero kill his master Seneca; or else desire ignorance that the thousand-headed beast might be better held vnder the yoke of gouernment: For if they be wise and godly, the rude Princes thinke that their nakednesse lyeth open, whereof contempt followeth. This is ethnicall pollicie. Contrarily, the wise and godly Prince shall by his wisedome, and godlinesse bind the consciences of his people, and cause them to reuerence and dread him, as Iob said of himselfe. This is the onely security of a Prince, as of Iob, Dauid, Solomon, Iosiah. Moreouer, if the wise would haue the benefit of his wisedome to redound to many, he must descend to their meannesse, and rudenesse, and of a plentifull seed-sowing most commonly reape little, and sometimes nothing.
Sixtly, he shall see the foole oft-times graced, countenanced, preferred for money, and other sinister respects, when he for all his wisedome shall not be regarded, but be buried in obscurity, and obliuion.
Seauenthly, If a man vnderstand all misteries, and all knowledge, and that no secret be hid from him, all cannot free him from death, but it shall rot in the graue with him: Wherefore if a man know not himselfe to be in the number of Gods Elect, if in the curious search of all things, he cannot find that in himselfe, what contentation, rest, ioy, quietnesse of conscience, what happinesse can knowledge bring him? nay rather it will increase his sorrow. Wherefore all humaine knowledge is vaine, euen nothing, and worse then nothing. For when a man hath attained to all knowledge that can be comprehended in mans braine, the Deuill hath still more then hee: For he hath been in the kingdome of glory, and seene God face to face. And if a man had as he hath, how much still should he be the better? Surely, if a man know not onely the depth of Gods wisedome in the world, but the secrets of the kingdome of glory, and of the damnation of hell, and also could by words vtter them, he should notwithstanding liue in miserable perplexity all his life, till hee had this sauing knowledge, which should be his onely ioy and comfort both in life and death.
This onely should sweeten all the miseries of this life,

whereas the other doth exacerbate, and turne all the prerogatiues, delights, and pleasures of this life into gall, and wormewood. There is no felicity on earth but this; feare God, and keepe his commandements: For he that hath obtained all worldly wisedome, cannot by the same worke out a felicitie to himselfe in this crooked state, and vaine condition of all things.



CHAPTER II.


Verse 1.
I said in my heart, goe to now, I will prooue thee with mirth, therefore inioy pleasure: and behold, this also is vanitie.

SOlomon hauing found no profit, no happy contentation in knowledge, nor in things subiect to knowledge, purposeth now to try what contentation may redound to him by the vse of the creatures, all care cast away, whereof aboue other men hee had the full possession and fruition. This verse containeth 1. a declaration of his counsell about the finding out of the chiefe good, by the tryall of another way. 2. his determination or censure, which is amplified by a note of attention, or asseueration, I said in my heart, etc. As if he should say, I haue already tryed what profit the studies of wisedome can afford; but neither in contemplation, nor in experimentall knowledge found I any thing, saue onely much affliction of the flesh, and vexation of minde; for contentation cannot be attained, nor grieuances auoyded thereby. Well, then I purposed in my heart to proue what profit the vse of worldly things might bring vnto me: And first of all, tis before I subdued my body to the spirit of my minde, supposing that the chiefe good wherein the soule resteth contented, was to be traced out by that path whereby a man commeth neerest vnto God, but found no contentment at all, yea contrarily sorrow; so now on the contrary, I fell into a consideration of the vses of the manifold creatures of God, for mans necessitie,

comfort, and delight. Therefore now I began to apply and exercise my wisedome in the cheering, and pampering of the flesh, in bathing my selfe in the pleasures and delights of the sonnes of men: I with-held nothing from the desires of my heart, but yeelding my selfe to all my bodily appetites, as farre forth as lawfully I might, to try what more profit and better contentment I, or any other that is most delighted in this way, might finde in this course of life. But when I reflected my spirit vpon the consideration of this way also, I saw that here was nothing but vanitie. For there is no stedfastnesse in the things that consume away euen with the moderate vsing, and the body together with them also, and the immoderate vse thereof would be a greater burden to the flesh, than the immoderate studyes of Learning. Because immoderation in this kinde would bring a sure and sudden destruction both to body and soule. Wherefore neither in the moderate nor immoderate vse thereof was there any felicitie, but vanity.



Verse 2.
I said of laughter, it is mad: and of mirth what doth it?

A Confirmation of the censure: Mirth and pleasure are vanitie. For when I had sought out and tryed what contentment epicurish and sensuall liuing could afford to him that is most addicted to it; I saw that laughter was madde, and mirth reasonlesse, both vaine. For indeede the matter of laughter is mans shame, or nakednesse; it is follie, or brutalitie to be lamented, not laughed at. For let a man laugh at what he will, and but smile at any thing, when he returneth to sobriety of heart, and to the prudent consideration of himselfe, and the thing that he laughed at, he shall finde it to be follie, vanitie, miserie, I meane a slippe, or defect of that wisedome, prudence, prouidence, and reason in some saying, deede, or euent which is not in the perfect image of God, nor in man as he is man, to wit, graue, wise, reuerend, honourable, perfect in this imperfect state that no light conceit of him, his words, actions, euents in the mindes of men should moue laughter. For what matter of laughter is there

in the persons, speaches, deedes, euents of reuerend Sages, Kings, Iudges, of Christ, and of God? Our Sauiour Christ often sorrowed, but we cannot learne that euer he laughed, neither yet conceiue at what he should laugh. It is recorded in stories that the Philosopher Heraclitus alwaies wept and sorrowed, because he saw nothing but vanities and miserie, yea, bruitishnesse in all the dealings of men, whether in their sobriety or laughter. Contrarily, Democritus alwaies laughed. What was the matter or obiect of his laughter? Euen the follie, madnesse, vanitie, brutalitie of men, which by laughter he neither reioyced at nor approued. Finally, whensoeuer a man laugheth at things great or small, let him by gathering onething of another but diue to the ground of his laughter, and he shall finde some matter of griefe and repentance, both in the person, or thing laughed at, and in himselfe, or at least in the one. For if Adam had neuer fallen, there should neuer haue beene laughter, nor weeping, but an heart possest with heauenly ioy, euen ioyfull sobriety.
The epicurish and sensuall laughter therefore that Solomon here speaketh of, is madnesse, euen the corruption and intemperance of reason, the froath of vaine imaginations, the superfluity of the spleene, corrupted by the fall, and bewrayeth oft times much sinne in the soule, which bringeth griefe and repentance. And as laughter was madnesse, so was mirth vnreasonablenesse, or foolishnesse. For it neither causaily bringeth out of it selfe, nor yet accidentally occasioneth any profit.
It is short, and vanishing, dying with the action, like the stroke of an instrument, and the taste of honey: The one whereof in the continuall vse groweth wearisome, and is in the end the greatest toyle; the other groweth bitter, and is in the end very loathsome: Neither affoord solide contentment. For hee that maketh the time of this life but a play, is as hee that maketh it but a market: Both shall receiue the same iudgement; the one for his Iouil^y, as the leud Iauils of these dayes tearme it, the other for his drudgery. Both are their owne Idols, opposite one to another, and both to God. Therefore are both, the carefulnesse of the one, and

carefulnesse of the other, a burden to the conscience. So that in laughter and mirth, wine and women, dissolutenesse and luxury, there is no felicity, but vanity, no contentation, but desperation. Yet notwithstanding all this we must put a difference betweene the common frailty of mans nature, which God passeth by, and the sinful laughter of the wicked.



Verse 3.
I sought in mine heart to giue my selfe vnto wine (yet acquainting mine heart with wisedome) and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that good for the sonnes of men, which they should doe vnder heauen all the dayes of their life.

AN exposition or declaration of Solomons counsell concerning the finding out of the chiefe good, by the tryall of another way, which is the exercise of his wisedome in pompe, and magnificence, to the end of the tenth verse. First he found no content in the studies of learning, or speculations of the minde: Secondly, he found lesse comfort in the contrary course, bodily pleasures: Now thirdly hee will try the ^^xt or middle course, in the right vse of all worldly delights, and bodily pleasures, according to the direction of wisedome, which is the glory of a King, euen that thing which all men count happinesse. And for the attainment of his intended purpose, he fared still deliciously, and by wisedome beheld the follies and vanities thereof: Namely, how Princes wanting wisedome, abused themselues in the dissolute and immoderate vse of these delights, and all prerogatiues, yea oft times transformed themselues into the natures of beasts, that so he might behold the true and right vse thereof, and consequently find out, yea worke out a perfect contentation to himselfe in such an happy state during the time of life, as many men haue dreamed of, and aimed at, but none for lacke of wisedome to enter into, and keepe the right path, haue attained. As the Al^hymists hold a possibility of making their Philosophers stone, to turne yron into gold; so doe men imagine a possibilitie of a worldly felicitie to change sinfull wretches into gods. But as the most learned could neuer find the one, so neither shall the most wise and wealthy euer

find the other. For this cause doth God lay sore trauaile, and crosses on men, to humble their pride thereby. For we children of Adam would faine be as Gods; Gen. 3. 5 6. We striue violently to runne backe into Paradise againe, but that is done away, and another is set before vs, into which earthly dregges haue no desire to enter: For the Eele loueth the mudde, not the christall Springs, and the Toade loueth scumme and ditches, not the Pallace.



Verse 4.
I made me great workes, I builded houses, I planted me Vineyards.

AN hypotyposis or liuely description of the acting and effecting of his counsell, to wit, his worldly pompe, and magnificence, by an enumeration of diuers particulars. First, he propoundeth the same generally; I made me great workes. All the workes that I did were curious, and costly, as mans wit could deuise the manner, and the world could afford the matter. So that the seate of my Pallace in all the workes thereof, was as it were a resemblance of the World, and the glory thereof, that mine eyes, and senses being filled with what pleasures and delights my heart could imagine, I might enioy full contentment. To which purpose I built me houses most large and spacious, whose timber workes were of Cedars, and pillars of Almug trees; I made me Chambers and Galleries for all vses, for necessary vses, for delights, and pleasures, for solitarinesse, and priuate meditation, for Summer and Winter, etc. For Cedars and siluer were as plentifull with me, as stones in the streetes, and Sycomore trees in the dales. Of gold I had abundance. For there came yeerely sixe hundred sixty sixe talents of gold, besides that which I had of Merchant men, and spice Merchants, of the Kings of Arabia, and Gouernours of the Countrey. I made me a great throne of Iuory, and ouer-laide it with the best gold, the like whereof was not in any Kingdome. All my drinking vessels were of gold, and all my vessels of the Forrest of Lebanon were of pure gold. I had also abundance of precious stones, Iewels, spices, oyntments, odours, and what precious things

the earth could affoord, were sent to me for presents. I had 1 King. 4. 7. 22, etc.twelue Officers ouer all Israel, to prouide victuals for me, and my houshold. I had for one dayes prouision thirty measures of fine flower, and sixty measures of meale, ten fat Oxen, and an hundred Sheep, besides Harts, and Roe-bucks, and Fallow Deare, and fatted Fowle. So that the meate of my Table, the sitting of my Seruants, the attendance of my Ministers, and their apparell, my Butlers, etc. were an astonishment to Princes. Moreouer, I had foure thousand stables 2 Chron. 9. 25. 1 Kings 4. 26. Chap. 10. 26.of Horses for my Chariots, ten Horses in euery Stable, forty thousand in all. I had foureteene hundred Chariots, and twelue hundred Horsemen. I made me two hundred Targets of beaten gold, sixe hundred sheckles went to one Target. I made me also three hundred shields of beaten gold, three pound of gold went to one shield. Also I was at peace with all Kings, which did reuerence to me, and sent me presents, who were desirous to heare of my wisedome, and of my workes. My Princes and Officers also were loyall and faithfull to me. So that I enioyed the fulnesse of prosperity, and security. And because no pleasant thing might be wanting to me, I planted me vineyards, and furnished them with the choysest Vines of all sorts.



Verse 5.
I made me Gardens, and Hortyards, and I planted trees in them of all kinde of fruits.

SEcondly, I made me also Gardens, contriued by the art of the best workemen, and filled them with all manner of pleasant plants, and hearbes. I made me hortyards, and planted therein trees of all kindes of fruites, pleasant to my sight, and delightfull to my taste, resembling euen the Garden of GOD.



Verse 6.
I made me pooles of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees.

THirdly, I made me also Cisternes to conuey waters from the Springs, and Fountaines, to water my Gardens and

Hortyards, and other trees therewith in the times of drought, to preserue them fresh and greene for the pleasure of mine eyes, and to make their flowres and fruites more beautifull, and delicious.



Verse 7.
I got me seruants and maidens, and had seruants borne in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small Cattle, aboue all that were in Ierusalem before me.

FOurthly, I got me also men-seruants and maid-seruants, such as had beene well trayned vp, and were fit for the seruice of Princes, both in regard of their persons and qualities. I had also others borne in my house, the children of Captiues, euen the choysest, and best qualified of those that had beene taken captiues in the warres. Also I had great possessions of Cattle, both of Oxen and Sheepe, of Horses, Camels, and Mules, partly for the prouision of my House, partly for other vses, aboue all that were before mee in Ierusalem.



Verse 8.
I gathered me also siluer and gold, and the peculiar treasure of Kings, and of the Prouinces: I got mee men-singers, and women-singers, and the delights of the sonnes of men, as musicall instruments, and that of all sorts.

FIftly, also of siluer and gold, I had abundance, which yeerely came vnto me, besides that which came once euerie three yeeres from Tarshish, for vessels and vtensils, for the beautifying of my house, for shields and targets, and other vses; and other precious treasures, which for their rarenesse and beauty, Princes value at highest rate, and are therefore peculiar to them. I got me also men-singers, and women-singers, that both had perfect skill and pleasant voyces, that not onely the shrilnesse of the quauering treble, and the grauity of the deepe base, and the delightfull mediocrity of the mixt tenor mitigating the sharpenesse of the one, and eleuating the flatnesse of the other, might refresh my spirits with their pleasant ayre; but also that the song it selfe might affect

my minde with the lightsome ayre of pleasant thoughts, insinuated by the pleasing deceits of harmonicall allurements, to remoue the impression of pensiue melancholy, and to pacifie the surges of cholericke fancies, that such obiects being stolne away from my minde vnawares, as cares are by sleepe, I might be retracted from the disturbance of intemperate passions. I had also the delights of the sonnes of men, euen all kindes of musicall Instruments. The Hebrew words are Schaddah, Schiddoth, id est, deuastation, and deuastations; or spoyle, and spoyles, and signifieth the fairest women taken captiues in the sacking of a City, as Xantis Pagnine translateth it, which thing was the common custome of old times. The words afore-going, delights of the sonnes of men, import as much, being, as I thinke, more properly related to Solomons three hundred Concubines, which were the fairest women of captiuities. For as Wife and Children are termed the pleasures of the eyes, and Idols the delight of the eyes; so also may these be termed the delights of the sonnes of men, in those warlike times; Iud. 5. 30. Haue they not sped? haue they diuided the prey, to euery man a damozell or two? which was a speciall reward. But Tremellius translateth it, Symphonie, and Symphonies, that is, all kindes of musicall Instruments, as it is in our English Translation. For melody is a mixture of like, and vnlike voyces, or of like, and vnlike sounds, in the mixture and temperature whereof, one is so refracted and retused by another, that of them all, Symphonie, id est, a discordant concord ariseth after the imitation of the elements refracted in an harmonicall mixture in compound bodies. Now musicke is delightfull to young men, and may well be thus termed.



Verse 9.
So I was great, and increased more then all that were before mee in Ierusalem: also my wisedome remained with mee.

A Conclusion containing an amplification of his pompous magnificence, by a comparison of all his predecessours. I became great both in power and wealth, eminent

and glorious aboue all. Neither in this royall splendour was I intemperate, giuing the reines to inordinate affections and lusts, but I behaued my selfe both in the getting and vsage of these things, according to the direction of wisedome, that I might both freely without checke of conscience reioyce in them, and also be admired and honoured in the mindes and hearts of mine owne subiects, and forraine Princes.



Verse 10.
And whatsoeuer mine eyes desired. I kept not from them, I with-held not mine heart from any ioy; for my heart reioyced in all my labour, and this was my portion of all my labour.

SIxtly, moreouer besides these particular prerogatiues, whereof I haue made mention by name, I with-held no delights from my senses, which either by the wisedome of my minde, or by the submonishing inclinations of my senses I perceiued to affoord accesse of ioyfull contentment. Neither did I suppresse the fancies of my heart with checke, or delay, but it reioyced in the easie, speedy, and full attainement thereof. Therefore my heart reioyced in all my labour which I tooke for the ioy of my heart. And this was the portion of all my labour, euen to reioyce my selfe in the vse of these things. Thus farre of the triall of the third way to felicitie.



Verse 11.
Then I looked on all the workes that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to doe: and behold all was vanity, and vexation of spirit; and there was no profit vnder the Sunne.

AN exposition of Solomons counsell, in the reuiew of his pompeous magnificence, and of the euent thereof. After that by wisedome I had effected all that was in mine heart to do, and gotten what comfort, contentment and ioy could be affoorded to my heart in the possession, sight, and vse thereof, the testimony of other Kings and Princes in their admiration of my royall splendour, also furthering and confirming

in me the conceited hope of happinesse: then vpon vnpartial reueiw of all my glory, according to true wisdome, without deceitfull flattery of my selfe, I saw no profit, no solidity, no perpetuity, but changeablenesse, and chancefulnesse both in the parts and in the whole. For both the things themselues are subiect to casualties, and alterations, and howsoeuer in time to vanish quite away, and also age it selfe maketh the most delightfull things wearisome. So that what felicity so euer men, through the errour of their mindes, may imagine to themselues, or the things of the world may occasion them to hope for, by their deceitfull shew promising what they cannot performe; yet there is no such profit, no sound tranquility, no constant rest in them, all things being vncertaine, fleeting, subiect to dissolution by a thousand wayes, some apparent, some suspected, most vnknowne, holding the vnstable minde, and doubtfull heart alwayes in vnquiet suspence. Therefore by reason of this vanity, they are a vexation to the spirit, giuing no more contentment thereto, then light wind doth to the hungry appetite and empty stomacke. Neither indeed can the armies of heauen and earth afford it, because God hath subdued all things vnder vanity.



Verse 12.
And I turned my selfe to behold wisedome, and madnesse, and folly: for what can the man doe, that commeth after the King? euen that which hath beene already done.

AN exposition of his counsell in the reuiew of the two former wayes to felicity, to wit, of wisedome, and beas^iall sensualitie, and also foolishnesse, with a confirmation therof. Wisedome and madnesse are quite contrary. Madnesse is inconsideratenes, rashnesse, epicurishnesse, mirth, and iollity, without all care. Folly seemeth here to be a mixture of both. But wisedome in the wicked cannot be tearmed wisedome, but worldly craftinesse, brutish, or diabol^call subtilty. The Hebrew is Sikkeluth, of the verbe, Sakal, i. pravus, distortus, perver^us suit, that is, wicked, froward peruerse, turning aside out o^ the right way. Such wise men, as the world counteth

wisedome, are in the Scriptures termed brutish, and foolish, Ier. 10. 8. And beasts euery where, because their wisedome is onely exercised in fulfilling their brutish appetites, and fleshly lusts, which is a thing common to man with beasts, neither can the vnregenerate do otherwise. 1 Ioh. 2. 16 A foole is either naturall or spirituall. The naturall foole is either reasonable, or reasonlesse. The reasonable is hee that wisely and prudently ordereth himselfe according to reason, which reason notwithstanding is corrupt and limited to lust. Rom 1. 22. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. So that in him there is nothing but folly and wickednesse. Such a foole is euery man vnregenerate, Psal. 14 1. 2. The reasonlesse foole, is either he that hath not sound reason, whose principles of reason are cra^kt, broken and confused, but yet to his power doth wickedly; or else that hath reason, but vseth none, being captiue to his lusts, of whom there is lesse hope than of the other. To this foole, shame and reproch belongeth. He is full of mischiefe, proud, wilfull, wrathfull, reuengefull, rash, and is inwrapped in many dangers, and troubles. For as he gloryeth in his craft, and is mischieuous, so mischiefe falleth on him, it is his portion. The spirituall foole is euery carnall Professour of the Gospel in outward shew without the power thereof, who hath a generall illumination, confused, and broken principles, but his manners and all his courses are heathenish, and brutish, being captiuated to his lusts. Yea, and he is a foole also, that hath vnderstanding, knowledge and learning, but yet serueth not God but his owne lusts thereof, deceiuing his owne heart. There are abundance of such fooles now a dayes. Of all these fooles Solomon here speaketh, but more specially, I thinke, of the reasonlesse fooles. To discouer the vanity, and folly of spirituall fooles more at large. This foolishnesse is that common mediocrity or meane, which worldly wise-men, polititians, and moralists, and all fooles doe falsly imagine to be vertue, or the best profession, which consisteth in the middle of their extreames. But in case of religion, their darke hearts neuer rightly conceiued what either extreames or middles were. For this common meane, is a mixture of light with darkenesse, good with euill, sweet with

sowre, wisedome with sensuality, pretious with vile, religion with carnality. But such indifferences are hatefull and loathsome before God, and vpright men. This the Scriptures tearme folly, and such wise ones, fooles and hypocrites, Matth. 23.
Vnderstand therefore the deceitfulnesse of the heart, and the delusion of Sathan, euen that deepe sophistrie, by which whole multitudes doe perish, yea euen all, except the very Elect. For what is that common wisedome, reason, indifference, honesty of men, but a certaine mediocrity or meane mixt of linnen and woollen, of sowre with sweet, of religion with fleshly morality; as though that all things, religion and all should onely tend, and ayme at a happy worldly state, or glorifying of the flesh or outward man, or to approach as neere to this marke as may be. This was the sinne of Saul. He did not aime at the sole glory of God, but mingled the holy commandement and his owne lust, euen his vaine-glory, together. He would not loose his owne glory in that triumph: Therefore Samuel told him that hoe was become a foole. 1 Sam. 13. 13. Such fooles were the Israelites. 1 Kings 18. 21. and Exod. 31. 1. Such fooles were the Pharises, Princes, people of the Iewes. The disciples being yet but rude, and weake were tainted with this folly, Ioh. 12. 22. Yet in them it was but infirmity, because they were in Gods election, and actually beleeued, and followed him in sincerity. Euery professour of the Gospel, not inwardly renued by the spirit of sanctification is a foole, but we must take heed of iudging, and censuring: For the worke of the spirit in the regenerate is not to make a mixture of heauenly and carnall things, but by mortification to sub due all things to himselfe, euen to conuert the whole man inward and outward into spirit, to bring euery thought and imagination, euery word and worke into captiuity vnder Christ, which is true wisedome and liberty. So that whereas it is said, that in state of grace we are partly flesh, partly spirit, in all our actions and affections, it is not meant of mixture, for where there is mixture, there is no sound, no sauing conuersion, but the Foxe will to his kinde; but that we are as the rusty Iron in the fire, the

menstruous or filthy rag in the fullers soap, nay rather Lazarus dead in the graue, into whom the soule being re-entred, causeth motion of the spirits, first in the heart, than of the pulses, and bloud, then of a leg, or arme, etc. till at length he be risen wholly out of the graue, and at last brought to his former state of life, and so is death ouercome of life. But what this meaneth, our common, honest, reasonable, wise, indifferent minded men, neither will nor can conceiue. For they know not through the hardnesse of their hearts, that the ground of their Christian profession, is the vtter denyall of themselues, or the vtter destruction of the flesh, and the best things thereof, as enmity to the grace of Christ, Rom. 8. 7. Phil. 3. 7. that they might be wholly in him, and for him, 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. which is the maine scope of this present treatise of Solomon. To redresse this beautifull, but fundamentall euill, let vs remember, and lay to heart these two Texts of Scriptures. The first is Dauids charge to Solomon his sonne, 2 Chron. 28. 9. And thou my sonne Solomon, know thou the God of they father, and serue him with a perfect heart, and willing minde: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and vnderstandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts. The second, is the ground and life of euery word and worke, which maketh it acceptable in the sight of God. Rom. 14. 23. Whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne. He that wanteth true faith shall perish euerlastingly, whatsoeuer, how great soeuer his workes be.
Lastly, Solomon here confirmeth his experiments, with the considerate and iudicious view thereof, by the conscience of his sufficiency in wisedome, and experience, which is figured by a Prelepsis, or preuention of an obiection, thus. It may be that thou hast not perfectly knowne the difference of wisdome and madnesse, and folly, and so hast not iudged and determined rightly of things, and the vse thereof. Ans. I haue sufficiently knowne, and tryed the truth of that which I haue spoken concerning these things, and the vanity thereof. This assertion is amplyfied by an argument of the Greater denyed. No man can know or try more than I haue done? The words are figured by a communication, What can the man doe? Haadam, ^* the greatest, learnedest, and most experienced, for the

demonstratiue article noteth eminence, or excellence. That commeth after the King? This testimony of himselfe is confirmed by the dignity and excellency of his person, (King,) amplified by a comparison included in the demonstratiue article, noting eminence, hammelek, the King, the most excellent King. As if he should say, If Kings that haue power to get the knowledge, and experience of things, are to be beleeued, then much more the most eminent King is sufficient to know, trie, and determine the truth of all this that hath beene saide, therefore to be beleeued.



Verse 13.
Then I saw that wisedome excelleth folly, as farre as light excelleth darkenesse.

A Determination or censure vpon his iudicious reuiew of the two former wayes, in the commendation of wisedome, and dispraise of folly, figured by a prolepsis thus; Thou seemest to put no difference betweene wisedome, and madnesse, and folly, in that thou canft finde no profit, no content in any of them, but onely vanity and vexation. Ans. Although that true felicity is not to be found in wisedome, neither in the wisedome of this World, nor in the literall knowledge of the Gospell, yet it altogether excelleth folly, yea, is contrary to folly. The proposition hee illustrateth by a comparison of things contrary. Euen as light excelleth darkenesse, not in degrees, but in nature; so doth wisedome excell folly, not in degrees, but in nature, hauing no fellowship or communion with it, but mortifieth it, as light excelleth darkenesse, and water extinguisheth fire. By folly, he meaneth the crooked actions and conuersation of wicked idiots, and crafty colts, vnaduised fooles, and cunning fooles, whose wisedome is worldly, sensuall, and diuellish; Iames 3. 15. separated from all feare of God, and grounds of naturall goodnesse, and exercised in euill, as Tamar saide to Amnon, intising her to incest; Thou shalt be a foole in Israel. Such a foole as he here meaneth, was Nabal.




Verse 14.
The wise mans eyes are in his head, but the foole walketh in darkenesse: and I my selfe perceiued also that one euent happeneth to them all.

A Confirmation of his determination in the commendation of wisedome, and dispraise of folly, and also a reuiew of the euent of wisedome, and the wise. The wise mans eyes are in his head. The head is as a Tower, the eyes are as watchmen looking round about, and afarre off, and as the Sunne which is the eye of the World. Watchmen in the top of a Tower, are watchfull, diligent, and circumspect, fore-seeing euill a farre off, and preuenting it before it surprize them. So in the eyes of a wise man there is vnderstanding, discerning, iudgement, sobriety, heedfull diligence, fore-sight. Wisedome ordereth all the wayes of a wise man, he escheweth dangers, mischiefes, inconueniences, and euery hurtfull thing; he procureth commodities on all sides, he hath delight and pleasure in the workes of his hands. Whereas contrarily, the foole is blind, he knowes not what he saith, nor what he doth; he obserues not persons, times, and place, but rusheth headily forward, committing euery word, and deede to fortune. He falles into the ditch on euery side, hee dasheth his head against euery post, he wrappes himselfe among bushes and briars, as they that walke in darkenesse, and vnknowne places, and is rent and torne, and if he struggle out, he is neuer the neerer, but is by and by in new dangers, because hee wanteth the lanterne of Gods Word and Spirit, to direct him into the right pathes, and to guide him therein, that onely is it that maketh the simple wise, and teacheth man knowledge.
The World is Gods Booke, euery thing that a man heareth or seeth, is a leafe, or a line, wherein hee may reade something to his owne instruction, and further edification. The wise man beholdeth the wisedome, prouidence, goodnesse, and iustice of God in all things. Againe, he beholdeth the deprauation and corruption of all things, brought in by the enuie of the Diuell. Hee discerneth the vprightnesse of

godlinesse, and the tortuosity of wickednesse, the plaine pathes of wisedome, and the peruerse wayes of folly in all things, and in euery thing. The one hee chuseth, ordering himselfe in all his wayes according to wisedome, the other he refuseth, and correcteth, and retracteth himselfe by wisedome. So that the vnderstanding, sober, heedfull, watchfull eyes of the wise, looke not on the things themselues, or outward appearances, but on Gods wisedome, goodnesse, iustice in the things; yea, hee beholdeth Sathans malice, and mans misery, and discerneth the times, and the seasons, the workes of God therein, and the counter-workes of the Diuel. But the foole walketh in darkenesse. The foole hath as it were no eyes, or eyes wherein the sight is perished. He looketh on things, as doth the wise, but he seeth into nothing. Therefore Solomon saith, Prou. 17. 24. The eyes of a foole are in the ends of the earth; that is, light, heedlesse, wandring eyes, shewing the confusion of many vaine imaginations in the head, but no discreete apprehension, no sobriety of wisedome, no prudent obseruation. He looketh on outward appearances, and obserueth childishly. But hee cannot see one whit how the Scriptures, teaching the whole knowledge of God, and of our selues, his wisedome, mans folly, his grace, mans malice, are continually fulfilled before his eyes. Hee that is in darkenesse, discerneth not colours, no more doth the foole things that differ. The foole gathereth vp follies, and glorieth in some imitatiue wicked subtilties, and a parable or wise sentence is harsh, and odious in his mouth. The foole hath the eyes of a beast, iudging, chusing, refusing, according to his carnall affections and lusts, etc. And I my selfe perceiued also that one euent happeneth to them all. Here is his reuiew of the euent of wisedome, and the wise. This worldly wisedome which men so much magnifie, maketh not a man happie. For I my selfe not forgetfull of my selfe in my royalty, not enamoured of my beauty, not kissing my hand, perceiued also as well as others, that one euent or end happeneth to the wise and foolish, and both of them are alike subiect to the manifold afflictions, calamities, sorrowes, and miseries of this mortall life. Therefore speake what you can in the

commendation of worldly wisedome, and act what you can thereby, it shall in the end be co-incident with folly.



Verse 15.
Then saide I in my heart, as it happeneth to the foole, so it happeneth euen to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I saide in my heart, that this also is vanity.

HIs determination, or conclusion vpon the reuiew. When I saw that the wise and foole had one euent, and chance; I reasoned thus within my heart. If good things befall the foole as well as mee, and euill things befall me as well as the foole, then haue I to no purpose wearied my body and minde, in searching out wisedome: But I see that it doth so; therefore to defraud a mans soule of pleasure, in striuing for wisedome; is to no purpose, and consequently it is also vanity.



Verse 16.
For there is no remembrance of the wise more then of the foole for euer, seeing that which is now, in the dayes to come shall be forgotten; and how dyeth the wise man? as the foole.

A Confirmation of his reason concluded in the verse aforegoing, by two arguments, the one in the beginning, the other in the end of the verse. Concerning the former. If the wise man with all his words and workes be not had in euerlasting remembrance, no more then the foole, then is the labour and wisedome of the wise to no purpose: but the antecedent or former part is true, because that both the persons, and their doings that now are, shall be forgotten in succeeding generations; therefore is the consequent or latter part true also. Time is a depth which swalloweth vp all things. And the decourse of time is a passage, leauing all things behind it. The further that time passeth away, the more confusedly still wee see things past, which in the end quite vanish out of minde, as the bird or arrow that flyeth into the profundity of the ayre, or stone that falleth into the height of the deepe. Now the fish, and the stone, the bird and the arrow, are all one, euen without difference, to him that seeth neither, yea, plaine nothing; and so are all things

vanished out of minde. And how dyeth the wise man? as the foole. Here is the latter argument, whereby hee confirmeth the vanity of wisedome, by the same condition thereof with follie, figured by a communication, or rather an exclamation, intimating, that the wise is greatly to be commiserated, because he receiueth no more fruit of his worthy labours, then the mad and foolish, that liue in sensuality and bodily pleasures, after the manner of beasts. It cannot be discerned by their end, in outward appearance, whether is the happier, or whether is the more miserable.



Verse 17.
Therefore I hated life, because the worke that is wrought vnder the Sunne, is grieuous vnto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

A Conclusion. Therefore am I so farre from hope of obtaining any contentment, profit, or happinesse in this World, that I rather hated life it selfe, hauing no matter of loue, or desire in it. My reason is, because that all things which men doe in this life, are grieuous. Euery worke is full of griefe in it selfe, and occasioneth griefe to others. The workes of the brutish Epicure are grieuous; the workes of the foolish that thinketh himselfe wise, are grieuous; and so are the workes of the wise, seeing that he dyeth, and his wisedome is forgotten, as they and theirs are. Moreouer, hee confirmeth this reason againe by a Prossyllogisme, or addition of another reason. For all, as well the best, as the worst things, is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Thus farre of his counsell in the reuiew of the two former wayes to happy contentment, verse 12. Of his determination, or censure of them, verse 13. of the confirmation of his determination, and the reuiew of the euent of wisedome, and the wise; verse 14. of his determination or conclusion vpon the reuiew; verse 15. of the confirmation of his determination, verse 16. and conclusion; verse 17.




Verse 18.
Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken vnder the Sunne: because I should leaue it vnto the men that shall be after mee.

THis verse hath relation to the reuiew, and euent of his pompous magnificence, verse 11. He looked on all his workes, and labours, but all was vanity and vexation; Why? because there was no profit vnder the Sunne. Here is further set downe the consequent of that euent, namely, that he obtained not only no contentment by his great workes, but also hated them. The reason of his hatred is, because hee should leaue them to the possession and vse of another man, who should be heire to all his labours, yet neuer tooke any paines for them.



Verse 19.
And who knoweth whether hee shall be a wise man or a foole? yet shall hee haue rule ouer all my labour, wherein I haue laboured, and wherein I haue shewed my selfe wise vnder the Sunne.

A Confirmation of the reason, figured by the preuention of an obiection, thus: That a man shall leaue his labours to another, is no cause of griefe: For seeing that hee must not alwayes liue here; for one generation passeth, and another commeth, it is a mans ioy, and comfort rather, yea, the prosperous successe of them in their continuance to future generations, giueth great contentment to the heart.
Ans. That cannot be, because it is impossible for me, or any man to know whether he shall be a wise man or a foole. It is figured by a communication, to intimate the impossibility thereof. And what manner of man soeuer hee shall be, yet shall he haue the rule, command, and vse of all my labours at his pleasure, wherein I haue so diligently exercised my wisedome. If hee proue a foole, what is the fruit of my labour, and my wisedome? euen to be the purueyour of another mans sensuality, and to subminister matter for the execution, and maintenance of his folly: So all my labour is

lost. If he proue a wise man, yet will he alter, change, and vse all my labours according to his owne minde, and so shall they be transformed, as a vesture, into a new fashion. Therefore in that a man must leaue his labours to another mans possession and disposition, that is also vanity.



Verse 20.
Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despaire of all the labour which I tooke vnder the Sunne.

A Conclusion of the reason confirmed in the verse before. Seeing that my wisedome in my labour, shall be either turned into folly, or else translated into another fashion, I iudged it better to despaire of getting contentment by my workes, rather then to place any hope in such vncertainties, that I might else-where seeke for the true happinesse, that cannot be lost nor changed. Therefore seeing that in the best things done here by wisedome, wee haue more matter of despaire than hope, and howsoeuer, are held in continuall suspence, they are meere vanity and vexation.



Verse 21.
For there is a man whose labour is in wisedome, and in knowledge, and in equity: yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leaue it for his portion. This also is vanity, and a great euill.

AN amplification of the conclusion conteined in the verse before; Namely, of the despaire and griefe of his labour, by an obseruation of the common condition of men. There is many a man that laboureth to attaine to an happy estate here, and that by wisedome, knowledge and equitie, to which God also giueth a blessing, that so his heart might reioyce without checke of conscience in the fruition thereof, which is seldome incident to the rich; yet shall he leaue his estate behinde him, to be a portion for another that neuer tooke any paines for it. And so be the prouident and true drudge of he knowes not whom; and how it shall be vsed and imployed, and blessed in the hands of him he altogether knoweth not. Yea, sometimes it falleth out that the

heire curseth his patrimony, because that if he had not had such a meanes and prouocation, he should not haue committed so many euils. Faelix necessitas, quae ad meliora tra^it. For our Sauiour saith, How hard is it for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen? This then is a vanity, and not onely a pr^uation of good, or a nothing, but also a great euill, namely, that a man should not onely be depriued of his goods by death, but also that his goods should be depraued.



Verse 22.
For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his heart wherein he hath laboured vnder the Sunne?

THis verse hath reference to the 18. verse before, containing a reason of the hatred of his dispairefull labours, figured by a communication, to giue more weight vnto it. If a man see no profit of the labours of his body and minde, then they haue nothing but matter of despaire and hatred in them: but what profit, or ioyfull contentment can any man finde in the laborious getting, and carefull keeping of his gettings? Therefore as I said at first, so after many proofes, I conclude; What profit hath a man of all his labour that hee taketh vnder the Sunne.



Verse 23.
For all his dayes are sorrow, and his trauaile griefe; yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanitie.

A Prossyllogisme, or confirmation of the former reason. He hath no profit of his labours, no calme contentation. Why? For because all his dayes are full of paines, and sorrowes, trouble, and anger. His trauaile is full of care and anguish, feares, and doubts, perplexitie, and anxiety. His heart is depriued of the naturall reft of night. For then hee falleth to reuiew the labours of the time past, and to dispose of the trauaile of the time following, to bring all things aptly together, without the interruption of manifold occurrences, or chances, for the accomplishment of his proiect. Againe, although he would take his rest, yet the manifold businesses, and exagitations of his thoughts on the day, cause

many broken dreames, and fearefull phantasies, which often disquiet the spirit, and maketh the heart pensiue afterward: So that a man hath no profit of his paines, but his labour for his trauaile, and this also is vanity.



Verse 24.
There is nothing better for a man, then that hee should eate and drinke, and that he should make his soule enioy the good of his labour. This also I saw, and that it was from the hand of God.

IN this verse Solomon setteth downe the right vse, and onely good that is to be found in the things of this life, for a remedy, or mitigation of the vanities or miseries, and declareth the same by the efficient cause. His proposition is illustrated by a comparison of the Greater denyed; And it is an answere to a secret obiection, which is this. If nothing but sorrow and griefe redound to man of all his labours, to what purpose then should a man apply his minde to wisedome, and his body to trauaile? And if so be that a man must either depriue himselfe of life, or else prolong his dayes in perpetuall sorrow, then the world seemeth to be made for none other end, then to be an engine of torture vnto men. Ans. Not so neither. For though I haue already prooued that a man can obtaine no true profit, or happy contentation by the things of the world, nor by any thing that can be knowne or done by mans wisedome: yet it followeth not therefore that there is no good in all things made for mans vse, by which he may be inabled and helped both to liue, and to order his life according to wisedome, and vertue. But there is a good in them for which cause God hath created them, and imparted the same to euery one according to his owne pleasure. And this good, is not to depend or rest on them, nor to trust in them; for therefore hath God made them vncertaine, and vaine, nor yet by treasuring them vp to depriue a mans selfe, or others of their vse, nor to lauish them out, as though they would neuer haue end: but to feede, cheere, and comfort the body therewith, with tranquility of minde resting on Gods mercy, and so to passe the time of this life with ioyfull contentation in honest labor, not in idlenesse,

sensualitie, or drudgery. He that looketh for more then this in them, is vtterly deceiued, seeing that in the best vse of them, they are transitory and vanishing. Lastly, this good vse of them he declareth by the principall efficient cause. Not onely the possession of these things, but also their vertue to feed, and refresh the body, and mind, is the gift of God. Otherwise, all wisedome is full of vanity, and griefe. They come neither by mans prouidence, and endeuour originally, nor by chance, Deut. 8. 17. Therefore let vs returne all praise and thankes to him, in the vsage of our selues, and vse of all his gifts.



Verse 25.
For who can eate? or who else can hasten hereunto more then I?

A Confirmation of his proposition, amplified by a comparison of the Greater denyed, and figured by a communication. Who could receiue more profit, ioy and contentment of these transitory, and fading things more then I? and who can more speedily, and easily obtaine, and more securely possesse and vse them more then I? what good thing soeuer could be had, and what vse could be made of them for the pleasure of my body, and delight of minde, I had it in the perfection thereof, yet this is all that I by experience found, or could conceiue in heart to be found in them.



Verse 26.
For God giueth to a man that is good in his fight, wisedome, and knowledge, and ioy: but to the sinner he giueth trauell to gather, and to heape vp, that he may giue to him that is good before God: This also is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

AN amplification of this right vse of worldly things by the efficient cause thereof, both in himselfe and other men. These men are described by their condition and quality (good;) Goodnesse is illustrated by a distinction thereof [in his sight,] that is, truely good, Psal 3^ 1 2. not in appearance before men, or his owne deceitfull ^ea^t Ier. 17. 9. which is hypocrisie. God who hath made the world, and all

things therein for mans vse, hath giuen wisedome and knowledge to those that are accepted of him, and feare him, to get them rightly, and to vse them comfortably. This worke of Gods mercy is illustrated by the Antithesis, or contrary worke of iudgement in the sinner. Contrarily, God withholdeth this wisedome, knowledge and ioy from the sinner, which feareth him not, but turneth his eare from the Law, and maketh no conscience of his doings, and leaueth him in the power and bondage of his lusts, to torment himselfe both night and day with carking, caring, and drudgery to gather riches, and yet to depriue himselfe of all comfort, meate, drinke, cloathing, recreation, etc. This worke of Gods iudgement in the sinner is declared by the end; Namely, that after this faithlesse drudge hath treasured them vp, God might giue them to them that feare him, and are accepted of him, Iob 27. 17. Againe, God doth take them away from good men, when he correcteth their faults, and giueth them to the wicked, that are both theirs and his enemies, as the example of Ezechias doth manifest. To conclude; This also is vanity and vexation of spirit.



CHAPTER III.


Verse 1.
To euery thing there is a season, and a time to euery purpose vnder heauen.

SOlomon hath hitherto discoursed, and concluded the vanity of mans purposes and designes of happy contentment. First, by the common obseruation of things subiect to mans knowledge. Secondly, by his owne experimentall knowledge both of wisedome, and of the vse of worldly things, in the two former Chapters* Now hee continueth still his obseruation, shewing by the conuersion of times, and particular examples pertaining to knowledge and vse, that all things, deedes, counsels, euents, good, and euill, are known to God onely, and

in regard of vs doe fluctuate vpon vncertaine issues, yea, altogether vncertaine in their beginnings, proceedings and endings, which depend and attend vpon vnstable times, whatsoeuer our aduisements and deuices be either in attaining good, or auoyding euill. This is another maine argument* or Prosepilogisme, confirming the Epilogisme, Cap. 1. 3. Whereby he proueth that a man hath no profit of all his labours. First, he propoundeth it generally in this verse, and after confirmeth it by an induction of sundry particulars as hee did before. And here is a liuely exposition of that which he spake, Chap. 1. verse 8. of the mutability, and corruptibility of all things, All things are full of labour, man cannot vtter it, etc.
To euery thing there is a season. No maruell is it if all mans wisedome, and the vse of worldly things, whether sensuall or magnificall be subiugated to vanity, when as all things, all counsels, all deeds, all euents, so variable, and repugnant in this vnquiet world are subiected to this instable course and recourse of times, which God hath put in his own hand; and in his secret prouidence hath prefixed a time vnknowne, and vnalterable by man. To euery thing that is subiected to the Law, inclination, and instinct of nature, there is a time; and a time to euery purpose vnder the Sunne, that is, to euery thing done by the election, counsell, and will of man. To euery thing that necessity vrgeth vs to doe there is a time, both of their beginnings and endings, ordained of God: So that wee cannot doe what we would, nor when we would, nor how we would, nor how long wee would, nor surcease when wee would, nor change when we would. For the hidden foundation of God remaineth sure, and sheweth it selfe in his time contrary and diuers to our manifold vaine imaginations, desires, and purposes. We therefore and all things with vs, within vs, and without vs, in our bodies, and in our mindes are subiect to the instabilities of times and seasons, euen to opportunities, and occasions, in our beginnings, proceedings and endings.




Verse 2.
A time to be borne, and a time to dye: a time to plant, and a time to plucke vp that which is planted.

FIrst, it is not in the power of man to come into the world, nor in his will to depart out of the world. But the season or opportunity of both, whether by the course of nature, or otherwise, is prefined by the counsell of God, and is the work of his hand. And as there is a time of the birth and death of man, so also of the planting and rooting vp of trees, there is a time ordained of God. There is a time of their growth, age, standing, and falling, according to the necessitie and vse of man: For euery man, and euery generation hath his necessitie, according to the exigence whereof hee applyeth himselfe by the information of reason, partly to obtaine good, partly to auoyd euill. So there is a time to sow, and to reape, which things though men voluntarily doe, yet the ground thereof is necessitie, and for the doing of them, wee tarry the appointed times, and waite for the conuenient seasons, which are not in our owne power.



Verse 3.
A time to kill, and a time to heale: a time to breake downe, and a time to build vp.

SEcondly, the times of naturall life and death, are not only appointed of God, but also vntimely deaths, by diseases, casualties, violence, Iustice, which wee thinke by skill to preuent, and by prouidence to auoyd, haue their appointed times. And contrarily, desperate life; namely, mortall euils, both of dangers and diseases, in our reason vnauoydable, is in the hands of God, who deliuereth and recou^reth, killeth and saueth aliue at his pleasure, to whom nothing is vnpossible. Hereof the Scriptures affoord innumerable examples. Dangers, and diseases, troubles and sicknesse, deliuerances and recoueries from both, are in the power of God. Moreouer, as there is a time of liuing, dying, planting, and rooting vp: so also of building and pulling downe, according to the exigence of mans necessitie; yea, a time there is of building

houses where trees, grasse, and corne haue growne, and beasts haue beene fed; and a time to feede beasts, to plant trees, and sow corne, where paued courts, and situations of faire buildings haue beene. And all these workes depend vpon the opportunities of times, without the power of man, to which man applieth himselfe voluntarily by iudgement of reason, according to the exigence of a secret necessity.



Verse 4.
A time to weepe, and a time to laugh: a time to mourne; and a time to dance.

THirdly, euery man by all his wit laboureth, or at least by desire wisheth to be free from cares, and that is the end of his cares, and to auoid the causes of weeping, yet can he not escape that euill. For either the want of fore-sight and diligence in himselfe, or outward crosses and chancefull occurrences shall cause, or else occasion weeping, whether he will or no. Againe, there is a time to mourne, which men desire to auoid as the greatest euill; yea, when they cry peace, then is sorrow at hand, which neither can be auoyded, nor mitigated, nor ended by the counsell of our owne will: For euen that is not in our power. Contrarily, heauinesse may endure for a night, but vnexpected ioy commeth in the morning; Psal. 30. 5. 11. As the one commeth vnsent for, so the other commeth vnlookt for.



Verse 5.
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together: a time to imbrace, and a time to refraine from imbracing.

FOurthly, if a man purpose to pull downe an house, yet that hee cannot doe euen when he would, but hee must tarry for a conuenient season. And if hee would gather stones together to build an house, he must craue leaue of opportunity, which dependeth on manifold circumstances. So that whatsoeuer he prepareth in his heart to doe, the issue must be of God, yea, opportunity calleth vs out to doe many things that we neuer intended. Also there is a time of

marriage, both with whom, and when; and a time for children appointed of God, to which a man must yeeld, or else procure great and manifold euils to himselfe. So there is a time to refraine from marriage, and a time to abstaine from imbracing, vnlesse a man shall bring vpon him the anger of God for his intemperancy,



Verse 6.
A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keepe, and a time to cast away.

FIftly, if a man vse any traffick by Sea or Land, or by what trade or exercise soeuer he getteth his liuing, hee must heedefully obserue the opportunity of time: For time and tide tarry no man. Time is to be taken and vsed whiles it serueth and offereth it selfe, otherwise, it is in vaine to follow the bird that is escaped. This is a thing, whereof all men repent them, that they tooke not time while time serued. Hence Solomon saith, Prou. 27. 1. Boast not of tomorrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. We in this Land, that doe not wisely vse that opportunity of peace which God offereth vs to enrich our selues by honest and lawfull parsimony, but breake out into pride, and prodigality, venery, and all kinde of vanity, shall once repent the misvsage thereof. We haue had a large and fit opportunity a long time to serue God, and to doe good workes; but with the vnprofitable seruant we hide our talent in the ground, nay, spend all on our lusts, which are as a fire kindled by the fire of hell, to deuoure vp holy things also. It is said that in old time they spared from backe and belly, and superfluous buildings, to build Churches, and maintaine Friars; but the proud, venereous, politicke, gluttonous Iou^ls of these times, haue enlarged their throats and bellies, as hell, to deuoure and swallow vp Churches, and tithes, and Ministers and all. Contrarily, there is a time also to lose, which by all our prouidence and best endeauour we cannot abide. Yea, sometimes the Merchants, how greedy of gaine soeuer they be, are glad to cast their wares into the Seas, and suffer their shippe sometimes to seeke a new master, and th^^^^ the

escape of their liues a precious merchandize, as the Mariners did in Pauls voyage.



Verse 7.
A time to rent, and a time to sow; a time to keepe silence, and a time to speake.

SIxtly, there is an opportunity to rent old garments, when they are worne, to be put to other vses. If they be rent before they be worne, that is vnprofitable; if they be worne too long, that is in-decent, and occasioneth contempt, and I know not what euill conceit of a man in the mindes of men, as the sonne of Sirach saith; The apparell, countenance, and gesture, declare what a man is. Contrarily, there is a time to sow garments, both for necessity, and comelinesse. But the superfluity of sowing bringeth pouerty, and discouereth shame. For God blesseth his owne ordinances, and prospereth his owne opportunities. But there is no time ordained of God in his will and ordinance for the inuenting, and bringing in of strange fashions; That is an opportunity taken by the permission of God from the Diuell. Furthermore, though there is necessary and continual vse of speech, yet it is limited and confined to fit opportunity, else is it foolish babling, displeasing and harsh to the eares of God and man. Therefore saith Solomon, Prou. 25. 11. A word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of siluer, id est, most acceptable, profitable, comfortable, amiable, beautifull. Also Chap. 15. 23. Ioy commeth to a man by the answer of his mouth, and how good is a word in due season? Hee that obserueth not opportunity of speech, doth oft times depriue himselfe of many good things, and inwrappeth himselfe in many miseries also. Further, Solomon saith; Prou. 16. 1. The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord: Contrarily, there is a time to keepe silence. To be silent in season, is as great a vertue, as to speake in due time; For he that is defectiue in the one, is so in the other. Wee most commonly offend in speaking, namely, in our owne causes; but in speaking on Gods behalfe, and our neighbours, we are commonly mute enough, yea, possest with a dumbe

spirit. But of good speech and silence, God giueth opportunity, and season. Our tongues are the keyes of God, to open and shut the doores of our lippes, and our hearts are, or should be Gods treasury. Therefore our Sauiour Christ saith; A good man out of the treasure of his heart, bringeth out good things. And out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. Dauid saith, Psalme 116. 10. I beleeued, therefore I spake. Paul saith; We speake wisedome among them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2. Dauid said; Awake my glory, meaning his tongue. Christ was the word of the Father, so must the beleeuer be the word of Christ.



Verse 8,
A time to loue, and a time to hate: a time of warre, and a time of peace.

SEauenthly, there is a time to loue, as there is a time to speake, and this opportunity of loue is as commonly offered of God. Loue or true friendship is the bond of humaine society. By the bond of loue, all the members of the body are knit together into one head: It is the sinewes of the Church, and common-wealth. Where loue faileth, all tendeth to dissolution. God is all loue, the Diuell hath knowledge and faith, but hee hath no loue at all* Therefore the vertue and power of opportunities, in getting, making, keeping, and vsing friends, is excellent, and necessary. Contrarily, there is a time to hate, to know our enemies, to confront, and contend with them, to beware, and auoid them, to encounter and flie away, yea, also to make good vse to our selues of the wrongs that are offered vs. For howsoeuer a man ordereth his life, and behaueth himselfe in all things, loue and hatred, concord and discord, good will and enuie shall sift and tosse all affaires. For the vncleane spirit mingleth himselfe in all things to make confusion, and to bring destruction. Therefore saith Solomon, Prou. 28. 4. They that forsake the Law, praise the wicked: but they that keepe the Law, contend with them. The wicked are whelpes of the same littour, therefore are they affectioned one towards another, and praise one another. Rom. 1. 31. Nam. 16. 41. They

grace sinne in others, to couer their owne blemishes, and to preuent reproach, and controulement of their euill dealings and behauiour: but the man of conscience, that feareth God, will discountenance, discourage, and dispraise them, resist, and oppose them, and striue for the truth vnto death. Hence it is that Dauid saith; I hate them that hate thee, and earnestly contend with them that rise vp against thee.
Ob. Christ saith, Math. 5. 39. Resist not euill: but whosoeuer shall smite thee on the right cheeke, turne to him the other also.
Ans. Resistance is either a lawfull and harmelesse auoiding of euill, or else a retaliation, or rendering of like for like, wrong for wrong, reuenge for reuenge, and that is forbidden, Leuit. 19. 17. 18. Yea, wee ought so to be possest with the spirit of patience, bounty, and goodnesse, as to suffer a new wrong, rather then to reuenge an old, through hatred and ill will. To this purpose Paul saith, Rom. 12. 17. Recompence to no man euill for euill, which is to be ouercome of euill, verse 21. but ouercome euill with goodnesse, darkenesse with light, corruption with grace; if it be possible, haue peace with all men. How is that? Auenge not, verse 19. but if thine enemy hunger, giue him meate, and if he thirst, giue him drinke* so shalt thou heape coales of fire vpon his head: to wit, either winne him with thy benefits, or his owne conscience shall witnesse against him, that the fire of Gods wrath hangeth ouer his head, who will not suffer wickednesse to goe vnpunished* Which terrour of his conscience thou must not desire, nor reioyce at in way of reuenge, or for ease of thine owne stomacke, least God turne his wrath from him vnto thee, but rather pitty him, yet so as God might haue the glory. Therefore by turning of the cheeke, is not meant that a man should make himselfe a prey to contentious men* malapert, and violent persons, and a voluntary obiect of their cruell contempt: but to be of such moderation and equity, as to pacifie and winne them with sufferance, goodnesse, kindnesse, or what good meanes sanctified reason can deuise, not to be incensed with hatred, to oppose and wracke them, and so be ouercome of Sathan by these his instruments, both to bring the Gospell into

slander and hatred, and to fall into the same condemnation with them. Wherefore we are to pray for the conuersion of them, and Gods protection of vs, not to contend with them in their kind, that by the vertues of the spirit appearing forth in vs, the corruption of nature, and malice of Satan in them may be by their owne consciences condemned. But all this infringeth not the law of nature, which is to kill rather then to be killed, without the lawfull course of ciuill iustice, nor yet disanulleth the politike law, which God hath ordained to protect the iust, to bridle the violent, and to reforme the vitious and iniurious. Let vs take heed how we cauill, and sophisticate the simplicity of the Scriptures.
All this is explained, verse 44. Loue your enemies: Your enemies; not Gods enemies, which we are to hate, yet to take heede of rash iudgement: For though the cause or fact be hatefull, yet that argueth not simply hatred of the person. Wherefore loue them, that is, desire their conuersion, not their confusion; for we know not whether they be in Gods election, but charity hopeth the best. Whom God hath cast off, and who haue cast off God, we must cast off, lest wee be partakers with Gods enemies; therefore we must not bid an obstinate heretike God-speed. Neither would the disciples haue eaten bread with Iudas, if they had knowne his plot of treachery, but Christ reuealed him not: And Paul saith, haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of darkenes. If a man can haue no fellowship with their workes, neither with their persons, specially such persons, as on the one side make a mocke of all good edification, and on the other side, are strong corrupters. For what could Satan incarnate and in subiection to the ciuill power doe more? To conclude; We must doe good to our enemies willingly, resist their euils peaceably, make the cause Gods, not our owne, contend with them lawfully, liue among them warily, commit the vengeance to God, cast no stumbling blocks before them, but rather offer meanes, and further their conuersion, that they may glorifie God in the day of visitation, that is, when it shal please God to open their eyes to see, and discerne the truth. To conclude. Loue and hatred in priuate persons, warres and

peace in publike states, haue alwayes beene, and must be to the end. For throughout all nature there is an opposition of one thing to another, as well discord as concord, tares as wheat, because God will be glorified as well by iudgement as by mercy. For in both he delighteth, Ier. 9. 24. All these things and times are out of our power, and fall out by the determinate counsell of God. As we receiue all temporall benefits from the hand of God, not what, not how much, not by what meanes we list, so likewise we take opportunities for all things from his hand also. For he is all hand, holding and giuing all things, what, to whom, how, when hee will, Iam. 4. 13. 14. 15. We purpose, but know not what shall be, wherefore we must say, if the Lord will, Prou. 27. 1. And Ieremy saith, O Lord, the way of man is not in himselfe.



Verse 9.
What hath he that worketh, in that wherein hee laboureth?

A Conclusion of the principall argument, that a man hath no profit of all his labours, Chap. 1. 3. The Proposition or Maior is, Chap. 3. 1. The Reason is framed thus:
If there be a time to euery thing* and to euery purpose vnder the Sunne, then a man hath no profit of all his labours, seeing that all things depend on the instability of times.
But the Antecedent, or former part of the reason is true, as I haue already proued by many examples, of things naturall, necessary, voluntary.
Therefore the consequent or latter part is true also, namely he that studyeth, endeauoureth; worketh, hath no profit in all his labours.
For the beginning, proceeding, finishing, euent, depend all on vncertainties. And euen in that he knoweth not what shall become of his labours, who shall haue the benefit, whether a wise-man or a foole, his friend, or his foe, doth as much afflict the minde, as to be crost in the beginning and proceeding of his workes by infortunate casualties; what greater vanity and griefe is there then for a man vpon the reueiw of his labours to say, Opera, and impensa perijt. All is lost?




Verse 10.
I haue seene the trauell which God hath ginen to the sonnes of men, to be exercised in it.

A Commoration, amplifying this conclusion to verse 16. In this verse he setteth downe the cause of this vanitie of mans labour, and that is the iudgement of God vpon his pride. For thus hath God alwayes auenged the ambition, and curiosity of mans heart, that he should intangle himselfe in infinite businesses, perplexe his minde with endlesse cares, spend all his dayes in troubles, griefe, anger, sorrow, sicknesse and till the day of death to be forgetfull of death, and vnmindfull of the euent of his toyle. But that hoped contentation of mind, which he dreameth of, shall he neuer obtaine, and if he doe obtaine it, it shall haue matter still of greater misery in it. The Israelites murmuring for flesh in the Wildernesse had their desires to the full, but the fulnesse of their desire, was their destruction, Num. 11. 32. 33. And our Sauiour saith, Matth. 6. Verely, they haue their reward. So that this supposed contentation, of allso earnestly laboured for, is in the possession thereof, but the earnest-penny of euerlasting misery. What profit then hath he that worketh, in that wherein hee laboureth? How much better were it to submit himselfe to the prouidence of God, and suffer himselfe to be gouerned by his lawes? This verse is an exposition of the 13. verse of the first Chapter.



Verse 11.
He hath made euery thing beautifull in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that none can find^ out the worke that God maketh from the beginning to the end.

THe vnprofitable vanity of mans labour is illustrated by an Antithesis, or contrariety of the most wise worke of Gods prouidence. God by the worke of his power and wisedome, hath made and set all things in comely order, and by the word of his prouidence he gouerneth and administreth all things, hauing prefined aforehand a conuenient and beautifull opportunity for euery thing. But whereas the imaginations

of mans heart, are onely euill, his pride is such, that he would be a god, and equall with God, Gen. 3. 5. 6. and that by working out an heauen, a felicitie, and a glory in the world to himselfe; therefore hath God laid a iudgement vpon his impatience, ambition, curiosity; namely, a presumptuous and foolish dotage, to imagine that he is able to comprehend the whole course of times past, and to come, and thereafter to plot his endeuours to attaine a possibilitie of his own proiects, to auoyd all opposite accidents, and to remoue all crosse occurrences; yet is hee so farre from the knowledge of that most wise, iust, conuenient, and secret administration or aeconomie of God, that he cannot rightly conceiue of one worke of Gods prouidence, how it is begun, how it proceedeth, how it is finished, by what meanes, turnings, and returnings it is effected. Yea, the wayes of God are past finding out. Yet this is the madnesse of those, whom we call vnderstanding, wise, prudent, and politicke men, to frame a world in, and according to their owne hearts, as if they were gods, or rather Gods Apes, that is, first, to purpose with themselues what they will haue, and what they will be, and then by their wisdome, and strength, to turne all the world, and euery thing about to this point, to winde and wring in euery man, and euery matter by craft or violence, by feare, by flattery, by simulation, dissimulation, to make in the end a generall concurrence or confluence of all streames into this Ocean. This impossibility is that, wherabout he beateth his braines, vexeth his minde, disquieteth his heart, toyleth his body, depriueth himselfe of all ioy, and comfortable rest all the daies of his life. But what is the profit of his wisedome and labour in the last end? Euen to make himselfe a foole, aby-word, a spectacle of follie. Parturiunt montes, exit ridiculus mus. The maine end of all, is but a bable like the towre of a Babel, a new nothing. It is like that great sencelesse lumpe of earth that Nabuchadnezzar set vp, yea, it is like that huge braineworke, the Synagogue of the Romish beast.
It may be obiected, How can euill things be said to be beautifull? and what times hath God ordained for wickednesse? I answere, euill things in the kinds and natures thereof,

as they proceed from the deuill, and the venemous fountaine of mans heart, are loathsome and vgly: but euill things in their times as God vseth them, are beautifull, necessary, and comely, namely, as they are sent as iust and due punishments from God, as executions of wrath and vengeance for the wickednesse of the world, and tryall of the faith, and patience of his seruants. In time of peace there is vnthankfulnesse, pride, contempt of God, abusing of his creatures to riot and excesse; then the sword, famine, warres, pestilence and manifold miseries, are in that respect beautifull in their time. Many men get their goods by couetousnesse, racking, oppression, vniust dealing, extortion, bribery, deceit, vsury, vnmercifulnesse to the poore, purloyning, and withholding of the Leuites wages. Now it is a iust reuenge, and beautifull that a Ruffian and dingthrift rise vp, and riotously waste all. Dauid committed adultery with Bathsheba, and slew her husband; This displeased the Lord, 2 Sam. 12. Therefore shall the sword neuer depart from his house, he will raise euill against him out of his owne house, and take his wiues before his eyes, and giue them vnto his neighbour, etc. So Amnon defiled his sister Thamar, and Absolon in reuenge slew him. Absolon rebelled against his father, and by the counsell of Achitophell committed incest with his wiues, etc. Afterwards Achitophell hanged himselfe, and Absolon was slaine by Ioab, (and he was executed by Solomon.) These adulteries, murthers, incests, rebellions, treasons are in their kindes abominable, but as they are iudgements of God, beautifull. He turneth all euill things to the good of his Elect, and his owne glory as well in executing Iustice, as shewing mercy.


Verse 12.
I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to reioyce, and to doe good in his life.



Verse 13.
And also that euery man should eate, and drinke, and inioy the good of all his labour, it is the gift of God.

Remedies of vanities IN these verses he gathereth and concludeth from the former obseruations and considerations, the right vse of all

worldly things, for a remedy or mitigation of the vanities, as he did, Chap. 2. 24. which he confirmeth, first, by the testimony of his owne knowledge; secondly, by the efficient cause. Seeing that it is the propertie of fooles to weary themselues about vaine contriuing, and disposing of things according to their inordinate desires, let the wise man be better aduised, and learne by the example of Gods dealing with them, how to apply himselfe both to get and spend; namely, with a contented mind, and quiet heart. Let him learne to reioyce, and cheere his body in the comfortable and sober vse thereof, and to giue part to the poore. Ephes. 4 28. and to the Church, 1 Cor. 9. 14. To this tranquility of minde Dauid exhorteth, Psal. 37. 3. Hope in the Lord, and be doing good, dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. Relye on Gods prouidence, and leane not to thine owne wisedome, as Solomon saith: This is all the good, that all our wisedome and trauell can produce out of these earthly things, and the onely true profit that can be made of them. But this consideration can no man fetch out of his owne braine: If he doe apprehend it, yet his memory cannot long hold it. And if hee doe remember it, yet his foolish heart cannot practise it, because wits (not seasoned with grace) must be working. It is therefore the gift of God.



Verse 14.
I know that whatsoeuer God doth, it shall be for euer: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doth it that men should feare before him.

A Confirmation of contentation, and tranquility in the right and good vse of things, drawne from the stedfastnesse of Gods workes, which are vnalterable. It is meere madnesse, either to think that the causes of things, and their proceedings are in our power, or that the euents of our counsels shall be according to our designements, or yet to vexe our selues at all, if the successe be not answerable according to our expectation. For let a mortall man deuise, aduise, and plot what he will, and as he will, yet can hee neuer disanull, or any whit alter the decree of God, for the preparations are

of the heart, saith Solomon, but the answere of the tongue is of the Lord, and so is the worke of the hands. Yea, it is a great impietie for a man to thinke that he can by his power or free-will, either adde, or detract from the decree of God, or turne aside any part of his counsell: For euen that which a man hath done by his free-will, was originally from the vnchangeable decree of Gods will, Act. 4. 28. From whence proceeded euill but from the negation of election and giff of perseuerance? The ordering and disposing whereof, God hath decreed according to the pleasure of his will, which is a depth vnsearchable, vncomprehensible. But wee know this, that he doth all out of the loue of himselfe, and to the glory of himselfe: And so is he all in all. All this he confirmes by the testimony of his owne knowledge.
Moreouer, the vnchangeablenesse of Gods prouidence, is amplified by the end thereof. That men might feare before him. That men seeing their owne ignorance, weakenesse, foolishnesse, in the diuine additions, detractions, changings and disa^ulling of their purposes and designes on the one side; and all things swayed by an ouer ruling power on the other side; might be brought euen whether they will or no, into his presence; namely to acknowledge, reuerence, and to depend on him only, and humble themselues to his ordinance, being reuoked from their owne ambition and pride, by the vnhappy successe of their wisest, and surest courses. This is that which Moses so laboureth in the repetition of the law to imprint in the minds of the Israelites. Deut. 8. 2. 3.



Verse 15.
That which hath beene, is now, and that which is to be, ^ hath already beene, and God requireth that which is past.

A Confirmation of the stability of Gods purposes or workes of his prouidence, as before, Chap. 1. 9. As the heauens, windes, riuers, haue their constant courses, and recourses by perpetuall motion; euen so God hath prouided in his most wise administration of mans affaires also, that one thing should succeed another, according to the instability of times, and returne againe by their courses, euen in their circuits,

in kinde and nature, according to the restlesse reuolution of time. So that whatsoeuer hath beene in old time, is now at this present: and whatsoeuer is gone and past, shall God cause to returne againe. Therefore, as times, so are all things in time in the hands of God, and as all things come from his hand in their conuenient seasons, so againe they returne into his hand, as the seede is cast out of the hand of the sower, and returneth againe into the hand of the sower, circularly for euer.



Verse 16.
And moreouer, I saw vnder the Sunne the place of iudgement, that wickednesse was there; and the place of righteousnesse, that iniquity was there.

He passeth here from the vanities of the body naturall, to the vanities of the body politicke.A third prosepilogisme, to proue the Epilogisme. Chap. 1. 3.SOlomon hath heretofore declared in generall the vanity of mans wisedome and prouidence, by peculiar obseruation and experience: now hee commeth particularly to declare the vanities, and vexations, vncertainty, and instability of all worldly things, by his diligent obseruation of outward examples in ciuill state, or common life. All which tend still to the same end, to wit, that a man can finde no perpetual course of prosperity in any worldly state, nor any thing in any state wherein to content his minde, and rest his heart, but that all things are full of vanity and vexation, and so consequently he must rest on God onely. Of these vanities and euils, some proceede from the malice of others, or doe outwardly come to a man, as those examples following doe manifest.
1. Example of vanities obserued in outward things. The first example is of oppressours, wherein he sheweth how vanity and vexation is increased by oppression. Euery man and estate is subiect to troubles, and contentions, caused partly through want of wisedome and prouidence to preuent euils, partly by the violence of cruell and mercilesse men, partly through the vnquietnesse of humorous, and distempered persons, partly through many vnauoydable chances. Howsoeuer, wheate and tares, Gods flocke and euill beasts, must liue together in ciuill state during the time of this life. Now whereas in this mixture, innumerable controuersies and wrongs arise, good lawes are established for

the deciding of the one, and reforming of the other, that men might liue happily, by the preseruation of peace, and iustice. And for the making, and execution of the same lawes, are Magistrates ordained. But I saw that wrong reigned in the place of iudgement, as well as any where else, and that publike authority was made but a cloake, yea, a defence of publike iniustice, whereof the Scriptures affoord vs many examples. Here is vanity, for no certaine remedy can be found here, but rather greatest euils oft times proceede from hence.



Verse 17.
I said in mine heart, God shall iudge the righteous, and the wicked: for there is a time there, for euery purpose, and for euery worke.

A Confirmation of vanity, increased by the place of iudgement, (wherein notwithstanding to the faithfull that waite on God, there is matter of comfort.) Because no remedy is here to be had, and that iudgement proceedeth not forth, but is turned into gall and wormewood, (for these persons being armed with publike authority, thinke to vse the Lawes at their pleasure, without punishment) therefore the oppressed must appeale to the iust Iudge, and vnpartiall auenger of euery wrong. But God doth not alwayes smite sinners in the act of sinne, but commonly when they haue forgotten, and are in greatest security; as Amnon had the stab, when his heart was merry with wine; Antiochus when he was in the height of his pride; Alexander and Herod, when they tooke vpon them to be gods; Iulius Caesar when he was in the Senate; Ierusalem about forty yeeres after Christs resurrection, when all was forgotten. Therefore a man must stay Gods leisure: For the Lord will come, and not tarry, he will be a swift witnesse, and auenger of wrongs. All must be conuented before his iudgement seate, 2 Cor. 5. 10. and render an account of euery idle word, much more of euill deeds. All is vanity.
For there is a time there for euery purpose, and for euery worke. This word, [there] as I thinke, hath relation to Gods iudgement

seate, as if hee should say, vniust Magistrates haue a time by the patience, and long-suffering of God, to fulfill their bloud-thirsty, and gold-thirsty lusts: but another time shall succeede that, when the wronger and wronged, the iust and vniust* shall giue vp an account, and be doomed according to their workes, to liue or die for euer: And euen then when they sit vpon the iudgement seate, is God present to take notice of their corrupt and partiall dealings, to censure them, and to giue sentence vpon their sentence; yea, and to beginne the execution of his sentence vpon them by vntimely death, disgrace, banishment, remorse of conscience, etc. Therefore they that haue authority and power to doe what they will, and to haue what they will, and those that are strengthened by authority in their lusts, shall obtaine no profit* nor quietnesse of heart thereby. This also is vanity, and vexation to them, aswell as suffering wrong to the other.



Verse 18.
I said in my heart concerning the estate of the sonnes of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselues are beasts.

A Confirmation of the former. I said in my heart concerning the state, or condition of the sonnes of men, that God by iudgement might manifest them, or lay them open, (for where no law is, there is no difference, and where no iudgement is, there is as little) and that they might see their owne shame, namely, themselues to be beasts, and that by their beastly lusts and affections, chiefly by their cruelty one towards another, in deuouring and preying one vpon another; as fishes, birds, and beasts doe, which want vnderstanding and reason, and so know not God, nor themselues. And though they glorifie themselues, and are as gods in their owne eyes, and cause others to fall downe, and humble themselues vnto them, whereout they sucke no small aduantage, yet shall they die like men, and come to the same end that beasts doe, yea; they are more miserable then beasts, which are not subiect to sinne, nor culpable of iudgement.

Or, these wordes may be thus interpreted. I said in my heart, concerning the order of the sonnes of men, that God had giuen them dignity, and to see to they are as beasts to themselues. For this word Dibrah, signifieth order, Psal. 110. 4. and Barar signifieth to chuse, to purge, to declare, whereof commeth Berurim, choyce men set vp in dignity, namely, Princes, Rulers, Gouernours, Officers ordained of God, for peaceable, honest, and happy life, which abusing themselues and their places, are to mans reason as but stronger, and more subtile beasts, preying vpon the weaker and more simple and harmelesse.
Againe, they may be translated thus, that they might cleere, or iustifie God, and see that they themselues are beasts; and therefore vanity it selfe, euen out of measure vaine. Lastly, thus, that God had purged them, id est, created them pure, holy, and righteous, in his owne image, in the beginning, yet to see to, in this state of degeneration or corruption, they are in themselues as beasts, accordingly as he saith, Chap. 7. 31. God hath made man righteous, but they haue sought out many inuentions: and Psal. 49. 20. Man that is in honour, and vnderstandeth not, is like the beasts that perish. Which of these interpretations is the most genuine and naturall, I leaue to euery mans iudgement.



Verse 19.
For that which befalleth the sonnes of men, befalleth beasts; euen one thing befalleth them all: as the one dyeth, so dyeth the other; yea, they haue all one breath, so that a man hath no preheminence aboue a beast: for all is vanity.

THe apt coherence of these three verses following with the former, intimate, that the last interpretation is the most proper. For they are a reason prouing the corruption, vanity, vilenesse, and misery of proud man, by comparing him to beasts, whose frailety, corruption, or vanity, is Gods iudgement vpon man. In them may hee behold his sinne, and his corporall punishments for sinne before his eyes, if otherwise he be insensible, which are the fore-runners, and beginning of eternal torments; and sencelesnesse is a iudgement

of God vpon the reprobate. This like condition of man and beast, to carnall iudgement, is set downe in these three verses; which similitude or likenesse made the Epicures to thinke that the estate and condition of them both, was all one; and consequently, that to eate, drinke, and play, was the chiefe good, or onely felicity of man. For wee see by daily experience, that man and beast are subiect to the like casualties and misfortunes, how men vexe, deuoure, lye in waite, insnare, kill, etc. one another, as beasts doe, how they die, as beasts doe, hauing the same causes of corruption in them with beasts. They haue the same breath whereby they liue, the same spirit whereby they moue, the same senses, the same inward and outward members, and in bodily shape many beasts come neere vnto him, and he is subiect to deformities, and all infirmities in his kinde, as much, and more then they. So that in outward state hee hath no preheminence aboue the beast. For he cannot longer vse the things of this World, nor carry any thing away with him more then the beast doth. The reason is, because all is vanity. Therefore there is no difference.



Verse 20.
All goe vnto one place, all are of the dust, and all turne to dust againe.

A Commoration. All goe to one place, that is, both men and beast are dissolued againe into their elements. For God created all things of the dust, and all turne to dust againe. There is the same matter of man, and beast. Some thinke that beast was made of the earth, and man of the dust of the earth, to wit, either of mire, or else of the dust, that lyeth on the sur-face of the earth. But that is an idle contention. For mire, and dust, and earth, are all one, and the same in essence or substance. When the raine falleth on the earth, it is mire, when the Sunne extracteth the moisture out of it, it is dust. So that the whole earth is nothing but dust, or mire, whether you will. Therefore man was not made of baser matter then beast, as some say, but rather of better: For Adam signifieth red earth, or red dust, or red mire. All

is one without any difference. And Solomon saith here, all are of the dust, or earth, which by the figure Synecdoche signifieth all the elements, whereof earth in earthly things is predominant, and water in the creatures thereof. No element is simple, or pure, but it hath a mixture of other elements also to be the Chaos or nurse of their sundry creatures, which in their purity they could not be. So that earthly things are most earth, especially, the more particular or simpler creatures, as mettals, stones, trees, etc. Yet water, ayre, and fire also, with which the element of earth is mixed: By vertue of which mixture, man and beast are made of the other elements as well as of the earth.



Verse 21.
Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth vpward, and the spirit of a beast that goeth downe-ward to the earth?

A Continuance of the commoration, figured by the preuention of an obiection, thus. There is great difference betweene man, and beast: For mans brutall nature and spirit is but the plasme or vessell of his soule, which is not compound, or mixed with it, but onely vnited to it. Therefore when this fraile vessell is broken or dissolued, the immortall spirit or soule ascendeth to God that gaue it, and the vessell againe is absumed into the elements whereof it was formed. But the spirit of a beast is nothing but the quintessence, the purest and prime of his body, or his life, which consisteth in the harmony or vnion of the elements, and so not being another essence separable from the body, it dyeth with the body. Ans. This is indeed the holy and diuine truth, but now speaking of the worldly, outward, and miserable state of man, as it appeareth to humaine senses and reason, who can by any signe or token, or skill of Anatomy find out any differing wayes of these spirits? What man can shew me the ascending of mans spirit into heauen, or the descending of the beasts spirit into the earth; namely, the dispersing thereof into the elements? If a man say, that the spirit of man ascends vpwards into the firmament, how can he let me see that? but if it doe, then doth the beasts so also. For the firmament is but the

quintessence or prime of the elements, as the spirit is of the body, according to Plato. And be it that by humaine reason, a man may easily demonstrate the immortality of the soule, as the learned heathen haue all done, yet what is that to the outward worldly state of man liuing? Man whiles hee is man, (and of man we onely speake, not of spirits) is no better then beast. So that to conclude; Seeing that it is with man, as with beast, there is no profit, no contentment, no rest, no durable prosperity, no happinesse at all in this cursed, confused, brutall world, but all is vanity.



Verse 22.
Wherefore I perceiue that there is nothing better, then that a man should reioyce in his owne workes: for that is his portion; for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?

A Conclusion of the right consideration, regard, and vse of worldly things inferred as before, ver. 12. And Chap. 2. 24. Seeing that there is nothing but vanity and miserie, I perceiued that it was but vanity and folly to seeke for any happinesse in any worldly state. And that it was the point of true and solide wisdome for a man to reioyce his heart in the honest getting, comfortable vsing, and prudent disposing of things put into his hand by the prouidence of God, while it is his, euen in his hands. For this is a mans portion, yea, all the good that can be found in them, and by them. For who can bring a man to see what shall be after him? Chap. 2. 18. 19. The knowledge of after-times belongeth to God onely, and when we are gone, then is all out of our hands, and none of ours, but left to Gods disposing, which how God vseth and bestoweth, or what good is done therewith, is no thankes, no reward to vs. Therefore it is but folly for a man to depriue himselfe of the benefit of his workes, and to disquiet his heart and minde in vaine, with prouiding and plotting for after-times; namely, for his posterity, whereof hee hath no certainty. What greater folly is there, then for a man to torment his body, vexe his spirit, torture his conscience, lose his soule, for those that come after him, which either shall be wrested from their goods, or die presently after him, or wastfully

spend them, working out their damnation in the prodigall spending, as he did in the couetous getting. But if they doe enioy them, and doe good with them, yet is that nothing to him that is now in torment. For it is not by vertue of the goods gotten, and left by him, but of Gods grace, and that doth good as well without those goods, as with them. For it is not how much we doe, but how well, not what, but what God accepteth. For all is his owne, wee can doe nothing for him, nor giue any thing to him.



CHAPTER IIII.


Verse 1.
So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done vnder the Sunne; and behold the teares of such as were* oppressed, and they had no Comforter: and on the side of their oppressours there was power, but they had no Comforter. II. Example of vanities in outward things.

A Second example of corruption in ciuill state, is of the oppressed. This is the second example of vanities, obserued in outward things, such things as outwardly come to a man. These words haue dependance on verse 16. chap. 3. There he shewed how vanity was increased by corruption in place of Iudgement and Iustice; here hee sheweth how vanity is increased by manifold oppressions euery where; whereby almost euery man of wit and wealth oppresseth, treadeth on, insnareth and vexeth the inferiour and weaker, after the manner of beasts. And behold, A graphicall or liuely description of oppressions in all ages, and among all sorts of men, continuall and common. They are described
First, by the greatnesse thereof. They are such as caused not onely griefe and complaining, but also teares.
Secondly, they are amplyfied by their want of remedy, the incompassionatenesse of people, which is the sinne of Sodome. They had no Comforter. There was none to deliuer

Esay 59. 16. them, none to take their parts, none to counsell them, but euery one rather treading on him that falleth, after the manner of brute beasts.
Thirdly, by the persons oppressing, which were men of authority and power, that had the law in their owne hands.
Fourthly, by the incompassionatenes of other great men, which were mercilesse, cruell, and hard-hearted, aboue the common sort of rude people, as Ierem. 5. 26. 27. 28. complaineth. Which persons though they were able to remedy wrongs, yet they rather approued the same, as Herod did Pilates, and Pilate in some sort did the Priests and Pharises: So farre were they from affording any comfort to the distressed. The whole verse laboureth of a gradation.


Verse 2.
Wherefore I praised the dead, which are already dead, more then the liuing, which are yet aliue.



Verse 3.
Yea, better is be then both they, which hath not yet been, who hath not seene the euill worke that is done vnder the Sun.

AN amplification. He amplifieth these grieuous euils both of the oppressours, and the oppressed, by a comparison from the Lesse to the Greater. They that are dead, hauing left their wiues and children, lands and goods behind them, which is a great cause of mourning, and teares as contrarily life is ioy; are notwithstanding more happy then these that are liuing, and inioy the priuiledges of life. This comparison is figured by a R^u^cation, whereby he recalleth backe the former comparison as not sufficient to illustrate the vanities and miseries of life, and bringeth in another more fit to expresse the greatnesse thereof. Yea, rather the condition of him that is not yet borne, is better then they both, because he hath not felt nor seene the calamities of the world. Better it is not to be at all, then to be in misery. What profit then hath a man of all the labour that he taketh vnder the Sunne? Mundus est inuolucrum, ^iue Chaos miseriarum.




Verse 4.
Againe, I considered all trauell, and euery right worke, that for this a man is enuyed of his neighbour: this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.

III. Example of vanity in outward things A Third example of vanities, outwardly incident to man, is enuy, not actiue but passiue. By enuy also is vanity greatly increased. I considered all the honest and moderate labour of him that rightly earned his liuing, without couetousnesse and wrong* who depriued not his soule of comfort by hoarding them vp, but reioyced in the work of his hands, and extended the fruits of his labours to others also. But euen this man was enuyed of his neighbour, because he was good, and did good. Yea, euen they that were pertakers of the benefit of his labours with him, reioyced at his fall. Wherefore did Cain hate his brother? euen because his brothers deeds were good, and his owne euill. Wherefore should Labans house enuy Iacob, through whose faithfulnes all things prospered well with them? yet so it was and is. Wherfore doth the righteous man make himselfe a prey? Isa. 59. 15. Because he speaketh the truth, and departeth from euill. Why did the sonnes of Iacob, enuy their brother Ioseph? because their father loued him. What occasioned Ismael to mocke Isaac? Gen. 21. 9. Euen because God had blessed him. And Amos saith, Chap. 5. 10. Hee that rebuketh in the gate is hated, and he is abhorred that speaketh vprightly. Why was our Sauiour Christ hated, persecuted, crucified? because he was true, holy, righteous, the holy one, and the iust. Because hee was good, and his goodnesse extended wholly to others. For in the world he had no prerogatiues of the world, all was theirs, and their childrens, he tooke nothing, but gaue himselfe for them; he was (...), full of loue and fauour to man, whatsoeuer he was it was for mans good. Yet in this he could not be pardoned, but must be put to shame and contempt with the greatest malefactors. All this argueth the great vanity of this life.



Verse 5.
The foole foldeth his hands together, and eateth his owne flesh.



Verse 6.
Better is an handfull with quietnesse, then both the hands full with trauell, and vexation of spirit.

I. Example of inward euils, is sloathfulnesse. THese vanities or euils hereafter following, proceed from a mans selfe, from within him, whereof there be three examples following in this Chapter, to wit, of the sloathsull, the niggard, and the will-full, which heape miseries vpon themselues by their owne folly.
The first example is of sloathfulnesse, whereby much vanity is increased, whereof much wickednesse and misery proceedeth. The sluggard is graphically depeinted forth by an hypotiposis, or liuely description, by his generall, and effects. in this verse. The foole. The idle person is first described by his generall, he is a foole, or wicked person, one of that ranke that wanteth wisedome and vnderstanding. For he despiseth the decree and ordinance of God. Gen. 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou get thy liuing. Againe, he bringeth himselfe, into contempt, base account, and hatred, by wilfull pouerty. Moreouer, he bringeth himselfe into bondage and slauery, when he is inforst to run into debt, and to submit himselfe to the vices, and euill dispositions, whatsoeuer they ^e* of other men, to please them, for reliefe, and so to be the seruant of other mens corruptions, a sonne of Belial. Finally, he setteth open the gap to infinite euils very hardly to be auoyded, as lying, dissembling, flattering, humouring, grudging, enuying, stealing, robbing, murthering, imprisonment, etc.
The foole foldeth his hands together. Secondly, he is described by his deedes, or gestures, which are priuatiues or prauatiues rather, signifying not any labour, or preparation to labour, but a preparation to more rest and ease, which is a priuation of labour. Hee foldeth his hands. Hee sitteth or lyeth now stretching, now enwrapping his armes one within another, now yawning to ease himselfe a little, when through want of motion, the blood drawing more inwardly thickneth, leauing the outward limmes more riged and stiffe, and setleth

about the heart. Now he hangeth the chin into the bosome, because his lazinesse wil not rouze vp his dull spirits, and disperse his cold and clottered bloud. Now hee looketh vpward, gaping with open mouth, because he will not stretch a little the sinewes of his throate and chapps, as a man doth that looketh vpwards with his lippes shut; therefore this idle foole draweth his breath in at his mouth most commonly, for the rheume ascending into his head, for want of moderate exercise, and discending into his nose, hindereth the easie passage of his breath, that hee cannot so fully enioy his pleasant sleepe. And for recreation sake, when he is weary with sleeping on the one side, he turneth on the other, as the gate doth on the hookes, Prou. 26. 14.
Againe, He foldeth his hands together. As others vnfold their hands, armes, knees, to labour; so he infoldeth or crudleth his limbes together to sleepe, as euery kinde of creature doth. Working and walking, doe most exercise the body, standing lesse, leaning lesse then that, sitting lesse, and lying lesse then that, but the infolding of the members giue greatest rest, and security. For then the blood is kept more temperate, hee coucheth in a lesse roome, and is sooner vp, if any euill outwardly assaile him. In heat the sluggard displayeth abroad his limbes, in cold he gathereth them on an heape. These drowsie fooles liue by instinct of corrupt nature, like beasts. As for prodigall, stirring, liuely, and witty fooles, they more resemble the Diuell. They are not snailes, but waspes, and hornets. They are idle also, for either they liue in no profession or calling, or else take no paines in their profession. And of them is this text also vnderstood.
And eateth vp his owne flesh. What other euils soeuer hee may auoide, yet this is a sure punishment laid on sluggishnesse, that it pineth, and consumeth the body, as it wasteth the outward state. For by labour must a man liue, therefore by idlenesse shall he destroy himselfe. For idlenesse is a cause of many diseases, when the dregges of the humours are not moued, nor superfluities evaporated by agitation, and sweat* Drowsinesse breedeth drossinesse, and vaine pleasures, which

is another kinde of idlenesse, bringeth pouerty and paine. Againe, he eateth vp his owne flesh with griefe, enuie, couetousnesse. Griefe flayeth him, Prou. 21. 25. Enuie and couetousnesse consume the flesh, and drye the bones. Many sluggards are couetous and greedy, yet proud, and idle, enuying the plenty of those that labour, and speake euill of them. There are abundance of such like now a dayes.


Verse 6.
Better is an handfull with quietnesse, etc. Thirdly, the sluggard is here described by his inward effects, or vaine imaginations of his foolish heart, destitute of iudgement, vttered by the tongue, whereby he excuseth, maintaineth, and confirmeth himselfe in his idlenesse. For a foole wanteth not his reasons, yea, the sluggard is wiser in his owne conceit, then seauen men that can render a reason; Prou. 26. 16. But his reasons are grounded on his lust, and according to his lust, for that is his law. Better it is to haue an handfull with quietnesse, then both hands full with trauell and vexation of spirit. As if he should say, it is better for a man to content himselfe with a little with rest, then to toyle himselfe as the drudge doth, carking and caring night and day hee cannot tell for whom. What should a man doe, but eate and drinke, and play, and be merry, and take his naturall rest? A man cannot tell how long hee shall liue, wherefore then should hee make a beast of himselfe? He were as good spend his goods himselfe, as let another spend them. A man may labour all his life to gather goods for his children, and they may hap to be rather the worse, then better for them. For as he hath freed them from care to get them, so will they but care how to waste them. Againe, he that striueth to be rich, shall be intangled in manifold businesses, troubles, suits, and be disquieted with a multitude of seruants and labourers, which will spend it as fast as they get it. Moreouer, he that hath much, is but a prey to theeues, robbers, and catch-poles, so that vnlesse hee looke well and warily to himselfe, hee shall be insnared one way or other, and be hated and enuyed. Now for a man to liue, and lie continually thus at defence, is a great vexation, and better were it that his goods were farre enough, then to liue in continuall feare, and drudgery. Therefore I hold it

a wiser course for a man to take his ease and pleasure, to be content with a little, let the World runne which way it will. The sluggard seemes to haue many good speeches oft times, but they proceede from an euill heart, and tend to an euill end. Therefore they are but foolishnesse and wickednesse.



Verse 7.
Then I returned, and saw vanity vnder the Sunne.

II. Example of inward euils is, vnsociablenesse. A Second example of the contrary, to wit, of couetousnesse, and drudgery, whereby vanity is increased. Then I returned, and saw vanity, etc. When I beheld the foolishnesse of the carelesse sluggard, and withall looking about for the hearted man that h d wisedome to order himselfe rightly in the affaires of this li^e, another extremity offered it selfe to my sight, which was a vanity aboue all vanities, yea, darkening all other, as the Sunne doth the starres. So that mee thought I began but now to see vanity vnder the Sunne. These words therefore are as it were a magnificall preface to the description of some great thing.



Verse 8.
There is one alone, and there is not a second, yea, he hath neither child nor brother; yet is there no end of all his labour, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither saith hee, for whom doe I labour, and bereaue my soule of good? this is also vanity, yea, it is a sore trauell.

A Description of the impure drudge. First, by his solitarinesse, or vnsatiablenesse: There is one, and not a second. That is to say, a soliuagant, or solitary vagrant, a Deastricolous person, whose heart is fixed in the ground like the roote of a tree, neither a rationall, nor yet a brutall creature, but a plaine vegitable, or locomotiue plant. For diuers of this kinde there be, that are without coniugall affection, or abstaine from marriage for feare of charge of children and expence. For hee hath not a second, (all liuing creatures are sociable but he) that is, he hath no companion or fellow, all companies are vaine and euill, and offensiue to this sober one, (for so is he conceited of himselfe) and the best man with him is

but a talker, a familiar friend is but a disturber of his thoughts, and hindereth him from his businesse. So fearefull and carefull, distrustfull and despairefull is a man, when God leaueth him to himselfe.
Secondly, he is described by his vnreasonablenesse, argued by the negation of the impulsiue causes of his carefull drudgery. He hath neither child nor brother, kinsman, nor allianee* at least that standeth in neede to be helped with his goods.
Thirdly, he is described by his excesse. There is none end of all his labour. Hee is insatiable, his heart is a bottomelesse gulfe that cannot be filled, his desires are inlarged as hell. All that he looketh vpon with his eyes, he desireth to haue. And if he had it, yet could not that quench his thirst, nor stay his hungry appetite. He is a Leuiathan, a Sea-dragon, or Whale, that wanteth roome in the maine Ocean.
Fourthly, he is described by his senselesnesse. forgetfulnesse, want of discourse, and vse of reason, being in vtter bondage to his lust, and so wholly degenerated into the nature of a beast. He neuer saith, for whom doe I labour, and bereaue my soule of good? Hee is carried euen forward like the plant by his inclination, or like the beast by his appetite, like euery irrationall by his instinct, neuer reflecting his reason vpon himselfe, or his trauell, to consider the end thereof, and vse of worldly things, nor vpon his owne end, though hee see death in others, both elder, younger, and equals euery day before his eyes, and euen feele the causes, fore-runners, or warnings of death in his owne flesh and bones summoning him to iudgement. This person most wise, most good in his owne conceit, commeth farre short of the rich man, Luke 12. who in the fulnesse of wealth was able to say; Now soule take thy rest, thou hast goods enough, eate* drinke, and be merrie. He commeth farre short of Nabal, that ate, and dranke, and was drunke, and slept soundly vpon it. Nay, he neuer bethinketh himselfe how all the things of this World serue for nothing else but meate, drinke, apparell. For he depriueth himselfe of these as neere as may be, and layeth them vp for the wormes, mothes, and canker. This seruice is the

euent of his labour, as much as in him lyeth, (for death, not he, putteth others in possession and vse thereof) what other end soeuer he confusedly dreameth of, but neuer obtaineth.
The whole verse laboureth of a Gradation, thus: He carefully laboureth for no cause; and not onely so, but there is none end of his labour; and not onely that, but he is neuer satisfied, neither that onely, but he affords no comfort to his body therewith. He planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit; he feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the milke, he is an oxe treading out the corne, and muzzleth his owne mouth, yea, when his bread is before him, he layeth his knife to his throat, as Solomon saith, scarcity is vpon his table. This is a vanity, and a sore trauell. It is one alone indeed, for there is nothing in nature to compare him to. For euery creature desireth the perfection of it selfe, but this seeketh his owne destruction. He is like a Water-mill.



Verse 9.
Two are better then one; because they haue a good reward for their labour.

AN illustration of the vanities of Without naturall affection towards men. Rom. 1.Misanthropicall couetousnesse, by a comparison of contrary Which is a remedy against the contrary* vanity.society or community of life; Two are better then one. This contrariety is confirmed by the opposition of the benefits of sociable life, and euils of solitary life, by diuerse examples, in these foure next verses, to wit, of two working together, of two lying together, of two contending, with the Opposition, or contrariety.Antithesis of their reasons, or contrary consequence of contraries.
The first example, is of two working together. Two or more labouring, or trauelling, or doing any thing are helped, furthered and comforted one by another. And that worke, or exercise whereabout they are busied, hath better successe by much, then when one is alone. Man by nature is the most sociable creature, as his reason and speech doth manifest. As for other liuing creatures they are sociable also, but yet by naturall sympathy, and so are plants also. They are gathered or seuered by their manifold differing kinds, and by sympathies and antipathies in their kinds: But reason and speech vniteth men into one ciuill body, and seuerall men are

seuerall members of that body. And whereas no member can serue it selfe, maintaine or comfort it selfe without the other, nor if it be sicke, lame, etc. can relieue it selfe without the other: so neither can any one man liue without the coworking, nor comfort himself without the aid and compassion of another. But if he striue to doe it, or can doe it in somethings yet it is altogether imperfectly, vnprofitably, vncomfortably done, and of no continuance. For the whole state of one member is so by diuine prouidence intangled and vnited with another, that in the perfect wel-fare of one there must be a concurrence or communion of all, as wee see it to be in the members of the body, which though they haue seuerall offices, yet cannot one execute his office to the perfect good of it selfe, without the communion of the offices of the other members. What can the man doe, whom all men forsake and leaue wholly to himselfe? what can the eye doe when all the other members leaue it? what profit hath it by seeing? Therefore the more that a man is seperated from society, and community of life, he is the more imperfect, comfortlesse, miserable. But now this Misanthropicall drudge hath no society with God, and little with men, therefore he is a member destitute, imperfect, yea worse then a beast. He is imperfect and destitute* quia flagrat inuidia populi, the hearts of all are against him. All the members with-hold their lucky communicati^g influence, as I may say, and are maleuolently aspected: Now he that is dishearted of all, is as fruit in an ill season, too cold, too hot, intemperate. Contrarily, he that hath the hearts or good will of men, flourisheth vnder their beneuolous aspect. Therefore the pliant sociable man is much better then the tough, stiffe, soliuagant drudge in all seasons and affaires.



Verse 10.
For if they fall, the one will lift vp his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not auother to helpe him vp.

THe contrary reasons, shewing the benefits of sociable life, and the euills of solitary couetousnesse. If they fall, etc. If

one or any of them miscarry, in a iourny, or any action, then his fellow will helpe him vp, commiserate his case, and communicate his helpe, euen his strength with the others weaknesse. So it is in the society, and community of ciuill life. If a man haue companions, friends, and well-willers, which are gotten and kept by mutuall duties, and tokens of loue and friendship, he shall haue helpers and furtherers of him in his neede, reioycers with him in his prosperity, comforters of him in his sickenesse, incouragers of him in his troubles, and commisserators of his ill-fare, of what kind soeuer it be. Contrarily, woe is to him that is alone; when he falleth, he hath not another to helpe him vp. Woe, that is, losse, trouble, vncomfortable liuing, etc. is to him that is alone: For as he careth for no man, so no man careth for him. Euen as he that is alone in a iourney, and falling by the way hurteth himselfe, or falleth lame, or falleth sicke, or wanteth money, etc. is in greater trouble and distresse, if he want a fellow, or companions to communicate, and impart their helpe vnto him: so if a man be a solitary drudge, and an vnprofitable incompact member, that he careth for none but for himselfe, nor yet in effect and truth for himselfe, as Domitius Nero, who complained that he could find none to kill him, when a more ignominious death waited for him; he I say, shall in his prosperity be enuyed, and grudged at of all, in his strict dealings be cursed, in his need be helples, in his troubles remedilesse, in his heauinesse comfortlesse, in his falling troden vnder foot, and after his death cast into the pit as an vnprofitable drone. Briefly, he shall want all the profitable and comfortable fruits that redound to men by vertue of mutuall duties, and loue in sociable, and ciuill life. What profit hath this man of all his labours that he taketh vnder the Sunne?



Verse 11.
Againe, if two lie together, then they haue heate; but how can one be warme alone?

THe second example is of two or more fellowes lying together in bed, or boards, or on the ground. Two lying together, are better then one, because they haue heate. Contrarily,

how can one be warme alone? If two or three men lye together in the colde, they shall be helped one by another, and all kept warme: euen so, if there be an entercourse of mutuall duties among men, accordingly as euery man hath receiued the gift of God, then shall they be helped, comforted, susteined one by another, and it shall be well with euery one of them. But contrarily, if one lie alone, the cold surpriseth him on euery side, and by his contrary quality, driuing and inforcing the blood and heat inwardly, benummeth the outward parts, oppresseth the heart, and mortifieth it; whereas two or three lying together, the heat is produced and kept in the outward parts the pores of the body kept open, the blood dispersed, the flesh kept supple by the heat, and so preserued from the rigidity of the cold: euen so in ciuill society, if a man be without fellow, friend, companions, louers, welwillers, he is helpelesse, comfortlesse, and impotent, subiect to many euils, and inconueniences that might be auoyded, hee hath none to reioyce with him in his good successe, nor to commiserate his euils, none to maintaine him in his standing, nor to sustaine him in his falling.



Verse 12.
And if one preuaile against him, two shall withstand him; and a three-fold cord is not quickly broken.

THe third example is of two or more fellowes in matter of contention. If one preuaile against him, two shall withstand him. As if he should say, If a man be not alone, but hath fellowes or pertakers, then though that one be stronger then he, to giue him the foile, yet shall he with the helpe of his fellow withstand that one. This is amplified by a comparison of the lesse to the greater, figured by a prouerbiall or alligoricall speech. (A three-sold cord is not quickely broken.) If with the helpe of one he shall be able to withstand him, much more then with the helpe of two or more. Or, when many shall lay their strengths together, they shall be much more able. So likewise if a man be not a solitary, malecontented, selfe-conceited, rigorous muckrell, but communicate with others, and be consociate with them by the

intercourse of mutuall duties, beneuolence, courtesies, kindnesse, compassionatenesse, etc. the like he shall find againe. Therefore the vniust steward dealt wisely, Luke 16. He made friends afore-hand, lest he should be alone, and destitute, and end his dayes in desperation.
To conclude all this point, our Sauiour Christ saith, With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you againe, Mat. 7. 2. Thus much of the second example of inward euils.



Verse 13
Better is a poore and a wise child, then an old and foolish King, who will no more be admonished.

III. Example of inward euils is wilfulnes. A Third example is of folly in kings, men of authority, and rule, men of wealth, and of what preheminence soeuer, whereby vanity is also increased. Idlenesse bringeth the sluggard to misery; couetousnesse bringeth the niggard to misery; and wilfulnesse bringeth euery man of power and great estate, who hath an outward shew of happinesse, to misery. Yea, so farre from happinesse is a wilfull and selfe-conceited man, although he be a King or Monarch, that a poore and a wise childe is better then he: The childe is better then the old man, the poore is better then the rich. Docility, teachablenes, tractablenes is the property of wisedome, and he that is wise is neerest vnto happinesse, whatsoeuer his age and estate be. Contrarily, stubbornnesse, peruersnesse, wilfulnesse is the property of foolishnesse, and he that is foolish is farthest from happinesse, though he be a Monarch; Yea, hee is neerest to greatest misery, as Ieho^akim, Saul, Zedekiah, etc. Samuel was better then Heli, and Dauid then Saul. And through the like folly, were ten tribes rent from Rehoboam. The highest estate, or dignitie that a man can attaine to, and which men commonly count the happiest, is the state of a king. For a king hauing all other in subiection and vnder command, is in that worldly respect the neerest vnto God, whose immediate vicegerent he is. And therefore in respect of supremacy in the execution of Iustice and iudgement, Kings are tearmed, comparatiuely, Gods.
But notwithstanding that high place and supreame power,

if hee want discretion and wisedome to sway the scepter in Iustice, and iudgement, according to the law of the highest, he is worse than a poore subiect or inferiour, that hath wisedome to order his priuate and particular state aright. Yea, though he be old, and rich, yet is he worse then one that is yong and euen a childe, and poore because this hath wisedome, that is, is capable, teachable, tractable, and so is in possibility and hope. But contrarily, the other being old, and by reason of age, and long experience should be of a wise and vnderstanding heart to discerne truth and equity, but yet is foolish, and carryed with the sway of wandring and fruitlesse lusts, as children commonly are; neither yet through wilfulnesse will be admonished, that is, will not heare, nor yeeld to the aduice and counsell of sage, and prudent counsellers, but like Rehoboam, Zedekiah, Ahab, Nebuchadnezzer setleth himselfe vpon his lees; the other, I say, is better then hee. All this comparison is figured by a Synecdoche of the Speciall. For by king is meant all men of any externall power, place, wealth, kindred, beauty, strength, age, or any prerogatiue. Contrarily, by the poore childe, is meant any one that wanteth these prerogatiues, and is the most inferiour.



Verse 14.
For out of prison hee commeth to raigne, whereas also he that is borne in his kingdome becommeth poore.

A Confirmation of the Antithesis, or contrariety, by the contrary effects of wisedome and folly in them both. For out of prison he commeth to raigne: That is, though he be a captiue, and kept in hold vnder chaines, as Ioseph was, yet by wisedome he commeth not onely to obtaine liberty, but also riseth by degrees to the scepter: So that he which was a bondman, is now become a King; contrarily, he that is borne in the kingdome becommeth poore, as if he should say the other was a made bondman, but borne a king, this made a king, but borne poore, because that the other was in his birth and bondage of a kingly heart and disposition, as was Dauid, though of meane parentage; but this in his kingly birth

and royall preheminence, is of a declining and degenerating heart and disposition, as was Iehoiakim, and Comah; Ier. 22. Whereby it commeth to passe, that he looseth the reuerend and awefull regard of his subiects, as did Sardanapalus, etc. By folly and wilfulnesse, are great houses and kingdomes ouerthrowne, and translated to others, whereof the Scriptures affoord diuers examples. By prison-house is meant any of meane estate, or low degree, as Dauid was, and as Ioseph was, according to the Psalme 113. 7. 8. and specially Psalme 106. 17. 18. 19. 20. By borne King, is meant any of higher estate, degree, or preheminence in outward things, by the figure Synecdoche. Such like were Zedekiah, Iehoiakim, Coniah.



Verse 15.
I considered all the liuing, which walke vnder the Sun, with the second child that shall stand vp in his stead.

THis third example of vanity, and vexation belonging to royall state, is figured by the preuention of an obiection thus: What though sometimes it fall out that Kings are led aside, either through their owne folly, or deceits of wicked Counsellours, as the flattering Princes corrupted Ioash? 2 Chron. 24. 17. that argueth not that wise Princes behauing themselues prudently in all their wayes, should be subiect to vanity; that is, depriued of happy contentation, as other inferiour degrees are. I answer, that vanity and vexation in royall state, is not onely increased by their owne folly, or produced by an inward cause; but also it proceedeth from an outward cause, to wit, occasioned (if he were guarded from all other euils and discontentments) by the vnconstancy, and the instability of the passionate people his subiects. For they are fickle and restlesse, carried to and ^ro, as euery blast of discontentment and idle fancies tosse their humours, and are oft times like the Sea, that maketh a noyse when no winde is stirring, when they haue no cause, but onely disquieted with an itch, affectation of nouelties and changes, though it be for the worse, as the Israelites being weary of Iudge* ordained of God, would be gouerned by Kings, as other Nations were, 1 Sam. 8. 6. 7. As they that being wea^y of rest,

must be exercised with labour, verse 11. to 18. that they may be brought to know their happy estate, which through fickle and wanton discontent they are ignorant of, like to children that hauing too much of their owne will, cry for the roode, for nothing else will quiet them. Deliciousnesse, and fulnesse in euery thing, groweth loathsome. Howsoeuer, men know not, or are forgetfull of their owne good. This then is a griefe, and vexation to a King, that the people rest not contented in him, and if they doe, yet when he is old, they begin for the most part to turne their hearts towards the second, euen the child, or heire, that shall reigne after him. And this is not one of the least griefes of old age, the contempt or neglect of the younger, when as they see themselues growing out of request, their names, account, and memoriall, decaying by little and little, with their bodies, and with death vanishing quite away. As this is to others, so to Kings also a vexation to see already the common aspect of their people, bent vpon another obiect before the time. Old age is iealous, and suspitious of the contempt of youth.



Verse 16.
There is no end of all the people, euen of all that haue b^^ne before them: they also that come after, shall not reioyce in him: surely this also is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

A Reason, why people are with the second child, that shall stand vp in the Kings stead, namely, their vnconstancy. There is no end of all the people that haue beene before them* End, hath not relation to time, or perpetuall succession of generations, but signifieth a fixed resolution, and resistfull contentation, or ioyfull complacence, which is not to be found in the people, which are wauering as the Sea, and variable as the Moone. For former people little regarded the present Kings Grand-father, being old, and in their desires turned after his Father being young, whom againe now being old, the present people are weary of, and are all for his sonne, and that for sinister respects, euen their owne preferment, gaine, etc. or itching after nouelties, and changes. They also that come after, shall not reioyce in him. And when he

is old also, the people then shall no more reioyce in him, then the former did in his aged Father. For the common people are like to children, that rest not contented with any Schoole-master, and like to seruants, that loue to change euery yeere their Masters, euen as againe Parents and Masters are affected to new Ministers. People are desirous to heare new Preachers, as Feasters to heare new songs, and new instruments; Ezech. 33. 32.



CHAPTER V.


Verse 1.
Keepe thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to heare, then to giue the sacrifice of fooles: for they consider not that they doe euill.

He sheweth here the vanities of the body ecclesiastick. IN this Chapter Solomon prosecuteth still the same argument of vanities. But from the first verse to the ninth, he maketh a digression from vanities in temporall things, and sheweth the vanities that are rife in the Word in the seruice of God. As before hee declared the vanities of all humane things, both inward and outward, and withall shewed the good that was to be found in them, euen the comfort of the body; so here hee setteth downe the true felicity and happinesse of man, and where it is to be found, to wit, not in worldly wisedome, worldly wealth, worldly pompe, but in the reuerend feare, and true seruice of God. It was not to be found in the Schooles of humaine learning, but in the house of God. And withall he sheweth the vanities and hypocrisies of men, corrupting themselues in this his seruice, to the verse 8. and the occasions of their hypocrisies and fainting in his seruice, verse 8. as doubtings of Gods prouidence and administration through oppressions; which still increaseth vanity. And this he doth by way of exhortations, dehortations, or admonitions. That so by shewing on the one side the vanities of humaine things, with the good of

them for the body; and on the other side, the good of spirituall things for the soule, with the vanities therein, he might plainely set before our eyes the most absolute and perfect felicity of both body and soule, euen of the whole man here in this World, yea, that in seeing the good of all things, and the vanities of all things, we might be mortified to this, and quickened or renewed to that. Keepe thy foote when thou goest to the house of God. Come not to the house of God, as to an ordinary house, but consider whether thou goest, into whose presence, to what end. In Prou. 4. 23. he saith; Keepe thy heart with all diligence. Here he biddeth, Keepe thy foote. By heart, hee meaneth the soule; by foote, the affections. The soule is carried vpon the affections, as the body is vpon the feete. Therefore the meaning is, take heede to thy soule, to thy selfe, to thy spirit, to thy affections. Consider well how thou art in spirit affected, in affections disposed, when thou goest to the Temple of God, to performe the workes of diuine seruice.
And be more ready to heare. When thou commest to the Temple of God, put thy shooes off thy feete, thy carnall affections, Exod. 3. 5. For the place where thou standest, is holy, that thou mayest resigne thy selfe wholly to the Lord; Ruth. 4. 7. Come in reuerence, humility, sincerity, to heare the Law and the Prophets, to vnderstand, to beleeue, to yeeld thy selfe to the Lord in absolute obedience to his Word. Know wherefore thou commest, into whose presence, what thou intendest by thy offerings, so shalt thou come in reuerence and dread, in faith, in thankfulnesse.
Then to offer the sacrifice of fooles. That is, fooles come cloathed with the ragges of vanity, ignorance, pride, presumption, and other lusts, they come without a wedding garment. They come with a multitude of sacrifices, and to burthen the Altar of God, as though God regarded their outward workes, and needed their gifts, that hee should be pleased with them, reconciled to them, and reward them for their workes and gifts sake, as great men vse to doe, when costly presents are sent vnto them. But these fooles know not that the true intent of sacrifices is not to giue to God, but

rather receiuing of God, as forgiuenesse of sinnes, deliuerance from euerlasting death, saluation, and life, the right of this World, and the glory to come by the death and merits of the Sonne of God, whom those sacrifices, and offerings did shadow forth, represent, and signifie vnto them. They know not that they should come to learne, vnderstand, see, beleeue, and receiue the endl^^se mercy and grace of God towards them in these sacrific^s, and withall to testifie their thankefull obedience to him; euen the deniall of themselues, and all fleshly lusts, to resigne themselues wholly to him, who in the appointment of God, had euen already giuen himselfe for them. This true faith and obedience is far from those ignorant fooles, who thinke to appease the anger of God, and to please him with their outward workes, and gifts, lip-prayers, and fastings; Math. 6. Yea, to merit at his hands hereby, as euidently appeareth, Mal. 3. 14. It is in vaine to serue God, and what profit is it that we haue kept his Commandements, and that we haue walked humbly before the Lord of Hosts? Here they looke to be rewarded of the Lord for their workes, and fastings, according to their lusts, as they that honour and flatter Princes for their owne benefit and preferment. They did all for their owne profit, as the multitude that followed Christ so earnestly, Iohn 6. 26. Suauis odor lucri ex re qualibet, Gaine is sweete out of euery thing. In Zach. 7. 4. 5. They fasted the fifth and seauenth moneth, (a Law of their owne making, else it should not haue beene kept so long, seauenty yeeres together, verse 5.) to obtaine temporall benefits for their bodies of him, but they stopped their eares at the voyces of the Prophets, verse 7. they refused to heare, they pulled away the shoulder, and made their hearts as an adamant, verse 11. 12. God a giuer was theirs, but not God a receiuer.
For they consider not that they doe euill. They vnderstand not that these workes, prayers, sacrifices, vowes, fastings, are an abomination to the Lord, where faith, reuerence, humble confession, loue, obedience, are wanting; Esai 1. Psal. 50. 8. to the end. 1 Sam. 15. 22. Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voyce of the Lord?

Behold* to obey is better then sacrifice; and to hearken, then the fat of Rammes; Prou. 15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked, is abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of the vpright is his delight. These outward exercises of Religion, performed by fooles, are euill; and therefore an abomination, procuring wrath and destruction from the Lord. First, when they are done in ignorance, and disobedience, as appeareth by the Texts aforesaid, the Iewes did, and most people now adayes doe, and alwayes haue done. Secondly, when vnder colour of religion, as hearing, reading, religious talking, etc. they intend to effect some mischiefe, at least to couer their prophanenesse, couetousnesse, reuenge, etc. So Absolon vnder colour of a vow conspired against his Father. The Pharises vnder pretence of long prayers, deuoured widdowes houses, they crucified Christ also vnder many pretences. So the Iewes fasted, Isai 58. 4. Such a fast was Iezebels, to murther Naboth. Such like were the Preachers of Corinth, and they that preached of enuie to increase Pauls afflictions; Phil. 1. 15. 16. And it is to be feared, that such like abominable ones are plentifull in these dayes. For as all things are pure to the pure, so hypocrites defile the purest, and holiest things.



Verse 2.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart bee hasty to vtter any thing before God: for God is in heauen, and thou vpon earth: therefore let thy words be few.

AN amplification of the former instruction by the specials or particulars, to wit, of prayer and vowes, to verse 8. but negatiuely, or dehortatorily, to declare also the vanities incident to these religious exercises, as I said before. Here he teacheth how we ought to pray, or to keepe our foote or heart in prayer. Be not rash with thy mouth. That is, when thou art about to aske any thing of God, or to giue him thankes by prayer, let not thy tongue runne before thy wit, let not thy minde be carried away with rowling imaginations of many broken matters, and confused apprehensions, nor yet thy affections vnpurged from the scent of sensuality,

pride, presumption, boasting, like the Pharises, babble not forth ignorant and heartlesse formall speeches in the eares of God, as hypocrites doe, which thinke to be heard for the loudnesse of their noyse, and multitude of their words, Mat. 6. 5. And let not thine heart be hasty to vtter a thing before God.
Be not vnaduised in thy thoughts, and intent thereof in Gods presence, to aske or promise what thou thinkest good according to thine owne lust or liking, Iam. 4. 2. 3. 4. to giue and take as pleaseth thy selfe, as if thou thy selfe be pleased God should be pleased also, to doubt of Gods goodnesse, and promise of giuing, and to limit his power. Let not thy counsels or thoughts proceed from an vnpurged, and ill disposed heart, nor thy words from vncomposed, vnconstant, wandring, wauering thoughts. For God is in heauen, and thou vpon earth. These words are an argument or motiue inforcing the former dehortation by a comparison of things vnlike, to wit, Gods glorious Maiesty, and mans weakenesse, basenesse vnworthinesse, argued by the difference, and distance of the places where God most sheweth forth his glory, (in heauen) and man hath his habitation (on earth.)
As the highest heauen, which is the throne of God, is more glorious and greater then the earth, which is but his foot-stoole, and how farre the one is distant from the other, so is God much more excellent and powerfull than man, as the Lord saith, My thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor my wayes as your wayes.
Therefore let thy words be few, that is to say, dread that glorious and fearefull Name, The Lord thy God, Deut. 28. 28. Come before him in humility, feare and reuerence, vtter no foolish speeches, make no vaine repetitions; but aske with an earnest desire in knowledge, according to his will, and for his glory. For he knoweth before what thou ne^dest, he vnderstandeth thy secret thoughts, and can giue thee what, and when it pleaseth him, without thy prayer. But this meanes hath God ordained that he might be glorified by thee, by thy reuerend seare, submission, thankefulnesse, that acknowledging of whom thou art, and from whom all that thou hast commeth, thou maist returne thy selfe, and all that thou

hast receiued to him, euen to the praise of his glorious name.
Few words are here opposed to ethnicall, pharisaicall, heartlesse crying, and babling. 1 King. 18. 28. not to the often praying, nor long prayers, nor feruent repetitions of the sanctified heart. Luc. 2. 37. Matth. 26. 44. Ioh. 17. 14. 16. Our Sauiour Christ spent whole nights in prayer, and the Apostle saith, Pray continually: And Christ by the parable of the vniust Iudge and the poore widdow, exhorts vs to frequent and vehement praying. Euery particular blessing requireth a particular prayer and thankesgiuing. The Lords prayer containeth the substance of all prayers, as the twelue articles doe the Gospell, and the tenne Commandements the whole Law. The disciples made a generall request of prayer in generall; Lord teach vs to pray, Luke 11. 1. not particularizing any subiect or matter, but as Iohn taught his disciples. The prayer of Iohn was doubtles (as Caluin^ saith) some certaine forme gathered from diuers Scriptures, agreeable to the time of the comming of Christ, and his spirituall kingdome. And the prayer of Christ containeth the whole substance of his kingdome, which is Gods wisedome and glory in mans saluation; the three former petitions respecting Gods glory, and the three latter those things that are profitable to mans saluation. So also the commandements are diuided into two tables, the former containing duties of piety towards God, the other duties of charitie towards men. So the twelue articles teach vs what to beleeue concerning God, Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost, and what concerning the Church. The disciples being yet but children and of confused knowledge vsed this prayer onely (I thinke) in solemne praying* as children and ignorant people are first taught the articles of faith, the commandements, and this prayer. But they that hold it enough to say the Lords prayer onely; namely, this forme of words, may as well lay it is enough to faith and obedience, onely to beleeue the Creede, and doe the commandements, refusing the particulars of the Law and the Prophets, the Prouerbes of Solomon, etc. the writings of the Euangelists, and Apostles, and all expositions and applications, as indeed they doe. But when the Apostles

were indued with full measure of the spirit they could frame prayers according to all circumstances, and exigence of times, and occasions, as Act. 4. 24. etc. Act. 20. 36. Which Pauls also in all his Epistles testifie after the example of Christ. Ioh. 17. and Chapter 11. 22. 42. etc. and many other places. Therefore I conclude, as a mans knowledge of the truth is, so let him pray generally or particularly; yea both, according to the direction of the Lords prayer, and that is according to the doctrine of the whole Scripture of Christs kingdome. Euery right prayer is a branch of the Lords prayer, so euery doctrine a branch of the Creed, and euery worke of the ten Commandements. Aske, beleeue, doe. If these seeds be within vs, they must branch forth all ouer, as veines doe from the liuer, and sinews from the braine; yea, if their branches fill the world, it is but the perfection and plerophorie, or fulnes of prayer, faith, obedience. As a man abounds in knowledge, so may he abound in all prayer and thankesgiuing. But he that will insist onely vpon the briefe collections or formes of the Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten Commandements, is very likely to deny all in particular, that in generall hee confusedly confesseth, saying as it were, that fruit, that br nch neuer came out of that kernell which I had in my mouth seauen yeares agoe. This is but a foolish babler, that standeth vp at the Creed, and fighteth against the Gospel. That bableth ouer the Commandements, and maintaineth swearing, and hateth euery godly and righteous man, and is to euery good worke reprobate, one that is like the corne vpon the house tops, that maketh a shew a while, but neuer commeth to good.



Verse 3.
For a dreame commeth through the multitude of businesse, and a fooles voyce is knowne by multitude of words.

AN argument of dehortation, drawne from the effect, or rather adiunct, of many words, [batologie, or polylogie,] they are signes of a foole, they bewray an ignorant and heartlesse hypocrite that prayes without knowledge, and without sanctified affections. This is illustrated by a similitude.

As the multitude of businesse causeth a dreame, so doe many words declare a foole, who by rash and inconsiderate speeches, vttereth many follies and vaine things, that make him knowne to be a foole that hath a fooles heart: For a foole is counted wise till he speake. He that hath no roote of vnderstanding and wisedome in his heart, but either saith other mens written prayers, or rabbles together many words and sentences without vnderstanding and affection, is a foole. Otherwise, he that is weake in knowledge, or otherwise defectiue, may vse other mens prayers, and parcels of many prayers, into which his vnderstanding and affection being implyed, they become his owne. For hee doth ioyne with holy men in their prayers, as the people ioyne with the preacher in his prayers, if he vse discretion in the vse of their prayers. For one set prayer cannot agree to all times and circumstances, vnlesse it be more generall, as the Lords prayer is most generall, and may therefore be said at all times.



Verse 4.
When thou vowest a vow vnto God deferre not to pay it: for hee hath no pleasure in fooles: pay that which thou hast vowed.

THe second particular is a vowe. When thou vowest a vow vnto God, deferre not to pay it. That is, when according to the Law thou hast vndertaken to exhibite an euident testimony of honour to the Lord by a vowe, thereby exciting and stirring vp thy selfe to giue vnto the Lord that which is his owne and due vnto him, euen thy selfe, the resignation, and consectation of thy selfe, or any thing into his hands, to be to his honour in thankefull obedience after a more speciall manner; deferre not to pay it, doe not mocke God, trifle not with him, make no dissembling shew of speciall seruice, and thankefulnesse to him, when thou art loath to performe it, as though thou wert willing to bind thy selfe to God, but yet loath to abridge thy selfe of liberty: This is like the hypocrisie of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5. For he hath no pleasure in fooles. An argument inforcing the admonition. They that doe so are not accepted of God, because they are

fooles, that is, they are sinfull and wicked, their rashnesse sheweth their irreuerence, their slacknesse in paying, sheweth their dead heart and coldnesse of affection, and their not paying, manifesteth their deepe hypocrisie and contempt of him. The man of honour, and the aged are offended, if a man in such sort trifle with them, much more is God displeased, when he is so lightly regarded, and mocked. Therefore the Lord commanded in the Law, Deut. 23. 21. When thou shalt vow a vow vnto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slacke to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sinne in thee. Pay that thou hast vowed. A conclusion of the reason. If thou slackest to pay thy vow, it shall be sinne in thee: Therefore pay it.



Verse 5.
Better it is that thou shouldest not vow, then that thou shouldest vow and not pay.

AN amplification of the conclusion, by a comparison. It is better not to vow, because that it is indifferent and free, for God hath not commanded it, but promised to accept that incitation of thy selfe to speciall seruice and duties. Therefore if thou forbeare to vow, it shall be no sinne in thee; Deut. 23. 22. it is better I say, then that thou shouldest vow and not pay, because that is sinne. For God is mocke^, seeing that whom with thy lippes thou hast honoured, thou hast by deede dishonoured, shewing thereby thy want of feare, reuerence, and loue to him, as followeth in the next verse.



Verse 6.
Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sinne, neither say thou before the Angel, that it was an errour: wherefore should God be angry at thy voyce, and destroy the worke of thine hands?

A Reason of the comparison, why it is better not to vow, then to vow and not to pay: because it is sinne. For though thy vow be in thy free choyce, yet when it is once made, God hath commanded the performance. Deut. 23. 23.

That which is gone out of thy lippes, thou shalt keepe, and performe; euen a free-will offering, according as thou hast vowed to the Lord thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth. Therefore Dauid saith, Psal. 66. 13. 14. I will pay thee my vowes, which my lippes haue vttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble. This he propoundeth by way of dehortation. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sinne. That is, neither conceiue in minde, nor promise with thy mouth, that which thou canst nor, nor oughtest to performe, for that is but to binde thy selfe to sinne, which easily thou mightest haue auoyded* yea, to call and seeke for occasions of sinne, in that thou takest vp that for an occasion, which God hath left free, and easie for thee to forbeare. Neither say thou before the Angell that it was an errour. A preuention of an obiection, thus. Although I haue rashly vowed that which now I cannot performe, and through ignorance haue vowed that, which afterwards I find to be vnlawfull, yet my intent was good: Therefore if I confesse mine errour before the Lords messenger, Mal. 2. 7. and seeke to be absolued from my vow according to the Law; Leuit. 5. 4, 5. etc. I trust God will be reconciled to me. Answer. When we are about to doe for our selues, I meane, to please God according to our owne ignorance and lust, then we terme it a good intent; but when the deede is naught through want of knowledge of Gods will, and hearty submission to his will, the intent is as bad. A foole will not want excuses for his follie, and this good meaning, or well meaning, is one of the common deceits of a carnall heart, being like him that wisheth well to his friend, but neuer doth him good, but rather euill alwayes in the end, when he is throughly tryed. He that inconsiderately and vnlawfully voweth, vnder colour of good, and good intents, prouoketh God to anger, and shall not goe vnpunished, notwithstanding his outward absolution. For vnlesse we dread his Maiesty, and seeke to know his will, that wee sinne not against him, he will not accept our offerings. Leuit. 5. 6. 10. Our prayers shall be turned into sinne. For this is nothing indeed; but to make the Ordinance of God, an occasion to sinne against God. If we sinne vnwillingly, and of

infirmity, we haue Iesus Christ the righteous, a propitiation for our sinnes; but if for that cause we be carelesse, and presumptuous, we mocke God, and deceiue our selues, and there is no truth in vs. For Christ came to redeeme vs from sinne, to bind vs vnto God, and not to giue liberty to sinne, to make lesse conscience thereof, but rather more, according to the abundance of mercy. Wherefore should hee be angry at thy voyce, and destroy the worke of thine hands? Wherefore shouldst thou prouoke God to anger by words, and such words as are in thine owne power? For God hath not commanded thee to promise this or that to him: So that in not promising, thou hast not sinned. Why then shouldest thou bring sinne vpon thy soule, by promising that which thou oughttest not, or canst not performe? Surely, when thus for want of feare of God, thou dishonourest him, hee will honour himselfe in thy lust iudgement, that others may dread his name.



Verse 7.
For in the multitude of dreames, and many words, there are also diuers vanities: but feare thou God.

A Reason of the dehortation, or admonition. For in many words, that is to say, in rash and inconsiderate promises, and excuses accordingly, there are diuers follies. For God is offended, the Messenger of the Lord is grieued at thy follies, men are scandalized, and thou art punished. This he illustrateth by a comparison of dreames, which neither are true, but the confused and disordered fancies of one that slumbereth, nor arising from the principles of rest, by iudicious discourse, but caused by distempered humours, neither to any end, but to disquiet him that would take his rest. Such like are foolish prayers and foolish vowes. But feare thou God. An exhortatory conclusion of all, setting downe the true ground of prayer and vowes, which maketh them acceptable to God. But feare God. The feare of God is the beginning of wisdome, Psal. 19. 9. The feare of God is cleane, a good vnderstanding haue they that doe thereafter. If thou fearest God, thou wilt wisely promise, and diligently performe. Feare being





grounded on wisedome, is here opposed to rash promising, and flack performance, the effects of folly, which testifie the want of feare and prophanes, whereof this word (but) is a signe.



Verse 8.
If thou seest oppression of the poore, and violent peruerting of iustice and iudgement in a Prouince, maruell not at the matter: for he that is higher then the highest regardeth; and there be higher then they.

THese words are a confirmation of his former documents, or diuine lessons of sacrificing, prayer, vowes, figured by a prolepsis, gathered from his former discourse of vanities, increased by oppressions, Chap. 3. 16. 17. Cap. 41. 2. 3. Obiect. It is in vaine for a man to bind himselfe too strictly to religion, and religious exercises, otherwise then for politicke respects seeing that there is no prouidence of God, nor diuine administration os the World, as euidently appeareth by the oppressions of the poore, and the violent peruerting of iudgement and iustice. For it is a maruell indeed, and a thing euen contrary to reason, that there should be not onely a generall, but also a speciall prouidence and gouernment in iudgement, and iustice, and mercy, Ier. 9. 24. and yet to see such oppressions and wrongs goe vnpunished and vnreformed, and the poore and godly without deliuerer, without comforter.
Ans. This argument seemeth good indeede to carnall reason, which iudgeth according to outward appearance, not according to the secret and good wisedome of God, who intendeth the glory of himselfe in all things. For so the foolish say, Mal. 3. 14. it is in vaine to serue God, what profit haue wee by obedience and humiliation of our selues in mourning and fasting? And the wicked say, Psal. 10. 11. God hath forgotten, he hideth away his face, he will neuer see it. So Psal. 73. 11. How doth God know? Is there knowledge in the most high? Dauid was also tempted to this folly, Verse 2. My feete were almost gone, my steps had wel-nigh slipt. For when I saw the wicked in prosperity, Verse 4. 5. 6. I said, I haue cleansed my heart in vaine, and to no purpose washed my hands in innocency, Verse 13. Seeing that I am contrarily plagued, and chastened continually, Verse 14. But Solomon here resolueth this doubt. If thou seest such disorder in a

Prouince, maruell not that it should be so, for God that is most high in power and dignity, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Iudge of Iudges, knoweth and regardeth, yea, ordereth all these disordered things according to his wisedome for his glory, the punishment of the wicked, and good of his seruants. And as these earthly Princes and Gouernours, are set in high place, and are therefore called gods, because they are Gods Vicegerents; so hath God other Ministers, an innumerable company of Angels, higher and greater then they, by whom he executeth iudgement on tyrants, and cruell oppressours in his time, as Chap. 3 17. They shall be punished, and the godly and poore, oppressed, shall be deliuered, Psal. 12 5. For the oppression of the poore, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that would insnare him.



Verse 9.
Moreouer, the profit of the earth is for all: the King himselfe is serued by the field.

IIII. Example of vanities obserued in outward things. A Regression to his former discourse of vanities in worldly things. This is the fourth example of vanities, obserued in outward things, to wit, of earthly possessions, pertaining to the manifold vses of this present life in ciuill state, which men get without oppression and wrong, by lawfull courses, whereby notwithstanding vanity is increased. And he maketh his repassage to the demonstration of these vanities, by a comparison of worldly goods among themselues. Moreouer, that is to say, now (after this digression to vanities in spirituall things) to returne againe to these earthly things, wherein men bestow so much study and trauell, amongst all their manifold studies and practises to satisfie their hearts desires, there is nothing more needfull and profitable then tillage. For the earth is for Bonum quo c^^unius, eo melius.all.
The earth is the wombe whereof all are formed, and the breasts or dugges whereof all are fed and preserued. The fulnesse of the earth are the creatures thereof, and the fulnesse of the creatures, the fruits and vertues that are in them, to sustaine and maintaine this mortall life. The reuenewes of the earth therefore are most necessary and excellent, amplified by an argument of the Greater.

If any could liue without the profit of the earth, then might the king; but whatsoeuer his other prerogatiues and excellencies are, yet can he not liue without the benefit of the field, Melek l^sadeh negnebad, i. the king is seruant to the field, to haue care of tillage and earthly fruites, that himselfe may be serued therewith.



Verse 10.
He that loueth siluer, shall not be satisfied with siluer; nor he that loueth abundance, with increase: this is also vanitie.

AN argument to confirme the vanities of this studie, exercise, and course of life also, illustrated by a comparison of the like. Euen as he that loueth siluer cannot be satisfied therewith, but this thirst increaseth with his store, as the Poet saith, Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, that is, as the heape is greater, so the appetite is sharper, All the benefit that he receiueth by his money, is the sight of it, and the sight breeds longing, and that breedeth discontent with that which is present; as this man I say, is not satisfied, so neither can he that loueth abundance be satisfied with increase. He that loueth full fraughtage of grounds, corne, cattle. etc. receiueth no contentation by those which he hath, but hee still desireth more, neither doe the fruits redound to him in such measure, as he still desireth. And if there be no difference betweene the greedy Farmer or Purchaser, and the biting Vsurer, the one receiuing no more contentation by his grounds and stocke, then the other doth by his siluer, then is the state of them both miserable, and vaine and full of vexation. Note, he saith not, He that hath money, or he that hath abundance is not satisfied, but he that loueth them. For a man may haue these, and yet loue God onely, which the other do not. But Solomon speakes here of worldly things, which are the desire, loue, delight of worldly men, whereby and wherein they seeke for an earthly felicitie in the pleasant paradise of their possessions, but finde naught.




Verse 11.
When goods increase, they are increased that eate them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, sauing the beholding of them with their eyes?

A Confirmation of this insatietie, and consequently vnprofitablenesse by a cause thereof. When goods increase, they are increased that eate them. As a man desires to haue aboundance of corne, cattle, wine, oyle, etc. So must he haue also a multitude of seruants and hirelings, his family must be inlarged with his reuenewes, who worke the same out of the earth for him. And what good is there, etc. That is to say, no good at all, figured by a communication. They worke for him indeed, but the benefit redoundeth to them, for as they get it, so theyeate it, and weare it, sharing him out a part thereof amongst them, sometimes the best, sometimes the worst, sometimes the greatest, sometimes the least, and that for ouerseeing them; and yet his ouersight is such sometimes, as that his alowance is made him accordingly. This is the good that hee reapeth by the profits of the field, euen to behold the sharing of them out into parts, to looke vpon his owne part, and to eate as the rest doe, for he can make no more of it, but meat, drinke and apparell, and so much doe they make of theirs, with as full contentment and more. For they lay all the burden of cares, and all other troubles vpon his fairer portion, to reduce it to an equal^tie with theirs.



Verse 12.
The sleepe of a labouring man is sweet, whether hee eate little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleepe.

AN amplification of the vnprofitablenesse of plenty of earthly fruits by a comparison. A man in the ample possession of these is in worse case then the poore man that wanteth this aboundance: Because that the sleepe of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eate little or much. The laboring man is tyed to a competency or meane, therefore on the one side hee is free from the euill superfluities of intemperance

and riot, to which filth is subiect, yea, to which out lustfull nature doth captiuate vs in the possession thereof, but the other is restrained, for his fire wanteth fuell to flame forth with the other, and is kept in a temper. Againe on the other side, he is free from consuming cares, which weary the braine, and disquiet the heart of the other; So that his bodily paines are recompensed with pleasant sleepe, whether he eate much or little, whereas the restlesse spirit of the other rideth his body day and night: For his abundance will not suffer him to sleepe. His abundance is a great heauy lumpe, like the stone of Sisiphus, which is rowled vp and downe continually with a doubtfull, fearefull, carefull heart; or else the contrary temptations thereof doe so ouer-power him, that he hath no more command of himselfe then the fed horse. So that his condition is miserable, and causeth the poore man to blesse himselfe in his mediocritie, yea, to preferre his pouerty before the others wealth. This is a great euill, but there is yet a sorer then this.



Verse 13.
There is a sore euill which I haue seene vnder the Sun; namely, riches kept for the owners thereof, to their hurt.

AN amplification of the vnprofitablenesse of wordly goods by their euent. It is first propounded generally, There is an euill. Secondly, confirmed by the testimony of his speciall obseruation: Which I haue seene vnder the Sunne. Thirdly, explicated more specially. Riches kept for the owners, to their hurt.
In these three last verses before, the vnprofitablenesse of riches, is figured by a gradation, thus. A man hath not onely no good by them* saue to looke on them, verse 11. but also they depriue him of his necessary and naturall rest by night, verse 12. Neither doe they onely so, but (positiuely) they bring him to ruine oft-times, verse 13. The former words include a comparison of euils among themselues, to illustrate this euill of riches; as if he should say: There be many infirmities and euils incident to man, and to his outward state, to increase vanity, anger, sorrow, griefe, etc. Yet is this a

sore euill, cholah, or euill disease, euen a sickenesse to death, that a man should spend all his dayes in trauell, depriuing his body and minde of recreations, and such comforts as the vse of riches bring, that in his latter dayes his ioy may be full, and perfect, without any mixture of care, or feare of want, either for himselfe or for his children; but then it should fall out quite contrary to his expectation; namely, that those things which were gathered, kept and preserued for his good, should be to his destruction in their euent. This was the euent of Hamans aspiring to promotion and honour, wealth, friends etc. Hee little thought that all his plots for honour and wealth should haue beene a rope and a gallowes to hang him on, whereas many others had been hanged with lesse cost and labour. But the more cost the greater infamy, the higher rise the greater fall.
The builders of the tower of Babel intended to make themselues famous in the earth, but the euent was their labor for their trauell, and the iudgement of God vpon their pride. It became a bable good for naught, but to proclaime their folly to all ages of the world. The deuill and the Pharises thought that all was firme and sure to them and theirs, when they had crucified Christ, and in his ignominious death had exposed his name, doctrine, and all that beleeued in him, to shame and perpetuall contempt. But the euent was the downe-fall of Satans kingdome, and the shame and confusion of them and their children, as it is in the parable of the vineyard. They that beleeue in him shall neuer be confounded, nor ashamed. Much a doe a long time also, hath there been about the building and establishing of the Romish Synagogue, and deifying the great Gull, but confusion and shame shall be the euent. The rich man. Luk. 12. prouided and laid vp great store of wealth, for his case and ioy in his old age, but when he begins to say, Now soule cast off all care, take thine ease, eate, drinke, and be merry, the euent was quite contrary, for his goods pressed downe his soule to hell.
Finally, to how many and most lamentable miseries may a man and his family be exposed by reason of his abundance,

wherein soeuer it consisteth, all ages affoord innumerable examples. Neither doe these euils befall the wicked onely, the euent of whose vnlawfull-gotten-goods, Solomon here alonely aimeth not at, but euen the good also, as the example of Naboth, and of innumerable in our experience may testifie. Sinne is the cause or ground of all euils. Pride was the cause of Hamans fall, and sinne was the ground of Iobs misery, and Naboths death.
To conclude, this is a vanity and a grieuous euill belonging to worldly goods, whosoeuer getteth them, or keepeth them; namely, oft-times to occasion his ruine. This generalitie doth Solomon principally intend.



Verse 14.
But these riches perish by euill trauell, and he begetteth a sonne, and there is nothing in his hand.

AN amplification of their vnprofitablenesse, by their instability and vncertainty. They are a slippery possession, like an Eele in a mans hand, or a bird that hath ill-will to tarry there, for as soone as the hand ^lacketh, she is flowne; so riches take them the wings of an Eagle, and flie vp suddenly into heauen, they writhle out of the hand, and lush into the deepe, and that when a man seeth and looketh on. But these riches perish by an euill trauell. This word (But) seemeth to imply a prolepsis, thus: Wealth indeed sometimes doth occasion a mans ruine, as Abraham trauelling into Egypt, feared that the beauty of his wife should be an occasion of his destruction, Gen. 20. 11. So Iacob feared that his posterity should occasion euill to him from Laban, and his sonnes, but that is seldome.
Ans. Be it so that a man perish not by those riches, yet these euen these riches hagnasher ha^ica, that a man hath so laboriously gotten, and carefully kept, and still diligently increaseth, shal perish in his hands, (as though they must either kill, or be killed) and that either by casualties, to which they lye open, as well as himselfe doth; or else by his owne folly, and improuidence. For there is a way, which a man in wisedome taketh, whereby all things succeed according to his minde.

Againe, there is a way which a man taketh for the best, and likeliest, but it is filled with crosse and losse, euery one falling in the necke of other, both causally, and occasionally, which thing oft times bringeth a sudden dissolution of the greatest, and most setled estate. For in this case a man is in a maze, and knoweth not which way to turne him. For if he take this way, a Lyon shall teare him; if he leape ouer the hedge, a Serpent shall bite him; if he turne another way, hee shall fall among theeues. Whether he trauaile or trafficke by Sea or Land, it is an euill trauaile. What can a man doe when the Army of God encountereth him, or with-draw, as I may say, their fortunate aspect from him? when nothing thriueth with him, but is like the panting Bird, or writhling Eele in his hand? And he begetteth a sonne, and there is nothing found in his hand. An amplification of his calamity, by the extent, which is the pouerty of his posterity also. It is not onely a griefe to him, to be depriued of his goods for himselfe, but that his children also, for whom he so carefully trauelled, and are as deare vnto him, as vnto himselfe, should be left destitute, and helpelesse. And withall, the griefe of their Fathers fall extendeth to them, to adde affliction to the sorrowfull, besides the hopes of their possibilitie, which are now become frustrate: To be depriued of that which a man was borne to, as we say, is a perpetuall sorrow, and causeth many a deepe sigh.



Verse 15.
As he came forth of his mothers wombe, naked shall he returne, to goe as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry away in his hand.

AN amplification of the vnprofitablenesse of riches, by their common adiunct. They are bodily, temporary, momentany. Man is euerlasting in his better part, whereof he is denominated a man. But riches serue onely for the time of this our life. There is no strength in them to free a man from death, but they leaue him in the iawes of death. They serue onely for his expence by the way, till he come to the place of his accompt, and his iudgement vpon his accompt.

Riches are like an Harlot, which hauing intangled a man with the loue of her, maketh a shew as though shee would not depatt from him; but when he is arrested by the Sergeant for debt, shee vtterly forsaketh him, and followeth other customers, whom shee mocketh in like sort. The rich man can carry away nothing in his hand of all his labour, to affoord any helpe, or comfort to him after death. Diues, Luke 16. doth witnesse this, who of all his earthly abundance, could not enioy so much as a droppe of water to coole his tongue. The rich mans departure out of the World, is illustrated by a comparison of his comming into the World. As he came naked, so shall he returne. It will be said; That is the common condition of euery man, and no more griefe to the rich then to the poore. Ans. It is indeed the common condition of all men, but yet a misery peculiar to the rich: For he hath onely laboured for riches, he hath put his confidence in his riches, his ioy, delight, comfort, was all in his riches; he knew none other God, but his Idoll. Now as it is the torment of hell, to be quite separated from the presence and protection of God, from the company of his Angels and Saints: so is it the greatest misery of the rich man, to be separated from the presence and protection of Mammon: When he and his Idoll are parted, then he falleth into desperation. This we see verified by the practise of those, who being yet aliue, and likely to liue long, make away themselues, yea, oft times for a small losse, but their feare is great: for they haue now none other God to trust on, or to fl^e vnto for succour. Therefore how much soeuer a man is addicted to any other sinne, how great soeuer his desire, his loue, delight be in any vice, yet for this onely is he termed an Idolater. And this is the cause, why the Scriptures impute this common condition of man with all creatures, to the rich, for a speciall miserie, Psal. 49. 17. And as a mans desire, ioy, loue, and confidence in his goods is the greater, so much greater is his miserie: Otherwise, he that trusteth in the liuing God, who hath life in himselfe, and by himselfe, and giueth life to all, is poore in his abundance, Math. 5. 3. and rich in his pouerty. For in vsing of this World, he vseth it not, for his heart is in

heauen, because his treasure is there. But hee that hath his treasure here, liueth in feare, and dyeth in despaire. O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that liueth at rest in his possessions, vnto the man that hath nothing (in outward appearance at least) to vexe him, and that hath prosperity in all things, (for a little while, as Craesus had) yea, vnto him that is yet able to eate meate, that is young, lusty, and strong? etc. Ecclus 41. 1.



Verse 16.
And this also is a sore euill, that in all points as he came, so shall he goe: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the winde?

AN amplification of the vnprofitablenesse of riches lost, by a comparison of the common condition of man leauing his riches. For a man by death to leaue all behinde him, is a misery. But it is a greater misery for riches to leaue a man before death. Commonly riches accompany the rich to the graue, and there giue him his farewell, which indeed is a misery to goe as he came: but this man hauing gotten them with excessiue toyle, is depriued of them before his death, so that in all points he goeth as he came. This is a double misery. Diues his misery was great in that hee must part from his wealth, yet he was honoured with a pompous funerall; but Iobs was greater, that being bestripped of all, hee should die before his death, and be buried before his graue was open, as yet hee knew nothing to the contrary. For first his whole state was dissolued, all his ornaments, all his necessaries vtterly dispersed, dead in his estate, dead in his children, the World was a dead thing to him, and hee a dead thing to the World, as the Prouerbe is, Who is so woe begoue, as first a man since none. Againe, he was buried in the graue of sorrow, and couered with the moulde of obliuion, and contempt. Therefore said Dauid in his deiection also, I am a worme, and no man, I am as a dead man out of minde; and Elias, 1 Kings 19. 4. I am not better then my Fathers were. This then is also a sore euill. These words are an illustration of this misery, by a comparison with the former verse 13. from

the Equals, in this word (also). As it is a grieuous euill for a man to perish by occasion of his riches; so is it also as grieuous an euill, that his riches should perish from him. For his life standeth in his riches. And as Dauid in his mourning for Absolon, wished that he had died for him, 2 Sam. 18. 33. So the rich man in his mourning for the losse of his goods, wisheth himselfe dead, or that he had beene dead, when by such or such a folly he incurred such an incurable damage. How many a man hazardeth, yea, looseth his life to saue his goods? This deuoted seruitor will also die for the honour of his god Mammon. He is a Martyr also. What profit hath hee that hath laboured for the winde? A conclusion amplified by a comparison, to illustrate the vnprofitablenesse and vanity of vncertaine and perishing riches. Euen as hee that laboureth for the winde, wearyeth himselfe, but getteth naught* so this man gathering goods, enioyeth naught. The wind-gatherer feeleth the winde, but graspeth naught; so this man imbraceth sweetly his goods, but holdeth naught.



Verse 17.
All his dayes also he eateth in darkenesse, and he hath much sorrow, and wrath in his sicknesse.

AN hypotyposis, or liuely description of his misery, that is despoyled of his possessions, which I called before the death and buriall of a man, in respect of his worldly estate. All his dayes he eateth [a synecdoche of the speciall) in darkenesse (a metaphor). As prosperity is compared to the shining of the Sunne, and brightnesse of the Moone, Iob 31. 26. so is aduersity to obscurity and darknesse; Esai 58. 10. The earth into the which the euill spirits were cast downe, is a death, and an hell to them in comparison of the glory of heauen; and this earth is proportionably an heauen to the damned. So in some proportion pouerty and want is a graue, a death, an hell to the wicked rich, in comparison of the splendour and glory of his wealthy state, from which he is fallen. When Diues would haue beene glad of one drop of water, how glorious and beautifull was the reuiew of his earthly state? yea, the thought that for a man to behold the light of the Sun,

to haue his abiding among the creatures of God, to liue among men, and to be in the Church of God, though otherwise he licked the dust with the Serpent, and drunke water, and were filled with all the temporall afflictions of this life, was an heauen. Now as this vale of misery was to Diues in torments an heauen without misery: so are vaine riches a paradise of pleasure to the godlesse rich, being now in pouerty. He counteth the rich happy, and himselfe when hee was rich; but now he is in despaire, and hateth himselfe, hee hath no comfort in himselfe. For then he loued himselfe for his goods sake, but they being lost, he is perished. Hee wandereth in solitarinesse, like to an ignis fatuus, vndone, deboshed, he auoydeth mans company, he delighteth in nothing, all things are turned into bitternesse, hee is a Pellican in the Wildernesse, an Owle in the Desert. He hath much sorrow sicklinesse, and anger. An amplification of the former generall speech, by the specials. Sorrow, in Hebrew Cagnas, signifieth indignation, wrathfulnesse, fretting, grudging, repining, making euery thing a prouocation of griefe, as Prou. 21. 19. It is better to dwell in the wildernesse, then with a woman of contentions, and indignation, vacagnas, sicklinesse, and anger. In the Hebrew, and sicklinesse, or languor, and fury. Indignation, mourning, fretting, causeth sicklinesse, consuming, and languishing, it dryeth, and maketh bitter the humours, which againe causeth furiousnesse. The Hebrew word Ketzeph, properly signifieth such anger as causeth foaming, and froathing, as the tumultuous waters tossed with the winde. As if he should say, He is full of madnesse, or beastly fury. For such men commonly are angry against God, to which Sathan would haue tempted Iob. They curse the Diuell and all ill lucke, they storme against the creatures themselues, and enuie other men. Neither doth he speake of those men onely that are thus impatient in losses, but of all men, which bewray such infirmities in like case, though not in such measure and desperation, as the wicked doe, which once hauing riches, trusted not in God, but in riches.




Verse 18.
Behold that which I haue seene: it is good and comely, for one to eate and to drinke, and to enioy the good of all his labour that he taketh vnder the Sunne, all the dayes of his life which God giueth him: for it is his portion.

A Proposition of Solomons iudgement (vpon consideration of these vanities) of the true and right vse of all worldly things, confirmed by the testimony of his owne obseruation, and experience* Behold, that which I haue seene. Behold, a preface to stirre vp attention, consideration, and remembrance of his instruction. That which I haue seene; The testimony. It is agood, which is comely, for one to eate* to drink etc. the proposition. This is the onely good that is to be found in them, bodily sustenance, and personall maintenance. This Good is amplified by the adiunct, comelinesse. This ioyfull, and comfortable vse of honest labour is agreeable to the nature of man, who differeth from a beast: And carnall reason teacheth, that all things are made for man, that man might reioyce with man in the comfortable vse thereof.
Againe, it is agreeable to the person of man, who is the image of God, indued with a reasonable soule, which is not made for his body, as the Epicure dreameth, nor the body for goods as the niggard slumbereth, but contrarily, Matth. 6. 31. Take no thought for meate, drinke, cloathing: For the body is not for raiment, nor the life for meate, but contrarily, Verse 25. Clothing is for the body, meate is for the life, and the life is for the kingdome of God, verse 33. Seeing that these things are for the reparation, sustenance, and maintenance of mans body, which is the house and vessell of the soule, it is a comely thing that this vessell or house be accordingly maintained. For* that is the onely end and vse thereof. As man is the most excellent creature and image of God, so let him not make himselfe a beast, and seruant to the creatures; but maintaine the dignity of his person. But yet let him not turne his person into an Idoll, as it is now common.
For that is his portion. A confirmation by a reason drawne

from the end, and vse of earthly things. They are giuen him of God, for that purpose, euen to conuert them to that vse onely, for no other good is in them, no further matter can be wrought, or attained to by them. Therefore herein let him rest himselfe contented, and to this end limit his desires, and indeauours.



Verse 19.
Euery man also, to whom God hath giuen riches, and wealth, and hath giuen him power to eate thereof, and to take his portion, and to reioyce in his labour; this is the gift of God.

AN amplification of the proposition, by the efficient cause, in the last words: This is the gift of God. For a man to labour moderately for riches, and by Gods blessing of his labour to attaine to riches and wealth; and also to haue power to vse the same for the comfort of his body, in eating, drinking, apparell, building; for the comfort also and education of his children and family, accordingly as God hath bestowed on him, and to reioyce herein also, without greedy desire of more, or faithlesse feare of losing that which is present; All this is the gift of God. For vnlesse God that giueth power to get wealth, giue also grace to vse wealth aright, hee shall liue beside his wealth, yea liue in pouerty, and die in misery.



Verse 20.
For he shall not much remember the dayes ^f his life: because God answereth him in the ioy of his heart.

AN amplification of the proposition by the effect, namely, of the right vse of riches. He shall He shall not be altogether free, and happy, but in some good measure.not much remember etc. that is, neither shall the time past be grieuous vnto him through the conscience of his couetous getting, and omission of euery good duty; or through the feeling of paines, aches, diseases gotten in times past, with lifts, burdens, fasting, watching* etc. Neither shall the time present, nor the time to come be grieuous through feare of want or losse, or through doubting of Gods prouidence for him and his posterity, or

through feare of death it selfe, sommoning him to his reckoning. And why? Because God answereth him in the ioy of his heart. A confirmation by the cause. As God hath giuen him power to gather riches and wealth, so he is answerable to his honest and conscionable labours and trauaile, with another power, gift, or grace; namely, ioy of heart* comfort, and hearty ioy in the vse thereof, to his owne good, his neighbours good, and Gods glory.



CHAPTER VI.


Verse 1.
There is an euill which I haue seene vnder the Sunne, and it is common among men.

AN illustration of the comfortable vse of riches, which is the gift of God, by the contrary vnprofitablenesse, vanity, or abuse therof, in those that want this grace; or rather by the abusing of themselues, their soules and bodies, in withholding the vse thereof from both. Which thing is a plague and curse of God vpon sinners, that seeke not his kingdome, and the righteousnesse thereof, but trusting in themselues and their goods, ayme at a full and firme estate, voyde of care and feare, or else of plaine and excessiue pride hoard vp their riches for the aduancement of their posterity: Of which purpose also God defeateth them, by translating their goods to strangers. And this is a great calamity and woefull misery. This hee toucheth to the end of verse 6.
This first verse containeth the generall proposition of this vnprofitablenesse, and vanity of riches, which increaseth the misery of man that seeketh for a felicitie in them, not in God. There is an euill which I haue seene vnder the Sunne, and it is common among men. This vnprofitable vanity i^ declared in this verse. 1. By the Generall, an euill. 2. Confirmed by testimony, Which I haue seene vnder the Sunne. 3. Amplified by

the adiunct, and it is common among men. This knowne euill, whereof there is great complaint euery where, is common among men, and peculiar or proper to men: For beasts are not subiect to this euill disease, but men onely, who in this respect among other, are worse and more miserable then beasts. And it is indeed our peculiar plague of God vpon the distrustfull, faithlesse, vncharitable niggard; who as he neither loueth God, nor his neighbour, so neither doth he loue himselfe, by the iust iudgement of God.



Verse 2.
A man to whom God hath giuen riches, wealth, and honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his soule of all that he desireth, yet God giueth him not power to eate thereof, but a stranger eateth it: This is vanity, and it is an euill disease.

A Particular explication of the proposition in these two next verses, wherein this vanity or euill plague, is set forth to the view of the eyes, by an hypotiposis or liuely description. There is a man, that as hee hath thirsted after worldly goods, as the Israelites hungred for flesh, so God hath giuen him his hearts desire: He hath riches, hee hath wealth, and the abundance of all things seruiceable for the welfare of mans life; he hath honour, or the place, and title of dignitie to which he hath aspired, neither doth hee want any thing that his soule lusted after, but hath inioyed all the full measure and perfection thereof. Here is the outward appearance of happinesse: But God withholdeth his grace from him, that he cannot vse it to his comfort. He is like an asse loaded with gold, and victuals, but eateth thistles, and in the end a stranger that neuer sweat for it, one vnknowne to him, yea, it may be one that was his enemy shall haue the vse thereof. So that it plainely appeareth at the last to all men, that this happy man was the drudge, the Purueyor, the Porter, the asse of other mens burdens. Here is the vnprofitablenesse and vanity of his labour. And this is an euill disease, or grieuous sickenesse. This euill disease than consisteth, 1. In the accomplishment of his desires, He hath riches, wealth, honour, amplified by a commoration, he wanteth nothing. 2. In the

priuation or want of grace to vse them: Yet God giueth him not power to eate thereof: Eating, is put for all comfortable vses, by a Synecdoche of the speciall, 3. In the euent of all his possessions, the translation thereof to strangers; But a stranger eateth it.



Verse 3.
If a man beget an hundred children, and liue many yeares, so that the dayes of his yeares be many; and his soule be not filled with good, and also that he haue no buriall, I say, that an vntimely birth is better then he.

A Continuation of the description of the vanity of riches without vse, figured by a Gradation. If, or although* a man hath not onely riches, wealth and honour, but hath euen an hundred children also, euen children (esteemed the greatest blessing, as orbity and barrennesse was a reproch) according to his desire, which he may send out like flocks, Iob 21. 11. and not onely so, but withall liue many yeeres, and yet his desires be not satisfied with riches, so that he cannot inioy the comfortable vse of these things that are present; but euen his children are an occasion of greedy desire, care, sorrow, sparing, and pinching, etc. and not onely satisfied and comfortlesse in life, but also at his death hath no buriall, euen neither then hath any vse of his goods, children, kinsfolkes: for the honourable execution of his funerall, Ier. 22. 18. but is rather executed for some capitall crime committed, as many Emperours and Popes were, or murthered, Ier. 22. 19. or drowned, or maketh away himselfe, as Nero, and Achitophel, Saul and Iudas did, or dyeth farre from home, and suddenly, or that had beene hated, as Iason, 2 Maccab^us 5. 8. 10. of all men, and euen his children be weary of him, and ashamed of him, yea discredited by him in his latter dayes, when his vnderstanding and memory fayling, he hath no gouernment of his inordinate passions, but is wickedly humorous, wearisome, and odious, and therefore euen his friends glad of his death; this is a vanity, a miserable calamity. This vanitie or euill disease, particularized in this verse, consisteth. 1. In hauing children at a mans desire. 2. In liuing

long. 3. In being depriued of all ioy through faithlesse and greedy desire. 4. In an infamous, and dishonourable death. Lastly, he illustrateth this vaine condition of the rich, by a comparison of an abortiue child, to wit, one that is borne before his time, and dyeth in his birth: The vntimely birth is better then he.



Verse 4.
For he commeth in with vanity, and departeth in darkenesse, and his name shall be couered with darkenesse.

A Confirmation of the comparison or preheminence of the vntimely-borne child aboue him. Ki bahebel ba, for he commeth in vanity, i. as nothing, being sencelesse of good and euill. So that his comming is as no comming at all. And as he commeth before his time and growth to ripenesse of birth, and so is no man; so againe he departeth in darknes, he is priuately buried, either few or none knowing thereof, and his name is couered with darkenesse. For there is no speech, nor remembrance of him any more.



Verse 5.
Moreouer, he hath not seene the Sunne, nor knowne any thing. This hath more rest then the other.

A Second priuiledge or preheminence of the abortiue aboue the vaine rich. Hee hath not seene the Sunne, etc. His birth was to him an end of all miseries to which the life of man is subiect. He neither felt in himselfe, nor saw the manifold corruptions and euils in the world, nor the cares and trauels of this painfull life. He is freed from bodily diseases and paines, from oppressions and enuy, from feares, and dangers, from griefe, anger and fury, with which the other was pressed and oppressed: Therefore he hath more rest then the other, who liued and dyed in vanity.
The corne that is cropt vp as soone as it appeareth, or is bruised in pieces when it lyeth in sprout, is better then the old weed that is hated while it standeth, and in the end is cut downe for the fire.




Verse 6.
Yea, though he liue a thousa^d yeeres twice told, yet hath he seene no good. Doe not all goe to one place?

AN amplification of the former argument by a prolepsis. Notwithstanding, the eo^mon afflictions of mortal life, yet it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sunne, to enioy the blessings of God bestowed on a man, and long life is a blessing desired of all. Therefore in that hee liued here many yeeres, his condition is much better then the abortiues, which was depriued of all. Ans. Although hee liued long, yea, a thousand yeeres, and a thousand to the end of that, yet is that no prerogatiue, but a multiplication of miseries, and vanities: For he hath seene no good. He hath spent his dayes in carefull trauell, in sorrow, griefe, anger, in much disquietnesse, feare, and trouble, he hath depriued himselfe of sociall recreations of the day, and the naturall rest of the night* to accomplish his vaine hopes, he hath liued besides all his goods, he hath iaded his body, broken his braines, burthened his conscience, he is hated of God, loathed of men, the earth groneth vnder his burden, the World is weary of him, hee is quite stript of all goodnesse, and banished out of euery place in the hearts of men, as Iason, 2 Macc. 5. 8. He dyeth in ignominy, he is burled in forgetfulnesse, his name is rotten before his body, he hath neither done good, nor enioyed good, and how long soeuer he liued; Doe not all goe to one place? After that he hath had the experience of two thousand yeeres vanities, he must descend into the graue of the abortiue, and returne againe into dust with him. Now when they are both dust, whether dust is the better? the former or later? The dust of him that had the experience of common, and personall vanities, without number, many yeeres, and ended his dayes in shame and dishonour, or of him that neuer knew any thing?




Verse 7.
All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.

THe second part of the Chapter: which is, a conclusion of the weakenesse, and insufficiency of riches to satisfie the desire of man, to the end of the Chapter. Man consisteth of an immortall soule and corruptible body; that is spirituall, this is earthly: yea, that is a spirit, and the body is but a vessell, or instrument vnited to it, without composition or mixture. This vessell is the sperme of the World, the dust of the earth, that is to say, an elementary matter or substance, consisting of a mixture of the elements, and therefore it is sustained and maintained by elementary foode; So that the appetite, to wit, hunger, and thirst, is earthly also. Now what is the end of all the labour of man? wherein doth he labour? what is the obiect or subiect whereon he worketh? Is it not all to satisfie the bodily appetite? Whence proceedeth, and whether tendeth this appetite? Nature it selfe declareth the matter. The appetite of the Tree is the more simple moisture, or rather iuyce of the earth, and it cannot, neither willeth to goe beyond his kinde: For the appetite is limited to the kinde, which onely desireth the perfection, and propagation thereof. And so of all creatures liuing and sensible, according to their kindes. But mans vessell being the most compound, not that it hath more elements then other creatures, but the most vniuersall nature, hath an vniuersall appetite: And the whole World, with all the creatures therein, serue onely for meate, drinke, and cloathing. The whole Armies of heauen and earth are onely for these three seruices of mans body, either immediately, or mediately; that is to say, either foode, or else preparatory vessels, Ministers, Officers, or Trades*men, subordinate one to another for man, who is the centre of them all* Sheepe and Oxen eate the iuyce of the earth, not immediately, but by the preparatory vessell, the greene hearbe, by which it is transformed into foode agreeable to the nature of ^ea^ts and fowles. So man ea^eth grasse and fodder, prepared by the bodies of cattle, also flies and

wormes, and vilest things, are by subordinate vessels from one to another, prepared to his mouth, and for his mouth. The most vniuersall instrument by whose foture the life of the World, and of all his furniture is maintained, is the light in the Sunne, which God therefore created before any other creature. Then the Starres, nextly the matter of the firmament, whereof the starres were formed: These are subordinate. So that the heauens are an vniuersall cause or vessell, by whose foture the elements are sustained. Againe, the elements are an vniuersall cause of sustenance of their creatures produced out of their wombes, and formed of them. Lastly, the mixt creatures are preparatory vessels one for another, till at length all come to the belly and backe of man, euen his body, the centre of them all: For all is meate, and meate includeth medicine also. Now euery man hath in him the nature of all men, so that all men are but as one man, this one man is the sperme or seede of the whole World, superiour and inferiour nature, as the kernell containes the tree with all his branches, leaues, colours, vermiculations, fruits, etc. and as the sperme of the liuing creature containeth the members, faculties, qualities, operations, etc. of the creature from whose body it is propagated, and is by the vniuersall fotures of the light, starres, firmament, elements, etc. produced into growth and perfection, which are but the vniuersall preparatory instruments, which this sperme vseth and applyeth for the building vp of it selfe with the next foode or matter, which is apt to be adapted, and incorporated into the nature of it selfe: This matter or foode it onely desireth. And so doth man also in his kinde. Of the animall and spirituall foode and appetite it is impertinent here to speake. Therefore all the labour of man is for his mouth. The heauens, the elements, the creatures, worke, and prepare for him, by their influences, inclinations, appetites, for to satisfie and fill his appetite. Their mouthes are made for his mouth, their skinnes for his clothing, and building also is but a cloathing or couering. All things are for the necessities and delights of the body. In this respect also is he the Image of God, in that all things are for him, and he is for himselfe, as concerning

the creatures. For all are seruants to him, but he is seruant to none: If he be, that is his degenerating, his curse, his fall, his brutishnesse: for he that serueth any thing, body, or bodily things, is a beast in that respect. But who almost now a dayes maketh not an Idoll of his body? therefore when we would be as gods, then are we euill beasts, filthy beasts. But bodily things are for the seruice of the body; the body for the spirit, and that for the Lord. Otherwise, as Ieremy saith; Euery man is a beast by his owne knowledge.
And yet the appetite is not filled. Or as the Hebrew signifieth; The soule is not filled. What the extent of mans appetite is, both personall, and bodily, may well appeare, by that which is already spoken, and also by the two examples following. The first is sufficiently testified by the example of Alexander the Great, who was not contented with the possession of the continent or Land, nor yet of the Sea, when he had heard Anaxagoras disputing of the plurality of Worlds; and when he had conquered all, hee must needs be a god, pretending a title to heauen also. The appetite of man is not limitted to the materiall World, till he be transformed, or degenerated into the nature of a beast, which is when his light is fallen downe into the confused Chaos againe, the lees of his concupiscence, which is vtter darkenesse. The second is testified by the example of Heliogabalus, the monstrous glutton, who was serued at one supper with seauen thousand fishes, and fiue thousand fowles, and had sixe hundred bawdes and harlots following him in chariots, and gaue great rewards to him that could inuent any new pleasure. Who is not an Alexander, and an Heliogabalus, if God suffer him to range? God hath alwayes permitted some to runne out into extremities of vice, as the Sodomites, that all men may see what horrible filth lyeth in the heart of euery man, which God restraineth for the preseruation of man-kinde for his Elect sake, otherwise the Diuell is come downe, and rideth vpon mans appetite. The appetite multiplyeth it selfe infinitely. For of all the millions of the liuing, among whom the World is diuided, euery one hath an appetite of all, which sheweth it selfe in the vehemency, and extreamity of

mens striuings, and aspirings higher and higher, one roaring waue or billow beating forward another to ouerflow the banks, and to conuert all into sea, if God had not limited their line, within which euery man is bounded, when hee hath inhiated, striuen, and done what he can. His might shall neuer be to his moode. For God hath set hill against dale, and contrarily. But what the appetite of him that hath but one acre of ground to liue on, and but one wife, is in the nature and kinde thereof without outward restraint, or inward grace, and indeed both, plainely appeareth by these two examples, which may serue for all. Therefore all the labour of man is for his body and bodily state, but the appetite is not filled.
Moreouer, if the bodily appetite should be satisfied with meate, drinke, apparrell, with the delights of the sonnes of men, and pleasures of the eyes; and that the personall appetite were also satisfied with honor and Soueraignty, which happened neither to Alexander, nor to Heliogabalus, nor to any naturall man; yet cannot the soule be satisfied with infinite worlds. For the food of the soule is not the world, but God in the world.
The excellent beauty of Gods wisedome shining forth in all things, enamoureth the soule with the loue thereof. And the more that a man knoweth, the more he thirsteth and longeth for knowledge. But this appetite is not filled, for it worketh on an infinite obiect, which cannot be comprehended nor contained in the soule, at least, while it worketh by earthly organes. So that neither Alexander nor yet his Master Aristotle, nor Plato, Aristotles Master could be satissied herewith. Their appetites could not be stanched. Hee that goeth about it, maketh God an Idoll, because he limiteth the infinite. But if he be comprehended of any creature in heauen or earth, then is he limited. I conclude, though the appetite of the body should be filled, yet the appetite of man could neuer be filled. Then full contentment or felicity is not to be found in this world, nor by this world, and the appetite that will not be filled with a little, shall neuer be filled, howsoeuer men commonly deceiue themselues, thinking

that if they had but this, or that, they would set vp their rest. Yea, euen as Diues would haue set vp his rest, if he had gotten but one drop of water to quench his feruent thirst. The truth is, the more fuell the fire hath, the more hot it burneth. But the spirit of Christ is the water that cooles this heate, and quencheth this thirst, his body and blood satisfieth this hunger. When the appetite, the attractiue, retentiue, digestiue powers worke on this foode, the other becommeth an excretion or expulsion.
But againe, though we enioy Christ and the kingdome of glory by faith, yet so long as we are here in the flesh, wee haue not the full possession thereof, 1. Ioh. 3. 1. and therefore desire to be with him, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2.
To conclude; Neither the appetite of the brutish man, nor of the animall or carnall man, nor of the spirituall man is here filled. And what shal fill the vegetable man, or locomotiue tree, which desireth not meat, drinke* cloathing, women, children, buildings, etc. Eccle. 4. 8. And yet is there none end of his labour? Men now a dayes grow as thinne as Oakes begin to grow, and all is filled with brutes and vnprofitable vegetables.



Verse 8.
For what hath the wise more then the foole? What hath the poore, that knoweth to walke before the liuing?

A Confirmation of his former proposition concerning the insufficiency, and weakenesse of earthly things, to satisfie the appetite in their vse, figured by a prolepsis, and that by a Communication. What can the wise man doe more with these worldly things then the foole? And what can the rich man in all his abundance doe more with it, then the poore doth without it? The Hebrew is thus. What more excellent or better thing by them is to the wise man, then to the foole? and what other thing is to the poore, then to him that knoweth to walke before the liuing? Then to him that can put forth himselfe, put himselfe in prease, make a shew, or crackling noise, carry a good account for doing good vnto himselfe, Psal. 49. 18. This I thinke

the Hebrew directly intendeth. Neither the wise man by, his wisedome, nor the rich man by his power, strength and skill to order them for the best, can doe more with them then bring their bodies to the ground in the full period of their times. But this the foole and the poore doe as well as they, andwhen they are all in the graue, what difference is there of their bones? And if there were any, what is of their dust? If the rich and the wise can do no more with them, then the poore and the foolish, then is there no strength in riches to full contentation, or felicity.



Verse 9.
Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandring of the desire: This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.

AN amplification of the former reason, further figured by another prolepsis, thus: Seeing that God hath giuen the earth and worldly goods to men for the sustenance and pleasures of the body, they are a blessing, and tokens of his loue, and the beholding of them with the eye, affordeth some contentment, and satisfieth the desire of the soule.
And although perfect happinesse consisteth not therein, yet it is much better then a wandring desire, which longeth after many things, and wanteth necessaries, which the body naturally calleth for, and prouoketh a man to seeke for, though he would neuer so much inforce himselfe to restfull contentation. He that hath a good competency and sufficiencie, to cheere his body with comfortable things, and to liue in good account and credit among the better sort, is of a more stayed desire, and hath loy in himselfe aboue him that hath lesse, and is alwayes wishing, complaining, crauing, etc.
Ans. Be it so, yet in these things that he possesseth, there is vanity and vexation of spirit. There is no soundnesse but rottennesse. Misery may be mitigated, but it can neuer be cured.




Verse 10.
That which hath beene, is named already, and it is knowne that it is man. neither may he contend with him that is mightier than hee.

A Confirmation of his iudgement, or censure deliuered in his former briefe answere, This is also vanity, etc. by two arguments. The former whereof is drawne from the notation of mans name. That which hath beene (whatsoeuer it is for outward respects) is already named, and it is knowne that it is man. Nod^agn asher huae adam. The reason is thus framed.

Prop. He that hath his name of the earth, is earthly, mortall, in bondage to corruption, miserable, vaine.
Assump. But man hath his name of the earth, the matter whereof he was formed; for Adam signifieth red earth, dust, or mire: Therefore
Man is earthly, mortall, miserable, etc.

Whether a man be wise, or foolish, rich, or poore, honorable or base, it mattereth not much. For it is enough to argue his vanitie, that he is Man, or Adam, of the earth, earthly, mire, dust, the most miserable of all creatures, subiect to infinite miseries, as hath beene already shewed. For the best good being corrupted becommeth the worst euill, from Lucifer to metals and stones. Neither may he contend with him that is mightier then he. Another argument drawne from the decree of God, who hath subdued him, and all things with him vnto vanitie, whereof he can by no meanes rid or free himselfe. For a man to contend with God, who is more mightie that is, but to encrease vanitie, euen to adde madnesse to folly.
There are indeed that haue striuen. 2 Mac. 9. 8. to exalt themselues and to be happie men in their owne eyes, and opinions of all the people (for the contrarie opinion of one man breaketh this enforced deceitfull complacence) as Valer. (...) lib. 7. cap. 3.Craesus thinking not onely himselfe happie, but that all men also should count him blessed, asked Solon who was the happie

man, to try what he would say; but when Solon preferred Tellus the Athenian, a priuate man, and Cl^obis and Bitus also, he was offended. But Solon answered him that he might he called rich and mightie, but not blessed till he had made an happie end. This curbed the vaine conceit of his fained, inforced felicitie. For such like will needes draw the iudgements of all men after their owne, to deifie them, eyther by reward or reuenge, by fauour or displeasure, by countenancing or disgracing, etc. So Mordecaies dis-reuerence was the breaking of Hamans felicity, and Micahs prophecy of Ahabs. The Scriptures afford diuers examples hereof. But the greatest shame, contempt, and confusion abideth on them that haue thus contended with God, 2 Mac. 9. 12. Act. 12. 23. and they are left for memorable examples of vanity till the worlds end. And so shall the great whore, that pompous scarlet whore of Babilon be trodden vnder foot, as vnsauorie salt, and swept away as doung in the end. This is a principle vttered by him that cannot lie, He that exalteth himselfe, shall be brought lowe. But man in honour vnderstandeth not, he is like the beasts that perish. All is, and must be vaine.
Well, whatsoeuer vanity and vile abhomination of euill is in one man, is in the nature of all, and that which breaketh out of the skinne of one, lieth in the bones of another, though it neuer finde passage forth in such measure, nor come to that height, as it hath sometimes done in others, to be an euident and visible document to all, of their vnknowne and vnfelt corruption. For God hath his hooke in their nostrils, and they are kept as wilde beasts in the grate, which being set at libertie soone shew whence they are bred. For all is but man. Nay, who almost forgets not himselfe to be but man? and who is not a beautifull Idoll in his owne sight? Who would not faine seeme to be a glorious man in the eyes of all, at least in the eyes of all of his owneranke, equals, and inferiours, and so on forward infinitely, as passage lies open, and obstacles are more and more remoued? Euen a beggar is proud of a better ragge, and a childe is proud of a toye, thinking himselfe happie in comparison of other children,

and would haue other children to praise, admire, blesse, and exalt him for his toye sake, and to deiect, and vilifie themselues in comparison of him, yea, he taketh occasion by his toye to shew forth not onely pride, but contempt, and crueltie. People in these dayes are huft-bubbles, tumorous excrescences. They striue much to make Idols of their bodies, they stretch out themselues beyond their measure, and racke others to make their bodies pompous spectacles, they couer, and colour till their whole substance be turned into rottennesse within the shel, and all is to make a goodly shew, to be glorified of others, as they glorifie themselues, and for that purpose glorifie others againe. But thou art still but man, when thou hast made of thy selfe what thou canst. And why art thou proud O earth and ashes! Thou dost but contend with him that is mightier than thou. He will still be exalted, and thou shalt be a beast. Euery one now striueth to be a proud Iezabel, to be an Herod, a Nabuchadnezzar, to make a deceitfull shew, to affect the subtilties of Anti-christ, to bewitch others with their shewes, as Iezabel would haue bewitched Iehu. They are like the deuill to cast phantasmes before the eyes and mindes of men, (heare this ye fine beastlie women) yea, they conuert holy things to the seruice of their Idoll, and all too little. And why? because man will needs inforce an happie state, at least in shew and account, vpon himselfe. But this is vanitie, and shall end in miserie. Bel, greedy Bel shall be stamped to powder, and Iezabel shall be dogs meat. And I pray God that our sinnes turne not our yealow starch into red.



Verse 11.
Seeing there be many things that encreaseth vanitie, what is man the better?

A Reason why man must not contend with God, but yeeld himselfe to the acknowledgement, and confession of vanitie; to depend on the commandement and mercie of God. Seeing there be many things that increase vanitie,

what is man the better? The hebrew is, seeing that, when as because much is belonging to things, or is of things increasing, or, that doe increase vanitie, what is there more to man? That is to say, seeing that the more things that a man hath and dealeth withall, the more that he intangles himselfe in, beateth his braines, and br^^keth his body about, the more vanities, and vexations he enwrappeth himselfe in, what is he better than he that sitteth still? Nay, doth he not most often by his wit worke out his woe? and by his strength procure his owne ruine? Therefore let not a man in pride and presumption seeke to breake out from vnder the yoke of God. Rom. 8. 20. forgetting himselfe to be but man; but rather humble himselfe to the right way, and meanes of freedome which God continually soundeth in his eares. If by mortification he hath entred in at the strait gate, let him keepe still in the narrow way, which few doe, least his Christian profession proue but a vaile to couer and colour paganisme, yea atheisme. To conclude, as worldly things are multiplied, so is vanity with them. It is but an addition and more vniuersall mixture of vanities, to bring forth greater and more miseries. For the deeper that a man wadeth, the more shall he be wet.



Verse 12.
For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the dayes of his vaine life, which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him vnder the Sunne?

THis verse containeth a confirmation of the former reason, why that a man medling with great and many matters, is nothing the better, figured by a communication to inculcate the certaintie thereof. No man knowes what is good for a man in this life, all the dayes of his vaine life. Life is amplified, first by an emmeration of the least particles of time concluded in the generall [all the dayes] Secondly, by the adiunct, vaine, Vanitie* is illustrated by a comparison, it passeth

away as a shadow. The time of life is but a day, which is diuided into morning, noone and euening. The shadow is longest in the morning, and it doth nothing but vanish till noone, where it seemeth to make a stand, but doth not, but by increasing it vanisheth quite away. If the shadow grow shorter, time spends, if it grow longer time also spends: so is the time of life a continuall spending, as the Snaile that continually wasteth her selfe. Now in this fleeting time, who can tell what is good for a man, seeing that man, and all things with him vanish away like a shadow? Againe, as there is no constancie of dayes, in regard of their naturall qualitie and disposition, but are variable and contrarie, so neither is there of the state of man in the decourse of his life: Euery day bringeth new trauels, new cares, new troubles, alterations, and changes, and euery one is doubtfull and fearefull of after times. And this is a vanitie.
Againe, euery man seeth his imprudence, and manifold errors, committed in the dayes that are past; he seeth his inconsiderate courses, his ouer-sights, the weakenesse of his vnderstanding and iudgement, in contriuing things to the best, for which he vexeth himselfe with griefe and anger all his life after, and so recompenceth vanitie with vanitie. Againe, when he seeketh to redresse that which hath beene amisse by a new and better course, he falleth rather into greater errours, as hee that is in a maze, or vast desart. Therefore neither can a man himselfe, who is best knowne to himselfe, tell what is good for him, neither can any other man. For who can tell a man what shall be after him? A confirmation of the former. No man can tell what is good for a man throughout the whole course of his life, seeing that life is vaine, and euery day of life is vaine. But why cannot a man tell what is good for a man? Because that he that cannot tell what shall be after a man, either in after times of life, or when he is dead, cannot tell what is good for a man to doe for the present; but the former can no man doe, neither can he doe the latter. If a man could tell what would be cheape, what deare, he would be rich in a yeere. But God

hath left that in his owne power, that all mans courses might be vaine and foolish, 1 Macc. 6. 8. So that when hee hath striuen all his dayes with vehemency of body and minde, the simple man that sat still, hath gotten the prize. Therefore seeing that no man can tell what shall be, he cannot tell what is good for him, whether to doe this, or that, whether to take this course, or that, whether the obtaining of his present desires shall turne to his good, or greater euill; 1 Macc. 6. 11. Luke 12. 20. He knoweth not the issue, or euent of any thing: For all is in the hands of God, who doth all that men may feare before him, and denying themselues, cast themselues wholly vpon him.



CHAPTER VII.


Verse 1.
A good name is better then precious oyntment; and the day of death, then the day of ones birth.

SOlomon hath hitherto declared the vanity of all worldly things in the last Chapter, of riches that occasion the destruction of the owner, of riches lost by casualties, and leauing their owner destitute and miserable of riches without grace to vse them, of the multitude of children, of long life, of the insufficiency of riches to satisfie mans desire, of their weakenesse to benefit one more then another, of their vncertaine euent; Chap. 5. Now in this Chapter he sheweth the vanities of this life by degrees, by comparing them with other things that are better for men then the best or most pleasing things, though to the carnall man it may seeme otherwise, and in their owne kinde are so indeede.
And his maine scope herein, is to set downe those better things for certaine remedies, whereby to auoide those vanities of life, or to extenuate and mittigate them, and to gather what good may redound to man by the right ordering

of himselfe in the things of this life. This he principally intendeth, and the demonstration of vanities lesse principally or by consequence in this Chapter. Moreouer, the auoyding, or extenuating of these vanities, is not all that hee aimeth at, but also the right meaning of that ioyfull and comfortable vse of riches, whereof he spake before, Chap. 5. 18. and 2. 24. For this gift of vsing riches, is not terminated in the welfare and complacence of the flesh, as the Heathen imagine, but for a further grace here intimated, in that those things that are contrary to the pleasure of the flesh, are preferred aboue all. This I take to be the counsell and direct intendment of Solomon here.
A good name is better then precious ointment. Concerning the coherence of these words with the former; They are an answer to an obiection vpon occasion of his last words especially, to wit, that the increase of worldly goods was nothing but a multiplication of vanities, and that no man could know what is good for him in this vaine life. The obiection may be thus framed. If there be nothing good for a man here, but all is vanity, and the more that hee seeketh to ridde himselfe of infelicity by wisedome and trauell, and to obtaine wealth and honour, by so much the more vanity is increased, yea, and that there is no good to be had, nor knowne in this life; then is there nothing but matter of despaire in this life, and better it is for a man to depriue himselfe of life, then to prolong it in misery, especially when hope of better faileth. Answ. Although that God hath subdued all things to vanity, and all the wisedome and studies of men to folly, yet that is not driftly to torture man with despaire, and to destroy his creature, but to bring him to faith and obedience, to know, to feare, and obey his Creatour. For if man of pride, and presumption, will needes exalt himselfe, and coyne a felicity or glorious state here in the World, to make a petty god of himselfe, he shall in the issue and vpshot find all to be but vanity, and himselfe a foole, and a beast. And all men naturally doe thus. Gen. 3. 5. 6. There is the spawne, or beginning, that hath ouer-spread all generations of the World.

Therefore God hath subiected all things to vanitie, out of which a man can by no meanes extricate himselfe, but rather by striuing runne further in. But yet seeing that there is an happie state of man here begunne, which a man is to desire and seeke for, in God, (not in worldy things) and euen that in this vaine life, which in that respect is not vaine, there are certaine salues for these sores, and remedies for these vanities: Solomon therefore, that he might take away from men discontentment, and dispaire of their estate, doth here deliuer rules of direction and comfort, that they may haue wherewith to arme themselues against the troubles and miseries of this vaine life, and in some good measure be able to alay and mitigate the same, which God laid vpon Adam, and all his sonnes, for a iust punishment of his fall.
The first rule or remedy is in this first verse: A good man. A good reputation or report, being the testimony of good men, of the vertuous life and honest conuersation of a man, is a speciallblessing of God, arming the heart with great ioy and comfort against many, yea, all outward losses, and want of bodily things. The excellencie of a good name is illustrated by a comparison of the best and most delicious things, signified by ointment, by a Synecdoche of the Speciall. The comparison is both of the qualitie and quantitie. First, concerning the qualitie: euen as the pretious ointment hath a fragrant scent refreshing and delighting the spirits of the senses, whereby the body and minde is cheered; so a good name and deserued estimation is of all outward things the most pleasant possession, comporting the heart in euery state of life: For it originally proceedeth from a good conscience, and is the perfume of a godly and faithfull heart, yea, hee that hauing a great measure of the annointing of God, which is the graces of his spirit, to be a patterne to the rude, a light to the blinde, a guide to them that know not the way, doth also refresh, encourage, and cheare the spirits and hearts of all that loue God, and his truth among the filthy sents of corrupt examples, fleshly fashions, and ethnicall behauiours, that are noysome and grieuous to the eyes,

eares, and mindes of men of gracious disposition, and as a fresh gale of sweet ayre to him that laboureth in the earth, that liueth among earthly men.
Concerning the quantity, the argument is from the lesse to the greater.
A precious oyntment is of great value, a chiefe treasure, and esteemed with the most precious things, but a good name is of more worth then it, or any earthly substance. For costly oyntments, and other treasures are of times more plentifull among the wicked: For the sensuall are all for their sences, but this is peculiar to good men alone. They may be bought for money, but this is the gift of God, not to be purchased with base mettall. They are corruptible, this is euerlasting. They leaue a man in death, and betake them to a new master, but the praise of the iust man remaineth still, and still, his owne. It both tarrieth behinde him on earth, and goeth with him to heauen, and will crowne him with glory at the last day. For although it be darkened for a time amongst the goates, as Naboth was, as Pauls and Dauids, yet shall it breake forth as the rayes of the Sunne from vnder a cloud. It may be couered, but it cannot be polluted with vnclean tongues, yet it becommeth more bright as mettall rubbed with dust or myre. Whereas contrarily, the false and forced praise of sinners that are prone and ambitious, turneth to their greater shame, as that of Herod, Senacherib, and the Pharisees did. And so shall Antichrists doe, as did that of Antiochus.
And the day of death, then the day of ones birth. These words are a second rule, to arme the man that feareth God against temporall miseries. Concerning their dependence vpon the former, they are an answere to an obiection framed thus: A good report in this life affords little comfort, seeing that death commeth after it, which is the miserable end of all men.
Ans. The day of death is better then the day that one is borne. It is better then the time of life, and the transitory things of life. Yea, it is better then a good report it selfe,

because it is a comfort to extenuate the afflictions of life, but this vtterly abolisheth all vanities. The birth-day is an entrance into all woe and misery, but the day of death is a passage into life. The body is but a prison and a racke to the soule, but by death it is set at liberty: For by death are all miseries ended, all dangers, paines, aches, diseases, sorrowes, teares, and that grieuous warre and conflict of concupiscence, or fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2. 11. doubtings, vnbeleefe, feares, pride, ignorance, couetousnesse, ambition, enuy, hatred, lust, which fight against the soule, are dead, from which Paul so earnestly desired to be freed, Romans 7. 24. 2 Cor. 12. 8.
Againe, by death a man is freed from euils to come, Esay 57. 1. He is deliuered from the wearisome company of petulcus goates* Psal. 120. 5. 1 King. 19. 4. and from the assaults of Sathan, yea from all fightings within and without, to rest, and raigne in glory with Christ, and the blessed company of heauen: This of the rule or remedy principally aymed at. Now for the sequele or collection concerning vanity, the argument from hence is thus. If the day of death, which to carnall reason is miserable, be better then the day of birth, surely this life is a thing most vaine. But so it is.



Verse 2.
It is better to goe to the house of mourning, then to goe to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the liuing will lay it to heart.

A Second rule or remedy whereby a man is armed against the vanities of life, is mortification, which is the suppressing of sinne, and curbing of the motions of sinne in the heart simply, because it displeaseth God, and is the onely thing whereby he is dishonoured. Other mortifications are but either philosophicall, or ciuill, or subtle; the first whereof is of naturall conscience, the second of vaine glorious disposition, the third of a diuellish heart. But this is wrought onely by the Spirit of God, who is a purifying fire, and purging

soape; Mal. 3. 2. 3. not onely restraining and bridling, but consuming sinne. This consumption beginneth at the heart, Ier. 4. 4. Breake vp your fallow grounds, circumcise the fore-skinne of your heart. If mortification beginne not here, it is guilefull; Psal. 32. 2. He is blessed whose spirit is not guilefull, though he be subiect to many infirmities. Now that this rule may be operatiue, and of force, Solomon setteth downe the meanes and courses that are to be taken, whereby to produce and nourish it, for the comfort of the soule, in this vale of misery. The gift is of God, from whom euery good seede of grace proceedeth; the other are but artificiall, imitatiue, and coyned: yet this seede of God groweth not but by planting and watering, as all other seeds doe, and that is the vse of the meanes. The meanes therefore of the growth and increase of this grace, Solomon here setteth downe, illustrating the same by a comparison of the contrary vanities, and they are foure, in the foure next verses.
The first meanes of mortification, are the outward prouocations thereunto, to wit, such places, and companies whereby that good seede of grace that lyeth in the heart may be preserued and increased. For euery seede must haue his proper place, and outward foture of warmth and moisture to concoct it to perfection, which Saint Paul calleth, Rigation. 1 Cor. 3. 6. It is better to goe to the house of mourning, to visit the sorrowfull, and sad in heart, to goe to the graue of the dead, to frequent the companies of mourners, to weepe with them; then to goe to the house of feasting, where there is singing, dancing, merriment, vanity, and prouocations to vanity most commonly. For that is the end of all men. A confirmation of this rule, or reason of the comparison, by the antithesis, or contrarietie of the adiuncts. The adiuncts of the banqueting house, are not expressed, but vnderstood by anantapod^sts; The former are death and mourning: for there is the end of all men.
Let a man feed, pride, and beautifie his body as he will, yea, as most doe now a dayes make an Idoll of it, yet shall it be a dead carkeis buried in the earth, as other dead carrion is,

and more vile then other. Bonum optimum corruptum fit pessimum. The more composition the more corruption, as in riches increased there is more vanity. So that if it must needs be an idoll, yet shall it be but a carrion idoll, and such are all they that adore it in feasts and pompous meetings, as did the Pharisees.
Againe, let a man put away all remembrance of death out of his heart, to source himselfe in the flesh, to boyle in pleasure, seeking out companions, and prouocations of lust, (which are planters and waterers also in their weedy kinde) yet shall it be turned in the end to lamentation and mourning, vnlesse that curse be laid on a mans death, that none shall mourne for him, but rather eate him vp, as the dogges did Iezabel, one worrying another for his goods and lands, and the wicked poore roaring like greedy Lions for his flesh, that care not who dye, nor how many, so that their bellies be filled.
And the lining will lay it to heart. A reason or proofe of the consecution of the former argument, which was this:
If in the house of mourning there be the end of all men, then it is better to goe thither, then to the house of feasting.
But the antecedent is true.
Therefore the consequent also.
The reason of the consequence is, the liuing shall lay it to heart. These words shew the effect of death and mourning, (which are termed, the end of all men) namely, a serious meditation of the state, and condition of man. All men are apt to forget themselues to be but men, specially in their feastings, and iolity, iouil^y, and ribaldry; but this end of all men, and them being exposed to the senses, eyes, and eares, doth occasion them to remember whence they came, what they are, whether they are to goe. So then this serious meditation or remembrance, is the effect of the impulsiue cause. For by the dead corpes and mourning, a man is occasioned to remember himselfe. The inward impulsiue or precedent, is the gracious disposition of the heart, to take such good occasions, or suffer himselfe to be moued therewith: for the

wicked heart is stony, brawny, without remorse, full of infidelity; therefore hee maketh this contrarily an occasion of more epicurish and sensuall liuing, yea, at this time seruing his belly and his lusts, as hee that cutteth purses euen before the bench. And the eye of the foole is mindlesse, wandring in the corners of the earth. The outward impulsiue, I say, is the occasion, to wit, the dead corpes and mourning, the house of mourning, and the graue of the dead. What is a man by this occasion moued to lay to his heart?
I. His owne death, for euen so must he die, and be mourned for of his wife, children, kinsfolkes, etc. cast into the graue, and be putrified in the earth.
II. The vanity of all worldly things, whereof a man is now quite bestript, as lands, goods, buildings, cloathing, treasures, skinne, body, and all are cleane sliuen off from the soule, as barke from a tree, and as a shell from the fish, and the soule is gone naked, as the body came in naked, either to be glorified in heauen for the good deeds that it did in the flesh with worldly things, or to be confounded and tormented in hell for the euill.
III. Of the account or reckoning, that it must make before the iust Iudge of the talent, that God gaue it to employ with diligence to his best aduantage.
IIII. Of repentance and continuall preparation to death, by auoiding euill, whereby his Lord is indammaged, and by doing good, setting euery thing in order euery day, and disposing all things to the best for the profit of his Lord, that when he commeth, hee may receiue his owne with aduantage.
These and such things doth he lay to his heart, that hath an heart, when hee goeth to the house of mourning, and commeth to the graue of the dead. The sequell, or argument of vanity gathered by the comparison, is this:

Prop, If it be better to goe to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting, then are all merry meetings, iuncatings, playes, games, sports, pastimes, etc. vaine and

vnprofitable and no quietnesse of heart to be found in them.
Assump.But the antecedent is thus; therefore the consequent.




Verse 3.
Sorrow is better then laughter; for by the sadnesse of the countenance, the heart is made better.

A Second meanes of mortification, is sorrow or anger, which is a godly indignation or griefe, for our sinnes committed, and duties omitted. This sorrow goeth before repentance, and worketh repentance. It is that which Saint Paul commendeth in the Corinthians, occasioned by his reprehensory letter 2 Cor. 7. 10. 11. where it is set downe by seauen effects in them.
1 Carefullnesse or diligence in reforming their errours, and in conforming themselues againe to that purity, which was wrought in them, when at first he preached the Gospell to them in the euidence of the spirit, from which they were declined through the Philosophicall ianglings of the false Apostles.
2 Clearing of themselues, or defence [(...)] which was a deprecatory excuse of their errours, which kinde of defence intimateth an ingenuous confession together with some alleadgement for themselues, to insinuate that they had done amisse, rather of infirmitie then wittingly and willingly, and so were ready to be reformed, which thing must needs pacifie Pauls mind, and moue him to commend them rather, seeing that to erre is humane frailty, but to acknowledge and reforme an errour is grace. So that this defence is an excusation including confession, deprecation, reformation.
3 Indignation, when a man grieueth at his folly, impudence, and carelessenesse, that he should be so or so ouertaken and misled, whereby to displease God, to offend his brother, to burthen his owne conscience, and to giue aduantage to the aduersary.

4 Feare, which is a sence of Gods displeasure, for some sinne committed. This remorse bringeth repentance. It is contrary to the seruile feare of an euill conscience with hardnesse of heart, and to worldly feares.
5 Vehement desire, namely to seeke for, and to obtaine the fauour of God, that they might reioyce in his grace againe, as they did at their first conuersion, for by sinning we grieue the spirit of God, and cause him to frowne on vs, whose presence and countenance we earnestly desire to be turned, towards vs againe, as he that through vnkind dealing, hauing almost lost his best friend, seeketh earnestly to recouer the fulnesse of his former loue, which thing is plainely exemplified in Dauid, Psal. 51.
6 Zeale, which is a feruent indeauour to repentance. It is mixt of loue, and anger, or rather here, of desire and indignation or sorrow, which is all one.
7 Reuenge, which is a chastening and curbing of our selues vpon consideration of Gods displeasure, that we may preuent his iudgements, and winne his fauour againe, 1 Cor. 11. 30. 31. The whole verse laboureth on a gradation. By the exposition of this verse it fully appeareth what the sorrow or indignation is that Solomon here speaketh of. The meaning of the words are, better is a sad and thoughtfull heart, caused by remorse and grudge of conscience, tending to repentance, and amendment of life, then a light heart and variable mind hauing no serious consideration of sinne, nor of Gods iudgements in this life, nor after this life impressed in it, but seeketh rather to extinguish both, the more freely to laugh and be fat.
For by the sadnesse of the countenance, etc. A confirmation by the effect. This sorrow of the heart appearing in the firme and sad countenance maketh the heart more ioyfull, and pleasant. For as heat expelleth heat, so doth godly and penitent sorrow expell feare, trouble and despaireful doubtings which oppresse the heart as an heauy weight. The reprobate cannot expell this seruile sorrow with penitent or gracious sorrow, but by other false remedies seeketh to mitigate

and alay the rigour, as Diues would haue cooled his heate with a drop of water, but one drop of grace in life, would haue done more then an Ocean of waters in hell. The wicked would be eased of torment, but they will giue no glory to God, like the nine lepers, whether they be liuing or dead, they are all for themselues. If Diues would as earnestly haue craued but for one drop of grace when he was liuing to haue killed the worme in her breeding, his thirst should haue beene quenched. But being giuen to the bellie, and bodily pleasures, he loued not sorrow, nor repentance, but applied false remedies to the worme, laughter and fatnesse. He loued not the rebukes of the wise, but such as were skilfull to feede his humors. These words may also be expounded thus. By the sad countenance and sober behauiour the hearts of one another are made better, vaine fancies and lustfull thoughts are checked and curbed, sinfull words and euill deeds following them are preuented. The sequell or argument of vanitie gathered by the comparison, is as before, and so throughout the Chapter.



Verse 4.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning: but the heart of fooles is in the house of mirth.

A Third meanes of mortification is sober conuersation. The heart of the wise, etc. As there is sorrow and remorse in the heart and conscience of the wise, so there is sadnesse in the countenance, and also sober behauiour, sober apparrell, and sober compaine. The heart of the wise man is affected to such places and companies as he may haue benefit by to his edification in knowledge, and godlinesse. Such things he loueth to heare, to speake, and to relate as may make both himselfe and others the better, Prou. 15. 30. Good hearing maketh his bones fat, (and so of the seeing also.) The heart of him that hath vnderstanding seeketh knowledge, that is, moueth his lippes, eyes and eares to seeke for increase of that holy wisedome, wherewith he is in some good measure

already indued. For to him that hath shall be giuen. Therefore he is ready also to frequent the houses of mourning (a synecdoche of the speciall) and the societie of mourners, such as are well acquainted with the crosse, exercised in temptations, and men of sober carriage, whereby he receiueth more comfort and ease of heart, than by all festiuall and merry meetings, where there is commonly vanity enough, and matter of griefe to him that seriously thinketh on his latter end, and the account of euery idle word. As the nature and kinde of the seede and roote is, such like is the sappe and shape of the tree, such or such places it desires to grow in, and among such or such other trees. If it hath place and companie according to his liking, than it prospereth, flourisheth and reioyceth, if not, yet it liueth, brancheth and fructifieth though poorely, as the willow in the forrest, the hys^p on the wall, wheat in light sand, and rapes in stiffe clay. Euery thing desireth his proper place and company, with other fotures according to his kinde, to attaine the perfection, and flourishing state of his kinde, which thing if it cannot doe, yet is it prudent and shiftie, and will reape the most commoditie to it selfe that may be, without any losse through improuidence and negligence: But if it be in a so^le contrarie to his kinde, it is much discouraged, his fruits are vnkindely and imperfect, his sappe is corrupted and much ai^ered by the qualitie of his food or humour, etc. yet will it retaine the kinde, or else dye. The seed or root of man is his heart, as the heart or spirit of man is, such is the man. Mens c^^usque, is est quisque. And though of all creatures he be most variable, and can personate himselfe infinite wayes, yet doth his spirit incline him one way. The Adamant in the diall is fickle, and it is vncertaine, what coast it most affecteth, or rather what his naturall position is, being violently agitated; but when disturbance ceaseth, it resteth on the north-pole. So, foxe to the kinde. A wise mans heart is his ^oote, and such like are his thoughts, countenance, words, workes, carriage. And as the man in his kinde, nature, and disposition is, such soile he re^^yceth to

grow in, such things he loues to heare by voyce or writings, such companies he frequenteth, this he extracteth, that he reiecteth, as his spirit is. For the body of a common*wealth is as it were a mixture of all kindes, or a Choas, from whence euery spirit may gather matter of edification and corruption: As the frame of his heart is, so may he adapt matter of perfection or destruction. But the wise heart vseth all things, and turneth all things to the best.
But the heart of fooles is in the house of mirth. An illustration of the former by the contrarie. This heart is of a contrarie sappe, of contrarie affection, and disposition, and as inwardly, so outwardly contrarie. Such soyles it loueth, and such fotures as are agreeable to his kinde, so doth euery beast, euery weed, euery plant. Such lips, such lettuce: And wilde things accord not well with the tame. And though they be tamed, yet are they troublesome. The spirit of policie curbeth and driueth the snaile into her shell, but the spirit of God renueth. The foole seeketh for nourishments of his follie, such counsels such bookes, such hearing, examples and companies, and ripeneth his follie. The foole is but a body, and his soule is but as sa^t to keepe it aliue. His sappe is bitter, his fruits are no better. If he be among the wise, and heare the words of the wise, the best things he reiecteth (light is not comprehended of darkenesse) other things he misconstrueth, and conuerts into follie. If hee heare or see infirmitie, or vani^ie, that he browzeth on, and catcheth vp as a sweet bit. Pro. 15. 24. The mouth of the foolish, is fed with foolishnesse, and so is his eare. The dainty tooth desireth delicates, so doth the foole all things that may feed his beastly lusts. Therefore let the wise be wary for giuing offence, and abstaine from appearances of euill, else will the foole by occasion of his follie runne mad. Therefore saith Solomon, answere a foole according to his foolishnesse, and answere not a foole according to his foolishnesse. Let thine answere curbe, not cherish his follie.




Verse 5.
It is better to heare the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to heare the song of fooles.

THe fourth meanes of mortification, which is the way to true felicity, is the rebuke of the wise, that is to say, it is better for a man to submit himselfe to the admonitions, and wholsome reproofes of the wise, then to be praised and flattered of fooles. Wisedome saith to the simple, Pro. 1. 23. Turne you at my correction, you that haue erred from the way of truth, and prodigally wasted your selues: But the foolish despise her counsels, her admonitions, her corrections, the stubborne foole will abide no touch, verse 25. The wise man will loue him that reproueth him, but the foole is prouoked to wrath. The wise childe is better than the old King that will not be admonished. Dauid desired rather to be smitten of the righteous, than to eate such things as please the wicked, because the rebukes of the wise are as pretious balmes. Better it is to be rebuked of the wise for a mans errors, than to be praised of the wicked for pleasing their humours. Than for a man to heare the song of fooles. An illustration of the former by the contrarie. The ieasting, merrie conceits, and fleshpleasing talke of the vngodly, corrupteth the mindes of the hearers, and stealeth sober thoughts out of their hearts, to settle them on their dregges, at least for the present, and is a meanes to quicken and reuiue those head-supprest reliques of concupiscence that are mortified in them, as the fire reuiueth the snake that is almost dead with cold. The foole footheth and flattereth a man in euill, and to euill. He extenuateth and vilifieth euery grace of God, he excuseth madnesse, and imbraceth follie, which is ciuill wickednesse. Yet he hath many good words, and sheweth wit, but all is to clothe vertue with the contemptible rags of vice, and to clothe vice with the robes of vertue. His good words are but as the scripture in the Deuils mouth, Mat. 4. 6. he defileth them, but they purifie not him. Therefore, whether a foole be merrie or sober, angry or pleased, hee is

grieuous to the wise, but the wise sheweth wisedome in both. His words are seasoned with salt. Hee is gracious and louely.



Verse 6.
For as the crackling of thornes vnder a pet, so is the laughter of the foole: this also is vanitie.

A Reason of the comparison, why that the rebuke of the wise is better than the song of fooles. It is illustrated by a similitude of thornes crackling vnder a pot. Euen as thornes vnder a pot make a loud noise, and flash forth into a great flame, but the noise suddenly ceaseth, and the flame is presently quenched: so vaine-glorious fooles, and epicurish fooles, enemies to sober wisedome and grace, make a pompous shew for the time, drawing all mouthes and eares, and eyes after them, as though they were the onely happie ones; but it is but a noise and flash of vanitie, Moreouer as the crackling of thornes is a vaine sound, offensiue, and harsh to the eare, and of no regard, so is the laughter of a foole, laughing at his owne wicked fantasies, grieuing the wise with his turbulent noise.
The sequele or collection concerning vanitie is this, if rebukes and checks be better than mirth and pleasant companions, and delicious, and voluptuous life, then is that pleasurable kinde of life but vaine, etc*



Verse 7.
Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad: and a gift destroyeth the heart.

A Third rule or remedy, whereby a man is armed against the miseries or vanities of this life is patience. Patience is a voluntary and continuall sustaining and bearing of euils and euill men, the more freely to shew and bring forth the fruits of the spirit, for the comfort of our owne hearts, and the increase of our assurance, and for the conuersion of the wicked our enemies. For in contending with the wicked in their kinde (otherwise the righteous contendeth with them) and

reuenging of our wrongs, wee shall obscure the graces of God, and fall into the same mischiefe, and condemnation with them, which thing the enemies of grace desire. This remedy is set downe in the foure next verses. The Analysis whereof I take to be this. Patience is first illustrated by a comparison of the contrary, to wit, impatience, expressed by the fountaine or cause thereof (pride of heart) verse 8. Impatience is described, first by the effects, verse 7. Secondly, by the euent, verse 8. Moreouer, patience is amplified by a dehortation, verse 9. and figured by a prol^psis, verse 10.
This verse then is a description of impatience, or the proud spirit, by the effects thereof, oppression, and peruerting of the Law. Oppression standeth in racking, wronging, reuenging. Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad. As a mad man is without the vse of reason, being violently carried with a corrupt humour, saying, and doing nothing from any ground of good vnderstanding, but according to the multitude of broken and confused phantasmes, caused by the distemper of blood: euen so the wise being carried with inordinate affections and lusts, to wrong, oppresse, reuenge, and catch from euery man to grind the face of euery man, in lending and betting, to wrest the Law for aduantage, bewrayeth not onely foolishnesse, but madnesse, harming himselfe, and mischieuing others, as other mad men doe. The difference betweene them standeth onely in this, that the one is but a bodily madnesse, caused most often through the superfluity of an humour, the other is spirituall, inspired and incensed of the Diuell. That is in the blood, this is in the heart: that is brutall, this is diuellish; that is common to all, this peculiar to the children of the Diuell: that hath not reason, this vseth not reason, or rather that cannot vse reason, this will not vse reason.
Finally, there is a spirituall frenzinesse in fleshly sobriety. These are Sathans wildings, whom he hath blinded, and so rideth them at his pleasure. They are taken of him at his will* as the Apostle saith. The proposition is amplified by a vehement asseu^ration, (Surely). And a gift destroyeth the

heart. This is another effect of impatience, peruerting of the Law for bribes: In Deut. 16. 19. A gift blindeth the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the righteous; that is, either the words of him that else would iudge righteously, or the matters of the innocent, for the Hebrew word Dabar, signifieth indifferently both, and both are one. Here it is said, a gift destroyeth the heart, corrupteth the heart, taketh away the heart, all are one. Who is so blind as he that will not see? And so foolish as he that wil not vnderstand? What heart is more corrupt then that which condemneth it selfe in that which it alloweth, or rather condemneth it owne thefe, in giuing sentence vpon anothers? yea, which presseth it selfe to death, in giuing sentence of death, or absoluing another from death? And what words more peruerse then those of Iudas, Quid mihi dabitis? What will ye giue me, and I will betray the innocent into the hands of his cruell aduersaries? When the Magistrates eyes are blinded, then is he led by the string of the briber, and the briber by the string of the Diuell, and they both fall into the ditch. As the sight of the Apple desfroyed the heart of Eue; so the sight, or feeling of a bribe, destroyeth the heart of the wise, that knoweth the Law, and discerneth iudgement. Our first Parents for an apple lost Paradise, and woon hell; so euery child of Adam, like Esau, for a sweet bit will sell his soule to the Diuell, and his brother to a lying bribing thiefe, yea, partake with the thiefe, as Iudas did with the Pharisees, and all for a bit. We, wiser children, thinke that it was a great folly in our first Parents, that hauing so much, and so much choyce of other fruits, would notwithstanding taste of the forbidden sruit, without any neede at all. It is euen as great folly, for a man in his abundance to destroy himselfe, and his brethren for a bribe, a trifle of no value. The briber is the Diuels messenger: Now when he presents his Masters baite to the bribe-taker, then is the Diuell at hand to inflame the lust of couetousnesse in him, whereby the bribe seemeth pleasant to the eyes, as the apple did to Eue. The gift dazzeleth the eyes, it hath a bewitching power in it, it taketh away the* heart,

it peruerteth wordes, it maketh a wise man madde.



Verse 8.
Better is the end of a thing then the beginning thereof: and the patient in spirit, is better then the proud in spirit.

A Description of impatience by the euent. Better is the end of a thing, etc. These proud persons that will not relie on the prouidence of God, nor submit themselues vnto his will, but they will needes be what they will be, and haue what they will haue, and so through impatience fall to wronging snatching, racking, reuenging, deceiuing, wresting, etc. doe at their beginning aime at great matters, worke much mischiefe, make themselues terrible to inferiour men, to sucke aduantage at their pleasure out of them, and to make them come in with offerings on euery side, as to some great Idoll. But this proud, presumptuous, tyrannicall beginning, shall haue a bitter end: For God is iust to defeat them, to reward their pride with shame and confusion* He is good and mercifull, and will deliuer the oppressed out of the hands of the oppressour in the end, euen in his good time. God most wise, most iust, will turne those euill attempts to his owne glory, and good of his children. The end tryeth euery matter, and euery man; for in the end commeth iudgement: And the iust Iudge will take vp all matters into his owne hands, and pronounce righteous iudgement. And the patient in spirit, is better then the proud in spirit. These words containe the rule it solfe, inferred by way of consequence, or a conclusion of the premisses. Therefore the condition of the patient man that suffereth wrongs and contumeliet, is better then he that of pride ^asteth away, yea, derideth patience, as but basenesse, timorousnesse, pusillanimity. The argument may be gathered thus.

Prop.If a wise man, of a proud and impatient spirit, falling to oppression and bribery, shall in the end bring the iust iudgement of God vpon his madnesse, then is the pationt in spirit, that rather suffereth wrong, better then he.
Assump.But the Antecedent is true: Therefore the Consequent.


Concerning the sequell, or argument of vanity, it may be thus framed.

Prop.If he that is oppressed, vnmercifully racked, despitefully entreated, depriued of his owne right, ouerthrowne in his righteous cause, yea, trodden vnder foote by the proud and violent; If he, I say, be better then a man of power, that may doe euen what he lusteth, that can auenge himselfe of euery man, that multiplyeth wealth, that by wisedome is crept into the place of honour, and is able to benefit whom he will, and vndoe any that contendeth with him, whereupon the people fall downe vnto him, and he sucke^h out of them what aduantage pleaseth him; then is all but vanity, and misery. For the former is counted miserable, and if the later, who blesseth himselfe, and is counted happy of others, be vaine in his beginnings, and miserable in his ending; then is all misery and vanity, both to oppresse, and to be oppressed.
Ass.But the Antecedent is true: therefore the Consequent.




Verse 9.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the bosome of fooles.

AN amplification of patience, by a dehortation. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry. Let no pride distemper thy passions, and moue thee to w^athfull contention and reuenge, whereby thou shalt be prouoked to deuise and plot mischiefe against thy neighbour, yea, and against the Lord also, when thou hast once giuen place to the Diuell, and suffered thy lust to get dominion ouer th^e. For anger resteth in the bosome of fooles. Anger is an enemy to wisedome and counsell, therefore he that is swayed with this inordinate affection, shall be carried head-long into all folly. For wrath is an euill counsellour, it cannot keepe secrets, nor couer infirmities, It is like Rehoboams young counsellours, and Hushai counselling Absolon, and inwrappeth a man in manifold troubles, dangers, and mischiefes. If he preuaile in his reuengefull and moody courses, then is he hated of all men;

if he be preuailed against, then is his impacience either turned to fury and madnes, and he becommeth an odious miscreant, or else shall be derided of his aduersaries* and bewray his folly to all men; and this shal be his inheritance. Anger therfore resteth in the breast of a proud, malitious man, but the wise-man will consider the worke of God, both of his ordinance and prouidence, and so according to the vnderstanding, and mature discerning of the matter, proceed or surcease, etc. For the prouidence of God shall surely be accomplished, but clamour, wrath, violent, wilfull and preposterous courses shall redound vpon the head of passionate fooles, of what degree, place or condition soeuer they be, whether their contention be against their superiours, equals, or inferiours. An example of foolish anger and wisedome, See Act. 5. 33. 34. etc. Act. 19. 28. to the end. Act. 23. 2. and verse 5. 6.



Verse 10.
Say not thou, what is the cause that the former dayes were better then these? for thou dost not inquire wisely concerning this.

THese words containe the complaint of impatient people, and are a common obiection of wrathfull fooles, whereby to excuse, yea, approoue, and cherrish their moody and reuengefull passions, which wanting particular causes of iust anger, open their mouthes wide against the world, but indeed against God himselfe, in whose hands the gouernment of the world is. This complaint is continually in the mouthes of the wicked moody, and the wicked needy. The moody Papist would murther all the godly that haue Scripture in their mouthes, yea, and liues also: For they be Canaanites and Hagarens. And the needy prophane would murther the rich, for they are lyons in the grate. What these would doe appeareth by their complaints, groaning like mute theeues and murtherers vnder the presse: For the weight of the Law lyeth heauy vpon them by occasion of their owne malice. For to the iust and godly euery law is a law of liberty. Say not thou, why were the former dayes better

then these? These next words are an answere. Thou dost not wisely inquire concerning this. Thou dost not consider of times according to wisedome, but art a foole to expostulate with God, who according to his owne infinite wisdome ordereth the times and seasons in iudgement, iustice and mercy. Solomon giueth no other reasons, because this common complaint is a common folly, and the murmuring of stubborne and reasonlesse persons, that are not capable of any reason, or else will not be perswaded by reason, but are rather worse when they are reasoned withall: They are most commonly but moody, needy, greedy and malecontented fooles that make this complaint, and it is vaine to argue according to wisdome with vncapable ignorants, and indocible stubborne ones. For they will despise the wisedome of the wise, and tread vnder foot their precious pearles, and glory in their mad contempt. Yet to try whether the foole will leaue his folly I will giue two or three answeres to this idle obiection not worth the answering.
First, let him recount from the dayes that God placed man vpon the earth, till the present time, and shew mee when this good world was, (antiquae meliora: The more ancient, the purer, saith the prouerbe in another respect.) How good were the dayes that Cain and Abel liued in? How good were the dayes of the old world, till the Flood? The dayes of Sem and Cham? The dayes of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob in Canaan? Of the Israelites in Egypt? How good were the dayes of the Iudges? The dayes of the Kings of Iuda, and Israel? How good were the dayes of Solomon, those peaceable and wealthy dayes? Did not the people complaine of the grieuous burden of those dayes, and were ready to rebell, as afterward they did? How good was the world in the dayes of Christ, and of the Apostles? If it were not then good* when should it be good? How good in the times of the Primitiue Church, boyling in the heat of persecutions and heresies? How good were and are the times of Antichrist? Of all times we find grieuous complaints. And of the times of Popery (hinc illae Lachrymae) we find great complaint

in the Fathers. These times were full of warres, bloudshed, massacres, treasons, rebellions, robberies, etc. caused by that man of sinne. Fryar Mantuan discouereth the goodnesse of the world then: And Euerard Arch-bishop of Canterbury, wrote a volumne (called Obiurgatorium temporis) the Rebuke of the time. Wicked and monstrous were those daies, yea, exceeding the heathen about two hundreth yeares agoe, the goodnesse whereof our wicked ignorants so much admire. But Elmerius, a Monke of Malmesbury, counted them the dayes of greatest woe and misery, and thereupon gathered the certainty of Anti-christs present raigne? Fullwell doe these proud murmurers shew their tyrannicall, and rebellious hearts: When they had a Pope to absolue them from their alleagiance, and to quench their thirst with the blood one of another, the world was good: When the Pope partly with subtilty, partly with violence wrested Nobles, yea, Kings out of their possessions, yea, whom he lusted, after one manner or another, then was there cheapnesse and plenty: The Fryars made Robin-hoods penny-worthes, and this is all that these greedy blood hounds commend the old world for. The Fryars bound the commons to them by making good penny-worths of other mens liuings, both of the Cleargy, and Laity, wrung from them by all deceitfull meanes, for which the Commons were but their slaues, and fooles praised their bounty for giuing them a cake of their owne meale. It is an easie matter to be liberall on other mens purses. Neither yet considering the times then, were there any such penny-worths. Your fore-Fathers groaned vnder the burthen of those penny-worths surely, when they put vp a bill in a Parliament, in the dayes of King Henry the fourth, the contents whereof was to take away Temporall Lands, inordinately spent by the Cleargie: Which Lands were sufficient to maintaine fifteene Earles, fifteene hundred Knights, sixe thousand and two hundred Esquires, one hundred Almes-houses, fifteene hundred Priests, and to allow twenty thousand pound yeerely to the King; allowing to euery Earle, three thousand markes by yeere: to euery Knight

one hundred markes, and foure plow-land; to euery Esquire forty marks and two plow-land; to euery Almes-house, for to maintaine such surplusage of poore, as Cities, and Townes were not able to maintaine, one hundred markes; and to euery Priest seuen markes. Fabian. chron. in Hen. 4. ann. 1410. Say not therefore, Why were the old times (in those respects) better then these?
A second answere is, that sinne and death hath ouerspread all places and times, all the sonnes of Adam are sinfull, and the curse lyeth on them, and the deuill is their Prince, who is the Lord of the flesh: but God hath gathered a Church to himselfe, which is pestered with Hypocrites also, and the children of God themselues, partly by meanes of these corrupting hypocrites, partly through the temptations of the reliques of lust within them, are drawne aside out of the way oft times. The iust God therefore punisheth the one, and chasteneth the other. His messengers or instruments are, the Plague, comprehending all infirmities, diseases, and maladies; the Sword signifying all miseries and troubles that way; and Famine. Say not therefore, Why were the old times (in that respect also) better then these?
A third answere is giuen by Solomon himselfe, Chap. 1. 9. 10. The thing that hath beene, is that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall be done, and there is no new thing vnder the Sunne. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, see this is new? The foole perceiueth nothing of all that is before him, why? Because he discerneth not the substance of things when they are cloathed with other circumstances. Therefore what is new, what old, hee knoweth not, neither can obserue how the variable imaginations of all generations, all their deeds, and manners are fixed in their centre, to the nature whereof all things are conuerted.
A fourth answere therefore shall be this. Leaue off murmuring, complaining, and disputing against God, mortifie wrath, reuenge, and couetousnesse, betake thy selfe to the word of God, with a wise and vnderstanding heart in humility, exer^ise thy faith in obedience thereto, and then shall

the world be well with thee, the righteous shall resort to thy company, they shall reioyce with thee, and commiserate with thee, and the peace of conscience shall ouercome all things. If the world be an hell of euils, yet shalt thou be in heauen; contrarily if the world were a paradise of pleasures, yet shouldest thou be in hell. Some are full of feare and despaire, and most greedy in time of plenty; some are ioyfull, hopefull, and content in time of scarcity. He that hath aboundance, and no children is a care full drudge, and hee that hath but little substance, and many children liueth in comfort. Therefore auoyde wrath, let goe displeasure let the world runne his circuits, heare thou for thy time what the Lord saith to thee, and doe his will while thou liuest, and then shall it be as good a world to thee as euer it was.
To conclude; If all these old worldlings would mortifie those rebellious affections and lusts which reigne in them, and heare what he saith, who speaketh to all generations, the world should be as good as they can imagine it euer yet was. But when the Lord calleth to them, then are they euer ready to call vp their fore-fathers, to set them in opposition against the Lords, as the Pharisees did, Ioh. 9. 28. We are none of this mans disciples, we are Moses disciples. The truth is, they were the deuils disciples, and so are these Sauages. If these answers satisfie not, the rod of the Magistrate is for the fooles backe, and the yoke for the beasts necke.



Verse 11.
Wisedome is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that see the Sun^e.

A Fourth rule or remedy, whereby a man is armed against the miseries and vanities of this life, whereof impatience, discontent, oppressions, murmuring, complaining, reuenging, etc. are principall vanities, is Wisedome. Concerning wisedome two things are handled. First, the profitablenesse thereof, to verse 23. Secondly, the difficultie thereof, from thence to the end. The profit is first generally propounded,

verse 11. 12. The proposition is infolded in a comparison with that which is of greatest account, yea, commonly counted the chiefest good among men, to wit, an inheritance. Wisedome is good with an inheritance, or as an inheritance, gnim nachalah: and by it there is profit, It is more excellent or better, Veiother, i. and praestantius, magis) to them that see the Sunne. The comparison is from the Lesse to the Greater, figured by a Correction, thus: A faire inheritance is a thing desired of all men, and a man of great possessions is commonly counted happier then other men. Yet is not that the onely good, nor the best good, but there is another gift of God, as good, and as profitable for man as an inheritance, without which his inheritance, be it neuer so great, shall be vnprofitable to him. Nay, if we must make comparison betweene wisedome and wealth, wisedome is the more excellent in it selfe, and better to man: For a wise and a poore childe is better then an old King that wanteth wisedome.



Verse 12.
For wisedome is a defence, and money is a defence: but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisedome giueth life to them that haue it.

A Reason of Wisedomes excellencie aboue wealth, because it is a defence to a man in euery state of life, and in euery matter. The Hebrew is, betzel hachoch^ah. i. In the shadow of wisedome. The fruit or profit of wisedome is illustrated by a comparison of an arbour, or thicke leaued tree in the heat of Summer, which is very great in those countries, and therefore they vse to sit and eate meate vnder such trees, yea, and to sacrifice to their idols in such places. As the thicke arbour by refraction of the Sunne-beames defendeth a man from the broiling heat of Summer, and refresheth him with the coole ayre, and also protecteth him from the violence of tempestuous blasts, mitigating the extremity of the one, and the rig^ur of the other, reducing both to the temper of mans body: so doth wisedome in prosperity, and aduersity defend a man, that neither the excesse of the one, nor extremitie

of the other shall ouerpower him, but he so moderateth both, as that he keepeth himselfe cleare and free in some good measure from the temptations and predominance of them both. Sapiens dominabitur actus: The wise man ouerpowreth the starres, and is armed against the weather. The heauiest things by engines may be remoued, and done, which otherwise to plaine strength are impossible, and by deuice of instruments the strongest castles are battered downe, and thickest wals pierced through: so many things to common iudgement vnpossible, are done and auoided by wisedome. And monie is a defence, or shadow. These words seeme to be an answere to an obiection, thus: Wisedome indeed is good, and a defence to a man, but monie also is needfull, and a present remedie. For by monie may a man readily obtaine his desires, and speedily auoid an euill. For what fauour can a man obtaine by wisedome, that cannot as well be obtained by money. Et genus* and formam, etc. It maketh the base honourable, and the deformed beautifull, yea, in another acception of the words, it desineth all things. Ans. It is true, money is a defence also, and may preuaile much oft times, and most in a corrupt state: Money maketh friends, and addeth strength, whereas otherwise a man is left naked, and exposed to many dangers and euils: But as I said before, it cannot hold out in comparison with wisedome. For it is more excellent, in that it giueth life to the owners thereof. Money is but as drugges and lenitiue oyntments to mitigate the swellings and diseases of the body, whose root, remaineth still within, and pullulateth againe after the same, or some other manner: but wisedome is a spirit incorporated into the radicall humour, giuing health, strength, and life to the body to extirpate the rootes of all diseases.
The life of a man standeth not in his riches, but wisedome giueth life. By wisedome is not meant worldly craftinesse* and the deepe counsels of sinners, which is nothing but execrable malice and follie, Eccl^s. 19. 22. but that which is ioyned with the feare of God. It is the knowledge of the law, and works of God, and the practise of his wisedome is

prudence, by which a man is directed alwaies in the best, safest, and neerest way to happinesse* Monie is ordered by wisedome: For without wisedome, it is but a knife in a childes hand. For the prosperitie of fooles shall destroy them, Prou. 1. 23. The rich man trusted to riches, Luk. 12. 19. Diues trusted to riches, Luk. 16. The king of Tyrs trusted to riches, Ezech. 28. Haman trusted to his wealth, so did Craesus King of Lydia, Nabuchadnezzar trusted to the strength of Babilon, and Xerxes to the multitude of his sould^ers, as did Senacherib also. But these defences were nothing: For riches auaileth not in the day of wrath, but righteousnesse deliuereth from death. The wicked in hell confesse too late, Wisd. 5. 8. What hath pride profited vs, or the pompe of riches brought vs? If a man hath tooles, and want wisedome to vse them, what is he the better? Nabal was a rich foole, and his riches for want of wisedome destroyed him. But thou wilt say, what can a wise man doe without riches? But wisedome is good with an inheritance. Yea, and without an inheritance. For if a wise man desire riches, he can by wisedome obtaine riches, and honour* for out of the prison-house commeth he to raigne, as Solomon said before. If he desire not temporall goods, he is rich already: For no man wanteth that which he desireth not, nor yet desireth that which hee needeth not. The wise man is rich in God, he hath therefore whatsoeuer is for his good, and more is but a superfluity. If pouerty be the way to life, and riches the way to death, whether is the better way? Whether is the better defence, or shadow? Whether is the better that is brought lowe to rise higher, as Iob was, or that riseth high to fall, as Haman did? Wisedome is a strong Tower to the wise, but a rich man is a shippe tossed on the waues. But a wise man with riches is better then a wise man without monie. I but tiches infatuate the heart of the wise, and are often a snare to him. For he that hath riches, commonly wanteth himselfe, they are strong tempters, and therefore wicked Mammon. Howsoeuer a man is more troubled to keepe a good conscience with riches, then he that wanteth

them. Neither indeede can a wise man want* seeing that there is as much vse of wisedome, and the wise, as of wealth and the rich: For the world is gouerned by wisedome, not by riches. Therefore wisedome shall alwaies haue the preheminence, and riches attending on it.



Verse 13.
Consider the worke of God: for who can make that straight, which he hath made crooked?

AS before he propounded, in generall, the profit and excellencie of wisedome, to arme a man against impatience and all other vanities; so here he beginneth to expresse the benefit and vse thereof more particularly, shewing what the practise of wisedome is, and how it is a defence, comfort, and life to a man in this vale of misery.
First, the practise of wisdome standeth in a right consideration of the workes of God, verse 13. The right consideration of the workes of God is not to search into the depth of his vnsearchable wisedome, but to rest contented in the worke of his ordinance. He doth all things after the counsell of his owne will. No man is his counsellour, his owne counsel must stand. Therfore consider the worke of God. All things are ordered by the wisedome of God, and it is thy wisdome, not to coyne worlds, and policies, at thy pleasure and will, by violence and turnings of deuices; but thou must rest, and relie on God, and let him worke his owne worke, otherwise impatience shall carry thee headlong into sinne against God, and against thy selfe. The reason of this practise is in the next words figured by a communication. For who can make that straight, which he hath made crooked? If thou seest oppression, and wrong* and peruerting of iustice, which may mooue thee to impatience, anger, reuenge, insurrection, etc. oppose not sinne against sinne, but feare God, and know that God is euen now in doing a worke of iustice on some by these, and afterward will doe a worke of iustice on these. If Iosiah the best King that euer raigned,

will needes goe out to fight against Pharaoh, whom the Lord had sent out for an executioner of iustice, he shall be slaine. The Lord maketh vse of crooked things, for his glorie, which thou canst neuer make straight. Walke thou vprightly, and speake thou vprightly, that they may know their crookednesse, if so be that God will reueale it to them, and returne to thy vprightnesse, if God giue them power to lay it to heart, but let their crookednesse be their owne, and fall vpon their owne heads. Rest thou on God, tarrie his leisure, all times and workes are in his hands. They cannot be hastened, nor slackned by the wit or strength of man.



Verse 14.
In the day of prosperity be ioyfull, but in the day of aduersitie consider: God also hath set the one ouer against the other, to the end that man should finde nothing after him.

SEcondly, the practise of wisedome stands in the right vse of the times and seasons, which are in Gods owne hands. These seasons are either of prosperity or aduersity, of wealth or want, of peace or troubles. In the day of prosperity be ioyfull, when God giueth thee thy hearts desire for the necessitie and comfort of thy body, receiue it thankefully, vse it ioyfully, cheere thine heart therewith, and let others be partakers of thy ioy. For to what other purpose hath God sent it? Make not a curse of his blessing, nor his goodnesse an occasion of sinne, either by depriuing thy selfe, or others of the vse thereof, or by abusing the same to the hurt of thy body, or mischieuing of others. Glorifie God in peace and plenty, comfort thy selfe, glad the heart of thy neighbour, let him praise God in the feeling of his blessings with thee, and not enuy thy wicked prosperity. But in the day of aduersity consider. Fall not to vnprofitable murmuring, grudging, complaining, cursing, etc. It is the worke of God whatsoeuer the meanes be. For nothing is without him. He vseth crooked things to the accomplishment of his will, as well as straight. But the wisedome of God in applying them to vnknowne ends, and good ends, excuseth not mans

malice, and euill intents. Weigh the reason of aduersity by wisedome, and then rest on God, as Iob did, and as Dauid did in Sauls persecutions, in Absolons rebellions, and Shimeis cursed raylings. Iob said, The Lord giueth, and the Lord taketh away, and we must receiue euil (punishment and chastisements) because we are euill, as well as good of the Lord. The former are our deserts, the later Gods mercy. Dauid said of Shimei, Let him alone, peradu^nture the Lord hath bidden him curse. So consider that this is the worke of God. Therefore feare, blaspheme not, neither fret, nor striue. Thou canst not alter the course of the heauens, nor change the weather, but thou in wisedome applye^t all thy worldly businesses to the times, and as the times will giue thee leaue. Anger, and contention is but vaine.
This patient consideration and contentation is inforced by a reason of the intent and end of Gods wisedome herein; God hath also set the one against the other, etc. So hath God tempered the life of man with the intercourse of crosses, and succession of things contrary, exercising iudgement, iustice, and mercy in his secret counsell, that man might find nothing what to say, or doe, to imagine or deuise in any state, of himselfe. For Gods worke is most wise, secret, and firme, vnalterable by man, not to be preuented, nor amended by his erroneous counsels. But the must let the arrogant search of causes passe, and glorifie God in aduersity as well as in prosperity, as Iob did: yea, God sendeth prosperity, and aduersity, and other contrary accidents to trie vs, namely, that we may see and know the manifold hidden hypocrisies of our hearts, that by these occasions shew forth themselues in imaginations, affections, words, and workes, Deut. 8. To conclude, God doth this, that wee may know and confesse him to be all in all, and our selues to be but fooles, and beasts of ourselues.




Verse 15.
All things haue I seene in the dayes of my vanity: There is a iust man that perisheth in his righteousnesse, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickednesse.

A Confirmation of the former reason by the effects of Gods secret and wonderfull prouidence, seeming quite contrary to reason, and to be intollerable indignities, which he further confirmeth by the testimony of his owne experimentall knowledge. All things haue I seene. There is nothing that can be conceiued, and knowne by the vnderstanding and reason of man, but I haue had the obseruation and experience thereof. For from the prudent obseruation, and experience of the workes of God, haue I gathered rules of wisedome, for the instruction and direction of others. He addeth, In the dayes of my vanity; to signifie the fulnesse of his experience of good and euill* of wisedome and folly. He hath seene both in himselfe, and obserued in others the workes of God. This briefly of the testimony. The matter or subiect of the testimony, are two particular effects of Gods prouidence. The first is, There is a iust man that perisheth in his iustice; namely, for truth and righteousnesse sake. So Abel was slaine by his brother Cain, because his deedes were righteous, and his owne wicked; 1 Iohn 3. 12. Esay saith, Chap. 59. 15. Hee that departeth from euill, maketh himselfe a prey. Naboth was slaine for keeping a good conscience. The Prophets, our Sauiour Christ, the Apostles and Martyrs, suffered death for the truth. Many are murthered, spoyled, vexed, rayled on by the wicked for righteousnesse sake, and euen the last end of the righteous oft times seemeth to be without honour, as the wicked in hell confesse they erroneously iudged in time of their iouill life; Wisd. 5. And this is a thing contrary to carnall reason, and hard to be vnderstood; Psal. 73. 16. 17. And therefore are many offended thereat, and take occasion to depart from the way of truth. For they fully know not this point of wisedome, namely,

to relie on the prouidence of God, contrary to humane reason, and that he is most honoured when we trust him on his bare word.
The second effect is contrary to this. And there is a wicked man, that prolongeth his dayes in his wickednesse. Contrarily againe, some there be that neither feare God, nor reuerence man, without conscience, without truth in words and deeds, swearers, blasphemers, oppressours, despisers of the good, mockers of grace, couetous, iniurious, and yet flourish in prosperity, haue the World at will, haue children at their desire, build houses, plant vineyards, purchase Lordships, yea, they are honoured of men, and praised for their wisedome; they liue in health, and die without sicknesse; Iob 21. 13. Lazarus perished in hunger, Diues liued in pleasure. Christ was soone cut downe; but Herod liued long, euen till he was foure-score yeeres old. If a man iudge according to outward appearance, these things argue that there is no prouidence at all. But it argueth infidelity, and pride enough, when a man will beleeue nothing without so many reasons and proofes, nor doe any thing at Gods command, till he see his wages; Mal. 3. 14 Righteous men die, and mercifull men are taken away; Esay 57. 1. that they might not see nor feele the euils to come on the World, as Lot was taken from among the Sodomites: And wicked men liue to their further vengeance and sorrow, as did Herod. The righteous are chastened with death, and the wicked liue to increase their damnation; 1 Cor. 11. 32. They are taken away, lest wickednesse should alter their vnderstanding, and deceit beguile their minde; Wisd. 4. 10. The wicked liue to defile their soules and bodies with all kinde of sinne, to haue all their worldly desires accomplished to ripenesse, as did the Canaanites. Let vs therefore turns our selues to the prouidence of God, and there rest contented. For they that trust in him, shall neuer be ashamed, nor confounded.




Verse 16.
Be not righteous ouermuch, neither make thy selfe euer wise: why shouldest thou destroy thy selfe?

THirdly, the practise of wisedome consisteth, first in auoyding extremities, verse 16. 17. Secondly, in keeping the meane, verse 18. The extremities are excesse, or defect. The excesse is an errour on the right hand, when a man by pride abuseth his wisedome, in stretching it beyond the limits and bounds of humane capacity, either in defining thereby what is iust, what vniust, or what is truth, what errour. Be not righteous ouer*much. A man cannot be too righteous in respect of obedience to the Commandements* yet if he be so much addicted to one or some, as that hee despiseth the rest, he bewrayeth hypocrisie and folly, and may well be said to be too iust. For a man is not to cull out what hee thinketh good, thereby to iustifie himselfe, and to condemne others; but as Dauid saith, to haue respect to all the commandements, else shall hell limit his obedience, and serue God, or rather seeme to serue him according to his owne liking; but reseruations and exceptions God abhorreth. But a man may make himselfe too iust, when hee presumptuously taketh vpon him beyond his apprehension, to define what is right, what not, in this confused disorder of the World, and state of frailety, wherein all things are full of difficulty. For no man must presume aboue his gift, or stretch himselfe beyond the line either of all mens capacity, or his owne. This is but to intrude a mans selfe into the roome of God, and to make himselfe a Law-giuer, rather then an vnderstander and doer of that which is already giuen, and so in the end become rather zealous of his owne Lawes, and fancies, then of Gods; as the Pharisees were, and Papists are, and other heretikes haue beene. Neither make thy selfe ouer-wise. As thou must not set vp* a iustice, or zeale of thine owne, so neither a wisedome, or doctrine of thine owne. And this a man doth, when he will search further into the wisedome of God, then he hath reuealed in his Word. But sith the most perfect hath

hardly attained to the fulnesse of reuealed wisedome, how shall a man pierce into that which is not reuealed?
Surely, he that will needs behold the Sunne with open eyes in his glory, shal loose his eye-sight, and so shall he loose his wits that will pry too deepely into the secrets of God. If a man will search further then God hath reuealed to man, or beyond the measure of his gift, he cannot but fall into heresies, and foolish fancies, which euen to common iudgement, shall be ridiculous or wicked. Therefore saith Solomon, why shouldst thou be desolate, or destroy thy selfe? Why shouldest thou prouoke God to anger, by proudly prying into him, and not rather honour him by humble obedience, admiring rather his wonderfull wisedome in his workes, then seeking to comprehend his infinitenesse to pride thy selfe withall, or yet to limit him to thy reason, and seeking for satisfaction in things that cannot be had, rather then to do good workes, as many proud barren talkers do now a dayes. The foole seeketh wisedome, and findeth it not. The Iewes will be righteous without Christ, they will haue a Church of their owne making, and a Christ of their owne forming: (So will the Brownists and Anabaptists, etc. The Greekes will be wiser then Christ, both lew and Gentile will be wiser and better then God. For whose doctrine was madnesse, and life sinfull, and end shamefull, if not Christs? whose lawes and traditions are preferred, inforced, and vrged more then Gods? But the one is wicked, the other foolish, both are both, and so are they desolate. For God hath destroyed the Iustice of the one, or them for their Iustice and Goodnesse, and the wisedome of the other. And so shall the Popish celestiall, terrestriall Hierarchies, their Iustice, and deuotions, proue wicked madnesse. If a man interpret these words of righteousnesse in ciuill causes, as it is said* summum ius summa in^uria, and as Cicero saith, Viuimus in faece Romuli, non in repub: Platonis, and of calumniations of the law, that is but a branch, for the words are to be taken in the generall sence of all diuine and humane things.




Verse 17.
Be not ouermuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?

THe contrary defect is set downe in this verse, which is an errour on the left hand. As some will be too iust, and too wise, so some againe will be too wicked and too foolish. Be not wicked ouer-much* etc. As thou must not arrogate to thy selfe to define what is iust and right at thy pleasure, as though thou haddest all knowledge, and all descerning, and the perfection or highest degrees of all, so neither must thou runne out into the other extremities of dissolutenesse and wickednesse. For, because thou canst not satisfie thy irreligious curiosity on the one side, must thou therefore deny the prouidence of God on the other side, and despise his ordinance? Because thou canst not comprehend his vnreuealed wisedome, wilt thou therefore cast off all knowledge and discerning? Because thou canst not sound the bottome of Gods wisedome, and find out the vnknowne trackt of his pathes, neither canst comprehend the reason of this or that, or why thou shouldest doe, or not doe this or that; wilt thou therefore cast off the royall commandement, and walke in crooked turnings and by-wayes? Wilt thou not vnderstand those duties aright, whereby thou art to testifie thy humility, feare, and obedience, because thou canst not goe beyond that which is written, or beyond thy line? Wilt thou not reade the Scriptures at all, because they are hard to be vnderstood? What must thou needs haue the exact vnderstanding of all, or else wilt thou vnderstand none? This is indeed the common folly of Popish Ideots; They dare meddle with any thing, saue the Bible: For they beleeue as the Church beleeues, but what it beleeueth they know not, so they beleeue they know not what, and liue they know not how. They are too wicked, too foolish.
If the Scriptures be hard, then must thou pray more earnestly, and labour more diligently. But the Gospell is hid to them that perish, not to others. Because there is, and all

wayes hath beene so much contention about the points of religion, and the chiefe articles of the faith; must thou therefore make thy selfe an Epicure? Must thou cast off all care, and seed thy belly? Because the Primitiue Church was pestered with heresies, must the Pope therefore take away all knowledge of God, clasping vp the Bible in an vnknowne tongue? And because Saint Ierome complaineth of the abuse of the common knowledge of the Scripture in the mouthes of some prophance vulgars, must all men, euen the whole Church therefore, be cast out into vtter darkenesse, must there be neither preaching, catechizing, nor praying* Must the Booke of God be turned into pictures and idols, teachers of lies? Must Pastors and Teachers be turned into idle Monkes and Fryers, and faith and true obedience the onely meanes to saluation into their regularities? As before the prophane made a common prattle of Scripture without reuerence, so now must they therefore be deuout in lies contrary to Scripture? A faire mends. Because Monkes and Fryars, the Popes orders, had too much liuing, not onely Tithes, the Churches due by diuine right, but the best Temporall liuings, lands and houses; must the Ministers of Christ now be stript of all, and be plaine beggars* Yea, destitute of common meate, drinke, and lodging? Because they had too much for nothing doing, must we haue nothing for sore trauell? Because they had more cloathes and gownes then needed, must we therefore by extreame need be driuen to weare but halfe gownes? And because they were wolues, deuouring the flocke, must therefore the flocke now be greedy dogges worrying their she pheards? Because nothing was enough for those Drones, shall therfore any thing be enough and good enough for diligent and faithfull Labourers? Stulti dum viuant vitia in ventraria currunt. The world is a foole, and a foole runneth euer out into extremities. Too iust or too wicked; too wise, or too foolish; too lauish, or too couetous, superstitious, or not religious at all, if not a Papist, then an Atheist. If not bringing gifts-superfluously to the Tabernacle, then taking away all maintenance, as these

greedy swine, the ciuill pompous Epicures doe in these present dayes, wherein euery one is skilfull to rob the Church without remorse, to maintaine greedy Bell, and proud Iezabel, to keepe the Minister vnder, that the deuill may be aloft and raigne, who ^ideth on their backs sumptuously sadled, and lodgeth in their bellies filled with the Church goods, Satans sweetest bits.
Why shouldest thou dye before thy time? Why shouldest thou bring Gods heauy iudgements vpon thee for thy dissolutenesse and contempt? The workes of the Lord are wonderfull, and to be sought out of all that feare him, that hee may be glorified in them. For neither the dumbe creatures, nor the dead praise him here in earth. But he destroyeth them that dispise the knowledge of him and his lawes. For wherefore hath the Lord giuen his word, but that we should know it and doe it? As Dauid exercised himselfe in the law day and night, and as the Bareans searched the Scriptures to try Pauls doctrine, for which they were commended of the holy Ghost; so must we also without curiosity search out diligently the secrets of the Lord therein contained. For things written belong to vs, and to our children. And the diligent shall attaine to the subtilty of knowledge, and to vnderstand the darke sayings of the wise, Prou. 1. 4. 6. But the vngodly that casteth his words behind him shall be reproued. And those mad fooles that gaue all to the Fryar, but snatch all from the Ministers of Christ, and delight in their wants and miseries, shall receiue a iust reward of their extremities. For what outward token of sound grace, is to be found almost in any of them? and who are they that desire most to creep into these possessions, but Zijms, ^ims, and goats in sheepes cloathing, or plaine rauening wolues? Who desire that all liuings might be impropriate, that we might not haue where to put our heads, as our Sauiour complaineth.
The deuill is put out at the fore-dore for a foule theese, and comes in at the backe doore like a braue gallant: wee were once wilde oliues, and are hastening to our old ^ildenesse againe: for our faith whereby we stand, is fruitlesse, and

lyes a dying, but the brutall part, the flesh, is euen deified, as Satan deified himselfe in the sight of God and the Angels.



Verse 18.
It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this, yea also from this withdraw not thine hand: for hee that feareth God shall come forth of them all.

THis verse setteth downe the practise of wisedome in keeping a meane betweene vaine curiositie, and prophane dissolutenesse, or contempt. It is good that thou shouldest, etc* Hold the meane betweene these two extreames, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left, as the Lord hath commanded in the Law, but keepe an euen course, or godly mediocrity. It is good to search into the depth of the word, and workes of God without curiositie. For the Lord giueth wisedome to those that seeke her as gold and siluer, to know Iustice and iudgement, and equitie, to vnderstand a Prouerbe, and the interpretation the words of the wise, and their darke sayings, and a wise man wil heare, and increase counsell, and a man of vnderstanding shall attaine to wise counsels. Pro. 1. Yea also from this withdraw not thine hand. His meaning is, not that we should make a mixture of righteousnesse and wickednesse, of wisedome and folly, which are things contrary, and haue no communion at all one with another. For what fellowship hath light with darkenesse, and Christ with Belial? There be many Atheisticall belly-gods in these daies that will be compounding, and deuizing mediums, according to their owne fantasies, and deuizing such religions as may stand with their owne lusts, they will gather the dewe of sweetest flowers with the Bee, and sucke Pitch and Tarre; and Horse-dung with the Waspe and Hornet* and dunghill-Flye, and make a loathsome potion of Gall and Honey. They will neither be too pure, not too popish, neither too good, nor too r^guish, but they will sauour of both, like Laban and Esau, because God may abhor^e the religious Atheist, and spue the honest Epicure out of his mouth. For such dregs are not for his seruice.
Blessed are the pure in spirit, notwithstanding their imperfections and infirmities, but cursed are they that halt betweene two religions, seruing their lusts of both. But the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that we should acknowledge our owne imperfections and weakenesse, both in regard of exact righteousnesse, and discerning of perfect Iustice in the intricate and difficult matters of the world, and of the depth of Gods secrets, and to teach vs modesty. We cannot be too iust, nor too wise, so long as we containe our selues within the compasse of the written word, and withall goe not beyond our line, that is, presume not aboue the gift that God hath giuen vs; Neither yet too wicked, nor too foolish, so long as we do but see and acknowledge our weakenesse in knowledge, and defectiuenesse in discerning of Iustice and Iudgement, and disability to attaine to the fulnesse of euery gift, and therefore rest our selues contented with that which we can attaine to, trusting in Gods mercy for the rest (not enuying our betters, and of pride, striuing to make all alike) as the Lord saith to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2. Cor. 12 9. It was wickednesse and folly therefore in him that had but one talent, to goe bury it in the ground, and to sit idle: But as it is an ordinary thing for a rich man to be couetous, and to seeke to be too rich, so it is for the meane or poore to be carelesse, and prodigally to waste that little which hee hath.
For he that seareth God, etc. A reason of the former speech, because he that hath the feare of God planted in his heart, shall auoyde both curiosity and dissolute ignorance: He that dreadeth the Maiestie of God will not arrogantly and presumptuously prie too farre into his secrets, nor limit his prouidence by his short and shallow capacitie, nor yet contrarily depart away from the knowledge of him in his word, and workes, but exercise himselfe in both, as Dauid did, and all the godly haue done.




Verse 19.
Wisedome strengtheneth the wise, more then ten mighty men which are in the Citie.

AN hortatorie conclusion of the premisses. Therefore follow wisedome, depart not from her directions and counsels. This exhortation is included in the reason or confirmation thereof: For wisedome hath more strength, then ten men of power and might in a Citie, for the defence thereof. Prudence excelleth puissance, and counsell valour. A weake man that hath light, is better then a giant that is blind, and a man ouer-commeth the Lyon, and the Elephant, and taketh the whale. For there is a time when the strong is weake, and the weake strong, and wisedome findeth it out. Great buildings are raised by skill, or wisedome of that kind, not by plaine strength. The ship also is guided by wisedome, and by wisedome of that kind are the windes and floods, made seruiceable. Hester by wisedome deliuered the Church of God from their oppressours, and brought Haman to the gallowes that he had prepared for Mordecai. By the wisedome of Iudeth was Bethulia deliuered, and the deuouring hoast of Olofernes disperst, and cropt vp with the sword. And by wisedome, Leonidas king of the Spartanes with sixe hundred men dispersed fiue hundreth thousand of Xerxes hoast. So that the strength of his tenne hundred thousands were broken by sixe hundred men, and Greece deliuered. Iusti^. lib. 2.



Verse 20.
For there is not a iust man vpon earth, that doth good, and sinneth not.

FOurthly, the practise of wisedome standeth in a right consideration of the condition of man since the fall. For there is not, etc. The true and full vnderstanding of this principle giueth great direction to the wise, both for the bridling of impatience, anger, reuenge, etc. and also for euen and moderate carriage of himselfe among all sorts of men, and

in euery matter. First, this is to be laid downe as an infallible ground, that no man is perfectly good, nor yet can attaine to perfect goodnesse in this vaine life. Therefore is euery man full of imperfection and wants, whereupon commeth such disorder, crossenesse, and difficulty of euery matter. Euery man then being fraile and sinfull, doth often more or lesse depart from this duty, partly of ignorance, partly of temptation, and who is hee that offendeth not in his tongue? There be many obstacles to let euill deedes, and remorse of conscience setleth the heart before they be acted, besides manifold occurrences: but the tongue is neere to the heart, and as it were the sound of the heart, which is conueyed by the ayre of the breath, and qualified by the imagination of the minde, which followeth either the suggestions of Sathan, or the cursed humours in euill. I say cursed, because the body is a masse of sinne and death, by the curse; Gen. 3. 17. Well, seeing that regeneration is but here begun, and not perfected, and that all men, partly of temptation, partly of infirmities are subiect to many falles in deedes, and words especially, there shall, and must be occasions of anger, discontent, reuenge, etc.



Verse 21.
Also take no heed vnto all words that are spoken; lest thou heare thy seruant curse thee.

A Consequent or conclusion of wisedome, deducted necessarily from the former ground. If all men be subiect to offend often by deede and word, then must thou not giue thine heart and memory to all the words that are spoken. Let not all crosse speeches, angry, and idle words, settle in thine heart, and memory: But let them passe away as other vaine sounds doe. For he that will examine euery word that men speake, sometimes of heat, sometimes vnaduisedly, etc. shall neuer be charitable, but alwayes contentious, neuer quiet, but alwayes grieued, and such seedes being receiued into the heart, will bring forth no good fruit, but corrupt the good seedes of grace, and make the ground barren. Euill

words are the seedes of many euill workes: Let the seedes die, and much euill shall be auoyded. When angry words are past, let euill thoughts passe away with them, and make them an occasion of firmer friendship, reconciliation and charity, which was a cause of emnity. But let not the euill spirit bring in these thoughts againe, at least giue them no entertainement, lest the last errour be worse then the first. Lest thou heare thy seruant curse thee, Asher Lo tishmagn; id est, when as, because thou shalt not, or oughtest not to heare thy seruant speaking euill, or reprouing thee. But in charity forbeare to examine his words and deedes too strictly: And then is this conclusion or precept inforced by an argument of the Greater denyed, to denie the Lesse, n these words. If thou oughtest not alway to heare with griefe thy seruant reprouing thee, or his angry complaints, then much lesse oughtest thou to regard the angry speeches or contumelies of others, etc. If in wisedome thou must turne away thine eare, and winke at many both words and deedes of thy seruant, who is maintained of thy Table and purse, and oweth duty and reuerence to thee, then mayest thou much more passe-by the reproaches and petty, abuses of others, that liue aequali iure vvith thee, that are free, as we, say, vnder God and the King. To conclude, if a man in charity must beare with the infirmities of his seruant, and those that are obliged to him by any bond or duty, then must he much more be of charitable behauiour towards all men, by suppressing anger, impatience, reuenge, etc.



Verse 22.
For oftentimes also thine owne heart knoweth, that thou thy selfe likewise hast cursed others.

A Confirmation of the former instruction concerning the bridling of anger, reuenge, etc. by the testimony of a mans owne conscience, conuincing him by the Law of nature, which teacheth euery man to doe to other men as he would be done to. As thou wouldest haue them to beare with thine infirmities, so beare thou with theirs, and make another mans case and state thine owne. For oftentimes also thine owne heart knoweth, etc. Examine thine owne conscience,

call thy selfe to account, and thou shalt find that thou hast often despised, and reproached others. Therefore heare, and beare with patience that other whiles, which thou hast imposed on others, and hauing a feeling of this frailtie, and many more in thy selfe, be readier to pardon then to reuenge wrongs in words or deedes, And compare not thy common infirmities with other mens personall sinnes, nor yet contrarily, that thou mayest be an indifferent Iudge betweene thy selfe and others. By personall sinne, is meant that speciall sinne, which euery particular person for his part is most addicted vnto. And by speciall, is meant a greater degree of this or that sinne, in this or that particular man; otherwise all sinne is in all men, but it is of a seuerall, of a differing conditure in seuerall men. If thou beest naturally more patient, and another cholerick, iustifie not thy selfe, nor yet condemn him by this comparison. For thou shalt finde some vertue in him to match thy patience, and some vice in thee to match his choller. But if his anger be sanctified, or but his infirmitie, and thy patience naturall or ciuill, he is a man, and thou art yet but a beast, yet in the flesh, and among the fleshly, thou hast thy commendation, and that is thy portion, thy reward; Mathew 6. Weigh these things by wisedome, and thy heart shall be armed against manifold vanities, to liue in rest, quiet, and comfort, in some good measure, in this miserable life, as these rules haue prescribed.



Verse 23.
All this haue I proued by wisedome: I said, I will be wise, but it was farre from me.

FRom this verse to the end hee declareth the difficulty of wisedome, to shew that curiosity is vaine on the one side, and that diligence to attaine to some good measure of wisedome, is requisite on the other side, and by consequence the errour of man appeareth in the one, and imperfection in the other, and vanity in both. Now the obiect of wisedome is either good or euill, things reasonable or agreeable to good reason, or things wicked, which are either with reason

and subtlety, or meere madnesse.
The difficulty of the former hee declareth by his owne experience in this verse. All these things haue I tryed by wisedome, that is to say, that which I haue said concerning the extremities and mediocrity for the establishing of the heart in patience and comfort, I haue seene and tryed by the direction of wisedome. Neither yet is a man moderate and wise enough, because he is able to bridle impatience, but he must diligently bethinke himselfe as well of that which is to come, as of that which is passed or present, whereupon the happy issue or euent of things present doe depend. For the experience of things past, and coniecture of that which is to come, or may happen, is the ground or direction of that which is to be done for the present, that the same may be to right and good purpose. For it is not enough that a thing be good in his kinde, but rightly applyed, and vsed to good purpose. And herein hath wisedome her chiefest stroke. Therefore I hauing obtained knowledge, and the practise of knowledge, euen wisedome, thought to attaine to the depth thereof, and said within my selfe. I will be wise, but it was far from me. But how much I thought my selfe more meerely to haue attained to wisedome, by so much the more was I further off. For where is wisedome to be found? Where is the place of vnderstanding? Iob 28. 12. Wisedome is a protection against all euils to come, wisedome directeth in iudgement and equity, wisedome guideth in the right way, and guardeth from the incursions of Sathan and the wicked, the wicked subtle, and the wicked mad or sensuall, both foolish, both beastly, and enemies to godly wisedome.



Verse 24.
That which is farre off and exceeding deepe, who can find it out.

A Reason of the difficulty of good wisedome, or of wisedome exercised in that which is good. That which is farre off, or remoued farre away and out of sight (an allegoricall

speech) worne out or dispersed away by succession of times, which doe alter and eate vp all things, who can find out? For of innumerable things past, there is no knowledge at all, and of a few memorable things there is some generall conceit; but the condition, or conditure, or circumstantiall existence of the times, and things past, is vanished, and that which was most common, is now become most difficult. And the learned is perplexed in searching out that which was once most triuiall. It is a difficult thing to calculate the whole figure or countenance of the heauens, in any one day of the moneth, sixe hundred yeeres agoe, etc. But it is more difficult to know the whole condition or state of that generation then liuing, though we may gather much by those that wrote in those dayes. The Papists for want of this wisedome are become sophisticall sots in the interpretation of the Fathers, and Scripture. If this calculation were granted to vs, as it was to Moses, and very much to Solomon, all the Scriptures and all Lawes should be most plaine and most easie to be vnderstood of him, whom the god of this World hath not blinded. And exceeding deepe, who can finde it? If things past be difficult, as the arrow or bird in the ayre vanishing out of sight more and more, insomuch that a man can onely say; Yonder is a Bird, but what kinde, what colour, and many more indiuiduall differences, he cannot tell, but guesse by coniecture as well as hee can; then are things to come much more difficult, being buried as it were in a darke dungeon, or pit, into which the eye can diue but very little. But all the deliberation of the wise proceedeth from the comparing of things past and to come, without which, a thing in it selfe good, shall not haue like effect, yea, it shall haue a contrary effect, and euent. The word of Gods prouidence is firme and sure, and it is before vs, but it is seene of them to whom God reuealeth it more or lesse. Man is not able to conceiue what is good for him, or right, it is the gift of God. But in his last end vpon reuiew of all things past, he shall see his manifold errours, vanities, madnesses on the one side, and of Gods wisedome, goodnesse, iustice, and mercy on the

other side, if that iudicious, and gracious reuiew be giuen him. For many liue in darkenesse, and die in darkenesse, without obseruation of Gods workes, like beasts. This of the difficultie of wisedome, in respect of the obiect of good, which is of God.



Verse 25.
I applied mine heart to know and to search, and to seeke out wisedome, and the reason of things, and to know the wickednesse of folly, euen of foolishnesse and madnesse.

HEre he beginneth to declare the difficultie of wisedome in finding out, and comprehending the deprauation, malice, and corruption of mans nature, which is infinite, for as he gaue his heart to know, to trace out, or see into, and to finde out wisedome, and the reason of things by the discourse of wisedome: so also he laboured as diligently to know the wickednesse of folly, or depraued wisedome of the vngodly, that feared not God, and the fortuous peruersenesse of reasonlesse mad ones that are carried like beasts after their lusts, their naturall light of vnderstanding and reason being extinguished.



Verse 26.
And I finde more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands: Who so pleaseth God shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.

AN explication of the infinitenesse of this wickednesse and folly, by an example of speciall obseruation of one kinde of folly, to wit, of the harlot. And I finde: The harlots diuellish subtilties he illustrateth, First, by a comparison of the Lesse to the Greater, more bitter then death. Death is terrible, and the paines of death are grieuous. Yea, all creatures abhorre death as an enemie to nature, and a most grieuous euill, because it is a deuourer, and a destroyer. But this is a small thing in comparison of the sorrowes, calamities and miserable destruction that the flickering harlot

bringeth a man vnto. For she is Vorago, the death and destruction both of body and soule, goods, and good name. So that shee grindeth a man and his estate all to powder. Secondly, her subtile deuices are compared to snares and nets. As the fowler and fisher are skilfull to catch fowles and fishes by their snares and nets, which otherwise are out of mans power and reach: so the harlot by her wilie deuises insnareth the wise by inflaming lust in them, which blindeth their vnderstandings, and bringeth their soules in the end into the bondage of the body, the Harlot, and the Deuil How she maketh and setteth her snares, and nets, Solomon depainteth out by an hypotyposis, or liuely description, Pro. 7. 10. to the end. Her bates or songs are pleasant, witty, and sugred words. Pro. 5. 3. The lips of a strange woman droppe as an home combe, and her mouth is smoother than oyle. She is subtle both by words and gestures, to kindle lust, to enamour and rauish the simple with the loue of her, she maketh her selfe a beautifull and precious Iewelin his eyes, she transformeth her selfe to delude the sences, and like a lugler draweth the imagination after her shewes to make him phantasticate on her as an angell, whereupon she seemeth to be an angell in his deluded eyes, when she is indeed but an Empusa, Lamia, Strix, a beastly whore, to be put to grinde in the house of correction, acommon pocky Iade.
And her hands are as bands. After that she hath once entangled their affections, she then bindeth them as prisoners are bound, as Delilah did Sampson, and leadeth them to hell. She in effect saith, as Delilah did. The Philistims be vpon thee Sampson, death and destruction be vpon thee my sweet heart, Prou. 7. 27. Her house is the way to hell, going downe to the chambers of death. She kisseth, shee imbraceth the foole in her armes, she ioyneth hand in hand, she dallieth, she mingleth now and then a discord with her lasciuious concords to whet the affections, but her armes are ropes wherewith the gentle louing beast is bound for the slaughter, and the feete of the spider inwrapping the bee or flie in her copwebs. Yet are these simple ones strongest, and the wisest also in their owne conceits, and so are they led as an Oxe to the slaughter, and

as a foole to the stocks, Prou. 7. 22. This of the illustration.
Who so pleaseth God shall escape from her. Here he amplifieth her deuillish subtilties, by the power and force thereof in the persons tempted. First, negatiuely onely he that feareth God, as did Ioseph, shall escape from her; or he that is good before God in his election, being taken by her shall escape from her though he be, through humane frailtie, for a time deluded by her. For the elect may fall, but neither wholly, nor finally. The seede of grace shall be of force in the end to ouer-power her force. Secondly, affirmatiuely, but the sinner shall be taken by her. He whom God hath forsaken shall be surely taken by her, he shall neuer be able to ouercome the strength of her temptations, but giue place to his fleshly lusts, prouoked and inflamed by her. For she is the rod of Gods indignation vpon the sinner, and her house is the wide gate and broad way that leadeth to hell.


Verse 27.
Behold, this haue I found (saith the Preaecher) counting one by one to finde out the accompt.



Verse 28.
Which yet my soule seeketh, but I finde not: one man among a thousand haue I found, but a woman among all those haue I not found.

A Confirmation of the infinitenesse of the harlots wicked subtilties, and the fooles madnesse, by the impossibility of finding it out. Behold. A note of a wonder, of attention, and serious consideration, of vehement asseueration, and of sensible proofe. For a man will beleeue what hee seeth, or else nothing, behold, consider, thinke well of it, see in your owne experience if it be not true. This haue I found counting one by one to finde out the accompt; That is to say, weighing one thing after another, or diligently searching out, by discourse and obseruation, all the subtilties and deuices of the harlot, and the mischiefes that insue thereof. Which yet my soule seeketh. I still desire to finde out her turning of deuices, her innumerable plots and fetches, her blindings,

her variable trans-forming of her selfe, to worke vpon the affections, as the Musitian turneth his instrument to what tune he pleaseth. But I find not: That is, there is none end of her wickednes. Shee is thespawne and fountaine of all manner of euils: For euery word and gesture is a world of deceits. Her apparrell, and euery part theseof, her motion, countenances, lookes, glaunces, frownes, flickerings, are innumerable. Shee fils the mind full of fancies, and configurateth them as she list, like a deuill. She stirreth vp the flesh into rebellion against the spirit, like a deuill. Omnia spirant delos. Her fingers are snakes, her words drops of poyson, she weepeth with the crocodile louingly and compassionately, her eyes streame out the venime of the cokatrice, she hath Hyaenaes voyce, and deuoureth as Leuiathan. For she bringeth the foole into a paradise of pleasure; but his out-gate at the last is the stocks, pocks, gallowes, hell. Saith the Preacher. A confirmation of the truth of this discourse and obseruation, concerning the infinite wickednesse of these subtle fooles and made fooles, by the testimony of the person searching, discoursing, obseruing: The Preacher, a man of age and experience, and exercised all his life in the studies of wisedome, and knowledge of all things good and euill.
One man of a thousand haue I found. q. d. there is a possibility to find out the subtle deuices and turnings of men that are wise and wil-full in euill, though they giue themselues ouer to delude, and ensnare. For there is some curbe of reason, some small remorse, whereby their wayes are something more plaine, they all deuiate not altogether from the principles of humanity into diabolicall falshood, cruelty, and shamelesnesse, and so some few of them may be found out and comprehended. But a woman among all those haue I not found: there is not one of these witty wicked harlots can be found out, i. their infinite wayes and deuillish deuices to deceiue, circumuent, ensnare, yea, and to spoyle by subtlety and cruelty, is not to be comprehended by the reason of man, because the wicked woman is reasonlesse, remorselesse, sencelesse, dead in sinne, her proceedings, and sudden enterprises

are vnnaturall, and voide of all reason; her spirit is buried and extinguished in her lusts, and so hath Sathan more power ouer her, and more powerfully worketh by her. Therefore her strange deuices, deceits, pleasing allurements, yea, and her cruelties also are like the deuils. Though Ahab had sold himselfe to commit wickednesse, and was euen sicke of his couetous desire, yet such a wicked and sudden plot, whereby to obtaine his desire, neuer entred into his minde, or if into his minde, yet not into his heart, to act it, without further prouocation, as that of Iezabels in murthering innocent Naboth.



Verse 29.
Loe, this onely haue I found, that God hath made man vpright: but they haue sought out many inuentions.

A Generall conclusion of the difficulty of wisedome, concerning foolishnesse and madnesse, and of the infinitenesse thereof, illustrated by the contrary, namely the state and condition of man in his creation. God made man vpright in his vnderstanding, reason, will, affections, but they haue sought out many inuentions, that is to say, the whole nature of man being corrupted, euill cogitations, studies, and deuices proceed from him, partly through ignorance of God and his truth, partly of hardnesse of heart, yea, his vnity with God being dissolued, he is become a beast, his spirit being cast downe into vtter darkenesse, euen the sediment of concupiscence, or the cursed flesh. For all that is in this world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. There is nothing but lust. Therefore there is no truth but lies, and deceits in man, and they are partly brutish or fleshly, and partly deuillish. For he is the Lord of the flesh.




CHAPTER VIII.


Verse 1.
Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? a mans wisedome maketh his face to shine, and the boldnesse of his face shall be changed.

SOtomon in the former Chapter, hauing treated of wisedome, the practise of wisedome, and difficulty thereof, the scope whereof was that we should rest contented with these things that God for the present offereth vs, and also abstaine from all wearisome and curious searching into the workes of God, and euill workes of men, wherein God hath a ruling, and ordering hand; he I say taking occasion by this last instruction or remedy of wisedome, proceedeth on forward to demonstrate the vanity of worldly things, by the instable and vncertaine administration thereof, which is two-fold; the one of man in this Chapter, to the end of verse 13. the o^h^r of God, from the verse 14. to the end of Chapter 9. To which the former is subordinate, and both of them so variable and confused to mans reason, as that no certainty thereof can be defined by any man, but things are swayed no man V. Example of vanities obserued in outward things, but the remedies of those vanities are still (...) at.can tell how, nor whether they ^end. And this is the fist example of vanities obserued in outward things: For here he speaketh of things according to their outward appearance to humane reason.
Of this Chapter there be two parts. The first containeth the dutie of men in ciu^^state, to the end of verse 8. wherein the awfull state it selfe the weth vanity, being caused through the corruption of mans crooked disposition; and much more doth the transgression of his duty herein, bring forth vanity and misery. The second part toucheth the tyrannicall abuse of gouernment, from the verse 8. to the end of the 13. verse. But this he doth by way of instruction, as in

the former Chapter, shewing here also what the practise of wisdome is in ciuill state, to arme a man still farther with this remedy against the miseries and euils that in this regard also may befall him, that so he may obtaine some measurable ioy, contentation, and comfort in this life.
This first verse is an Eulogie, praise or commendation of wisedome, and that by the excellence of wisedome, and the effects thereof, The excellence is set forth by a comparison of equals denyed, figured by a communication, and that againe by an exclamation, or Epiphonema, more significantly or emphatically to expresse the worthinesse of wisedome Who is as the wise? What man of any estate, degree or quality may be compared to a man of wisedome? None, Who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? An explication of his excellence, illustrated, and figured in like manner: Who hath vnderstanding, iudgement and discerning of things, persons, places, times and seasons, as hath beene already said, and is now to be further declared, who hath these, I say, but the wise? Who knoweth what to speake, and when to speake? Who knoweth when, and how to beginne a businesse, to proceede, to surcease, to handle a businesse, to tarry for occasion, to take opportunity, but the wise?
Moreouer wisedome is set forth by the effects. A mans wisedome maketh his face to shine, and the strength of his countenance shall be changed. These words haue relation to the former Chapter, verse 2. 3. 4 5. 6. That is to say, whereas I said before that a man was armed against the vanities of this life, by mourning, anger, sorrow, sadnesse of heart, countenance, behauiour, etc. and that was a point of wisedome; so now contrarily in another case or respect, the same wisedome maketh the countenance of the wise lightsome, amiable, serene, that no token of indignation, griefe, anger, displeasure, may appeare therein, but the frowning seuerity, and sadnesse thereof is changed into the contrarie. The vnderstanding of this point of wisedome appeareth by that which followeth after.




Verse 2.
I counsell thee to keepe the kings commandement, and that in regard of the oath of God.

THe principall proposition of a mans duty towards the higher powers, wherein the practise of wisedome consisteth. The words are an admonition or counsell. I counsell thee to obserue the kings mouth, or word, or to keepe his commandements, according to the intent thereof, as it commeth from his mouth, and is maintained by his power, and that not so much for feare of his power, and punishment, as for the oath sake, in faithfulnesse and conscience, whereby thou art bound to God, and to him vnder God. In old times some of the kings of Iuda caused the people to sweare that they would serue the Lord, and cleaue to him, and renounce idolatry. This loyall obedience is subordinate to our obedience to God, and is our obedience to God, forasmuch as rulers and gouernours are ordained of God, to which therefore we must submit our selues vnder him, and to him in them, and to their lawes being agreeable to his lawes, and grounded on his lawes. For the lawes of God are generall for all nations, and generations of the world, and respect the conformitie of mans nature thereunto, and therefore continue the same for euer; but the lawes of Princes are alterable, and changeable, at their discretion, according to the condition of times and people, but yet by the direction of the lawes of God. This is godly wisedome, godly policie. For the maine intendment, spirit, and life of mans law, is the preseruation and keeping of Gods law, that those that haue not an inward conscience and feare, yea, loue wrought within them by the preaching of the word, or light of naturall principles before the word commeth, that those may haue an outward conscience, to which they shall be inforced by the power of the magistrate, to make brutish men ciuill, and ciuil men religious, if God giue grace, and religious men to continue religious.
And therefore as Saint Paul termeth the Gospell of Christ,

his Gospel, which according to his wisedome and discretion, hee propounded, vsed, and applyed to the best, for the planting and further building vp of the Church; so is Gods Law the Kings Law, and his word the Kings word, as he taketh it into his custody to impose it, and to inforce the obedience thereof vnder God vpon all men, and to punish vnder God the breakers thereof. Est enim medicus reipub. Therefore must wee chearefully, readily, willingly, faithfully obey the same, as if wee had receiued it immediately from the mouth of God.



Verse 3.
Be not hasty to goe out of his sight, stand not in an euill thing, for he doth whatsoeuer pleaseth him.

AN explication or illustration of the former generall instruction, by the contrary practise of folly, here forbidden. Be not hasty to goe out of his sight. If any thing displease thee, because thou thinkest it not to be agreeable to iustice, and right, or some way inconuenient, or some damage thereof to ensue to thy selfe, etc. take heede of pride, and choler, let it not appeare in thy words, countenance, or gesture, which are appearances of a rebellious disposition, yea, seedes of future rebellion; when occasions, and further prouocations shall come thereunto, shew no token of displeasure at all, but in wisedome humble and submit thy selfe, and speake as by good and lawfull leaue thou art permitted, that it may plainely appeare, that thy heart is for the Kings honour, and safety. Therefore doe not vnaduisedly, or in discontent depart out of his presence, nor in such sense or appearance refraine from his presence, lest the disposition of thy heart be suspected to be rather from him, then towards him. For that is the seede, or beginning of a disease, which doubtlesse shall be purged, or with disgrace curbed, or at lest he shall alwayes haue a iealous eye ouer thee, and how doubtfull things may be interpreted in that case, consider. For great euils may come vpon thee causelesse* but yet vnknowne; for he that is in an ill name, is halfe hanged. Howsoeuer, thou hast giuen

aduantage to thine enemies, and laid a way open for them to come betweene him and thee.
To conclude, boast not thy selfe before the King, neither arrogate any thing to thy selfe, be not too wise before him, as though thou wert an instructer or teacher, or haddest a reach beyond him; but let thy wisedome and counsell be so couertly ingested, as that rather it may appeare to him to be his owne, thy words being as it were an occasion to bring it to his minde, so shall he conceiue and vtter, and doe that which thou wouldest haue him, without any impeachment of his honour at all, seeing that that which was thine, is made his owne, and so is his owne counsell and will, not thine. Put not thy selfe forth before the King; Prou. 25. 6. Lest thou carrie the shew of a corriuall, or part stake, but be modest, and humble. And herein Ioab did wisely, when he sent to Dauid to come and take Rabbah himselfe, lest the victory should be imputed to him, but Saul vndeseruedly enuyed Dauid, for the songs that the women sang of his victory of Goliah. Stand not in an euill thing. Stand not in a thing proudly, though thou beest in the right, as it seemeth to thee, neither stand in an euill without pride. For pride marreth a good substance, and euill marreth a good circumstance. If thou stand in an euill thing of errour, it shall bring present disgrace, and if it be of pride, it shall bring present destruction. In this case therefore aske counsell of wisedome, and shee shall giue thee true direction to come out of both, to auoid both. It is discredit enough to erre before a great man, to stand in an errour is disgrace, for it betokeneth folly, but to stand in it in pride, is stubbornnesse and madnesse. For hee doth whatsoeuer pleaseth him. A reason to inforce the former admonitions. It is in vaine, and a point of greatest folly to contend with him that hath power in his owne hands, yea, who onely hath power, which cannot be opposed without iust punishment. For contention controuleth and rebuketh, and then is power no power, and the heart that prepareth it selfe to resistance, intrudeth it selfe into his roome, who hath sole command vnder God: an euill matter indeed may be resisted,

but neither the person, nor place. Well, concerning the cause, there is great wisedome to be vsed, be not thou for thy part too iust, nor too wise, as was said before, lest thy cause be construed to be but a pretence, and the beginning of a disease in the Common-wealth. For the King is the Common-wealths Physitian. By King, we may vnderstand euery man in authority, by going out of his sight, to depart from duty and obedience. It is an Hebrew phrase. Ionah 1. and 3.



Verse 4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power: And who may say vnto him, what doest thou.

A Prossyllogisme or confirmation of the former reason, Where the word, etc. The commandement of a King is with power to haue it done. He may doe very much, be it right or wrong, by the weight of his power, and who may say vnto him, what doest thou? What subiect can oppose himselfe to power, to controule, or expostulate there with? Seeing that he sustaineth the person of the whole Common-wealth vnder God, how can one or a few branches contend against the whole tree, or against the root, or body thereof? The strength and power of all is put into his hands. What then is a priuate man, or a priuate cause, be what it will? A common and dangerous griefe indeed is equiualent, and easily perswadeth a Prince, but it is enough for a priuate man to haue displeased, for who shall stand in for him?



Verse 5.
Who so keepeth the Commandement, shall seele none euill thing: and a wise mans heart discerneth both time and iudgement.

A Reason inforcing the practise of the instruction, verse 2. He that keepeth the commandement, etc. He that sheweth himselfe modest, and obsequious to these, whom in duty he ought to obey, shall be free from many dangers, troubles, and incumbrances, and preuent such calamities, as may not onely

for the present, but afterwards vpon displeasure arise. Howsoeuer a great man will contend for his honour: And he that resisteth, shall make himselfe a prey to euery man. But he that is dutifull and louing, shall auoid all. And a wise mans heart discerneth both time and iudgement. The wise in heart knoweth what is lawfull, what vnlawfull, and how farre. He discerneth when to obey, when to dissemble, how to obey, how farre, and when to be ignorant, when to with-draw himselfe, in what sort, in what measure. The wise hath discerning of the prouidence of God, to which he giueth place, and therefore in all things he tryeth what is the good pleasure of God. These words I take to imply an answer to an obiection, thus. A man sometimes for being too ready, obsequious, and hasty in obeying the commandement of a Prince, may procure to himselfe and others great euils, as Doeg did. For Princes haue their errours, and are tempted to euill as well as other men; and oft times a small errour at the first occasioneth great euils, and who is he that saith or doth not sometimes that, whereof he repenteth him not? Therefore may too quicke obedience displease afterwards, as well as present slacknesse. Againe, a Prince is not himselfe, but all his subiects inclusiuely, euen the whole body or state of the Kingdome: So that in a King there is not onely an vnion of body and spirit, as in all men, but also of his person, and the politike body or state. Now if in commanding he swerue from this vnion, here is the difficulty of wisedome.
Answer. All this is true. But the wise man in obeying obserueth time and iudgement, and so in slacknesse also. Opportunity calleth him forth, iudgement biddeth him speake, and hold his peace. Doeg was destitute of vnderstanding, both in his words and deedes; 1 Sam. 22. 9* 10. But the Kings Sergeants shewed wisedome, verse 17. Ioab answered wisely, 1 Chro. 21. 3. but too harshly; 2 Sam. 19. 5. 6.




Verse 6.
Because to euery purpose there is a time, and iudgement: therefore the misery of man is great vpon him.

AN explication of the answereshewing a reason, why that a wise man obseruing time and iudgement, shall feele none euill, at least so farre forth as by mans wisedome can be auoyded. Because to euery purpose, etc. All things are in the hands of God, and the hearts of Kings also, and his purpose in the least thing is vnchangeable. So that for euery thing there is a time prefined of God, together with a most wise, and right meanes and manner, wherevpon euery euent necessarily dependeth. Now he that obserueth this worke of God, shall auoide all euils. A thing in his kinde good, may by euill vsage be made naught; and a good deede must be ordered by time and iudgement. If time be preuented, it shall be frustrate, yet afterwards, though otherwise effected. For God doth all in time and season, and will haue them cloathed with his owne circumstances also; but the vaine imaginations of man are innumerable, and hee is giuen to take too much vpon him, as though all things were in his hand. But God will make him know that hee is but vaine man. Therefore is the misery of man great vpon him. A consequence or collection of the manifold and great miseries of man, applyed to the disobedient, and ouer-wise: Because there is a due time, and right meanes, and manner in the prouidence of God, for euery thing to his owne glory, which is the ground and guide of good wisedome; therefore is there so much vanity in all counsels, wordes, and workes, and the endlesse troubles and miseries of presumptuous man are occasioned from hence.




Verse 7.
For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him, when it shall be?

A Reason why that the vanitie and miserie of man should be increased by the most wise and good prouidence of God. For he knoweth not what shall be. The good wisedome of God is not the cause of vanities in politicke state, but an occasion, and mans ignorance and malice is the cause. For being depriued of wisedome and iustice through his owne malice, his imaginations are all foolish and vaine, and his follie is vpon him. The deliberation of the wise standeth in comparing things past and to come, but the one is farre off, and the other is deepe, as was said in the former chapter. But foolish men, impatient, and ouer-wise, are altogether ignorant of that which shall be, neither doe they regard whether it shall be, or no, in the prouidence of God, but they haue a prouidence of their owne, a false, coyned, or apish world, to which by their subtilty and violence they thinke to cause all things to incline, and to make Gods prouidence and wisedome to stoupe downe to theirs, perswading themselues that that shall be which they haue purposed, and closely plotted, and deuised the meanes, and manner how it shall be effected. Here is vanity and misery enough. If a man stand in opposition for a good thing, he cannot tell whether that good thing shall be or no. For there are many things good in our vnderstanding, which are not so in the wise prouidence of God. But as it is good, so must it be well, and it cannot be well, but in Gods appointed time, with all circumstances fitting. Who can tell when it shall be? Although this good to be effected, or euill to be reformed, is to be taken in hand because it shall be done in the common iudgement and desire of men, yet who can tell a man when it shall be done, and how it shall be done? If a King himselfe would doe a thing, he must depend on Gods prouidence, and tarry till the appointed season. For

God is the chiefe Pilate of the ship, and the Watch-man of the city. And if a thing shall be done by him, yet the time and manner is vncertaine. Hee must not striue against God, neither must thou being a particular branch, of particular capacitie, striue against the root that beareth thee and all the branches, whose generall good, first, and consequently particulars in their kindes, it respecteth, as thou doest thine owne. Well, seeing that a man either knoweth not what shall be, or else knoweth not how and when it shall be, his contention intangleth himselfe in great errours, troubles, and dangers, and his disobedience, and contention shall be punished, he shall not escape: He must depend vpon the prouidence of God, and opportunitie offered of God, and not stand in an euill thing, nor euilly in a good thing before the higher power.



Verse 8.
There is no man that hath power ouer the spirit to receiue the spirit, neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that warre, neither shall wickednesse deliuer those that are giuen to it.

AN exposition of the miseries that the foolish and rebellious runne into. There is no man hath power ouer the spirit to preserue the spirit, etc. Although that the man of strength and subtiltie verily thinketh through his power, wealth, and subtle plots to effect his wicked designes, and to escape punishment, yet is this but foolishnesse and imprudence, caused of hautinesse of stomacke. For his life is not in his owne hands, neither hath he power to liue, or free himselfe from death by any meanes or deuice, when the king requireth it as a iust reward of his wickednesse.
There is no discharge in that warre. There is no casting of weapons then to ouer-power the kings power, which is to alter and change the state of a kingdome, a great worke of Gods prouidence. For when the king in iustice exacteth his life, the whole burthen of the kingdome presseth him to

death. But if there be iniustice, or rigorous extremitie in the matter, who shall stand vp in defence for him against the king? Who shall take vp armes with him?
Neither shall wickednesse deliuer those that are giuen to it. It is the custome of the wicked to seek to auoid imminent dangers by euill meanes, as Caiaphas and Pilate did, but he that feareth the frost, the snow shall fall vpon him: Many thinke to auoid pouerty with theft, vsurie, couetousnesse, but all in vaine. Neither shall violent nor craftie courses preuaile or helpe a man. It is impossible to breake off the whole politicke body in him. If the king will be auenged of him that hath offended, who shall stand on his part to deliuer him? For who shall expostulate or examine the cause? Who shall bring the King into iudgement? If the case be all mens, and euery mans, there is indeede an equiualence in the matter, for the whole body matcheth the head, and the head is not for it selfe but for the body. Surely it is an hard case, that the head should make all the body sicke. For the disvnion of the head and the body is lamentable. When the body of Israel tooke a new head to it, namely a king, God was displeased. God appointed them Iudges, but they had rather imitate the nations, then stand to Gods ordinance. Againe, afterward, when it tooke another head to it, Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, what was it the better? That was not the salue for their sore. It is one thing to change a state, or an head, and another thing to purge out a corruption, or in time to weare it out. Wickednesse can neuer deliuer those that are giuen to it. Surely if one man, then all men in one body must abide the triall, and the rod of correction. For if they will needs auoid the scourge of God one way, they shall bring a scourge vpon themselues more grieuous to be borne another way. Not the Senate of Rome, but the whole world executed Nero: For he was an enemie of mankinde, and defacer of the image of God, a resolute dissolute tyrant. Hee was no gouernour, but a destroyer, and put himselfe out of office, and left the body of his dominions destitute,

and for his part exposed it to dissolution. So did not Saul, nor Rehoboam, nor Manasses, nor Amon, etc. Wickednesse is not to be reformed by wickednesse in the ordinance of God, but euill is to be ouercome with goodnes saith the Apostle. This of the duties or practise of wisedome in ciuill state, whereby to auoid, at least to mitigate the vanities, troubles, and vexations of this miserable life. Whereupon wee may gather by necessarie consequence what vanities or miseries a man is subiect to in a politicke state. And for a man to liue out of such an estate is misery it selfe: For men should be, as in old times dispersed people haue beene, more vile then beasts, and better is the worst common-wealth then none, and the worst peace then the best warre. All which things argue the necessitie of vanity: And the practise of wisedome, is to mitigate the same, by reducing mankinde to the best of miserable estates, according to the prouidence and ordinance of God, and to abide an inconuenience to auoid a mischiefe. So it is in the body, and so it is in the Common-wealth.



Verse 9.
All this haue I seene, and applyed my heart to euery worke that is done vnder the Sunne: There is a time wherein one man ruleth ouer another, to his owne hurt.

THe second part of the Chapter of tyrannicall abuse of gouernment, or that which is done vainely, against law and right. All this haue I seene. A confirmation of the proposition following by the testimony of his owne experience. All this that I haue spoken, and am to speake of, of people and magistrates in ciuill gouernment, I haue seene, euen with mine eyes, and applyed my heart to euery worke that is done in the world. This is a confirmation of his obseruation, by the meanes and diligence that hee vsed to obtaine the true and exact knowledge of things. For as a mans heart and diligence is, such are his obseruations.

The wise taketh the right course, and findeth out the truth. But the foole bringeth forth superstition, false rules, and like conclusions.
There is a time wherein one ruleth ouer another, to his owne hurt. The proposition of this vanitie. Rule and soueraigntie is desired of all. For herein the pompe and glory of man sheweth forth it selfe most. And great states are commonly counted happie. For in regard of superiority, splendor, and administration of humane things they are tearmed gods. But sometimes this title, state, and power is turned into greatest vanitie. It becommeth vaine, first in respect of those that are gouerned, when a Prince seeketh rather the hurt then the good of the people, as when he falleth to couetousnesse, and oppression, when he exalteth, deiecteth, graceth, disgraceth, according to his owne lust, not regarding the worthinesse, or vnworthinesse of the persons, whereby vertue is put to rebuke and silence, and all manner of vice flourisheth, as weeds in an vncleane or vntilled soyle. Secondly, in respect of the gouernours, whose wickednesse shall be punished with euerlasting ignominie. For as they are most eminent in place and degree, so shall the commendation of their vertues, or the shame of their follie be eminent also and memorable for after times. That a man should raigne ouer others to his owne hurt, is but vanitie, and of other vanities the chiefe.



Verse 10.
And so I saw the wicked buryed, who had come and gone from the place of the Holy, and they were forgotten in the citie, where they had so done: This is also vanity.

AN exposition of the euils, or vanities, that follow tirannie, to wit, buriall and obliuion. And I saw the wicked buried. Their wickednesse profited them nothing, they were as gods, but they died like men, yea, they arrogating the glory of God to themselues, liued like

beasts, and were pitted like beasts, tumbled into the graue, or depriued of the honour of the graue, as was Cononiah and Iezabel, and Ahabs bloud was lickt vp of dogges. There be many examples hereof of Emperours and Popes. Who had come, and gone from the place of the Holy. An illustration of their misery by a comparison or vnlikenesse of their place and dignity, and their end. They went and came with pompe and terrour, to the place of iudgement, they sate in maiestie vpon the seat of iudgement, which is the place of the most holy, they sate on the throne of God, and forgetting themselues to be but men, vsurped the glory of God, as Nabuchadnezzar, Senacherib, Antiochus, Herod, Antichrist did. Therefore so much the more remarkeable was their latter buriall or latter end, the vanitie o^ pompous tyrannie more euident, the pride of the wicked wise more despicable, and their end made a document to the liuing of mans madnesse and miserie. Howsoeuer they are couered with darkenesse, and returne to their dust. Their show, and stirre, and tumult in the world, is but the crackling of thornes vnder a pot, which maketh a noise for a while, and suddenly falleth into ashes, which are cast vpon the dunghill. This is their end. And they were forgotten in the Citie, where they had so done. A second euill or vanitie of tyrants. Whereas in their life time they would be as gods, they died like men, and were soone forgotten as beasts. As soone as they were put into the graue, so soone were they put out of minde and memorie. They were not worthy to be thought on, nor spoken of, but their names rather to be clipt and curtalled, as Ieconiahs, Ier. 22. 24. or cast into the ground to rot and consume with their corpses, and to be made documents to the liuing to their euerlasting shame and contempt. As Princes are the most eminent and excellent in their kinde, I meane of mankinde, so in their degenerating are they most vile, and as salt hauing lost the sauour, most

vaine and miserable. For the earthly felicitie and glory of a Prince, is his honour, which being turned into shame is the greatest miserie. Vertuous Princes shine as starres in the world, their names are alwaies fresh in memorie, their names are honoured and reuerenced in the hearts of men, as though they were yet liuing, and their workes here done in the flesh, increase still to the glory of God in the world. Their influence hath a perpetuall liuely operation. For their worthy acts, their counsels, wise sentences, are rules of instructions and direction to all ages, and peoples. But it is quite contrary with wicked Princes. Therefore in life, in death, after death are they most vaine and miserable.



Verse 11.
Because sentence against an euill worke is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sonnes of men is fully set in them to doe euill.

A Conclusion of these vanities, containing a most heauy sentence or iudgement, wherein: First, he declareth the cause of wicked mens boldnesse in sinne, in this verse. Secondly, he propoundeth the iudgement it selfe in the two next verses. This verse is an exposition of the reason or cause, why that men, both Prince and people are so bold and fearelesse in wickednesse. Their heart is fully set in them to doe euill. They are fully bent on mischiefe, and will presumptuously doe it, why? Because God doth not presently powre downe the fiercenesse of his wrath vpon them. If God should presently send his hangman, the Deuill, to plucke the thiefe by the throat, and flye away to hell with him, hee would be afraid to steale. If he should send his executioner to plucke out the tongue of the swearer, blasphemer and scorner of his word, and so carrie him to hell in the sight of all men, tearing out his bowels, and sprinkling his

bloud in the ayre, he would be afraid to open his mouth, le^t he should offend. Some sinners of all sorts God hath, and doth strike suddenly, as Senacherib, Antiochus, the Sodomites, etc. to be insamples to the liuing. But so long as a sinner hath escaped once, twice, etc. and that he seeth others to liue long, and die in sinne without punishment, or extraordinary vengeance, he is emboldened, and hopeth the best, thinking that God hath forgotten, or seeth not, or that his sinnes are not so great, or that God will not punish him. And thus abusing the patience and long-suffering of God, he continueth and hardeneth himselfe in sinne without remorse. And so will by no meanes be brought to confesse, and acknowledge his errours. But if he doe it, yet will he not amend his wayes, but hoping of pardon, rather adde drunkennesse to thirst.


Verse 12.
Though a sinner doe euill an hundred times, and his dayes be prolonged; yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that feare God, which feare before him.



Verse 13.
But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his dayes, which are as a shadow; because he feareth not before God.

AN exposition of the iudgement it selfe in these two verses, which standeth of a denunciation of punishment on the sinner, and a pronunciation of deliuerance and blessing on the good. Concerning the former. First, it is illustrated by an argument of the diuerse, which is figured by a prolepsis, whereof the obiection is the imagination of the presumptuous sinner, as before. The answer is expressed here. Though a sinner doth euill continually, figured by a synecdoche of the speciall, to wit, a finite number put for an infinite, an hundred times, amplified by a comparison of the lesse, to argue the greater, and his dayes be prolonged in euill, meaning many yeeres, figured by a Climax or gradation

thus. Though a sinner doth euill, and not onely so, but continually, and not onely continually, but long time doth euill, that liueth extraordinarily long to doe euill, yet shall he be punished, figured by an hyperbole, to wit, a meiosis, or liptote, yet shall it not be well with the sinner, illustrated by a commoration, the wicked* neither shall he prolong his dayes, illustrated by a similitude of a shadow; as Iob 8. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
Secondly, this denunciation is explicated by the cause thereof, Because he feareth not before God. The contrary is vnderstood by anantapodosis, but in hypocrisie before men, or for feare of the Sword.
Concerning the later part, to wit, the pronunciation of deliuerance and blessing of the good. But it shall bee well with the good. First, confirmed by the testimony of his owne knowledge. I know, which is further confirmed by the certainty and infallibility thereof, Surely. Which is spoken in opposition to the vaine imaginations of dreaming sinners or slumberers, in the verse afore-going, who imagine that they are good in doing euill, and in doing euill, hope well. Secondly, by the cause, That feare God. Which is illustrated by a distinction or difference of feare, that feare before him. To wit, not in shew, but in truth and deede, behauing themselues alwayes godlily and reuerently, as in his presence. The wicked haue a seruile feare, which causeth them to runne out of his presence, as Adam did, and they labour to expell that feare also, to liue securely in sinne; but by the preaching of the Law, it is maintained, to bridle and compell them by outward force of the ciuill sword. Thus farre of vanity increased by the instability and variablenesse of humane things, in regard of ciuill gouernement.




Verse 14.
There is a vanity which is done vpon the earth, that there be iust men, vnto whom it happeneth according to the worke of the wicked; againe, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the worke of the righteous: I said, that this also is vanity.

HEre Solomon beginneth to declare how vanity is increased, by the vncertainty and variablenesse of the diuine administration of all things, as they appeare to carnall reason, or worldly wisedome, which cannot comprehend the secrets of Gods infinite wisedome, in the gouernment and disposition of all things. For those things are in measure reuealed onely to Gods secret ones. They that feare him, and keepe his Commandements, as Dauid saith, are wiser then the experienst aged, and worldly teachers. But Solomon speaketh here of the vanities of all worldly things in state of corruption, both within man, and without man, not of the gifts and graces of Gods children, to whom all things are sanctified, and greatest miseries turned into comfort, and meanes to felicity, which to the naturall man are sorrow, and beginnings of endlesse sorrow. For though euery carnall man striue to worke a contentation, and felicity out of them, yet shall he neuer doe it, but trouble and sorrow shall be his portion, when he hath striuen with might and maine all his life, when he hath salued, and smeeted, and skinned ouer, and with what gentle deceitfull lenitiues he can, healed himselfe; yet shall all be rotten within, and vanity shall breake out as filth out of an old festered sore skinned ouer, or a rotten egge broken vnder the Hen, at the time of her hatching.
There is a vanitie which is done vpon earth. As if he should say; when I considered th^ condition of men in the world, both the good, and the bad, him that doth his duty in that state of life wherein God had placed him, and him that doth it not, him that feareth before God, and him that casteth

the feare of God; then I saw another thing contrary to mans reason, namely, that there were iust men, who deserued praise and preferment, but they had the reward of the wicked, and there were wicked men who deserued to be disgraced and punished, but they were countenanced in their wickednesse, and by wickednesse obtained preferment. Neither had the iust man a benefactor, nor the wicked man an auenger, the godly man oppressed had no deliuerer, nor the sinner oppressing any that would curbe, and punish him. But contrarily, the vngodly man flourished as a greene bay tree in fauour, prosperity, and honour; wealth and honour was heaped vpon him: on the other side, the godly was wounded with the tongue, despised, and suppressed, and subiect to many afflictions and miseries; his goodnesse was not regarded, his wisedome set at naught, and both enuyed. But vice was set aloft, and the vicious exalted. In which case there seemed to be no prouidence of God in the World, but confusion and chance rather, or a carelesse ouer-sight, things being carried topsie turuy, without all regard. And this was also vanity among many others before specified.



Verse 15:
Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing vnder the Sunne, then to eate, and to drinke, and to be merrie: for that shall abide with him of his labour, the dayes of his life, which God giueth him vnder the Sunne.

A Conclusion and consequence of the right consideration and vse of worldly things. And I commended mirth, etc. Seeing that there is such confusion and disorder in all things, which no man can comprehend, nor redresse; I thought it best for a man to cast off all vnprofitable and endlesse curiosity, which is irkesome and grieuous to the flesh; and to cheere his body, and reioyce his heart with those worldly goods, which God hath by honest labour

and trauell in a lawfull calling bestowed on him, seeing that that is the fruit that onely shall abide with him, and for that end hath God giuen them, which vse onely is to be made of them, and none other, all the dayes that a man liueth here vnder the Sunne.



Verse 16.
When I applyed mine heart to know wisedome, and to see the businesse that is done vpon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night seeth sleepe with his eyes.)
Verse 17.
Then I beheld all the worke of God, that a man cannot find out the worke that is done vnder the Sunne, because though a man labour to seeke it out; yea, further, though a wise man thinke to know it, yet shall he not be able to finde it.

A Confirmation of the former consequence, concerning the right consideration and vse of worldly things, namely, that it is better to reioyce in that which God giueth for the present, then curiously to search out the works of God for further contentment. The reason is drawne from the vnprofitablenesse of such kind of labour, because it is endlesse, and fruitlesse, which he proueth. First, by his owne endeauour, and other mens also, in this verse. Secondly, by the issue or euent thereof, which is a knowledge of the impossibility of that which seemed possible, verse 17.
Concerning the first. In the time when I applied mine heart to know wisedome: When I set mine heart with full resolution to know by diligent search, as God had giuen me extraordinarie gifts and meanes to seeke out this vnknowne wisedome of God in the administration of things here below, and to see the businesse that is done vpon the earth, to see the reason, and to finde out the good of mens great labours, and endlesse toyle in all places and ages, which are full of strife and contention about obtaining some great matter, which in a confused imagination

and hope they ayme at. For also there is that neither day nor night seeth sleepe with his eyes. For there is that striueth by all indeauour of body and minde, night and day; one labouring by practise to obtaine, another by the studies of learning, and learned obseruations to search out that imagined good, and the right meanes to obtaine it, which are the secret wayes and pathes of God, whereof they imagine to themselues a certaine possibilitie: Then I beh^ld all the worke of God, that a man cannot finde out the worke that is done vnder the Sunne. I saw that the way of diuine administration, by which all things, and euery thing is gouerned and ordered, exceeded all apprehension, and capacitie of man. This was the issue and euent of my labour, and exercise of my wisedome in this businesse, euen impossibilitie to finde it out. For, or because though a man labour to seeke it out, yet shall he not finde it. A reason of the impossibilitie. Let a man labour, euen the best Emperike in this kinde, by manifold experience, and by greatest contention, and extention of strength and wit continually to seeke it out, yet shall his labour be all lost. This reason is figured by a Reuocation, or Correction in the next words, Yea, further though a wise man thinke to know it, yet shall be not bee able to finde it. Euery man is an emperike in this kinde, but what shall I speake of the vndergatherers, or aftergatherers, and short witted ones? For let the learned man that hath gifts and meanes, and seperateth himselfe to this diligent search, who is able to comprehend in minde the whole frame of the world, both the conditure and vse of this great engine, that comprehendeth at once the state and course of times from the creation till this present, that can descend from the most vniuersall nature to the most particular, and contrarily, this is the best reader and interpreter of the booke of nature, this is hee that thinketh and hopeth to finde out the workes of God; let this man I say, doe what he can, yet

shall he not be able to finde it, but be tossed about in a Labyrinth, or as a way-faring man in an vnknowne desart. If a man cannot define any thing because the formes of things are vnknowne, if he know not the creatures themselues, ab imo ad summum, neither shall he know the wisedome of God in the vse of them. The world is Gods engine by which he worketh, he that cannot know the engine, cannot know the worke that may be done with it. The wisedome of God in the making and vsing of this engine, is infinite, constant, certaine, and vnchangeable, not to be comprehended of that which is finite, imperfect, and changeable. Therefore there is nothing better then to reioyce in that which God giueth, with contentment, in the feare of God. This hath hee giuen vs, the rest hath he reserued to himselfe. It is enough for the seruant to doe his masters will, to vnderstand what hee reuealeth to him, and commandeth, not to inquire into his secrets, and demaund reasons. For then shall hee be no longer a seruaut, but his masters fellow, and equall. But God will haue no equals nor fellowes, neither can he.




CHAPTER IX.


Verse 1.
For all this I considered in my heart, euen to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their workes are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either loue, or hatred, by all that is about him.

THis Chapter is an explication of the vanity aforesaid, verse 14. chap. 8. increased by the instabilitie, and variablenesse of diuine administration, or aeconomie, as it seemeth to carnall reason, or outward appearance. And also of the consequence of the right consideration and vse of worldly things, verse 15. The maine substance and scope is, that the diuine gouernement both in ciuill and naturall policie, both of man and all things with man, is secret and vnknowne to man, that there seemeth to be nothing in the world but at axie and anomie, disorder and confusion, which plainely euinceth that no man can by any endeauour or wisedome, worke or finde out any good to himselfe by or in them. Which thing some men vainely labour to doe. Others againe, vpon this consideration take occasion to be dissolute, and Epicurish beasts. But the maine intent of the holy Ghost, is to teach men to quiet their hearts in contentment with their lot, and to seeke for the chiefe good elsewhere, euen in feare and obedience, chap. 12. 13. Of which good euery state and condition of life is partaker (else could it not be the chiefe good) because all worldly things are but subseruant to this good, God hauing turned the curse into a blessing to them that beleeue, and is therefore subseruant to this good also. So that the poorest may enioy it as well as the richest, and the greatest Monarch in the world.

This explication is made by an induction of particular examples in this chapter, The first is of the euent of all persons, to the verse 7. The second is of the euent of the deedes and endeauours of men, verse 7. 8. 9. 10. The third is of the euent of counsell and wisedome, verse 13. to the end.
For all this I considered in my heart, euen to declare all this. This is the first example of induction. For] is here a note of a conclusion. q. d. Whereas I said before that to some iust men it happened according to the deedes of the wicked, and contrarily, which is confusion, disorder, and vanitie: And that therefore it is the best thing for a man to eate, drinke, and to be merry, which thing onely is certaine to him, because no man can finde out the worke that is done vnder the Sunne, as I my selfe and many others also haue found by much study and experience; therefore euen for this cause haue I let that curious and vaine search alone, and considered another thing in mine heart, to which euen by common obseruation daily before mine eyes I was inforced, namely to vnderstand all this perfectly, and manifestly to declare all this, as followeth, that the righteous, and the wise, and their workes, and whatsoeuer befalleth them, as also contrarily, the wicked, the foolish, and their wicked follies, etc. Which words are vnderstood by anantapodosis, or ellipsis, are in the hand of God, set apart from the power, disposition and will of man, and gouerned by a secret way, vnknowne to man, and by mans wisedome vnsearcheable. No man knoweth loue or hatred of all that is before them. Henee it is that no man is able to determine of Gods loue or hatred by any thing subiect to man, whether good, or euill things, perfections or defects, whether naturall gifts of mind and body, or outward possessions, or any thing that occurreth to the senses and minde of the naturall man. Therefore it must needes be a vaine labour, and fruitlesse, studie to seeke for any profit, contentation or happinesse, in any

thing by the endeauour of mans wisedome here vnder the Sunne. Yet is euery man of the earth thus vaine, neither can he be otherwise.



Verse 2.
All things come alike to all: there is one euent to the righteous, and to the wicked, to the good, and to the cleane, and to the vncleane, to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.

A Confirmation. For all things come alike to all, that is to say* wit, and simplicity; beauty* and deformity; health, and sicknesse; soundnesse, and diseases; wealth, and pouerty; strength, and weaknesse; abundance, and want; long life, and vntimely death; ioy, and sorrow; honour, and ignominie: finally, all kindes of prosperities and aduersities, happinesses and miseries in this World happen to all, as well to the iust as to the wicked, and contrarily. All men are subiect to the same things, both the good and the cleane, and the filthy that is polluted with all kindes of vices, hee that sacrificeth (a Synecdoche of the speciall) hee that worshippeth God, and diligently exerciseth himselfe in all Christian duties, and he that is a contemner of Religion, a scorner of deuotion, a mocker of the godly, and their liues; there is the same condition of life, and fruition of earthly things, both to the good man, and to the sinner, to him that sweareth without reuerence of God, and maketh no conscience of periury, as to him that dreadeth to vse lightly the name of God in his mouth, much more for to sweare falsly, but maketh conscience both of his deedes and words.




Verse 3.
This is an euill among all things that are done vnder the Sunne, that there is one event vnto all: yea also the heart of the sonnes of men is full of euill, and madnesse is in their heart while they liue, and after that they go to the dead.

AN amplification of the former vanitie by a comparison of all other euills or vanities, figured by an Exclamation or Indignation. This is of all vanities the chiefest, and most grieuous to mans reason, yet not to be thought on with patience, that it should be done to the wicked as to the good* that of men so much differing, as light from darkenesse, heauen from hell, there should be made no difference in the dispensation of worldly things, as though there were neither wisdome nor iustice in the world but plaine chance and blinde fortune seruing all alike. Yea also the heart of the sonnes of men is full of euill, etc. A continuation of the comparison figured by a Climax or gradation. As it is a most vaine and grieuous thing, that the same euent should be to all men, so doth this aggrauate their miserie, that the hearts of men all the time of their life, are full of griefe, sorrow, wrath, enuy, angu sh, ^eare, despaire, euen a lumpe of miseries, vexing and tormenting the whole body, and breaking forth into incurable madnesses and follies, to the disquieting and vexing one of another; and then after all, to be buried and ro^te in the earth, and to consume i^t^ slime and dust, as though they neuer were, or had any being in the world. This is a thing most vaine and grieuous to bee thought, that of a vaine life there should be a more vaine end, yea* that life and death should be nothing but a crackling nothing, sodainely vanishing.



Vers. 4.
For to him that is ioyned to all the liuing, there is hope: for a liuing Dogge is better then a dead Lion.

A Reason, why that death augmenteth this grieuous vanitie. For to him that is ioyned to all the liuing* etc. The Hebrew is, Ki mi a sher jebuchar, quia vter sit, qui eligatur,

First, because whether of them he be that is chosen, that is to say, whether the iust or the vniust, he that maketh conscience of his wayes, or he that liueth in his lusts be approued of thee, whose wayes and maner of life thou best likest, and most followest; when he is dead there is an end of all, and vse of all both good and euill. But to him that is yet remayning amongst the liuing, there is euer still some pleasing hope, and delightfull expectation of better things to the contentation of a mans minde. As he hath a present fruition of good things, so hath hee still an hope of more, and if of euill things, as crosses and troubles, dabit Deus his quoque finem, they shall haue an end, and the remembrance of euills past, shall affect the minde in time to come, I know not with what delight. The remembrance and relation of things past, euen of troubles and dangers delight the aged, as a desire of hearing, seeing, and looking into the world tickleth the young that are vnexperienced. For the world promiseth to the young man great matters, it putteth them in great and proude hopes, but it performeth I know not what. ^t beateth him home that will needes rauen and range. He therefore that hath euaded out of many dangers and euills, is better then he that knoweth not the difference. Therefore to the liuing there is still a feeding hope of a better condition in this inexhaust treasurehouse of the variable world replenished with innumerable blessings and benefits of all sorts.
For a liuing Dogge is better than a dead Lion. The former speach is figured heere by a prouerbiall sentence. He that is but poore and of meane estate, is better then the man of authoritie, strength, wealth, and honour that is dead, who hath lost the societie of the liuing, the good things and pleasures of this life (whatsoeuer they be, or howsoeuer mixed) and is cut off from all hopes, and ioyfull complacence in the fruition of things desired.




Verse 5.
For the liuing know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither haue they any more a reward; for the memorie of them is forgotten.

A Reason why that the poore man liuing is better then the corpse of the noble. For the liuing know that they shall die. They know that they cannot alwayes liue here, but while they liue, they enioy the blessings of God here, which all men do desire, and in hope and possibilitie the poore man yet liuing enioyeth all things. For God sheweth forth many examples of exalting and humbling, that the meanest may hope, and the greatest may feare. For they rise and fall by him, not by themselues* The carelesse oft times attaineth to great wealth, and the wrestling niggard commeth to pouertie, but neither of them can describe how. Likewise, the remembrance of death doth put them in mind of their end, and their account, to refraine from euill, and to prepare themselues to die in ioy and comfort, by purging their hearts and consciences more and more through daily renouation of faith and repentance. For which cause a man at the point of death desireth to liue but one houre longer, thinking himselfe for that, better then him that is dead alreadie; the lifting vp of his heart and hands once more, giueth great contentment to him: and if after that he is dead in the iudgement of his friends, he reuiue againe but to looke vp on them, and to speake two or three words, it giueth them wonderfull satisfaction. But the dead is depriued of all. There is no knowledge of any thing in the graue, no more hope, no repentance.
Neither haue they any more a reward. They can adde nothing further to themselues in any respect, neither can any good thing more be hoped for, being cut off from all possibilities. Againe, as the time of labour is here, so is the meanes of reward here: as he here worketh, so shall his reward be increased: as he soweth, so shall he reape in this world, and in the world to come.
For the memorie of them is forgotten. Whatsoeuer they haue said and done here, though they haue striuen to draw all eyes and eares after them alone, yet now is there not any thought of them, but they are as though they had neuer bene borne into the world, in respect of the liuing. Both their future hopes, and their glorie past is vanished away, as smoake in the aire, as the bodie into dust, and dust into the winde, which disperseth it all ouer the earth and the waters.



Verse 6.
Also their loue* and their hatred, and their enuie is n^w perished: neither haue they any more a portion for euer in any thing that is vnder the Sunne.

AN amplification by an enumeration of some particulars. Also their loue and their hatred, etc. These words are to be taken actiuely, whether in the good or euill sence, thus: Their loues, kindnesses, liberalities one towards another, their feastings and reioycings one with another, etc. for which they were praised and extolled of men here, is perished. Their hatred, opposition, contention, reuenge, their glorie in ouerthrowing and vanquishing their aduersaries, which also is a blessing promised to the godly, though the godly glorie not herein carnally, as the wicked do, but as the wicked are enemies first to the Lord, and to them for the Lord. In this sence the Saints in heauen reioyce at the vengeance of the wicked which persecute he Church, and waite for the day of vengeance, as men reioyce when their grounds are purged of weeds and serpents; all this, I say, is now perished. Their enuie also, emulation and ambition, contention of honour and preferment, is now perished.
Neither haue they any more a portion for euer* etc. They are now no longer partakers of earthly things, that are so much desired and hoped of the liuing, no fruite of any facultie, or possession redoundeth to them, they haue no part, no footing here any longer, but are swallowed vp of the graue, the pit hath shut her mouth vpon them; so that their paths

and wayes of life are closed vp as the paths of a ship in the waters and of a bird or arrow in the aire. The intent of the holy Ghost in all these things, is to shew the vanitie of life and death; to crucifie the world to vs, and vs to the world, that we might liue in the Lord, and not to giue way to dissolute, carelesse, epicurish liuing, as the wicked doe interprete all things according to their lusts, and vse them to their damnation, which by words and deeds they call vnto them.



Verse 7.
Go thy way, eate thy bread with ioy, and drinke thy wine with a merrie heart: for God now accepteth thy workes.

THese next foure verses are an explication of the consequence, vers. 15. chap. 8 by an enumeration or an hypotyposis of the vse of worldly things, by way of an exhortation or permission of their comfortable and ioyfull vse, whereof many make some doubt; as man is most apt to place a deuotion and conscience in things indifferent, with neglect of that which is necessarie. Our owne things please vs best, but other mens we see a farre off, and are coldly affected. So we deale with God. But the kingdome of God standeth not in meates, drinkes, wedlocks, etc. which are worldly and transitorie things, but in a new creature. For no ordinance of God is to be disanulled. But if we be renewed, all things shall become holy to vs. For to the pure, all things are pure and holy: otherwise, the best things are vncleane to vs, and defiled by vs. We are not vnder the bondage of any thing, but all things are subseruant to vs, and lawfull, except in case of offence. Go thy way. The first particular is of the comfortable vse of meates and drinkes. Giue ouer thy carefull and vnprofitable studies, and idle speculations, leaue secret things to the Lord; be content with that which he giueth by lawfull meanes in a lawfull calling; desire not other mens labours, pled not in difficult, hard and vneuen by-paths with griefe and greedie desire, but eate thy bread with ioy, liue comfortably of that

which thou hast; cast thy care vpon God. Drinke thy wine with a merrie heart: Let faith and peace of conscience expell the bitternesse of distrust and feare; the arme of the Lord is not shortened, nor his hand emptied; thy care can neither adde nor diminish: the Lord is mercifull, not cruell to leaue his seruants; he is bountifull, not niggardly; if he tarrie long, it is but to trie thee. Though he kill thee, as Iob saith, yet beleeue in him. Hope in God, saith Dauid, doe good^, dwell in the land, and thou shalt be fed. Eate and drinke therefore with an hopefull heart, comfort thy bodie with thy goods, For God accepteth thy workes. Because thou art not carefull, distrustfull, fearfull, not leaning to thine owne wisedome, not relying on thine owne prouidence, nor arrogating the gift of God to thy selfe, and blessing thy selfe as infidels doe, therefore doth God accept thy workes, for he accepteth thy person, and hath taken thee into his protection and wardship: therefore eate with ioy, drinke with mirth, liue in comfort. Obserue here, that first we must please God by faith in him, which is his owne gift and worke. Secondly, when he is thus pleased, then doe our persons please him, we are his, and accepted of him in his Sonne, in whom we beleeue. Thirdly, when he accepteth our persons, then do our workes please him, both religious exercises, and externall workes, as eating, drinking, feasting, reioycing, apparelling, marrying, etc. For God is glorified in all things by his children. For they respect the glorie of God their maine end, not the satisfying of the flesh in the affections and lusts thereof. The feasts of Abraham and Iobs children were accepted of God: the royall attire of Solomon, Dauid, Hester, pleased the Lord, because their persons pleased him. The Wedding dinner of the Iewes pleased Christ, Ioh. 2. 2. The labour of the husbandman and tradesman: the honest care of euery housholder, the worke of euery seruant pleaseth him. Faith and a good conscience remoueth away the curse from vs, and then are all things blessed to vs.




Verse 8.
Let thy garments be alwayes white, and let thy head lacke no oyntment.

THe second particular is of Apparrell; Let thy garments, etc. As God hath crcated all things for the seruice and vse of man, aswel for satiety delight, and pleasure, as for necessitie, not onely skinnes of beasts, haire and wooll for cloathing, but also silkes, and fine linnen for elegance, and ornament, and hath giuen an vnderstanding heart to man to find out the skill and knowledge of converting them to a mans comfortable vse; he may also vse the same according to the dignity of his person, yet in modestie and sobrietie, in carelesse comelinesse, to shew forth reuerend gravitie, not contemptible leuitie, as phantasticall apishnesse is now in most people ridiculous, making themselues spectacles of folly one to another, as though the soule were made for the apparrell, and the apparrell, to shew forth the lust of the body, which is in these dayes like the fire of hell, deuouring vp all things, firing men and women of all sorts out of their possessions, and bringing many into desperation, their pompous shewes ending in ignominie, and making them by-words to the basest people.
Let thy head want no oyntment. In those countries there are many aromaticall plants, and much vse of oyntments which are in those places most precious, and delicious, vsed for the refreshing of the spirits with the fragrant odours thereof. The vse hereof our Sauiour Christ approued in receiuing the oyntment brought him, and commending the woman for it. Iohn 12. 3. 7. and else-where. By oyntment, is meant all kindes of sents and perfumes, and whatsoeuer else for the comfort and delight of all the sences, all precious and pleasant things dainties, and nouelties, vsed not for prouocations to lust, or of pride, but for the ornament of the soules pallace, that she may more cheerefully execute her functions therein.
Lastly, white garments and oyntments signifie ioyfull and comfortable liuing in the right vse of the fruit of faith, and peace of conscience.




Verse 9.
Liue ioyfully with the wife, whom thou louest all the dayes of the life of thy vanitie, which he hath giuen thee vuder the Sunne, all the dayes of thy vanitie: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest vnder the Sunne.

A Third particular, is of wedlocke, or house-keeping. Liue ioyfully, etc. As heretofore he hath shewed, that wisedome, in respect of worldly goods, is the gift of God to extenuate the miseries of this vaine life, and that both in their getting and spending; and also, that fellowship and community of life in mutuall duties, is a great meanes also; so heere he sheweth, that in aeconomie or wedlocke, coniugall loue and societie is a means also, and the gift of God, Prouerbs 18. 22. whereby many miseries in house-keeping, and vexations from without also, are auoyded or mittigated.
Liue ioyfully, etc. This he speaketh not as though euery thing in wedlocke were lawfull, seeing that it serueth specialy for the procreation of children for the supply of Gods Church, and accomplishment of the number of the Elect: and also to auoyd fornication, not for brutishnesse, and lasciuiousnesse, after the manner of the heathen, and Epicures, who pamper their bodies by all meanes, and deuices for none other ends. To this end the Apostle, Rom. 13. 13. exhorts Christians to liue honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkennesse, nor yet in chambering and wantonnesse, for marriage is honourable, Hebr. 13. 4. and the lawfull vse of Matrimony in these words, and the bed vndefiled. Which words are opposed to whooredome, and adulterie, whether it be with another, or a mans owne wife, the affections and imagination being fixed on anothers. To bee briefe, his meaning is, that the continuance of coniugall amity, or first vnion of affections, which is the inward bond of matrimony, is a great meanes to auoyde much vanity, which ariseth of the violating of this vnion. This ioyfull liuing is maintained by giuing due beneuolence, 1, Corinth. 7. 3. and

Gen. 26. 8. which text let a man interprete as he pleaseth, I thinke that in all things for mans vse, there is not onely a meere necessitie giuen of God, but also a satietie permitted, not saturitie, which in this kind is salacitie and proteruious behauionr. For if we must marrie in the Lord, as the Apostle there teacheth, then we must liue in the Lord, euen keepe our bodies vndefiled members of Christs bodie, else we cannot glorifie him in bodie and spirit, 1. Cor. 6. 20. To conclude, to weigh this and all things moderately and indifferently by wisedome, let vs note what the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 10. 13. There hath no tentation taken you, but such as appertaineth to man. Yet his meaning is withall, that we should aime at perfection in all things. Though God beare with our frailties and impersections, yet we must not make a stand for all that, much lesse grow remisse, but rather receiue comfort thereby, and thereupon encouragement in the way to perfection.
Whom thou louest. Whom thou hast and doest sympathize and affect aboue all other women. Loue is the procreant and conseruant cause of this comfortable liuing. What this loue is, the Apostle setteth forth by a comparison of Christs loue towards his Church, which is also illustrated by the Equall, he loued his Church as himselfe, euen so must men loue their wiues, viz. as their owne bodies, Eph. 5. 25. etc. And this shalt thou doe, if thou delightest in her loue, (in the Lord) Prou. 5. 19. as the louing Hind and pleasant Roe loue their mates, if thou beest faithfull in regard of bodie and goods, that is, if thou liuest onely to her, and for her in the Lord; if thou prouidest for her, and maintainest her without fraud, according to thy estate; if thou passest by her infirmities, honouring her as the weaker vessell, and kindly entertainest her friends for her sake.
All the dayes. q. d. Loue one another, and liue comfortably together as long as ye liue together, as well in old age as in the flower of youth, as well in the fading as freshnesse of beautie. In that he saith, All the dayes, it is euident, that he meanes not Epicurish loue (as some thinke

he speakes all here in the person of the Epicure) which proceedeth from lust onely, and is grounded on outward beautie and meere fleshly allurements, and vanish away with beautie, and that with youth.
Of thy most vaine life. This he often repeateth to curbe and draw backe roauing fancies and groundlesse imaginations of I know not what happie contentation in this life, which withhold a man from present duties, and present comfortable vse of things, and constancie, tormenting himselfe with discontentment and vnsetlednesse, and so wants or fully enioyes not such comforts or mitigations of vanitie, as here by sobrietie of wisedome may be had.
Which he hath giuen thee vnder the Sunne. That is, which wife God hath giuen thee. A good wife is the gift of God, and of worldly comforts the chiefest, Prou. 18. ^2. An euill wife is a plague and scourge giuen of God to the wicked.
All the dayes) that thou shouldst liue with her in godly loue and honestie, in comfortable societie, as long as thou liuest. Of thy vanitie) of this miserable life, which to mitigate, God hath ordained this coniugall societie, as a chiefe remedie among others.
For that is thy portion. An argument of confirmation. As he said before, that the comfortable vse of worldly goods gotten with great labour, was the gift of God, or remedie to cheere the bodie in the vanitie thereof, Chap. 3. 13 and 5. 18. so here he saith, that the ioyfull, cheerfull, and comfortable vse of wedlocke in the feare of God, is a mans portion, euen the chiefest and best good of outward goods, which who so wants, he can haue no ioy in any thing. For if in ripenesse of age he want this coniugall comfort, he is but halfe himselfe, solitarie and mournefull. But if he be fellowed with a wicked woman, then he is euen no man, and wearie of life.
In this life. Many men imagine to themselues a more complete and full portion then this, whereof they make this to be but a part, but yet it is the principall part, and remaineth to man when other faile. For whether a man be

in prosperitie or aduersitie, in sicknesse or health, this is a liuing comfort, euen a speciall remedie, and vniuersall remedie appliable to him in euery state. The faithfulnesse of Ouids wife was an onely and speciall comfort to him in his banishment, though she was at Rome, and he in Pontus, as diuers of his Epistles make manifest.
And in thy labour, which thou takest vnder the Sunne. He saith not, this is the fruite or end of thy labour, which is the practise or life of swinish Epicures, whose labours are onely for bodily pleasures* and pleasure their whole felicitie; but in thy labour, in all thy trauels, troubles, sorrowes, sufferings, this is a remedie, reliefe, succour, when a man hath a prudent, faithfull, and louing fellow to compassionate and communicate with him in euery state and condition of life.



Verse 10.
Whatsoeuer thine hand findeth to do, do it with thy might: for there is no worke, nor deuice, nor knowledge, nor wisedome in the graue, whither thou goest.

A Fourth particular of reioycing, is sedulitie or diligence in a mans vocation, both in the workes of our Christian calling, and of our particular calling. Whatsoeuer thine hand findeth to do* etc. God hath giuen a gift or talent to euery man to be exercised therein, God layeth some work or businesse before euery one: worke is prouided for him against his comming into the world: Ars long a, vita breuis: Skill, knowledge or art is long or difficult, businesse is great, but life is short and sickly, time hasteth, and is irreuocable. Therefore performe thy dutie towards God, towards thy neighbours, towards thy selfe, without delay, while time and opportunitie lasteth: for God hath appointed a conuenient season for euery thing, euen the least thing. Thou hast the gift, the worke, the time, the opportunitie and season from him, obserue and do thereafter. Then shall euery thing go well with thee, thou shalt preuent manifold crosses and hinderances, thou shalt haue a quiet and peaceable conscience, and auoide this vanitie, euen the penaltie of idlenesse, which is pouertie and sorrow, and many

euills. For whereinsoeuer we sinne, therein shall we be punished; That is Gods vnchangeable decree. Therefore sayth Salomon, the strong man attayneth to riches, and so to what comforts riches may bring. Surely, whatsoeuer befalleth a man, if it be not through his owne idlenesse and follie, it is not grieuous, but he taketh it as from the hand of God, and is well contented, being for his good some way, and for Gods glory, as the example of Iob testifieth. Doubtlesse this was a great comfort to Iob in his extreamitie, euen the conscience of his innocencie, sinceritie and godly indeuors at all times. This sustained him against the temptations of Satan, of his kinsfolkes, and his wife, for at this time he was throughly tried, his comfort was onely in God, and his good conscience.
For there is no worke, nor deuice, etc. A confirmation. The time of working is in this life, it ceaseth in the graue. Heere may a man reioyce in his worke, but when the night cometh, a man leaueth working, and receiueth his wages; no man shall be benefited by thy workes, wisedome, skill, or counsell, when thou art dead, neyther canst thou praise God, nor glorifie him in the graue. For here is the time of vsing, and bestowing those gifts that God hath giuen for his glorie in this life. The soule must be rewarded according to her workes done in the body, and by the body; but when the body is dead, the soule can worke no more for a reward. For her instrument wherewith she worketh, is taken away for euer. If the soule glorifie not God with the body and bodily things (heare this yee Church-robbers, Bels, Iezebels^) i^ shall neuer glorifie him in heauens, but descend to him that is Lord of the flesh and death. For the prophane and vncleane can haue no fellowship with the Saints in glorie, because they are no members of Christ his mysticall body, they are in their menstruous cloth, in their bloud, Ezeoh. 16.



Verse 11.
I returned and sawe vnder the Sunne, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battell to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of vnderstanding*

nor yet fauour to men of skill, but time and chance happeneth to them all.

THE second example of induction of the euent of the deedes and indeuours of men, euincing that nothing is in our power, but all is in the hand of God, Verse 11. 1^. I returned.) whereas I said before, that sedulitie and diligence is a meanes to auoyde or mitigate many vanities and euills, whereby to obtaine some contentation of minde in this vaine life* it is not so to be vnderstood as that a man can by his owne indeuour obtaine it, neyther yet is hee to place any confidence in his gift or diligence, for they shall be either fruitfull or fruitlesse to him* as pleaseth God. For this is certaine that there is no certainetie in any thing, that man might feare God, and onely depend on him, and know that whatsoeuer he is, or hath, it is Gods* and in Gods disposing to his owne glorie, who will do with his vessells what pleaseth him, he formeth thee, and vseth thee in his wisedome according to his owne will; but the vaine imaginations of man are infinite. I returned and saw vnder the Sunne. A confirmation of that which followeth by the testimony of his owne obseruation. That the race is not to the swift, etc. This haue I considered, that the vse of those faculties of body and minde, which God hath bestowed on man, eyther in his birth, or by his industry, is not in mans power. For the race is not to the swift, nor battell to the strong Againe, if a man being indued with these faculties, doth also vse them, and vse them well; yet the profite and fruit thereof is not in the power of him that vseth them rightly. For doe we not see that bread is sometimes wanting to the wise, money, meate, drinke, and apparrell to the learned, wealth to the prudent and men of vnderstanding fauour and grace to men of learning and skill? Therfore both the facultie and gift it selfe, the exercise of the gift and the benefit of the exercise is to be referred to God, who is the author and disposer of all gifts and euents. Surely, this seemeth to be a great vanitie and grieuous to carnall reason, that the swift should loose the benefit of the race, and

another that sitteth still receiue it; that the strong man. should loose the reward of the battel, and the wise man who procureth much good vnto others, should want necessary foode and payment; that the prudent and man of counsell, by whom publique and priuate states are settled, vpheld, and maintained, should want riches, and that men of skill, should want good will and fauour. Againe, the swiftest man sometimes in running, looseth the race, the strong armie looseth the battell. So Abraham with his three hundred seruants put foure Kings to flight, Genes. 14. Gedeon with the found of Trumpets murdered the hoste of the Madianites, Iudges 7. Dauid slew the Grant Goliah, 1. King. 17. Leonidas with sixe hundred men massacred fiue hundred thousand of Xerxes hoste. Tomyris Queene of Scythia, deuouted vp the whole hoste of Cyrus, whose force Babylon could not resist. So Iudas Maccabeus cut downe his strong enemies on euery side. What should I speake of the Prophets of Christ, and the Apostles the lights and life of the world? What was the reward of their wisedome, their gifts and labours? And why? Because dogges must haue meate howsoeuer, gluttons must surcharge their stomacks, whores must ^ide in coaches, and fare deliciously, and goe sumptuously; scuballs, that doe nothing but deuise how to grace a lustfull corps are thought worthy of any thing, of all they haue, be it neuer so much. But Christ in his Ministers, as he was in his owne person, must be exposed to derision and contempt; any thing is enough for a Priest, they must want necessaries in their greatest labours, as the Israelites did in Egypt. But Bel* and Iezebel, and lay Impropriators aresuperfluous enough; but wherein they sinne, therein shall they be punished, let all men obserue how they prosper, or whether he depriue them of his grace, at least of continuance of temporall blessings, as they with-hold his coate from him, and share it among them. Let, I say, euery man of wisdome note this, and then tell me how many escape vengeance. Ministers must worke on the weeke day for necessary food (to make their title of Gentlemen ridiculous) and earne with great pains the other halfe of their gowne, if they can, and

spend their strength on the Sabbath day, while greedy Bel is all for his body, to make it fat and shining, and Iezebel for the shew: yet they sit with bookes in their hands, as in Ezechiels time, they can reade and talke to pride in their wits, their talking is but the crackling of thornes vnder a pot. For the one taketh away the Ministers food to giue it to dogs, and feed horses, and for voluptuous liuing; and the other plucks off his coate, to further the beautifying of a carrion-Idoll. But if he will please Bel, and admire Iezebel, (for she lookes about to see who lookes on her) then he shall be allowed somewhat, the crummes vnder their table, a dinner or a supper, to see and praise their finenesse, and to be blinded with Marthaes courtesie. Bel and Iezebel are the moderators and censurers of his Sermons, if the style and phrase be right, (that is, nothing to the purpose) the good seruant shall enter into the ioy of his maister and mistresse. Stat fixum, the corpse is the Idoll that now must be adored and glorified. The Priest must stoupe and yeeld his necke: why? because the Frier domineered. Is there no difference betweene staring and starke mad? Stulti dum vitant vitia in contraria currunt, and tandem coincidunt. As good the Frier, as the Atheist: as good Baal still, as the Calues of Bethel, and Bel: as good the better extreame, as the worse, if we must needs be in extreames: as good and better Superstition then Atheisme. If we beate the diuell out at the fore doore, and let him in at the backe doore, what are we the better? There must be a Iudas and an Antichrist, euen so must there be an Atheist that can vse the Scripture politickly, or Turklike frame a religion and conscience to himselfe, according to his lusts out of all opinions. For that he will bee a Papist, for this a Puritan, for that a Brownist, for this an Anabaptist, or Familist, etc. and for all a foole and a beast.
But time and chance commeth to them all. The time of rising, falling, aduancement, deiection, fauour, disgrace, plentie, scarcitie, etc come to all, euen to the wisest and most prouident, according to the appointment of God in his prouidence, whose wayes and meanes of effecting his

workes are vnsearchable. The old world knew not their time of visitation. Sodome knew not her time, Ierusalem knew not her time, Babylon knew not her time, the Whore of Babylon knoweth not her time till she be troden vnder foote as dung, neither shall the last end of the world know their time. And as it is in visitations and indgements, so is it also in mercies and deliuerances, that men might hereby be taught to feare God, and depend wholly on him.
And chance commeth to them all. It is chance in respect of vs, who are ignorant of causes, and improuident; not in respect of God, who doth all his workes in wisedome, according to the eternall counsell of his will, and from whom no secret is hid, himselfe being the orderer euen of all euill secrets to his owne glory and good of his elect. Therefore to God there is nothing chancefull or sudden, but to vs all things are vncertaine, and chance bringeth to passe such effects, as by all our owne strength and wisedome could neuer haue bene effected; yea oft times what we by our silly wisedome and insufficient strength are plodding about, chance notably effecteth. Yet are we not to despise the meanes and gifts of God, no more then the husbandman neglecteth the times, tooles and meanes of earing and reaping. But we are hereby taught, that although a man hath all gifts and meanes, yet he must commit the blessing and successe thereof to God.



Verse 12.
For man also knoweth not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an euill net, and as the birds that are caught in the snares, so are the sons of men snared in an euill time, when it falleth suddenly vpon them.

A Confirmation or reason of the former example of induction. For man also knoweth not his time. These words seeme to be a comparison from the equals. Man is so farre from hauing any power or command of himselfe in the things aforesaid, that he knoweth not what shall happen to him in any time, day, or houre, no more then other creatures. This he illustrateth by a similitude, the protasis

or proposition whereof is double: As the fishes are taken in an euill net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, the apodosis or redition: So are the sonnes of men snared in an euill time. The fishes in their kinds are wise and prouident, suspitious and cautelous, dreading many euils, and auoiding many dangers. For as they are cunning to insnare and deuoure one another, so are they subtill to preuent euils, and defend themselues, and to prouide and gather foode for the preseruation of their kinde. The like may bee also saide of birds. But whereas all things are vnder the power and dominion of man, created for his seruice, and therefore hath also vnderstanding and knowledge giuen him to serue himselfe of the creatures, though they be high in the aire aboue him, and deepe in the waters beneath him, and farre in the forrest from him, all out of his reach, giuing him as it were the farewell, and bidding defiance to him, as being in their owne power, and hauing nothing to do with him, nor he with them, as they imagine; yet can they not escape his hand, nor auoide his power, because the decrre must stand, Gen. 1. 28. Be fruitfull, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and haue dominion ouer the fish of the sea, and ouer the fowle of the aire, and ouer euery liuing thing that moueth on the earth. Therfore cannot that which is in the depth of the aire, nor in the height of the seas, nor in the far corners of the wildernesse, nor that buildeth in rockes and tops of trees, nor that is hidden in the thicke bushes and hollow trees, nor that lurketh in dens and caues of the earth, nor which is bedded in the mud and rootes of flags, nothing can escape his nets, grins, hookes, bates, but they are taken vnawares, they know not how, nor by whom, they willingly runne their heads into the net, their feete into the snare, their iawes to the hooke; all which traps they either see or discerne not, or else they are so priuily layed and disguised, that they see not. For man is wiser then beasts, he comprehendeth them, but they cannot comprehend him. As the soule of man exceedeth beasts, so doth God exceed men: yet like beasts, they thinke that they are far out of his sight: hee is in the height of heauen, they are in the depth and lower parts of

the earth, they are couered with the clouds, as Adam was hid from him in the thickets of the garden* Gen. 3. 10. as at the day of iudgement they shall runne into caues and holes of the rockes to hide them, and vnder the bottomes of mountaines if it were possible; yea and they couer with a couering, hiding their counsels deepe from the Lord, and keeping close their deuice in the bottome of their heart from the Lord. They neuer thinke of him, nor know him, though he walke in the midst of them, no more then wilde beasts, wilde foule and fishes know man their soueraigne, being alwayes among them, and in their sight, but they discerne him not. For though the wittie wicked thinke himselfe to be the wisest, yet he is a foole, Psal. 14* 1. and a beast. And of foule, beasts and fishes there is a generositie and a rusticitie, an innocencie and a crueltie, yet all is beast. God comprehendeth man, and all things, but he is infinite, and comprehended of nothing. The subtilty of the wicked is but foolishnesse, he puts his foote into the trap, his heele into the grin, his necke into the snare, with prouidence and cunning, as the greedy fish and rauenous foule, that hee alone may swallow vp all the hooke into his throate, and be first taken. He diggeth vp a pit, and falleth into it himselfe; he hideth his trap priuily, and his owne foote is taken. He imagineth that all things must giue way to his wisedome and counsell, for God is not in all his thoughts: but when he least suspecteth, God that is greater then he, whose power, command, soueraigntie and glory he neuer regarded, striketh him suddenly, and intangleth him in his owne nets and traps. Sennacherib, Antiochus, Nabuchadnezzar, Alexander, were become Behemoths and Leuiathans, Elephants and Whales, surpassing the common condition of men, Heroes, or Demi-gods; swords, stau^s, hookes, lines, snares, nets, were but sticks and cobwebs: but in their greatest rage and tumult he putteth his hooke into their noses, and turneth them about with his bridle, Esa. ^7. 29. The wicked conceiue mischiefe, and bring forth iniquitie, and their belly prepareth deceit, Iob 15. 35* as did Achitophel, Haman* Iudas, etc. but they suddenly

perish, and come to a fearefull end. For there is a snare in the prosperitie and hopes of the wicked. They are trap-makers and snare-setters for others, and others for them. For so are the wits of the wicked exercised all their dayes. They walke about with snares and nets, and walke among snares and traps. Now are they take^ suddenly in their owne, now suddenly in other mens. They are preuented by sudden death, as the vnripe grape is shaken off, and the flower of the oliue with a stormie blast or nipping East winde, and their glorious verdure is withered in a moment, as the ioyous and luxurious graine is blasted with lightning. Amnon perished when his heart was merry with wine, 2. Sam. 13. 29. Belteshazzar perished suddenly in the night of a festiuall day, Dan. 6. 30. Nabuchadnezzar in the same houre that he exalted himselfe aboue all power, was disrobed of his royaltie, turned into a beast, and driuen out from amongst men. The rich man, in the same night that he blessed himselfe in the reuiew of his worldly possessions, was carried away to hell. The old world was swept all away with the floud, when they were eating, drinking, feasting, marrying. So were the Sodomites in a morning, when they were ready to rise from nightly venery to adorne their proud corpse for meetings, to eating, drinking, gaming, to prouoke to lust, and to make themselues strong for lust. For they were rich, and despised the poore, they were farting full, and spuing full, proud beasts, they regarded not the afflictions of Ioseph, but were cruell, and mad against those that reproued them, as their dealings and speeches to Lot do testifie. We in this land are growing into this veine, to be crafty and proud donaughts, the child teaching the father, being it selfe reprobate to euery good worke.



Verse 13.
This wisedome haue I seene also vnder the Sunne, and it seemed great vnto me.

THe third example of induction of the euent of counsels and wisedome: the vanitie whereof (to carnall

reason) sheweth the vnknowne and deepe wisedome of God, who most wisely, and to the best ends ordereth and disposeth the same. Whereas hee sayd before, that bread was not to the wise, nor riches to men of vnderstanding, which was a speciall and remarkeable vanity, he returneth to a better reuiew thereof, and expresseth it at large vnder a Parable. Wherein it is by an Hypotyp^sis, or liuely description plainly set forth before our eies. It consists of two partes, of a Preface, and of a Narration. The Preface as in this verse; This wisedome haue I seene also, etc. This worke of Gods wisedome doe I also obserue, and it is a thing not vn-usuall, but it is to mans reason strange and wonderfull. First, that a man of counsell and wisedome should be poore. Secondly, that the benefit and vse of his wisedome should redound to the vnthankefull, who being protected and inriched by his wisedome, should notwithstanding leaue him destitute, and let him liue in pouertie still. Which thing is euery where now adayes verified in many worthy seruants of Christ, whose paines in the Gospel is of great desert, and the benefit thereof inestimable.


Verse 14.
There was a little Citie, and few men within it: and there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarkes against it.



Verse 15.
Now there was found in it a poore wise man, and he by his wisedome deliuered the Citie, yet no man remembred that same poore man.

THE Narration or Parable it selfe in these two verses, There was a Citie; little in it selfe, and the inhabitants were few. It was neyther fortified with Towers, Castles, strong Walls, nor Gates of strength, nor yet prouided of men and munition for the battell. And a powerfull King came against it with a great army: hee layd siege to it, and built great bulwarkes against it, and made engines to batter it downe vpon them. Now amongest all the rich, the strong, the honourable, there was found a man of a verie meane estate (as God bestoweth his gifts as pleaseth him on the poore, and the young, Iob 32. 8. 9.) but yet a man of

wisedome, iudgement, and counsell, who by his wisedome deliuered this Citie. Euery man tooke notice of him, for they were in great feare and despaire; and they were all partakers of this benefit. Their wiues and children, liues and goods were preserued by the wisedome of this poore man. But what was the euent of his gift, and practise of his gift? What fruit redounded thereby to himselfe?
There was no man that remembred that poore man. Both they and all that euer they had were in his hands; they receiued life and goods of him, for by his counsell he pulled the City out of the jawes of the enemy, who was ready to swallow it vp at once, whereas he might haue escaped free himselfe and left them desolate. Yet for all this, as Nabal dealt with Dauid, they regarded him not. For hauing obtained what they desired, they let him shift for himselfe, as wicked hypocrites vse to deale with their painfull teachers, as they doe with their emptied figge-frayles, they forgot him, and tooke no notice afterwards of him. So the Butler of Pharaoh, being set at liberty, forgot the affliction of his fellow prisoner Ioseph. Dauid was ill rewarded by Saul, who of enuy, because the women sung Anthemes of that worthy and wonderfull conquest of Goliah, persecuted him with a wicked eye. Christ was ill rewarded by the nine Lepers, who being cleansed of that grieuous disease, would not returne to giue him so much as bare thankes, not so much as to acknowledge the benefit. But he was worse rewarded by him that being afflicted with an infirmity thirty and eight yeres, Ioh. 5. who after that he was cured, discouered him to his enemies that sought his life, verse 15. For he fearing the cruelty of the Pharisies reprouing him, verse 10. respected his owne safety, as it may seeme. And the Pillars of our peace, plenty, and security in this Land, I doe meane, godly, painefull and profitable teachers are of many little regarded. Yea many liue in beggery, and worke for their liuings, the proud epicurish laitie reioycing thereat. Iudge as yee will, yee swinish* Gadarenes, these despicable ones are the pillars of your happinesse, not your cursed wisedome in making the fine great, and rent small to

defeate them of their right, nor your manifold subtilties to diminish the chippings, and parings, and small bitlockes, when ye haue already got the whole loa^e.



Verse 16.
Then said I, wisedome is better then strength* neuerthelesse the poore mans wisedome is despised, and his words are not heard.

AN amplification of the Parable by a Consectary, shewing the excellence of wisedome, and vse thereof, in whomsoeuer it is, though the common sort respect persons and outward appearances, and admiring the rich and the stro^g, despise the same, or haue it small in account. Then said I, when I saw that strength, multitude, riches, nobility, had no power in them to benefit the owners thereof in their greatest want, nor to deliuer them out of iminent danger, but a poore man destitute of these helpes did it by wisedome; Then I sawe, I gathered by good consequence, and learned, and also teach others what the excellence and dignitie of wisedome is, and how that it is to be sought for, and imbraced aboue all other desirable things.
Wisedome is better then strength. An illustration of the excellence of wisedome by an argument of the Lesse. Strength is a thing admired and desired of all; the strong man glorieth, and secureth himselfe in his strength, as did Goliah, but wisedome is better and a stronger defence. Samson was strong, yet was hee ouercome by the subtilty of a woman. Abimelech was strong, yet a woman vnawares slew him with a peece of a Mill-stone, Iudges 9. 53. and so deliuered the City. Cyrus was strong, yet by the subtilty of a woman (as Stories report) was he and euery man of his great army slayne; and so was Holofernes also, and his murdering hoste shorne vp. Ahab trusted more to his strength then to the counsell of Micah, therefore he perished. Zedekiah and his Princes trusted to their strength, and despised the counsell of Ieremie, therefore was he and his Princes slayne, Ierusalem sacked and set on fire. Nabuchadnezar refused the counsell of Daniel, and boasted in the defence of Babylon, and

strength of his souldiers; and so did Beltshazzar also, and Xerxes, of whom I spake before, but their strength helped them not, as Deuid saith.
Though the poore mans wisedome be despised. Though the common sort which is brutish, esteeming strength, beauty, wealth, apparell, etc. the most desirable things, because they serue for the feeding and pampering of the flesh, doe lightly regard, yea despise wisedome, especially in him that doth want these outward things, yet is he better then they, as appeareth by his example afore mentioned.
And his words be not heard. A base conditioned person is honoured for his riches and apparell sake; and the speech of a foole in the place of honour, is applauded. Externa personae dignit as conciliat dignitatem orationi. Haman was honoured, but not of Mordecai; and the mad common people dazled with the royall apparell of the foxe Herod, cryed, The voice of God, and not of man; but yet Christ gaue no such testimony of him, but as he was a beast, so he esteemed him. So dealt the Prophets also with the wicked; and S. Iohn termeth Antichrist a Beast and a Dragon, to whom the wicked hypocrites attribute title of Lord God the Pope. S. Paul likened the High priest to a whited wall; and Dauid the wicked Princes to dogs and bulls* but all these had the spirit of prophesie and discerning.
But the wisedome of a poore man is not heard. The rich doth wrong, and is not reproued, and vttereth folly and is praised: the poore man doth right and is not fauoured, he vttereth wisedome, and they say, What fellow is this? When as Christ taught in the Temple, Ioh. 7. 14. 15. they say, How knoweth he the Scripture, seeing he neuer learned? Here is a miracle, a plaine euidence of diuine power and extra ordinary wisedome, yet they lightly passe by it, for they iudged according to his outward appearance, vers. ^4. They knew whence he was, speaking contemptibly, vers. 27. So when he taught in a Synagogue, Mark. 6. ^. 3. whilest their mindes were fixed on his speeches* (for the no^elty of his doctrine wrought attention) they say, Whence hath he those things? What wisedome is this that is giuen him? But when his

pouerty, and meannesse of his education, trade, parents, kinsfolks come into their mindes, they are offended, they yeeld no honour, affoord no entertainment, they beleeue nothing, but turne about to their olde biasse. So Pauls Gospell is despised of the flanting Preachers of Corinth, because his bodily presence was weake, and his Sermons without Philosophy and ^^hetoricke. He was poore, humble, spirituall. So do our flanting badges now adayes, that suite themselues to mens humours, admiring persons for aduantage, and make themselues as strange to their brethren, as Ruffians do to the graue, wise and ancient. They shew what spirit they are of, and which way they came in.



Verse 17.
The words of wise men are heard in quiet, more then the crie of him that ruleth among fooles.

ANother comparison of the Lesse, to illustrate the excellence of wisedome, or dignitie of the wise mans speeches, though his words co^monly be not heard. For this verse hath reference to the last words before. The loud noise and thundering words of a proud and wrathful gouernour, among such like as himselfe, ignorant, foolish and passionate, are heard. For terrible and sounding words most affect the rude and passionate. But the words of a wise man in quiet, namely of a poore or meane man that hath no commanding power, but is submisse, humble, and speaketh vnder correction, not proudly and peremptorily, are to be heard before him. For pride, stomachfulnesse* headinesse, wilfulnesse and presumptuous foole-hardinesse auaile little; but things are rightly and easily effected by wisedome: great weights are easily moued and remoued by the deuice of engines, which to plaine strength are impossible. The great words, great strength and power of Xerxes was nothing good to but to dig down mountains, to make nearer passages of riuers, and to drinke riuers dry, as it is recorded of his hoast* For Leonidas with few words, and no noise, and few men surprised him, as being a Whale on the sands, and the ioyntlesse beast Alce leaning to a tree almost

sawne through; for these are taken by wisedome, not by strength. The submisse words of a poore man speaking with g ood vnderstanding, are rather to be heard of gouernors and honorable men, then are the boisterous words of the proud and foolish among fooles. For the matters of the world are ordered by the wisedome of God, which he reuealeth to whom he will, without respect of persons: for he respecteth his glory onely. Therefore ^he regardeth the lowlinesse of the poore, and sendeth the rich empty away. He despiseth not the poore for his pouertie, nor accepteth the person of the rich to giue him wisedome, etc. because of his riches, though the rich foole arrogateth all to himselfe, ta^qua^ proprio iure. All this is euident by the parable aforesaid.



Verse 18.
Wisedome is better then weapons of warre: but one sinner destroyeth much good.

A Third comparison to illustrate the excellencie of wisedome. Weapons and engines auaile much in warres, for no warre is made-without them: but let them be as good and as strong as they can be, yet wisedome is stronger. For where wisedome is wanting, weapons are as ready to turne their points vpon their maisters, as against the enemies, as the Madianites did, and as the Iewes in the last siege and vtter ouerthrow of Ierusalem and their whole nation did. This is a thing confessed of euery good warrier, that weapons are nothing without wisedome and counsell, and that wisedome giueth the dead blow, as Tully saith, Parua sunt soris arma, nisi est consilium domi; and not Achilles* but Vlysses is termed Poliporthos, the sacker of cities. One wise Commander is better then many fighting men. The Lion that is Leader or Captaine of Harts, is better then an Hart that is Captaine and Leader of Lions. Therefore the silence of wisedome is better then the noise of strength. If the ship be not gouerned by the skilfull Pilot, the rowers shall by their strength but runne her on the rockes and into the sands* ^herefore ^e that sitteth at the sterne, and discerneth the coasts, bringeth the ship to the hauen rather then

the mariners. And this was the glory of the Romanes, that they conquered the world by wisedom, not by strength. The Romanes were ciuill and prudent, other nations barbarous and strong. If beasts knew their strength, they would beare rule ouer man, and bring him into subiection vnder them, to labour for them as they do for him, and would prey vpon him. If Absolon had obeyed the counsell of Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17. 1. 2. 3. he had preuailed against Dauid; but being yong and heady, strong and furious, such like violent courses best pleased him. For when Hushai told him of an hoast like the sands of the sea shore for multitude, and that it should fall on Dauid and his men like dew, not leauing a man aliue, and that they would draw downe cities with ropes into the riuer, not leauing one stone behinde them, he preferred this violent fury before the murdering counsell of Achitophel. For the Lord had appointed to defeate the good counsell of Achitophel, that he might turne Absolons foolish strength against himselfe. If Rehoboam had followed the sage counsell of the Ancients, and not taken the violent courses of the yong men, he had not lost ten parts of his kingdome.
And one sinner destroyeth much good. The Hebrew is Vechotea, that is, one declining, diuerting, aberring from the right way or straight course into by-wayes. The words may be taken as a confirmation of the former sentence concerning the excellency and necessity of wisedome in warres. He that faileth but once in policy or counsell through neglect, shall weaken his hoast, and giue aduantage to the aduersary, and haply lose all his former victories, as Hannibal and Attilius Regulus, and many more stout warriers haue done Or rather they are an explication or illustration of wisedome, by a distinction of wisedome and wise men. For there is wisedome ioyned with the feare of God, commonly called good wisedome; and there is worldly crastinesse, which Saint Iames termeth, earthly sensuall, and diuellish, Iam* 3. 15. and the sonne of Sirach termeth it, execrable malice. Such was the counsell of Achitophel and Herod. This wisedome is serpentine and diabolicall, like that of the High

priest, princes, and Pharises against Christ, and his spirituall kingdome. It is suggested of lust, and ingested of Sathan.
One sinner destroyeth much good, as one wiseman, fearing God, doth much good, as the Parable afore shewed, and the example of good Obadiah and Iob testifie; and of Hushai also. So againe, one fraudulent, crafty guilefull person bringeth a curse vpon a whole common-wealth, as Ieroboam did, whose execrable deuice, to stablish his kingdome; see 1. King. 12. 26. to the end* So Herod to stablish himselfe in his kingdome, slew all the children in Bethlem, and the coasts about, that were two yeares olde and vnder. Such were the plots of Absolon against Dauid, of the high Priest, and princes of the Iewes against Christ. The one will get a kingdome by wicked wisedome, and the other preserue their kingdome by wicked wisedome. But good is neither gotten nor preserued by euill. For God wil be God, and glorified only, and man shall be a beast. The mischiuous imaginations of the wicked shall not prosper. Such is the wisedome of Antichrist, and to conclude, of the Diuell and all his children. All euill proceedeth of them, and in the end falleth vpon them, as the dew that riseth out of the ground, and falleth downe vpon the ground. Therefore, how profitable and wise soeuer the counsel of a wicked man seemeth to be, yet giue no eare vnto him, though our selues (being euill) are euer inclinable to the worse part. For his counsells and doings (in the end) will marre all. He will but shew foorth witty folly, and bring desolation, shame, and perpetuall ignominy. All shall be in the end but the crackling of thornes vnder a pot. For they do hatch Cockatrice egges, and weaue the Spiders web, Esay 59. 5. They are crafty fooles, hindering what good they can, and doing euil, hurting many, and killing themselues. There is nothing in them but selfe-loue, pride, hatred, and mocking of them that are good. The good wisedome of God in his children which is humble and louing, they despise, and deride, exalting and preferring their owne serpentine suttlety. For they are of the Diuell, seeking their owne wils, lusts, and glory, not Gods, nor any mans good.




CHAPTER X.


Verse 1.
Dead slies cause the oyntment of the Apothecarie to send foorth a stinking sauour: so doth alittle follie him, that is in reputation for wisedome and honour.

THis Chapter hath two parts. First, an exhortation to perseuerance in wisdome, verses 1. 2. 3. Secondly, a remedy against vanities in ciuill gouernement by the direction of wisedome; from verse 4. to the end. The Exhortation is inforced by an argument drawne ab incommodo, from the hurt, and inconuenience that shall follow vpon inconstancie, negligence, or leuitie.
A little folly staineth or disgraceth him that is in reputation for wisedome. It is illustrated by a similitude of dead flies infecting the Apothecaries ointment. As an oyntment made by th'art of the Apothecary is esteemd most precious, and desired of euery one, yet is it corrupted with a few dead flies, and contrarily casteth foorth a stinking sauour that offendeth the sence: euen so a man that hath beene highly esteemed for his wisedome, doth by a little errour, yet indiscreetly committed, lose his former grace and reputation. A blacke spot in a white sheete is seene of euery one, that can hardly discerne other colours; and secret enuy that is put to silence by the common fame and grace, yea and carried backe with the sway of the multitude, as the Shippe is with the Tide, breaketh foorth as waters when a small gap or breach is opened. And this is also vanity. God is only good, only wise, and will be knowne to be so. If Salomon had not beene tempted to folly by his heathenish wiues, nor Iosiah giuen the battell to Pharao, without asking counsell of the Lord, yet after-times shal bewray the ignorance and vanitie of man, seeing that that which seemeth to be both

wisely and well done for the present to mans reason, hath a diuers and contrary euent for want of wise prouidence. Therefore is God onely wise, onely good. Man must not therefore be discouraged, but more carefully imitate him, and learne as children do of their parents, and as wisedome hath taught vs, Mat. 5. 48. Be you perfect sv your heauenly father is perfect,



Verse 2.
A wise mans heart is at his right hand: but a fooles heart at his left.

THis verse setteth downe the meanes whereby to preuent and auoide the blemish of folly, and to maintaine still the honourable reputation of wisedome. The meanes is double, or hath two members. First, the wise man is led and guided by vnderstanding, according to the fundamentall truth, or the right ground* of things. Secondly, if he erre, he soone perceiueth it, and quickly recalleth and recouereth himselfe. This is illustrated by the contrary, and both contraries by a similitude of the right hand and the left. A wise mans heart is at his right hand. The right hand is more strong, agile and operatiue then the left, therefore the artificer handleth his toole, and worketh with it, and so proceedeth well, and bringeth his worke to perfection: but if he giue but one stroke with the left hand* he marreth his work; for the left hand is but an helper or seruant attending on and gouerned by the right. Therefore the eye and minde of the worker, is euer at his right hand: so likewise sound reason or good vnderstanding is a mans right hand, and his affections are his left. The wise man is alwayes inclinable to good reason: his eye, mind, heart is altogether fixed on the ground of the truth, and thereafter he worketh and proceedeth; and his affections are but attendants and seruants to his wisedome, which he hath at command: but if hee yeeld or giue place but once to them, P^ssima suggerunt, they are brutall, he marreth all the splendour or grace of his worke, euen that one stroke shall be a great blemish and eye-sore. Let not him also that can fundamentally and methodically carry his worke with him, intermingle a foolish

opinion or perswasion of another, lest it be as brimstone cast into the lake or vessell of the Alchymist among gold, whereby his worke is marred. Moreouer, a man is the right hand, woman is the left. For she was created for an helper, an vpholder of the family, not an actor: (yet is some man left handed,) the prudent man oft times giuing place to a woman, is as gold mingled with brimstone, or as one that holdeth his worke in the right hand, and worketh with the left. Adam, Solomon, Samson, may be examples hereof; and if Iob had regarded his wiues counsell, all his innocencie had bene vtterly corrupted* and his vprightnesse peruerted, but the heart of a wise man is at his right hand. The other member of the meanes is vnderstood by anantapodosis or ellipsis, and is gathered by the opposite, vers. 3. This is illustrated by the contrary practise of the foole. The heart of a foole is at his left hand. The foole is carried with his affections, he is alwayes in clinable to folly, a wicked and a vaine thing soundeth best in his eares, wisedome cannot enter into his head, wholesome instruction he abhorreth. For he hath an euill heart, vnpurged, vnhallowed, and therefore is he euer inclined to the worse part. His grounds are broken and confused, disturbed, and ruled by his lusts, so are his proceedings disorderly, and bring forth vanitie.



Verse 3.
Yea also when he that is a foole walketh by the way* his wisedome faileth him, and he saith to euery one that he is a foole.

THe second member of contrary folly, seruing to illustrate the practise of wisedome, or second member of the meanes, whereby the reputation of a wise man is preserued from blemish. Yea also when he that is a foole, etc. When a wicked man is entred into the way that his filthy lusts haue drawne him into, then his heart faileth him, he considereth not whence he is swarued, nor whither he tendeth; but being proud and wilfull, he will neither reclaime himselfe, nor be reclaimed by another, but saith to euery one

that he is a foole, he declareth his folly, and maintaineth his folly. He hath no delight in vnderstanding, but that his heart may discouer it selfe, Prou. 18* 2. seeking out reasons and excuses for his folly, and giuing foolish answers to euery thing that is obiected against his folly, and also strengthening himselfe with the opinions and testimonies of such like as himselfe is. Whereas contrarily, the wise man presently acknowledgeth, concealeth, and speedily salueth his error, antequam in publicum exeat, before it breake forth, he killeth it in the hatching. But the foole neuer ceaseth till he fall into vtter obloquy and contempt, and in the end becometh desperate and shamelesse, and as almost nothing offended at the reputation of a foole or wicked person, but oft times rather glorieth in it. Or, by way may be meant euery way wherin the foole walketh, and place where he is, he babbleth and declares his folly to euery one where he commeth, so that all men may see his ignorance, wrathfulnesse, and wilfulnesse.



Verse 4.
If the spirit of the ruler rise vp against thee, leaue not thy place: for yeelding pacifieth great offences.

HEre beginneth the second part of the Chapter, setting downe a remedy or rule to arme a man against vanities and miseries incident to man in ciuill gouernment. The confusions and disorders thereof must be rightly considered by wisedome to the pacifying of the mind, no^ be opposed by contrary vanitie, seeing that there is a wisedome of God in these vanities not vaine and vnresistable. The scope hereof is to teach modest and submisse behauiour in wisedome towards Princes: for they are either the faithfull shepheards of God, or else the rods of his correction. If the spirit of the ruler, etc. If the Ruler hath taken a displeasure against thee, if his anger be kindled against thee, that hath authority and power ouer thee, leaue not thy place, oppose not displeasure to displeasure, though he be wrongfully displeased, go not out of his sight in anger, nor moue thy selfe from place to place, nor vse any gesture or countenance

as they doe that are angry. Neyther rebell, nor shew rebellious disposition, but contrarily (vnderstood by anantapodosis or ellipsis, most frequent in the Scriptures) vse what meanes thou canst to saue thy selfe, by saluing the wound, or vexed spirit of the Ruler. For yeelding pacifieth great offences. Heb. marpeaci, that is, sanctitie, lenitie, or healing shall make great sinnes or offences to cease.
The precept is confirmed by three reasons. The first is contained in these words drawne from the effect of submission. The second from verse 5. to verse 12. The third, from verse 12. to verse 16. Concerning the first, yeelding is an acknowledging, submission and deprecation if a man be in an errour, or haue iustly offended; also patience and forbearance if a man be blamelesse and innocent. For a Ruler er^ing is not to be conuicted of errour and reproued oppositiuely, which doth impayre his place and person, but vnder subiection and correction to be rightlier informed in the matter or businesse. And this shall, in the end, giue great content, and bring thee into greater fauour then was the displeasure. Whereas contrarily on the one side thou shouldest prouoke him to deuise euill against thee, whilest that he contendeth for his honour, or to quiet his minde by reuenge; and on the other side, inwrappe thy selfe in endlesse troubles by sinister courses. For hee is too high and heany for thee to contend against.



Vers. 5.
There is an euill which I haue seene vnder the Sunne as an errour, which proceedeth from the Ruler.

A Second reason of the precept is, because that by patient submission the princes ire shall not only be healed and retracted from reuenge, as was said before, but also the subiect shall preuent and auoyde many euills, that through his sinister courses hee should procure vnto himselfe, to verse 11. and afterwards be ineuitable, verse 11. This reason, as I thinke is propounded by way of a complaint. First, geuerally in these three next verses, the answer wherof is illustrated by comparisons in the next foure

verses after. There is an euill which I haue seene, etc. There is a principall and speciall euill to be seene in this disordered world, as an errour which proceedeth from the Ruler: an illustration of this euill by a comparison of the like. As the errour of the Prince is a publique euill redounding to the hurt of many, yea of the whole Common-wealth, as himselfe is a publique person: so is this also an euill very grieuous, whereby great calamitie often ensueth to men both in respect of their persons and estates. If any man vnderstand this of the errour of Princes, Preferring vnworthy and vnfit persons to the place of dignitie, and magistracie, which causeth much euill in the kingdome; I easily yeeld to it.



Verse 6.
Follie is set in great dignitie, and the rich in lowe place.

A Particular explication of the euill or disorder before generally propounded, and illustrated in these two verses; Follie is set in dignitie or height, and the rich in lowe place. Follie, a Metonymie of the Adiunct, for foole* By foole, is not meant him that is destitute of reason or vnderstanding, but him especially that hauing both, vseth neither or abuseth both. As the fruit of crackt or crasie reason is follie, so of corrupt or wicked reason also. There is more hope of a foole then of him that is wilfull in his wayes, corrupt or wicked wit is woorse then a weake vnderstanding. By Rich, is not meant wealthy, but rich in wisedome, vnderstanding, discretion and gifts to discharge the high calling of a Prince or Ruler, as it is said, that God gaue to Saul another heart, 1. Sam. 10. 9. and which was figured by the holy Oyle, wherewith the Kings of Israell were annoynted at their coronation. This is the complaint of Salomon, that vnreasonable, and reasonlesse men should sit on the Throne, and the Bench. That such should reigne and sit in the place of Iudgement is the secret iudgement of God, either because people despise the goodnesse of God in his word, and so hee setteth euill princes or

children to rule ouer them, or else for their tryall, that their faith may be tried vnder a wicked Ruler. But it followeth not, as this complaint intimateth, that eyther wicked or childish Princes should bee seditiously thrust out of their place and office, as Childericke King of Fraunce is sayd to haue beene by Pope Zacharie: For that is nothing else but to offer violence to God, to pull the scourge out of his hand, which with patience we must beare. But wee must rather looke to the cause thereof, our sinnes and hypocrisies; wee must pray for pasience and repentance, and pardon, and so remoue euill with good, and not contend against God to increase our miseries.



Verse 7.
I haue seene seruants vpon horses, and Princes walking as seruvnts vpon the earth.

BY seruants is meant vnworthy persons, of base spirit, and roguish conditions, such as are enthralled to their Iusts, such as hate wisedome, and instruction, despisers and mockers of godlinesse, and them that are good, which if they were but seperated from their riches and authoritie, and their cloth taken from them, would be most contemptible doe naughts of all other, Belialls, good for nothing at all. Vpon horses. Aduanced to honours, sitting on the seate of iudgement, and place of iustice, abounding in wealth, faring deliciously, apparelled gorgeously, dwelling in sumptuous houses, stored with costly furniture, enioying the pleasures of the world, as Iob complayneth chapter 21. Dauid in Psal 73. and Amos chap. 6. riding abroad on pleasure, riding on strong and shining horses, riding in Coaches, hunting, and sporting, intertayning and being intertayned sumptuously.
And Princes walking as seruants on the earth. That is to say, men of learning, discretion, wisedome, godlinesse, grauitie, wanting semblable meate, drinke, apparell, building, houshold*stuffe, lodging, friendship, and for want of an horse trauelling on foote, like to labouring men, and seruants, and working for want of necessary food and raiment, as the meanest men doe. If this were not in the

Church as well as in the Common-wealth, it were more tollerable. But better it is to walke on foote to heauen, then to ride on horse-backe to hell with the foole.



Verse 8.
He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and who so breaketh an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.

THE answer to this complaint is contayned in these next foure verses, expressing the euill that a discontented, immodest, or rebellious subiect bringeth vpon himselfe, not barely propounded, but illustrated by foure elegant similitudes, whereof two are set downe in this verse: He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it. A prouerbiall sentence taken from those that make graues, or deepe pittes, which often vnawares fall into the same themselues. In those Countries they vse to make pits lightly couered ouer with straw, leaues, stickes and dust to catch wilde beasts in, and to catch me also in. It is applied to plotters and deuisers of mischiefe, which going about to harme other men, are cast downe into the pit of their owne counsells, Psal. 7. 15. 16. He made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch, that he made, his mischiefe shall returne vpon his owne head, and his violent dealing shall come downe vpon his owne pate. So Haman was hanged vpon the same gallowes, that he had prepared for Mordecai, Hest 7. and Perillus was first broyled in the brasen Bull that hee made for the tyrant Phalaris to torment others in. Ioh sayth, The Lord taketh the wise in their craftinesse. This craftinesse is the wisedome of the world so much extolled. If a man be subtile and politike for his owne aduantage, though others be hindered and harmed thereby, and God dishonoured, yet hee is praysed, at leastwise he is highly conceited of himselfe for his wisedome. It is commonly sayd, The best gamesters haue the worst lucke, so these craftie foxes play often wilie beguile themselues For the Lord will not let their wicked imaginations prosper, lest they be too proude He that intendeth euill against the Ruler, is secret and deepe, but he first falleth into his owne pit. The sauage Papists haue afforded

foorded vs many examples hereof in this Land* for God hath giuen them vp into a foolish and reprobate minde, to make snares, traps and pits for themselues; it is all their practise, they do nothing but worke their owne woe. They rush against the rocke, and are split in peeces.
And who so breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. He that goeth about to dissolue the gouernment, or alter it at his pleasure, which is compared to an hedge, shall be stung of the serpent, euill shall light on him vnawares, that imagineth euill against the Lords annointed. Therefore would not Dauid touch Saul* that wrongfully sought his life. Thus was Achitophel taken in his owne wilinesse; and Absolon, 2. Sam. 18. 14. was stung with the darts of Ioab. And Pharao persecuting the Israelites, or rather the Lord in his people, was ouer whelmed with the waters; and so it fared with Guido Fauks and his fellow-conspirators.



Verse 9.
Who so remoueth*stones, shall be hurt therewith: and he that cleaueth wood, shall be indangered thereby.

WHosoeuer diggeth downe another mans wall to enter into his house, or remoueth land-markes, shall be punished, either with misfortune in the euill doing, or by law. Or, the meaning is, he that diggeth stones out of the quarry or rocke, and lifteth them vp, or carrieth and recarrieth them, is in danger to be hurt; and he that cleaueth wood, is in danger to be hurt many wayes. He that goeth about to remoue a Ruler out of his place, and to deuide a settled gouernment that is at vnitie in it selfe, vndertaketh a dangerous peece of businesse. As he vndertaketh a desperate worke, such shall his reward be. It is euill medling with edge tooles, and heauy stones, and trees are not for children to deale withall.



Verse 10.
If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength: but wisedome (...) profitable to direct.

IF the edge of his axe or wedges be blunt, and vnfit for

such workes, and he hath not whetted or prepared and fitted them according to the greatnesse and knottinesse of the tree, then must he adde to more strength, and weary himselfe, but effect nothing, vnlesse the breaking of his tooles, and maiming of himselfe: so he also that diggeth a pit without knowledge and skill, that rashly breaketh vp an hedge, and remoueth stones without consideration and art, and good aduice, shall effect nothing by strength, but hurt himselfe, for such weights are not to be dealt withall by plaine strength. But wisedome is excellent to direct. Wisedome prepareth a good toole to worke withall, wisedome considereth the weight of the worke, and contriueth accordingly. For plaine strength auaileth little in woodworkes, stoneworkes, ironworkes, which are done by art and fit engines and instruments. Well, as these things are not done with inconsiderate strength, but by art and diligence; so neither can any man by wilfulnes, frowardnes, or foolish strength preuaile against the Prince, nor appease his anger or heauy displeasure by any such like opposite courses. For this is an heauy matter or subiect to worke vpon, not to be enterprised without perfect skill, sharpe tooles, and mature deliberation to contriue it. A ship is a weighty vessell, and cannot be vsed at our pleasure as a little boate or a dish. A King counterpoiseth the kingdome, and the states of kingdomes are not often changed: he therefore that vndertaketh that worke is a foole, swimming in a pit ful of snakes to catch an eele. When God wil bring a generall iudgement or vtter destruction vpon a land, then shall he in wisedome effect it as pleaseth him. The Papists will needs make themselues Gods actors, pretending his cause: they are the diuels sollicitors and actors, and God giueth them the ouerthrow. For what speciall reuelation or command haue they to stab and poyson Princes? or to set vp a monarchy by bloudshed? The Church was neither so planted nor augmented, as the Antichristian synagogue hath bene: for then should Christ haue had need of Peters sword; and then the Apostles should haue killed, rather then haue bene killed, with a word, as Peter did Ananias and Saphira. Therefore the Papists dig

pits, and fall into them; they breake vp hedges, and are stung of serpents; they cleaue wood, and cut their owne legs, and trees^all on their necks, they remoue stones, and are bruised therewith, the whole quarry, the rocke grindeth them to powder. For wisedome is excellent to direct: but they want the wisedome which is of God, and commeth out from his throne, therefore are they taken in the wilinesse that they haue imagined.



Verse 11.
Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no better.

AN amplification of the euill which commeth through improuidence and want of solid counsell, which euill is ineuitable and incurable, surely the serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no better. As it is a vaine thing for a man to handle a serpent, trusting either to his strength, or hoping that the serpent will not bite; and as it is more vaine to begin his charme after that he is stung, for then both strength, hope and charmes are all in vaine: so is he vpon whom the displeasure of the Prince is fallen for his con^umacie and rebellion but a babbler, his afterwit is worth naught, it will cost him a great price notwithstanding, which shall make it to be more abhorred.



Verse 12.
The words of a wise mans mouth are gracious: but the lips of a foole will swallow vp himselfe.

A Third reason of the precept, vers 4. The words of him that speaketh in wisedome are acceptable, and procure him fauour and grace, as they proceed from a gracious heart. For he knoweth what is best pleasing to God for him to speake, and what is most acceptable for good men to heare, and what deserueth to be accepted for faithfulnes and truth. For by his wise handling of the matter, the equitie thereof is found out, and fauoured by reason of his forcible and good arguments vsed in his defence. Also his milde and submisse behauiour and patient speech, worketh

vpon the Prince to pacifie his displeasure, and mitigate his fiercenesse; yea and he stirreth vp friends by his wise discourse to stand in his defence, and to intercede for him, whereupon his cause beginneth not to be his owne, but other mens also, and so is the Ruler soone perswaded. By Prince and Ruler is meant euery superiour. But the lips of a foole will swallow him vp. An illustration of the reason by an antithesis or opposition of the contrary. As the mouth or gracious and acceptable speeches of the wise deliuereth him, and reconcileth the Ruler, and procureth him fauour: so contrarily the mouth of the foole deuoureth him, or destroyeth him. For the foole neither knoweth nor regardeth those things, but vomiteth out peruerse speeches, such as tend to rebellion, and shew forth a rebellious disposition, an heart implacable and reuengefull, whensoeuer opportunitie shall offer it selfe to do euill, contrary to the practise of Dauid. So Ioabs rustiei speeches were but harsh, 2. Sam. 19. 5. if his good counsell had not qualified the rigour thereof, and at this time strength was in his hands. His answer was better, 1. Chron. 21. 3. and he did wisely, vers. 4. in that he contended not against him in that doubtfull vnlawfull commandement. For he knew not the intent of the Kings heart, yet he vttered his suspition in most wise sort, with a secret implicite reproofe, vers. 3. For it was not his duty to demand reasons of his maister, because he was but a seruant: and a seruant is but the hand, not the heart, the foote, not the head of his maister. That which a man knoweth to be contrary to Gods commandement, he may refuse to do, yet wisely, though he suffer persecution for it. For then is God persecuted, and not he, the cause is Gods. For euery maister is but a commander vnder God, as he is commanded of God, Nemo sui iuris est praeter Deum. And euen things indifferent must not be enormous, but haue relation to things necessary, whence they are to be deducted by good consequence. For God must haue no corriuall in the least things. And we must not be the seruants of men, sayth the Apostle, but subordinately vnder God. Whatsoeuer we are enforced to do, hath externum principium, their sinne is

the greater, and ours the lesse. Let our Rulers and all commanders therefore take heed, that they abuse not their authoritie to persecution: for they themselues are but substitutes and seruants vnder God; and God shall be auenged on them righteously, that vexe his people wrongfully. For he alone is autexousios and aneuthunetos.



Verse 13.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is fooleshnesse: and the end of his talke is mischieuous madnesse.

THe next three verses are an explication of the former words generally propounded, amplified by the degrees of his folly. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishnesse. The foole hath not an vnderstanding heart, he apprehendeth not the ground of a matter, he discerneth not the truth from errour to set himselfe in the right way at first, but he imagineth and speaketh also according to the suggestion of his lust. He is an idiot, that well knoweth what he would haue, as all beasts in their kinde doe; but what is right and fitting, he regardeth not. For God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. As his speeches are at the first vaine and friuolous, that a man cannot well vnderstand him what he would, for he is double and confused, so is the end of his talke mischieuous madnesse, he setleth downe on his lees. In the end he plainly bewrayeth that wickednesse is in his mind, and madnesse or violent wilfulnes in his heart, to procure much euill vnto others, and more vnto himselfe.



Verse 14.
A foole also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can tell?

SEcondly, he multiplieth vaine words for the excuse and defence of his folly, his foolish enterprises, and wilfull proceedings, figured by aprosopopeia or mimesis. As the fooles heart is not fixed on God, nor hath the loue of his

truth in it, for he hateth such knowledge; so he is full of groundlesse imaginations according to his variable lusts: and though his words be not alwayes ill, yet he neuer speaketh well. For a prouerbe or wise sentence is odious in a fooles mouth, he so polluteth it by misapplying it.
A man cannot tell what shall be, and what shall be after him who can tell? These are the sentences of the wise, Chap. 6. 1^. Who can tell a man shall be after him vnder the Sunne? Chap. 8. 7. A man knoweth not that which shall be. The intent hereof, is to shew the vanities and miseries of this life, but the foole applieth them to defend vanity and wickednesse, and to shew the possibility of his wilfull and witlesse enterprises. So there are good words in the diuels mouth, Mat. 4. 6. but they are wickedly applied and vsed. The words are an argument of comfort to the children of God, drawne from their safe protection by the Angels of God: but Sathan distorteth the true intent thereof, to perswade Christ to refuse the ordinary meanes of Gods appointment to tempt God. If the Angels haue charge ouer thee, cast thy selfe downe headlong. When we doe without warrant or command, we put our selues out of the Angels charge, for they are faithfull attendants on God, wholly depending on his will, not on our disobedience and rebellion. To proceed, the foole hath not wit, but will, he will not be perswaded nor disswaded by sound reason; but what he willeth, he hopeth, and what he hopeth, shall not be to him impossible, for he maketh all things chance and lucke. And so deriding wisedome, he dependeth on fortune. Whereas fortune is nothing but our ignorance and improuidence. The more wisedome and prouidence, the lesse fortune; but fooles terme those things the fortunes of the wise, which they by wisedome foresaw, and by counsell and right meanes brought to passe. So the foole is wise, but for ill lucks and ill haps, which he saith none can be against. Who then shall perswade him that he is a foole? who shall disswade him from his folly? For a foole hath examples pro and contra, for his owne lusts, but the intendment and circumstances he regardeth not, the differences and conueniences he discerneth not. If his

contrary and biasse courses produce not such effects as he seeth in the world, then it is ill lucke, but whether himselfe be a wise man or a foole, that he discerneth not, whether his lust and desires be opposite to Gods prouidence or no, he knoweth no more then a beast; but some haue hap, and some sticke in the gap; and giue a man lucke, and cast him into the Sea.
The foole is so hopefull and chancefull, that he careth not much what he saith, how hee speaketh, to whom hee speaketh, when he speaketh, or doth any thing. How spake such a one? How did such a one? Why might not I say this, or doe that? (so Esopes Asse immitated the Dogge, fawning and leaping on his maister) what can come on it? It is as it is taken, as it falleth out, who can tell vntill hee trie? What knew I whether this or that would haue followed? who can tell any thing? must not all be as God will? The foole indeede stands all vpon trialls according to his lust, but what the reuealed will and commandement of God is, he regardeth not, he is an enemy to that knowledge. But the wise knoweth that there is a conuenient season, and due time for all things in the appoynted time of God, that euery season, and euery conditure or condition of time produceth his owne words, and deedes, silence, or surceasing. But the foole obserueth nothing, hee will say, as others say, I haue sayd, and doe as others haue doone. That which in it owne time is wisely spoken or done, is at an other time flat follie, and iniquitie. So the foole in his best moode neyther imagineth well, nor speaketh well, nor doth any thing well. For, the good that is past he cannot apply well to the present. For Nabal is his name, and follie is with him.



Verse 15.
The labour of the foolish wearieth euery one of them* because he knoweth not how to goe to the Citie.

THirdly, the foole will neuer be wise, nor giue ouer his follie. He is so proudly conceited of himselfe, and so wilfull, but wearieth himselfe in his crooked and disordered

wayes, and is wearied with the euils that his follies haue intangled him in. He is full of troubles, for as he wanteth wisedome and the feare of God, so hee medleth in many matters that are aboue his reach, whereof he knoweth neither beginning nor ending. Why is the foole wearied in his manifold, crooked and presumptuous businesses? Because he knoweth not to goe to the Citie. The plaine tract, and euen path of wisedome, the Kings high way, the royall commandement* Iam. 2. 8. he knoweth not, being like to a blinde man, or staggering drunkard, that can not keepe the high way that leadeth directly to the City, but wandereth in crooked, and turning by lanes, backward and forward, to and fro, being wearied with these his owne waies, when he hath forsaken the right way, as the men of Sodome were with seeking for Lots doore; fooles are full of wit, as they thinke, and so, full of businesse. VVhat is meant by the wearinesse of fooles, they themselues doe interpret, Wised. 4. 5, 6, 7* 8. Wee haue wearied our selues in the way of wickednesse, and destruction, and we haue gone through dangerous wayes, (by*wayes) but we haue not knowne the way of the Lord (that leades to the Citie.) What hath pride profited vs, and pompe of riches brought vs? These fooles loued wearinesse, and wearinesse was their portion. They loued to weary themselues, and others also* and they were, and shall be filled with the fruit of their owne wayes.



Verse 16.
Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child and thy Princes eate in the morning.

A Reitteration or renewing of the former complaint, vers. 5 6. 7. shewing foorth the common discontent, and griefe of the querulo us multitude, who being impatient of afflictions which God hath laid vpon man si^ce the Fall, but yet extenuateth the same in mercie, or augmenteth the same in iustice, accordingly as we obey or disobey him; who being I say impatient, and eagerly and erroneously pursuing a worldly felicition, and ioyfull contentment murmure against Princes as causes of their afflictions,

or hinderers of their conceited phantasticall happinesse. (VVhereas they themselues are a wearinesse to princes, and ^o themselues; so euery contentious foole and wilfull foole curseth Lawyers, and wisheth that there were none, when his money is spent, and his wicked will lost.) The Iewes expected such a kinde of Messias or Redeemer that should free them from the bondage of the Romans, and vexations of their enemies, amongst whom they had beene dispersed many yeares, and therefore they followed Christ in such troupes and multitudes, and many offered themselues to be his disciples in such worldly respects, ayming at the aduauncement of their persons and estates in the world; and the disciples being yet weake and rude, hoped as much, but Iudas especially: therefore, when both he and the people saw that their expectation should be frustrate, as himselfe by many parables and plaine speeches reclaimed them from such vanitie, hee betrayed him, and they crucified him. For they were afraid lest they should not onely haue no profite by him, which they looked for, but also by his meanes procure the displeasure of the Romans, and so lose that small freedome which they had. VVherein we may learne what the spirits of the vnsanctified common people are in such complaints, and of those chiefly that talke so much of the goodnesse of the olde world. They falsly imagine that the Pope much eased them of the burthen of Princes, and Nobles, whereas they were both body and soule the Popes, and the Diuels vassalls, excepting the Elect. And that is a thing which the naturall man, who is filius gehennae, desireth. To conclude* it is rebellion, not religion. They would faine enioy a carnall peace, contentation, and felicitie they care not how. The sonnes of Adam would faine bee in an earthly Paradise againe, which thing Salomon reclaymeth them from in this booke, to cause them to looke for the true, spirituall, and euerlasting peace and happinesse, and to enter into the heauenly Paradise. Let vs therefore murmure at our sinnes, and be discontented with our discontentednesse, and behold our wickednesse in our afflictions and troubles, which

are but the measurable punishments of our vnmeasurable sinnes, and set vp our rest, peace, and comfort in him onely* and there onely, in whom, and where it is to befound, and had.
Wobe to thee* O Land, when thy King is a childe. This complaint in the verses before, shewd forth indignatio, which being pacified with Salomons answer breakes foorth agayne after another maner, to wit, in an exclamation* commiseration, or desperation* which is further emphatically coloured with the figure apostrophe, to presse it more forcibly. The parts, in respect of the subiect or matter, are two. First the childishnes, or insufficiecy of the King to rule. Sece^dly, the voluptuousnes, or riotousnes of the Nobles. Wo be to thee. This word alwayes importeth some great euill, as heere it signifieth the foolish prince to be the greatest euill, and a sure token of Gods anger it is indeed. Therefore the Lord threatned to set children to rule ouer the rebellious Iewes* vnder whom there should be neither peace, nor iustice, but oppression and wrong, euery man vexing and deuouring another. When thy King is a childe. By Childe, he meaneth not so much one that is young in yeares, as in vnderstanding, and discretion. S^nex aetate, and iuvenis moribus, old in yeares, but a childe in discretion, and contrarily, is a distinction well knowne. When Ioash was yong, he followed the counsell of Iehoiada the high priest, and the Land prosperd, and the Church florished, but in his elder dayes, hee became a childe, being mis-led by the wicked princes, 2* Chron. 24. So Vzzia^ being but sixteene yeares olde reigned well, 2. Chroni^. 26. 3. And Iosiah beganne to seeke the Lord when he was a childe, and reigned well all his dayes. 2. King. 22. But contrarily, Rehoboam was forty yeares olde, when he shewed childishnes in refusing the wise counsell of the Ancient* 1. Kin. 12. To conclude, that king is termed a child, when he is ignorant of the Law, and without discretion, contrary to the commandement* Deu. 17. 18 19. 20. Secondly, when he is mindlesse, and forgetful of the cause of the poore, and of the righteous, which are alwaies oppressed* and falsely accused by the rich, and the wicked. Thirdly, when

he that should gouerne, is rather gouerned and led by others, giuing place to craftie and flattering perswasions, as Ioash did, after that Iehoiada was dead. Fourthly, when he committeth the gouernment and care of the kingdome to others, which at their pleasure prey vpon the subiects, enriching themselues by oppression and robbery both of Church and commonwealth, whiles he followeth his pleasures and vanities. Fiftly, when he is prouoked to wrath for trifles, but passeth by the great matters of the law, as the Pharises did. Sixtly, when being addicted to licentiousnes he crusheth the Church, the godly and ancient, through the false suggestions of prophane Princes, as Ioash did, but openeth the mouthes, and strengtheneth the armes of wicked flatterers, yea suppresseth the one, and countenanceth the other, as children loue to be pleased, and are kinde to deceitfull flatterers, but they hang downe their heads, and runne away from their true hearted friends and best counsellers. Briefly, when he seeketh not Gods glory in obedience to his word, but his owne glory, as Saul did. Therfore Samuel told him that he was become a foole.
The second part of the woe, is the riotousnesse of the Nobles and officers, which giue themselues to pompe and prodigalitie, not regarding the welfare of the people, but their owne bellies, which is meant by eating in the morning. They meditate not, study not, consult not in the morning, when wit and memory is fresh, for the welfare of the Church and commonaltie, but for couetousnesse, oppression, pride and pleasures, as it is said of the idle shepheards* Esay 56. 12. Yea rude Princes oppose themselues to the feare of God and practise of religion, and contrarily giue countenance to rude libertines, left their rudenesse should appeare to the commons, and so breed contempt, and shake off the yoke of obedience; whereas if they themselues were godly and gracious, they should be loued of the godly and be a terror to the wicked* as Iob was. They should binde Kings with chaines, and Nobles with fetters of iron, much more the commons, such honour haue all his Saints, Psal. 149. 8. 9. And why should not Kings be Saints? It is

no disparagement to their royaltie, though wicked Amaziah bade Amos prophesie no more at Bethel, because it was the Kings Chappell, and the Kings Court, Amos 7. 13. yet not many wise, not many noble, not many learned after the flesh hath God called, 1. Cor. 1. And it is hard for the rich to enter into the kingdome of heauen, yet are all things possible with God that sanctifieth. When Princes are not godly and gracious themselues, their owne consciences breed iealousies and euill suspitions in them, euen when there is no cause at all. For the wicked man flyeth, when none pursueth, when none opposeth, as Saul pursued Dauid, and grew at length into such extremities as to slay the Lords priests, and to account them his enemies and worst subiects that feared God most, and most lamented his case, whereas his cauilling clawbacks brought him to a miserable end.



Verse 17.
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eate in due season, for strength, and not for drunkennesse.

AN illustration or aggrauation of the former griefe, by the antithesis, or opposition of the contrary blessednes of the land that is gouerned by the royall hearted King, and truly noble Princes. Blessed art thou, etc. By noble is not meant him onely that is of royall bloud or descent, for so was Iehoiakim, who is likened to an asse, Ier. 22. 19. or carrion, and Ieconiah, whose name was curtalled and cropt off in contempt, as the lappes of Dauids seruants were by the King of Ammon. vers. 24. Neither by sonne of Nobles is meant him that thinketh himselfe glorious for his ambition, pompe, pride, crueltie, as Rehoboam did, and Sennacherib, Nabuchadnezzar, Antiochus, Herod, etc. but he that was noble hearted, as was Dauid, who was borne of meane parentage, and Iosiah, who was not giuen to pompe, pride, ambition, superfluitie, but was content with a mediocritie, and delighted in purging the Church of Idolatry, in setting forth the glory of God, as Dauid did* He that is wise

and godly, is the truly aged, though he be a childe, and truly royall and noble, though he be poo^re, as Salomon said before, Chap. 4. 13. He that feareth God, and hath command ouer his owne lusts, and not captiuated to his owne will, is truly royall.
And thy Princes eate in due season, etc. That is, when thy Magistrates, Counsellers and officers are moderate and modest, not giuen to feasting, banketting, prodigalitie, pride, glorifying one another in the flesh, not to proud apparell, proud buildings, not to sports and pleasures, drunkennesse and venery, Prou. 31. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. For who is then graced, preferred, rewarded, but the vassals of their lusts? The Church and Churchmen go to wracke, wanting necessary meate, drinke, apparell, lodging, etc. but rather to sobrietie and parsimony, not to oppression and robbery, but to liberalitie and bountifulnesse; not to carelesse wasting of the wealth of the land, but to preserue and increase the same; not to rob and spoyle, but to enrich the Church and commonaltie: lastly so to serue the body, that the body of the Church and commonwealth may be serued by it, and the Lord by both.



Verse 18.
By much slouthfulnesse the building decayeth; and through idlenesse of the hands the house droppeth through.

AN exposition or explication of the woe or miserie, especially of the former part thereof, vers. 16. illustrated and inforced by a comparison drawne from the euill, and disorderly oeconomie or gouernement of a priuate house or family, which sheweth forth it selfe in the euill vsage of the outward building. These euils are slouthfulnesse, and carelesnesse, or idlenesse. The former is a vice of the minde, the latter of the body. A carelesse minde, an idle hand. Where those vices reigne, the house not onely decayeth, but rotteth, and droppeth vpon the head of the improuident, slouthfull, vnthristie housholder. A man in respect of his person is knowne by his apparell, countenance and gate what manner of one he is, as touching his

ethicks or morality, saith the sonne of Sirach. Againe, he is knowne by his house, yard, grounds, cattell, seruants, and children, what manner of man he is, as touching his economie or husbandry, Prou. 24. 30. 31. The house of the slouthfull man is ruinous, and droppeth through, his yard is like a vaste desert, the fences and walls broken downe, as a vineyard layd waste, his fields are ouergrowne with thistles and briers, his family is disordered and idle, one contending and quarelling with another, girning one at another, all maisters and vnruly. Thus it is in the house of prodigals, drinking slipthrifts, and Belials, do naughts. Thirdly, in respect of his politicks or magistracie he is knowne by his subiects. For as the housholder is in his house or family, so is the magistrate in the citie, and the king in his dominions. An house is a part of a streete, a streete is a part of a citie, the citie is a part of the kindome. The king is the head, the kingdome is his body, consisting of members, whereof some are superiour, as those that are placed in gouernment vnder him, and are subordinate one to another, others are inferiour,
Whereas the Prince feareth not God, but is either couetous or wastfull, carelesse and dissolute, then the Church and common wealth go to wracke. The gouernours are rauening Harpies, and riotous, deuouring the commons, and feeding themselues of the flocke, yea euery one after their examples preying one on another. The vngodly, flatterers, lust-seruers are aduanced, and placed in offices for money or fauour, for there is no care nor feare of God in the superiours, but euery one that feareth God is dishearted, and he that speaketh vprightly is hated in the gate, and he that rebuketh is abhorred, Amos 5. And amongst those wicked ones, there is nothing but enuie and contentions, euery one being giuen to oppression, pride and ambition, and all enemies to God and godlinesse. Whereupon it commeth in the end to be a vast desert of wilde beasts, and as a vineyard lying waste, spoyled with foxes and wilde boares, like a field ouerrunne and cropt vp with cattell, and pastures rooted vp with swine, and ouergrowne with thistles

and briers. Such desolations doth the Lord threat vpon carnalitie and contempt of his word. All these things declare what the Prince is, and by what manner of spirit the commonwealth is inliued and moued. For as the spirit of a thing is, such is the thing. If the spirit be weake, the body is ouergrowne, and ouercome with diseases, as we see in plants, in beasts, in men. Now the spirit of houshold gouernment is pater familias, the good man of the house. The spirit of polity, or commonwealths gouernment, is the king. A prudent and valiant Prince hath a strong constitution, and sound body, his spirit worketh effectually in the finger, and all vtmost parts, as well as at the heart and inward parts, that there may be soundnesse and ioy in all the body.



Verse 19.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merrie, but money answereth all things.

AN explication of the complaint or woe, especially of the latter part thereof, vers. 16. which was this, Thy Princes eate in the morning, that is, spend their whole time, euen the morning it selfe, wherein nature it selfe bindeth vs to sobrietie and solitary study, in eating, drinking, pleasures, like to the Sodomites, and beastiall Princes of Israel. It is illustrated by the contrary, and right vse of eating, drinking, and other expence. A feast is made for laughter. The vse of meate, is the reparation* and conseruation of the body in health and strength, that a man may be enambled to discharge the duties of his calling, wherein God hath placed him. He must keepe his body in temperance, sobriety and chastity, that the minde may be more cleare and free, of greater strength and vigour in the functions thereof, both for deliberation and execution. As for a feast, that is made for laughter, for a recreation of the minde and body at certaine conuenient times, and to preserue common societie and neighbourhood, or rather to testifie friendship and loue one towards another, though particular businesses and necessities haue distracted them, and drawne euery man ad

sua curanda, to care for his owne things* of the vse whereof feasting and co mmon meetings testifie a certaine communitie, such as in this disordered world, and miserable condition of man can be had. But to be addicted to feasting, to make a trade of pampering the body, as epicurishnesse, and beastlinesse. For beasts regard nothing but the belly; they are all body, and to feede well, is their perfection.
And wine maketh merrie. Wine also hath the same vse that is of meates. He that giueth himselfe to drinking and companiship, is a drunkard, although he neuer be drunke. Therefore the Prophet Esay denounceth a woe against them, that are able to drinke strong drinke; Woe be to them, for they spend not onely the time of life idlely, and wastefully, but also make others drunke, and glorie in euill. But wine is not for Kings, nor strong drinke for Princes, Prou. 31. 4. but for the sicke to recouer health, as Saint Paul said vnto Timothie, Drinke a little wine for thy stomackes sake and often infirmities; and wine is for the sorrowfull to reuiue the spirits, and disperse the blood of the oppressed heart to forget his pouertie and miserie.
And money answereth to all things. This vetse may be interpreted thus. Their feast is made for laughter and prodigalitie, not for recreation, etc. and their wine maketh them merry to cast off all care, that they may more freely liue in pleasure, Esay 56. 12. and their money or abundance answereth to all these things, that is, to none other vse, but to maintaine epicurish liuing, as is all ready sayd. Or else they may haue dependence vpon the former verse; The Building of them decayeth, and their houses droppe through, who prepare feasts for laughter, and wine for rioting, and Luxuriousnes, and their money serueth to all these things, to none other vse, but to prouide for feastings, drinking, and epicurish meetings. This interpretation may well stand. But to proceede in the former. Money answereth to all things. Hauing shewed the right vse of eating, and drinking, hee now sheweth the right vse of money. Money serueth not for prouiding, and mayntaining of feasts, delicious fare,

pompe, and pride, but for all things. For money is not as other mettalls, limited to certaine workes, vessells, or instruments, but it hath in it, by humane constitution, the nature of all things, and is all things. So that hee which hath money wanteth nothing that the world can affoord. Therefore it is so loued and desired of worldlings, yea euen of all men. If it were of a particular nature and vse, it then should be lesse desired, and of some not at all. It is made for change, and ready supply of euery mans neede, that euery one might be helped by other. Money therefore is all things, and for all things; not for feasts and drinkings, but to be layd out to other vses both diuine and humane; not to be hoorded vp from vse, which is theft, because no man is for himselfe, but for others also, and others for him, which is the essence of Charitie. Hee that giueth money, giueth, meate, drinke, cloathing, and lodging. Hee that hoordeth it vp burieth all these necessary things in the ground, from God and the poore to his power: seeing that without money they can not be had; yet both money and all things vnder the Sunne, and the Sunne it selfe, serue for nothing but backe and belly. Mans body is the centre of all materiall things. And if the body be the temple of the holy Ghost, there is neyther money, nor any thing else, for the body, but all for God. If all men were for God, there should be no such hungring for money. It should be the vilest mettall of all other. For yron is better then siluer. If man were perfect in innocencie and holinesse, he should neede no money at all; it would be more trouble to him to carry money, then it is now to want money. The selfe-loue, hatred, and misery of man appeareth in this, that hee which hath no money wanteth euery thing; and he which hath abuudance of mony wanteth nothing. Where abundance of money is, there is abundance of couetousnesse, oppression, and all mischiefe; euery rich thiefe striuing who shall buy, nay wring and weary the poore out of all. Contrarily, when there is little money, there is greatest contentation and loue amongest neighbours; but when money commeth in, it setteth all

on fire* and parteth friends. The diuell commeth in with it, for it in flameth the desire; and the diuell bloweth the bellowes, and they that are in loue with it, are beasts, Idolaters, the children of the Diuell. For it is his baite and his hooke, whereby hee catcheth them, and as it were hangeth them vp by the chappes.



Verse 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: and curse not the rich in thy bed-chamber: for a bird of the ayre shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shal tell the matter.

THis last verse is an answer to the complaint; It is propounded by way of an Admonition or Dehortation, which hath two parts answerable to the complaint, verse 16. The first is; Curse not the King, or, speake not euill of the King: figured by an Epanorthosis, or correction, no not in thy thought: or it is a Prolepsis answering to the common obiection, Thought is free. If thou hast no euill thought, or euill disposition of the heart, thou canst not speake euill (otherwise thou canst not speake well;) let this then be one of the things that thou canst not doe, and thou shalt be safe, thy tongue shall not slippe. It belongeth to God onely to reprooue Kings by his word. For hee is the seruant of God, Gods vicegerent, and must not be lifted vp aboue his brethren, hee is subiect to the word of God, as well as any other, and hath speciall commaundement to haue the Booke of the Law by him continually to be exercised therein, and he shall be punished for his transgressions as well as any other. This denunciation is made by man from God, but the execution is in Gods owne hand. If a subiect transgresse, then he is punished, because the king is eustos vtriusque tabulae. Hee hath the Couenant in keeping; he must be true and faithfull to his maister in punishing, protecting, rewarding his fellow seruants, acco^rding to his Lords appoyntment, not after his owne lust, and pleasure. Nemo sui iuris est praeter Deum. And things indifferent, wherein they haue most power, must not bee

discordant from things necessary, but attendants and ornaments, not disparagements thereto. No man is his owne, hee neyther standeth nor falleth, liueth nor dieth to himselfe, but all to God. All men are to be reprooued and punished by the king, but the King by God alone: God denounceth iudgement by men, but executeth by himselfe. If the Kingsmaners displease thee, looke to thy selfe, and consider the beame that is in thine owne eyes. For thou in thy state and dealings, and to thy power ar^ bad enough, and if honour and power were put vpon thy backe, what manner of man wouldest thou be? Magistratus indicat virum. What wouldest thou doe? Great matters surely. It may be somewhat for a while. If the burden of the whole kingdome were layde on thy backe, thou wouldest beare it lustily. Euen as a child set vpon the back of a proude, stomackfull, vnruly horse, would ride lustily. Art thou in an office? Looke to thy selfe how thou execucutest that. Art thou rich? what good doest thou? How behauest thou thy selfe towards thy poore neighbours, and tenants and seruants? Thou art now a Scholler, what if thou wert a Schoolemaister? Dost thou know what thou art? what thou wouldest be thou well knowest not. Something lyeth curbed and pind vp in a secret corner, as flies in winter, that the warme Sunne-shine of Authoritie and Honour would produce. If the handmaid were mistresse, how gentle, kinde, and good would shee be to her fellow seruants and poore neighbours? Salomon saith, Prouerbs 30. 21. 22. 23. For three things the earth is disquieted, and for foure which it can not beare* for a seruant when he reigneth, and a foole, when he is filled with meate, an odious or froward woman when she is married, and an handmaid, when she is beire to her mistresse, that is, her maisters wife.
And curse not the rich in thy bed-chamber. The second part of the Admonition, answerable to the second part of the complaint. By rich are meant Nobles, and higher powers. Speake not euill of the King and his peeres, otherwise then their dignity requireth. For they represent the person of the King, as he doth of God, and their authority

is his authority and power. Therefore speake no euill of them, neither in publicke nor in priuate, not in the hearing of thy best friend, nor in thine owne hearing alone, as the manner of some is to talke to themselues, vse not that. For as they that talke in a dreame know it not; so if thou beest talkatiue in thy bed-chamber of such things, it will out in another place ere thou be aware. And out of the aboundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
For a bird of the aire shall carry the voice. A reason inforcing the admonition. It shall not be kept secret, but reuealed; or thou shalt be punished as if it were reuealed. Briefly, thou shalt surely be punished. This certaintie of punishment is confirmed by the possibility of an impossibility in nature, to take away all manner of obiections. How shall my thought, and priuate or solitary speech be known, none hearing of it? If it cannot otherwise be knowne, then the bird that flyeth ouer thy head, or is wandring aboue in the aire, shall perceiue thy thought, and heare thy voice, and relate the same to the King; so shalt thou be punished. And if the King of Kings shall punish thee, who knoweth the secrets of thine heart, it is all one as if thy words were brought to the kings eare.
And that which hath wings shall tell the matter. An amplification of the reason by a commemoration to inculcate the same more deeply into the heart. The bird shall speedily carry it, the Poste shall not ride on horsebacke, but be caried on wings. Thou shalt not onely certainly, but speedily be punished. Wilfull murder and treason will out. For euery man is the image of God, and the King is next to him, his surrogate.




CHAPTER XI.


Verse 1.
Cast thy bread vpon the waters: for thou shalt finde it As the first degree of felicity consisted in the comfortable vse of worldly things, and wise auoidance of euils: so the second degree thereof consisteth in doing good, communicating and ^o^palsionating of others. The former, in one terme may be called sobriety, this charitie.after many dayes.

THis Chapter setteth down a soueraigne remedy against the vanities, Chap 9. that seeme to carnall reason to be in the diuine administration of the world, to arme the soule against despaire, distrust in Gods prouidence, carnall securitie, d ssolute and carelesse liuing, Epicurisme, to take away the offence of the weake, who hearing that all things are caried hand ouer head in the gouernment of the world, may begin to be weary of well doing, and to giue themselues ouer to carnalitie. Whereas contrarily, letting alone things that are aboue our reach, we must lay hold on the commandement that is before vs, in our eyes and eares, and be more carefull and diligent, working out our reward with feare and trembling, with all confidence in Gods prouidence and promises, howsoeuer things be caried and ruled aboue and against mans reason. It is enough for the seruant to do his maisters will. And also to learne to vnderstand and know the secret wayes of God out of his word in all these things, which the blinde world confound, and terme chance and fortune. As before he hath diuers times taught, that the good of worldly things consisted in the bodily vse thereof, the sustenance or comfortable maintenance of the body; so now he farther teacheth the spirituall vse thereof, or good of the soule, which consisteth in the exercise of saith and charitie therewith. For in doing good, and communicating to others that need our helpe, we make our loue to God, and faith in Gods promises more certaine to our selues. In these times many search into the secret counsell of God for their assurance, and are much perplexed

about predestination, but in the meane time are full of pride and couetousnesse, and worldly pompe, which in baptisme they haue promised to forsake. Their spirit is full of guile. If they could by deep search know their election, they would assuredly beleeue in him, and confidently rely on him, and cheere their flesh in these transitory dayes. If they can attaine to this assurance, but some doubt still perplexeth them, they will yet be sure of one thing, to liue in pride, pompe, pleasure here on earth. So that whether they be sure, they will liue in pride and pleasure, or not sure, they will liue in pride and pleasure. Whatsoeuer else they can attaine to be sure of, this in the meane time they will be sure of. But whiles they follow the pride, pompe, couetousnes, ease and pleasures of the world, as many doe, they shall be alwayes in perplexitie as many are. Shew me thy faith by thy workes of loue or charitie, sayth Saint Iames to such like Christians in his dayes, and I will shew thee my faith by my workes; so shall we not deceiue our selues, nor be deceiued one of another. Men imagine many things, and talke of many things, but the worke done, sheweth the resolution of the spirit. The whole course or frame of life is the spirit. The condition of life sheweth infallibly the conditure of the spirit. Simulations and dissimulations are but friuolous couerings. Summer will shew it selfe to be Summer, whatsoeuer the weather be; so will Winter shew it selfe, let the weather be as faire as it will be. An hypocrite will shew himselfe, do what he can to the contrary; and he that truly feareth God, cannot be hid with infirmities or slanders. The thick clouds cannot turne day into night, nor the brightest Moone, night into day. He that is dead to the world, and to the lusts thereof, and beleeueth in God, is mercifull and liberall: but faithlesse worldlings will needs breake into Paradise againe without Christ, which Solomon in this book reclaimeth them from. The diuell and the flesh are their deceiuers and helpers, and so their whole life is nothing but a Gigantomachie, the Giants battell against God, his word, his Ministers, his people. They liue like pompous and proud beasts, and die like filthy beasts, their glory is to

their shame, that minde earthly things. To conclude, this Chapter hath two parts: first a Catascue, instruction or confirmation, to vers. 7. Secondly, an Anascue, destruction or refutation, from thence to the end.
Concerning the first, it is an instruction or remedy propounded by way of exhortation. This remedy is liberality or bountifulnesse, grounded on faith and confidence in God alone, and contrary to humane reason. If wee doe good to others, God cannot do ill to vs: and if we beleeue in him, his promises cannot faile. But why doth Solomon here aboue all other vertues bring this for a speciall antidote against the former vanities and miseries of this life? Go aske Saint Paul why he so extolleth charity aboue all gifts, 1. Cor. 13. Againe, what vertue more becommeth a Christian then charity, which is to shew mercy as he hath receiued mercy, and to do good as he hath receiued good. He that receiueth good, and doth none, maketh God his seruant, and himselfe a god, a god of this world, or diuell. Againe, God requireth the practise of this vertue of vs more strictly, and inforceth the same, and imprinteth the same in the memory by his owne example, Ioh. 13. 4. to vers. 17. here is the vertue of charity dramatically set forth before their eyes, and things seene cannot be forgotten. Also Ioh. 15. 12. Lastly, we shall be iudged by the workes of charity at the last day, Math 25. Come yee blessed of my Father, etc. but this is not meant of morall, or ethnicall workes, Pharisaicall, Popish workes. For sinners are bountifull to sinners, they giue and lend, and that freely sometimes to such like as themselues in fleshly respects. But Christ saith, Whatsoeuer ye did to the least of my brethen, yee did to me.
Cast thy bread vpon the waters. Euery word of this sentence is emphaticall. Cast, that is to say, giue with a good heart willingly, and readily, and freely, not being bound at all to the loue of earthly things, as Dauid saith, If riches increase, set not your heart vpon them, Psal. 62. 10. and God loueth an open heart, or cheerfull giuer, that giueth confidently without feare, and freely without compulsion.

This goodnesse of the heart in this respect consisteth of these particulars:
I. Thankefulnesse, when vpon consideration of Gods mercy and bounty towards vs in Christ, we deuote in way of thankfulnesse our goods, not onely to our owne vse, but to the poore, and to the Church. 2. Cor. 8. 5. The Macedonians first gaue themselues to the Lord, and after to the Apostles, and to the poore at their request. And the citizens of Tyrus being conuerted, deuote their merchandize and gaines to the Lord, Esay 23. 18. Her merchandize shall not be layd vp and kept in store, but it shall be for them that dwel before the Lord, to eate sufficiently etc.
II. Loue, 1. Cor. 13. 3. If a man giue all that he hath, and hath not loue, it is nothing. Many build Hospitals for the poore, and so do Turks also; but the Lords poore, the brethren of Christ, Math. 25. they know not: nay, they had rather take from such poore.
III. Compassion. We must reioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that weepe: wee must relieue them that want, and make their case our owne. The wicked churle sayth, do as they will, shift as they can, etc. when he dispossesseth a poore tenant for a little more rent; for one poore man will oppresse and dispossesse another, and this is like the raging storme that destroyeth all things. It is the voice of a beast, not of a man; euery beast careth onely for himselfe, and when one is fallen, the other tread vpon him, and goare him, and so do beastly men.
IIII. Simplicitie; and that is when we aime at neither profit nor praise, but intend to obey the commandement of God. Therefore sayth Christ, Math 6. 3. Let not the left hand know what the right doth. Giue in vprightnesse and sinceritie of heart, whether in priuate or publicke; otherwise he that giueth, giueth not to God, but to himselfe; that is the meaning of these words.
V. Cheerfulnesse. Rich men must distribute and communicate, for God loueth a cheerfull giuer. 1. Tim. 6 16 Solomon sayth, Prou. 3. 28. Say not to thy neighbour, go, and come againe to morrow, and I will giue it thee, if thou hast it now.

Iob sayth, that he restrained not the desire of the poore, nor made the eie of the widdow to faile, Iob 31. 16.
VI. Bountifulnesse. He that soweth plentifully, shall reape plentifully, 2. Cor. 7.
Bread. A Synecdoche of the Speciall. By Bread he meaneth all kinde of sustenance and maintenance, meate, drinke, apparrell, lodging, money, Matth. 25. 35. etc. euen whatsoeuer our brethren stand in neede of, wherein wee are able to helpe them, their soules, bodies, states. For we must not onely helpe a man when he is fallen, with our almes, but assist him before he fall with our reliefe, and succour, both by giuing and lending. The deceitful hearts of hypocrites and churles is herein damnable. They will relieue or assist no man, but suffer him to fall, yea occasion, and cause his fall to buy vp all that he hath, for neede maketh good penny worths. Then will they; nay, then must they relieue him on the common almes, wherin the churle for his part will beare the least charge. And if for his great penny worth hee doth any thing of free will, hee thinketh that hee hath done a great worke, deseruing great commendation, and reward at Gods hands. These are the common good workes and almes of the deceitfull world. They are most commonly like vnto persecuters and robbers that doe giue (sometimes) to the poore part of their stollen goods. It is (indeede) nothing but the offering of a Dogs head, and Swines bloud in facrifice, yet they thinke to merit heauen therewith.
Thy bread. Therefore thou must giue thine owne, not as mercilesse churles doe, guilefully; nor yet as their fellow thieues doe, which steale much from one, and giue alittle to another; or benefit one, and hurt many. The thiefe that robbeth by the highway giueth to the poore, that beggeth by the highway, and hee is counted a good maister, but hee shall be hanged for his goodnesse, if hee be apprehended. Consider this ye couetous persons, extortioners, vsurers, and all vnlawfull getters, that enrich your selues by the hinderance of other men, God indeede may in mercie accept your repentance, but your gifts and great workes

are abhominable in the sight of God without repentance, and deniall of all your deceitfull and false goodnesse. For God is no receiuer of stollen goods. If yee bee contented with that which ye can lawfully get in a lawfull calling, and trust in him, giuing a little of a little, yee shall please him better, then otherwise with thousands. Be thou content, and let them do great workes into whose hands God hath put much wealth. If they will not, their damnation shalbe the greater, and God shall dispose of their wealth as pleaseth him, it may be, to thee, or thine. The widdowes mite shall be as great a gift, in the sight of God, the rewarder of euery worke, as the great summes of Princes in the eyes of men. As for the gift of the couetous person, vsurer, extortioner, or oppressour, it is but the sacrificing of a dogges head, and swines bloud, as I sayd before, it is but a bribe to make God partaker of their theft and robberies, Amos 2. 8. vnlesse it be in the way of restitution vpon vnfained repentance, as Zacheus did. Many, chiefly Popish worldlings will doe no good whiles they liue, but at their last end they thinke to merit heauen with a great funerall feast, or gift of money, of an house, or of some land out of their superfluity. They haue indeed made many good bargaines in their life, and this is one of the best. The earnest penny indeede is offered, if it will be receiued, but heauen cannot be so bought. A wise man goeth forth to his worke in the morning, he taketh the day before him; but this person will beginne at Sunne-set (if at all) when the gates of the Citty are shut. In the time of life I heard him say often, that all things may be done for mony, and with the bribe hath he procured himselfe much fauour, and auoyded deserued punishment, and the beast thinketh now to deale so with God. For I see no token of a penitent and contrite heart, nor sorrow for sinne, but iustifying of himselfe, no restitution, but onely a gift giuen out of superfluity; and sometimes nothing at all.
Vpon the waters. An illustration of the right manner of giuing, by a similitude of Seede or Bread sowne or cast vpon the Seas, signifying not only the sincerity and freedome

of the heart in giuing, but also the persons to whom it is giuen. The wise worldling thinketh that whatsoeuer is giuen is lost; and if neither profit, nor praise of men, nor any thing redound at all to him againe, hee counteth it quite lost. Therefore respecting himselfe onely in euery thing, (neither can hee doe otherwise) hee counteth that which is giuen to the poore Minister, who is nearest vnto God, cleerly cast away, because the worldling is either Popish or Turkish, either an hypocrite or plaine ethnicke, neither would he haue any man that feareth God to haue any thing. His spirit telleth him that he is of the world, and hath his portion in this life onely, therefore he claymeth the world as his owne right to himselfe, and such as are seruiceable and pleasing to his flesh. Their spirit, I say, sayth as their father the diuell sayd, Luc. 4. All is mine, and I giue it to whom I will. The children of God are not for the profit or praise of worldlings, therefore would they haue the world rid of them. They cry with open mouth, away with them.
The persons to whom we must giue, are the poore, such as need our reliefe and almes, that is, such as are not able to labour for liuing, by reason of sicknesse, age, etc. These poore are either good, or else prophane, idle, Belials, donaughts. The good are those that liue honestly, and labour truly for their liuing as health and strength will permit, and are thankfull to God and to their benefactors. These are a fertile soyle, worth the cost and labour, and plenty of good seed. For that which is done to them, is done to Christ himselfe. He calleth them his brethren, Math. 25. 40. and his little ones. To these must we doe good especially, or else it is a sure token that the loue of God is not in vs. For he that seeth his brother haue need, and shutteth vp his compassion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? Againe, the Law sayth, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. The Macedonians were willing to their power, and beyond their power to relieue their poore brethren, 2. Cor. 8. 3. yet it is not meant that a man should ease others and burthen himselfe, as he that lendeth his money without increase to him

that is richer then himselfe, and in the meane time wanteth necessaries, vers. 13. but to make an equality in supplying one anothers want, vers. 14. Neither is this meant to confound callings, for euery one must be content with his calling, as Paul sayth of seruants, etc. but to relieue mens wants in their callings, yea and friendly to helpe them forward; not to enuy and suppresse on euery side, that we our selues may be aloft alone, and haue all at our owne disposing. Neither yet in wants is it meant of an Arithmeticall equality, but Geometricall, as the Philosophers say, that reliefe be giuen according to the need and worthinesse of the person. I say worthinesse; for the houshold of faith is specially to be relieued, though our All-alikes can abide no difference, except in this, that as the world loueth his owne, so do they most affect their rascals and claw-backs. Herein they make a difference, for to these are they very bountifull, when they will not bestow a good looke vpon a poore Minister, nor honest poore man, these must licke their liuing of the thorne, and chew vpon the bridle. They will haue no difference at all of grace and morality, (this difference the Papist cannot abide) morality and flattery, infirmities and prophanenesse, but all must be alike. But when all is alike, that is to say, darknesse and carnality, (for that their spirit intendeth) then will their pride make distinctions and degrees enough. And this is nothing but to draw all from God, that they themselues might be gods, censuring and iudging, iustifying and condemning, helping and forsaking men accordingly as they please, and as they are pleased.
The other sort of poore are neuer-goods or doenaughts, that haue liued idlely, and brought themselues into want, and in want are still idle and thanklesse, abusing themselues euen in that litle which they haue, and is giuen them. These are a barren soyle for a man to cast his seede vpon. They are water that consumeth and rotteth the seede or bread that is cast into it; and so in respect of them it is lost. For they are rather ready to speake euill, and doe uill to those that doe them good, and walke about with

lies; yet in their necessity and misery must we help them, though they be naught, because we our selues are good, euen the children of God, and followers of God, who causeth the raine to fall, and the Sunne to shine vpon all. Christ healed the nine vnthankefull Leapers, as well as the tenth, and he did good to vs when wee were his enemies. He prayed for his persecuters, for he came to saue, not to destroy. And Salomon sayth, Doe good for the commaundement sake. Relieue the godly in loue, the euill in pittie: we may be sure of this, that our gift to the euil in that sense shall doe vs good, and him good also, and more happly then we are aware of; this being excepted, that wee minister not matter to his wickednesse. I meane, that our liberalitie be not meanes to maintayne his idlenesse, drunkennesse, whooredome, etc. to our knowledge. (Yet many are too wise, too circumspect heerein; they proue naught in seeming to be too good.) In this case lend to the poore, and lend not) and if he be without grace or gouernment, put thy meate into his mouth, but let him not finger thy money, neyther be surety for such, lest the weight of his folly be layd on thy backe. For hee hath the plague, and would haue all alike with him. The prodigall loueth not parsimony. His nature is to vndoe all that deale with him, and follow his humours; neyther regarde his serpentine tongue, it is no slaunder. As his necke is, so let him chew such a bit. For Salomon sayth, That a wise man ordereth his affaires by discretion. Be not ashamed, saith the sonne of Syrach, to beate an ydle stubborne seruant to the blood. And Nature teacheth vs to cast out vnprofitable Drones. But what Drone can be worse then those that curse, murmure, and speake euill of their Benefactors, when as they should pray for them? Lastly, the Law sayth, Respect not the poore for his pouerty, giue righteous iudgement. By all this we learne what to do with an euill tongued Drone, and a sturdy loynes, and what course to take with the wicked labouring man, that spendeth all, and spareth naught, because the Parish must keepe his children. Some such like poore there are. Lastly, we must do good to strangers

whom wee neuer sawe, and are neuer like to see agayne; which are signified by waters also.
For thou shalt finde it after many dayes. A reason to enforce this duty. Thy benefit shall not be fruitlesse, though it seeme to be cast into the Sea, and vtterly lost; yet it is in the hand of the Lord, who shall restore it to thee agayne with aduantage. The Seede that is seattered abroade vpon the ground, seemeth to be lost; yet it groweth by little and little, and commeth in the end to a plentifull haruest; so shall that doe which is sowne on the waters. The poore are compared to ground, 2. Cor. 7. ready dressed and tilled to our hands, and our reliefe is seede cast vpon it; and for our paynes and cost in sowing it, we are promised to reape the whole croppe our selues. For he saith Deuteron. 15. 10. The Lord thy God shall blesse thee in all thy workes, and in all that thou puttest thine hand vnto, Prouer. 19. 17. He that hath pittie on the poore, lendeth to the Lord, and that which he hath giuen will he pay him againe. Also Math. 10. 42. He that giueth but a cuppe of colde water to one of these little ones, in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward. A cuppe of colde water giuen in this sence, is better then thousands and millions in a carnall respect. For God respecteth the intent of the heart onely, as for the gift it selfe, that is Gods owne already; the whole world is his owne, he hath no neede of our gifts, it is his already, and he can giue it to whom hee will, hee maketh heires; therefore hee respecteth not the greatnesse of the gift, but the sinceritie of the giuer; hee needeth, I say, nothing from vs, who can feede his poore at his pleasure, but we haue neede of faith and obedience, that he might be glorified in our saluation, whose glorie is not diminished, though we were all damned. If God blesse and prosper a man in his person, familie, cattell Lands, he shall soone be rich, although his beginning be right little. For it is not to be regarded, how much a man hath, but how it prospereth. Corne, hempe, flaxe, trees, hearbs grow in a shortspace, but no man seeth how; so is it with him whom God prospereth. For first, God giues him wisdome, and a right forecast. Secondly, there is a blessing vppon it,

which is aboue all indeuours. Some man groweth rich, no man knoweth how, nor himselfe neyther. Agayne, some becommeth poore, hee knoweth not how; neyther can any man well tell him. Moreouer, besides the continuall successe of his labours, God stirreth vp others to doe good to him after many dayes vpon long triall of his faith and constancie; and the Lord maketh heyres at his pleasure, lands and goods are in his disposing. But the wisedome of the flesh is quite contrary. The way to be rich, is to spend nothing, to giue nothing, to oppresse the poore, to detaine their wages etc.
There was in a certaine place, one that went among the neighbours to craue some beneuolence towards the Ministers maintenance, three of the richest and wisest (so reputed) gaue these answers. One said; The more I do giue, the lesse I haue. Another olde man said; I see the fore-end of my life, but I see not my latter: I may come to want that which I now giue. The third said; I know what I haue heere, but I am not sure what reward I shall haue when I am dead. His meaning was, that if he had beene sure that there were a Kingdome of glory, hee would haue giuen somewhat to haue purchased it. And a fourth olde man said; That he was old, and past preaching, let his sonne, if he would, giue to preaching. Yea and another aged man said; That he knew how to bestow his money better. Heere is fleshly wisedome, which is enmity to the Law of God But the word of God teacheth quite contrary. The former is mans wisedome, sensuall and diuellish, but this following is Gods. He that will be rich, let him bestow freely on the poore; he that will giue, shall get; it is better to giue then to take; he that will saue his life, shall lose it; and contrarily, he that will keepe and saue his goodes, shall lose them; and hee that will cast them away, shall saue and encrease them, and that eyther by prosperitie, and continuall good successe in innumerable small partciulars thereof; or else afterward, as the Lord prouided for the faithfull widdow of Sarepta, when she looked for nothing but death; yet of that little Meale and Oyle that was left, shee serued the Lords Prophet first: a worthy example of faith. And Abigael,

for a smal present bestowed on Dauid in his necessity, became a Queene, whereas churlish Nabal was strucken dead. So do these couetous wretches rake mony together for other men that neuer sweat for it.



Verse 2.
Giue a portion to seuen, and also to eight: for thou knowest not what euill shall be vpon the earth.

THis verse setteth downe the extent of our liberality, shewing to how many we must giue. Giue a portion to seuen, and also to eight. A Synecdoche of the speciall, a finite number being put for an infinite; as Christ answered to Peter, Forgiue not thy brother till seuen times, but till seuenty seuen times. This maner of speech is vsed, Mica 5. 5. Then shall we raise against him seuen shepheards, and eight principall men: that is, so many shepheards, both teachers and rulers as shall sufficiently feed the Church of Christ, and defend it from the enemies, and breake the power thereof. Therefore we must giue to all that need our helpe. Luke 6. Giue to euery one that asketh. As charity maketh a difference of persons, so againe it respecteth euery mans necessity to giue to him according to his need. A gift bestowed on a mans necessity, is not lost, because it is put into the hands of God, that is done for the commandement sake, and of pity. For God regardeth the heart of the giuer, not the gift, nor so much the person to whom. A small gift of a good heart is great; and contrarily.
For thou knowest not what euill shall be vpon the earth. How long thou shalt enioy thy goods, thou knowest not, and what need thou or thine may come to, thou knowest nor. Surely, with what measure a man meateth, to him it shall be measured againe. Blessed is he (sayth Dauid) that prouideth for the sicke and needy, the Lord shall deliuer him in time of trouble. Diues prouided for his owne belly, but nothing for the poore, but aft rward he stood in need of Lazarus helpe, but in vaine. So shall it be wi^h euery rich glutton that loueth himselfe and hateth the poore, When the rich mans soule is in hell, then shall his goods be dispersed on the earth, and his children vagabonds, begging

their bread, and sometimes hanged for their leudnesse. As the diuels fetched away the soule of the couetous rich man Luk. 12. so commonly do^vsurers, whores, and other miscreants carry away their goods. Surely, if Diues could haue risen from the dead, he would haue done good; but the Apostle sayth, While we haue time, let vs do^good, while we are liuing, and haue goods to bestow. For while we are liuing, they are ours, afterwards they are none of ours: we are now the stewards of them, let vs now make friends of the vnrighteous Mammon, let vs worke while we haue the instrument in our hands, and do good while God giueth power to do it. For riches are for the time our gift or talent, to be layd out and vsed for our Lords aduantage. It is a folly not to do good in time of life, but to deferre till death, as many brute heads do, seruing God as they list, and how and when they list, seruing themselues first, and if ought leaue, then shall God haue something; contrary to the practise of the faithfull widow of Sarepta, as though God were a begger that stood need at all times, and so nothing could come amisse, nor at any time amisse, and that he must depend on vs, and be thankfull to vs. Thou foole and mad man, God biddeth thee doe good in time of strength, not at thy last end; he respecteth thy faith and obedience to his commandement, not thy gift, which is his owne, not thine. Hast thou his grace at command? Thou that wilt not now do good, shalt not then. For he will cut thee off suddenly, thou shalt die in thy sinne; nay in stead of doing good, thou shalt haply end thy dayes in cursing and blaspheming God, and in fearfull desperation. Againe, thou wilt giue to the poore at thy last end, etc. How many are suddenly taken, as one arrested by the Sergeant? and as thou hast bene vnfaithfull to the poore, so may thy executors be to thee and them. But i^ the poore be partakers thereof, that is no good to thee, but thy faith and obedience should haue bene rewarded. The commandement is giuen to men liuing, not to men dying. Thou hast alwayes bene a theefe, and art so still, for this is but a small part of that which thou hast vniustly withheld from the poore, and

wrongfully gotten. Therefore thou art but as one going to the execution for theft, and restoring some small part of his stollen goods to the poore as he goeth, which cannot free him from the gallowes, and leauing the rest to his babes, which shall be taken, yea stollen from them againe, or wither away, they cannot tell how. For the curse of the poore is vpon their patrimony, though themselues be safe.



Verse 3.
If the clouds be full of raine, they emptie themselues vpon the earth: and if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.

A Confirmation drawne from the creatures, or law of nature, whereof two are specified; full clouds, and fruitfull trees. Or, they are an illustration of the rich mans duty or stewardship, and vse of worldly goods, by the similitudes or examples of clouds and trees, vegetables and meteors, euen all the creatures. As the clouds being full, doe not withhold their raine, but powre it downe vpon the earth; so the rich man must not hoord vp his treasures or goods from others. When the merchants of Tyre repented, they left off to hoord vp riches and gaine, according to their old manner, and dedicated them to holy vses. Our Sauiour sayth, Giue almes, and lay vp treasure in heauen. Thus did Iob, and the faithfull in the Primitiue Church sold their possessions to communicate to the needy. Moreouer, the clouds do not raine vpon certaine mens grounds, certaine fields and woods, but vpon all places and all things where they are caried with the windes. So the truly mercifull, namely he that is receiued to mercy, sheweth mercy on all, his compassion is extended to all; which generall extent is a print or stampe of Gods mercy set in his heart, to wit, that he is receiued to mercy, and is againe truly mercifull, a fruite of the former. Christ sayth, Be yee mercifull, as your heauenly Father is mercifull. Now he sheweth mercy on all, as Paul saith, He is the Sauiour of all men, especially of them that beleeue. Rich mens houses are Gods

store-houses. His gold, siluer, corne, wine, oyle, etc. is not layd vp in euery house, nor the charge and dispensation thereof committed to euery one, but to certaine persons and places, where it must not lye as a talent hid in the ground, but be dispersed abroad among other men. For ^e that hath giuen power, right and a commandement to gather his frui es, hath also giuen a commandement how to dispose them. As the clouds, so all creatures haue their fulnesse, which is not for themselues, but for the earth; and they enuy their raine to no man. The rich mansfulnesse is not for himselfe, but for all, and he must enuy the same to no man, for that is hatefull to God and man. For the earth is the Lords, with the fulnesse thereof, and the creatures with the fulnesse thereof; euery fulnesse is for man, and euery man hath a fulnesse to be rained vpon all, to be distributed and communicated* to all; and that is his gift or talent. All creatures haue not one kind of fulnesse, nor all members one office, nor all men in a corporation one trade. But euery one distributeth his fulnesse, and is serued of the fulnesse of others, that there may be a supply of all necessaries to euery man, and an equality. He that retaineth his fulnesse to rot within him; is worthily hated. For he is a drone and a theefe. Therefore Saint Iames threatneth iudgment, mourning, and woe to them, Iam. 5. 1. 2. 3. The rottennesse of their riches, the mothes of their garments, the canker and rust of their gold and siluer shall be a witnesse against them, and eate vp their flesh as fire.
And if the tree falleth, etc. The trees bring forth fruite for man, so must man do for man. They are fruitfull on euery side, and where their fruite falleth, there it lyeth for all that need it: so must euery man be fruitfull of good workes, as he hath receiued the gift and the fulnesse thereof. And in what place soeuer the tree groweth it fructifieth, so doth a good man out of the good treasure of his heart bring forth good vnto all, wheresoeuer he is,




Verse 4.
He that obserueth the winde, shall not sow: and he that regardeth the clouds, shall not reape.

THe former exhortation is figured by a double Prolepsis in this and the next verse: wherein the answers are wholly set downe, figured by an allegory, but the obiections are vnderstood. The first is concerning the time, and persons. First, for the time. They say, that now they are not prouided to giue, they haue rents to pay, they haue an hard Landlord, (it is because thou art hard to the poore, Mat. 7. 2.) they haue a purchase to pay for. They haue layd all out vpon house, land, cattell, they will hereafter do something. When they die, they will make a bequest to the poore. (Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.) Mony is scant, (but grace is more scant,) they feare a dearth, (that is the churles desire) therefore they cannot yet do good.
Secondly, concerning the persons. They alledge that they should haue bene more prouident and painfull in former times, that they are vnworthy of any thing; that they are leud and wicked (like thy selfe) and will spend it naughtily (as thou gettest it,) that all is lost which is put into a riuen dish (not in a close chest,) they must not doe for euery one (that do all for themselues,) and so out of their selfeloue, distrust and infidelity, they pretend a thousand excuses and delayes, they find innumerable obstacles to hinder them that they shall neuer do any good thing at all.
The answer hereto, is illustrated by a similitude of the sower and the reaper. He that obserueth the winde, shall not sow. He that stands vpon winde and weather, calme and sunshine, shall neuer sow his seed in the spring. Now it is rainy, now a drisling fog and claggie, now snow-like, now frosty and dry, now windy and stormy, etc. no weather pleaseth, he will tarry for a more conuenient season, and that comes to be out of season, and sometimes, when earing time is past. It is colde, threfore the slouch will not plow, Prou. 20. 4. It raineth, the land will be too heauie; it dris^eth, that will rot the furniture: the windes are aloft, that

will blow his seed on heapes; it is ouermoist, that will cause weeds; it is ouerdrie and frost-like, the seed will not come vp; it is a faire day and a conuenient season, but there is a Lion in the way. So the wicked rich cannot sow the seed of good workes, for want of a conuenient time and person. Either the weather or land is not in tune, because himselfe is out of tune. But the strong man attaineth to riches, the good husbandman ouerpowreth the weather, and the stars: so a good heart of gracious disposition can do good at all times, and to all persons, hee is armed against all weathers.
And he that regardeth the clouds, shall not reape. Hee that will tarry for a conuenient season of his owne deuising, shall reape his owne deuice, euen nothing. He that will not sow till he see and be sure of faire weather, shall haply neuer mow, but let his corne, rot on the ground, or be all eaten with beasts and birds. We must take the time as it is, and reape the fruites as they are. As we serue others, so are we serued againe. Some man will do good when he is old, some when he dieth, some after death by his last will; some feare pouertie and want hereafter; some haue now no leisure; some alledge the vnworthinesse and vnthankfulnesse of the poore: but none of these can finde a time when, nor a person to whom to do good, till death summon them to iudgement, and then come they with their talent tied vp in a napkin. Their reward shall be according to their workes.



Verse 5.
As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the wombe of her that is with child: euen so thou knowest not the workes of God who maketh all.

AN answer to the second obiection, concerning a mans selfe, arising from his diffidence in Gods prouidence, and deniall of his power. It is thus: I know not what need I may stand hereafter, for I see not my latter end, I must prouide also for my wife and children; the more that I lay vp the more shall they finde, this I am sure of; and the more that I giue, the lesse I haue, that I am as sure of

I will not depend on chaunces, fortunes, and vaine hope, I will not make my selfe richer by other mens goodes, and hee that waiteth for olde mens shooes, may happily goe bare foote in the meane time; and a bird in the hand is far better then two in the wood: (but if she die, and be turned into rottennesse in thine hand, or bee poyson to thee when thou eatest her, what art thou the better?) how, or which way shall God doe this or that for me, or mine? what will he doe for me? when will he doe it? While the grasse groweth, the horse dyeth in the meane time; I will first relie on mine owne prouidence, and on Gods afterward. I will doe for my selfe, (yea by stealing and lying amongest hands;) such like were the distrustfull and blasphemous speeches of the Israelites in the wildernesse, which are set forth as ensamples for our admonition. They also limited Gods power and prouidence. How shall we do for bread and water in this barren and thirsty desert? Can God prepare a Table in the wildernesse? Wee are wearie of this Manna, can hee giue vs flesh? would to God wee were in Aegypt agayne: (or in the bottome of the redde Sea with Pharaohs armie, if God should deale with you according to your deserts, but that hee respecteth his promise to Abraham, and glory of his name amongst the heathen.)
The answer is illustrated by a similitude. As thou knowest not what is the way of the Spirit. Leane not to thine owne wisedome, nor limite the power of God. Hee hath commaunded, thou must obey without reasons. He hath promised, thou must beleeue without interrogatories; thou must not binde him to times and meanes. His secresie is his glorie, none is of his counsell, neither is any worthy or able, for his wisedome is infinite* his goodnesse is to all, and his mercy is ouer all his workes, and on them that feare him throughout all generations. As thou knowest not the way of the winde, when it shall come, whence it commeth, or whither, or how it goeth: and as thou knowest not how the bones doe grow in the wombe, so neyther canst thou know the workes of God, who maketh all by the word of his power, and gouernes all by the word of his prouidence;

he onely is all in all, shewing mercy and iustice on all. Feare and obey therefore, trust not thine owne counterfeit imaginations, make not a world nor an estate to thy selfe after thine owne will, for all that shall be but as the cracking of thornes vnder a pot. Thy flame shall seeme great, thy noise loud, but both shall sodainly vanish into light ashes: without Gods blessing thy riches shall neuer doe thee good, thy prouision shall come to naught, none of thine for whome thou art so carefull shall be the better for it. For a curse is vpon it. God blesseth his owne gifts, not thy gatherings, his owne ordinance, not thy deuice. The Manna gathered on the weeke day by Gods appoyntment, prospered, but that which was gathered on the Sabaoths morning by the couetous, fearefull, and distrustfull, was putrified and full of wormes; and they that were not content with Gods allowance, but would haue flesh, had their desire; but their desire was wicked, therefore their flesh brought a plague with it. Neither did the Manna nor the flesh of their owne gathering and desiring doe them good. For there was the man, but the meate was taken away; here was the meate, but the man was taken away. So it is now. Therefore, be thou contented, hope in him, bee doing good, and thou shalt haue good, and thy good shall be good to thee, and continue with thee. Be sure of this, that of doing good there can come none euill, neyther can wickednesse prosper. If thou hast goods in thine owne hands, and canst looke vpon them, thou art joyfull; and if they be in the hand of God, not yet giuen thee, distrust not. That which is in Gods hands, is (by faith) surer to thee then that which is in thine owne hands, if thou doest but looke vpon thy sinnefull and polluted hands aswell as vpon thy goods in them. Thy sinnes shall take these from thee, and thy faith shall bring the other to thee. Note this worke of God in the world. There is many a rich heyre that can neuer be at ease till all his patrimony be spent. Againe, there is that cannot thriue till his foule inheritance be cleane washed away, or his hands cleansed of that filth, and then afterwards he prospereth and attaineth to riches. For the man that sets

his heart to gather for his children, withdraweth himselfe commonly from relieuing the poore, and so bringeth a curse on his house and lands, the executioner whereof is the heyre for whom he laboured. Hee that hath grace to beleene, to trust in God, to doe good, whether hee hath much or little, is heyre to all things, and shall want nothing that is for his good: and God knoweth what is for our good better then we; he is our father, the Ancient of daies, most wise, wee are but children, etc. Therefore feare not, God shall bring it to passe, cast thy care on him, onely be doing good. The good Counsellor shall want no Clients; the good Physition no patients; the good Tradesman no custome; the man that feareth God no friends and helpers. For the hearts of all men are in Gods hands, and his workes aboue reason, and beyond expectation are infinite; to conclude, limite not God, but considder how the Lord brought Ionas to Nineue; and by what meanes he aduanced Ioseph, and prouided for Iacob with his sonnes in the great and long famine of Canaan.



Verse 6.
In the morning sowe thy seede, and in the euening with-hold not thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, eyther this or that, or whether they both both shall be alike good.

A Conclusion of the exhortation, verses 2. 3. 4. 5. with the answers to the obiections, verses 4. 5. figured by an Allegorie. Therefore, in the morning sowe thy seede, and in the euening, etc. Lay out thy goods bountifully, and that with a good and free heart in the morning, and let the day care for it selfe. Doe good all the day vntill the euening, and then also* and thus doe from day to day. Then shalt thou rest in peace, and sleepe in safetie, when thou hast reposed thy selfe on God. Doe good in thy young age, and mortifie the lusts of youth, and cares of middle age, and continue in well doing till olde age, and be then weary of life, but not of well doing; neither weary of life to do well. And in thy last end, finish thy good life well, and doe some good worke after thou hast taken thy leaue of the world,

and turned thy backe, as the last word after a farewell for a memoriall and good ensample to the liuing. While a mans name is in memorie, and his works in fight, he is not dead, but liuing.
For thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this, or that, etc. A confirmation drawn from the vncertainty of the successe of morning and euening sowing, whether shall bring a better haruest, or both alike, thou canst not tell. Therefore do good, worke at all times, from morning till night; from youth till olde age, and as at all times, so to all men, good and bad, knowne and vnknowne. For neither doest thou know which shall be most fruitfull, nor which God will most reward. A word in due time is like Apples of golde with pictures of siluer; and so is a good deede, which can neuer be out of due time. A gift of small valew oft times doth great good to a man, and procureth great good to thy selfe, for God will heare the prayer of the poore for thy sake, and reward thee, when thou hast forgotten and knowest wherefore it is. Euen as God doth punish age for the sinnes of youth, else would not Dauid haue prayed, Psal. 25. 7. Remember not the sinnes of my youth: so doth he reward the good workes of youth in olde age. For hee that giueth in youth, laith vp for age: because, whatsoeuer he seemeth to cast on the waters to his present hinderance, shalbe paid him agayne with aduantage. What then? wilt thou giue because of aduantage? That is vsurie, which God hateth. Giue freely, of a faithfull and obedient heart, looking for nothing againe at all. But thou wilt say, many receiue no such reward. I answer, God knoweth the heart of the giuer, and thou must remember the resurrection of the Iust, as well as present things. God hath a better thing in store for thee, let not the trifles of this nonage discourage thee. This is a sure ground, well doing shalbe rewarded. If thou seest not such a reward heere, thou art more blessed because more assured of the reward hereafter. For the wicked also receiue temporall rewards of externall, and hertlesse good workes. Doe good therefore continually, and to all; saue not thy meate, and lose thy life as Nabal did. Shall I giue

my meate, drinke, money I know not to whom? So the foole reasoned. But Abraham and Lot, by shewing kindnesse to euery one, entertayned Angels vnawares. If they had beene as wise as Nabal thought himselfe, they might haue perished in the fiery deluge of Sodom, as Nabal should haue perished by the sword. But bountifull Abigail could not perish, no more then Lot; for the Lord deliuereth the mercifull and libetall in time of trouble, and plenteously rewardeth the proude doer.



Verse 7.
Truely the light is sweete, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sunne.

THE second part of the chapter, or anascoue, maintaining the former precepts by a confutation or destruction of the corrupt and lustfull imaginations of mans worldly heart. It is figured by a double Prolepsis; the former whereof is generall. The obiection is figured by a Prosopopeia, which is figured againe by an Allegorie in this verse. The answer is giuen in the next; Truely the light is sweete, etc. By Light is meant worldly prosperitie, Esay 58. 8. Then shall thy light breake foorth as the morning. By the Sunne is meant an happy outward estate, excelling all other, splendide and pompous, whereof the worldly heart is enamoured, as the onely felicitie, Iob 31. 26. If I beheld the Sunne when it shined, or the Moone walking in her brightnesle. That is, if mine heart was enamoured on my flourishing estate, if I blessed my selfe for my wealth, power, and honour. To proceed, wheras Solomon hath before recalled men from coueting earthly things, and selfe-loue to charitie, and good workes, that he might more firmely settle this grace in their hearts; hee now rooteth vp the weedes of fleshly pleasures, and worldly delights, by bringing in the careall man objecting or replying against him for himselfe, or rather, vpon his good admonitions to retract him closely, clinging to his dirty god Mammon, as Crabbes cleaue to the rocke, and one to an other when they are pulled away.
Ah! but for all that, a goodly inheritance is a sweeto

thing: it is a pleasant thing to be well seated in a fertile soile, in an wholesome aire, neare to the riuer, not farre from the citie or market, to be free from all troubles and cares that pouertie bringeth. What an heauenly life it is when a man need do nothing, but walke about his grounds for his pleasure, ouersee his workmen, looke on his cattell, etc. (as the couetous rich man did, Luk 12.) when hee is prouided of the best housholdstuffe and lodgings, and withall able to make his friend welcome, to entertaine a gentleman, to keepe gentlemen companie, to keepe a couple of men and a good gelding, to ride with credit, and to change the fashion with the better sort, and to haue mony alwayes in his purse, to be able to pleasure a friend or a gentleman at his request in his need, to be able to maintaine his wife in the gentlewomans fashion, and to bring vp his children in learning for greater preferment. Ah, this is a louely and desireable estate aboue all things, say what they will. I will go labour, and spare all that I can, and cast about euery way, that I may haue as such a one hath, and liue as he doth, or might do if he were wise. Ah, what good could I doe, if I had as he hath, or had bene so well left? He dwelleth in a sweete seate, what goodly and sweete grounds hath he adioyning to his house? what sweete fields of wheate? what goodly pastures? what a goodly roote of wood? what pleasant groues? some say, it will be solde ere long. He prospereth not, he is indebted; who but a foole and a beast would make away such a goodly thing? Ah, would to God I had money to buy it, I would neuer part from it; well, I will haue mony if I liue, I will make all cracke else. I shall liue in pleasure and comfort hereafter when I am old, and my sonne shall be a fine yong gentleman, of good account among gentlemens sonnes, well accepted of the best sort, and shall easily attaine to greater dignitie, as I meane to bring him vp, and place him in mariage. [What a zealous man is this! how his bowels yerne with pitie on the poore, and poore Minister! how he first of all seeketh the kingdome of God and his righteousnesse!] He meaneth to be first, a couetous beast, to rake mony together by all meanes, quo iure, quaque iniuria,

from Church and poore, and to leaue his substance to his heire; but when the diuels fetch him away, and his heire roguishly wasteth all, and is at last hanged, then shall his folly and madnesse appeare. In the meane time nothing plagueth him, but precise Preachers, they are his tomentors.



Verse 8.
But if a man liue many yeares, and reioyce in them all: yet let him remember the dayes of darknesse, for they shall be many. All that commeth is vanitie.

AN answer to the reply, proponnded by way of admonition. The argument is drawne from the contrary adiunct. Youth and prosperitie are subiect to age and death, which beginneth in age, and formeth him from the graue. Whereupon he inferreth the common conclusion, to take away this and all other replies, All that commeth is vanitie. But if a man liue many yeares, etc. Put the case (Dato, non concesso) that a man enioyed that conceited happinesse, confisting in a free worldly prosperitie, that earthly men so dreame of, and aime at in all their courses. Say that he liue long, which is a thing desired of all men, chiefly the rich, and that he reioyce as freely as it is possible for a man to do in this confused and disordered world; yet let him remember that which he cannot alway forget, nor altogether forget in his freest iollitie, namely that he is mortall, that his flower fadeth, his leafe withereth, his verdure vanisheth testie and tedious old age hasteneth, light shall be turned into darknesse, pleasure into paine, delights into wearisomnesse, and the darke dayes of olde age and death exceed in number the lightsome dayes of life; I say, the darke dayes of old age and death, because old age is the infancie or childhood of death, as the sun setting to vs is the sun rising to the Antipodes? For these pleasant sunshine dayes, wherewith thou art so rauished, are but a worme gleame, and momentanie glance; but contrarily, the dayes wherein the body must lie in the darke graue, are many. These last words are a meiosis or liptote, which are a kinde of hyperbole, to wit, of defect.

Many, is put for innumerable, endlesse, eternall. It may also be a synecdoche of the speciall. Let a man remember all this, and it will abate his lustfull courage, it will take downe the pride of his flesh, it will mitigate the eagernesse of his desires, and the lushiousnesse, lothsomnesse of his worldly zeale, and make him more out of loue with his tender darling, his body, it will gather home his wilde dispersed fancies, and his rouing thoughts into their hold, and hang them on their right hinge, and bring backe the prodigall vagabond home, lastly it will recouer his wits, and restore him to his right mind. Therefore be satisfied with this, be admonished hereby to contentation in things present, striue not for an imaginary happinesse, but exercise thy selfe in workes of charitie, rather doe good, which bringeth the true good, then seeke for it in goods which cannot affoord it. For all that commeth to man in this life as concerning the outward, man, is vanitie, seeing that old age commeth, and death followeth after, and that is eternall. To conclude, eate, drinke, reioyce in the workes of thine hands, but remember thine end, exercise thy selfe to good works, that as thou liuest ioyfully with Gods gifts, so thou mayest die happily, and enter into euerlasting ioy. That light is sweete, that Sunne pleasant. For we eate to liue, and liue to do good; we liue ioyfully to put away tediousnesse, that we may serue God more cheerfully.



Verse 9.
Reioyce O yong man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheere thee in the dayes of thy youth* and walke in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee to iudgement.

THis verse is an answer to the second obiection, or reply, which is more particular, to wit, concerning the yong man, for whom there is some colour of reason pretended by the wicked ciuill. The reply is directed against the former answer, but it is not here expressed, but vnderstood by the context of the words. I grant indeed, that when a

man is full growne, and growne full, elder and richer, hee should be helpfull to the poore, and letting all youthfull tricks passe, haue a care of his family, and follow his husbandrie, that the poore may be relieued, and his children well prouided for. But youth will be youth, youth must not be abridged of libertie, yong men must be borne withall, if they be not too leud. But indeed if they beginne to fall to whoredome, and vnthriftinesse especially, they must be bridled, else shall they lose their good name, and spend that which their friends haue left them, which is worst of all. Againe, when a man growes into age, he must beginne to thinke of his end (it is time I thinke) and come to Church duly to serue God (after that the diuell is first serued) and at his last end haue a chiefe care to set all right and straight. For when things are rawly left, I see oft times that variance growes among his children^, and much heart-burne, and vaine expence, the Lawyer getteth all in the end, and they all become beggars. That is the very fruite of thy wisedom and workes, it is Gods iust iudgement vpon the worldly wise, which seeke not Gods kingdome, desire not his grace, nor teach their children the feare of the Lord, but aime all at worldly wealth and credit, euen that imaginary happinesse which Solomon here confuteth.
The answer to this obiection, is directed to the vaine imaginations of the yong man. First it is propounded, and figure by an ironicall concession, and after rendered in plaine words, by way of correction and threatning. Secondly, it is amplified by a milder, but graue exhortation.
Reioyce, O yong man, etc. Concerning the imaginations of the yong mans heart, which Solomon here meeteth with, they are three.
1. Some yong men imagine the time of this life to be but a market of buying and selling, to heape vp treasure, and to set themselues into a couetous course, and so fall into innumerable sinnes of that kind.
2. Some imagine it to be but a play. These enter into an Epicurish course of life, and innumerable sins of that kind. Yet of these contrary liues, there are sundrie degrees and

fashions, and the latter sort are most incident to youth, the other to age.
3. Some hold a meane, Ne quid nimis, they participate of both these extremes, and those are the moderate, wise, ciuill, and orderly wicked. The other two are madnesse, and this is folly. For in man there is no true wisedome, nor true goodnesse. As one holds on couetousuesse, the other on voluptuousnesse, so the third on pride and worldly pomp, wherein soeuer it standeth. He is meanely couetous which he calleth parsimonie, and meanly prodigall which he termeth liberalitie; but extremely vainglorious and proud, and as reprobate to euery truly good worke as the other. This we haue from our mother Eue, a desire to be as gods. Parsimony, and liberalitie, and all other vertues are splendide sinnes (as Austine sayth) attending on vainglorie.
To all these Solomon sh^peth this answer by way of mockage and derision, seeming to yeeld vnto their reasons and excuses, because yong men, whether yong in yeares, or yong in discretion, are proud, wilfull, selfe conceited, impatient of admonition and reproofe, but in the end he leaueth a sting in their consciences at his farewell, to be a sowre sawce to their dainties, to stay their appetites from surfetting. Thou art wise, yong man, and valiant hearted, thou needest no counseller, it is a discredite to be taught, consult with thy selfe, and be like thy selfe, liue in pleasure, and* follow after delights, cheere thy body in the vse of those things that thy heart lusteth after, enioy the fancies and pleasures of thine eyes, thou art yet yong enough, thou hast a long time to liue, now be merry and Ionill (louis filius) thou hast nothing to care for, put vp no wrongs, auenge thy quarrell, braue it with the proudest, maintaine thy credite, trie thy valour, follow the fashion, court it brauely, a word and a blow, stand to it stoutly, make them stoope to thee, put vp no abuse, spend thy bloud before thou put vp disgrace, neuer yeeld, for flesh and bloud cannot endure it, spend frankly among thy companions, part with thy mony freely, sit not out for a little, shew thy selfe right bred, take thy liquor with thee, etc. Let base fellowes go, auoide precise companie

for staining thy reputation among the generous, it is neither for thy profite nor preferment to regard Sermons, Ministers are but maisters, they are no gentlemen (yet is thy tongue too bad a clout to wipe their shooes whom thou most despisest.) Well sirra, feed on your fancies, and reioyce with your fleshly and lecherous companions, and corrupt ye one another with your wicked blasphemies, put away all remorse of conscience, and the day of euill, and make a league with death and hell; but know this for certaine, that God will bring you to iudgement, you must be summoned to appeare before his tribunall seate, neither your wit, nor your valour, nor your bloud shall be regarded there. You must giue vp a iust account of all your words and deeds, as well of your youth, as of your age, and as well of those things that you haue forgotten, as those* grosse sinnes that ye remember, neither do ye know how soone. It is but your folly to put the day of death farre from you, death commeth often like a lightning or thunderbolt, it blasteth the greene corne, and consumeth the new and strong building. As for those that you so scorne, and basely esteeme as but priests, precise persons, clownes, what if you see them your Iudges appearing in glorie, and your selues as base miscreants and theeues holding vp your hands at the barre among your other fellow diuels?
Wil you needs be wealthy? remember the rich foole, Luk. 12. Will you needs liue in pleasure on earth, with contempt of all that feare God? remember the Sodomites. Will you be glorious and pompous spectacles? remember Diues. Do you approue of any thing except Religion and the feare of God? Heare what your brethren and companions say, that are gone to yours and their home before you: heare what they said when they were aliue as you are now, Wild. 2. throughout. And againe, heare what they say now being dead, as you shall be, Chap. 5. 4. 5. 6. etc. And you proud, oppressing, pompous mockers, what aduantage is your wit, your wealth, your pride, and pompe to you, when your riches are vanished? when your idols your bodies are rotten? when your children are begging, and come to fearfull ends?

and when your soules are in hell? Remember this thou yong man, to moderate thy fleshly ioy, pleasures, delights, to pacifie thy wrath, to mollifie thy rigor, to teach thee wisedome and humilitie, and aboue all things to seeke the kingdome of God.



Verse 10.
Therefore remoue sorrow from thine heart, and put away euill from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanitie.

A Conclusion with an exhortation, which is twofold. The first is destructiue or negatiue, teaching mortification, in this verse. The other is astructiue or affirmatiue, teaching viuification, Chap. 12. by which meanes the heauie iudgements of God are auoided, and true happinesse is attained. Therefore put sorrow from thy heart, and put away euill from thy flesh, to wit, inordinate affections and lusts. Put away moodinesse, anger, impatience, carnall loue, worldly zeale, hatred, enuie, griefe, sorrow, etc. And put away all inordinate and insatiable desires, and lusting after worldly things, riches, honours, pleasures, vainglorie, pompe, gluttonie, voluptuous liuing, pride, venerie, epicurisme, euen all disordered affections and lusts. For childhood and youth are vanitie. A reason to enforce the exhortation. As childhood soone vanisheth away, so doth youth or middle age; as morning is soone spent, so is the mid day, and old age hasteneth, as the Sunne to his going downe. The pleasure of youth is vaine and momentanie, it is like the fading flower in the Spring, whose verdure and beautie soone vanisheth, the blast of the East winde, and the scorching beames of the Westerne Sunne cause it to wither in a moment. As the time of youth is fleeting and transitorie, so is the state thereof sinfull and dangerous. Sinfull because the plasme or vessell of the soule is now strongest in her temptatious; dangerous, because the diuell and the world are now most busie to imprint folly in the hearr of the yong man. He is now in winning or losing. The way of a yong man is like a serpent vpon a stone, a bird in the aire, a ship on the sea; which way these will turne, no man certainly knoweth.




CHAPTER XII.


Verse 1.
Remember now thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, while the euill dayes come not, nor the yeares draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in them.

As the second degree of felicitie consisted in the works of charitie: so the third and last in the practise of pietie. THis Chapter hath two parts; an exhortation, and a conclusion. The exhortation is contained in the first seuen verses. It is the astructiue or affirmatiue part of the conclusion. Chap. 11. 10. exhorting to Christian or godly life, specially duties of pietie, consisting in faith and obedience; as in the former Chapter he exhorted to duties of charitie.
Remember. This word is opposed to forgetfulnesse, the common corruption and vanitie of youth. For youth being violently carried with headstrong passions and vnbridled lusts, is most apt to forget God, to despise instruction and hate correction. Remembrance is historicall, or practicke and effectuall. The former is the bare vnderstanding and bearing in mind of a thing past, as not pertaining to vs, but the wise man maketh vse of euery thing. The latter is the vnderstanding remembrance of that which pertaineth to vs to do, or a dutie to be performed. It is particular or generall. Particular, is of euery mans dutie in that calling wherein God hath placed him. Generall, is of Christian duties to be performed of all. Particular callings and duties, are sanctified by the generall, and comprehended vnder it. Therefore this remembrance is holy and generall; holy, because it is a remembrance of God, and his glorie; generall, because it extendeth to the whole man, inward and outward. Therefore he saith, Remember thy Creator that made thee in his image, and all things for thee. Remembrance therefore is to direct all faith, hope, loue, feare, obedience, euery action of life, and cogitation of the mind to God onely, euen to his praise

and glorie. Contrarily to forget, is to be vnthankefull and disobedient, Deuteron. 8. 11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, not keeping his commandements, and his lawes, and his ordinances, etc. 14. Then thine heart be lifted vp, and thou forget the Lord thy God, etc* Therefore this word Remember, implieth continuall obedience in euery thing, or perpetuall thankefulnesse.
Thy Creatour. This is not an ampl fication, but an argument of confirmation. Remember God, f^r hee hath made thee an^ that in his owne image, therefore art thou bound to him in pe petuall duety and seruice.
Now. Hee speak in of the time present, as the Apostle doth, Hebr. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily while it is called to day A d what is this but to remember God, while we haue our being, as Dauid sayth? Let euery thing that hath breath praise the Lord; euen whiles it hath breath. Then must we needs remember him from the comming in, ti^l the going forth of the breath. And, so often as we drawe our breath, l^t vs remember that wee drawe life, and all things for life, from him. And as we send forth our breath, so must we returne all in thankefull obedience to him. We draw the allnourishing ayre into our bodies, and send it out of our bodies; euen so what we haue receiued from God, let vs returne it againe to God with aduantage. This is the practike or effectuall remembrance here spoken of.
In the dayes of thy youth. Hee sayth not, whiles thou arte young, or in time of youth, but maketh mention of dayes, to intimate, that euery particular day of this life, is to bee consecrated to the Lord, that is, not the bare time, as some giue the Sabaoth to God, but all our thoughts, words, and workes in the day, and not some, but all. For wee are not our owne, but the Lords, as Saint Paul sayth to Seruants; Serue the Lord, not men. And to speake as the thing is, the whole time of life is a Sabbath. The Sabbath was ordained for the reliefe and helpe of our infirmitie, and also to shew forth our consociation and fellowshippe with our fellowmembers, and fellow-seruants in the Church triumphant, as farre foorth as the necessities of our bodies heere below

will permit. For eternall life is heere begunne. Therefore wee owe nothing to the flesh, not one minute of time, nor one thought of the heart. We are the Spouse of Christ, as Paul sayth, he presented the Corinthians a pure Virgine to Christ. Wee must be chaste, as the Angells are beautified with all chastitie. Concerning olde age there is no doubt made. For euery one thinketh that a man must then beginne to draw neare vnto God, but they imagine yong age to be a time of libertie. But heerein these indifferent minded men are like the sacrilegious Iewes, Malach. 1. 13. 14. They offer, the torne, the lame, the sicke, the corrupt, the leane, as Caine did. Therefore are they accursed, verse 8. Goe offer it to thy Prince, will hee be content, and accept thy person? It is the offering of an olde Dogge. Men commonly offer health, strength, beauty: Youth to their lusts, to the world, and to Satan; but sickenesse, weakenesse, deform tie, olde age to God. When they can serue the world no longer, then come they to God, the adulterer, and the olde whoore The world is an harlot, when her louer is quite spent, she casteth him off, then commeth he to God with his olde carkasse. Those things that the world contemneth, or little regardeth, must God haue; but howsoeuer, the world must haue the first offer. Pouertie and basenesse we can be content to giue to God, but riches and honour to our selues, and the diuell. For he saith indeede, All is mine. Luke 4. 6. God must be serued of Lazarus: Diues is too great, too good; therefore hee must not abase himselfe to stoupe so lowe, but rather honourably deuote himselfe to his belly, and to the Diuell the lord of the belly. The virginitie of the tender beautifull woman, is too good to be consecrated to the Lord, to liue chastly, so the lewd lourdaine thinketh. So Nabal thought any morsell of his meate, or bottle of his drinke, too good for Dauid, but nothing was enough, nor good enough for himselfe. So the Churle can spare nothing to the poore Minister, nor giue one houre of the weeke to God. But the olde whoore, the olde thiefe, the olde adulterer, the olde Nabal, etc. that are sodden, and rotten in their lusts, can be well content to giue

their carkasses vnto God. And when they haue at their last end disposed their goods to their children, and their rich friends and kinsfolkes, they will happly send for the Minister to instruct them, and to pray for them, but they will not yet remember the afflictions of Ioseph. And wherefore to pray? that God would now accept that carrion-idoll, and receiue it into the kingdome of glorie, and company of the Angells of Light. These wicked beasts thinke that they owe no more seruice to God all their life but this. But dogges, whoores, whooremongers, gluttons, liars and couetous persons shall be without, and cast downe into the fierie Lake among their fellow diuels, for whom is reserued the blackenesse of darkenesse for euer, Reu. 22. 18. Solomon teacheth here a contrary lesson. And so doth Dauid, Psal. 119. 9. Wherewithall shall a young man redresse his way? Euen by taking heede thereto according to thy word. Heere is both rudenesse, ignorance, and ethnicall ciuilitie excluded. A young man must redresse his foule wayes, and purge out his menstruous or naturall filth by the word of God, that both mortifieth, and quickeneth, killeth, and maketh aliue. The young man must be offered in sacrifice with Isaac, and grow in grace as he growes in yeares. Yong children were to be taught the meaning of the Passeouer; and so is the word to be preached to children, the grounds of Religion are to be settled in them.
But let vs examine and insist vpon the words of Dauid alittle, or whosoeuer was the Authour. Wherein, heb. bammeh, that is, In what thing principally, or in what thing alone. The words doe imply an excellencie or singularitie. Young man. heb. nagnar, that is, rude, precipitant, inconsiderate, passionate; it properly signifieth a confusion or mixture of things cast out of the lappe, without regarde of order. Redresse his way. heb. iezakkeh, in the con ugation piel, that is, wholly, and all together, and also alway and continually. For the first, there are no excuses, delayes or alleadgements for young men, they are t^e^ to sobrietie as well as olde, though euery mans infirmitie be to be borne withall. Young men are rash and heedlesse; olde men are

peeuish, and rigorous, etc. Saint Paul sayth, Tit. 2. 6. Exhort young men that they be sober minded; graec. sophronein: id est, temperantes esse. Now temperancie is a vertue ouerruling all lusts, and inordinate appetites, subdewing them to the Lawe of God, or godly reason. The partes thereof are shamefastnesse, honesty, abstinence, sobrietie, chastitie, continence, humilitie, modestie, seueritie, parsimonie, innocencie.
The Apostles will is, that the faith of young men and women be exercised in these vertues. Againe, verse 10. Seruants must adorne the doctrine of God in all things; and they are most commonly young, and especially arrogate rudenesse, and libertie, as it were by their owne right. Moreouer, Ephes. 6. 4. Children must be brought vp in instruction, and information in the Lord. graec. en paid^ia, cai nouthesia. Instruction stands in incouragement to vertue, and in correction, and reproofe. Concerning the former he saith, Prouoke not your children to anger, to grow into stubborne resolutions, but cheerefully to obey you with loue and delight. Concerning the second, Prou. 22. 15. Foolishnesse is bound in the heart of a childe, but the rodde of correction fetcheth it out. Information standeth in doctrine or catechizing, and in precepts of good manners.
For the second signification, he must redresse his way alwayes and continually, euen in childhood. First, because, as in the time of the Law the first-fruits were offered to the Lord, Deuter. 26* 2 and euery male first borne was giuen to God: So men must consecrate their children vnto the Lord; and young men must offer themselues to the Lord. To which offering Saint Paul alludeth, Rom. 12. 1* specially the young man, 1. Corinth. 7. 34. In the Law, God commanded young men to be taught the meaning of the Passeouer; and to rehearse his Lawes to their children; according to which precepts Timothie was brought vp, and Obadiah 1. Kings 18. 12. Abrahams and Cornelius families, and 2. Iohn 4. I reioyced greatly that I found thy children walking (not in ethnicall ciuilitie) in the truth. This condemnes all

vncleane beasts. Againe, yong men haue promised in baptisme, and set their seale, that they will forsake the world, the flesh and the diuell. For baptisme is the restipulation or repromission of a good conscience. It is the badge of our pro, session, which is to consecrate our selues wholly to Christ, into whose name we are baptized. Now we are consecrated to God, when we die to sinne, slaine with the sacrifice, crucified with Christ, yea risen out of the graue of sinne, and glorified or sanctified with him, Gal* 2. 20. Yong men are to remember their promise or vow in baptisme, and not like carelesse dingthrifts to throw the debt on their sureties, as Esau that preferred a messe of pottage before his birthright.
While the euill dayes come not* etc. An argument of confirmation, drawne from the instable state of yong age, which passeth away as a shadow in the diall, and as the day and summer passeth away, and the winter and night draweth on. Moreouer, the force of the argument lieth i^ the consideration of olde age, as a meanes to cause the yo^g to remember the duties of charitie and pietie in the stre gth of his yeares, while he hath time, while the day serueth, and summer lasteth. The day is for labour, as Dauid saith, Man goeth forth vnto his worke vntill the euening, the night is for rest. Our Sauiour Christ saith, Ioh. 12. 35* Walke while ye haue the light, lest darknesse come vpon you. Worke out your saluation with feare and trembling, saith the Apostle. Now the day is for worke, and as well the morning as the euening, and rather. Why stand ye idle, saith Christ, get you into my vineyard. The haruest is great, the labourers are few. The workes of charitie and pietie are great and many, we are but fraile and we^ke. Let vs recompence our weaknesse with willingnesse, our short time with sedulitie and diligence. If there be first willing mind, God accepteth according to that which a man hath. Let vs carefully husband our talent while we haue time and strength. The Spring produceth all things out of the earth, that were buried in Winter; euen so what lyeth buried in childhood, sheweth forth it selfe in youth. Corruption must not shew it selfe forth now, but

the practise of instructions and godly informations formerly taught, euen grace wrought in childhood by these good meanes. The Summer ripeneth what the Spring brought forth; let middle age bring to maturitie and perfection that which hath bene taught vs in our yong age. The old in euill dieth in euill, a thousand to one.
Now that the consideration of old age may take the deeper impression in the heart of the yong, he depainteth it out by an allegoricall hypotyposis, or liuely description, first generally in these words, and after particularly in the next six verses.
While the euill dayes come not. By euill dayes in generall is meant pouertie, weaknesse, sicknesse, lamenesse, blindnes, and other afflictions of body and state, whereby a man is disabled from the actuall performance of such duties as hee is called vnto. Whatsoeuer abilitie or gift a man hath, that is his talent. And in all affaires and workes of this life, men take the appointed sea on, and vse the time with diligence; night letteth, raine letteth, winde and tempest letteth, these lets men redeeme with diligence, (and some with double diligence) and reserue some workes for letting dayes, that euery moment of time may be supplied; so they will neuer be idle, that meane to be wealthy. So it must be with vs in our Christian calling. We must worke with the Oare while we haue strength, and after sit at the sterne. Let euery man do good while he is able. Let him take grace when it is offered and vse it whe^ he is bidden. The Law saith, yea the heart and whole drift of the Law is this, Loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, minde, soule, strength, soule and body, superiour and inferiour powers, euen while thou hast an heart, which first liueth, and last dieth, while thou hast a minde and a memory, while thou hast strength, while thou hast health, while thou hast wealth. Suffer no gift to be vnfruitfull. Euery talent must fructifie. Secondly, by euill dayes more specially is meant the disease of olde age. For olde age is a disease, it is the consumption of the whole body, whereby a man is disabled from doing any thing. It is grieuous and wearisome. The lame is past labour, and the sicke past

study. These words, the euill dayes, as I thinke, haue relation to the body, and the next to the mind.
Nor the yeares draw nigh, wherein thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in them. An amplification figured by a Prosopopeia, whereby hee setteth the future age, person, words of the yong man before himselfe. Men draw forth as liuely as they can, the pictures of their yong age, that in old age they may see their youth before their eyes, this is but a vanitie; yet may good vse be made hereof. So contrarily, Solomon draweth out the picture of olde age, that men in time of youth may see and looke vpon, and remember their olde age, and death which followeth, and their account which followeth that. This is an instigation to workes of charitie and pietie. Better it is for a yong man to haue the picture of death before him, then for an old man to haue the picture of youth in his eyes. An old dotard is odious, and an old babbler hatefull.
I haue no pleasure in them. These words haue reference to the minde of the olde man, when the body is pained, the minde is grieued. When the bones are full of ach^ it is past worke, and suffereth not the mind to be exercised in study, meditation, counsell, aduice, direction, etc. Euery thing is tedious and irksome to the wearie, he delighteth in nothing, but in ^esting, sleepe is sweete to him, and so is death to the aged. The marriner speaketh of the windes, the shepheard of his flocke, the plow-man of his grounds and cattell and the old man of his diseases, infirmities, aches. His relations of things past are concise, independent, confuse; he cannot manage and vse his experiments and obseruations to profit withal: yea his former practises are but speculations to himselfe, much more to another, therefore he hath no list to speake, all things are quite altered the world is new, it surpasseth his skill. And thus it is with euery old man throughout all generations of the world, insomuch that if they which haue bene long dead should rise againe as but out of an hundred yeares sleepe, they could not know the world nor the way of it, and might as well cause the Sunne to go backward, as to reduce it to the former state; and though it

should be the same, and continue like it selfe, yet should a man be vnlike himselfe; and so should the world one and the same in it selfe, appeare in new and strange formes to him. As for example; All things are full of vanitie, misery and griefe to the afflicted, and to him vpon whom God turneth his backe; whereas contrarily at the same time it is a paradise of pleasure to an other. It is now an heauen, but if God instantly forsake a man vtterly, it is an hell. And as Diues desired to be out of hell, so would he desire to be out of the world; whatsoeuer his estate should be heereafter, he had rather stand to the hazard then liue. If health, strength, wealth and honor could, at an instant, be put vpon the poore, sicke, lame, blind beggar, the world should be a new world, and such a world as hee neuer imagined, the other dayes world should be passed as in a dreame, and as but a dreame. And so doth olde age wonder at the change of the world, hee longeth after the former generation, and desires to be dead. All is vanity, vexation and wearinesse. But the yong generation thinketh not so. Their endeuors* expectations, and hopes are strong and possible; but the aged despaireth, and sorroweth, and is vexed to see vanities, and foolish presumptions. To conclude, that which to his youth was a pleasure, is to his age a paine; that which was a delight, is a wearinesse and anger, and the Pallace is but a prison house.



Verse 2.
While the Sunne, or the Light, or the Moone, or the Starres be not darkened, nor the Cloudes returne after the raine.

HEere hee beginneth the particular description of olde age, drawing it out in liuely shape and colours to represent it to the eyes of the young men, that being now young, hee may see himselfe olde before his eyes. And this he doth allegorically, by manifold similitudes drawne from common and vsuall things continually obuious to the eies and eares, the more firmely to fixe it in the memorie; to the end that considering the shortnesse of time, and weakenesse

of age, and certainty of death, hee might the more diligently and carefully b^stirre him to his worke, and in his worke; euen doing good while time serueth, to finish his worke before Sune-set, to inne his fruits before winter.
While the Sunne, or the Light etc. quasi dicat, before the sight of thine eyes be dimme, through the weaknesse of the spirites, drinesse of the sinewes, and humour of the eyes, and through vapours, which arising out of the body into the head, through coldnesse of the braine, are clouded into rheume, which trickleth downe the nose and eyes; and being done away quickely, returneth agayne, as cloudes after raine in a moist season, and waters into an emptyed fountaine, which causeth olde age to weare his napkin at his girdle, to keepe his head and feete warme, that colde strike not vp into his head; and being there, may not congeale, but euaporate forth through the poares and seames of the head, and for the same purpose to weare a cloth about his necke, to keepe the poares open, that the vapours may there breake forth; qu^ data porta ruant, to preuent headach, tooth-ach, joynt-ach, rheume in the eyes, nose etc. The ayre to aged eyes seemeth duskie, and mistie, and the Sunne wadeth, as the Moone in a foggie euening, and the Starres are out of sight. Let the ouer-shadowing cloudes, drisling mi^^es, thicke fogges, watrish ayre, dewing moisture, dropping of trees in a mist, the dullnesse of the darke day, the sluggishnesse of the rainie day, the dropping of the eaues, the siping through of waters into the house, put vs in minde of the irkesomnesse and annoyances of olde age, and to doe our dueties, while wee haue the vse of our sight; which once failing, wee are disabled from innumerable things, wherein we might be profitable to man, gainfull to God, and furtherers of our saluation.



Verse 3.
In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselues, and the grinders cease* because they are few, and those that looke out of the windowes be darkened.

By the Keepers of the house are meant the hands: The

hand (sayth Aristotle) is the organ of organes, or instrument of instruments. For whereas other members haue their seuerall offices, the office of the hand is manifold, and generall, seruing all the rest. The body is an house, or city, or kingdome in it selfe; the king or chiefe ruler is the head, the hands are the keepers or guard. Euery creature hath his weapons for defence; man hath his hands, his hands are all weapons, euen as he is a little world. What all particular creatures can doe with their weapons, that can hee doe with his hands; yea what suttleties or meanes of getting foode is in them, all is in him, humano more. When the keepers of the house shall tremble. that is, with the palsie, caused of cold binding, or of heate consuming, or of humors stopping the sinewes.
And the strong men shall bow themselues. When the thighs shalbe weake, standing loose in the bases, or sockets of the knees, the spirit languishing, the sinews withring, the bloud setling, and thickning in the veines as riuers in the drought of summer. For strength is attributed to the bones, thighs, or legges Psal. 147. 10. He delighteth not in the strength of an horse, he taketh not pleasure in the legges of a man. Old mens knees buckle or bend forward, like an elbowe, through the weakenesse of their joynts and sinewes; as drunkards goe staggeringly when they are top-heauy, nimio solutus Iaccho; and their sinewes dissolued, and heat euaporated with loud talking, vehement contending, and much drinke. And the grinders cease: that is, when the t^eth are worme-eaten, or moskered, or mildered away, or stand wedshodde in slimie humour, standing like weather-beate stakes, and mos^e begrowne rootes, hollow, and stumpie, falling out one after another, as the cogges of a mill, worne thinne and narrow at the toppe, or else rotten in the roote, which partly are troublesome to the aged, and partly they are afraid to break those odde straglers remayning. And those that looke out at the windowes be darkened. That is, the eyes which are as ones head looking out at an hole, or window; the body is an house or tower; the eye-holes are windowes, through which the soule looketh out into the Cittie of the world.

The eyes of the aged are like an olde dustie window.



Verse 4.
And the doores shall be shut in the streetes, when the sound of the grinding is low, and hee shall rise vp at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musicke shall be brought low.

BY doores is meant the lips. The wind-pipe is the entry, the mouth is the doore-gate, the lips are the two-leafed doore of the heart or soule, as our Sauiour saith, Out of the aboundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. Euill thoughts come out of the heart, passing by the entry of the throate through the doore. The lips of old people are often pendulons, and tremulous, they keep them shut, to stay the daily distillation of rheume; neither haue they what to speake among strong men, because their vnderstanding and memory faileth them; they are testie, morose, cholericke and passionate, their voice is weake, and breath short, and the state of all things is so altered since they were yong, that they cannot tell what to thinke or say. Children and olde men are neither Counsellours nor Actors; the one committeth both these to the elder, 1. King. 3. 7. 9. the other to the yonger, 2. Sam. 19. 35. 37. The strength of the one is to come, the other is gone.
When the sound of the grinding is low; because the teeth stand thin, or loose, or moskerd at the roote, or that they are fallen out, and he cheweth with his gummes, and the grinding* cannot be heard.
And he shall rise vp at the noise of the bird. The fulnesse of humors, corpus succiplenum, is the aliment or food of sleepe, as is to be seene in children and yong folkes; but the humors of old men are dried vp, as the stalkes of plants, and the corne in haruest, and their skinne rough, withered and wrinkled as old trees. Hence it is that they cannot sleepe soundly, but the crowing of the cocke, the noise of little birds, the whimpering of mice, euery small stirrage w^keth them.
And all the daughters of musicke shall be brought low. An Hebrew phrase of speech, as 2. Sam. 12. 5. He that hath done this, is the child of death. By daughters of musicke is meant the naturall organes or instruments of the voice or song, as the lungs, the wind-pipe, the teeth, the lips, whereof some shall be weake, some wanting, as in old vntuneable instruments. Or, by daughters of musicke, may be meant the eares. As old men are dimme of eye-sight, so dull of hearing, they discerne not the harmonie or distinction of sounds, neither are affected with musicke, as Barzillai to Dauid, I am this day fourescore yeares olde, and can I discerne betweene good and euill? can thy seruant taste what I eate, or what I drinke? can I heare any more the voice of singing-men and singing-women? 2. Sam. 19. 35.



Verse 5.
Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and feares shall be in the way, and the Almond tree shall flourish, and the grashopper shall be a burden, and desire shall faile: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streetes.

BY that which is high, is meant knobbie hillocks, or small extuberances in the way, little stones or clods, which old men feare to stumble on. And feares shall be in the way. As children going abroad feare many things, so doe olde men, because they are vnwealdie, and vnable to auoide dangers; a little fall or turning aside hurteth them, and they arise vp againe with difficultie and paine; they are afraid of dogs suddenly rushing out and crossing the streetes at euery noise; they feare the thronging of people, some on foote, some on horsebacke, some running and hasting about businesse, others bearing burdens, whereof many are rash and heedlesse, hurting children, and thrusting olde people against the walls.
And the Almond tree shall flourish. A Synecdoche of the speciall, for all trees. The Almond tree hath white flowers, it flourisheth betimes in the Spring afore other trees; it is therefore of speciall note, and a welcome fore-runner of

Summer, ^untius veris, cheering the minde after drowsie Winter, with the vernall thoughts of pleasant and liuely Summer. ^ut the old man little regardeth, his couch, and the warme fire, and multitude of clothes, and therein keeping himselfe warme at an euen stay, doth most comfort him. For the hot Sunne soone enfeebleth him, the coole Northerne and Easterne aire offendeth him. For though the Sunne be hot in Summer, yet the aire is variable as in Winter, and the influence of the starres haue a composition, but not a mixture in the aire. So that though the Sun be hot, and scorcheth the face of the beholder, yet is the aire frostie, and nippeth the necke. He that bestirreth himselfe in labour, sweateth and panteth, but the waterish cold or frostie cold suddenly pierceth through the powers of his bodie, and distempereth his bloud. Summer and Winter are all one, excepting the Sunnes reuolution. Yong men perceiue not those differences of middle weathers, but onely extremities of heate and colde, strong windes and stormy blasts, etc. but olde men feele euery change of the aire, yea when the starres begin their businesse, and are preparing their worke. They feele it before it come, and are therefore saide to carry their Almanacke in their bones, whereas yong men feele but the height and extremitie thereof, and beare it off without hurt, by reason of heate and fulnesse of humours.
And the Grashopper shall be a burden. A Synecdoche, as before, for the whistling and singing of all Birds. As the Almond tree in the Spring, so the Grashopper in Summer or latter end of the Spring, Nuntia aestatis, affecteth not old age with any delightfull fancies, Cant. 2. 13. The melody of grashoppers is more pleasant in Summer, because the aire is more cleare and pure, and therefore more siluer sounding, but both naturall and artificiall musicke to olde age is no more then the cr^aking of a doore, or s^raming of a new axeltree, for the noise ouerpowreth their feeble spirit, and youthfull fancies are vanished away through coldnesse, drinesse and earthlinesse of the dull dreggie humours; the fiery humour, alme aire, spirit of life is feeble, and is little

quickened with the warbling of melodious ayre. And desire shall faile. All desire and delight in such things shall vanish, wherewith youth is most affected. Concupiscence, and feminine appetite shall be extinguished; no obiects affect the dull and dying sences, but are rather grieuous as the Sunne and Raine are to olde stumpes, and trees, rather rotting and hastening putrefaction, then quickening them. All things, but death, are tedious to the olde man.
Because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners etc. A reason of the tediousnesse and irkesomnesse of all things to old age; because the old and decrepite is past the world, and neare to death, his time is spent. his pilgrimage is finished, hee hath no more businesse heere to doe, in this strange Country, he is weary of the world, and the world is weary of him; he is but as an obstacle in the way, an hinderer of busie workers, not an helper. Mothers and Nurces haue pleasure in Infants, and Parents in Children, and euery one affecteth yong people, whether free or bond, but olde people are burthensome to all, neyther their talke nor company is acceptable. Therefore seeing himselfe despised, or little regarded, and a burden; yea himselfe a burden to himselfe, he is desirous to be at home, he would be out of trouble and at rest. For here is nothing but vanity and misery, all is winter both to the body and minde of olde age; well were he if hee were at rest. And the mourners go about in the streetes. His friends and neighbours are preparing themselues against his funerall, and the widowes to make lamentation. As the Midwiues bring them into the world with joy; so the widowes (as it was a custome among the Iewes) bewaile their death with mourning. This kinde of symphonie, heauy, and dead-sounding flattes is most befitting querulous and mournfull olde age. The hoarse Grashopper, and the warbling Harpe, the whistling Bird, and the Flute, with all winde instruments, instrumentall and vocall consents, as Barzillai said to Dauid, are more fit for Chimham, 2. Sam. 19. 37. then for aged Barzillai, whose desire is to turne backe, that hee may die in his owne Cittie, and be buried in the graue of his father, and of his mother.




Verse 6.
Or euer the siluer cord be loosed, or the golden bowle be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountaine, or the wheele broken at the Cisterne.

BY siluer coard is meant the marrow in the backe, which is inclosed in a bright smoothe skinne like to siluer, it is more properly called of the Arabians the Nuche of the backe, whereof this word Eunuch is compounded. For marrow is but the superfluity of nutriment arising from the bloud for the moistening and nourishment of the bones. But the Nuche is of the nature of the braine, engendred of seede, created for sence and motion; to wit, to procreate the sinewes. For from the braine, and the Nuche, proceed diuers combinations or couples of sinewes, seruing for the sences, as hearing, seeing, feeling and motion of the members. For many sinewes are deriued, thirty couples as the Anitomists write, are sprung of this cord, and deriued from the knuckles or turning-joynts of the chine or backe bone into all the body seruing for bodily motion; from which againe, small haires or threeds, like those of the rootes of trees and leaues are dispersed. When this cord is loosed, the backe bendeth, motion is slowe, and feeling faileth.
Or the golden bowle be broken, This golden bowle is the thinne membrane, or sinewie skinne of yellow colour, called Pia mater, compassing the braine like a swathing cloth, or inner thinde of a tree, and entring within the diuers infoldings of the braine, and as it were cloathing the sides of the three ventricles, or hollowes wherein the imagination, reason, and memory are formed. It serues not only to inuolue and keep the braine whole and solide, in his place, as the shel or skin next the shell doth the egges: but also to containe, to gather together and sustaine the veins and arteries which are deriued from thence like small ramified channells, or pipes, or like a net. All the braine within, and without, is enwrapped and incompassed with this veiny and arteriall, or sinewy net. The veines feede and nourish the braine with bloud, the arteries bring heate and spirit to it from

the heart, to giue the sence of feeling vnto it. For though it impart sence to all other parts, yet it hath none of it selfe, namely the narrowie white substance, but conuerteth or digesteth the vitall spirits of the heart (attracted by this sinewie pia mater or golden bowle) into animall or sensible spirits. In like case the sperme hath foture and sustenance in the matri^e by and from the chorion or secundine.
Or the pitcher be broken at the fountaine. By the pitcher he meaneth the veines, by the fountaine the liuer. For the liuer is the shop of bloud, conuerting the white chile which commeth of the meate digested in the stomacke into bloud. The substance thereof is red, and like clottered or curded bloud, assimulating the chile to the qualitie of it selfe. In the neather hollow part thereof is the portall veine, called the great carrying veine, which hath many branches (venae mesaraicae) like the small and threddie rootes of a tree, by which the chile or iuyce of mea^ concocted in the stomach, is transported fro^ the stomach to the liuer. And the portal vein hath issuing from it many small veines like a net throughout the whole body of the liuer, that the chile being distributed into small parcels, might be more perfectly concocted and conuerted into bloud. And the bloud is ingendered and purified in the middle of the liuer, which containeth the masse of the foure humours. Now it being here purified and boyled, the more heauie superfluitie, which is seculent or dreggie, settleth to the bottome, and is carried by a veine into the spleene. It is the earthly sowre or tart part of the chile, and is called blacke choler, or melancholy. Againe, the lighter superfluitie boyleth vpward, which is the fiery, bitter or sharpe part of the chile called yellow choler, which is caried by a veine into the gall. Vnderstand by melancholy and yellow choler, not the purest thereof, which is mixed with the bloud, but the separate superfluitie or impuritie thereof. Thirdly, the waterish superfluitie is caried to the kidneys and passages of the vrine. In the convexitie or vpper bowing part of the liuer is the hollow veine or bloudgate, whose branches receiue the bloud purified in the middle of the liuer, from the branches of the portall-veine. From

the bloudgate are innumerable veines ramified throughout all the body. For as the bulke of a tree receiuing sap from the roote, as that againe doth from the small spires, is ramified into all the branches, so doth the hollow veine, being the greatest in all the body, (vehiculum alimenti) distribute the bloud throughout the body by his other veines, and first into the right ventricle of the heart, to receiue his vital heate for the nutrition of the whole body.
Or the wheele be broken at the cisterre. By wheele is meant the head, by cisterne the heart, from whence the vitall spirits are conueyed to the braine, and there conuerted into animall, to giue sence and motion to the body. When the braine is weake, the sinewes loosed, and the head hanging downe, the wheele beginneth to breake.



Verse 7.
Then shall the dust returne to the earth, as it was: and the spirit shall returne to God who gaue it.

AS before he hath shewed the vnaptnesse and disabilitie of old age to performe such seruice as the Lord requireh to be performed of man, hauing liuelily depainted it sorth before his eyes, to the end that euery one may be stirred vp in youth and middle age to doe good workes, euen with all diligence to practise the duties of pietie and charitie: so here he putteth them in minde also of death, and their account that they must make before their Iudge.
And the dust returne to the earth as it was. By dust he meaneth the corpse made of the dust, by a metonymie of the matter. By earth he meaneth the elements whereof the body is compounded. As the body was created of the earth, so shall it returne thither againe, euen into the first and simplest matter.
And the spirit shall returne to God that gaue it. By spirit he meaneth the soule, which is compared to winde or aire, as the body is to dust or earth. Because winde or aire being an inuisible substance, is the fittest thing in nature to vnderstand the nature of the soule by. For whiles we are in the flesh, we vnderstand and conceiue of inuisible, spiritual, eternall

things, humano more, by the phantasie, per similitudines and locos, as Tully saith, and that either affirmatiuely or negatilely.
To God that gaue it. Hee doth not here define, whither the spirit shall go, but to whom, namely to his Iudge, who shall require a iust account of all the workes done in the flesh good or euill, and shall accordingly giue sentence vpon it. 2. Cor. 5. 10.



Verse 8.
Vanitie of vanities, saith the Preacher, all is vanitie.

A Conclusion which is twofold; particular, of this treatise of mortification, to the 13. verse. Generall of all Christian doctrine, from thence to the end. Vanitie of vanities. He concludeth the prossyllogisme propounded in the beginning in the same words, to intimate both his mature deliberation, and the certaine truth thereof. For hauing seriously considered, and by long experience found out the condition of man, and state of all things, he could conclude no otherwise then at the first he propounded, namely, that all things are vanitie, most vaine. All things are vncertaine, full of corruption, and matter of griefe. There is nothing whereon to trust, nothing that affoordeth happie contentment. Euery state of life is miserable, both the contemplatiue, the sensuall, and the royall, both the priuate and the publicke, both the ciuill and also diuine gouernment to humane reason is nothing but confusion and disorder. And euen those things that seeme to be in our power, haue their euents contrary to our intention and expectation. Now all this is to bring vs to the deniall of our selues, to restraine our greedy desires, worldly vaine hopes, and vnprofitable endeuours, to trust in the liuing God, who only is most wise, most good, and giueth all at his pleasure, and in his owne time.




Verse 9.
And moreouer, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge: yea hee gaue good heede, and sought out, and set in order many prouerbes.

AN amplification of the conclusion, by an admonition begun here digressiuely, figured by a Prolepsis, the obiection whereof is vnderstood, and is such like; we are not bound to giue credence to all things contained in this treatise, seeing that no man is so perfect in this life, but that he may erre, and is defectiue and weake in the truth it selfe. Besides that, the inordinate life of those that write, to instruct and admonish others, is a meanes to diminish their authoritie, and to make their labours fruitlesse. The answer is, vers. 9. 10. 11. wherein he procureth authoritie to his doctrine, by sundry arguments.
Because the Preacher. The first argument is drawne from his person or office. He is not now Solomon seduced by his idolatrous wiues and flickering concubines, he is not Solomon giuing the reins to inordinate desires, not Solomon enamoured with the glory of the world and worldly delights; but Solomon aged, experienced, prudent, repenting, mortified, reconciled to the Church of God, neare to death, neare to iudgement. Therefore is he the fittest, and most able to admonish others by reason of his knowledge and much experience in all things.
Was wise. The second argument drawne from his extraordinary wisedome. He was wise, yea the most wise, therefore are his admonitions to be regarded and followed.
He still taught the people knowledge. A confirmation of the admonition, by the end and vse of his wisedome, which was the godly gouernment of his people, not meerly politicke for his owne tranquillity and pleasure, and vainglory of his owne person, but diuine and religious, that the people might be contained in obedience, euen in the religious feare of God, rather then either by plaine force or other beguiling deuices, without care or loue of Religion, which come to naught. 1. King 3 7. what the intent of Solomons prayer

there is, and his meaning here, is euident, Deut. 17. 19. 20. by the charge of Moses; the King must be continually exercised in the booke of God, that he may learne to feare the Lord and obey his word, without arrogating libertie to himselfe to decline either to the right hand or to the left, that his hart be not lifted vp aboue his brethren to tyrannize and rule in his owne name, but to ioyne in the worship and seruice of God with them, yea to be a patterne and example of vertuous and godly life vnto them.
Yea he gaue good heed. The third argument is drawne from his carefull obseruation and experience. He was wholly and continually attentiue to heare, to see, to discerne, to iudge, as the Hebrew word aizzen of the coniugation piel signifieth.
And sought out. As he was attentiue and heedfull, so was he industrious and painfull to know much by liuely and selfexperience; this is the fourth argument.
And set in order many prouerbes. A confirmation of his knowledge, attentiuenesse and industry, by the effect or fruite thereof, as 1. King. 4. 31. 32. 33. 34. He was wiser then all men, then Ethan, Heman, Chalcol or Darda; he spake three thousand prouerbes, and his songs were an hundred and fiue* he spake of all the creatures, and there came of all people to heare his wisedome. By all these arguments we learne what the calling, gifts, and duties of true teachers are. Cursed therefore are these Popish ignorants, and our Atheisticall politicians. They are both alike enemies to knowledge and the true feare of God.



Verse 10.
The Preacher sought to finde out acceptable words* and that which was written was vpright, euen the words of truth.

A Fifth argument drawne from the profitablenesse of his doctrine. The Preacher sought to find out words of delight, or acceptation, not vain speculations* carnall inuentions, vnprofitable fables, curious and fruitles fancies, vain ianglings; but wholsome doctrine profitable for edification in faith and

obedience to the word of God, as S. Paul saith, 2. Tim. 3. 16. The Scripture is giuen by inspiratio^ of God for doctrine, and reproofe, for correction and instruction, that we might know the truth, and by the truth destroy lies and errours. And that we might be mortified and dead to sinne, and quickened and renewed into holinesse and righteousnesse. The setting forth of truth and righteousnesse, and the destruction of lying errours, and vice, is all that the Scripture aimeth at, that the man of God might bee perfected to all good workes of piety and charity. This is the drift of the Holy-Ghost in the Pen-men of the Scriptures, and of Solomon heere, and so of euery teacher sent of God.
And that which was written, was vpright, etc. A sixt Argument. As they were profitable writings or delightfull to them that loued trueth and righteousnesse, so were they vpright and true, not deceitfull, flattering, men-pleasing, but the true wholesome foode of the soule. Solomon, in vttering the words of this Treatise, had the infallible assistance of the Spirit.



Verse 11.
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nailes fastened by the maisters of Assemblies, which are giuen from one Shepheard.

AN explication of those acceptable, and vpright words of truth, taught by the truely wise, that are inspired of God, by the effect or vse thereof, which is illustrated by a twofold similitude of goads, and nailes. The words of the wise are as goads. The heauy and idle Oxe, minding no other thing, of himselfe, but eating and sleeping, is rouzed vp, and caused to doe profitable seruice to his owner, by the prickes of the goad, as the horse is by the spurre* and ^he whippe: euen so by the reproofes and checkes of the wise, are the drowsie and sluggish carnalls stirred vp to duties of pietie and charitie, which of themselues are but selfe louing lumpes of sinne, vnwilling, vnapt, dull and blockish to learne or practise any workes, eyther of worship or seruice. Pride, couetousnesse, gluttonie and venery make them like

oxen, horses and swine, spirituall sluggards, drunkards and bedlums; yea, as vnprofitable drones and vermine, such as are for wast, destruction and euill. These drossie ones are moued, rouzed, awaked, and prouoked to some good duties by th^ pricking, sharpe, or smart words of the wise, chasing and rubbing these dead sleepers in sinne, and mollifying, yea scarifying their rough, crusted, barked consciences that cannot bleede, stirring vp the idle worme to her worke, with the tarte vinegar of Gods iudgements and plagues denounced against them in the Lawe. This is the effect and vse of words spoken by the wise, inspired of God. But contrarily, such as speake of themselues, making merchandise of the word, are flatterers and claw-backes, sowing pillowes vnder the elbowes of sleepers, to make them sleepe out their eyes, and to make fooles runne starke madde. They winke at proude carnalls, but doe not mortifie them, that they might deuote themselues to good workes; yea they doe rather glorifie them, and admire their persons because of aduantage, and so both fall downe into the same condemnation.
This hath beene alwayes the practise of false prophets, false apostles, and shepheards of olde, and is now at this present. And the proude, couetous, oppressing carnalls preferre and countenance such teachers, they dignifie them and honour them to be flattered by them, and partake with them in their sinnes. But their madnesse shall in the end be manifested, and the patient abiding of the meeke shall not alway be forgotten Paul saith, Let him not be a yong Scholler, etc. But who is now so fit as a yong Scholler, proude and talkatiue, a fashionable foole, ciuill, ethnically ciuil and courtier like? The finest Gentleman, the best Minister. But a fine Gentleman, and a Romish reader, will prooue all one in the end, I feare; yet is the Reader better then the proude Corinthian Preacher.
And as nayles fastened by the maisters of Assemblies. Euen as nailes being driuen into pales, doe fasten them to their ^a les; so the godly and graue sentences of teachers which are the maisters of Assemblies, or congregations gathered

together to be instructed in the knowledge of God and their duties, do pierce into their hearts to vnite them vnto God and one to another, and to containe them for euer in that holy vnion of faith and communion of loue, which is the true coporation of the Saints or inuisible Church. Contrarily, false teachers and schismatickes breake this vnion of faith, and dissolue this bond of loue, bringing in erroneous doctrines and opinions, to corrupt the mindes and manners of men, whereby they fall from the godly purity and plainnesse of the Gospell, to contentions and proud ianglings, but in the meane space liue according to their lusts, yea without all sense of Religion, and are to euery good worke reprobate, yea enemies to the truth of that which outwardly in hypocrisie they professe, as they do which stand vp at the Creed, but fight against the Gospell; which make a leg at the name of Iesus, but hate his commandement of faith and loue; which receiue the signe of the crosse, but fight vnder the diuels banner against Christ and his kingdome. This is the miserable condition of Papists, Libertines, Atheists, Epicures, whose hearts are not brawny but stony, that neither goades nor nailes can pierce into them. Woe be to them, for they are full of enuy and hatred as Cain, they are mockers as Ismael, deuoted to their bellies as Esau. They are as they that striue with the Priest, Amos 5. 10. Woe be vnto them, for they are false accusers of their brethren, and stir vp hatred against their brethren that are better then they. Woe be vnto them for they are dogs* and wolues in sheepes cloathing, thirsting for the bloud of the Saints; they present themselues among the people of God, as Satan did, to cauill, Iob 2. and take all occasions to disgrace the truth, and to bring the feare of God into slander. Wo be to those reuolting Pagans, which oppose Princes lawes against the kingdome of Iesus Christ, whereof they are the guard and protectors. These as the first begotten of the diuell, oppose the letter of the law against the intent, equitie and conscience thereof, saying that they are for law, not for conscience.
Which are giuen from one Shepheard. An amplification of those acceptable and vpright words of the wise, by the efficient

cause or author thereof, namely God in Christ, termed a Shepheard, or chiefe Shepheard, because he gathereth together and feedeth his people with the spirituall bread and waters of life, as shepheards do their flockes. Psal. 23. 1. Ioh. 10. 11. Chap. 4. 14. and 6. 50. 51.



Verse 12.
And further, by these, my sonne, be admonished: of making many bookes there is no end, and much studie is a wearinesse to the flesh.

A Regression to the admonition interrupted, ver 9. 10. 11. This verse containeth first the admonition it selfe* secondly the reasons. The admonition is in the former words, wherein are to be considered, first the subiect of it, namely the persons to whom it is directed, euery faithfull Reader, and therefore he speaketh to all vnder the name of one, and that out of loue as a father to his child; and that euery one might hearken to him as a louing and dutifnll childe to his father, he calleth him his sonne. Secondly, the matter it selfe. By these be admonished. An exhortation is a prouocation or incitement to embrace and follow that which is good: an admonition is an inducement of a cautelous consideration, or practicke remembrance of that which is hurtfull and euill to auoide it. It is enforced by destructiue arguments, tending to deterre and auert the party admonished from an error, to embrace and follow the contrary good. Exhortation and admonition are of a thing already proued and granted; bnt perswasion and disswasion are of a thing doubtfull and probable. Be admonished by these arguments euidently euicting the vanity of worldly things, and auoid the vnprofitable courses of worldly minded men, who seeking for an happy state in the state of corruption and misery, find nothing, but rather lose the true felicity. Contrarily, lay hold on these precepts of wisedome, charity and piety, and rest thy selfe on God, who shall without thy carking and thoughtfull caring administer all things needfull for thee and thine. For thou cans^ not adde one cubite to thy stature, nor make one haire white or blacke, but euery plans

which God hath not planted shall bee rooted vp. Let this therefore that hath beene said, be sufficient to settle and stablish thine heart and minde in the right path, that I haue shewed thee. Rejoyee in that which God sendeth, strife, and vaine feares neyther make nor mend; be content with thy state, doe good alway to thy abilitie, and there set vp thy rest. If this will not yet satisfie, then remember Lots wife. Remember Diues. Remember the couetous rich man, Luke 12.
Of making Bookes there is no end, etc. A two*fold reason inforcing the admonition vpon the Reader. The first is drawne from the vnprofitablenesse of many words and writings of men, which are discordant and distractiue of mens mindes, which falleth out whereas the infallibilitie or direction of the spirit is wanting* which gift was promised to Solomon, 1* Kings 3. 12. and he was assured thereof; and therefore, without vaine presumption, may iustly retract the Reader from other warbling, erroneous, imperfect discourses, and treatises of men, wherewith doubtlesse hee was acquainted, as in his Booke hee intimateth plainely enough to this diuine-inspired Treatise of his owne concerning the chiefe good. So that all writings, except those that are warrantable by, and grounded on these speciall pen men of the Holy-Ghost, are vnprofitable, and to little purpose, affoording no tranquillitie, peace, durable joy, comfort to the heart and conscience. For they can not impart that to others which they altogether want themselues. For they being in darkenesse seeke onely for it, where it cannot be found, seeing that God hath subdewed man, and all things to vanitie, which can neuer be the mother or fountaine of felicitie. And the earthly paradise is destroyed. This text maketh litle for those that being so eagerly and seruently deuoted to their worldly and fleshly lusts thinke, and say, that so much preaching and writing is neceelesse. For Solomon taxeth not the holy and great Labours of the Lords Ministers, who keepe themselues within the compasse of his written word, but he taxeth these slouthfull ones, sleepie, and spirituall drunken ones, ignorants, and fooles that

euen weary the Messengers o^ God, with calling, crying, lifting vp their voyces li^ e Trumpets, earely an la^e, and yet will they not be awaked; they are heauy-hearted* dulleared, pore-blind, long about alittle, and that little is quickely forgotten. If the Preacher be but silent a while* they are ready to daunce about the golden Calfe, and beginne to thinke and talke of Egypt agayne. They are like the stone of Sisiphus* or heauy logges pulled vp the side of a stiepe hill, which lush downe agayne, when a man letteth his hold go. Againe on the contrary side, this taxeth those, that are quick of hearing, but heauy footed, ripe in the top, dead at the roote, nimble*chapt, and slowe handed. There is none end of their hearing, new instruments, new voyces, new tunes, new formes, new stiles, they are all for nouelties, full of the itch* full of curiositie, but their heart goeth after their pride, after their couetousnesse. These extreames are at length coincident. There is none end of speaking and writing to the sluggish and curious. They are both a great burden to their teachers, they will neuer be pleased. Solomon therefore in these words willeth them to be doers, and diligent practisers, the one sort to humble themselues, the other to rouze themselues to obedience, that they may haue experience, and feeling in themselues of the grace and wisedome of God; (manus est causa sapientiae) and then shall they comfort, not weary to death their teachers, as many doe. But those greedy eares, proude and couetous, that are so zealous to heare, and yet their teachers but figge-frailes, and themselues sucking spiders, casting them out when they haue suckt them as they doe their oyster shells, are but gadding carnalls and bloud-suckers. When they would be ridde of their teacher, then will they put him out of breath; and when he cannot preach twice a day, hee may sit vnder the Iuniper tree with Elias, to be fedde with Rauens. I speake not this to set dogges on barking, to whom all things are alike; but the God of order hateth confusion) which take vp all occasions of euill speaking, but rather to stoppe their mouthes, by putting a difference betweene the truely religious, and truely deuoted, and gadding talkers, whose

backs and eyes are full of pride and adultery. But our Allalikes are not for differences, but confusion. But when they haue once made a confusion of good and euill, sowre and sweete, light and darknesse, then in the flesh will they make differences, they cannot abide confusion, euery one striueth for superiority and preheminence, euery one preferreth him selfe before other* and glorieth in his riches, in his learning, in his knowledge, in his skill, in his friends, in his strength, and men acknowledge such differences; but of light and darknesse, carnall and spirituall, precious and vile, they will admit no difference: all must be alike; and the more carnall the more acceptable. The ciuill and orderly vicious, the best garnisher of vice in vertues robes and colours, is the most wise, and most commended.
And much study is a wearinesse to the flesh. Hee speakes not this of the paines of the holy writer, nor of the reader, that ought to exercise himselfe day and night in the Scriptures, and that with delight, but of those erraticall extreame persons, of whom I spake before, both writers and readers. Dauid exercised himselfe continually in the Law, Psal. 1. 2. but he got wisedome by doing it, Psal. 119. 98. 99. 100. And Plato saith. Manus est causa sapientiae. When a man hath disquieted and tormented himselfe long about predestination, etc. yet shall the ioyfull and cheerfull practise of Christianitie sustain him, and faith in Gods mercy towards him shall be his onely comfort in life and death. For all our felicity is in Gods acceptation: and he putteth none away that constantly seeke him with their whole heart, that is, sincerely, not guilefully, Psal. 32. 2. Neither doth he forsake any that do not first forsake him. The vnderstanding of this may we see in Iudas the guilefull disciple, and the eleuen true disciples. Know thy maisters mind, heare what he saith to thee, and apply thy selfe to do his wil without seaching into his secrets, and thou shalt neuer lose his fauour, nor be turned out of his seruice. For he is not so easily displeased, but beareth with innumerable imperfections and infirmities in his children, whom he measurably chasteneth, and deliuereth not ouer to death. He is most wise, most good, most mercifull, if thou doest not

account his mercy greater then thy sinnes, thou doest limit him who is infinite. To know thy sinnes, to acknowledge and confesse them, and to despaire of righteousnesse and saluation in thy selfe and by thy selfe, is that which he requireth: for then thou wilt flie to him, trust in him, rely on him, and be euer thankfull to him. Surely, when thou art none of thine owne, then art thou his. Much reading and studying is indeed a wearinesse, but it is a delightfull thing to do the commandements. Experimentall knowledge is full, delightfull and comfortable. A litle that one eateth, is better then all that a man can heare of, reade of, study of, dreame of. Greedy speculatists and hearers, are but dreamers, they are neuer satisfied, but soone weary of well doing: but God will be heard of vs, seene of vs, and serued of vs as if he were a King in bodily presence. This is the fulnesse of sound faith, feare and obedience, not fantastick dreaming, as they that would seem to be as deuout as Mary, and yet are as proud as Iezebel; as zealous as Dauid, but as couetous as Nabal* A meere delusio^.



Verse 13.
Let vs heare the conclusion of the whole matter: Feare God, and keepe his commandements, for this is the whole dutie of man.

THe generall conclusion of the whole scope of all Christian doctrine and exhortation. For all is but the mortification of the old man, and the quickning or renewing of the inner man, and both these are one* They are one motion, and differ but in respect of the termes, a quo, and ad quem. For what is that which mortifieth but life? The spirit of mortification enliueth, and the spirit of life mortifieth at one and the same instant, vno actu. The conclusion is inferred by way of exhortation, to moue attention, to print in the memory the substance of all, and the maine end of all writings, which whosoeuer hath not rooted in his heart, he can neither vnderstand rightly, nor do truly, but is a lyer, euen a very hypocrite in his best speechss and best actions. Thomas sayd to Christ, Ioh. 14. 5. We know not whither thou goest, and how can we know the way? The knowledge of the place goeth before

the knowledge of the way; and the maine end and drift of euery instruction and action, is first to be weighed. What is the end of all writings, but to feare God and keepe his commandements? He that doth not this, knoweth nothing, and is but a dreamer.
Feare God and keepe his commandements. This is the substance of the conclusion, consisting of two precepts; the one whereof concerneth the inward man, or the affection; the other concerneth the outward man or the action; the one the heart, the other the life. Concerning the first; by feare is meant a reuerent awe of Gods maiestie, proceeding from faith, whereby through the feeling of his loue, as well as the weight of his displeasure, we are afraid to offend him. Feare is put for the whole worship of God, by the figure Synecdoche. It is the principall part of Gods worship, and keepeth all the other in their duties, all euill being committed where it is wanting. Therefore sayth the Scripture, Blessed is the man that feareth alway. It is the beginning of wisedome, true and sauing wisedome, Prou. 14. 16. and the perfection of piety. For the better vnderstanding hereof, I wil insist a litle vpo^ it.
There are sundry sorts of feare.
First, Dabolicall, Iam. 2. 19. The diuels beleeue and tremble.
Second* Naturall. It is an affection or passion of the heart, whereby we feare not onely death or dissolution, but dangers and euils that are destructiue of our good estate or welfare. This feare is by naturall instinct in all sensible creatures as well as in man, and in the godly as they are men, and in Christ as he was man, subiect to our infirmities, not to sin. This feare of it selfe is not a sinne, for Christ could not sin, but in vs it is sin, by reason of our corruption, because we do not order it according to the law of God; but Christ in fearing death did also submit himselfe to the decree of his Father, according to the commandement, Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, etc. So feare was ouercome of loue, or rightly ordered by loue. So the godly after the example of Christ, though they feare death, yet they humble themselues to death and to all crosses, because the loue of God taketh away or extenuateth feare.

Third, Worldly feare. This is the corruption of naturall feare, when as men do forsake or deny God and Christ, in what measure soeuer, that they might not lose their goods, good name, pleasures, preferments, etc. The worldly, iealous, zealous, deuout, are full of this feare. Their feare is great and continual; but it is a pernicious and damnable feare: and all that they feare, be they neuer so subtil and prouident, shal fall vpon them. Math. 10. 28. Feare not them which kill the body, etc. Ioh. 12. 42. many beleeued on Christ, but durst not confesse him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, and incurre the displeasure of great ones. This was Nicodemus his infirmity, Ioh 3. 2. The Princes, Priests and Pharises were drunke with this feare, Ioh. 11 48.
Fourth, Seruile feare. It is proper to the wicked. For their conscience being guilty of sin, they feare the wrath of God, both temporall and eternall, Prou. 28. 1. The wicked flie, when no man pursueth. The wicked are like a raging sea, Esay 57. 20. It hath two effects: First, it restraineth from grosse crimes, and constraineth to outward duties, at leastwise it mitigateth the extremities of sinners, as doth also the sword of the magistrates, which curbeth those that are senslesse, or haue but a dogs conscience. Hence the Poet sayth:
Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore,Oderunt peccare mali virtutis amore.
When as Paul disputed of righteousnesse, temperance, and the iudgement to come, Felix trembled, Acts 24. 25. Secondly, it worketh hardnes of heart and desperation in some, when it groweth to an height of wicked resolution, all hope being vtterly quenched.
Fifth, Filiall or sonlike feare. This is proper to the regenerate, who by this feare are moued to auoide sinne and to liue godlily and righteously. It ariseth from the knowledge of God and out selues, and from the feeling of his acceptation and loue of vs, wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Of this Solomon saith* Prou, 1, 17* and Psal, 111. 10. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome, a good vnderstanding haue all they that do his commandements. Iob 28. 28. The feare of the Lord is wisedome, and to depart from euill is vnderstanding.

More plainely, this feare is thus begotten.
1. When a man heareth the Lawe, what is there commaunded and forbidden, the Holy-Ghost commeth and taketh away the vaile of naturall blindnesse, and slumbering, causing him to see his sinne, and to beholde the wrath of God vpon him euen to lay them both to his hard heart, whereupon feare troubleth the conscience, and breaketh the hard heart.
2. When a men in this case heareth the Gospel, the Holy-Ghost inlightneth his minde to vnderstand, and beleeue, and to apply the promises to himselfe, whereupon hee beginneth to feele quietnesse, and peace of conscience, being more and more perswaded that hee is beloued of God. Now on this perswasion ariseth the loue of God for his loue, grace, and mercie in Christ* On this loue ariseth a new feare, namely, to displease God so louing and mercifull, Psal. 130. 4. There is mercie with thee that thou mayest be feared.
Of this filiall feare there be foure degrees expressed by the feare of children toward their parents, whereof there are foure degrees.
First, a childe loueth his parents, and flieth to them as his chiefe refuge, yet is he held in obedience with threatthreatnings, and feare of the rodde. Secondly, partly by reason, partly by the rodde. Thirdly, lesse by the rodde, and more by reason. Fourthly, by reason alone without the rodde. Now to apply this.
First, children haue a sincere loue to their parents, and a generall disposition to be conformable to them in al things; yet being left to themselues, they are carried by their childish fancies and vaine desires, both vnprofitable to themselues and to their parents for want of reason. Hence Solomon sayth, Follie groweth in the heart of a childe, but the rodde of correction fercheth it out. So the regenerate newly conuerted haue a sincere, though weake loue of God, and a generall disposition and right motions to obey God in all things; yet without the consideration of Gods iustice, and feare of punishment, or rather corrections, they are apt to

be carried and ouercome with the lusts of the flesh, allurements of the world, and baites of Sathan. Therefore Dauid sayd; It is good for me that I haue beene in trouble. And Paul 1. Corinth. 11. 32. When we are iudged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we might not be condemned of the world.
Secondly, parents instruct their children in what is to be done, and what to be eschewed, and that with threatnings of punishment. And for feare of the rodde more then vpon consideration of their owne good, they obey, because reason is yet weake, and they haue but smal discerning of good and euill: So likewise, God teacheth vs what we ought to beleeue, what to doe to his glorie, and our owne good; with threatnings of temporall punishments, and crosses of sundry kindes* by which we are held in awe* and contained in duty till we come to more perfection and discerning.
Thirdly, when a childe, by reason of age, is riper in vnderstanding and reason, hee beginnes to know his parents, and his duty towards them, and what is for his owne good. Therefore he is held in obedience, not for feare of the rod, but instruction and exhortation preuaileth most. So wee, growing more perfect in the knowledge of God our father in Christ, what his loue hath beene towards vs, what hee hath done for vs, and will doe for vs, are mooued to obey him, not so much for feare of punishments, as by instruction, which we desire, and exhortation vnto which wee yeelde with delight. And as faith and loue growe stronger, so doth the Lawe with the threatnings and curses thereof growe the weaker. The Lawe is our Schoolemaster in our nonage, but when the fulnesse of yeares are come, wee are our owne instructers, and able to gouerne our selues by our owne reason.
Fourthly, when the childe commeth to perfect reason and discretion, the feare of the rod goeth away. For, hauing now the perfect knowledge of the loue, care, and benefits of his father towards him, and also of his duety towards him againe, he performeth obedience with willingnesse, delight, ioyfulnesse, fearing to displease and offend him, and is ashamed of childish follies: So wee growing

stronger in faith, and perfect men in Christ, doe willingly, cheerefully, and with delight worship and serue God, fearing to displease him vpon consideration of his greatnesse, goodnesse, mercy, and benefites towards vs, Galat, 3. 25. After that faith is come, wee are no longer vnder a Schoolemaister, that is, the ceremonies and threatnings of the Law, childish rudiments and feares, Rom. 8. 15. Yee haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare againe, but the spirit of adoption, etc. He is called the spirit of bondage, when he worketh weakely in vs, as in babes and younglings, whom the Lawe terrifieth from sinne, and compelleth to obedience. He is called the spirit of adoption, when he worketh more strongly in vs, or hath brought vs to a greater perfection of the degrees of faith, hope, loue, whereupon we are termed perfect men in Christ. The Magistrate is not terrible to the innocent, nor the rodde to the man of age, Romans 12. 3. Wilt thou be without feare of the power* doe well* and thou shalt haue praise: So likewise, wilt thou be without feare of the curse, of wrath, of hell? be strong in faith* hope, loue, and thou shalt delight, in God, in his word, Ministers, and children. His word shall be thy delight and joy. ^. Iohn 3. 21. Beloued if our hearts condemne vs not, we haue boldnesse with God. Chap. 4. 18. There is no feare in loue, for perfect loue casteth out feare: For feare hath painefulnesse, hee that feareth is not perfect in loue. Thus much of feare.
And keepe his Commandements. This is the effect of true feare, The roote is faith, the sappe or iuyce is feare, the fruit is obedience. As is the inward man, so is the outward man, the heart is deceitfull* but the hypocrit cannot be hid, for the tree shall be knowne by his fruite, not by the sight, or outward shew thereof, for the wilding maketh a fairer shew then many a good apple, but by the taste. Who is he that in sincerity keepeth the Commaundements? Hee that setteth God alway before his face. Moreouer, obedience is Legall, or Euangelicall: of the latter Solomon here speaketh. For both the curse, and rigorous exaction of the Lawe is remoued away from them that beleeue, which are the ingenuous and free borne sonnes of God. In these times there

are many maisters, but few doers; therefore shall they receiue the greater condemnation. They would haue good done, so that they themselues haue no hand in it. Here is no feare of God, but a deceitfull and wicked spirit* For how much a man doth, so much he feareth. He that doth the commandements is true, the rest are babblers. Neither haue there bene so many tongue-tied Christians in times of Popery, as there shall be phantasticall babblers and deceitfull Satanists in these last times, whose words and deeds are all falshoods and lies: yet it is but that multitude of malignants, who wil either be idolaters, or Atheists, of a false religion, or of no religion.
For this is the whole dutie of man. A reason drawne from the end of creation and redemption, which is nothing else but to feare God* and keepe his commandements, which who so doth not, is a son of perdition. Eph. 1. 4. He hath chosen vs in Christ, that we should be holy, and blamelesse before him in loue. Tit. 2. 14. He gaue himselfe for vs, that he might redeem vs from all iniquitie, and purifie vs vnto himselfe, a peculiar people, zealous of good workes. By zeale he meaneth not the bare pulpit zeale, but deuotion. Many can counterfeit zeale, as vpon a stage, but when they are out of the pulpit, they are of a quite contrary fashion, gallants, proud, stately. But the Frier shall rise vp in iudgement against them. To conclude, to feare God and keep his commandements, is the adequate, obiect or subiect of the whole man inward and outward. To this one thing must a man haue respect in euery thing. Hither must he refer all his studies and labours, if he will be partaker of true felicitie. This onely is true profite, and all exccept this is vanitie, though the blind world seek for felicitie and meanes of blisse in any thing, and in euery thing besides this.



Verse 14.
For God shall bring euery worke into iudgement, with euery secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be euill.

AN argument of confirmation, drawn from the last iudgment, whether the generall or the particular, tending to terrifie the wicked* and comfort the godly* For God shal bring into iudgement* The Iudge is God, most mightie, not to be

resisted by strength; most iust, not to be corrupted with bribes; most wise, not to be blinded with cauils, Euery worke with euery secret thing. A declaration of the iudgement by the obiects, viz. things knowne, whether words or workes, publicke or priuate; and things vnknowne, not onely done and spoken in secret, but the thoughts and imaginations of the heart, with the affections and dispositions thereof. All which are amplified by a diuision in respect of their qualities, good or euill. As euery person since the creation till the last consummation shall be summoned, and not one escape; so shall euery deed, word and thought be iudged, not one shal escape. For the bookes shall be opened, and euery secret thing shall be reuealed, the booke of Gods omniscience, and the booke of mans conscience. That which is now forgotten as a thing in sleepe, shall then be brought to remembrance as a thing to a man awaked, which is as fresh in memory, and more fresh then it was before. As the roote lying buried in the earth in Winter, sheweth forth it selfe in the Spring; so shall all things now buried in forgetfulnesse, be then made manifest vnto vs, as if they were layd before our eyes. All hearts shall be layd open, to the discouery and terror of the wicked, and to the manifestation of the godly, whose faith and truth shall now appeare, and these shall enter into euerlasting rest and ioy, but the other shall go into euerlasting fire.


FINIS.
