



GOOD SPEEDE TO Virginia.

Iosuah. 17. 14.

Then the children of Ioseph spake vnto Ioshua, saying, why hast thou giue^ me but one lot, and one portion to inherite, seeing I am a great people?
Ioshua then answered, if thou beest much people, get thee vp to the wood, and cut trees for thy selfe in the land of the Perizzites, and of the Giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.
Then the children of Ioseph said, the Mountaine will not be inough for vs, and all the Canaanites that dwell in the low countrey, haue Charcts of Iron as well as they in Bethshean, and in the townes of the same, as they in the valley of Israel.
And Ioshua spake vnto the house of Ioseph, to Ephraim, and Manasses, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power, and shalt not haue one lot.
Therefore the Mountain shal be thine, for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it downe, and the endes of it shall be thine, and thou shalt cast out the Canaanites thogh they haue Iron Charets, and though they be strong.


THe heauens saith Dauid, euen the heauens are the Lords, and so is the earth, but he hath giuen it to the children of men. Psa. 113. 16. Yet notwithsta^ding the fatherly prouide^ce, and large bountie of God towards man, so improuident and irrespectiue is man, that he had rather liue like a drone, and feede vppon the fruites of other mens labors, wherunto God hath not entituled him, then looke

out and flie abroad, like the Bee to gather the pleasures and riches of the earth, which God hath giuen him to enioy: whece vpon it comes to passe, that although the Lord hath giuen the earth to the children of men, yet this earth which is mans fee-simple by deede of gift fro^ God, is the greater part of it possessed and wrongfully vsurped by wild beasts, and vnreasonable creatures, or by brutish sauages, which by reason of their godles ignorance, and blasphemous Idolatrie, are worse then those beasts which are of most wilde and sauage nature. As Ahab therfore sometimes said to his seruants, 1. King. 22. 13. Know ye not that Ramoth Gilead was ours, and we stay and take it not out of the hands of the King of Aram? So may man say to himselfe: The earth was mine, God gaue it me, and my posteritie, by the name of the children of men, and yet I stay and take it not out of the hands of beasts, and brutish sauages, which haue no interest in it, because they participate rather of the nature of beasts then men.
The Christian part of the world did plainly bewray this improuident and irrespectiue neglect of Gods prouidence and bountie. When Christopher Columbus made proffer to the Kings of England, Portugall, and Spaine, to inuest them with the most precious and richest veynes of the whole earth, neuer knowne before: but this offer was not onely reiected, but the man himself, who deserues euer to be renowned, was (of vs English especially) scorned and accou^ted for an idle Nouellist. Some thinke it was because of his poore apparell, and simple lookes, but surely it is rather to be imputed to the improuidency and imprudencie of our Nation, which hath alwayes bred such diffidence in vs, that we co^ceit no new report, bee it neuer so likely, nor beleeue any thing be it neuer so probable, before we see the effects. This hath alwayes beene reported of the English, by

those that haue obserued the nature of nations: Bodin. lib. 5. de Repub. cap. 1. reporteth, that the English were alwayes accounted more warlike, valorous, and couragious, then the French, but the French went alwayes beyond them in prudence, and pollicie. And to expresse the same, he vseth the words of Ennius. Bellipotentes sunt magis quam sapients potentes. And it may be that this might be reported of vs English, in those times when our Country was not pesteced with multitude, nor ouercharged with swarmes of people, for peace and plentie breed securitie in men: neither is it necessarie for anie man to beleeue reports, though probable, nor to follow strange proiects be they neuer so likely, so long as he hath home inbred hopes to relie vpon, and assured certainties to satisfie his future expectation.
In those dayes this Kingdome was not so populous as now it is, Ciuell warres at home, and forreine wars abroad, did cut off the ouer-spreading branches of our people. Our cou^try the^ yeelded vnto all that were in it a surplussage of all necessities: it yeelded preferment in due correspondencie, for al degrees and sorts of men. The commons of our Country lay free and open for the poore Commons to inioy, for there was roome enough in the land for euery man, so that no ma^ needed to encroch or inclose from another, whereby it is manifest, that in those dayes we had no great need to follow strange reports, or to seeke wilde aduentures, for seeing we had not onely sufficiencie, but an ouerflowing measure proportioned to euerie man. Religion and pietie taught vs, that seeing our lot was fallen vnto vs in a faire ground, and that we had a goodly heritage, rather to be content with our own, then either politikely or ambitiously to vndertake vncouth enterprises, vnto which necessitie did no way vrge vs.

But nowe God hath prospered vs with the blessings of the wombe, and with the blessings of the brests, the sword deuoureth not abroad, neither is there any feare in our streets at home; so that we are now for multitude as the thousand of Manasses, and as the ten thousads of Ephraim, the Prince of peace hath ioyned the wood of Israel and Iudah in one troe. And therefore we may iustly say, as the children of Israel say here to Ioshua, we are a great people, and the lande is too narrow for vs: so that whatsoeuer we haue beene, now it behooues vs to be both prudent and politicke, and not to deride and reiect good profers of profitable and gainefull expectation, but rather to imbrace euery occasion which hath any probabilitie in it of future hopes: And seeing there is neither preferment nor employment for all within the lists of our countrey, we might iustly be accounted as in former times, both imprudent and improuident, if we will yet sit with our armes foulded in our bosomes, and not rather seeke after such aduentures whereby the glory of God may be aduanced, the territories of our kingdome inlarged, our people both preferred and employed abroad, our wants supplyed at home, his Maiesties customes wonderfully augmented, and the honour and renown of our Nation spred and propagated to the ends of the world. Many examples might be produced to mooue vs hereunto, but because they were the practises of rude and barharous people, they are no exemplarie presidents for christians: but forasmuch as euery example approued in the scripture, is a precept, I thought good to handle this conference betweene the tribe of Ioseph a family in the Israel of God, and Ioshua a faithfull and godly Prince ouer the whole commonwealth of Gods Israel: which to my seeming, is much like that plot which we haue now in hand for Virginia; for here the

people of Ephraim and of the halfe tribe of Manasses, are a great people, and so are we: and by reason of the multitude of their people, the land is too narrow for them; and so stands our case, whereupon they repaire to (...) to haue his warrant and direction to inlarge their ^^^oers, and so haue many of our Noble men of honorable minds, worthy knights, rich marchants, and diuerse other of the best dispositio^, solicited our Ioshua, and mightie Monarch, that most religious and renowned King Iames, that by his Maiesties leaue, they might vndertake the plantation of Virginia. Lastly, as Ioshua not onely giues leaue, but also a blessing to the childre^ of Ioseph in their enterprises, so hath our gratious Soueraigne granted his free Charter to our people, for ye vndertaking of their intended enterprise and aduenture, so that from this example, there is both sufficient warrant for our King to graunt his chacter for the plantation of Virginia, and sufficient warrant also for our people to vndertake the same. And therefore for the better satisfying of some, and for the encoraging of all fortes of people concerning this proiect for Virginia, let vs more fully examine the particulars of this discourse betweene the children of Ioseph and Ioshua. First we gather from the text, that the cause why the children of Ioseph desired to inlarge their borders, was the multitude and greatnesse whereunto they were growne. God had blessed them according to the prophesie of Iacob, Gen. 48. 19. So yt the portion which was first thought to be roomie and large inough for them, is now too narrowe and little for them. What should they do in this case? should they prouide and establish lawes to hinder the increase of their people, as we reade of Hyppodamus, sometimes a law-giuer among ye Miles^ans; whose example in gouernme^t, Aristotle in his 7. booke of Politicks and 16. chapter, and

Plato in his ^. booke Delegibus, haue drawne into precept and rule of policie? should they decree against building and execting houses, luniting a certaine number and no more for euery familie in their tribe, as P^^do amongst the Corinthians sometimes did, and (...) ^^ey of Paris of late enacted, taking order that old an^ ancie^t houses should be repayred, but no new edifices erected. Anno. 1548? should they haue pestered themselues with Inmates, and one houshold haue receiued into it two or three families? They put none of these in practise, but with one consent they repaire to the Magistrate, they complaine that their lot is not large inough, and theyshew the reason, because they are a great people.
There is nothing more daungerous for the estate of common-wealths, then when the people do increase to a greater multitude and number then may instly paralell with the largenesse of the place and countrey: for hereupon comes oppression, and diuerse kinde of wrongs, mutinies, sedition, commotion, and rebellion, scarcitie, dearth, pouertie, and sundrie sorts of calamities, which either breed the co^uersion, or euersion, of cities and common-wealths. For euen as bloud though it be the best humour in the body, yet if it abound in greater quantitie then the state of the body will beare, doth indanger the bodie, and oftentimes destroyes it: so although the honour of the king be in the multitude of people, Pro. 14. 28. yet when this multitude of people increaseth to ouer great a number, the common-wealth stands subiect to many perillous inconueniences, for which cause many Natio^s perceyuing their people to increase aboue a due and proportionable number, they haue sent their ouerflowing multitudes abroad into other countreyes and prouinces, to the ends they might preserue their owne in greater peace and prosperitie: so we see ye husbandman deale with his grou^ds

when they are ouercharged with cattell, he remooues them from one ground to another, and so he prouideth ^ell both for his cattel and for his ground: and so doth the maister of the bee-garden, when he soes a hiue pesteted with multitudes of bees, he driues ye hiue, and so reapeth ^ greater gaine by his ware and honie.
And herupon many states-men haue thought nothing more profitable for populous common-wealths, then to haue forreigne and externe warres, to the ende that thereby the superfluous braunches might be cut off. This was the cause why Scipio when he had conquered Carthage, would not haue it vtterly ruinated, least saith he, the Romains hauing no warres abroad, mooue ciuill warres amongst themselues at home: others seeing the multitude of their people increase, haue planted Colonies with them, others haue banished them into remote countries: and the children of Ioseph here being pestered with multitude come to Ioshua to be directed and relieued. This should teach vs of this kingdome and countrey, prudence and prouidence, the Lord hath blessed vs, and we are growne to be a great people, so that one lot is not sufficient for vs: Our multitudes like too much bloud in the body, infect our countrey with plague and pouertie, our land hath brought foorth, but it hath not milke sufficient in the breast thereof to nourish all those children which it hath brought forth, it affordeth neither employment nor preferment for those that depend vpon it: And hereupon it is, that many seruiceable men giue themselues to lewd courses, as to robbing by the high way, theft, and cosoning, sharking vpon the land, piracie vpon the Sea, and so are cut off by shamefull and vntimely death: others liue prophanely, riotously, and idely, to the great dishonour of Almightie God, the detriment of the commonwealth. Now our case standing

thus it behooueth euerie one to deuise a remedie for this misery: When there was no bread in Chanaa^, Iacob and his familie sought into Egypt for corne to relieue themselues. And Iacob seeing his sonnes destitute of counsel in that extremity, did sharply reprehe^d them for ye dissolute managing of their present state, saying: Why gaze ye one vpo another? Behold, I haue heard there is food in Egypt, get ye down thither, and buy vs food thence, that we may liue. Euen so may it be said to a companie of people in this land, which doe nothing but gaze one vpon another, destitute of counsell, aduise, and meanes, how to prouide iustly and honestly for their maintenaunce. They heare of honourable proiects abroade, they heare of employment and preserment, they heare of plentie and abundance of many good things, of which a fruitful country largely makes offer vnto them: they heare of gaine and profite both to them and their posteritie, they heare many honourable men, many worthie wise men, many valiaunt and couragious men, many rich and wealthie men, aduenture their persons, their mony, their ships, towards the accomplishing of so godly and memorable a dsigne, and yet they sit still folowing their intemperauncie, incontinencie, and other their luxurious and riotous courses, to the high dishonour of almightie God, to the great hurt of the common-wealth, and to their own euerlasting shame and ignomie. If an honourable death were set before a vertuous minde, it would chuse rather to die heroically, then liue opprobriously. What then shall we thinke of those persons, who hauing an honourable life set before them, doe yet chuse rather to liue in idlenesse, dishonestie and obscenitie? surely they are of degenerate and dunghill minder, neither are they worthy to be nourished in the bosome of a wel gouerned common-wealth. It was for euer a

blemish to the honour and credit of Vlisses, because hee feigned himselfe mad, and sowed salt in sreed of corne in his field, onely that by such a shift he might keepe himselfe at home, and not go with the Grecians to the siege of Troy. So let perpetuall shame and dishonour attend vpon all those, which doting vpon their wealth, or suffeting vpon their pleasures, finde delaies and deuise shifts, either to saue their purses, or their persons, from such honourable and profitable designments, as offer probable likelyhoods of future good to this our countrey or common-wealth.
Thus we haue heard the dutie of the people which is prudently and prouidently to consult with the magistrates, concerning the disburdening, and discharging of such vnnecessarie multitudes as pester a commonwealth, and also to further such enterprises either with their purses or their persons as make to the same ende. Now yt in next place, we are to note the direction of Iosua, vpon the aforesaide complaint of the children of Ioseph, which is to enlarge their territories, and dilate their borders, by destroying Gods enemies the Perizzites, and Giants, which inhabited the valleyes, bordering vpon mount Ephraim, which were most abominable Idolaters, and had no knowledge of the true and onely God: from whence we may learne, how odious those people are, in the sight of God, which hauing no knowledge of him and his worship, giue that honour to the insensible and vnreasonable creature, which is onely due to the omnipotent and almightie Creator. For this cause hath almightie God, ouerthrowne the mightiest Monarchies in the world, for this cause did hee disperse his owne Israel among the Nations, and neuer vouchsafed them to returne againe into their owne land. Dauid by way of prophecie, doth promise a blessing to those

that shall take the children of the Idolatrous Babilonians and dash them against the stones, and they that haue taken armes against such people, are said to fight the Lords battells. Saul had his kingdome rent from him and his posteritie, because he spared Agag, that Idolatrous king of the Amalechites, whom God would not haue spared: so acceptable a seruice is it to destroy Idolaters whom God hateth, but forasmuch as God doth not delight in bloud, but rather that a sinner should conuert and liue, agreeable vnto which, is that speech of our Sauiour Christ in the Gospell, There is ioy in heauen ouer one sinner that repenteth. It is far more commendable, and out of doubt more acceptable vnto God, to reclaime an Idolater, vnles we haue a speciall commaundement of God to the contrarie, as Saul had then to destroy him, to win him to the faith, then to depriue him of life, and to bring him to the knowledge of God, and whom he hath sent Christ Iesus: rather then to kill them in their ignorance, and so to bring them into daunger both of bodie and soule, for they that turne many vnto righteousnesse shall shine as the starres for euermore. Dan. 12. 3. Paul calls those whom he had won to the faith of Christ, his crowne, his ioy, his glorie. 1. Thessa. 2. 19. 20. As though they were the matter of his ioy, of his crowne, and of his glorie. Happie therefore is he that hath an hand in turning any vnto God. And he that will finde delaie whereby so gratious a worke may be hindered, is not with God, but against God, for asmuch as he hinders the building vp of the kingdome of God.
And surely so desirous is man of ciuill societie by nature, that he easily yeelds to discipline and gouernment,

if he see any reasonable motiue to induce him to the same. For we reade of certaine people in Affrica, inhabiting the mountaine Magnan, which offentimes do constraine straungers which trauell that way, to take the gouernment of them, and to impose lawes vnto them, whereby they may be iustly and orderly gouerned: and many Nations willingly submitted themselues to the subiection of the Romanes, being allured thereunto by Iustice, equitie, clemencie, and vpright dealing of the Romaine captaines: for it is not the nature of men, but the education of men, which make them barbarous and vnciuill, and therefore chaunge the education of men, and you shall see that their nature will be greatly rectified and corrected: seeing therefore men by nature so easily yeelde to discipline and gouernment vpon any reasonable shewe of bettering their fortunes, it is euerie mans dutie to trauell both by sea and land, and to venture either with his person or with his purse, to bring the barbarous and sauage people to a ciuill and Christian kinde of gouernment, vnder which they may learne how to liue holily, iustly, and soberly in this world, and to apprehend the meanes to saue their soules in the world to come, rather then to destroy them, or vtterly to roote them out: for a wise man, but much more a Chrtstian, ought to trie all meanes before they vndertake warre: di^astation and depopulation ought to be the last thing which Christians should put in practise, yet forasmuch as euerie example in the scripture as I saide is a precept, we are warranted by this direction of Ioshua, to destroy wilfull and conuicted Idolaters, rather then to let them liue, if by no other meanes they can be reclaimed.

The report goeth, that in Virginia the people are sauage and incredibly rude, they worship the diuell, offer their young children in sacrifice vnto him, wander vp and downe like beasts, and in manners and conditions, differ very litle from beasts, hauing no Art, nor scie^ce, nor trade, to imploy themselues, or giue themselues vnto, yet by nature louing and, gentle, and desirous to imbrace a better condition. Oh how happy were that man which could reduce this people from brutishnes, to ciuilitie, to religion, to Christianitie, to the sauing of their soules: happy is that man and blest of God, whom God hath endued, either with meanes or will to attempt this busines, but farre be it from the nature of the English, to exercise any bloudie crueltie amongst these people: farre be it from the hearts of the English, to giue them occasion, that the holy name of God, should be dishonoured among the Infidels, or that in the plantation of that continent, they should giue any cause to the world, to say that they sought the wealth of that countrie aboue or before the glorie of God, and the propagation of his kingdome. I remember the practise of Christopher Collombus, which he vsed amongst the west Indians, to perswade them to receiue his Spaniardes to societie and commerce, which was, he obserued that they were superstitiously giuen to worship the Moone, and by the skill he had in Astronomie, he foresaw that within three daies the Moone should be eclipsed: wherupon he called them together, and told them, that he had often vsed his best meanes, to bring them to a ciuill, and friendly conuerse with strangers, but they would not harken vnto him, and therefore in the presence of

them all, he called vpon the Moone to reuenge such a ^acha^ous people, which denied stra^gers so conuerse, and commerce with them: within three dayes after the Moone was much darkened by reason of the Eclipse, which when the Indians saw, they thought the Moone to be angrie with them, and fearing some plague would proceede from her displeasure, they were easily induced to doe whatsoeuer Columbus would haue them. In like maner should all men vse their wits in the first place, and weapons should alwayes be the last meanes in all our proiects. And therefore although the children of Ioseph haue an expresse commaundement here in this place, to destroy those Idolaters, and possesse their land, yet forasmuch as we haue no precept but by example, we must first trie all means before weapons, and when we take them into our hands, necessitie of preseruing our owne liues, must rather moue vs to destroy the enemyes of God, then either ambition, or greedinesse of gaine, or crueltie, or anie priuate respect whatsoeuer.
Now the third thing which we are to obserue in this entercourse of wordes betweene the children of Ioseph, and Iosua, is the delayes which the people vse, and the excuses which they feigne, which seeme to import an impossibilitie, in the vndertaking of Iosuas direction. And their delayes are, that the Chanaanites were strong and well prouided of warlike munition, both for their owne defence, and also for the defence of those which would vndertake to supplant or inuade them, they had yron Charets, and such like muniments of warre, so that it stoode not with wisedome to make an inuasion, with likelihoode to make a conquest of them. This is the nature of muddy and earthly spirits, to find delayes, and forge excuses in matters of least difficultie: Man sayeth, A Lion is without, I shall be

slaine in the streete. Prou. 22. 13. What slanders did the ten spies bring vpon the land of Canaan? which sla^ders the I sraelites made good grou^ds for their retiring back into Egypt, and thought them lawfull excuses for them to murmur against Moses and Aaron, Han^ba had much ado to bring his Carthagenians into Italy, they alledged the tediousnesse of the voiage; and the inaccessible passage of ye Alpes. We read of Caligula, sometimes Emperor of Rome, that he on a time condemned a certain Citizens son of Rome to be executed, and he sent for his father to see his sonnes execution. The father to excuse his absence, feined himselfe to be sick, whervpon the Emperor sent him his horslitter, and by that meanes tooke away from him all colour of excuse. This perplexed father had good cause to find delayes to keep him at home: but they that forge cauils, to withdraw themselues from such attempts whereby God may be honored, the maiestie and royaltie of their King aduauced, the common wealth enriched, and postrecitie prouided for, would not be drawne to these attempts in Caligulaes horslitter, for that is too easie meanes to draw on such backward spirits, neither would I haue them punished for their delayes, as Tu^lus Hostilius sometimes punished Metius Sufferius for his delayes: but I would some Diomedes would find out a meanes to drawe them on to this enterprise, by discouering their driftes and excuses; for all that they can alleags for their backewardnesse, is most idle and friuolous.
The first obiection is, by what right or warrant we can enter into the land of these Sauages, take away their rightfull in hexitance from them, and plant our selues in their places, being vnwronged or vnprouoked by them. Some affirme, and it is likely to be true, that these Sauages haue no particular proprietis in

any part or parcell of that Countrey, but only a generall recidencis there, as wild beasts haue in the forrest, for they range and wander vp and downe the Countrey, without any law or gouernment, being led only by their owne lusts and sensualitie, there is not meum Ortuum amongest them: so that if the whole lande should bee taken from them, there is not a man that can complaine of any particular wrong done vnto him.
But the answer to the foresaid obiectio^ is, that there is no intendment to take away from them by force that rightfull inheritaunce which they haue in that Countrey, for they are willing to entertaine vs, and haue offered to yeelde into our handes on reasonable conditions, more lande then we shall bee able this long time to plant and manure: and out of all question vppon easie composition with them, wee may haue as much of their Countrey yeelded vnto vs, by lawfull graunt from them, as wee can or will desire, so that wee goe to liue peaceablie among them, and not to supplant them: wee desire not, neither doe wee intend to take anie thing from them, ex pacto and iure foederis: but to compound with them for that wee shall haue of them: and surelie except succession and election, there cannot bee a more lawfull entrance to a kingdome then this of ours.
Moreouer, all Polititians doe with one consent, holde and maintaine, that a Christian King may lawfullie make warre vppon barbarous and Sauage people, and such as liue vnder no lawfull or warrantable gouernment, and may make a conquest of them, so that the warre bee vndertaken to this ende, to reclaime and reduce those Sauages from their barbarous kinde of life,

and from their brutish and ferine manners, to huinanitie, pietie, and honestie. Lip. lib. 5. pol. ca. 8. Casman. in pol. cap. 8. Ke^kerm. lib. 7. pol. pag. 124. And Lipsius alledgeth Saint Augustine for proofe hereof, whose wordes are these: Qui licentia iniquitatis eripitur, vtiliter vincitur. Those people are vanquished to their vnspeakeable profite and gaine, which by conquest are abridged of the libertie of sinne and impietie. And the same Saint Augustine hath an other golden saying to this purpose. Apud veros Dei cultores etiam illa bella peccata non sunt qua non cupiditate and crudelitate sed pacis studio geruntur, vt mali coerceantur, and boni subleuentur: Amongest the true worshippers of GOD, euen that warre is lawfull which is vndertaken, not for couetousnesse and crueltie, but for peace and vnities sake: so that lewde and wicked men may thereby be suppressed and good men maintained and relieued: whereby we see, that both in the opinion of Polititians, and also by the iudgement of Augustine himselfe, we might lawfully make warre vppon the Sauages of Virginia our proiect, hauing the endes aforesaid. And therefore let euerie man that is or will be an aduenturer in this plantation, examine his whole heart, and if hee finde that hee is drawne to partake in this businesse, to drawe the Sauages from their barbarous kinde of life, to a moreciuill, honest, and Christian kinde of life, let him not doubt of the lawfulnesse of it, but let him cheerefully and liberally put his helping hand to this businesse.
Secondly, they reason of the future euents by those that are alreadie past. And seeing it is aboue twentie yeares agee since this attempt was begun, and yet no good hath come of it, nor little hope of any, they holde it an vnaduised course to set the same attempt

on foote againe: which obiection of theirs is very sufficientlie answered in that booke intituled Noua Britannia. And indeed most childish is this obiection, for neither was the end of the first attempt the same, with the end of this, nor the meanes, nor the managing of the meanes of this attempt semblable with the former, and therefore in all likelihood the euent of this cannot be iudged by the euent of the former.
Their second obiection is, that this age will see no profit of this plantatio^. Which obiection admit it were true, yet it is too brutish, and bewraies their neglect and incurious respect of posteritie: we are not borne like beasts for our ielues, and the time present only, but besides manie other things which may challenge an interest and right in vs: posteritie and the age yet ensuing haue not the least part in our life and labours. What benefit or comfort should we haue enioyed in the things of this world, if our forefathers had not prouided better for vs, and bin more carefully respectiue of posteritie then for themselues? We sow, we set, we plant, we build, not so much for our selues as for posteritie; we practise the workes of Godlines in this life, yet shall we not see the end of our hope before wee inioy it in the world to come: It is a blessed thing to be blessed of posteritie. It was the reioycing of the Uirgin Marie, that from thenceforth all generations should call her blessed. They that do not prouide for eternitie, can haue no assured hope of eternitie, and they which onely are for themselues, shall die in themselues, and shall not haue a name among posteritie, their rootes shall bee dried vp beneath, and aboue shall their branch bee cut downe, their remembrance shall perish from the earth, and they shal haue no name in the streete, Iob 18. 16. 17. But the remembrance which a good man leaues behind him, is like the composition of the perfume that is made by the Art of the Apothecary; it is sweet as honie in all mouthes, and as musicke at a banket of wine: let it not grieue thee therefore to plant and

build for posteritie, for the memorie of the iust shall bee blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Prou. 10. 7.
Others obiect the continuall charges which will prooue in their opinion very heauie and burdensome to those that shall vndertake the said Plantation. These like the dog in the manger, neither eate hay themselues, neither will they suffer the Oxe yt would. They neuer think any charges too much that may any way increase their owne priuate estate. They haue thousands to bestow about the ingrossing of a commoditie, or vpon a morgage, or to take their Neighbours house ouer his head, or to lend vpon vsurie: but if it come to a publicke good, they grone vnder the least burden of charges that can bee required of them. These men would bee vsed like sponges, they must be squeased, seeing they drnuke vp all, and will yeeld to nothing, though it concerne the common good neuer so greatly. But it is demonstratiuely prooued in Noua Britannia, that the charges about this Plantation will be nothing, in comparison of the benefit that will grow thereof. And what notable thing I pray you can be brought to passe without charges? The things of this world are appointed vnto man with such conditions as there may no profit accrew vnto him without paine, nor no gaine without charge: Hiel will build Iericho, though the foundation of it cost him his eldest sonne, and the setting vp of the gates cost him his youngest sonne: Haman wil haue his wicked desire vpon the Jewes, though it cost him ten thousand talents; So little doe the wicked respect charges about the effecting of their malicious, or vaine glorious attempts, condemning those that professe pietie and religion, which for sauing charges, neglect, and often times suffer most honorable and profitable protects to faile and fall to the ground. Without question kee that saues his mony, where Gods glory is to bee aduanced, Christian religion propagated and planted, the good of the Commonwealth increased, and the glorious renowne of the King inlarged, s subiect to the curse of Simon

Magus, his monie and he are in danger to perish together. Let none therefore find delaies, or faine excuses to withhold them from this imployment for Virginia, seeing euery opposition against it is an opposition against God, the King, the Church, and the Commonwealth.
Now in the last place let vs heare the answere of Ioshua to the excuses of the children of Ioseph, and his answere is an exhortation, that in stead of delaies they would vse Art and industrie in this enterprise which they were to vndertake: Art in cutting downe the trees and making the Countrie champion: Industrie by taking paines to conquer and cast out those Idolatrous Cananites, and to plant themselues in their places. From whence we are to gather, that for this present businesse of plantation in Virginia, there must bee speciall choice and care had of such persons as shall be sent thither. Nature hath emptied her selfe in bestowing her richest treasures vpon that Countrie; so that if Art and industrie be vsed, as helpes to Nature, it is likely to prooue the happiest attempt that euer was vndertaken by the English. And forasmuch as of all humane Artes Political gouernment is the chiefest, there must be a speciall care in the Magistrate how to carry himselfe in his place and order: for herein consists the verie maine matter of the successe of this businesse. As therefore the Magistrate hath the eminencie of dignitie conferred vpon him by his Prince, so must he furnish himselfe with eminencie of vertue: for he shal the better containe others within the bounds and limits of honestie and godlinesse, if he first be able to containe himselfe. Mala anima male imperat, Plato: 1. de legibus. A Magistrate therefore must haue a good conscience towards God, and he must also haue a louing affection towards those ouer whom hee hath the gouernment. Concerning the conscience that a Magistrate must carrie towards God, he must so watch ouer himselse, that at no time he burst soorth into any notorious vice, nor suffer himselfe to be stained with the imputation of any

enormious crime; for the vices of men are holden so much the greater, by how much greater the Maiestie is of the partie delinquent: the blemishes of Princes are deformities, and diminitiue sins in the^, are sins of the highest nature. Again, he that is in place of gouernment must know that his example preualles much with those yt are vnder his gouernment, so that he shall rule his subiects better by his good example of life, then by all the lawes and statutes that hee can make. Lastly, a Magistrate must know that the moderne times doe not onely behold him, but that he is subiect also to the view of succeeding posteritie; and therefore Tacitus doth aduise Princes, lib. 4. Ann. to beware by all meanes that they giue no occasion to Chroniclers to publish their leaud and wicked actions. Concerning his looing affection towards his subiects, his first care must be that he alwaies seeke the publike good of his subiects aboue his owne priuate profit: to which purpose the Emperour Adrian was wont to say; Ita se rempublicam gesturum vt sciret populi rem esse, non propriam. The example of Alexander the Great is most memorable for this purpose, who leading his souldiers through the drie and w^^ places of India, had almost lost his whole armie for water. At the last one of his souldiers found out the riuer Oxus, and brought the King water to quench his thirst: but the King powred the water vpon the ground before all his souldiers, and would not drinke it, speaking these words: Ego bibam? and reliqui sitient? and when he and his whole armie came to the riuer, hee would not drinke before all his souldiers had quenched their thirst: giuing thereby all Princes to vnderstand, that they should prouide for the good of their people before their owne good. Thus in conscience towards God, and in affection towards his subiects ought a Prince to stand affected. And if he stand so affected he will punish such as are vild and vitious, and he will aduance such as are veriuous and well disposed; he will incourage the painfull and industrious,

and he will correct the idle and dissolute; he will establish true religion, and he will represse heresies and schismes; he wil reiceue the weake and impotent, and he wil suppresse the mutinous and insolent; so that God will giue a blessing, and al things wil prosper vnder his gouernment.
And for as much as no policie can stand long without religion, a chiefe care must be had of sufficient, honest, and sober minded Ministers to teach and instruct the people both by their life and doctrine in their dutie to God, and obedience to their rulers. When the T^^be of Dan went to plant themselues in La^sh, they tooke a Leuite with them to bee a father and a Priest vnto them: Micah thought that the Lord would be better vnto him because he had a Leuite in his house. Neither do I euer reade of any that euer attained vnto any gouernment of what religion soeuer they were, but their first care was to prouide fit persons which might teach the people religion and diuine worship; and therefore if this p^antatio^ should bee vndertaken without this care, there were small hope of any good successe to come thereof. And as the Minister being a subiect must yeeld his obedience to the Magistrate, so (...) Magistrate must bee carefull to yeeld him countenance to keepe him from neglect, and maintenance to incourage him in his ministery. And it must be specially foreseene of the Ministers that they resist Poperie; for as it doth infect the mind with errour, so it doth infect the manners of men with disloyaltie and treachery: and lastly they must labour to preserue the vnitie of the spirit in the bond of peace; for if they ^nce ^arre, or dissent among themselues, they open a gappe to schisme and contempt of religion. Policie thus establishing religion, and religion guiding policie; prouision must be made of men furnished with Arts and trades most necessarie for this busines: Artificers and tradesmen must be nourished and cherished, for without Artificers and tradesmen a common-wealth cannot flourish nor endure: and therefore the Magistrate must specially

regard them and respect them, and they must so carrie themselues that they may be respected and cherished of the Magistrate. It is required at their hands that they be faithfull, painefull, and honest in their callings; for if they be thus qualified, the countrie itselfe will make them rich. Euery trade hath his mystery, which is for the most part grounded vpon deceit and fraud: but seeing the beginning of a common wealth is now attempted, the foundation must not bee laid vpon fraud and deceit, for there can no good end be expected of an euill beginning. It is requ^red likewise that they be painefull in their trades, or else the commonwealth can haue little vse or comfort of them. And here our English tradesmen and Artificers are to be aduised that they be warie in taking the Sauages to bee apprentices to teach them their trade, seeing there be meanes of imployment sufficient besides to set many thousands on worke; and therefore not necessarie as yet to instruct them in our trades and mysteries.
Besides all this, industrie must be also added to helpe Arte and Nature, so that such as haue no prosessed artes and trades, must painefully im^^^y themselues in some labour or other, to the furthering of this Plantation: a Drone will in short space deuoure more hony than the Bee can gather in along time, and therefore the Magistrate must correct with al sharpenesse of discipline, those vnthriftie and vnprofitable Drones, which liue idly: for there is a law giuen to the sonnes of Adam to labour, and to the daughters of Eue, with the sweate of their browes to get their liuing, and therefore it is an Euangelicall precept that they which will not labour must not eate. In Iobs time there was a very strict order taken for such as liued idely, Iob 30. 5. They were chased forth from among men, and euery one showted at them as at a theefe: and surely such an order must bee taken with those that will not liue painefully in Virginia, the rather because meate and drinke, and such other necessarie

supplies of liueliehoode will be very precious there a while: and therefore order had more neede be taken, that such prouision be not consumed by vnseruiceable loytering companions.
Lastly, all degrees and sorts of people which haue prepared themselues for this Plantation must be admonished to preserue vnitie, loue and concord amongst themselues: for by concord small things increase and growe to great things, but by discord great things soone come to nothing. Agesilaus being demaunded why the Citie of Sparta was not compassed about with walles for the better defence and safety of the Citie, he shewed vnto the demandant, the Citizens and Souldiers of Sparta, all of them liuing and agreeing together in firme concord and vnitie; these, saith Agesilaus, are the walles of Sparta: and out of question so it is; concord and good agreement amongst coinhabitants is a more sure defence than walles or Castles, or any other warlike munition whatsoeuer. Therefore if any mutinous or seditious person dare aduenture to mooue any matter which may tend to the breach of concord and vnitie, he is presently to be suppressed as a most d^^gerous enemy to the state and gouernement there established. Now all these particulars being already not onely concluded vpon, but also prouided for by the godly care of the counsell and Aouenturers of Virginia: I haue presumed onely to aduise, being ^^t o^ ^oubt that they will be as carefully performed, as they at? already wisely and religiously determined. And thus far haue I presumed in my loue to the Aduenturers, and liking to the enterprise, ^o deale in this businesse, praying as much good successe to them and it, as their owne hearts can desire hoping to see their expectation satisfied, and the glory of England as much increased by this their honorable attempt, as euer was the Romane Empire by the enterprises of her greatest Emperours, sorrowing with my selfe that I am not able neither in person nor purse to be a partaker in the businesse.
FINIS.

