



GRAVE COVNSELS, AND GODLY OBSERVATIONS: SERVING GENERALLY TO DIRECT ALL MEN IN THE WAIES OF TRVE GODLINES; BVT PRINCIPALly applyed to instruct, and comfort all afflicted consciences.

Affections.
HE vsed this triall of his affections; as of anger, griefe, ioy, or such like, in this manner: If by them he was made lesse fit to pray; more vnable to do the good he should, lesse carefull to auoid sin; then he thoughtTriall of affections. his affection carnall and euill, and not of God: but when his anger, loue, grief, and other affectio^s prouoked him more to pray, and made him fitter to do good, then he thought his affections to be sent from God, as a blessing vnto him.
2 God sheweth vs often in our affections, what we may doe in our outward actions.
3 Some labour more for knowledge, lesse for affection: some more for affection, lesseHow to labour for knowledge and affection. for knowledge: some busie themselues in Church-discipline, and are slender sighted in their priuie corruptions: some be diligent to espie things in others abroad, and negligent to trie themselues at home: but it is good to match both together.
4 Rare good things are pleasant, but by vse they are lesse esteemed: and rare euill things are fearefull, but by vse they become lesse grieuous. This comes to passe, because we rather bring with vs naturall affections, of ioy, and sorrow, and feare, than spirituallNaturall affections. meditations, which are onely of the true ioy and sorrow.
5 We must euer learne to suspect our owne opinion and affection, when the case anyWhen to suspect affectio^. See more in the title of iudgement, sect. 1. thing concerneth vs.
6 He said, that when for some causes naturall affection deceiued him: yet the ordinance of God caused him to doe duties.
7 He thought it not good at table to be extraordinarie either in ioy or sorrow, vnlesse it were for some special cause: but rather it were conuenient, priuately to a godly friend or before the Lord to powre out our hearts, and after the example of Ioseph to make our affections knowne as little in companie as may be.


Afflictions.
1 HE thought all afflictions, to be puttings of him to God from slothfulnes.Slothfulnes.
2 It is a most certaine thing in Gods children, that the more their afflictions grow, the more their faith groweth: the more Sathan striueth to draw them from God, the more they draw neer to God: although indeed in feeling they ca^not see somuch.Feeling.
3 Many can speak faire things in the eares of God, so long as they be in affliction: but afterwards they will speake euill things in the eares of heauen and earth.
4 He said to one complaining of sudden gripes and nips in the bodie, Of sudden ^earesOf sudden gripes and nips in the bodie, and feares in the minde. in the minde, that we should make our vse of them: and though it were hard to search the particular cause of them, it was both easie and sure to attribute it to our failing in religion, in not doing some good which God required at our hands: or if we did it, because we were too ceremoniall, and rested in the thing wrought. If we haue failed in not doing, it may be the Lord calleth vs to some thing to be done. Againe, by these sudden feares and griefes, the Lord will sometime prepare a way to come vnto vs, not much vnlike to a Prince, who before his comming hath a peale of gunnes as a warning peece, and then we are to meete the Lord with prayer: for now is the time, now is the fit oportunitie of praying, because the Lord will shortly passe by vs, and therefore we must stirre vp our selues. And hauing prayed* it is good to make an holy pursuite after him, as laying a godly claime to the promises of God, not in particular, but in generall: for who knoweth, but the Lord, what is good in particular for our saluation. Here he shewed by his owne example, to commend the vse of prayer, how he being once feared with deceiuable and grieuous visions, called to minde (being alone in the darke night) the vnbeliefe of the Disciples on the Seas, where our Sauiour Christ was asleepe: then he asked his owne soule whether he had prayed or no; or whether in prayer, he made not some haste out of it, as being desirous toPrayer. be rid of it. Then co^sidering that he gaue himselfe to God, who was the Lord of the night as well as of the day; of darknes, as well as of the light, he prayed againe, and to the praise of God he spake it, he slept more quietly than before, after he did so striue in faithfull prayer.
5 In afflictions we must search the cause: first by ascending to God, then by descendingIn afflictions to descend into our selues, and to ascend to God. Deut. 30. 1. 2. 3 4. Simile. into our selues. First, we must ascend to God, pleading guiltie, crauing mercie, and not stand quarrelling with the malice of men, or hatred of the diuell against vs: for as it were no good wisedome for a man, condemned to die, to make any long suite to the Iaylor, or to the executioner, (for they be but vnder officers, and can do nothing) but he must labour to the Iudge, who can either reprieue or release him: so it is no good policy to stand about Sathan in our temptations, who doth all by constraint and restraint vnder the Lord: but we must goe to the principall, that is God, in whose hands are both the entrance, the continuance, and the issues of our sufferings. Secondly, we must search our selues, how farre either reason is vnreformed, or affections vnrenewed: knowing that the diuell himselfeThe diuell cannot hurt vs, till we haue hurt our selues. can neuer hurt vs, vntill we haue hurt our selues. And looke in what measure our reason is corrupt, or our affections disordered, in that measure are we weake, and easier to be ouerthrowne of men, or of Sathan: and in what measure our reason is sound, and our affections sincere, in that measure we remaine inuincible. Before, and in all we must pray that the spirit may be giuen vs, that we neither adde nor detract, that we goe not too farre, nor come too short.
6 If God bestow good gifts on a man, it were good to feele some crosse to seale and seasonThe crosse doth seale and season Gods graces in vs. them in vs. If God giue vs foode and raiment, it were good to be exercised with some crosse.
7 He that will haue comfort in his triall and trauels, must haue a good conscience, a sound cause, and must be sure that he hath vsed and doth vse sound, discreete, and louingThree things in all trials. meanes.
8 We must not like fooles stumble at the crosse, but profit by the grace offered to vs in it, by repenting our former state past, and by giuing thankes for our state present, and fearing our state to come.
9 It is a great corruption in men, to be more grieued when the crosse priuatly touchethPublike calamities must affect vs most. themselues, than when publikely it concerneth the whole Church and common-wealth.
10 Being in great paines and crosses which he suffered, hee said, Blessed be God that I suffer no more: for the Lord that in mercie laieth this affliction vpon me, might iustly punish me in my soule and bodie, and cast me into hell, and as soone haue taken away the life of my soule and bodie, as this thing.
11 To one complaining that his afflictions were extraordinarie, he answered: It isExtraordinarie affliction in appearance. not so, for your afflictions are farre inferiour to your sinnes: and therefore howsoeuer it seemeth to you to be an extraordinarie affliction, yet with God it is but ordinarie, or lesse

than ordinarie. Besides, this is a dangerous temptation: for it will bring you to this conceit, that you shall reason thus in your selfe, that an extraordinarie crosse must haue an extraordinarie comfort, and therefore you must looke for some wonderfull and strange consolation, whereby Sathan will moue you to contemne, or at least not so to regard ordinarie consolations, which haue helped others, and may helpe you, and by this meanes breed in you such vnthankfulnes, that before you are aware, an extraordinarie affliction shall be sent indeed.
12 He that will suffer great things in persecution, must suffer small things in peace, and they that will suffer of Papists, must suffer of Protestants.


Anger.
1 THis is a good triall, whether our anger be spirituall or carnall; if our anger hindersSee Affections pag. 1. not some other holy action, but stirres vs vp to good workes; if it hinder vs not to pray with libertie of minde; if it interrupt not our meditations; if we doe not omit the doing of any dutie to the partie offending vs; if we can deale with others without peeuishnes, then our anger is spirituall, and will comfort our consciences.
2 He was euer most grieued and angrie, yet in loue with them whom he tendred most in the Lord, and who had giuen him most credit, by submitting themselues wholie to his ministerie.


Angels.
1 TO one, asking how the Angels of God watch ouer vs, he answered: we are ratherPsal. 91. Heb. 1. to pray for the experience of their ministerie vnto vs, than either to describe it, or prescribe it. This is sure, if we be Gods children and walke in his waies; the Angels of God do watch ouer vs, and yet all see it not, and when they see it, it is by the effect of their ministerie: for though their ministerie be certaine, yet the manifestation of it is extraordinarie.


Atheisme.
1 A Certaine man being a Papist, though not so grounded as he desired to be, tooke a view of the life of Papists, if it were as glorious in truth as they pretended; which when he found not, he turned himselfe to the Protestants, and looking into their conuersation, he found himselfe not contented, vntill in the end he met with Familists, in whom he so staied himselfe, that he grew into familiaritie with their doctrine. The first principle that they taught him, was, that there was no God: This boyled much in him, so that he began to adde conclusions to this precept on this sort: If there be a God, he is not so iust and mercifull* as they say: if there be no God, there is neither heauen, nor hell; or if there be any, the ioyes are not so eternall, nor the paines so continuall, as some haue taught: Why then doe I sell my certaine pleasures in this world, for vncertaine pleasuresA Papist became a ^amii^st and so an Atheist; and his end. in the world to come? This diuellish illusion so farre preuailed, that he stole an horse, for which he was apprehended, imprisoned, arraigned, and condemned: but, by the prouidence of God, he conferring with a godly Minister, confessed himselfe an Atheist: whereupon suite was made and granted for his reprieuing vntill the next Assise, in hope of his conuersion, in which time, he would willingly graunt all generall truths taught him, with liking of his teachers, but could not by any thing be brought from his Atheisme. The Assise following drew neere, he is to be executed, the place is assigned, the person needs must be executed, who when he should be turned from the ladder, cried thus, For Christs sake stay my life: whereupon he spake these or the like words: Well, let the world say what they will; doubtlesse, there is a God, and the same God is iust for euer to his enemies, and euerlastingly keepeth his mercies with his children; now turne me ouer: and so he made an end of his speech, and of his daies.
2 He feared rather Atheisme than Papisme in the Realme: for many hauing escapedFeare of Atheisme to increase rather than Papisme. out of the gulfe of superstition, are now too farre plunged and swallowed vp of prophanenesse, thinking either that there is no God, or else that he is not so fearefull and mercifull, as his threatnings and promises commend him to be.



Calling.
1 A Certaine man afflicted in minde, began, through the temptation ofThe mistiking of our ordinary callings how dangerous. Sathan, to mislike his calling, and chaunged it, afterward he thought this calling and that calling to be vnlawfull, and so was almost brought to mislike all. He felt on a time a great paine in his legge, and being desirous to goe from his bed to his table for a booke, he could not, his legge remaining sore: Then remembring that it was said in the Scripture, If thy foote offend thee, cut it off; he straight way laying his le^ge on a blocke, and taking a hatchet in his hand, stroake off his legge, not feeling paine, the veynes being so torne, he could not but bleed to death, how be it he dyed very penitently: so dangerous a policie, and so perilous a temptation is it, to leaue our callings as things vnlawfull.Meditations in labour.
2 A godly Gentlewoman said, that euen in her ordinarie labour, she tasted oft of as heauenly meditations, as if all things ordinarie laid aside she had giuen her whole minde to attend vpon the spirit of God, in quietnes of studie. She also said, that we are like children, who need not once to be bid to aske things necessarie, but twice to be thankfull for mercies receiued.
3 As in mariage, though the parties met in the flesh without any sanctified meanes, toMariage. assure themselues to be ioyned of the Lord: yet if God afterward giue them grace to liue holily in their meeting, he sheweth that not onely their corrupt meeting is pardoned, but that now their meeting is blessed: so if entring into a calling for want of gifts and affections, we haue no assurance at the first, of a warrantable calling: yet if God afterwards furnishEntring into a calling without gifts to discharge it. vs with able gifts, and sanctifie vs with pure minds, he doth not onely shew vs that our former sinne is pardoned, but also that he is well pleased with our calling whereunto he hath so blessed vs.
4 No trouble should hinder vs in our calling, vnlesse it be in a case of meere vngodlines: for if for euery trouble, or for many troubles, a man may forsake his calling, he should be out of all, for euery calling hath both lets and troubles.
5 To one that asked his aduice, whether he might auoid the doing of a thing wherevnto he was called, because he felt corruption in himselfe, he said: In auoiding societie you should couer, but not cure your infirmities, and though you depart from men, yet you cannot goe out of your selfe.
6 Vnto one that was willing to change his feate for the corruption of the place whereChange of places. he dwelt, he said: Wheresoeuer he purposed to liue as a Christian, the crosse would follow him, because that Christ would follow him, and because on the earth are some good men, and some euill: but when we come to heauen, all would be good, and therefore there shall be no trouble.
7 He said he neuer looked for a better estate than that wherein he was, but often prepared himselfe for a worse.
8 Whensoeuer we are out of our place and calling, Sathan hath a fit occasion of temptation.


Care.
1 VVHere there is an immoderate care of outward things, there commonly isImmoderate or distracting cares. Matth. 6. little care of inward good things: for if one haue inward good things, they so content the persons that haue them, that they labour not much for outward things: if they want them and desire them, the carefull seeking of them bringeth a godly neglect of outward things, 1. Cor. 7. 30. 31.


Censures.
1 IT is a marueilous thing that many will make more of a small infirmitie in another,How blinde many be in themselues. although that they see, that the whole course of their life is truely to please God; than they make of grosse sinnes in themselues, notwithstanding they take no course at all in their life to please God.



Conference.
1 BEing desirous to speake to the profit of others, he said, that he obserued such a silence in men, as none could well breake into it, and often such a libertie of speech, asA dead silence in meetings. none can take hold of, to turne it to good; he obserued the cause of such silence, to be some great griefe, or some deepe meditation occupying the mind, or some deadnes of spirit, or some worldly shame, or some desire to speake, and the Lord staying the speech, or the carelesnes in them that should heare it, in that they doe not desire it: The remedie against this is either in humilitie to aske some question, or to speake somewhat, and not to giue place to such deadnes.
2 In the most abrupt and disordered speeches of men, he thought God disposed them for his profit, and though presently reason could prompt no reason, why they should speak so, yet long after it would. He was much affected with the fact of Iosias, who would not be moued with the Iosias hearkened not to the words of Necho, which were of the mouth of God. 2* Chro. 35. 22. speech of wicked Pharaoh, but entring battell was slaine: whereupon he would say, that no man was so good, but the Lord would sometime let him fall into some euill, for his further humbling; and no man so euill, but the Lord did conuey goodnes into him at sometimes, to make his condemnation the greater.


Conscience afflicted.
1 A Certaine man some yeares afflicted in conscience, said, his continuall agonies were as great as the paines of a man readie to die, and that he felt so small comfort in Gods countenance, that he would willingly haue suffered his body to haue liued in burning fire vntill the appearing of Christ, so he might then be assured of Gods fauour towards him, yea his greatest comfort was this, that though he should be in hell, yet he hoped therin of Gods fauour to haue his torments mitigated with them that sufferThe godly afflicted consciences feare to displease God. least. In all which troubles notwithstanding no world of reward, no terror of tyrannie, could cause him willingly to doe the least thing displeasing to God: whom when the Lord released, he would comfort himselfe in Christ, saying, that the diuell would take the aduantage of his sorrow, to make him vnthankefull in good things.
2 We are either as a Prince or as a peasant, either most mightie aboue all Princes, orA good conscience, how sweet and comfortable Prou. 15. 15. most vile among the sonnes of men. If all the Monarches in the world withstood vs, our owne consciences comforting vs, we ruled aboue all. If the vilest vassall in the world rise against vs, our owne heart condemning vs, we seeme to be most miserable of all.
3 He said, howsoeuer men might deale with outward matters, yet when griefes and fancies grew in the minde and grieued it, nothing could surely cure them, but onely theThe word cures the conscience. word of God.
4 Hauing to deale with diuers humbled consciences, he would mislike them that would not abide to tarry the Lords leisure, but they must needs be helped at once, euen by and by, as soone as they heard him speake, or else they would then thinke farre worse of him than euer before, notwithstanding the good report had, and the good opinion conceiued of him: for besides that, hee that beleeueth maketh not hast, this is a comming rather as itEsay. 28. 16. The true Ministers of Christ neuer cure nor comfort the sicke hastely, as wizards doe. were to a Magitian (who, by an incantation of words, makes sillie soules looke for health) than to the minister of God, whose words being most Angelicall comfort not vntill, and so much as it pleaseth the Lord to giue a blessing vnto them, which sometime he doth denie, because we come to them with too great an opinion of them; as though they were wise men, not vnto such as vsing their meanes, yet doe looke and stay for our comfort wholy from God himselfe.
5 Being asked how in the examining of our consciences for sinne, we should find out the speciall sinne, he said, that could not easily be done (for who doth vnderstand the errors of his life) but by oft examining of our selues, by acquainting of our selues with ourTo find out our speciall sinnes. owne estate, by earnest prayer that God would reueale vs the sinne, by oft hearing and reading the word, by marking the most checkes of our consciences, and reproches of our enemies, we might be led to the neerest sight of them.1. 2.
6 Vnto one afflicted in minde he gaue this comfort: first, if you haue knowledge, be3. 4. 5. 6.

thankfull for it, and desire the Lord to giue you faith: if you haue faith, which vndoubtedly you may haue, though not rightly discerning your selfe, you presently perceiue itFaith without feeling. not: you must waite on the Lord for feeling of it: for many times he exerciseth faith with temptations, before he sends feeling. And though it may be you shall ^arrie the Lords leisure long, yet surely he will giue it you in time. In the meane time assure your selfe, that the greatest faith is when there is least feeling. It is easie for euery one in glorious feelings, and ioyes vnspeakable to beleeue: but when a man feeling no sensible comfort in the Lord, can notwithstanding beleeue in the Lord, and by faith waite on him; this mans faith is most great.
7 After some effectuall working of Gods spirit in vs, most commonly (in many) notCauses of deadnes of minde. long after comes deadnes and dulnes: against this euill we must first search the cause, whether it be for some euill thing done, or for some good thing not done, for leauing some meane of saluation vnused: whether for some sinne seene, but nor repented of, or some sin1. 2. repented of, but not soundly, or for vnthankfulnes. Secondly, vse the remedie, please not3. 4. your selfe in it, but rouse vp your selfe as from a slumber, which willingly you would shake5. off from you: call to minde the speciall and greatest mercy of God, vse the meanes. Thirdly, in the meanes offer thy selfe vnto God, wayting humbly, and patiently for the time of deliuerance, neither esteeming too much nor too little of the affliction.
8 When one was troubled in minde, he gaue him this comfortable note: That althoughHow it comes to passe* that Gods graces are more sweete vnto vs at our first entrance into regeneration, than after. it came to passe, that after some trauaile in the new birth, Gods graces were not so sweete, and our sinnes not so sower and grieuous vnto vs, as they were at our first entrance into regeneration, but we are now weaker in lesse assaults, hauing afore beene stronger in greater temptations: we are not to despayre: but to consider from whence this gracious progresse did come, namely of God, and not of our selues, who shewed himselfe more fauourable in the beginning, both because he would not discourage vs newly comming vnto him, and for that we forsaking our selues, with a godly suspecting of our weaknes in the least temptations, did flie vnto Gods helpe by prayer: who in wisedome can hide himselfe vnder a clowde, partly for that he will looke to see some triall of strength at our hands, comming to some age in new birth; partly for that now we lesse forsake or suspect our selues, no not in greater temptations, and so presumptuously trusting to our strength, and staying our selues with our owne staffe, we doe not call to God for helpe; and not calling, doe not obtaine; and not obtaining helpe, we take the foyle in the conflict, that the Lord may make knowne vnto vs, that notwithstanding our proceeding in Christianitie, we are still but men, and God alone is God.
9 He said to one troubled in minde for a secret and small sinne, I doe not so much feareA conscience touched for small sinnes. this sinne in you, as the policie of Sathan by it, either in that he will not sticke to shew you the lesse sinnes, and hide from you the greater; or else by the quicke sight of your secret and small sinnes, to cast vpon you an open and grosse sinne of vaine glorie and priuie pride.
10 Afflicted consciences must not dispute too much against themselues, for their own actions, for that being displeased with their owne persons, they cannot be pleased with their owne doings.
11 He tolde in loue, this obseruation and experience; when any came with a troubledHow to proceed in comforting the afflicted. conscience for sinne, wisely to discerne, whether they be meanely grieued with a generall sight of their sinne, or whether they be extreamely throwne downe, with the burthen of particular sinnes; if so they be, then it is good at the first to shew that no sinne is so great, but in Christ it is pardonable, and that there is mercy with God that he might be feared: so1 on the other side shewiug the mercy to come from God, but so as they are nothing fit to2 receiue mercie, vnlesse they feele their particular and pricking sinnes. But if their sorrow be more confessed in generall things, then it is good to humble them more and more, to3 giue them a terror of Gods iustice for particular sinnes: for experience doth teach, that this is the best way to obtaine sound comfort, both to see our sinne, and to be humbled to see our sinne, because often, men will more readily acknowledge greater sinne they haue beene in, than that lesse sinne they presently lie in to be humbled, that being throughly throwne downe, we may directly seeke Christ, and keepe no stay, vntill we haue found

comfort in him, who then is most readie to free vs from our sinne, and to comfort vs with his spirit, when we are most cast downe with our sinnes, and most feare them.
12 If the health of body be such a thing, as is rather with comfort enioyed, than inOur ioy in the holy Ghost we cannot expresse. Philip. 4. Rom. 14. 17. words to be expressed, how great is the peace of conscience and ioy in the holy Ghost, which may be tasted, but cannot be vttered.
13 There are some which haue peace neither with God, nor with themselues, as desperate heretikes: some haue peace with themselues, but not with God, as secure sinners: some haue peace with God and with themselues, as repentant Christians.
14 We must learne to pitie them that are cast downe in griefe of spirit, though they beA threefolde pealce. Psa. 41. 1. also pettish; for it is an easie matter when one seemeth much to be quiet with God, to be in peace with men, who often hinder our quietnes with God. Againe, we little know how great their desire is to feele peace, which when they cannot feele, presently they are madeTo beare with impatiencie of the sicke. impatient: and yet see this was in Dauid the man of God, who found in himselfe, this diuersitie of affections, which we so much wonder at, and speake of in the children of God in our daies: he diuides himself as it were into two parts, Psal 43. 5. he thought himself sometime very strong in God, againe at another time so cast downe, that he would on no side lay hold on any comfort in the world: yet more then that, he was tumultuous and fretting within himselfe. And therefore learne this, thou that art vnmercifull, to stay thy impatiencie, behold this thou that art afflicted, to stay thy griefe, and say not, oh, Dauid indeed was humbled, but I finde another qualitie in my self; besides, I am pettish, I am vncomfortable and vnquiet with them, with whom I liue; for Dauid was both impatient and pettish. Here also learne of Dauid for thy minde to waite on God, for faith deliuereth both from griefe and anger, and causeth comfortable waiting, and not to make too much haste, but to possesse our soules in patience, vntill God performe his promises vnto vs.
15 It is an vsuall temptation to afflicted consciences, to perswade them, after some freeA sweet consolation for weake consciences, after their often fals. Rom. 11. deliuerance, that they are not to looke to be deliuered again, because as the Lord hath beene very liberall, so we must not wearie and make tedious his bountifull dealings with vs: but we must know that the gifts of God are without repentance, and the Lord hath manifold deliuerances in store, which is as impossible by vse and often receiuing to waste, as it is the Lord himselfe should be deceiued: he will surely make an end of his owne worke in vs, and that for his owne glorie, which as he hath appoynted to be endlesse in our deliuerance, so the meanes thereunto are also endlesse: and therefore yet and againe, we are to learne against our vnbeleefe the vnmeasurable treasure of Gods goodnesse in our saluation, yea, when wee seeme as it were to be in a whirlepit, and to be carried with a violent griefe and gulfe of troubles, wee know not whither, and are constrained oft to diue and plunge downe (the waters of affliction running ouer our head) yet the Lord will recouer vs, and set our feete in steady places if we be cast downe, so we can but scraule vp againe: if we be resisted of Sathan, so we can but kicke against him, if we can but open our lips and accuse his malice before the Lord, there is sound hope of comfort to be found of him.


Couering of infirmities.
1 GOds children couer many infirmities in others vnder one good gift: the vngodly burie many good gifts in others vnder one infirmitie.


Confession of sinnes.
1 HE said vnto one troubled in minde, that we should not much be troubled in light things, but that rather in griefes we should make knowne our hearts vnto God,Simile. To powre forth our griefes into Gods bosome. than deuoure them priuately: for if in carnall sorrowes we find some ease when we make things knowne to our faithfull and louing friends, as to our parents, or to our brethren, much more are we to thinke it an ease to our spirituall griefes, if wee powre foorth our griefes into the bosome of the Lord, who is most faithfull to conceale, most louing to take pitie, and most able to helpe vs in all our griefes whatsoeuer.
2 He obserueth that men would make knowne many sinnes and infirmities, and yet retaine one which is the most secret, and oftentimes the most chiefe; as Moses had many

reasons of his tergiuersation, and yet there was one secret reason, and that the greatest,Not to hide any one of our sinnes. which he would not vtter. Where obserue the great mercy of the Lord, that though hee might haue been displeased, especially after so great promises, for his refusall, vet he rather pardoneth this one infirmitie of feare, that forgetting his manifold good things, would presse him with this one want: and therefore after many reasons, the Lord vouch^aseth to handle very gently his priuie sore, and to salue it on this manner. Nay Moses, there is one thing that thou fearest most, and that is thine euill entertainement with Pharaoh, and the reuenging of his blood whom thou sheddest: but let not this stay thee, for they are all dead. This answere seemed to take away the greatest argument of t^rgiuersation, though it was least knowne: for presently vpon this comfort he takes his calling in hand, wherein also is to be noted, that how fearefull soeuer man is in respect of himselfe, yet when God enableth, and incourageth him, wee see he shall be inuincible, as Moses against Pharaoh himselfe.


Concupiscence.
1 ONe asking his aduice how he might best auoide concupiscence, he said to him,1. 2. that a continuall examination of our selues by the law; a reuerent and daily meditation3. 4. of the word; a painful walking in our honest calling; a holy shaming of our5. selues, and fearing of our selues before our friends; a continuall temperance in diet, sleepe,6. and apparell: a carefull watching ouer our eyes, and other parts of our bodies; a zealous7. iealousie to auoide all occasions of person, time and place, which might nourish concupiscence;8. a godly frequenting of persons, times, and places, which may breed in vs true mortification;9. together with an humbling of our selues, with the shame of our sinnes past, with10. the griefe of sinnes present, and with feare of sinnes to come: lastly, a carefull vsing of fasting,11. prayer, and watching, when neede required (for he still recommended a religious fasting:) these are the meanes to mortifie concupiscence, which being wisely, and in someFasting. conuenient time vsed with moderate exercise of the body: if they do not preuaile, it is like that God doth call a man to the holy vse of mariage: howbeit, it is to be obserued, thatMariage. in watching and fasting we are not to prefixe certaine set times, this day, or that day, but then to vse it when God calleth vs vnto it by fit occasion, without the which care the often vse of these exercises will breede a want of reuerence of them.


Cause good.
1 THere is no greater enemie to a good cause, than he that by euill meanes doth both handle and maintaine it.
2 He said that men must profit by this, if hauing had good causes in hand, they haue had ill successe: because herein it pleaseth God often to denie that vnto vs iustly, which men denie vnto vs vniustly, either for that he correcteth some sinne, wherein they liue, or else for that they vsed not prayer, but trusted too much in the meanes, and not in God.


Of naturall Corruption.
1 HE obserued this experience in himselfe, that when he would not doe a thing thatNeglects in any occasio^ of doing good. was good, then his owne reason and the diuell would easily teach him an excuse:

Lord forgiue vs this corruption.

2 He thought by nature all men to be Papists, heretickes, adulterers, etc. vntill God renuedThe spawne of all sinnes in euery man. them, so that if all heresies, Papistrie, impietie, were ceast among all men, yet if a man be left of God, he hath in himselfe sufficient matter and spawne to breede, reuiue, and to renew all kinds of sinne.


Despaire.A particular faith.
1 HE obserued this policie in Sathan, that to make men despaire, hee would make them argue thus: I haue no faith in this and that particular. And contrarily, to traine men to presumption, hee would make men argue thus: I haue a generall

hope and faith* and therefore I d^^^^^ not but my faith is ^ound in euery particular: both which are hurtfull.
2 When we distrust Gods promises, let vs set before vs the example of his mercieExamples. done to others, that we may be the more assured to obtaine faith: and when we begin to presume, let vs set before vs the examples of Gods iudgements, that we may pray for humilitie.
3 Many dispaire of helpe, because of their owne vnworthinesse, as though there were ^o hope of Gods mercie vnlesse we bring in our gift, and pawne in our hands to him: butGod is most free in his mercie* therfore let no thought of vnworthines ke^pe thee from him* Simile. this were to disered it the Lords mercies, and to bring in credit our merits, and rather to binde the Lord vnto vs, than vs vnto him: but if our sinnes be great, our redemption is greater; though our merits be beggerly, Gods mercie is a rich mercie: if our case were not desperate, and we past hope of recouerie, our redemption should not be so plentifull: but when all seemes to goe one way, when heauen and earth, the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres goe against vs, then to ransome vs, and to make a perfect restitution, is to draw something out of nothing; euen as in sicknes, to haue either little danger, o^ in great danger, deliuerance by present meanes is nothing: but in extreame perill, when physicke can doe nothing, and nothing maketh for vs but the graue, then to be rescued from the graue, and to recouer our life from the pit, is redemption.


Death.
1 AS we must thinke of life as being content to die, so we must thinke of death as being content to liue: And they are as well to be liked of, that measurably feareA measurable feare of death commandable. death, as they who ioy so much at it; because they that moderately feare death, haue this in them more than the other (which is also allowable by grace and nature) that they tremble at Gods iudgements.
2. He said, be neuer durst desire to die, howsoeuer his continuall crosses did affoord him small desire to liue: therefore he feared and forewarned men of these kindes of wishes, becauseWishes of death euill. often the Lord heareth a man in iudgement, though in some mercie, and when he wisheth this or that affliction* he laieth it on him, so that after he cannot doe that good to others, which to his owne comfort he might haue done.
3 To one that said she feared death, he said: As I would haue you to thinke of life, as being content to die, so thinke of death as you would also be content to liue: and as for the feare of death, I like as well of them that measurably feare it, as of them who so ioy at it, for I hope and like well of them also. Howbeit I see not this in those, which is in them, and which is a thing both allowed by grace and nature, that is, that they tremble at Gods iudgements. You will say, that notwithstanding you see not why you should not feare death* seeing you finde no comfort in life: to which I answere, that your life hath not been without comforts, howsoeuer things gone are soone forgotten, though your co^forts were not in the full measure hoped for, and it may be that plentifull measure shall be giuen you in death. But what if you should die in this discomfort? for my part (as I my selfe looke forMaister Greenhams death. no great things in my death) I would not thinke more hardly of you, neither would I wish any to iudge otherwise of Gods childe in that estate of death: for we shall not be iudged according to that particular instance of death, but according to our generall course of life,Not to iudge of any man according to his state in death. not according to our deed in that present, but according to the desire of our hearts euer before* and therefore we are not to mistrust Gods mercie in death, be we neuer so vncomfortable, if so be it hath beene, before, sealed in our vocation and sanctification.


Desire.
1 HE said, God looketh to the desires, not to the deeds of his children: and if we purpose to doe good, howsoeuer we finde ignorance, what, where, and when to doe good, God will direct vs in occasion, place and time, and in mercie will pardon our weakenes, though we faile in the circumstances.



Dispraise.
1 WHen any told a thing that sounded to the dispraise of a man, he (as not credulous in such matters) would make shew to the carnall plainti^e, that he was as one not hearing, and would fence off the matter a long time by causing him to repeate often his matter.


Diet.
1 BEcause no particular rule can be set downe how to amend excesse and defect in diet, this were the best rule generally to be obserued, so to feede, as that we may be made thereby more fit either to speake or heare the praises of God with more cheerfulnes and reuerence.


Dreames.
1 A Naturall dreame, which commeth of naturall causes, easily slippeth away: but if our dreames dwell longer vpon vs, and leaue some greater impression in vs, they may be thought to proceed either from God, or from the diuell. And by these it is good to profit, if they be fauourable, by thinking such a thing we might haue, if weHow to profit by dreames. were not vnprepared for it: if contrarie, by thinking and forecasting, and fearing such an euill, if the Lord be not mercifull; because God doth often correct some sinne past which we regarded not, or foreshewes some sinne to come which we were not afraide of: and an1. A naturall dreame. euill dreame doth shew some euill in the heart, either in some sinne alreadie committed, or in some sinne which may be shortly committed. If the dreame be terrible, it is good to2. A good dreame. auoid all the occasions of that euill, and to giue our selues to prayer, and not to giue too great credit to dreames, least they weaken faith. The best is to be neither too remisse, nor3. An euill dreame. too wise in them, but to labour to profit by them, because the Lord by leauing such long impressions in vs, doth as it were call vpon our consciences not to passe them ouer without4. A terrible dreame. some vse.
2 Being asked how one might auoide the sinne of vncleane dreames in the night, heVncleane dreames. said, first it were good to auoide all obiects and wandring thoughts in the day, and securitie of praying against it at night. If these meanes did not preuaile, we must then think that God calleth vs to some more earnest repentance for this or some other sinne before committed:See more in the title of Humilitie sect. 2. specially we are to beware of companie, such as may stirre vs vp vnto euill; either labouring not to come into their companie, or hauing iust occasion, to doe it with feare and with prayer* and doing this, not to tarrie longer than godly occasion is offered.


Distraction of minde.
1 BEing asked, why a man after sundrie and laborious reading in his calling, being desirous by meditation to apply the things read vnto himsel^e, was so much interrupted, and violently, suddenly, and vnwillingly drawne into other conceites: he said, it was either want of preparing and sanctifying our hearts by prayer before we set vpon so holyHow we be hindered in godly meditations. an exercise, and therefore the Lord correcteth the pride of our ^^ts and presumption of our hearts, in being bold to worke vpon holy matters in our own strength or else for that we resting vpon a generall purpose of thinking some good thing, or at least not to thinke any euil, did not fasten our minde constantly or continually vpon some particular obiect, but raunging vp and downe, as hauing some part of our affections, studies, and meditations voide for some other matters, did not wholy and seriously set on the thing propounded to our selues. The trueth hereof may appeare hereby, for that which the heart is throughly set vpon, it is so attentiue to, that it can be present to no other thing at that instant, especially if it be an hindrance to the thing taken in hand.


Dulnes.
1 HE said, after his great ioyes conceiued of some effectuall working of God in himselfe,Deadnes and dulnes. he most commonly not long after fell into deadnes and dulnes, and thereby

was humbled: so that vntill that he was prepared with some new grace from God, and had receiued some new mercie at his hands, he was very vnfit to performe any seruice vnto God or men.
2 Deadnes of the spirit, is the graue of many heauenly graces.


Doctrine.
1 BEcause in reading of examples we restraine duties to certaine persons, and wringRules concerning doctrine drawne from examples in Scripture. our own necke out of the yoke, or else we chiefly tye the mercies of God to them, and thinke they appertaine not to vs; it is good to learne certaine rules whereby we may know when the vse of the doctrine is generall, and when particular, which is set downe in singular examples. Three rules are to be obserued: first, if we reade of any thing in particular, we are to search whether in some other place in the Scripture, the samething is not set downe generally, that is, whether that which is comme^ded, or discommended in some1 proper person, be not commanded or forbidden to all: if it be, then the vse of that is generall, not particular: but if it be a particular precept enioyned to some one, and no warrant found in the word of that to be done of another; then it is a thing personall, proper to some, not general appertaining to all. The second rule is, that wheresoeuer there is a generall2 equitie of a thing, there is a general practise to be had, howsoeuer we see it set down but in particular. The third is, whersoeuer by the scope of the place there appeares a generall3 drift, either by something going before or comming after, though the present place seemeth to be particular, yet there is a generall vse of the doctrine to be gathered out of it.


Exercise of religion.
1THe wicked not daring openly to professe iniquitie, redeeme times secretlyAs Nicodemus. Iohn.3. to commit it: so though we haue not the strength to professe religion publikely, yet let vs redeeme times secretly to frequent the exercises of godlinesse.
2 As it is but a small pleasure, so long as we are in the garde^, to be delightedSimile. with the smel of herbes, vnlesse we gather of euery kinde some to carrie with vs, that so we may haue the benefit of the garden, though we be farre from it. And as it is but a small comfort to be rauished with sweet odors, so long as we are in the Apothecaries shop, and afterward to want them: so it is but a flattering ioy, nay rather aOf starting ioyes and affections to the word which some haue, while they are in the Church. starting ioy, no longer to be affected with the word and religion than we are in the Church: therefore we must gather here and there, that may worke on our affections when we be farre from the place where they grew.
3 We must vse all exercises of reading, hearing, conferring, praying, singing and meditating: but we must not tye the working of Gods spirit to any one particular.


Experience of our corruption.
1 WE shall neuer be brought hungerly to seeke after Christ, vntill we come bySee before of corruption in C. the last precept, to see and feele our naturall corruption, where of we must not onely haue knowledge, but experience also, as S. Paul had, Rom. 7. Now wheras the Papists say, that this corruption is a sinne in the vnregenerate, but ^^t in the regenerate; we say it is a sinne in both. I say a bare knowledge hereof is not sufficient: for euen the knowledge of our corruption is not without the corruption of a priuie pride.


Faith.
IT is harder to beleeue in the abundance of worldly things, than it is in the wantHard for the rich to beleeue. of them* for these things are, as it were, vailes set betwixt God and vs, they stay our sight in them that it cannot pearce to God.
2 As the arme being soundly knit to the body, receiueth pith and strengthSimile. from the bodie to resist all euill, and to draw all good things vnto it, and being but out of ioynt, and the sinewes which did knit it to the body being loosed, it hath no such force to

performe duties: so our faith being the meanes spiritually to ioyne vs vnto the Lord, weFaith sound how needfull. 1. Ioh 5. 4. receiue strength so long as it is sound, both to resist euill and accomplish good: but if it decay, and fall as it were out of ioynt, then we cannot draw that full strength from the Lord, for our defence and strength which we were wont to haue.
3 When one asked him, whether we first receiued the spirit or the word, to the workingThe spirit comes by the word, Gal. 3. 2. yet is he the first cause of our faith and loue to the word. of faith, he said, we first receiue the spirit; howbeit to feele our faith we must necessarily receiue the word. And although the smoke, in respect of vs, doe first shew that there is fire hidden vnder the ashes, yet there was fire before the smoke came: so though the word first make knowne vnto vs our faith, yet sure it is that the spirit of God was giuen vs before our feeling wrought this mightily by the word.
As he that had but a dimme sight to behold the Serpent in the wildernes was healed, as well as he that saw perfectly: so he that hath but a weake faith in the sonne of God, shall neuer haue his saluation denied him, Zach. 12. 10.Smile.


Familie.
1 SO often as we be asked of the welfare of our people, wife, or family, we ought toOur care for our familie. take it as an occasion whereby God stirreth vs vp to pray for them, to giue thankes for them, and to examine our owne heart, what meanes both in presence, and absence, we haue vsed for their good.
2 Care in superiours, and feare in inferiours, cause a godly gouernement both priuate and publike, in familie, Church, and Common-wealth.


Feeling.
1 THough a man haue knowledge, yet he may want faith: though he haue faith, yet because many euils come betweene, feeling immediatly doth not alwaies follow, nor after feeling ioy, nor after ioy practise.Feeling.
2 We can doe but little good to any body, except we haue a feeling pitie and compassion of them.
3 If any be afflicted in minde for want of feeling, he must distinguish betweene GodsHow to distinguish betweene Gods spirit and his graces in vs. Simile. spirit and his graces in vs: for his spirit may liue in vs when his graces are dead in vs, Psal. 51. For as by some extreame sicknes life may be within one, yet it cannot be felt of the sicke bodie: so in some great temptation, the holy Ghost may be in vs, and yet we not feele nor finde his presence. Howbeit, as by breathing neuer so short we discerne life: so by the actions of the spirit, he it neuer so little, we may iudge of the life of God in vs.
4 Such as for want of feeling be loth to pray, must learne, not to tarrie to pray till they finde feeling, but offer themselues vp into the hands of Iesus Christ, and so humblingPrayer without feeling. themselues before him, pray on, and continue in prayer of faith, though not of feeling.
5 Though we feele not the spirituall ioy which we should feele, yet let vs not be too much cast downe; so that our conscience tell vs, that we are readie to withdraw somewhatIn any case take heede ye draw not carnall ioyes into the place of spirituall ioyes. from our outward pleasures, for want of this inward pleasure; and that we haue not preuented or smothered out these spirituall ioyes, but are grieued that we haue them not, and waite for the time to feele them: for of all things we must beware that we draw not into their steed carnall ioyes, and so driue as it were into exile the working of Gods spirit in vs by them.
6 A certai^e man complaining that he was comfortlesse for want of feeling, receiueth this answere: Oh brother be of good comfort, we hold Christ by faith, and not by feeling.


Fruites of faith.
1 ONe being curteously faluted, and worthily commended of a Gentlewoman, who said, she heard a very good report of him: he answered her, the like haue I heard of you: but God make our after fruits of his spirit more effectuall than the former, or else we shall not answere the glorie of God and good opinion of his Saints conceiued of vs.
2 There are two workings of Gods spirit in vs: the one inferiour, which bringeth but

some fruit of the spirit, without any speciall fruits of grace: the other superiour and moreTwo works of Gods spirit. certaine, when the spirit worketh an infallible sanctification: the first may totally be darkened and fully quenched: the other hath but a particular Eclipse, and in measure may be dimmed, as it was in Dauid, Psalm. 51. but this is not finally quenched. As God made man so that hee might fall, though afterwards hee had mercie vpon him: so he regenerateth vs so, that we may fall, so as afterwards hee may raise vs againe, and will. And it is fearefull enough, that there may be such particular decayes of grace in vs, as after sinne, to feele lesse comfort in the word, lesse feare of sinne, lesse care of well doing, lesse zeale in praving, lesse fruits in the meanes: so that all our actions are turned to be bitter, which were sweeter vnto vs then any worldly increase vnto the worldly man, or honie can beeEuident tokens of true sanctification to them that loue it. These are euident tokens of the sanctifying spirit, to loue good, because it is good; and to hate sinne, because it is sinne: the more wee grow in gifts, the more to hunger, the more to complaine of our vnworthinesse: the more being humbled1 in our selues, the more meekly to iudge of others: when we are most quiet with all things,2 then to thinke our selues least quiet, and then most to feare our selues: so to feele the graces3 of God in vs, as that yet our sense and feeling is not lessened, and to feare and quake4 at the first degree and motions of sinne; not least they fully quench, but least they coole5 the heate of the spirit in vs. Here, I say, let vs not forget to feare, for if it be so, that thou6 being the childe of God, canst not finally fall, yet consider how will this grieue thee, if thy sinne breake out to the dishonour of so louing a Redeemer? or though he keepe thy sinne from flaming out, yet that thou shalt feele such a burthen in thy selfe, or such vile corruption or matter as shall coole the heate of all Gods graces in thee.


Falling into sinne.
1* IF any doubt concerning this question, (whether the childe of God might fall often into one and the same sinne) these cautions and distinctions are to be obserued.1
First, whether the partie bee generally called, or specially touched: if hee be butCautio^s concerning a relapse. generally called, as all common Christians professing the Gospell, it were an easie matter to slippe in that state. Secondly, if the partie be effectually called, it is to be enquired, whether he be but a babe in Christ or no, or whether he be come to some good growth2 in Christ: for that if he be but a nouice, he may twice fall so. Thirdly, we must obserue,3 if he be now growne to some good age in Christ, whether the sinne committed be a thing knowne vnto him, or if hee know it not to be a sinne, hee may doubtles slip into it.
2 When wee consider how Noah, Moses, and others fell in their latter dayes, and how the most excellent men haue fallen, wee must earnestly pray, rather that the Lord would take vs out of the worlde, than that our life should bring any offence to the Church, or slander to the Gospell.


Feare.
1 BEe neuer afraide of leauing good vndone, least the Lord suffer you to fall into the contrarie euill.
2 Hee thought when he had no feare nor griefe, he could not profit.
3 Beware of immoderate feare, which rather hinder the certaintie of saith, then beateImmoderate feares. downe the securitie of the flesh, and which be the readiest meanes to pull Gods wrath vpon vs, in that they be the fruites of vnbeliefe, and such as would tye the grace of God promised, to the present danger and deliuerance out of the same. The meane and middle path is, that wee should feare and forethinke of euils to come, not as thinking that of necessitie they must fall vpon vs, as though God could not, or would not deliuer vs from them, but as they, who beeing guiltie in this one, desire to submit themselues to the hand of God, and acknowledge themselues heires of Gods iustice or wrath in this or that euill: yet so as we meete with the Lords mercie, who is both able and willing euen then most of all to assist and deliuer vs, when wee most feare, and through this godlie feare are reuerentlie humbled vnder the hand of his Maiestie. For if naturall pare^ts know then to mitigate the stripes of their correction to their children, when they see in them a milde and meeke submission

of themselues, vnder the hand of their authoritie, and yet so fearing them as Gouernours,To submit our selues to Gods ha^d, acknowledging that he may iustly confound vs, yet desiring to meete with his mercies in Christ Iesus. but vpholding with mercie as fathers: if they haue that wisedome, by so much to make their hand in correction the heauier, by howe much the Childe to bee beaten is the stubborner; we must then thinke this mercifull wisdome and confideration to bee much more in the Lorde, from whose brightnesse the parents haue receiued these sparkes.
4 Hee said, that to winne anie, or to continue anie in the feare of God, he would giue no such things which he loued not, but such things as he loued most dearely, that they might know it to be a gift of loue, and not of fashion.


Feastings.
1 IN our meetings and feastings, we are to looke to our selues; if good speeches be vsed,To cherish the feare of God in men. wee must be thankefull; if euill, sorrowfull; if things not meerely euill, not greatly to torment our selues.


Friendship.
1 THis aduise he gaue, that it was good to discerne of them whom wee much receiue into our companie, least we lose the credite of the Church conceiued of vs. For although many seeme and shewe themselues to bee well disposed, yet because there be so many corruptions in our nature, it is heauenly wisedome to discerne of men; whereforeNoscitur ex comite qui no^ cogno citur ex se. Psalm. 1. it is good for vs to consider with what soundnesse of iudgement, and power of true knowledge they doe speake: first looke what sight they haue of inward corruptions This humility teacheth true wisedome, and the sight hereof would cause vs to seeke after Christ and him Crucified. For manie, who haue a little confused knowledge, will much bee talking,1 Rules to discerne such as wee recei^e. into our societie. but for want of this knowledge they are not so sound. Secondly, we must see how ready they are by their soundnesse of knowledge, and feeling of inward corruptions, to doe good to others with cheerfulnes, and to speake of the infirmities of others with compassion and griefe; for manie for want of this sanctified knowledge, will rather bitterlie and openly declaime against the infirmities of others, then either wisely ^dmonish them,2 or brotherly pittie them.
2 Hee said, the best way to haue comfort in any of our friendes, was to pray for them,A true token of loue. and that hee neuer had more ioy in anie, then from them whom hee most prayed for, and in them most when he prayed the oftner and vehementer for them present or absent. for this is a true token of true loue to pray for them whome we loue.
3 Though he was most seuere to his friends and kindred, so long as they were not reconciled to God: yet once being wearyed with one, hee shut vp the matter with this sentence; It is wonderfull, that diuers hearing the same word of God spoken, one should belieue, and another should not belieue: but I am rather to thanke God that I belieue, then to search o^t a reason, why another doth not belieue; and as I am to be thankfull for my selfe, so I am to be pitifull to others.
4 Like as naturall men doe well by naturall wisedome: so wee ought much more to be stirred vp to doe well by spirituall wisedome. It is commended ^or s^^ciall wisedomeSocietie. in our Saui^ur Christ, Iohn* 2. that hee did not committee himselfe vnto ^l^ ^^^^, because hee knewe what was in their hearts: So it is a speciall token of w^sedome in vs, on the contrarie not to commit our selues vnto all men, because wee know not what is in their hearts.
5 Hee reioyced to see his friends, but hee was humbled, in tha hee rested so much in that ioy, that hee forgate to doe them good to their saluation, or to receiue good from them to his saluation, which he thought he should doe, and to be his dutie.
6 His loue euer grewe to a man, as he knew the man to grow in godlines: he said, that if hee had once seene any effectuall worke of Gods spirite in anie man, h^e could neuer but hope well of him: If graces decayed, first hee was grieued, and then his loue decreased in him.



Grace of God.
1 HE feeling on a time the grace of God assisting him in a thing which of himselfe he despaired of, said: Oh how easie are the waies of man, whilest the Lord doth gouerne him, and how is he beset as with a hedge of thornes, when the Lord doth not assist him.
2 As we are carefull to vse the meanes of our saluation, so must we wholy referre the blessing of the meanes to the grace of God: neither, as some doe, thinke that we can obtainePerseuera^ce in the vse of the meanes. or continue the graces of God in vs without vsing the meanes, (for that is but a dreame of fantasticall spirits) neither, as the manner of some is, so to trust to the meanes, as neglecting to pray for the grace of God in them: which is but a preposterours zeale of such as are not rightly instructed in the way of their saluation.
3 It is a profitable note to obserue, when extraordinarie gifts of God be for our good, and when for our hurt. If our extraordinarie blessings driue vs more carefully to seeke toExtraordinarie gifts. the ordinarie meanes, then it is of Gods mercie: but if they slaken our care in the ordinarie meanes, and puffing vs vp with a spirituall pride, cause vs to rest in them, then they are for our further condemnation: as if God blesse vs maruellously without prayer in any thing, if we are driuen more to prayer by it, then this is of God: if it cause vs to leaue prayer, it is perilous.
4 There is nothing so precious as Gods grace, which chaungeth the face of heauen andThe pollution and pow er of sin. earth: and nothing so vile as sinne, which openeth hell, and staineth the earth, and shutteth vp heauen.
5 As of all gifts, the gift of Gods spirit is the dearest, so the losse of it is most daungerous:The decay of Gods graces how dangerous. for besides that, wee know how few taste of it, and with what paine they that haue gotten it keep it, and with what hard brunts they that lose the graces of it recouer them againe, we may coniecture the greatnesse of the losse, by our experience in other things: they that haue beene in reputation for their riches, and are become bankerouts, are grieuedSimile. and ashamed; how much more then should their griefe be, who by the riches of Gods graces haue beene comfortable to themselues, and honourable among others; and now by the decay of those gifts, haue lost both the sweet ioy and peace in themselues, and their credite with God, and in the conscience of the godly.
6 Some reioyce so much in the hearing of good things preached, that they forget to be humbled for their wants: againe, others alwaies looking on their wants, walke not thankfully for Gods graces receiued: The meane way is the best, so to reioyce in the grace of God, that we be humbled for our wants, and so to mourne for our wants, that we praise God for his graces.


Good workes.
1 AS it argueth great height and willingnes to sinne, when men fearing to sinne in the day, redeeme, and steale time to sinne in the night: so it sheweth a great height and willingnesse to godlinesse, when men being not sufficiently contented to do good in the day, stretch their wel-doing euen to the night also: wherein they shew themselues to be free from vaineglory, that none seeing them, yet they doe good for the loue of God, and not for outward things.
2 A man may truely iudge himselfe to be truely willing to doe any good, when he striues all that he can, to do it, although he cannot do it as he should.


Griefe for sinne.
1 WE cannot heartily be grieued for that sinne in another, whereof we haue not made great conscience in our selues.
2 The things that are euill, and grieue vs, so farre as we see them with griefe, hurt vs not.
3 Seeing a woman lamenting for the sinnes of the people, he said vnto her, (not purposing

to cause her to cease from so good an action, but admonishing her to looke to herThree rules to trie our sorrow for the sinnes of other men. affections) you shall well trie your heart, said he, if this sorrow for sinne be first bred for your owne sinnes, and from your selfe proceed to the sinnes of others. Againe, the measure of your mourning must be agreeable, and proportionable to the sinne. Lastly, your griefe must so be for the person, as you may be moued rather to pittie and pray for him, than to hate and despise him.1
4 That is true sorrow and griefe for sinne, which neither can by outward pleasures be2 stollen away, nor by continuance of time be taken from vs, but onely in Christ.3
5 Because great, naturall and worldly sorrow and ioy, will cause a man to breake his sleepe at midnight, he would trie himselfe whether sorrow for sinne, or icy in saluation had caused him to doe the like.
6 His greatest sorrow was, when he spake of some good thing, that was not in himselfe,Triall of our ioyes. and the greatest ioy he had was in the contrary.
7 As by nature we are long and hard to be brought to be grieued for sinne: so beingTwo extremities of ioy and sorrow. once downe, we are hard to get vp, and to rise out of griefe againe. For two extremities attend vpon vs; the one to be grieued and feared too little; the other, to ^e grieued and feared too much: the one makes vs secure, and the other dead and dull. To meete with these two, it is good in time of ioy to thinke what iudgements ^aue befallen vs heretofore, what may befall vs hereafter. In time of humbling we are to consider what mercies we haue receiued, and what mercies are stored vp, and ^^rrie for vs againe: and surely* no one thing makes griefe more to waste vs, than the forgetfulnes of Gods mercies past, and doubtfulnes of Gods mercies to come: and nothing doth more strengthen our new temptations, than the forgetfulnes of Gods iudgements past, and the carelesnesse of them that are to come. Though mercies succeed mercies, yet the sea of Gods mercies is neuer drawn drie, if we claime hold of them by our faith and former experience.


Hardnes of heart.
1 THe cause why mens hearts are hardened now adaies, may be this in part, because they see as great gifts of learning, tongues, and ciuill life in Papists, and heretikes, as in Gods true seruants. Euen as the cause of Pha^^^hs obstinacie was this, that being willing to be dece^ied, he would not obey the Lord, because other Sorcerers in Aegypt could doe (as he thought) as great matters as Moses and A^ron.
2 To one that complained of hardnes of heart, he said: You must waite for comfort, and know, that you can now no more iudge of your selfe, than a man sleeping can iudge of things which he did waking: or a man wandring in the darke can discerne of bright colours: for as the one may while he waketh doe excellent things, and yet now neither he himselfe knoweth of them, nor any other can espie them in him: and the other may be amongSimile. flowers, and for want of light, can haue no vse of his eyes, nor pleasure in the obiects: so you haue done great good things whilest God gaue you a waking heart to put them in practise, and the light of his spirit to discerne his graces in you, though now you haue neither the sight nor sense of them: and this is the thing which deceiueth and disquieteth many: they looke for that discerning of themselues (when in them Gods graces were more oppressed) which they had when Gods spirit wrought in the sweetest and fullest measure in them: and because there is some intermission of the worke of new birth,Note. they thinke it is a flat omission in them of the spirit of God. But as it is a token of a minde too presumptuous and infatuated, in time of dead securitie, to perswade our selues still of that safetie, for hauing those graces which sometime we had: so it is a signe of a minde abiect, and too much de^payring, to thinke that because that we haue not euen present seeling of those ioyes, glorious and vnspeakeable which we haue had; therefore we neuer had ^^^m heretofore, or that we shall neuer haue them againe hereafter.
3 Admonis^ing one to preuent hardnes of heart in his childe, by godly and discreete correction: he said, that because children incline often to the sinnes of their fathers, parents

correcting, should in wisedome first consider, if it were not a sinne before in themselues,Conferre this with the 6. Sermon, concerning the education of Children. (which they gaue them as it were) which now they are about to correct, and finding it so, that they should be humbled in themselues; and being humbled, proceed to correction, in prayer, in the feare of God, in wisedome, in loue, and desire of their conuersion, and in measure, as correcting their owne sinnes, after a sort in their owne children. For men begetting Children without regeneration, giue a naturall propagation of their sinnes, without some speciall blessing of God: and none in regeneration begetteth any with such gifts of nature, but vnlesse they become newe borne, they haue no good thing in them.


Heresie.
1 MEn be more grieued for murther and adulterie, then for superstition and heresie;Harlots are sooner reclaimed then heretikes. because these be peccata rationis, the other, affectionis and actionis; the one goeth with a priuie pride vnder colour of deuotion, the other are euer apparant, and are accompanied with outward shame and confusion.
2 As the Gospell first began by simple Fisher-men to be preached, but afterward being receiued in loue, grewe to the other more learneder sort: so, for not receiuing the word in loue, but hauing our eares tickling to new doctrine, heresies, and sects, (beginning now amongstWee find this true alreadie in our time. vs but in the simpler sort, and ignorant men of the Countrey) are like to inuade the best learned. And God purposing to punish the coldnes of our age, can as well now send an hereticall spirite, not onely into the common people, but into 400. learned Preachers, as hee did in times past send a lying spirite into the mouthes of 400. Prophets.
3 Euen as polygamie was not very hurtfull to the Church, so long as it was within Lamech his house, and when it preast into Abrahams familie, got great strength and preuailed much: So ill opinions are then lesse hurtfull, whilest they are amongst the wicked and ignorant: but when they get fauour amongst the learned and godly, they beginne to be most dangerous.


Heart.
1 THe heart is Gods owne part, and that which must goe to the Lord. Now as nothing might be imploied to common vses, which was sacrificed by the priests vnder the Law: So the heart which is the Lords, must not be applyed to any other vse, than to his seruice.


Haste, how it argueth vnbeliefe: and of Watching and waiting.
1 NOthing more bewrayes vnbeliefe, then not to stay the Lords leisure: as contrariwise, Watching and waiting on the Lord shewes Faith: for those hastie and vnquiet spirits, when they see not speedy redresse according to their expectation, they either murmure in impatiencie, or they will ease their griefe by seeking vndirect meanes. And sure as nothing in prosperitie is a greater token of Gods fauour then to feare our selues: so in aduersitie, this is a pleasant pledge of our patience, when wee can waite and attend on the Lorde, for the time, and the manner, and the measure of our deliuerance.
There be some principall properties of true wayting:1
The first is, to waite in our selues: for manie will not outwardly murmure, and yet inwardlyProperties of constant waiting on God. they boyle and fret in themselues: and manie will abstaine from outward impatiencie, which looke to the inward estate of their hearts but a little. But it is good for vs to beginne here: for if there bee a quietnes of the heart, there cannot be any great disquietnes2 in the tongue, or in the hand. The second propertie is, to waite on the Worde. Manie will say, they waite on God, and yet they are maruellous impatient, if yee charge them with impatiencie: but weigh their waiting by the Word, and it will not abide the tryall, it will not goe for good. Looke what Faith wee haue to waite on God, vnlesse it be taught out of the Word, (which is as true as God himselfe) it is not found. Some will be content to waite on God, but it is not to haue their obedience and Faith in the Worde, but to obtaine some thing the sooner, which they desire. This is no true waiting, but to waite

rather for our owne profite, then for Gods glorie. Th^ third property is, to corti^ue in it.3 Euery man by nature can waite for a while, so he may know a certaine and definitiue time of his waiting: but to offer our obedience in waiting, and not know for how long or how little we shall waite, this is the ^ainting of the soule: for if it were determined to vs how many dayes, or moneths, or houres we should waite, the hope of the profit drawing neere, and of a terme drawing out, would sustaine vs: but to leaue all moments, and conditions to the Lord, and to bee in a continuall seruice and expectation, this is hard for flesh and blood. We must learne to amend this fault, by considering how iustly the Lord may suspend his answere* and helping of vs, for that our sinnes are not sufficiently bewa^led, or our faith is not sufficiently purified, or his graces not sufficiently wrought in vs. The4 fourth and last propertie is, to continue waiting with a kinde of vehemencie: keeping vs from faultring or fainting in our hope, though it be long ere our suite be answered, or our danger be helped. To be vehement a while, or lesse importunate long, is little worth: but to haue our affections h^to; and for a good thing, and not to slake the heate in long continuance of time, and not to be made remisse or dead in the suit of our desires, though no appearance of our deliuerance appeare, is hard indeede. And here to meete with an obiection, we say, vehemencie argueth faith, and vehemencie bewrayeth want of faith. Faith, when no deferring of our desire doth breake the power of our zeale: want of faith, when without all hope, we are greedie and rauenous to haue our request, or else we cast all off.


Humilitie.
1 MAnie deceiue themselues with a bare opinion of humilitie: therfore this may be a true triall of humilitie, if wee willingly suffer our selues to be taught of our inferiours:Admonition. and if we can patiently abide our selues to be admonished of our faults.
2 Heathen men were humbled by their dreames, wee are not humbled by the Word: they that will not profite by Gods iudgements in others, shall feele them themselues. Wee haue no claime to Gods mercie offered in the Gospell, v^till we be humbled by the threatnings of the law.
3 Wee must bee like children in three things chiefly, first, like little babes. Secondly,1 how the faithfull must ^ee li^^ little children. ^2 1. Pet. 2. 1. like innocents. Thirdly, like them that are growing from childhood. First, babes are neuer quiet, except the p^p be in their mouth, or else hauing late bene at it, they are well fed: so ought we still to desire to lie at the foode of our soules, and to finde vnquietnes in our soules, if we be long from it. Secondly, weaned children, though they are not without naturall corruption; yet this corruption doth rather shew it selfe by imitation, than by action: and if they doe any euill, it is rather violent than permanent. Thus should we be, not making an occupation of sinne, but preoccupated of sinne; not forecasting patternes of sinne, but bending our mindes how we may not sinne; we are violently drawne thereunto by another rather then voluntarily commit it our selues. Thirdly, they that grow out of3 child-hood, doe things beseeming man-hood, rather then childishees: so though babish things both in life and doctrine become vs being babes, yet hauing past our child-hood,Heb: 5. 12. the Lord looks for more manly ripenesse, both in knowledge and in holines of life, though our perfect age be not consummated before the resurrection. As little children, whether in teachablenes to good, or reformablenes from sinne, are either wo^^e by a faire word,Simile. or ^llured by a trifling benefit, or awed by a checke, or feared by a frowning looke or stiiled by seeing another beaten before them, or else quieted by the rod: so if we be children, either the promises of God must affect vs, or the mercies of God must allure vs, or his threatnings in his word must awe vs, or his angrie countenance must feare vs, or his correcting of others must humble vs; or else the corrections of God vpon our selues, must pull vs downe. But as those children are of most liberall and ingenuous nature, who are rather allured with faire words, than driuen to dutie with the rod; so they are most gracious, which are most broken with the conscience of their vnkindnesse, more prouoked by the promises of God: then by all the curses, thunderings, and threatnings of the law: but they that are affected with neither, degenerate as yet from the affections of children.



Hypocrisie.
1 HEe obserued some, who outwardly liued an honest and ciuill life, yet lying hypocriticallyHow the wicked often discouer themselues in their death. in some sinne, were constrained in death, or before, to vtter it to their shame. Which kinde of iudgements are most necessarie, that God might shewe himselfe to be God, and his threatnings to be true, that the wicked might lesse reioyce in their exceeding impietie, and that Gods children might be raised from their securitie.


Iudgement.
1 IN our most earnest matters wee must be zealous ouer our owne heart, and then especiallieAffections. examine and call to account our affections, because that in such a case there is either some speciall worke of God, or else it is some notable worke of the flesh, or of Sathan. And whereas it is a pedagogie of the soule, that in all things we had neede to aske the gouernement of God, by his word and spirit, for that a man knoweth what hee is, but not what he shall be in this or that action. When wee cannot gage the depth of our heart, wee must impute it to want of prayer, and the not trauailing with our heart how to doe the things in wisedome.
2 Though all exercises of pure religion purely vsed, doe both strengthen iudgementWhat exercises (...) me^ and what f^rre v^ affection. and whet vp affections, yet reading, hearing, and conferring, do most strengthen iudgement, and in part whet on affections. But praying, singing, and meditation, doe mos^ chiefly whet vp affection, but in part strengthen iudgement and vnderstanding.
3 Being desired to giue his iudgement of a weighty matter, hee answered: Syr, neither am I able to speake, nor you to heare, for that wee haue not prayed, indeede I may talke, and you answere as naturall men; but wee are not now prepared to conferre as t^eSe^ Psal. 119 vers. 116. children of God.
4 Hee fatherlie exhorted men to labour for increase of iudgment: first by reason,1 then by example: by reason thus, without soundnes of iudgement, it is a more difficultReasons to labour for increase of iudgement. trauailing for the childe of God with his owne heart to any fruit. Againe, not being stayed in iudgement, one shall be troubled to commit, and afraide to doe many things, which indeede he might lawfully and comfortably doe if he had knowledge. Thirdly, wee shall not without good knowledge satisfie our godlie desire in perswading or dislwading an^e,2 for that we cannot doe so assuredly, substantially and effectually, as wee ought, and would3 doe. By example he exhorted men to consider of the Prophet Dauid, in his Ps^lme ^19. hee prayeth for knowledge, hauing no one thing oftner then this, Teach mee O Lorde thy statutes, etc.


Sound ioy.
1 THe more one tasteth of heauenly things, the lesse is his ioy in earthly things: theTriall of our ioy. more one feeleth earthlie things pleasant, the lesse ioy can hee haue in heauenlie. Coloss: 3. 1. Phil: 3. 20.
2 Wee must in reading the iudgements of God obserue this rule: If any man will trie conclusions against Gods conclusions, hee shall prooue nothing in the ende but himselfe to be a foole. And if hee faile in his triall, by how much the more he might be admonished, by so much the more hee shall be without excuse. There are many that feare (Psal. 14. 5.) where no feare is: but there are more which reioyce, where no cause of ioy is.
3 Some ioy euery man must haue, either carnall or spirituall: and therfore when Cain had lost his title and interest in heauen, hee made himselfe a seate on earth: and when hee had lost the harmony of a good conscie^ce, his nephew Tubal was faine to inuent Organs, that hee might haue some musicke and solace in outward things. And 2. Kings. 11. when the people could not haue their owne fond delights, Salomon causeth Apes, Peacockes, and such like, to bee brought from Ophir for them. Men will haue ioy ^t they cannot haue the more solemne melodie by Arte, they will haue the common instruments of the Countrey. But the reason is, because the soule is mouldring, and the heart is p^rching drie. But let these sandie mouldring earthly hearts consider, that there is no secure nor

true ioy, which either time may loose, or death dismay, or the iudgements of God make afraide. It is no sound ioy that either will leaue vs, or wee shall be glad to leaue it as an vnprofitable possession.
4 Manie had rather part from all fauour of God, then loose the grace of some wittieIests. speech, which they haue deuised: but cursed bee that merriment which respecteth not either dutie to God, or loue to our neighbour.


Knowledge.
THere are manie who haue a generall knowledge of the Truth, but when it comes to particular practise, they are hindred with profites, pleasures,A generall knowledge. and selfeloue.
2 They whose knowledge is in swelling words, and painted eloquence of humane wisedome, being but a doctrine of the letter, in their death they are as if they knew nothing of Christ crucified: and whereof comes it, that there is so much preaching, and so little learning? but because men preach and delight to heare plausible nouelties, to please the eare rather then the simple power of theSimile. Word to pierce the heart: they take the bone, and refuse the marrow: they are content with the shell, but want the kernell: and not onely the law killeth, but also the Gospell:How the Gospell may be said to kill. that is, the letter of the Gospell beeing ministred without the spirite. Aske the wounded conscience, what comfort it is to heare that Christ dyed for our sinnes; Nay, aske if this gall not as much as the lawe it selfe, so long as it is rather conceiued by reason, than receiued by faith.
3 He said, how after hee knew God, hee desired by prayer two things principallie: theLoue the Saints. one, that hee might loue the Saints: the other, that hee might willingly and profitablie beholde the iudgements of God on others: which as God in mercie had graunted him, so he confessed this fruite thereof, that vnlesse hee had seene such iudgements, he should haue fallen into many troubles, which now through Gods grace he had escaped, by seeing and hearing the causes of these miseries in others. For when hee saw how God dealt with others, hee searched his owne heart, whether he had bene or was such a man: hee perswaded himselfe hee might be such a one hereafter, and therefore hee repented before Gods iudgements came on him, if euer hee had done the like; And so by prayer and good meanes hee was made more carefull for falling into it hereafter.


Loue of the creatures.
1 THe loue of the creatures hindreth vs in good things, but the vse of them furthereth vs therein. Gods children looke to the spirituall vse of those things, which the worldlings vse carnally.
2 Then wee haue a sure testimonie of our loue to good things, and of our hatred to euill, when no punishment nor reward can either driue vs from good, or drawe vs vnto euill.


Madnes.
1 A Great cause of madnes is impatiencie of minde, or else the sudden wrath of God vpon a man, for doing some thing against his conscience.


Matrimonie.
1 ONe may know whether his wife be brought vnto him of the Lord by these notes. First, if there be any agreeing or proportionable liking each of other, and that in1 the gifts of the minde, concerning their generall calling, as zeale, faith, godlines; and alsoNotes of an holy mariage concerning their particular calling. Secondly, if they being thus consonant, do vse good2 meanes, as the word, prayer, and consent of parents in their contracts, and then the good

order of the Church in their meetings, and if they vse no charmes, nor vnhonest or vnlawfull meanes. Thirdly, that their hearts be sincerely affected to Gods holy ordinance,3 so that first they respect this end, to haue a helper to Gods kingdome, when each of them hath said in their soules, I will seeke out one in whom I may see mine owne image of faith, loue, holinesse, etc. that will helpe mee to Gods kingdome. Againe, when they doe not marrie for riches, beau^ie, or such like outward things: but haue a desire4 mutually to doe the duties which they owe one vnto another. Besides, they must5 haue a desire to hasten the kingdome of Christ, by fulfilling, so much as in them lieth, the number of the elect: and vsing it as a remedie against incontinencie. And so we see condemned6 here all marrying of young men with old women, when there can be no hope of procreation.
2 Vnto a gentlewoman that was afraide that her good will was suspected to her husband,If our owne heart condemne vs, no man can acquite vs. being fa^re from her, in that he receiued not the letters she sent him, he said: If your conscience did excuse you, he could not condemne you, and God will make knowne your heart vnto him: if your owne heart condemne you, then can he not ex^use you, no not although he thought very well of you*
3 As a louing husband will not take away his loue from his wife for some particularSimile. wants, so long as she keepeth her loue wholy and truly vnto him: so the Lord will not cast off his louing kindnes to vs for speciall wants, or frailtie in particular commandements, so long as we generally labour to please him.
4 When one asked him concerning marriage, whether it were good to marrie; seeing sometimes, when concupiscence pricked him, he was moued to it, and some other time when he felt no such thing, he thought he might abstaine from it: He answered, manySee before title of concupiscence. come hastily into that calling, not v^ing the means of trying their estate throughly before; as namely, whether they by prayer, fasting, and auoyding all occasions of concupiscence, haue the gi^t of chastitie or no? Many vse some of the meanes, and not all: many vse all the meanes, but a small time: therefore it is good to vse first the meanes, not part of them, but all of them: not for a while, but long. If so be that all these things will not preuaile, attend vpon the Lords ordinance, and waite when the Lord shall giue iust occasion of vsing that estate, to his glorie and our comfort.
5 He thought it to be a good ceremonie for the father to giue his daughter in mariageThe father to giue his daughter in marriage. before the congregation, if she either be a virgin or a yong widow, to shew that she made not her owne match, but that she made it by her fathers consent. And being asked how it should be, ^^ t^^ father were dead, he said, then he would not haue the mother to doe it in the congregation, but th^ught it good for the father in his testament, wisely to appoynt some viceg^rent to do^ his dutie. If any man doe this rather at the appoyntment of the yong parties, than at the appoyntment of the parents, it is an abuse. Now that there mustConsent of parents. be in all lawfull contracts the consent of parents, he said: first, children are a part of mens goods, as in Iob. 1. it appeareth, in that Sathan hauing commission to set on the goods of Iob, did seaze on the children of Iob. Secondly, if in the law a damsell might not performe her vow vnto the Lord, her father misliking it: then much lesse, as it is probable, may a damsell performe promise of mariage to a man, her father misliking it.
6 He said, he could not away with such as would marrie too soone after they had ^uriedSecond mariages not to be hastened. Est mul^er in^amis propter nuptiarum festinationem, si ante annum nubit. In authenticis Iustiniani, collatione quarta de nuptii^. their wiues, but that it were better for abstaining a time, to shew themselues humbled vnderneath the hand of God in that crosse: and to testifie that it was no light loue vnto the parties whom they loued in the Lord. For besides that, it is almost vnnaturall, to get another bodie in bed, before the former be rotten in the graue: it is a thing of euill report impugning common honestie, in that it may offer offence vnto the friends of the parties departed, and giue occasion to thinke that their loue was but light, being so soone forgotten; ^s also for that it may giue occasion of iealousie to the parties to be maried, and to their friends, in that they may feare that their loue will be as light and little to them, as it was to the other before. And although any set time for diuers circumstances cannot be prescribed, yet vsually a yeere were but sufficient for this purpose of abstinence.



Meditation.
1 MEditation is the very life and strength of reading, hearing, prayer and Sacraments, without which they are made weake and vnprofitable vnto vs.
2 Meditation is that exercise of the minde, whereby we calling to our remembranceWhat meditation is. that which we know, doe further debate of it, and applie it to our selues, that we might haue some vse of it in our practise.
3 In meditation two parts of the soule are occupied:

1. The memorie. Remembring some thing heard or read.
2. The vnderstanding. Gathering some other thing vpo^ that which is reme^bred, as namely, in finding out the
Causes.Fruites.Properties.

4 The worke wrought in the affections is this, that they are framed either to loue or hatred, hope or feare, ioy or sorrow, according to the diuersitie of the thing which the reasonable part hath seriously considered of. For example, a man then meditateth on the word, when he so remembreth it and museth on it, that he goeth from poynt to poynt, applying generally somethings vnto himselfe, and wisely examining how the case stands betwixt the Lord and him in those things, whereby he seeing what is like to follow vpon it, hath his heart stirred vp to put something in practise.
5 In hearing of the word with others, and reading of it by our selues, we think we haue to deale but with men, because those are but outward things, many men will carrie themselues cheerefully: but there is nothing more tedious vnto vs, (without Gods speciall assistance)Godly meditation painfull. than by meditation to call our selues to account before Gods iudgeme^t seate for that which we haue heard, and to deale with our hearts in good earnest for the doing or not doing of the things we haue learned: and without hypocrisie to lay our hearts naked before God, accusing our selues when we come short of any thing, praying also for grace therein, confessing our sinnes that we haue been rebuked of, and crauing forgiuenes: acknowledging his mercie where we haue receiued any thing, and begging for the continuance of it: and so to depart away either more humbled in our selues, to auoide sinne more carefully; or comforted in the Lord, to goe on forward in weldoing more cheerefully.
6 A great companie of men, ^^d euen many prosessors, haue an euill opinion of meditation, because (hauing purposed to passe their time in mirth) they feare if they should deale thus streightly with themselues* least it would make them melancholike and heauy: vpon which occasion, they will not so much as abide to be alone, nay in the companie ofFalse feares of m^lancholie. graue and sober men: and to keepe them from thi^, some of great place are content to maintaine Iesters, etc. But if we will consider the profits which come to those, who vse meditation, and the hurts which fall on them who vse it not, we shall be easily perswaded to embrace it.


Commodities of meditation, and hurts of the want thereof.
1 IF we meditate of those generall rules which we haue heard out of the word, we shallPsal. 119. I am wiser than my teachers. many times see more cleerely into the truth of it, than he that preacheth, or at least more than he expressed vnto vs. For by the spirit of God we shall be taught to applie it more particularly to our selues, than he did or could doe, because we are most priuie to our owne estate.
2 Those that much meditate, become there by the godliest men, and most profitable to themselues and others: because meditation so increaseth knowledge in vs, as that it especially breedeth good affections, and quickeneth them most, being begun in vs, and by ou^ affections we are carried to practise goodnesse in our selues. Contrariwise, they which vse not meditation, cannot attaine to that knowledge, which otherwise they might haue. For

we see that a scholler of a most excellent wit, cannot attaine to great learning, if he meditate not on the things read vnto him; how much lesse can wee which are dull and blinde, concerning spirituall things?
3 Furthermore, the knowledge which one gets, whilest it swimmes in the braine, and is not setled in the affections by meditation, is but a vanishing knowledge. For if persecution befall vs, or if heretikes trie vs with subtill arguments, or if Sathan tempt vs, we shall be shaken from our former knowledge. But contrariwise a setled perswasion of the heart, is hardly or not at all ouercome.
4 Those who omit meditation, haue their knowledge for the most part grounded vponHorat. lib. 1. E^ist. 2, other mens sayings and writings, and they bring themselues into this bondage, to belieue all to be true that their writer saith, because they haue not examined it.In v^^ba jura^^ mag i^^.
5 Want of Meditation destroyeth the memorie, and causeth men to trust altogether to their books: so as if they haue time sufficient and store of books, they are able to speake with great admiration of the hearers, and yet of the same matters can scarse speake toMeditation helps memorie. a priuate man tolerablie to his edification and comfort, because hee hath but spoken it out of the booke, and not laboured to make it his owne by Meditation, that thereby hee might finde out how to applie it to his owne vse, and the benefit of others. Want of Meditation takes away the vse of knowledge.


Rules for Meditation.
1 FIrst, let the word be the obiect, and beware of mingling it with mens deuices, Psalm. 1. 2. 26. 119. 99. Secondly, heare, reade, and conferre much with reuerence and diligence, else our Meditations may be erronious, Psal: 119. 99. The Prophet was wiser then his teachers: therfore he had instructions and conference before his meditation. IoshuahIosh: ^. 8. 1 Tim: 4. 13. 15. and Timothie were commanded to reade before, and then to meditate.
2 Meditate but of one thing at once, and at one time, according to the olde prouerbe: Hoc age.
3 Though hee who is come to strength of Meditation, can make his vse of all places and companies: yet euen these, and much more other, not growne to such ripenesse, must bee carefull to chuse time and place, and to sequester themselues from all lets, that ^ight carrie them away, when they will giue themselues to earnest meditation, as Iob did, who whilest his sonnes were banquetting, kept himselfe apart. And they are to vse fasting, that they may bring themselues into the presence of God, and see into the depth of t^eir owne corruptions.
4 In meditating of a point, wee must first trauaile with our iudgement and affections, before wee come to make vse of it in our hearts.
5 Wee must know that there will neuer be sound nor abiding fruite of meditation, vntill our heart be sound and sincere, and dehorting others from sinne, looke that wee our selues hate it.
6 Before and in all wee must pray that the spirite may be giuen vs, that we neither adde nor detract, that wee goe not too farre, nor come not too short.
7 We must euer be mindefull to be thankfull vnto God, when hee blesseth vs in our meditation; else we shall be buffeted in our next meditation.
8 Being often troubled suddenly in his deepest meditations with distractions of mind, he tryed whether they were of God or not, in this manner: If they did either bring some euill things past into his minde to humble him, or some good thing to comfort him, and make him thankefull; or if they did instruct him in any thing to come, leauing an admonition in him to be circumspect, then hee tooke them to be of God: but if they drewe his minde from the things present, to roue and wander after other matters, hee presently suspected it, and fell to prayer, to be established in his present calling, from whence his owneHow to helpe our sudden failing of our memorie in preaching the word. corruptions and Sathan went about to leade him.
9 Hee had often in his publike ministerie and priuate conference, a sudden failing in memorie, so as by no meanes hee could recouer himselfe in those things hee purposed to speake: in which case he vsed this remedie, presently to groane in his hart, and to humble

his soule vnderneath the holy hand of God, not busilie to stand troubling and tossing his memorie, because he knew, and had often prooued, that this was the best way to turne away this euill.
10 To reade and not to meditate, is vnfruitfull: to meditate and not to reade, is dangerous for errours: to reade and meditate without prayer is hurtfull.
11 The cause why our meditations and prayers are no stronger in the night, is because we ioyne not with meditation the examination of our hearts vpon our beds: which if we did in some truth, it would keepe vs from drowsinesse, and want of reuerence in our prayers; as well as worldly men are kept waking, by thinking on worldly matters. Here we are taught by Dauids example, when we want the more solemne and best meanes, to make a supplie by often and sincere vsing of such priuate meanes as we can.


Ministerie, Ministers.
1 WE must neuer be so moued at the reproches of enemies, as at the not profiting of friends: that is, such as be, or ought to be the ioy, crowne, and glorie of our ministerie, for whom wee haue prayed, and with whom we haue trauailed for their saluation. For as these men alone giue all the credite to our ministerie in well-doing, so they doe farre more discredite it by euill doing, then all others, at whose hands we looke for no such things. And for this cause wee may not be so moued to see the common sort of people offend, because what maruaile is it if they faile in duties, when others which are continually taught, doe so often slip and fall?
2 Ministers should most frequent those places where God hath made their Ministerie most fruitfull: they should heerein be like the couetous man, that where they haue once found the sweetnes of gaining of soules, thither they should be most desirous to resort.
3 Hee feared much the preposterous zeale and hastie running of young men into the Ministerie; because as iudgement, so also stayednesse, and moderation, vse, experience, grauitie in ordering affections, and the hauing some masterie ouer corruption, was needefullThe haste of young men to the ministery in him, that should teach others. And hee obserued the extreame in our age, to be contrarie to that in the first age, wherein men being but slenderly brought vp, it was very long ere they were vsed in the Church: but now education being bettered, they are too soone imployed. Too hastie a triall must not be made of mens giftes to their hurt that vse them, and that haue the vse of them.
4 If we aske, whether a man may not lawfully desire to be in the Ministerie or no? I answere, that in the Ministerie are two things; a worke and a worship; a dutie and a dignitie. The worke and dutie to the glory of God, and the good of his Church, a man may desire: The worship or dignity, to serue our couetous mind, is not to be desired. It is good before we come to the complete function of the Ministery, there should be some training vp by degrees in the schooles of the Prophets, Acts, 20. Wee reade of the training vp of certaine Disciples at Corinth, and at Antioch: Paul was first a Disciple, then an Apostle: Ioshua vnder Moses; Samuel vnder Ely; Elisha vnder Elias; Salomon vnder Nathan; Baruch vnder Ieremie; Timothie vnder Paul; were trained vp. And surely it is a diuine policie, first, to be of the childre^ of the Prophets, then a Prophet, the^ a Pastor. First, Christ calleth some to be domesticall Disciples, Luk: 6. After, he sendeth them forth, Luk: 10. And then they preach most fully, whe^ after his Ascension they had receiued the holy Ghost. Now if this order were in the Prophets times, why should it not be much more in ours? In the common-weale, there is a training vp of the Gentrie, before they be installed into Magistracie. In the Court, no man at the first is admitted to the highest titles and functions, but according to their gifts and practise. In naturall things, wee will not commit our bodies to euery Physitian, and professor, but make enquiry after him who hath had the longest experience. Then it is good, first with Ioshua, Samuel, Elisha, Salomon, Baruch, and Timothie to be humbled; then with Moses, Ely, Elias, Nathan, and Paul to be honored. For what age requireth this more then our headie olde age of the world? Wherein young men are some what forward, and young men haue younger iudgeme^ts, younger affections, vnseasoned speeches, and vnseasoned speeches bring retractions, and retractions bring their discredit.



Mirth.
1 WHen a Gentlewoman asked him if he were not sometime merrie. Yes, saithMirth. he, we are often merrie, and sometimes we are afraid of our mirth.


Mercies.
1 THe way to see the length, depth, breadth and heigth of Gods mercies, is first with shame and sorrow to see the length, etc. of our owne sinnes.


Memorie.
1 THe best arte of Memorie, is, to be humbled at Gods threatnings, and comforted at his promises: for sure it is, that exceeding griefes or exceeding ioyes, leaue great impressions in vs.
2 The best arte of Logicke is to reason E conuerso, out of that saying of Paul; There isTemptation. no temptation hath ouertaken you, but it hath ouertaken others. And to say thus, There hath no temptation ouertaken others, but the same may ouertake vs. This will teach vs to speake charitably and profitably of other mens infirmities.


Markes of the children of God.
1 THere be some notable markes to know whether our iourney be to heauen, or to hell: first, if a man be so close, that he will not open his way whither he purposeth1 How to discerne and discouer the 2 waies of men. to goe, yet you shall sp^e out his intent, by obseruing which way his carriage is sent: if our carriage goe after the flesh, to the flesh we shall come: if after the spirit, to the spirit we shall come. Secondly, if a man conceale his voyage, yet you shall discerne him by his inquirie this way or that way: if he aske which is the way to Canaan, and where the way lieth in the wildernesse, it is an argument he is going to the promised land. Thirdly,3 albeit he would keepe his iourney neuer so priuie; yet he is bewrayed, if when in hearing a man speake against his countrey, and dispraise his Prince and people, his blood beginneth to rise, he findeth himselfe grieued, and standeth in defence of his countrey: So, if when men disgrace Gods word, speake euil of his Ministers, or reproch his Saints, we finde our selues moued, and not able to containe our selues from reprehension: that is a token we are trauailing towards heauen.


Occasions of euill.
1 GOdly men are not in danger of grosse wicked women: wherefore we must haue a greater carefulnes of our selues, when we are in companie of such as professe godlinesse. And so in all euils beware of secret and colourable occasions of euill, wherein some make a shew of good, being guiltie of great offences.


Patience.
1 PAtience then possesseth the soule, whensoeuer all our outward wants are suppliedTriall of our patience. by patience.
2 There are many who haue set a presse on their hearts, and purposed to exempt themselues from all griefe: others eate vp their hearts with griefe, as the flesh of the body is eaten vp with a corrosiue, and so make themselues dull stones, rather than feeling members:Some eate vp their hearts with griefe. the meane is not to be too quiet, as without all griefe; nor to be vnquiet too much, as being without a God.


Pitie.
1 THey are not to be pitied in their griefe, which sorrow not with some griefe for their sinnes.



Pouertie.
1 WE often want outward things, because we esteeme no more of inward graces.Cause of outward wants. Murmuring.
2 It is the policie of Sathan, to lay before vs the great benefits which we want, to cause vs to murmur for them, and to disgrace the present benefits which we haue, least we should be thankfull. We must not desire to come out of the fire of affliction, vntill the Lord thereby haue purified ^s, as fine gold, for his owne vse: but still thinke that the continuing of the crosse, is the continuing of scouring away of some corruption.
3 The Lord oftentimes giueth his children no other riches, but his promise made vnto them, which they must wholy depend vpon, vntill the Lord seeing them readie for theCo^tentation. thing in the testament hequeathed vnto them, shall in wisedome giue them their legacies.
3 The Lord will haue vs to begin with good things though our beginning be small: the diuell contrary. In euill things God would haue vs feare the very first beginnings: the diuell contrary.


Preaching.
1 IT is to be feared, that by reason of our long peace and ease, mens teaching will become glassie, bright and brittle: for that preaching is alreadie growne so cold and so humane, that the simple preaching of Christ doth greatly decay: and that the great peace and The simple preaching of Christ. 1. Cor. 2. 2. 3. 2. Cor. 4. 5. 6. 7. quietnes which men haue in themselues, shall destroy the power of godlines out of them.
2 If wee preach things whereof wee are not fully perswaded, or if we be perswaded of them, yet if they be not sound according to truth, they will trouble our consciences afterwards.
3 He obserued that many would receiue the word of God publikely preached with reuerence, and being priuately spoken, they made no such account of it: wherein men shewed themselues not to respect the preacher of God and his word, but some other thing. And that some men (which was a foule sinne, and worthie publike reprehension) wouldHypocrisie. heare a man willingly in the Church, and gainsay his doctrine at home. Wherein they bewraied, rather that they heard for solemnitie of place, more then for any deuotion.
4 In denouncing the iudgements of God, either priuatly to one, or publikely to more, the Ministers of Christ still ought earnestly and inwardly to be moued to pray, that that euill which the Lord foreshewed them by the word to fall on such sinners, might be turnedPreachers must be farre from wrath. 1. Tim. 2. 22. away: so farre must they be from speaking in wrath.
5 Some Preachers doe much inueigh against the body, crying out, that it is the enemy of the soule: when notwithstanding we are rather to nourish the body as the friend of the soule, for the exercise of repentance, and mortification, and sanctification: and on the contrarie,The corrupt actions of the body proceed from the corrupt affections of the soule. the soule is the enemie to the body in vsing it to sinne, for that there is neuer any corrupt action in the body, but there hath been first a corrupt motion and sinful affection in the soule.
6 He was alwaies desirous to be in the place of publike reading, praying and preaching, euen of conscience to Gods ordinance, were the Preachers neuer so meane. For if he spake of iudgement, he either increased (as he said) or confirmed his knowledge. If the speaker had great wants, euen these wants did humble him, and made him to meditate inwardlyTo attend the holy ministerie and Preaching of the word. of that truth, whereof the Preacher failed: in so much that sometimes hearing the wants, and then meditating of the truth, he could as well be enabled to preach againe of that text, as if he had read some Commentarie.


Prayer.
1 WE cannot be drie in the graces of God, so long as we resort to Christ by feruent prayer.
2 If you will aske any blessing at Gods hands, begin with crauing his fauour: Psal. 4. If you would auoid any crosse, begin first with repenting and crauing pardon for thy sinne. Psal. 32.
3 He in all things would aske counsell of God by his word and prayer, thinking he

could neuer well doe good to others, vnlesse he had also first done well to his owne soule. And hee obserued, that taking in hand things more suddenly, hee either was crossed in the doing of them, or if he had any present fruite, yet hee saw it was not an abiding and remaining fruite.
4 It is good to vse euery night as soone as wee awake, some exercise of prayer, or meditation,Prayer in the night. and to preuent the morning and euening watch in thinking on the Word.
5 Hee compounded with himselfe three times a day, to pray for those things which hePrayer in the day. preached, vsing also daily three portions of Psalm: 119.
6 They pray not altogether of fashion, who see their infirmitie in praying, and areTo see our infirmities and wa^ts in prayer, and to be grieued for them. grieued for it: And they that indeed doe pray onely of fashion, doe not see it: and this imperfection doth not so much displease the Lorde, as the griefe in vs for our imperfection doth please him. And though it come to passe that God doe crosse a vehement prayer, and doth graunt our prayer when wee pray coldlie, it is not either to make vs to surcease from zeale, or to slip to coldnes in prayer, (for that is the way either to heresie or prophanenesse) but to teach vs that wee must not on the one side, trust too much to theIames, 5. meanes, as though wee would tye God to our praying; and to encourage vs on the other side to vse prayer, when seeing the Lord hath heard vs praying faintly, he will surely heare vs when we pray feruently.
7 Sometimes in a good action, vsing good meanes with an vpright heart, to a lawfull ende, if our prayers be vnfruitfull, and our labours want successe: then let vs remember,Secret corruptions may hinder successe in good actions. that in all these there were secret imperfections, and that the Lords deferring is, that wee being better prepared by humilitie to be thankfull, he may graunt our requests in richer manner and measure.
8 When one said to him after long conference and prayer: Sir, I haue troubled you; Oh my brother, not so (said hee) I neuer felt ill by well-doing, and if I may pleasure you, it is as ioyfull to mee as any thing can bee: for, for this cause I liue.


Praise.
1 VNto one that with many words disabled himselfe, he said meekly: O why do you so much seeke your owne praise? for it bewrayeth a priuie corruption of nature, that by too open dispraise, desireth to stirre vp his owne praise and co^mendations.


Parents.
1 SEeing a godlie man hauing his sonne in his armes, whome hee loued tenderlie, heImmoderate loue of parents. said to him: Sir, there is the matter of your reioycing, God make it the matter of your thanksgiuing.
2 The Lord hath corrected the immoderate loue of parents towards their Children, specially when it was grounded on nature, more then on the gifts of God: as we may see in Abraham, who so loued Ishmael; in Isaack, who so loued Esau; and in Dauid, who so loued Absolon.


Prosperitie and Peace.
1 MEn ought to vse all good meanes in the time of peace, and before troubles come: and yet, though (because outward things are as a vaile to hide Gods face from vs) we cannot vnderstand good things so easily in prosperitie; or if we vnderstand, we hardlie haue the feeling of them: we must therefore still vse the meanes, in hope of that fruite and comfort that commeth in time of trouble, vnto which time God often reserues ourFeelings most vnder the crosse. 2. Cor. 12. 9. greatest feeling, because it is the most needfull time of helpe.
2 And if it be so that in our prosperitie we haue not vsed so the meanes, yet are we not therefore in aduersitie vtterly to dispaire of comfort, because the Word was giuen for mans helpe, who needeth meanes, not to helpe GOD, who can comfort without meanes: neither are wee to bee out of heart, though our Conscience tell vs that wee haue vsed theMeanes. meanes in some weaknes: for the Lord pardoneth our infirmities, and crowneth our sinceritie in them.
3 Browne bread and the peace of the Gospell is good cheere.
4 Hee said surely, that long prosperitie will breede either heresie or securitie, or someThe long prosperitie of the Church. great aduersitie: and that howsoeuer men did little feare these plentifull dayes, yet when prosperitie is full and come to repletion, there must needes follow some rupture, and the abundance of wealth must needes haue an vlcer, to breake out in one place or other.


Rebuking or reprouing of sinne.
1 BEing asked how a man might reprehend, he answered: First, looke that you haueRules for admonition. a ground out of the Worde for reprouing: then looke if it stand with your calling to reproue: Afterward, consider if some other man might doe it more profitably1 than you: then looke before whome you reproue, least you hinder the credite of2 the partie with his friends, and increase his discredite with his foes. And againe, if by all3 occasions of calling, person, time, and place, the Lord hath put you in this place to rebuke4 sinne; Consider, you must put on you the person of the offender, that as you spare not his5 sinne, because of the zeale of Gods glorie, so you presse it not too farre, because of compassion6 to a brother; then looke that with these your heart be right in zeale and loue, and7 so call for Gods assistance, before you speake, his grace in speaking, and for his blessing after your speaking: If anie thing bee left out that might haue bene profitable, please not8 your selfe in it, but be humbled for it; though some infirmities bee in you, yet shall they not doe so much hurt, as Gods ordinance shall doe good.9
2 We must rather winne men with a louing admonition, then gore them with a sharpe reprehension, that we may more easily worke vpon them afterward.A louing admonition.
3 If we thinke we may speake, wee will speake too soone: if we thinke we may keepe silence, we will holde our peace too long: when wee much loue the persons to whome we speake, we slacke our zeale in rebuking of sinne: if we be zealous against sinne, we slacke our loue to the person.
4 Wee may rebuke publikely, a publike offence of a priuate man on this manner: My brethren, such a sinne hath passed from this place, the guiltlesse neede not to be offended, the person guiltie is to repent of it.
5 His manner was both in espying and reprouing of sinne, he would not alwayes more sharply reproue the greater sinne, nor more earnestly reprehend the lesser sinne: but measuring the accidents and the circumstances of the sinne, with the qualitie and degree of the sinne it selfe, hee did see that some appurtenances with the sinne, did aggrauate or extenuate it: So as a greater sinne with some circumstances, he thought lesse to be reproueable,What to consider in reprouing both little and great sinnes. and some lesser sinne with some accidents, to be more condemnable: euen as we see that the Lord did strike with death the man that with a high hand, did but gather stickes on the Sabbath, and yet not punished others so grieuouslie, who of infirmitie did more deepely prophane the Sabbath.
6 By admonition wee may winne and saue soules, and for want of due admonition, we loose and destroy soules. When we are admonished, we either denie the thing, or else we quarrell with the affection of the speaker, and finde many faults. Wee had much rather haue our consciences priuily touched, then our names openly dishonoured: yet when we haue chafed with our owne shadowe, and disputed with our owne reason, it will come toHow vnwilling wee be to accept an admonition. passe, that we shall speake reuerently of him behinde his backe, whom we much gainsaide in words before his face. Neither for all this vnpatient bearing of an admonition, must we leaue off, or maruell too much at the little successe of this dutie: for either we sinned in the manner of doing, or in the want of wisedome: or we would too much haue gloried in our selues, if wee had done good, or too much grieued with our selues, if we had not doneMotiues to practise admonition. good; or we did conuince iudgement generally, or not obserue the applying of things to their circumstances particularly; or wee doe all without loue, or without prayer, and so though wee plant and sow, God denieth the first and the latter raine to blesse our labours. Againe, we are to comfort our selues vnder hope of time to come: for experience proueth, that some at the first receiuing of an admonition most hardly, haue after most profited by

it: and others receiuing an admonition very gently, haue lost the fruits of it afterward very negligently. For many curteous natures are as soft as waxe, sooner able to receiue theSimile. impression of an admonition, but lesse able to retaine it. Again, a more heroicall nature, is as the harder wax not so soon admitting the print, as surely keeping the print being made. Many notwithstanding had rather sleepe in the whole skinne of their senslesnes of sinne, and therfore giue entertainment vnto flatterers, whom for a while they loue, but afterward most grieuously hate: for when a flatterer comming to haue some bootie is denied, he will reason on this maner: Sir, I did you this good, and therefore I deserue this pleasure. Nay rather he should say; I haue not done good but euil: and therefore it is the mercie of God, that I lose the wages of my sinne. For let vs learne this as a rule of our liefe, neuer to trust himNeuer trust him that will conceale a sin in vs. that will promise to conceale a sinne in vs; nor againe to mistrust him too much that will not willingly be admonished at the first. For as a furious or a phreneticall braine, can by no meanes away with him that shall lay any hands vpon him, though it were for his profit: so, so long as we be in impatiencie, we shall suffer no man to speake vnto vs, though it be forSimile. our good: but the l^thargie of our minde being cured, we marueile at our former impatiencie, and are ready to shew our selues thankful vnto him that would haue a care to draw vs out of such a sinne.


Regeneration.
1 AS good natures doe not helpe of necessitie to regeneration: so euill natures cannotGood and euil natures. hinder Gods purpose in calling, if the meanes with his mercie and blessing be purely and painfully vsed.


Repentance.
1 SAthan vnder the colour of repentance, bringeth many into an extreame sadnes, andExtreame sadnes. strictnesse in vsing the creatures of God. Again vnder pretence of Christian libertie, and deliuering of men from extreame griefes, he allureth them to an immoderate and an vnsanctified mirth, and intemperate vse of the creatures of God: so blinding iudgement, he afterward corrupteth affection.
2 One complaining vnto him for the not feeling of his corruption, which did sometime enbolden him to sinne, and to adde one sinne to another, as to shuffle a little sinneTo deferre sorrowing for some one sinne vnto the more generall accounting time, who dangerous. vnder the pretence of a great sinne, and to deferre the sorrowing of one sinne, vntill the more generall accounting time, when we should sorrow for more and many sinnes, his temptation touching him on this manner: Why fearest thou to commit this one sin and this little sinne, which is as pardonable by repe^tance as the former sinnes, which are more in number and greater than this, seeing thou maist repent for this sinne when thou repent^st for them all? He made this answere: In such a temptation, because Sathan is very neere, we are to tremble vnder the hand of God, to feare our selues, to striue in prayer, and to mourne for the temptation, whereby Satan would cause vs after not to dispute with it: and we be to suspect our selues to be rather readie to adde sinne to sinne, than to repent of any sinne, howsoeuer Sathan would blind vs with a kind of repenting: and we must stay vpon the power and helpe of God in Iesus Christ.


Reproches.
1 HE said, although he was subiect to many and grieuous reproches, yet two thingsTriall of our hearts in reproches. did euer comfort him: the one, that his heart was well, and not euill affected to any man: secondly, that going alone, he could humble himselfe and pray to God, that the authors of such reproches might be pardoned.


Riches.
1 SOmetimes good outward gifts hurt the beholders, when they hurt not the possessors,A mediocritie. as we may see in the beautie of Sara and Ioseph: which thing ought to humble vs in the desire of outward things, and to make vs thankfull for a mediocritie.
2 It is a iust iudgement that earthly riches doe deceiue our hearts, when heauenly richesA triall of the rich mans faith. doe not delight vs; that the outward things should carrie vs away, when heauenly

things cannot so much preuaile with vs. Well, howsoeuer gold or siluer goe here on earth for the greatest riches before men: godlines is the greatest riches before God and Angels in heauen.


Sacraments.
1 AS Isaaks intent being to blesse Esau, hindered not the will of God in blessing of Iacob: so the corrupt intent of the Minister doth not hinder the blessing of God in the Sacraments, it being Gods owne ordinance.
2 After one had asked his aduice for sitting, or kneeling at the Lords table, he said: As for such things, let vs labour what we may, to doe as much as we can for the peaceof the Church.


Securitie.
1 SEcuritie is a forerunner of some grosse sinne, or of some great crosse.
2 We must ouercome our vnwillingnes and sluggishnes betimes in good things:Delayes. Triall of our dulnes. and preuent delayes at the first; because it is certaine, the longer we delay, the worse.
3 There is a great corruption in our natures, which makes vs most dull when we haue most meanes. This ariseth either because when we haue the publike meanes more plentifully,1 we vse the priuate more sparingly: or because we doe not so much esteeme of the2 meanes, ordinarily administred, as we doe when they are lesse familiar vnto vs: or if the3 Lord seeing vs too immoderatly desire the place where we are, denieth vs the benefits and4 fruites of the place to correct our desire: or for that we promised to our selues too large a hope of freedome from many euils, by the meanes of the word; therefore it pleaseth the Lord to proue vnto vs, that they are nothing vnto vs without the blessing of his holy spirit.5 Or this may arise from the temptation of Sathan, who because he would make vs discontentChange of place and calling. with our present estate and calling, and to hunt after new; therefore he sheweth vs all the inconueniences of the place present, and hides all the profits; and shewes vs all the profits of the place where we haue beene, or shall be, and hides all the inconueniences. Or because when we were the best in a whole towne, and saw nothing in others but corruption,6 we pleased our selues, and prouoked our selues more to good things; and being among many good men, we make not so much of our goodnes, and grow something secure,7 and trust too much in the goodnesse of the place and persons. Or in that we like of our selues well, when we are teaching and instructing others, and are more impatient of silence8 in our selues, and to be instructed of others. Or because we would still be getting praise by bringing out, but we are loth to store vp treasures both new and old for time to9 come, when as yet there is a time of both. Or we more see this, because the last complaint seemeth the greatest, though indeed we haue suffered as euill; euen as a man thinketh his sicknes present to be sorer than any sicknes past. The onely remedie against this dulnes is, continually by prayer, and by vsing the meanes to striue against it.


Singing.
1 HE wished all men that would sing, that in singing they euer sing with affection andAffection and feeling in singing Psalmes. feeling, or else haue a mourning in their hart that they cannot doe so. Coloss. 3. 17. Ephes* 5.


Sinne.
1 I^ we goe on still in sinne, God will goe on still in iudgement: but if our hearts relent from sinne, God will release his sentence of punishment.Cause of sin within vs, occasions without vs.
2 To a Courtier complaining of the occasions of euill, he said: Though you haue occasions of sinne offered, yet the cause of sinne is still in your selfe.
3 Because God worketh the sense of sinne by degrees in his children, he suspected them, who at euery sinne named, would shew themselues forthwith troubled.Sins be linked and chained one in another.
4 Sinne is such a canker that it spreadeth secretly, and there is such a chaine of sinnes, that he that yeeldeth to one, draweth on another; grant a little one, and a great one will

follow: wherefore as it is good wisedome not onely to auoide the plague, but to eschewe euery little ragge that may seeme to carrie the plague: so it is heauenly wisedome not onelyHeb. 3. 12. 13. Simile. to auoide grosse sinnes, but all such shewes of sinnes, as may draw on the other. And as we count it pollicie, not to go as neere the riuers banke as we can, least suddenly (or at vnawares we should slip in: so it is a spirituall policie, not to goe too neere sinne, least we be ouertaken of it before we be aware of it.
5 It is our corruption to be scrupulous in sinne, in the beginning: but when we are entred in a little, wee runne ouer head and eares.The triall of our state against any one speciall sinne often assailing vs.
6 This is a sure experience, whether the sinne which hath often assailed vs shall get dominion ouer vs or not: if the oftner we are tempted, the more we are grieued, the more we striue against it, the more we labour for the contrary vertue, we shall shortly be conquerors ouer it. But if the first comming of sinne wrought some griefe in vs, and the often comming of it, makes our griefe the lesse, and causeth vs to cease to vse the meanes of with standing it, and to be carelesse in the contrarie vertue, then it were to bee feared that that sinne in time should preuaile against vs, and that we should get no victory ouer it.
7 Though it is hard to find out our speciall sinnes, yet by often and diligent examiningTo know our speciall sinne. of our selues by earnest prayer, that God would reueale vnto vs our sinnes, by often hearing and reading the word, by marking the most checks of our consciences, and reproches of our enemies, we might be led to the neerest sight thereof.
8 If Gods children are readie to slip in a moment; how much more dangerous is theHow the godly feare sinne more the^ externall crosses estate of the wicked, who are willing to fall continuallie? It is wonderfull to see a poore sinner ready to swound and fall dead almost at euery sinne, which a man would thinke to be nothing to feare him, or driue him to this feare; and yet when aduersities, straunge iudgements, persecutions, and death doe come, to bee exceeding patient, comfortable, couragious, and valiant. And againe, it is strange to see others, who maruell that men will suffer themselues to be feared with sinnes, and aske what meane men to stand trembling at the word of God: yet let sicknes come, or if the hand of God be vpon them, or let deathHow the godly and godlesse differ in their ioyes and feares. come towards them, they quake at the name of sicknes, death, or hell; and either they proue very senslesse and blockish, or else they be in a most desperate estate: yea, if God begin to recken with them, euery countenance of a godly man, euery chirping of a bird, and drawing neere of the least and weakest creature towards them, euery shaking of a leafe, mouing of a shadow, euery noyse of the aire appaleth their courage, and maketh them most fearfull cowards. They feare most when Gods iudgements are executed, which feare least when they are threatned: And they feare least when Gods iudgements are accomplished, which tremble most when wrath is denounced. Wherefore if wee long for courage, and lothe cowardise, against the euill day, let vs labour for a good conscience, which breedethNote. true boldnes, and flie from sinne, which bringeth a spirite of feare vpon vs, as daily experience may teach vs. It is better to feare the euill to come, when only feare, and not euill is vpon vs, than to feare then, when besides the feare, the affliction it selfe is come, which so sorely besetteth vs, that wee haue no libertie or leaue to breathe for any comfort, or to hope for any deliuerance.
9 They that will haue a true faith in Christ must belieue in him, that he is our wisdome, righteousnes, sanctification, and redemption. Are then thy cogitations confounded? Seest thou no knowledge, not so much as a literall knowledge of Christ, but all is doubtfulnes, all is dulnes, all is deadnes in thee, as though thou neuer knewest, heardest, readest,True remedies against deadnes and au^es. or learnedst any thing? Now know and belieue, that whatsoeuer knowledge, experienced power of vnderstanding, was in Iesus Christ, the same is made thine; hee is thine annoynting, that will teach thee all. Hast thou knowledge, and yet thy life not brought agreeable or proportionable to thy knowledge? Thou art troubled with thy sinnes, thou feelest no goodnes, thou thinkest thy selfe as an euill tree voide of all good fruite: Now rememberChrist is our wisedome. that as Christ being no sinner, was made of God a sinner, and punished of God as a sinner for thee: thou hauing no righteousnesse, art made through Christ righteous, and shalt be rewarded of God as righteous through him. It may be God hath enlightened thee with heauenly vnderstanding, he hath hitherto strengthened thy desire in giuing thee to walke

vprightly; but now thou art afraid thou shalt not perseuere, because of thy corruptions: thou tremblest to remember how many excelling thee in gifts and graces haue fallen away, and that all is but hypocrisie, thine owne heart thou thinkest will one day begu^le thee: now call to minde that Christ is made vnto thee holines, not as a new Moses to follow,Christ is our holines. but as a Messias to beleeue in, as the author and finisher, of thy holinesse; so that to perseuere seemeth impossible to thee, yet with him it is possible: yea and more easie to continue thee in holinesse being begun, than to conuert Zacheus, Mathew, and Mary Magdalen, or to reconcile the Lambe and the Lion, and others which he hath surely done. ThereEsa. 11. 3. 4. 5. is one thing yet troubles thee; thou hast many things promised thee, and thou thinkest they are not performed; thou lookest for peace of thy minde, and behold a wound of the spirit; thou art the heire of the whole earth, and yet pinched with pouertie; thou art Lord of libertie, and yet liest in prison: it is so, and yet in all this see Christ is thy redemption,Christ is our redemption. not suffring thee to be ouercome with any of these in this life, and freeing thee wholy from them in the life to come. Admit thou werst cruelly persecuted, ca^not he that made the fire not to burne at all the three children in the furnace, make the fire so easily consume thee, as thou shalt comfortablie beare it? Will not he that made the Lions being hungrie, not once to open their mouthes on Daniel, crush thee so greedily that thou shalt willingly sustaine it? Now the meanes are the word, prayer, and Sacraments: the word carrieth the spiritNote. of faith into thy heart; prayer giueth thee a feeling of thy faith; the Sacraments confirme both thy faith and feeling.
10 We must not be proud in our gifts, for God hath in iudgement giuen iudgement toSpirituall pride. many simple ones to spie vs out. If we confesse to God, we must frankly and freely bring our selues into the presence of God, and lay our hearts naked and b^re before him: we must not as harlots wipe our mouthes and say we haue offended, and yet fall into sinne againe: but with remorse of conscience acknowledge them, and with feare and reuerence leaue them.
11 Many thinke it to be easier to confesse their sinnes to God, than to acknowledgeHow hard it is to confesse our sinnes to God. them vnto men: but it seemeth to be contrary: for he that refuseth to confesse his sinne before man, in whom is but a drop of the indignation against sinne, which is feareful in the Lord, will not willingly open them and strip them naked before the maiestie of God. And he that can frankly stand as a penitent before God and his Angels, he will not sticke to confesse his sinne before the face of men. Behold our father Adam whilest there was no man to feare him, the Lord commeth at the first to him by pricke of co^science, he hideth himselfe with figtree leaues: to this pricke of conscience the Lord sendeth a voyce or a noise that is heard: Now not content with a few leaues, he goeth into the thicket of wood: at the length the Lord to draw him out of his hypocrisie, bringeth him into the plaine, and vrgeth him with substantial questions: he not able to hide himselfe any longer, hideth ^^ sinne, and shifteth it off to Eua. Why doth the holy Ghost thus orderly and particularly set downe this matter, but to shew that though we haue a pricke of sinne by nature in part to confesse sinnes, yet nakedly to vncase thy sinnes before God, is a hard thing to flesh and blood, the Diuell lying by, prompting vs, that in so doing we shall bring our selues to despaire, we shall runne out of our wits, we shall kill our selues, and neuer liue merrie day againe? In that notable Psalme of instruction, 32. we are taught, that then there is hope our sinnes are forgiuen, when God emptying our harts of all guile, we can be content freely to giue God the glorie, and to shame our selues before men. We see when his great affliction could not bring him to confesse his sinne, yet no comfort came to him, vntill by Gods grace he grew to this issue, that he reckoned vp the whole catalogue of his great sinnes: soSundrie euasions of sinners. hard a thing it is to confesse our sinnes before God.
12 It is our great corruption, being admonished or charged of sinne, we either denie it to be a sin, or we denie our selues to haue sinned in that sinne, or we quarrell and wrangle1 about the nature of sin, or else we cou^tenance our selues by Scriptures, as the Familists do2 couer many iniquities, by making plaine places allegories; or if we confesse, it is in great3 hypocrisie; or if we confesse in some truth, yet we goe not out of the sinne. HowsoeuerAdmonition. 4 Popish confession hath made a cloake for sinne, so as now a theefe on the gallowes5 6

ready to fall into the graue, and into hell both at once, will say, it is sufficient to confesse my sinnes vnto God, thogh I do not so vnto men: yet I say, there is no greater toke^ of grace, than when for the glorie of God or good of the brethren, wee can be content to discouer and lay open our selues. If none of these excuses serue, then we can say, why, this is a common7 thing, I am not alone, better then I haue done so; or else, such a one prouoked me to8 doe thus, or else I had not done it; or else we are very fraile, and may not you sinne? or was9. 10. there euer any that sinned not? Thus we are euen as daintie as Gentlewomen, who hauing a sore, which they are loth to haue esp^ed, will couer it till it be incurable* so wee, hauing some sinnes, are loth to open them, vntill they growe almost vnrecouerable.
13 Euery man is afraide of this, least his sinne should breake out, yet euery one vsethDiscouer and confesse the mother sinne. the way of breaking out. Nothing more stayeth sinne, then to make it knowne in time. Nothing draweth it sooner forth, than too long to conceale it. It may be some will confesse some sinnes; yea many sinnes, and yet hide the mother sinne, whose life if we continue, howsoeuer we may murther some of her broode, yet she will hatch new sinnes againe.
14 When thou art afraid thou shalt go out of thy wit, because thou fearest sinne; when thou canst dispute and preach more fearfully against thy selfe, then all the preachers in the1 world: remember how Christ Iesus hauing no holines by the flesh, by being of his owneConsolations against diuers kindes of griefe^. mother (to the testification whereof it pleased him to be borne of such a one, whose progenitors were notable sinners, to keepe company with such as were the most miserable wretches, to call to the greatest dignitie in the Church, the prophanest tole* gatherers, persecutors and worldlings) hath giuen thee an holines vnperfect, and would not haue thee to looke for any great things in thy selfe, seeing hee hauing put on thy flesh, got no gaine thereby at all. It may be the multitude of thy sinnes trouble thee, and therefore thou thinkest, now2 it is hard to make thee an holy one. Consider how Mary Magdalene had seuen spirits, and yet of all women was made most deuout; and after Christ his resurrection receiued greatest3 dignitie to see him first. It may be the great continua^ce of thy sin troubles thee: remember how Christ called Matthew, who long time had weltered in worldlines. It may be the greatnes of thy sinnes feare thee: consider how the greatest persecutor of the Church was4 made of all other, the most glorious preacher of the Gospell. It may be thy sinnes drawne5 from thy countrey grieue thee: the Cretians were good Christians, and the filthy Corinthians,6 became most faithfull professors. It may be thine hereditarie sinnes by nature moue thee to despaire of helpe: consider, he that can so farre ouerrule nature, that the wolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, the Leopard lie with the kidde, Esai: 11. 5. 6. he can also change that course of nature in thee, by a supernaturall grace. And yet as I would haue thee to beware, so to trust in Christ his righteousnes, as thou forget not, he is also thine holines: and so to labour for thine holines in him, that thou forget not he is thy righteousnes: but so to labour for both, as if thou beest righteous, thou must also be holie: and being neuer so holie, yet to seeke for thy whole righteousnes before God in Christ onely.
15 Many feebled and exercised minds are often cast downe without hope of helpe, because of their owne vnworthines, as thogh there were no comfort to be obtained of God, vnlesse wee bring of our owne fruits to present him withall: but this were to discredit the Lords mercies, and to bring in credit our merites, and rather to binde the Lord to vs, thanConsolation against the feare of our owne vnworthines. vs to him. But what meaneth this? There is with the Lorde plentifull redemption: and therefore Israell need not to feare to finde mercie; if our sinnes be great, our redemption is greater; though our merits be beggarly, Gods mercie is a rich mercie. If our peril be not come euen to a desperate case, and that wee be as it were vtterly lost, and past hope of recouerie, there is no praise of redemption. Heere then is the power and profit of our redemption, that when all sinnes goe ouer our heads, and heauen and earth, the Sunne and Moone, and the Starres come as it were in iudgement against vs, yet a cleare and full raunsome shall be giuen into our hands, wherewith to purchase our redemption, and so to procure our perfect deliuerance beyond all expectation: and so as it were to fetch something out of nothing. We see for example, in sicknes to haue either little daunger, or in great daunger to haue deliuerance by present meanes, is nothing: but in extremitie and perill, when Physicke can doe no good, and make nothing for vs, to keepe vs from the graue, then aboue

and beyond all this to be rescued therefro, and to recouer our life from the pits brinke, is a worke highly deseruing: So though God driuevs to ordinarie meanes, this is not to withdraw our redemption in vsing the meanes, but to traine vp our faith, that after hee may make knowne that he hath an helpe beyond all helpes, and much redemption. And this is needfull for vs to learne: for if the meanes be manie, we rest in them: but if they be fewe, and faint, the meditation of this redemption will be most comfortable.
15 It is an experiment of Gods Children, that by prayer sinnes receiue their deadly wound, and a temptation by resistance: yea, we shall finde it both sooner to depart, and toSinne is wounded by prayer, and temptation by resistance. recompence the present and little paine, with an after and longer pleasure: and contrarywise the not resisting thereof, causeth it the further to feed in vs, and the small present pleasing of our selues, is payed with a long bitter griefe of conscience afterward.
16 If we will truely learne how to auoide sinnes, let vs remember oft what punishment we haue felt for sinne. If wee will be kept from vnthankfulnes, we must oft call to minde the things that the Lord hath done for his glorie, and our soules health in vs.


Sicke, and sicknesse.
1 THis I take to be a fitte prescription to all parties afflicted: First, to labour to haueRules for the sicke. peace of conscie^ce, and ioy of the holy Ghost, through the assurance of their sinnes pardoned in Iesus Christ: then to be carefull to vse the meanes which may nourish1 their inward peace and ioy: thirdly, they must reioyce and recreate themselues in wisedome2 and well-doing with the Saints of God, and holie companie: and lastly, they must3 refresh themselues with kitchin physicke, and a thankefull vsing of the creatures of God.4
2 It is not good to vse that for dyet, which is prescribed for physicke: for that will not worke in the extraordinarie neede of the bodie, which is vsed as ordinarie in the state and time of health.
3 He marked two things commonly neglected: he saw that men being in daunger of death, would bee prayed for in the Church, but they would not haue the Church giuePublike prayers for the sicke. thankes for their recouerie. Againe, hee saw that women would giue thankes after their deliuerance, which is a Christian dutie well beseeming them, but they would not before aske the prayers of the Church. And seeing it is so rare a blessing to haue the fruit of the wombe, seeing sometime the mother, sometime the children, sometimes both died: and that the gift of both is a worke passing the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres: it were nothing superfluous or burdensome in such cases to pray and to be thankfull.
4 It is the wisedome of God ioyned with mercie, for the preseruing of his Children, in humility and thankfulnes (if they forget to spie out, and to be humbled for their inward corruptions) either to let them fall into some sinne, to punish their pride, and sway of their owne wit, or else (which is his more mercifull chastisement) to breake them with some crosse, vntill their harts be bruised. Hereof it commeth that the Lord is constrained to correct our haughtines, and coole our courage by some kinde of affliction, because we are ready to breake out in time of prosperitie. Wherefore to cut off the occasions of sinne, which Sathan would finde out in our proude flesh, after long time of health, the Lord sendethHow the Lord corrects the pride of our prosperitie. some sicknes, or some weaknes vpon vs, to cut short our hornes, wherewith by reason of long wealth, wee would (like Buls of Ba^an) push at the godly; the Lord sendeth fire, theeues, and oppressions to let vs bloud in our riches, least wee should ^e too rancke, and grow into a surfet. The best way in the middest of our prosperitie is, to labour to thinke wisely and lowly of our selues: and to walke fearfully, as being now most jealous ouer this our corrupt nature, which least feareth, when Gods graces are greatest: and namely, as of all blessings this is one of the greatest, ^uen in abundance, health, credit, and authoritie, to carrie as humble and meeke an heart, and faithfull a spirit, as wee would or ought to haue, euen when we come out of some affliction: So this of all the plagues is the greatest, to be pricked, and not to feele; to be striken, and not to be humbled for it. And yet it is no great commendation to bee made better by affliction: But this is the praise of godlinesse, to grow on more in prosperitie, then, not to forsake our first loue; then, to enter into a lowly conceit of our selues: for as it is a signe of a more liberall and ingenuous nature, to learne

more by lenitie, than by seueritie; or if he slip, to recouer himselfe as carefully at the sight of another corrected before him, as if he were beaten himselfe: So it is a token of a minde more reformed to haue a bruifed minde rather with the ^aste of Gods mercies, than with the terror of his iustice; or if he see but an inckling of Gods displeasure breeding, as much to strike his heart, as if the heauie hands of a fearefull scourge were vpon him. And here we must beware that we lose not the fruite of the least crosse: for if we breake not our hearts with a little affliction, we shall afterwards become blockish in greater. Wherefore seeing it is a token of a melting heart to bleed at the least blow; and it is a signe of a senselesse minde, not to be touched vntill the sword hath tasted deeply of our blood: let vs pray1 for the first grace of Gods children, not to neede to be corrected; or for the second, to be2 the better by the least correction; or at the least, that the Lord let vs not goe so farre, as neither prosperitie nor aduersitie can doe vs good.


Sathans practises.
1 SAthan is readie euer to make vs most vnwilling to that, wherein the Lord will mostNote. vse vs to the greatest good of his Church.
2 We must pray that the Lord giue not that measure of leaue to the diuell that we giue out to sinne: but that he would rather make Sathan a surgeon to shew vs our sinnes, than a sergeant to arrest vs to perpetuall imprisonment for our sinnes.
3 Sathan hath two waies to buffet vs: first, he moueth to despaire, shewing vs how suchSathan buffeteth vs two waies. men did abide trouble, but they were rare men, of rare faith, of rare feeling, of rare patience; God hath not called vs to that measure of grace; we are vnworthie by reason of our sinnes, to hope for the like faith or fruites of faith. His other temptation sauours of pride,1 when he will make vs equall in dignitie with the highest of Gods Saints, but vnequall in2 dutie with them: then he will perswade that God is as good, and as strong to vs, as he hath been to others: but he keeps vs from vsing those waies and meanes, whereby others haue, and we ought to haue this goodnesse and power of God conueyed into vs. Wherefore as we must not distr^st God that we shall obtaine the like mercie with others, if we vse the like meanes: so we must not be so bold, as to dreame that euer we shall haue the like fauour with them, vnlesse we labour for the like faith with them, the like faith I say, though not in quantitie, ^^^^. qualitie, and that by vse of the meanes.
4 Vnto one that said he was possest of a Diuell: he answered, as hoping that he was thePossession. 1. Cor. 6. Ye are not your owne. childe of God, and rather deluded than so afflicted. True it is, that as much as lieth in you, you haue giue^ ouer your selfe vnto the Diuell: but it is not in your power to giue ouer your selfe vnto him, neither is it in his iurisdiction to possesse you.


Superstition.
1 MAny hauing escaped out of the gulfe of superstition, are too deepe plunged inProphanenes. prophanenes.


Strange corrections.
1 VNto a very godly man, whose onely sonne was drowned, and therfore came vnto him in great anguish of minde, and asked whether such strange corrections were not alwaies tokens of strange sinnes. He answered, That albeit God did seuerely correctCauses of great afflictions. sinne in it, yet it was not necessarie that God should chiefly respect the punishment of sinne in this thing; as might appeare in the like dealing with Iob and other of his children: Eccl. 9. Such things happen oftner to the good, etc. Howbeit (said he) God might correct your1 securitie herein (which either brings some sinne or crosse) or God might correct your immoderate2 loue of him; or your vnthankfulnes for what measure he was reformed, or your3 not praying for him: or the Lord might take away this consolation, and withdraw wholie4 your minde from the world, and more throughly sanctifie you to himselfe. Or he might5 preuent some worldlinesse which you might haue fallen into, or some sinne which your6 sonne might haue fallen into, which would haue been a sorer trouble than his death: and7 therefore you must stay your selfe on the loue of God in all.8



Saluation.
1 THat man is blest whom God hath from all beginnings chosen to eternall life. ToThe golden chaine of our free election. whom God hath giuen his Christ as a perfect redeemer. In who^ he hath sealed the assurance of ^l those things by his holy spirit; to whom he hath giuen his word; in whom the word and spirit haue begot faith; by whose power faith hath begotten ioyes in1 heauenly things; in whom ioy hath wrought a sincere heart to please God; in whom sinceritie2 is accompanied with loue vnfained to the Lord and his Saints; loue ioyned with a3 care to obey the commandements; this care breeding a reuerent feare to please God; in4 whom this godly feare rebuketh sinne; th^ rebuking of sin worketh a mourning spirit; in5 whom a mourning spirit begetteth true meekenes, this meekenes of minde causing vs to6 hunger after Christ. So as feeling his owne miserie, he is taught to shew mercie vnto others,7 and so sheweth mercie as it is with the bowels of compassion; whose heart God so gouerning,8 that all outward benefits turne to his blessing, as seales of the fauour of God; vnto9 whom all crosses being sanctified in Christ, turne to his good: who finally in this faith10 and fruites of faith, meekely and patiently possessing his soule, waiteth and looketh assuredly11 for the glorious kingdome of God after this life. This is the golden chaine of vndoubted12 blessednesse, whose linckes are so fastened the one in the other, that wheresoeuer13 any of them be wanting, there is a breach and weakenes made in the whole.14


To make speede to good things.15 16
1 AS it is a fearefull thing to hasten to doe euill, and to linger to an euill thing is an17 holy lingring: so it is a blessed thing to hasten to godlinesse, and to make speede to a good thing, is a hastines very godly, Psal. 42. Psal. 95. Elisha must not salute any body in the way: the Apostles must not commune with any in their iourney, and why? They must make haste to doe the will of God. It is profitable to make haste to heauen; but it is no wisedome to make haste to hell: and yet to doe well, we finde a Lion in the streetes; but to doe euil, nothing can stay vs He that euil come to heauen must make haste: for the kingdome of God Or as another copie, is taken of them, that vse violence to come to it. must be taken violently: he must be like those wise virgins not linge^ing to get oyle, nor delaying ^o furnish themselues with the graces of God against the comming of Christ.


Sleepe.
1 BEcause great naturall and worldly sorrow and ioy will cause a man to breake his sleepe at midnight, he ^ould trie himselfe whether sorrow for sinne, and ioy in saluation had caused him to doe the like.


Sermons.
1 MAny men may be said to be Sermon-sick, as there are some said to be Sea-sick: forSermonsicke. as they that are Sea-sicke, for the time of their seafaring, so long as they be on the water are feeble stomacked, faint hear^ed, euer readie to die: and yet arriuing on the land, being gotten out of the ship, and hauing paused some little time, doe begin to forget their late troubles, and to recouer their former strength againe: So many, so long as they are in the Church hearing, and are tossed by the power of the word, their hearts are sicke, their consciences melt, they are much troubled: but when once the voyce ceaseth, and they are out of the Church doores, and haue acquainted themselues with the aire of the world, they forget what they heard, and wherewith they were moued, and so retire to their former life againe.


Schisme.
1 ALthough it is sure that a good man shall not finally fall in the maine points of his saluation, yet hee may be seduced in some lesse matters, but for all that in the end he shall escape: but the seducer shall surely be punished. For a well meaning man found in faith, and yet a nouice in Christ, may be carried to like some solemne superstitions, and

po^pous ceremonies in the worship of God. Againe, a man careful and right in the substance of saluation, for the remnants of corruptions and defects of good things, may easily be drawne of a malicious man to cut off himselfe from the Church, not being able to discerne betweene essentiall and accidentall, betweene the principall and inferiour points, which make or destroy a Church, that is, which cannot iudge how, the substantial ground workes remaining, there is a Church, though there be otherwise some accidentall things wanting. If any man not so much intending this mans good, as to feede his owne ambition,Schismes. pride, stomacke or vaine glory, shal carrie such a one to such superstitions or schismes, he by his euill heart intending to hinder the truth, and to destroy the temple of God, the Lord shall destroy him, and he shall either grow prophane or worldly, or he shall be cut off by death, or beare some other token of Gods wrath. And because of a singularitie ofSingularitie of spirit. spirit, such men with an euill conscience disturbe the Church, they may grow from error to heresies, from precisenesse to prophannesse, from strictnes to madnes, not being content to be corrupted, but seeking to corrupt. Howbeit, the man of infirmities and for want of iudgement going in an high path, shall in the end inherit good things and be saued, but as by fire.


The true suruay and examination of our selues.
1 VVHen we examine ourselues, we are to sit in iudgement ouer our selues, and to keepe a solemne court in our owne consciences, to suruay our manners: our wits, our senses, our members, and to see how we haue vsed them: but yet least we should be too fauourable to our selues, either in not espying out our sinnes, or in not co^demning our sinnes, still we remember to make the law our iudge, but Christ the answerer of the iudge.


The motions of the spirit of God in vs.
1 IT is a good thing to make much of a tender conscience, and to nourish the motions of Gods spirit, and not to offer any violence to that spirit of grace, which rebuketh sinne i^ vs: for he that hath once crackt his credit, will happily care for nothing: she that hath once bruised her virginitie, will by all likelihoods proue an old harlot. It is daungerous to burie the checkes of our conscience, to fight against Gods spirit, or to ^mother theChecke of conscience. light of grace in vs: for so we may grow to such a sottishnes in sinne, that no admonition can forewarne vs, nor punishment can affray vs: the smallest meanes will prouoke vs to sinne, the greatest meanes cannot reuoke vs from sinne. For suffering our selues to be hardned by degrees, the spirit is so quickly quenched, the conscience so tender is so soone bruised, that it is no maruell though we vse so great precisenesse and warinesse in so tender a matter, by suspecting the retire of old sinnes, and by foreseeing the assaults of new sinnes.


Euill spirits.
1 HE obserued the difference of superstition and true religion in many things, and namely, how the diuell whilest he was made knowne to men onely by hornes, by clawes, or by an hollow voyce, was wonderfully feared; but now being reuealed toSathan feared in superstition too much, and now in the light too little. be a more secret aduersarie, a spirituall tempter, a priuie ouerthrower of the soule, no man almost regards him: and therefore as some haue feared him too superstitiously; so now it is come to a more dangerous extremitie, that he is not feared at all: and which is more, we cannot truly beleeue the gracious helpe of Gods holy Angels, but seeke after Satans practises He marked, that good men and learned, did much omit this in their prayers, that God would send his Angels to them to deliuer them from euill spirits.


Temptations.
1 EVery man is that indeed that he is in temptation.
2 The faithfull shall not be tempted aboue their strength, but with the increase of temptation the Lord will increase our faith: or with the decrease of our faith he will decrease our temptation.
3 Gods children haue their faith so tried by the crosse, as alwaies some drosse of sinneThe crosses of the faithfull euer take away some drosse from them. is purged away thereby. As Iacob ceased not to wrestle though his thigh were ^^^^^d, till he got the blessing: so we must not faint in temptation though we be humbled, til we get the victorie. We must not despayre of victorie, because in our striuing we had some infirmities; but rather we must reioyce in this, that God hath giuen vs a will and a desire to cleaue vnto him.
4 It is a great fault in time of temptation not to resist those corruptions, which after ourTo resist our corruption in temptation. temptation is ouer, we are ashamed of, and time it selfe resisteth them.
5 Outward temptations doe not hurt till our inward corruption doth yeeld: but rather they are as Surgeons to draw out our festered corruptions.Outward temptations.
6 Long and strange temptations may betoken long and strange sinnes.
7 Gods seruants being tempted, are not so much to looke at their state present, as onStrange te^ptations. their estate to come: because they that presently sow in teares, in time to come shall reape in ioy.
8 He said, that when a great temptation hangeth long vpon vs, it were good to seekeAgainst great temptations. for some speciall sinnes in vs, because that we shall finde that for some priuie pride, or vnthankfulnes, or such like, a te^ptation remaineth long with vs. There is a a traine of corruption in vs, and God often punisheth one sinne with another; which if we espie not, but looke onely to the grosser sinnes, we shall hardly be brought to humble our soules vnderneath the hand of God, or to profit by the admonition of others. Againe, we must auoide all occasions of drawing on sinne, and vse ruery principall meanes at the least that helpeth against sinne For although we shunne all occasions, and vse many meanes, and omit but one of the chiefest, God may correct that one omission in vs.
9 He thought it to be a Christian d^scretion neuer to vtter a temptation, but when aWhen to manifest our temptations to our brethren. man had no comfort in himselfe, or when he stood in very great neede of comfort, and then alwaies to discerne to whom he opened it.
10 Subtiltie and violence are vsually attendant vpon the temptations of the diuell and the flesh: the diuell especially vsing these two.
11 Vnto one that was much tempted with vnbeleefe, he gaue this counsell: When theSathanicall temptations. temptation commeth, either fall downe in prayer, and say, Lord thou makest me to possesse the sinnes of my youth, and this temptation is of very equitie: howbeit, oh Lord,To be tempted with vnbeliefe and the remedies. grant I may by wisedome herein, make this temptation an holy instruction, and suffer me to possesse my soule in patience: oh turne this ^o thy glorie and my saluation. I see and confesse what hath beene in me a long time, by that which now sheweth it selfe in me, and that thy grace ^ath altogether hitherto kept vnder this corruption: yet Lord I beleeue, and yet Lord I will beleeue, helpe Lord my vnbeleefe, thy name be praised for this seale1 of thy loue, and pledge of thy spirit; that in this vnbeleefe I am grieued, as in my beleefePrayer. I am wont to be comforted. And though my former old and secret sinnes, descrue that I should not only be giuen ouer to infidelitie, but also that it should be in me without griefe and remorse, ^et Lord forgiue me my sinnes new and old, forgiue me my vnthankfulnes, increase my f^ith. And gr^^t good father, when thou shalt restore to me this gift of faith2 againe, that I may vse it in feare, and shew it in fruites. Or if this doe not preuaile, giueReading of the word. your selfe with all humblenes to reade the word of God, especially his promises, and be still attending vpon the meanes, waiting when the Lord shall in large your heart. Or if this3 do not helpe, goe to some faithfull brother, confesse your selfe to him, acknowledge yourConfession. weakenes to him, and be not ashamed to giue God the glorie, by shaming your selfe, and opening your corruption to him, that so he may pray for you, whose prayer according4 to the promise of God, made to his holy ordinance herein, Iames. 5 vndoubtedly shall beAttend on your calling with patie^ce. heard in the appointed time. Thus hauing prayed by yourselfe, and with another, and vsed the meanes of reading for your recouerie, though you haue not present reliefe: yet in meekenes of minde, and patience of your spirit, goe to your calling, knowing that your5 prayers and the word of God, being as seede, must haue some time betweene the sowingN^t to reason with our temptations or the diuel. of them, and the reaping of the increase and fruit of them. Aboue all, reason not with your temptations, dispute not with the diuell, as though you could preuaile of your selfe.

And as I would not you should dispute with your temptation, so I would not you should despise it, and make no account of it: for in both are extremities. If you take it too much to heart, or maruell how you should ouercome such a temptation, it will make you dull or desperate. If you account of it too little, and maruell how such things should come into your head, which was not wont to be so, it will make you not to striue, and you shall be swallowed vp before you be aware. If you account of it too fearefully, Sathan will oppresse you before you begin to fight. If you account of it too lightly, the diuell needes not to wrestle with you, you will ouercome your selfe: therefore feare in respect of your selfe,6 fight boldly in Christ, tremble at your owne corruptions, but rest and trust in Christ yourTo waite the temptation, and so to offer it vp to God in prayer. saluation. If still you are tempted and no body by you, write your temptation, and offer it to God by prayer, and promise to him that you will aske counsell at his word, at the mouth of his minister, when he shall giue you iust occasion. If all this helpe not, comfort your selfe with this pledge of Election, that you are ioyed when you feele your beleefe, and you are grieued least you displease God by your vnbeleefe: and know, that as there is7 a vicissitude of the meanes of saluation, which you must vse; so there is also a vicissitudeRemedie. of temptations, whereof this is one, against which you must striue.
12 Vnto one that was tempted with worldly shame, and thought the distemperatureTo be te^pted with worldly shame, and the remedies. of his minde proceeded thereof, he said on this sort: First know, that Sathan hath no absolute power, but a power by permission to trie vs: against which we must arme our selues ly faith; which will assure vs, that either the Lord will mittigate our temptation, if our power and patience be not great: or else, if he ^^large the triall, he will increase our strength according to the proportion of our temptation. We must also pray, that the1 Lord giue not out that measure of leaue to the diuell, which we giue out to sinne, to worke2 rebellion in vs against his maiestie: but that he would rather make Sathan a Chirurgion to shew vs our sinnes, than a Sergeant to co^found vs for them. It is the pollicie of the aduersarie, to perswade many that the weakenes of their body, and feeblenes of their braineWhen and how temptations breed. proceedeth of their temptations; when indeed it commeth of their vnstained mindes, wandring too much after the motions of the diuell, in that they not resting on the word, nor depending on Christ, nor contenting themselues to be tried, nor comforting themselues by meditation, attend too much, and confer too often with the diuels illusions and temptations, and so they complaine of the effects, and not of the causes of the temptations, being more grieued for their present sufferings, than for their sinnes past. The roote of this worldly shame, is pride, and haughtines of mind, which is a priuie euill, and hardly will be beaten into the head of them that are infected with it. But sure it is that we would neuer be so grieued for the losse of a thing, if we did not too much desire it, and too immoderatly vse it, whilest we had it, Ioh. 12. 42. Which sinne of haughtines, the Lord seeing in his children, that they are more humbled with the losse of worldly credit, than with the sense of their sinnes, and losse of his glorie; he striketh them with the want of that thing which is most precious vnto them, because they made no conscience of that honour which is most pr^cious vnto him. Wherefore this is the best remedie, rather to be grieued that we feele not our sinnes to be pardoned with God, than that we are knowne to be sinners against men: and that we be readie to shame ourselues, that God may haue the glorie, acknowledging shame and confusion, and the whole pit of hellish temptations to be due vnto vs; and glorie, praise and compassion, to be the Lords only. For this is a speciall worke of the child of God, by temptations rightly humbled, when he is readie to shame himselfe for his sinne, to glorifie God in his mercie.
13 Vnto one that thought himselfe to haue sinned against the holy Ghost, he said: Sathans temptations follow our affections: for if we lightly account of sinne, he bleares our eyes still with Gods mercies. If we begin to make a conscience of sinne, he loadeth vs withHow Satans temptations follow our affections. the iudgements of God, being as readie now to aggrauate this sinne, more than it is in it selfe, as before he would extenuate it to make it seeme lesse than it was. Howbeit (said he to the man thus afflicted) I will say vnto you, as Samuel said to the people, after they hadOne fearing he had sinned against the holy Ghost. confessed themselues to haue sinned against God with a great sinne: True it is, said Samuel, (not flattering them in their iniquities) ye haue sinned greatly: notwithstanding, if ye will feare the Lord and serue him, and heare his voyce, and not disobey the word of the

Lord, ye shall follow the Lord your God: but if ye will not obey the voyce of the Lord, but disobey the Lords mouth, then shall the hand of the Lord be vpon you, 1. Sam. 12. 14. So I will not les^en your sinne, but I say you haue sinned a great sinne before the Lord, in that you made a mocke of the word which you knew: yet if you turne to the Lord in feare and serue him, your sinne is remissible, howsoeuer Sathan chargeth your conscience, in that you haue done euill against your owne knowledge, and in that you are afraide, least that sinne be in you, and would reioyce in God if it were not in you: if you purpose to leaue your former sinnes, and in truth to turne vnto the Lord, I dare assure you, that as yet you are free from that sinne.
14 When a maide was so sore troubled, that two or three held her in her fit: he chargedToresist te^ptation. her in the name of the Lord Iesus Christ, that when the agonie came, she should not willingly yeeld to it, but in the Lord resist it. For both experience teacheth, that the ouer much fearing of temptation before it commeth, and little purpose to resist it when it commeth, mightily incourageth Sathan: and also the holy Ghost biddeth vs to resist the diuell, and he will flie from vs; to draw neere to God, and he will draw neere to vs. And the maide was neuer after afflicted.


Thankesgiuing.
1 OF all sacrifices, most acceptable is that of thanksgiuing: and therefore, in many words the Saints of God haue vowed, and entred into bands with the Lord to pay this oblation, bo^h to preuent the vntowardnes of nature, which is so vnwilling to this, as also to shame themselues more if happily they grow herein negligent: in which repetition of their vowes and promises (which argueth the great desire of their hearts: for looke what one delighteth in, he often speaketh of it, and in many words) they declare, that as euen in things agreeable to nature, we will helpe our delight by often speaking and repeating of them: so much more this helpe is requisite in things aboue nature, and among all the parts of godlines which are aboue nature, and chiefly in thanksgiuing, which is most contrarie to nature: for we will pray often for a thing, but hardly giue thankes once. And yet experience proueth in ciuill things, that of all arguments to perswade one to giue vs a gift, none is more eloquent or forcible, than to promise our selues to be thankfull and mindfull for that we shall receiue.
2 It is our common corruption, that the immoderate griefe of euils present, stealethNote. from vs all the remembrance of former benefits, and all thankfulnes for them.


Vnbeleefe.
1 HE gaue this aduice to one, that when he felt mistrust of Gods promises, he should set before him the examples of Gods mercies done to others, that we may be the more assured to obtaine faith: and when he began to presume,Against presumption and dispaire. he should set before him the examples of Gods iudgements, that he might pray for humilitie.
2 He said to a godly Christian, much inueighing against her vnbeleefe; I doe not now suspect your estate, when you seeme to me rather to haue faith, than when you seeme to your selfe to haue it. For faith being the gift of God, is then most obtained and increasedFaith and feeling. of God, when you thirsting after the increase of present feeling, thinke the smallest measure obtained to be no faith: and therefore be yet humbled vnder the mightie and mercifull hand of God for it. Rather I suspect you when you say you haue faith, because then you can lesse feare and suspect your selfe, and by that meanes lie open to vnbeleefe againe. And surely experience proueth, that when we shew we haue beleefe, when we mourne for our vnbeleefe, and then our faith may be least, when we thinke it to be most. Besides, herein you are to comfort your selfe with hope of increase of faith, because faith growethThe growth of faith by two meanes. by these two meanes, either by some great feelings, by the word and the spirit, and humble thanksgiuing joyned thereunto: or else by humbling our selues before the mercie seate of God for want of our faith.



Vngodlines.
1 WE may not goe to see vngodlines, to breede a great detestation of it in vs. For1 first, in respect of our selues in so doing, and presuming on a thing not warranted,Not to be present at the Masse, or any such superstitious seruice. it is the iust iudgement of God, that we should learne to fall into that sin, whereof before we were ignorant, because naturally we are inclined to such an action* Secondly, in respect of our brethren it is vnlawfull: for if they be strong, we offend them; if they be weake, we misleade them. Thirdly, in regard of Gods glorie it is vnlawfull: for such should be our zeale thereunto, (if not hauing heroicall spirits, by the motions of Gods spirit to speake against it) that we should not ouersee such a thing. Dan. 3. 15.2 3


Vse of the creatures.
1 AS naturall men vse Gods creatures to stirre vp a naturall comfort: so spirituall men should vse them to procure some spirituall comfort, and to stirre vp godly ioyes and fruitfull meditations in themselues: for as Satan seeing men of a sanguine complexion and sanctified, laboureth to mixe with their spirituall ioy a carnall i^y: so seeing some of a melancholie complexion sanctified, to haue spirituall sorrowes, he bestirreth himselfe to bring vpon them carnall sorrowes.


Vnthankfulnes.
1 HE would say, I feare not the time of the visitation of them, that thereby doe grow in the gifts and graces of God: but rather I feare the time of their deliuerance, least it should be ouertaken with vnthankfulnes; and so wofully they should lose the fruite of that good, which so dearely they had purchased of the Lord.


Visions.
1 BEing asked if there might now be visions agreeable to the word, he said: They might be extraordinarie, but not to be credited but for the words sake: and who so is moued with them, and not with the word, wherewith a man is charged to be moued, and is not drawne the more by the vision to the true meanes, that mans faith is suspitious.Visions and preaching. And as visions haue beene ordinarie, and preaching extraordinarie: so now preaching is ordinarie, and visions extraordinarie. But if you obiect that the visions be true: he said, Sathan will speake truth, and keepe touch twice or thrice in lesse matters, to get vs in the lu^ch in greater matters, and at length in some contrarie to the word of God.


Of Vsurie.
1 VSurie is the diuels Alchymistrie to turne siluer into golde; it is lucre by lending,Lucrum ex ^^^^o. L^^o^^s puluinarii. and they that vse it be a gracious kinde of theeues; it is a sinne that hath many aduocates and patrons. But to whom may this be vsed? Men are either poore, meane, or rich: to the poore giue freely, to the meane lend freely, of the rich take vsurie. The Lord was neuer the author of this diuision. Aristotle by the very light of reason, saw that it was a monstrous thing, for money to beget money, but Gods law goeth further, Leuit. 25 36. Deu. 5. 19. Againe, the Iewe of a Iewe might not take interest, but the linke of a Christian is neerer than of a Countrie: their brother-hood was but by Countrie onely, ours by redemption. Indeed recompence is to be made, where the thing is the worse for the vsing that is lent, Exod. 21. 14. but money for the lending is not worse, Ergo nothing to be taken for the lending of it. No member is permitted but that which directeth others in their callings, as the eye, or labours, being directed, as the hand: so is it, or ought to be in our vocations: then the Vsurer doing neither, is not to be permitted.
2 A certaine man that was an Vsurer, asking him how with a good conscience he might vse his money, he said: Occupie it in some trade of life, and when you can lend to the poore, do it freely and willingly, and that you may henceforth labour as well against couetousnes in occupying that trade, as before you desired to striue against vsury: especially

vse prayer, the word of God, and the companie and conference of his children: and whatsoeuer you get by lawfull gaine, giue euermore the tenth to the poore.


Word of God and the hearing of it.
1 EVermore be musing, reading, hearing, and talking of Gods word, and praying, that we may keepe the puritie of doctrine and a good conscience, to wade out of the iniquitie of the time, and to doe good as long as we may.
2 If you desire to heare the word with profit, obserue these things. Before you goe to Church humble your selfe in prayer to God, that he may prepare your vnderstandingPreparatio^ to the hearing of the word. 1 and affection to learne, and memorie to retaine, and that the preacher may speake to your consciences. After in hearing with some short prayer, applie the seuerall threatnings, promises and instructions, to your owne estate: when you are come home from hearing, change all that you remember into a prayer, and desire God that2 you may remember it most, when you should practise it, and vse to teach others, and to3 conferre of all things remembred. And this is a good way to remember a thing, and the4 reason of it.
3 As the Lord doth feede poore prisoners, euen with a little foode, who though theySimile. desire more foo^e, can haue no more, and doe not refuse more ordinarie meanes; and the same God suffereth many to be pined, who hauing abundance, thinke themselues ratherMeanes of saluation. cloyed with the meanes, than nourished by Gods prouidence: so the Lord extraordinarily doth nourish the soules of them, who hauing few meanes, doe looke for the ordinarie meanes more plentifully: and suffereth some to rot in ignorance, who being at the full measure of the meanes, haue no reuerent regard of the necessitie of them. And hereof it commeth to passe, that some hungrie soules haue beene filled with more grace at one sermon, than the proud, who hauing heard many sermons, are sent emptie away.


Witchcraft.
1 SEnding his friend to one that thought her selfe bewitched, he gaue these aduertisements: First and chiefly to beware of sending to Wizards. Secondly, to vse prayerAduertisements against witchcraft. 1 that Sathan might be confounded. Thirdly, to labour to bring the person to repe^t for2 sinne, because God permitteth such things to be done, either to correct some euill, or to3 trie our faith. Lastly, to perswade the partie to waite for the time of deliuerance, though4 it were long before it came: because hauing repented for sinne, yet the Lord will defe^e health to make a further triall of vs: whether we will still trust in his helpe, or flie to vnlawfull meanes.
2 One asking what he thought of Fayries: he answered, he thought they were spirits: but he distinguished betweene them and other spirits, as commonly men distinguish betweene Not for that they are good or lawfull, but of blind people so called and reputed. good witches and bad witches.


Worship of God.
1 IT is good to take vp the oportunitie of the morning for the worship of God. For first, who so will see the image of his heart, he shall by obseruing his first thoughts in theThe morning how fit for Gods worship. 1 morning come to some light of it. Againe, of all times it is most fit to doe any thing in,2 and we, by reason of the alacritie which commeth vpon vs after our rest, are most fit to do any thing in it. Besides, if we be seriously minded on good things in the morning, other vile thoughts shall the more feeb^y fasten on vs all the day after. And againe, delay the3 morning, with suffering worldly thoughts to seaze on vs, and our minde will be so forestalled4 with them, that we cannot easily and roundly gather vp our affections afterwards to Gods worship. For this is a sure note, that he which consecrateth in truth the first fruitsNote. of the day to the Lord, and shu^teth vp the day with sacrificing to him; if he haue any sin falling on him in the day time, he is checked, either with his first morning sacrifice, because he hath not done as he prayed, and promised vnto the Lord: or he is controuled by the

euening and latter sacrifice, in that a feare and shame of his sinne, makes him appalled to come into the presence of God.


World.
1 VVHen two gentlemen ride a hunting, it is hard to discerne each others hounds,Simile. because they be mingled together, which afterward is more easily done when the hunters are seuered: Euen so, so long as Gods children and worldlings walke as it were together, it is hard to distinguish betweene the heires of the one and of the other: but when they are seuered by persecution, it will surely be seene who be the children of God, and who be the heires ^f the world.


Word preached.
1 MAny come to prayer, and of custome resort to the Sacraments, who either do not1 at all heare the word preached; or else they heare at their leisure; or else they do2 it bu^ in ceremonie without vnderstanding; or if they doe vnderstand it, they doe not3 practise it; or if they practise it, it is done coldly, and not in power, and yet their owne4 practise in some things is somewhat strange. They will graunt that to come to the Sacrament5 requireth a more solemne preparation: and yet they dare boldly aduenture onPreperation to the word and Sacraments. prayer and on hearing of the word, without any preparation at all. But certainly as the abuse of the Sacrament bringeth iudgement; so the abuse of prayer and the word wil procure it: for as the prayer of faith is a sweet oblation to the Lord; so the prayer of the vnbeleeuer is an abomination to the Lord. We must not onely bring the eare of vnderstanding, but we must also bring the eare of remembrance, and of practise, and beware that the word by little and little waxe not lesse pretious vnto vs, as honey to the mouth that is satisfied.Of profiting in holy exercises. And this is sure, when and how much the word preached doth preuaile, so much our prayers and sacrifices do preuaile: looke how much the word preached doth profit, so much doe we profit in prayer, and in the Sacraments. And whensoeuer our delights in the word waxe faint, our prayers and all good exercises are like shortly to decay. Prayer bringeth aAll our power in prayer commeth from the word. feeling, and the Sacraments a more confirming of that which we haue in the word. We must beware therefore that we be not too quiet in sinne, that we please not our selues in a generall good, and in a perswasion we haue heard enough, but still let vs labour for the word: for I dare say that all our power in prayer commeth from the word, euen as the life that is in a tree is inuisible, and yet by the fruites comming out in due season is discernedSimile. of all: and as the life of a childe is a thing not seene, but by mouing, going and feeling isSimile. easily perceiued; so the life of faith is a thing very secret, and yet by the effects of it at one time or other is discerned of good men. There may seeme to be workes, and yet not faith; and there may be faith, and yet not workes by and by following. Many men thinke the word now preached not to be the right word, because few men are brought to the obedience of God by so long preaching of it. But we must rather reason the contrarie: this is a sure note it is the true word, because it is so much refused, and men are made the worse by abusing the word: which as it would make them better, and doth make better all that obey; so it maketh worse all that doe not receiue it in loue, that they may be saued* 2. Thess. 2. 11.




AN OTHER ADDITION OF AN HVNDRED GRAVE COVNSELS OR DIVINE APHORISMES.
IF you desire to heare the word with profit, obserue these things: before you goe to the Church, humble your selfeHearing the word profitablie. in prayer to God, that he may prepare your vnderstanding, affection, and memorie to receiue: and that the Preacher may speake to your conscience: after in hearing with1 some short prayer, applie the seuerall threatnings, promises,2 and instructions to your owne estate: when you are3 come home from hearing, change all that you remember4 into prayer, and desire God that you may remember it5 most, when you should practise it: and vse to teach others,6 and to conferre of the things remembred: it is a good way7 8 to remember a thing, diligently, to remember the reason of it.
2 The cause why our meditations and prayers are no stronger in the night, is becauseMeditation and Prayer. we ioyne not with meditation the examination of our hearts vpon our beds: which if we did in some truth, it would keep vs from drowsinesse, and want of reuerence in our prayers, as well as worldly men are kept waking by thinking of worldly matters. Here we are taught by Dauids example, when we want the more solemne and glorious meanes in dignitie, to make a supplie by often and sincere vsing of such priuate meanes as we can.
3 It is better to offer a voluntarie and free sacrifice in respect of Gods mercie, as doeOur obedience must be free, not constrained. the Angels, than a violent and constrained obedience, as doe the Diuels And this dare^ say, that though the fearefull pronouncing of the curse, the wrath, the iudgement of God be fearefull in the law, yet the denouncing of our separation from Gods kingdome, of the gnawing worme, of the second death, is farre more fearefull in the Gospell, which by how much it is the more proper seate and treasurie of Gods mercies, so when thundrings and lightnings doe proceede from thence, they are the more piercing.
4 Two notes to discerne good Christians from hypocrites. First, whether they complaineTriall of Hypocrites. of their owne wants and corruptions. Secondly, whether they speake with griefe and compassion of the infirmities of others.
5 To one that seemed scrupulous in wearing the Surplice and Cap, and notwithstandingCeremonies. stood in neede of greater things; he said: As I will not for all the world aduise you ^o weare them; so I would counsell you to be well grounded ere you leaue them, least you shaking them off, ^ather of light affection than of sound iudgement, afterward take them againe to your great shame and the offence of others.
6 The greater gifts we haue, the flesh is the prouder, and Sathan the readier to assaultPride. vs.
7 The Church is to feare and expect some notable affliction, when long ease and prosperitieChurch. haue bred either superstition or prophanenesse.
8 Thinke not with thy selfe, if I were in such a place, if I were in such a calling, or if itAgainst de^^^^s of repentance. were such a time, if I had obtained such a thing, or if such a trouble were past, then I would serue God, then I would take another course: though the time were changed, and

these things changed, yet if thy minde were not chaunged, thou wouldest be of the same opinion still; and though these lets were r^moued, yet the diuell would put more great impediments into thy minde to hinder thee still, but redeeme the time present, doe good while thou mayest: serue God to day, for who knowes whether thou shalt liue till to morrow. God hath left to man the time past to repent of it, and the time present toRepentance. consider of it, but the time to come hee hath wholly taken to himselfe, to dispose of it. Thou maist imagine the time to come; but if thou hast beene deceiued in the time past, art deceiued of the time present, much more thou shalt be deceiued of the time to come. Say not then I will doe such a thing, and such a thing hereafter; doe something now; for art thou a Papist? Hast thou free will? If thou finde thy selfe vnfit now, thou shalt find thy selfe more vnfit hereafter: if there be manie occasions to hinder thee now, there will bee moe occasions to hinder thee hereafter.
9 The persons afflicted are either the reprobate, or Gods elect, the children of wrath,Afflictions of the reprobate or the children of God. The afflictions of the reprobate are the punishments of their sinnes: here they suffer some, in hell they shall suffer all torments; here for a time, there for euer; here a little, there vnmeasurable. Gods children are either his children onely by election, and not by effectuall vocation: or else such as are called in Christ. The affliction of Gods children not effectually called, are the punishments of sinne: God will haueAfflictions of the elect, before grace, and in grace. them vnder the rigor of his iustice, to make them meet to receiue the grace of his mercy. Gods children not onely by election, but also by effectuall vocation, are of two sorts: they are either such as are not sufficiently called, which are more out of Christ then in Christ, or else they are sufficiently called, in whome Christ liueth.
Againe, those that are not sufficiently in Christ, which are more carnall than spirituall,Note. are of two sorts, they are either babes in Christ, in whome there hath bene no more working of the spirit; or such as haue had a greater worke of God in them, in whom the spirit is quenched: those that are but babes in Christ, and continuing babes still, in whom there is but a little worke of God, and great abundance of flesh, their afflictions are the punishments of sinne: because they will not bee gouerned by the rule of Gods spirite, God willHeb. 3. 13. haue them ruled by the rodde of affliction; and they in whom the spirit of God is decayed through the deceitfulnes of sinne, their afflictions also are the punishme^ts of their sinnes, for because they refused the gratious gouernme^t of Gods mercie in the Gospell, therfore hee bringeth them backe to the rigorous gouernment of his iustice in the law, till Christ be formed anew in them againe. Those onely which are sufficiently called, in whome Christ isA sweete consolation. thus formed, their afflictions are no punishments of sinne: but Christ suffers with them when they are medicines against sinne, much more when they are trialls of Faith, and most of all when they are for well doing: but all the former suffered themselues, Christ suffered not with them, because they suffered for sinne.
10 Rebecca wished to haue children, but when they stroue in her wombe, then sheeRegeneration and repe^tance, painfull, but very gainfull. brast forth into words of impatiencie: so God giueth to some a desire to be borne againe, who when their conception is so painfull, and when the spirit and the flesh striue together, they would sometime be content to be in the olde estate againe.
11 When Moses came downe from the Mount, the skinne of his face did shine, but onlyAgainst spirituall pride. the people did see it, hee did not perceiue it: So should our righteousnes shine in the eyes of others, not in our owne.Simile.
12 As a Fountaine and all the water that springs from it haue the same qualitie: so theThe fountain of the heart. heart, and the thoughts, words, and deeds are all of the same nature: if one be filthy all be filthie, and purge one, and purge all.Simile.
13 God calleth his children out of this world in the fittest time, when though theyDeath. liued longer, yet they would be no better.
14 If wee loue not Christ more then his benefites, euen than our owne saluation, weeTo loue Christ more then his benefites. are not worthie of him. Phillip saith, Iohn 14. 8. If wee may see the Father it is sufficient: And Iacob said, it is sufficient for mee that Ioseph is aliue, hee cared not for his benefites: And Dauid saith (as if hee should say no more) one thing haue I desired, to dwell in the house of the Lord.
15 Wee must at all times ^eare the Worde, and vse ^^^ the meanes o^ our (...),Hearing of the word. though wee feele our selues most vnwilling thereunto. For we know not when God will blesse it, or any of them to vs. Yea it may be, that when we do but once a^^^^t our selues from the hearing thereof, such things may be then spoken of, as may most serue for our soules health.
16 Albeit Marthaes part be the worst, because it continueth not, yet the world hatethThe loue of the world. Ma^ies part, which is the best, and desireth ^uer to chuse with Martha.
17 Looke how much we would come to Christ; so much we must come to the WordWord and Sacraments. and Sacraments.
18 If wee rest too much in the outward action of the Word, and not in the inward affectionHearing the Word. of the heart; we shall be puffed vp, and become prophane.
19 Many Protestants can say, it is God that worketh the will and the deede, but in aCarnall Protestants. conceiued imagination, not from a perswaded minde, and experienced con^c^e^ce: for if they were perswaded hereof, it would greatly humble them, and make them to finish their course with reuerence and feare.
20 Looke what a man loueth, hee wisheth the good thereof.Loue.
21 Euery one is eaten vp with the zeale of one thing or oth^r.Zeale.
22 No man can purchase to himsel^e the glorious ^^^^^, that he loueth God, except heeTriall of our loue to God. hath a through hatred and detestation of that which ^^d hateth.
23 Then shall wee vnfainedly praise GOD for our ^^^^ creation, and his Fatherly prouidenceRegeneration watching ouer vs; when wee are created a new by the Spirit of God, and feele our Redemption in Christ.
24 As farre as the Spirit is aboue the flesh, God aboue men, Heauen aboue the earth,Regeneration Eternitie aboue frailtie; so farre is the new creation aboue the olde: for the one is but of mortall and corrupt seede that shall per^^h: but the other is of immortall seede, and from Heauen, a great worke of God which shall abide for euer.
25 In temporall things our ioy is greater then the cause: in spirituall things, the causeIoy. is greater than the ioy.
26 If this be our chiefest felicitie to be Gods people, it hath also the chiefest challengeIoy. to our ioy.
27 They that be in the hell of things fleshly, ca^not see the heauens of things spirituall.Loue of the world.
28 Spirituall thinges are tedious, because sense, reason, and nature, cannot taste of such ioyes.Ioy.
29 Gods children being in the world, though not of the world, but sauouring of theTrue ioyes. things of the world, must be prouoked to this sound ioy; and be led from the crackling ioyes which flame vp for a little, and make a sudden noise, but neuer truely heate or comfort the heart, but in death and affliction doe mu^h shame and feare vs.
30 To bee perswaded of Gods presence in our thoughts, words, and labours, is a pureGods presence. rule of Christianitie. In euery place we are before God, but more specially in priuate prayer, and most of all in publike prayer.
31 As there is no sinne so great, but with repentance is pardonable; so there is no sinneRepentance. so little, but without repentance is damnable.
32 The offence of sinne is not so great as the de^ence of sinne.Sinne.
33 One teare of repentance is better then a thousand sack-clothes: first, our sorrowRepentance. must bee spirituall, then continuall; because our sinne breedeth at the heart, and buddeth foorth daily. There is no greater miserie, than to bee without miserie; nor greater sorrow, then to be without sorrow.
34 As the childe breaking one rodde, and burning it, prouoketh his father to prepareAffliction. a sharper: so a man vnpatiently wrestling with one affliction sent from God, and escaping it, prouoketh the Lord in greater displeasure to send a sharper scourge.
35 The more godly a man is, and the more the graces and blessings of God are vponPrayer. him, the more need he hath to pray, because Sathan is busiest against him, and because he is readyest to be puffed vp with a conceited holinesse.
36 Where the Scripture hath not a mouth, we ought not to haue eares.Word.
37 O^ that one would doe that thing, the remembrance whereof ^o long after shouldTo respect future ioyes and griefes. bring comfort: oh that one should doe that thing, the re^e^ora^ce whereof so long after sh(...)g griefe: and yet we so little esteem^ ^ho^e ^^^^gs, which might after comfort vs, and so little feare those things which migh^ aft^r grieue vs.
38 The ^^^^s is often taken for the morall law of God: his precepts for the CeremoniallSee Psal. 119. Law: his Iudgements or Righteousnesse, for the ^a^cti^us of the Lawe, whereby the Lorde ^^^ accomplisheth his promises for his Children, or execut^th his wrath vpon his ^^^m^es.
39 A though the Lord hath promised a speciall blessing to the publike ministery of hisMinisterie. word, yet we must not t^e his wisedome to any ordinary mea^es, but if any at any time, shall haue more ^ffectuall feelings by priuate conference, let him not neglect the publike reading, but with all holy and humble thankfulnes, yeeld this soueraigntie to the Lord, that he is to dispose his gifts, to whom, by whom, where, and when it pleaset^ him.
40 We are neuer the further from temptation for misliking it, but the neerer, vnlesseTemptation as in ^udgement we mislike it, so in affection we humble our selues in feare and prayer, as knowing that in time it may inuade vs.
41 Though o^ten we speake of things lawfull, yet we want wisedome in examining theConference. ti^^^ pl^^e, ^^^ persons, when, where, and with whom wee talke; and so Sathan laboureth to m^ke vs sil^nt, when wee might speake to Gods glorie. For the auoyding of this temp^ation wee must speake when GOD giueth vs occasion, beeing thankfull for the good mo^io^s of Gods spirite; and humbled for our weakenesse, wherby both our speeches are most s^ained, and we faile in many circumstances. Then doing it in singlenes of hear^, onely for the loue of Gods word, and of his glorie, let vs wholly commit the succ^ss^ (wh^^h depends not on vs, though wee obserue all circumstances,) to the blessing of God in I^sus Christ.
42 In the regeneration and dying of sinne, we come as it were to the best head, and triallRegeneration of our hearts, when wee come to those sinnes, wherein either nature or custome doth breede delight.
43 The meditation of death doth so far moue vs from suffering our delights to dwellMeditation of Death. on earthly things, as reason disswadeth vs from making any cost about a tabernacle, where we know we shall dwell but a while.
44 Our corruption is like to the wantonnesse of children, who will doe either as theyObedience. list or ^l^^ leaue all vndone.
45 W^en we thinke that our chiefest care is to glorifie God, wee indeed doe seeke ourVaine-glory. owne glorie.
46 It is a gracious thing to vse all our members to Gods worship; for that will comfortGods worship our co^science, when we cannot vse them.
47 If we ^^ notorious in sinne, we shall be notorious in an euill name: Many would beA good name lo^h to be ^^^^ed wicked, who can be contented to be wicked: but Gods children had rather be good then accounted good; as the couetous man, etc.
48 Ma^ie oft times desire that, which when they haue gotten their conscience is afraidDesires. to vse.
49 Lord giue me thy grace to remember the bead-row of my sinnes to humble me inPrayer. prayer: Lord teach me the catalogue of thy mercies, truely to make me thankfull.
50 As God doth rather oftentimes by heaping his benefites, then powring his plaguesOffences. vpon vs shew vs our sinnes: so we must rather by courteous dealing then seuere handling, shew others how they haue offended vs.
51 Ordinarily when God most comforteth, he most humbleth before.Humiliation.
52 If God watch ouer vs when we sleepe in vnbeliefe, much more he will doe it whenProuidence. we wake in faith.
53 The sinne of the master of a familie, bringeth sinne ouer the whole familie, as weeFamilie. see in Ab^melech.
54 Wee can marke what men are spared, and so flatter our selues: but we marke notRepentance. how they repent, least we should disquiet our selues.
55 We must not denie mercie to others, least God denie mercie to vs.
56 Many meddle and stirre much about a new Church gouernment, which are senslesMercie. and barren in the doctrine of new birth: but ala^, what though a man know many things,Regeneration and yet know not himselfe to be a new creature in Iesus Christ? It is often the policie of Sathan to make vs trauell in some good thing to come, when more fitly wee might be occupied in good things present.
57 As the creatures were made for man, so were they punished for man.Creatures.
58 If mercie must pleade for mercie: Ma^th: 5 then mercie cannot pleade for merit,Merit.
59 It is a mercie to let vs see that by Temptation, which wee might feele by wofullTemptation. action.
60 If wee be tempted, let vs first examine it by prayer, whether it be contrarie to theTemptation. word: if it be a sinne, then it bringeth the curse; if it bring a curse, then must we tremble: if wee tremble not, let vs suspect that our nature liketh the temptation, and let vs applie prayer; if wee tremble in truth, we will neuer doe the thing whereunto we are tempted.
61 The D^uell when he cannot at the first corrupt the action, he will begin to corruptSathanicall suggestions. the iudgement and the affection.
62 When wee must of necessitie vse inferiour things, wee must vse them as readie toM^anes. want them.
63 As the hiding of our sinne with Adam, hindreth mercie: so to confesse our sinneConsession. greater then it is with C^ine, displeaseth God highly.
64 Manie will seeke the kingdome of heauen, but not the righteousnes thereof.Hypocrisie.
65 A good thing, if it bee let alone, it will decay: but if an euill thing be let alone, itGood things. will increase.
66 The Prophets hauing regard, not what ought to be first in knowledge, but first inProphets. practise, respected not the perfection of order, but the corruption of our nature.
67 Familiaritie with sinners bringeth the punishment of ^^ne. If the wicked, that areFamiliarity. without the tuition of God, and stand onely vpon his ^^^^ (...), and euery minute of an houre lye open to Gods curse and vengeance, if they bee our companions, then when they are punished, doubtles wee shall not escape.
68 Sinne may easily be conquered of vs when it is young; wee may easily be conqueredSinne. of it when it is olde.
69 Wee must not so much reioyce for that we haue done, as we must be carefull whatPerseuerance. to doe hereafter: For man^e are called but few are chosen; many begin gloriously, which ende ignomi^iously.
70 When wee deferre to haue that in affection which we haue in iudgement, it is theAffection. iust iudgement of God to depriue ^^ ^^ that which we had in iudgement.
71 When wee haue oftentimes q^^ked at a sinne; and afterward, although wee like itRepentance. not, yet if we mislike it not with as great indignation as we were woont to do, but by little and little wee can well away with it; it is to be feared that by degrees wee will fall to that sinne ourselues.
72 We must be proud against Sathan in Christ, and humble to all men in Christ.
73 The neerer Heresie commeth to the likenesse of the Trueth, the more daungerousHumilitie. it is.Heresie.
74 Hee that will dissemble with God in his life, will dissemble with him in his death.
75 Many will take vp the sword to defend Christs cause with Peter, who with Peter willRepentance. shrinke when persecution commeth.Persecution.
76 Wee shall sometime feele by experience a terror suddenly come vpon vs when we are alone, or vehemently to strike vs in the night, which is sent to humble vs, the PhysitionSudden terrors of mind. will say it is a melancholy passion: but it is the power of Gods presence, preparing vs to prayer, or some such seruice of God: which when we feele, if wee fall downe before God in prayer, we shall finde an vnspeakable ioy following it: but if we cherish it with euill surmises, it will leade vs to further inconueniences.
77 When we haue greatest cause of ioy for doing some good; then it is a good thingVnthankfulnes. most to feare our vnthankfulnes, and our selfe-loue, and our secure vnkindnes.
78 When Sathan cannot get vs to grosse sinnes, he will ^ssaile vs with spirituall temptations.Temptations.
79 Nothing in the world will so much feare and shame vs, as God in his mercies powredHumilitie. vpon vs: which meditation in receiuing graces from God, will humble vs from pride in them, and keepe vs in feare; which be the waies to obtaine new mercies.
80 We must beware of smoothering the watch word of our conscience, when we areConscience. bent to sinne. Euery man in his owne conscience is forewarned of sinne, though the Lord speake not to him from heauen, as he did to Cain.
81 As a man being outlawed, may take his pleasure for a while: but whensoeuer, orSecuritie. wheresoeuer he may be taken, he must yeeld to that punishment, which by verdict is appoynted: so the wicked, on whom sentence of damnation is already passed, may for a while shake off their paines with vaine pleasures, but afterward they shall be arrested, and carried violently to the place of wofull execution. But for the godly, (which haue the assurance of their inheritance sealed vp in their consciences) though they shall be warned in the day of the resurrection, to make their open appearance; yet as honest men of the countrie shall stand before the Iudge, not as fellonious offenders.
82 We must first make men by a feeling of sinne to seeke Christ, by an holy faith toFeeling. find Christ, and then by newnes of life to dwell with Christ.
83 Bal^am prayed that he might die the death of the righteous: but let vs pray thatDeath. we may liue the life of the righteous, for he liued not the life of the righteous, and therefore he could not die the death of the righteous: and if we liue the life of the righteous, we shall be sure to die the death of the righteous.
84 It is a great token of regeneration, if we doe not onely sorrow for great sinnes, andRegeneration. sigh for small offences, but mourne for particular wants of good actions, or in good actions for w^nt of good affections.
85 There is small hope of him which cannot discerne in himselfe the life of the spirit,Regeneration. and the life of the flesh, and it is to be doubted that he is yet vnregenerate.
86 When men being young are too much giuen to carnall pleasures, they being oldYouth. are too much giuen to worldly profit.
87 As we haue taken a vaine delight in the vaine course of this life: so we must sighYouth. and pray to be delighted spiritually in spirituall things.
88 Adam should haue been no worse for his temptation, no more than Christ was; butTemptation. that the one yeelded, the other did not.
89 If the blood of Christ hath washed vs from the guiltines of sinne; then the holySanctification. Ghost hath purged vs from the filthines of sinne.
90 When our sinne hath lesse liking in vs, then there is hope that it will decay in vs:Repentance. especially if we sorrow for it when we cannot fully forsake it, and labour to forsake it because it is sinne.
91 In true mortification we must haue the first motions of sinne, and condemne themMortification. as accessaries to sinne in conspiring the death of our soules.
92 Hypocrisie is seene, when sinne lyeth most dead vnder a cloake, and most liuethHypocrisie. vnder a closet; wherewith God is so displeased, that when we make no conscience of sinne in close places, our priuie sinnes shall breake forth into open places.
93 Particular infirmities doe not hinder the preparation of our hearts for the Lord, ifInfirmities. we haue a true loue of his word, as had Iehosaphat.
94 Two things are necessarie to espouse vs to Christ: the one to vse the pure meanes,Our spiritual vinion with Christ. the other to vse those meanes with a pure heart.
95 If we play with our owne affections, sinne in the end, from sport, will spurre vs to confusion. For though we be twice or thrice spared, yet we must know that the Lord willAffections. recompence his long tarrying with wrath.
96 Through our corruption we profit more by the doctrine of a man, if we thinke heAdmonition. be our enemie, than if we thinke him to be our friend: for if he be our friend, we let it passe as not spoken to vs, though the matter neuer so much concerne vs: if our enemie, if it neuer so little touch vs, we thinke it to be spoken against vs.
97 Walking spirits are vndoubtedly not the soules departed, but the euill spirits of theSpirits. ayre.
98 It is a great mercie of God to haue a large affection of weldoing, when we haueGoodworks. good occasion thereof: for God neuer ceaseth in offering occasions, but we often cease in hauing affections.
99 Obedience is a chaine to tye vp all the creatures of God from our hurt, and as aObedience. thing to muzzle their mouthes that they cannot bite vs. Againe, disobedience breaketh and openeth the mouthes of all things to our destruction.
100 If we haue not the fauour of men, it is either for the triall of our faith, or for wantFauour. of dutie vnto them that are displeased with vs, or because we sought to please them by displeasing of God, or because we haue not prayed for them; or haue offended God, for which he causeth men to be offended with vs.
1 Because we doe not to men the good we should doe, God often suffereth them to reportReport. of vs the euill they should not.
2 Those temptations are most dangerous which haue most holy ends.Temptation.
3 When a man is most merrie, he is neerest danger.Mirth.
4 It is the easiest thing in the world to deceiue a good man.Deceit.
5 God hath two hands; in the one he holdeth a hammer to breake the proud in peeces,Gods hand. and to bray them to powder; in the other hand he hath a horne, to powre Gods blessings vpon the humble, 1. Pet. 5. 5.
6 If a man should be stinted to one meale a weeke, he would haue a pined body at theWord. weekes end: euen so, if our soules be but fed with the word once a weeke, they would be as hunger-starued, if we could see it.
7 You are in earth to follow your calling, you are not yet in heauen. Adam when heVocation. was most holy by creation, and free from euery iot of sinne and corruption, did walke in his calling appointed of God: much more then are we comfortably to follow the Lord his ordinance; seeing these outward things did not come in with sinne, but were ordained before sinne.
8 Whatsoeuer is vpon you, it is from the Lord: and whatsoeuer is from the Lord, toAffliction. you, it is in mercie: and whatsoeuer comes in mercie, ought not to be grieuous vnto you. What losse is it, when the losing of earthly things, is the gaining of spiritual things? What if your body be decayed, your soule being renued? Haue you had comfort in your body; but as it is the temple of the holy Ghost, the Lord preparing it for his Spirit, why are you grieued? Your body is the Lords, and the Lords louing hand is vpon your body; all shall be for your good, if you make your vse of all.
9 In our greatest earnestnes we should be most iealous ouer our owne hearts, and thenZeale. especially examine our affections. When we cannot gage the depth of our hearts, we should impute it to want of prayer, and the not trauelling with our hearts how to doe it in wisedome.
10 God by his graces and benefits marketh vs, and prepareth vs for some temptationTemptation. to come: for he putteth not on the armour, but he will also prouide for vs the battell.
11 Not the finding of a want onely, but the seeking of a remedie to supplie the want, isGodlinesse. a token of a godly minde.
12 That God that drew light out of darknes, doth often draw goodnes out of our corruption.Grace.
13 The Lord will rather looke vpon his old graces which we haue receiued, than onMercie. the new sinnes which we haue committed.



A THIRD ADDITION OF GRAVE COVNSELS, AND DIVINE DIRECTIONS, FOR THE ATTAINING AND RETAINING OF FAITH, AND a good Conscience.
EVen as a man swimming in deepe water^ is not in daunger of drowning, so long as his head still keepeth aboue the water: So thoughSimile. wee swimme in deepe and dangerous waters of our accusing consciences,The securitie of the faithfull wandring through all the tribulations of this life. yet wee are sure and secure, that wee shall not finally bee ouerthrowne, because our Head still remaineth aboue all in heauen; which Head is CHRIST, who vndoubtedly can no more condemne, forsake, denie, and separate himselfe from vs, then hee that was condemned for vs, can condemne vs; then the aduocate can forsake his Client; then the Prince can denie the Subiect; then the head can bee separated from his members.
So that when wee dare not present our prayers in our persons, wee must present them to Christ, and Christ will present them to his Father, whereby our prayers that are vnworthyHebr. 12. 15. to appeare by reason of our corruption, are most worthie because of Christ his intercession; for whose sake the Lord turneth his wrath from poore sinners ^ccused by Sathan. For Christ is now our gouernour, not as hee is God alone, for so hath hee alwayes beene, but as Mediator, that is, as God and man, which hee shall be, vntill hee hauing deliuered vp the kingdome to God the Father, shall cease from his Mediatorship, and shall bee all in all.
2 There is a generall faith, and a particular faith, a generall faith assuring vs, that God is such a one as his word prescribeth, a particular faith applying things to our selues. This particular faith is either actiue or passiue: actiue, when we beleeue, that if we keepe the law we are saued; and this faith was in Adam, and is in the diuels, and yet neither of them hauing the iustifying faith. For Adam had it, when the passiue or iustifying faith needed not; the diuels haue it, who know, that if they could fulfill the law they should be saued: but they doe not beleeue it to be fulfilled of any other for them. The passiue faith, which is onely of the Gospell, whereby we are staied in the obedience of Christ imputed vnto vs, is the true iustifying faith, and onely proper to God his children. The actiue faith, is either of the precepts, or of the iudgements of God: of the iudgements of God, I say, because one may beleeue the precepts, and yet not beleeue the other. Eua at the first fall beleeued the commaundement of God to be good, for she could confirme it with a strong reason, but she halted in beleeuing the threatning of God, and extenuated it with a peraduenture.Custome. Eye.
3 A strong custome in euill things is as a second nature.
4 The eye is the best window for Sathan.A co^parison betweene the children of light and darknes.
5 As it is true, that the children of darkenes are wiser in their generation, than the children of light, so it is as true, that the children of light in their light, are better than the children of darkenes.
6 If a man rightly obserueth the course of corruptions in others, he may haue an easie character of corruptions in himselfe, or if he take a godly view of the graces of God inHow to examine our selues. himselfe, he shall haue a more speedie sight of the graces of God in another: againe, if we

make an Anatomie or our owne ^^ir^^ties, wee shall the better discerne the veines and cond^ites of sinne mothers; or if we reuerently obserue the graces of God in another, heNote well. shall see the image of that which is in himselfe. Howbeit, because the holy Ghost worketh by many meanes* and the diuell hath many shifts, and therewithall our discerning of good things is dimme, and our iudgement of sinne is corrupt, we must not bee too strict herein. Onely we may with safety make this vse, that we make others to vs, and our selues to others, as looking glasses ^ow good.
7 Wee must in reading the Iudgements of God obserue this rule, that ruinae praecedentiumIudgements. must be pr^m^^^tio sequentium.
If any man will trie conclusions against God his conclusion, he shall proue nothing in the end, but himselfe to be a ^oole; and if he faile in his triall, by how much he might the more be before admonished, by so much he is the more without excuse.
8 There are manie that f^are, Psal: 14. when no cause of feare is: but there are more reioyce, where no cause of ioy is.Feare and ioy.
If a man walke in the coole of the wood and be refreshed, it is nothing: but, if a man walke, as did the three children, in the fiery furnace, and be refreshed, that is a cooling indeede:Ioy in afflictions. So, to be refreshed with ordinarie meanes of wine, oyle, wheate, fruits, or whatsoeuer, is a small thing: but in prison, persecution, and trouble, to finde comfortable refreshing, is a thing both worthy to be made of and marue^led ^t.
9 The minde being perpetually in some action, may well be compared to a Mill, continually grinding out either good or euill.The minde.
10 It is the mercie of God, and wisedome of the holie Ghost, euen in things of their owne nature most lawfull and good, to take order with vs for the pure vsing of them, andThe pure vse of all blessings. of euery motion in them, that so, vnlesse wee will obstinately, wee should not be guiltie of the abuse of them.
11 Manie had rather part from all fauour both of God and man, than that they would lose the grace of some wi^tie speech, which they haue deuised; so great a delight theyFoolish iesting. conceiue in it. But as we would not haue God to murther all ioy, so God would not haue vs to murther all griefes; but that the remembrance of our bodies turned to moules, and of soules, called to the booke, should correct our vnruly hearts, remembring in our deepest ioyes the lamentable cries of Syon, and accompting our delight to be but as the ruines of Babell.
12 Oh, that men would feare and follow the Lorde! Well, follow they must one way or other: If wee will not follow the shepheard to the folde, we must follow the butcher to the shambles: if we chuse rather to goe to the shambles then to the fold, we are sheepe indeede, and worse then sheepe too. But men haue gotten an old distinction, when they areLate repentance. not able to turne their sicke bones on their beds, they then will bring a dish of sinnes and dryed skinnes to the Lorde: but how vnacceptable a sacrifice such refuses are, Malachit doth tell them, and they shall one day trie it.
13 If yee aske, whether a man may not lawfully desire to be in the Ministerie or no: I answere, that in the Ministery are two things, a worke and a worship; a dutie and a dignitie:Ministerie. the worke or dutie to the glorie of God and good of his Church a man may desire: but the worship and dignitie to serue our owne loose mindes is not to be desired.
14 It is the wisedome of God in his holie word, not onely to instruct vs in things concerning our saluation, but also to teach vs in things of this life. For although all things beThe right vse of the creatures. good in the ordinance of God, yet they are not good to vs, vnlesse by knowledge and faith we be able to vse them according to the ordinance of God, with prayer and thanksgiuing. And as it is not sufficient to be a good man onely, but a good man must vse good things: So it is not enough to vse good things alone, but he that must vse them must see himselfeTit. 1. 15. Rom. 4. to be a good man; that is, to haue his heart clensed by faith and by prayer, whereby he is assured that he hath fetched the interest from Christ, who hath and giueth title to all, being himselfe the heire of the world.
15 When we examine our selues, we are to sit in iudgement on our selues, and to keepeExaminatio^. a solemne court in our owne consciences, to su^uay our memorie, our wit, our senses, our

members, and to see how we haue vsed them: but yet so, as, least we should be too fa^ourable to our selues, either in not espying out our sinnes, or in not condemning our sinnes, still we remember to make the law the Iudge, but Christ the answerer of t^e Iudge.
16 If God his children are readie to slip in a moment, how much more dangerous isSinners. the estate of the wicked, who are willing to fall continually?
17 It is wonderfull to see a poore sinner readie to swound and fall dead almost at euery little sinne, when nothing in the world doth feare him or driue him to this feare; and yet when aduersitie, strange iudgements of God, persecution and death come, to be exceedingThe ^^^re of the godly and godlesse how they differ. patient and comfortable, couragious and valiant: and againe, it is straunge to see others, who maruell that men will suffer themselues to be feared with sinne, and aske, what men meane to stand trembling at the word; yet let sicknes come, or if the hand of God be vpon them, or let death come towards the^, they quaile at the name of sicknes, hell, or death, and either they proue very senselesse blocks, or else they be in a most desperate estate Yea, if God begin to reckon with them, euery stirring of a mouse, shaking of a leafe, mouing of a shadow, euery noise of the eare, euery countenance of a godly man, euery chirping of a bird, or drawing neere of the least and weakest creature towards them, appalles their courage, and makes them most fearefull cowards. They most feare when God his iudgements are executed, which feare least when they are threatned, and they feare least when God his iudgements are accomplished, which tremble most when his wrath is denounced. Wherefore as we most long for courage and most lothe cowardlines, when the euill day approcheth; so let vs labour for a good conscience, which breedeth t^ue boldnes, and flie far from sinne, which bringeth a spirit of feare on vs. And surely experimentall wisdome may teach vs, that it is better to feare the euill to come, when onely feare and no euill is vpon vs, than to feare then, when besides the feare the affliction itselfe so sorely presseth vs, that we haue no libertie or leaue to breathe for any comforts, or to hope for any deliuerance.
18 We are wont to ascribe the afflictions of the Church or Common-wealth, the defectThe sins of the people moue God to punish them with euill gouernours, etc. of right discipline and gouernment to the sinnes of the Magistrates, when rather, if we consider things with a single eye, our owne sinnes haue begot such fruites. For that God, who rather loueth many than one, that God, who for tenne good men would haue spared whole Sodom, who rather taketh away Saul a sinful gouernour, than punisheth his louing Israel being humbled subiects, knoweth rather to take away the King, if the subiects be good, than he desireth to alter the whole estate for the sin of one, vnlesse it be when both Prince and people agree together in sin. That God, which euen in the time of the Church remaining but in a few families would rebuke Kings, as Phara^h, and Abimelech, that they should doe his Prophets, Abraham, and Isaac no harme: ^oubtlesse the sinnes of the people doe breede defects of well doing in Princes. When Israel began to sinne, the Lord withdrawing his grace from Dauid, left him to the numbring of his people. The Altars were not taken away, and why, in the time of Iosiah? The holy Ghost saith, the people had not prepared their hearts to walke with the Lord their God.
19 It is farre otherwise in our Christian profession, than in the profession of other Arts. Physitians loue to haue some secret experiments, wherein they haue a singularitie, andHow Christians should communicate good things. which in their life they will communicate to none. Lawyers haue some points, which they will not make common, but keepe for present and priuate gaine. But this is rather a note of pride and of a conceited minde in heauenly things, than of godlinesse. For as true godlinesse forewarneth others of that sinne, the sting, torment, and filthinesse whereof we haue found; so it traineth vp others to that fruit of holinesse, whose beautie, glorie and excellencie we haue both tasted and proued.
20 It euer hath beene and is, that prayer, or comming to the diuine Seruice, as they call it, and resorting to the Sacraments haue beene more accompted of, than the word, and hearing of it preached. Many of superstition may thus come to prayer, and of custome resort to the Sacrament, who either doe not at all heare the word, or else they heare it at their leisure, or else they doe it but in ceremonie without vnderstanding; or if they vnderstand it,Preparation to the hearing of the word. they doe not practise it; or if they practise it, it is done coldly and not in power. And yet their owne practise in some things, is somewhat strange: they will graunt, that to come to

the Sacrament requireth a mo^e solemne preparation, and yet they dare bol^ly venture on prayer and on the hearing of the word oftentimes without any preparation at all. But certainly as the abuse of the Sacrament bringeth iudgement, so the abuse of prayer and of the word will procure it. For as the prayer of faith is a sweet oblation to the Lord, so the prayer of the vnbeleeuer is an abomination to the Lord. We must not only bring the eare of vnderstanding, but we must also bring the eare of remembrance, and of practise, and beware that by little and little the word waxe not lesse pretious vnto vs, as honey to the mouth, that is satisfied. And this is sure, when and how much the word preached doth preu^ile, so much our prayers and our sacrifices doe preuaile; looke how much the word doth profit, so much doe we profit in prayer and in the Sacraments; and whensoeuer our delight in the word waxeth faint, our prayers and all good exercises are like shortly to decay. Prayer bringeth a feeling, and the Sacraments a more continuing of that, which we heare in the word. We must beware therefore, that we be not too qu^^^ ^^ sinne, that we pleaseAll our power in prayer commeth from the word. not our selues in a generall good course, in a perswasion we haue heard enough, but still let vs labour for the word: for I dare say, that all our power in prayer commeth from the word.
21 Euen as the life that is in a tree is a thing inuisible, and yet by the fruites comming out in due season, is discerned of all (howsoeuer it may be greene, yet wanting fruite)The life of faith very secret, and often hardly discerned. or as the life in a childe is a thing not seene but by mouing, going, and feeling easily perceiued; so the life of faith is a thing very secret, and yet by the effects of it at one time or at another is discerned of good men. Howsoeuer, there may be workes and yet no faith, howsoeuer there may be faith, and yet not by and by workes following.
Many men thinke the word now preached not to be the right word, because no moe are brought to the obedience of God by so long preaching of it: but we must rather reason to the contrarie, this is a sure note it is the true word, because it is so much refused, and men are made the worse by abusing the word, which as it would make them better, and doth make better all that doe obey it; so it maketh worse all that doe not obey it.
22 Of all the Commandements we shall neuer be brought hungerly to seeke Christ, vntill we can in the last precept, see and feele our naturall corruption, whereof we must not onely haue a knowledge, but experience also, as Paul had, Rom 7. Now where the PapistsHow we must haue not onely a knowledge by the last commandement of our naturall corruption, but also an experience. say, that this corruption is a sinne in the vnregenerate, but not in the regenerate, we say it is a sinne in both, and that which is sinne in one is sinne in another, without respect of persons: but yet we affirme that there is a diuers qualitie in this sinne in those diuers subiects, because that sinne is imputed to the one, and not to the other. The not diligent obseruing and vnderstanding of this corruption doth hurt euen some of the godly, bending to that other opinion, whiles they thinke too little of the first motions of sinne: for which if they were humbled truly, it is sure that they should not only not breake foorth into any corrupt life, but also they should haue lesse corrupted lips. I say a bare knowledge hereof also is not sufficie^t (for euen the knowledge of our corruption is not without the corruption of priuie pride) but we must ioyne therewith faith in the iudgements of God, which the Niniuites hauing escaped the wrath of God, which the old world not hauing fell into the wrath of God.
23 Seeing prophanenes is not so much in grosser sinnes, as in the vnreuerent and irreligious handling of most holy exercises, we must more warily watch ouer our selues, but especially that we beare sanctified mindes in our vsing of outward things, which in themseluesProphaning of holy exercises. haue no great holinesse, because we may easily be corrupted euen in prayer, in hearing of the word, in keeping of our Sabbath, which in themselues do carrie a kind of holinesse, which being not rightly vsed are said to be prophaned. This sinne is so perilous and infatuateth vs so farre, that it bringeth vs to make away not onely our maintenance on earth, but also our inheritance in heauen for most vile and contemptible things, as Es^^ did, who though he did to supplie his neede vse vnlawfull meanes, yet if he be set head by head with a great many not hauing any such neede, he for his need in respect of the^ might be lesse condemnable, but they in respect of him most iustly reproueable. Now if there beNote well. any Esau, who will not sticke to sell heauen, his soule, and the kingdome of God, vnder

pretence of necessitie, let vs beware we follow not Iacob in taking this aduantage (for this was a particular thing permitted of God, and Iacob will doe so no more) but let vs exhort him to waite vpon God his prouidence, to take a better course for the safetie of his conscience, and contribute to his necessitie, that Esau may not haue by our vncharitable dealing a cloake for his prophanenes, but that, if he will needes be prophane, he may be prophane and guiltie in and of himselfe alone.
24 We must not be proud in our owne gifts, for God hath in iudgement giuen iudgement to many simple ones to spie vs out.
25 If we confesse our sinnes to God, we must frankly and freely bring our selues into the presence of God, and lay our hearts naked and bare before him. We must not as harlots wipe our mouthes, and say we offended, and yet fall into sinne againe, but with remorse of conscience acknowledge them, and in feare and reuerence leaue them.
26 Satan is not discouraged at the first, though he lose his possession, yet he will keepSathans diligence. his title, and will lay claime to vs as to his mansion place; and yet though Sathan thinks vs to be sties for himselfe. Christ makes vs of the sties of Sathan, palaces of his spirit.
27 Though when Satan findeth vs waste and voide, he may enter into vs, yet if we haue any store of good, yea if we haue a sparke of goodnesse, it shall fire out the diuell, the least groune pronounceth a iudgement against him, euery teare is as a pearcing sword to him:We must be as diligent to serue the Prince of glorie, as the (...) are the Prince of darknes. but wholy to quench the spirit, to be waste, to be swept of all the graces of God, yea and not onely to offer violence to God his spirit, but to build and labour for the diuell is a very fearefull thing, for that maketh the diuell to looke better to his possession the second time. And as we must not flatter our selues in euery motion, as though we were sealed most surely; so one sparke of pure zeale doth fire out the diuell and his whole traine. Surely we must doe as much for our God, as the wicked for the diuell, that is, we must be swept of all corruptions, and garnished with all graces of God his spirit, that the Lord may delight in his hold in vs, euen as the wicked gratifie their Prince of darknes with sweeping cleane away the graces of God, and furnishing euery roome with some loathsome sinne or other.
28 The neerer Christ his comming was, the cleerer was the Law. Moses saw it cleererThe (...) the light law Law ^^ Gospell in ^^^ ages till Christ came. than the Patriarches, the Prophets saw it more cleerely than Moses, Iohn Baptist more euidently than the Prophets, and Christ Iesus more spiritually than they all did see into it and taught it, not as a teacher of any new doctrine, which the grosse Pharises dwelling on the literall sense did thinke, but as a confirmer and more diuine reader of the Law, than euer had beene in any age before, which thing we must needes beleeue. For if Christ be the Fathers Counseller, then is he wonderfull, and why is he so wonderfull, but because his doctrine is a mysterie, if his doctrine be a mysterie, no maruell though so many see not into it. In this spritual interpreter, the Fathers Counseller, whose name is Wonderfull, must we beleeue.
29 There is no striuing in sinne, but in God his iudgement and wrath, and thereforeNo thriuing in sinne. it is vsuall with the Lord to checke sinne sooner in his owne children than in the wicked, and to rebuke it sorer in his children regenerate, than in them that are not renewed, and to withstand more seuerely sin in his children renewed and hauing more plentifull meanes, than in the regenerate not hauing so great a measure of the meanes.
30 We must labour to haue the feare of God before our eyes alwaies. Beleeue we cannotThe feare of God the strong bridle of the faithfull. alwaies, reioyce in God we cannot alwaies, faith is often faint, loue is little, ioy is dead, feeling is fallen asleepe; yet if we continue in the feare of God, fearing our selues for the absence of these things, it will be a meane to recouer them all againe. For this iealousie of our selues, least we should displease God, will driue vs to such an examination of our owne hearts, as we seeing these wants, we are constrained to mourne, vntill the graces of God shine to vs againe: but if this feare be once gone, yea though we had those other gifts, yet will they decay, and we shall fall into so deepe a peace with our sinnes, that though we slip very grossely, we will neuer suspect our selues for any thing.
31 That man is truly blessed, whom God hath from all beginnings chosen, to whom God hath giuen his Christ as a perfit Redeemer, in whom he hath sealed vp the assurance

of these things by his holy spirit, to whom he hath giuen his word, in whom the word and spirit haue begot faith, by whose power Faith hath begotten ioyes in heauenly things, in whom ioy hath wrought a sincere heart to please God, in whom sincerit^e is accompanied with loue vnfained to the Lord, and his Saints, loue ioyned with a care to obey his commaundemens; this care breeding a reuerend feare to displease God, in whome this godly feare rebuketh sinne, the rebuking of sinne worketh a mourning spirit, in whom a mourning spirit begetteth true meekenes, this meekenesse of minde causing vs to hunger after Christ, so as feeling his owne miserie he is taught to shew mercie vnto others, and so sheweth mercie as it is with the bowels of compassion, whose heart God so gouerning, all outward benefites turne to his blessing, as seales of the fauour of God, vnto whome all crosses being sanctified in Christ, turne to his good, who finally in this faith and fruites of faith, meekely and patiently possessing his soule, waites, and looketh assuredly for the glorious kingdome of God after this life. This is the golden chaine of the vndoubted blessednes, whose linkes doe so coherently ioyne together, that wheresoeuer a^^^ of the least is wanting, there is a breach and weaknes made in the whole.
32 Great is the power, and mightie is the force of the feare of God, that is, when wee haue a sure perswasion, we are still in the presence of the God of all glorious Maiestie, not sparing the least sinne vnrepented, and yet in the sight of a most gracious Father, not punishingThe great power of Gods feare. the greatest sinne repented of. First we consider this Maiestie and glory, and are driuen to seeke comfort in Christ: Secondly, when we remember through Christ the seate of Maiestie to be turned into a seate of mercie, and the throne of glorie to be made a throne of grace, our feare is corrected, tempered, and mittigated, least it should be excessiue, that is rather hindering the certaintie of faith, than repressing the securitie of the flesh For so exquisite is God his iustice, so great is his glorie, so bright is his Maiestie, that without the view of his fauour we could not abide it. Neither doth this faith in God his mercie abolish, but correct the feare of his Maiestie. Againe, sure it is so long as we haue this feare before our eyes, howsoeuer we may of ignorance or infirmitie sinne, yet we shall neuer sinne presumptuously, or if forgetting our selues we slip suddenly, we shal not lie long in our sin, but this feare of God will soone draw vs out and recouer vs.
33 The cause why oft our hearts want libertie and comfort in prayer, is, because our consciences tell vs, that we haue beene vnthankful for the former benefits. And therefore we must be thankfull, as we are readie to craue. For therefore is the Church often afflicted, that it may often pray, that often praying it may pull downe many benefits fro^ the Lord,Thankesgiuing. that pulling downe many benefits from God, it may returne many praises vnto him. In this dutie the godly differ from others: for though others haue the outward benefits, yet hauing no feeling of the fauour of God in them, they cannot hartily praise him for them. Another cause why our prayers are feeble, is, because our faith is faint: but God can as well denie himselfe, and cast downe his throne from heauen, as denie to heare vs crying inHow feruent prayer preuailes with God. faith, which if we were perswaded of, we should haue more heart in prayer, yea euery little want would set vs a worke in it. It is not a particular practise of God at one speciall time to receiue our prayers, as it was of certaine Princes once in the yeere sitting in the gate to accept freely the bils of request preferred vnto them, but it is an vnchangeable nature in God: so as no sooner than he can cease to be a God can he cease to heare our requests. Wherefore if our faith be weake in the assurance of our sinnes pardoned, we must know, that the Lord hauing chosen vs, though our iniquities be as black as the diuels, yet God is vnchaungeable, and maketh them white as snow; and as he loueth vs not simply for any wel doing, so he doth not cast off his loue simplie for any euil doing. We must often listen to that sweete Eccho, which is betweene the Lord and our consciences. Sinner, saith the Lord, I am thy saluation: Father, saith the sinner, thou shalt be my saluation. That we mayA sweete consolation. be assured hereof, it pleaseth the Lord euen to admit vs into his Tabernacle of co^ference, and will not only let vs tread in the courts, but also giueth vs a stool^ to sit in his owne presence before the Arke; yea and not onely giueth vs a roome in his Church, but also diuideth vs our portion of heauenly consolation by his Spirit and truth, whereby not only our soules and bodies be holden together, but also we grow from glorie to glorie, from pleasure

to pleasure, vntill wee be made perfit in his Syon.
34 The heart is God his owne part, and that which must goe to the Lord* Now as nothingThe heart whose it is by right. should runne to common vses, which was sacrificed to the Priests vnder the Law; so the heart which is the Lords title, must not be freely giuen to any possession, but onely in, for, and from him.
35 As of all mercies of God this is not the least that the Lorde will not let vs thriue inA great mercie not to thriue in sinne. sinne, but vouch safeth to crosse vs, and meete vs in our way, as hee did with Ba^^^m going into an euill way; So this of all iudgements is the sorest, when the Lord taking away his carefull hand from vs, shall suffer vs to prosper and growe cunning in sinne, so as wee can rode thorow and cut downe whole woods, drie vp whole fountaines, and drinke vp manie riuers, and ouerthrowe euery mountaine that stands in our way. And therefore God his children are quickly espied to be bungerlike workers of sinne, that the Lorde may shame them in this life, but the wicked knit so close a web, that they goe away with art and peace, vntill the Lord shame them in the day of shame.
36 As many being much diseased in bodie, are the more thereby distempered in theirPatience. mindes; So manie troubled in minde bring a disorder of nature, euen vpon their bodies. And none more then conte^tious persons, who not looking to the hand of God, but to the weaknes of man, doe fret too much, which is only to be remedied, with considering of the vilenes of our sinne, and of the wisedome of our God. Iob did not fume against the Chaldeans, but humbled himselfe before God. Dauid fretted not against Shim^i, but cast himselfe into a searching of his conscience. And wee shall finde by proofe, that they that are much humbled for their owne sinnes, are most meeke to others, as also that they who are most contentious with others, are not much humbled with their owne sinnes.
37 It is one thing to haue our hearts hardening, and another to haue them hardened.Hardnes of heart. Our hearts are hardened, when there is litle hope of repentance, or at least hard comming to repentance: our hearts are hardening, when we are but in the way to the other, and this commeth either by wholly refusing of good things, or by some carelesse vsing of them; or else by doing of euill, and suffering our selues to be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sinne. This deceiueablenesse of sinne is either an inarching vpon vs after some good fruite or Christian profession, when hauing beene any long time well occupied, wee haue not through want of feare and priuie pride, the former iealouzie ouer our thoughts, but wee are ready to giue some larger libertie to our first motions, motions breeding consent, consent producing the action, the action iterated, bringing a custome, and custome casting vs into hardnes of heart, or else it sl^ lie stealeth vpon vs, by leauing our exercises of religion, by little and little, when we can leaue off for once, without any necessitie one thing, and ^not^^r time another, vntill at the length our desire die, and our good purposes lye buryed ^re we ^e aware.
38 Wee may learne to suspect our wisedome in matters concerning a better life, euenSimile. by the wise men of the world in things concerning this life. The Physition, whose Arte hath bene fruitfull to manie, will not content himselfe being fallen into some sicknes withTo suspect our own wisedome in matters of saluation. his owne knowledge, but will ioyne in conference with the more learned in that facultie for his recouerie. The skilfull Lawyer hauing co^mendablie handled the causes and controuersies of many Clients, will not in his purchase, or proper case, trust to his owne practise, but prouideth better for the matter, by taking the aduice of many men of experience in that profession; and yet in the matter of saluation, in the great sicknesse of the soule, and purchase of eternall life, wee thinke our selues wise enough, and that sinne can soone be plaistered, and Heauen gotten with ease, as though saluation were not worth the labouring for.
39 Manie are readie to doe duties, and they will also require duties, and though theyDiuers infirmities of men haue not duties answered to them, yet they must goe forward in duties. Manie will doe no iniurie, and they will suffer no iniurie, yet they must learne to beare iniuries, and bee readier to receiue the second then to reuenge the first. It is also true, that many see their owne infirmities, and will not see other mens, and yet they espie not so manie things, as they may espie. Manie thinke they doe many good things, and they doe so, yet they doe not

many things, which they may doe. And one may doe many things good in their owne natures, and yet corrupt them in the manner of doing, and by some blemish in the affection corrupt the beautie of the whole action* Manie leaue many sinnes, and doe manie good things, thinking that all others should le^ue many sinnes too, and that euery one should goe foote by foote by them, and yet God giueth not the like measure to euery one. Many rebuke a thing rebukable, and when the offenders see it not they growe impatient, and yet in wisedome wee should waite for the turning of the sinner. Manie will forgiue, when they see a man relenting, neither is it any great matter; yet this is a Christian dutie in deed by faith in God to hope and waite for the conuersion of a sinner, in the meane time supporting all infirmities. The naturall affection of parents with their children, doth by hope vse great longanimitie; and why should not we then vse the same and more in Christianitie* For Gods children are to put vpon them the affection of fathers, of mothers, and of brethren and sisters, to heare out and sustaine the infirmitie of our brethren. Many do duties, forbeare want of duties, looke to the least infirmitie in themselues, not prie into theAdmonition. How can rebuke kindly. A good counsell. defects of others, and yet cannot away to bee adn onished: but if a man can sustaine the rebuke of his friend, and the reproch of his enemie, not looking so much into the affection or manner of doing in the speaker, as to his prefiting by the wisdome and prouidence of God, this is a marke of a sincere and sanctified heart.
40 Iudgement being corrupted, wee can make reasons for our selues, but not for others.Iudgement.
41 As God giueth worship vnto vs, so we must aduaunce the worship of God: otherwise all our goodly gifts will be but as the gourd of (...), is the locks of Absolom. For as the gourd of Ionah did suddenly wither, not beeing able to keepe him from the parching Sunne; so our gifts shall suddenly rotte, not being able to keepe vs from the heate of theTo vse well the graces which God hath giue^ vs. wrath of God; and the beautifull things, wherein we were more proud in our selues, then profitable to others, shall rather be a way to bring vs to our destruction, than a meanes to helpe vs to our saluation.
42 Whensoeuer we come to a generall promise of outward things, wee must not takeThe generall promises of outward things. 1. Tim. 4. 8 it so vniuersally as admitting no exception, but know, that outward promises doe so farre extend, as they stand with God his glorie and our good, as also that either some sinne, or some failing in obedience, or the want of saith, or triall of faith, may suspend the performance of them.
43 Wee must learne by o^r outward senses to espie our inward corruptions. For whyTo learne to obserue inward corruption by the outward sense. doth my sense l^ade me to this sinne, but because mine heart hath ledde my sense, and my corruption hath stolne away mine heart? or why doth my sense helpe me in this good, but that my heart hath gouerned my senses, and God his Spirit hath guided mine heart? our outward senses will bew^ay our inward affections. For looke what I loue, I am ready to heare of it, I am willing to see it; looke what I loue not, I care not to see it, I esteeme not to heare of it.
44 It is the s^upour of this age not to regard a good name, not to bee touched with reproches,How some respect neither cursing nor blessing. not to care for the prayers of men, not to feare the curses of men. In times past they were superstitious, in hauing men pray for them (euen being dead) now they are prophane, not esteeming the prayers of men whilest they be aliue.
Sinne bringeth alwayes it owne punishment with it, it neuer wants a tormentor: it is a snare, an assise, a bench, a Iudge, a Iailor, an hangman to it selfe. Though all Quest-menSinne how terrible. could be intreated, and the Iudge himselfe be corrupted, yet iudgement and inquirie i^ at hand. It intangleth our consciences, it bindeth and pinnioneth vs with cordes: but righteousnes is it owne reward, and carrieth an whole court with it, it carryeth a sword to reuenge, a crowne before it selfe to reward it selfe. For as manie in the middest of merrie cups haue their grieuous gripes, so manie in the gripes of desperation are refreshed with their cup of consolation: And as the wicked, howsoeuer he hideth himselfe for a while, is gotten at the length of the Sergeant of his owne conscience: so howsoeuer the godly for a time content themselues to mourne in sorrow, yet in the ende they are found and refreshed with the Sauiour of their soules.
45 There is no faith but by the word, no experience of faith but in temptation: and yetAn experienced faith. we must not tarrie vntill our faith be proued by great triall, but be content to be wrought vpon by smaller things. For it is the goodnes of God to giue them faith in greater matters, who would haue faith in lesser things; and it is the wisedome of God first to giue little trials, and then to giue greater.
46 The politike Atheists and disciples of Philosophers of our time thinke, that raine must come by a coniunction of Planets of necessitie. We graunt the Lord vseth meanes,Gods prouidence. but so as he intendeth and remitteth them by his owne limitation and power. Man in want sueth to the creatures, the creatures not able to supplie it complaine to the earth, the earth seeketh to the heauens, the heauens craue helpe from God as the last refuge, whereunto we flie immediately; God as the author, from whom our helpe commeth, heareth the heauens, the heauens answere the earth, the earth relieueth the creatures, the creatures minister vnto man.
47 The Arke had cleane and vncleane beasts, Abraham had Ishmael and Isaac, theThe Church hath a mixture of good and bad. Common-wealth true and false subiects, an house hath thriftie and vnthriftie seruants, the body members and excrements, the Church good and bad.
48 As he that hath tenne graines of Pepper bruised, hath no more in quantitie than the man that hath tenne graines vnbruised (howsoeuer he hath a more odoriferous qualitieSimile. than hath the other) so in substance the Fathers had no other faith than we haue in ChristOur faith the same with the Fathers. Iesus, howsoeuer it being more vnfolded vnto vs, is more comfortable than to our Fathers.
49 It is a worne controuersie, whether the Gospell or the Law is to be preached. We answere both: the Law is to prepare, the Gospell is to follow after. So likewise whetherHow the law and the Gospel is to be preached. it is better to gouerne by clemencie or by seueritie. We answere by both. But if in comparison ye aske, whether the Law or the Gospell is most to be preached, the lenitie or rigour of the iudge most to be vsed, we say, consideration must be had of the persons preaching and preached to. The person preaching may be of this or that gift more inclinable to doe good, this, or that way. True it is, Iohn did no doubt sometime pipe, and Christ sometime mourne; but for the most part Iohn did mourne and Christ did pipe, being ordained of God thereunto. The persons preached to, if they be alreadie humbled, must haue the promises; if they be in their sinne and ignorance, or are fallen by securitie, the Law rather than the Gospell is to be vrged. This holy mixture and wise order we may obserue both in the Prophecies, and in the Epistles of the Apostles.
50 Many say, they can profit by some, and not by others It is their infirmitie, and theyOf profiting by hearing of sermons. must be humbled. Yet thus much for our comfort, it is God his mercie if we profit any way; howbeit stay not here, for either thou must at the least desire to profit by both, or els in the end it will come, thou wilt profit by none. It is vnnaturall for an old man in Christ to be fed againe with the dugge of the first doctrine, as it is vnseemely to offer the strong mysteries of faith to a childe and nouice in Christ. We must learne not onely to discerne good from euill, but better from good. Some can dance, when Christ doth pipe; some can sorrow, when Iohn doth mourne; some can tremble when Paul preacheth of iudgement; some can reioyce to heare him preach the promises; some can entertaine him when he commeth with a kisse; some can profit more when he commeth with a rod. Some will say, if doctrine be much vsed, we cannot vnderstand, he is too profound: some, if perswasion be vrged, we can learne little, he is alwaies about one matter: some, when one is vehement, say, he is an Heremite too precise for vs to follow, he had neede of a new world: some, if the Preacher be comfortable, thinke, he is a clawbacke and seeketh for liuing: some say, if they heare one for the peace of the Church tolerating some ceremonies, that he is a timeseruer and man-pleaser: if they heare one zealous and vnwilling to giue any little credit to superstitions, then they say, he is factious: if he be young and vehement, then they say, he will grow wiser and colder in time: if he be old and still faithfull, then he wants wisedome and is but a doting foole. But wisedome is iustified of all her children; if doctrine be vsed, we learne; if perswasion, we are moued; if threatnings, we are humbled; if promises, we are comforted; if lenitie, we thinke God calleth vs in mercie; if seueritie, God calleth vs

out of securitie, and so we profit by all in something, though by some in more things and oftner.
51 We are said to be alwaies in God his presence, and yet we are said to be in God hisOf Gods presence, and how to present our selues before him in his worship. Heb. 11. 26. 27 presence in the time of God his worship. The fathers are said to walke with God, they were as children alwaies looking on their father, to see what hee would haue them doe, God being present with them, though inuisible to nature, yet visible to faith. Yet we are said to be in God his presence in his worship, because more neerely we bring our selues before him. And sure it is, that the more we are in his presence, whiles we are in any holy exercise, the more shall we be in his worship euen in our ordinarie callings. Againe, the more carelesse we are in his worship to bring our selues into his sight, the more carelesse of his presence shall we be in our ordinarie callings.
52 This is not the priuiledge of God his children, not to be tempted, neither is it a differenceDifferences of sinning in the godly and godlesse. betweene the godly or vngodly to be tempted or not tempted; but God his children pursue it not in the greedines of their affections, but they either sin not, or he drawne by delay vnto sinne. God his children before feare to sinne, the wicked before lay platformes of sinne: the godly in sinning finde some paine, the wicked a pleasure, the godly thinke of their sinne with shame and griefe, the world put their sinnes in a new die by speaking and doing of them with glorie and gladnes: the wicked blaspheme God in sinning, the godly rebuke themselues for sinnes: the godly are fiercely and violently pursued of temptation, the wicked are so^^ishly and voluntarily infatuated by temptation, the godly powre out their spirits to be cured in temptation, the vngodly powre out their spirits to be strengthened in sinnes. Abraham laughed, Sarah laughed, Abraham reioyced by faith in their promise, Sarah derided by vnbeliefe the thing that was promised: Zacharie questioneth with the Angell, Mary questioneth with the Angell: Zacharie doth it in vnbeliefe, Mary doth it to be confirmed in the meanes for her faith.
53 It is wonderfull, how some delighting and lying in a sinne, will correct the selfeHow some can correct the same sin in others which they like in themselues. same sinne in others, and cannot abide it in their owne children: and yet it hath been obserued, that politike dames, ciuill housekeepers, cunning whores secretly bathing their bodies in filthines, could not abide a wa^ton looke, or vnchast behauiour in their children. Howbeit these secret sinnes, as all others in time haue blurted out. And let such sinners know, that God will still giue them some to be as a glasse to see their owne sinnes in them, as it were face to face. Thou complainest against thy sonne, thy seruant, or against thy inferiour: but doest thou gouerne him, hast thou taught, corrected, and reformed him, hast thou gone in and out in godly life before him, hast thou taught him publikely as well as priuately, and at home as wel as abroade? If thou hast, though thy sonne be a reprobate, or thy seruant a castaway, thou hast at the least though not co^uerted his hart, yet striken him with confusion of conscience.
54 It is both the fault and the folly of many, that being rebuked of a sinne like beastsHow many couer sinne by example. following the drouer, or puppits following the play maister say, they doe but as others doe, wherein they rather accuse themselues of a new folly, than excuse themselues of their old fault. For thinking they doe well, because they doe as others doe; they strengthen rather than weaken the sin, by ioyning to sinners, and increasing the multitude of sinners in that kinde; whereas on the contrarie, if they for themselues would leaue the sinne, the number of offenders would grow the lesse, and then the number of well doers being greater than the number of euill doers, would make them ashamed of themselues, and though not for conscience sake, yet for shame, the sinne would be the sooner left. In regard whereof a godly father hearing of an heresie like to spread in the Church, got as many to subscribe to the true part, as could be gotten, which he did for this cause, that the aduersaries seeing a few holding with them, and many standing against them, might suspect their cause, and be the more ashamed of their defence. And experience proueth, that sinne is like to die shortly, which is nourished of none, but starued of all, and that sinne is like to preuaile, which is entertained of the most, and withstood of the fewest: we must beware of following a multitude to sinne.
55 Looke wheresoeuer in Realme, Citie, towne, or household there is any remnant of

the Lords seede, although it sustaineth for a while some iniurie, as Noah in the old worlde,What respect God hath to his children, in the execution of his iudgements. Lot in Sodome, Ieremiah among his people, and Abraham with his, yet as they are preferued from many iudgements by these men, so their eyes shall see them fall in the end. The world is not couered with water, vntill Noah be prouided for in the Arke, Sodome is spared vntill Lot be deliuered, and the Lord euen rebuked Kings for his seruant Abrahams sake. If this were so in the infancie of the Church, whilest it was in one or few families, how much more will the Lorde gouerne and preserue it now vnder the kingdome of Iesus Christ, if peaceably wee waite, vntill the arme of the Lord be reuealed vnto vs?
56 It is an euill signe, when gentlenesse makes vs worse and wanton, more bold in disobedience,A good signe of Gods grace when Gods sweete blessings make vs more free in his seruice. more remisse in obedience: and it prognosticateth good, to bee made by gentlenesse more free in obedience, more afraide to disobey. This being as true in the spirituall estate hath caused the Lorde to cause some to beare the yoke from their youth; and who are more pliable to the word? Others againe, not tasting of any crosses, which haue beene more vntractable to all good duties. Among many pawnes of God his loue, this is one chiefe, when God his blessings breede in vs humilitie and carefulnes: among manie tokens of euill, this is one, when God his benefits breede pride and fluggishnes. And this is a triall of our good, if the more wee haue, the more we feare to sinne, the more we care to doe well.
57 If in respect of sinne, the will onely be enough to conuince and condemne a man,How God accepteth the will in some, for the deede. though the worke follow not, and he is counted an adulterer before the iudgement seate of God, who hath onely looked on his neighbours wife to lust after her: so in respect of good things we must not doubt, but our good will and desire, which but for abilitie and occasion is ready to good, is also approued and accepted of God, although the effects follow not so soone, and so excellent, as we doe desire. If there be a willing minde it is accepted, according to that which it hath, 2. Cor. 8. 12. and such is our imputation with God, as is our affection: howsoeuer in effects we lagge somewhat behinde, and come short of that ende, and perfection, which is set downe in the Law. Abraham was accepted for his will, and Paul reioyceth in nothing but in his will, Rom. 7.
58 Merchants of one companie, and partners are partakers alike of all their profitesOf our happy communion with Christ, and how thereby wee haue an assurance of all his insearchable riches. and damages, which grow of their merchandise: The man and wife ioyned both in marriage, are both one flesh, and participate in well and woe one with another; Christ Iesus by reason of that societie, which we haue together with him, giueth vs a part, and we likewise him, of all that we haue and possesse. And as a Prince marrying a meaner woman, indoweth her with all his treasure, and is conte^t with her ragges, purposing now to inuest her with his robes; So the Lord Iesus, espousing vs most vnworthie to him, is content to take the ragges of our vnrighteousnes, to endow vs with the treasures of his holines, and to inuest vs with the robes of his righteousnes. Indeed some difference is betweene the Merchants and vs; for both the gaine and the vse of trafficke is equall among them: but betweene Christ and vs, the gaine of his glorie is ours, deserued and purchased by his obedience: and the losse of our deserued death is his, and charged wholly vpon him, though our disobedience hath purchased it.
59 Whosoeuer is ioyned in Christ for iustification, hee must be ioyned to him in sanctification.Iustification, and sanctification goe together. Shall we then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? Shall we make the Temple of God the mansion of diuells? Shall we doe such iniurie to the member of Christ? Shall wee offer such violence to the Temple of God? Shall wee being rotten imps, and yet ingraffed on the stocke Christ Iesus, willingly cut off our selues, that we might rather be fit (for our rottenes to be laid on the fire) than for bringing of fruite, remaine in so sound a roote? God forbid.
50 If Christ his Crosse be as a chariot of Triumph, and as a pillar to fasten on the euidenceIf we respect Christ and his Crosse, wee may not continue in the filthines of our sinnes. which accused vs, if the entrance of his Passion was so grieuous, the continuance so fearefull, the ende so lamentable, and all to free vs from the guiltinesse of sinne; it were great vnthankfulnes, to let all his paines be lost, by continuing still in the filthines of our sinne, whereby though we haue no care of our owne saluation, we shew an open contempt of Christ his precious Passion. And we are then worthie to die, in that, whereas we might

liue, wee rather did chuse to die with sinne; then to liue with Christ. If wee will not ouercome when wee may, wee shall loose the promised rewards that are giuen to them, who will not on^ly presse out the breath of sinne, and at the death of it close vp the eyes of it, but also follow it to the graue, and couer it with moules, that it neuer rise vp againe. R^uel. 3. 5. 12. 22.
61 Though we cannot wholly leaue off sinne, yet the body, life, and kingdome of sinneHow sinne dw^lles in the godly. is weakened in vs Sinne in the godly is as a rebell, not as a Prince, it is readie to spue out treason against the Spirit, but it hath no power to rule ouer the spirit. And as a serpent cut into many pieces hath but certaine relikes of poyson, in the maimed and mangled members thereof, and is not able to exercise the like violence to a man, as when it was whole, and right membred, so howsoeuer some remnants of sinne sticke in our old, but martyred Adam, yet it hath no such force to exercise it selfe against vs, as when it was a perfect monarchie, and had the sole regiment and primacie in vs.
62 Sathan is very wise in all his attempts, hee taketh the best instruments, as politikeHow the diuell chuseth the best wits for his seruice. men vse to doe in matters of importance. In Paradise he maketh choice of the most subtill beasts, and opposeth his strength to the weakest vessell. After being moued to choler for the Churches deliuerance in Egipt, he stirres vp no meane parties, but sorteth out Magicians, inchanters, mathematicall heads, and men of deeper wit and experience. Vnder the Prophets he chuseth Kings and Queenes, and they carrie the traine of the common people as the drouer doth his heard. Against Christ he setteth the profound Scribes and learned Pharises; yea, he chuseth out Iudas, so cunning an hypocrite, that the disciples being forewarned of that treason, euery one suspected rather himselfe than Iudas.
63 The Scriptures lap vp in one sinne, all that are accessarie to that sinne, whether it beHow many sinnes may lie couered vnder one. by ministring instruments of sinning, or by commaunding, or by counselling, or by consenting, or by concealing, or by communicating in the bootie gotten, or by commending the sinne, or by not hindering it, as we may, or not by dissoluing it before a magistrate; or by not admonishing, or by not mourning for the offender; or lastly, by not praying, when wee heare of euill, both that the malefactor may repent and wee may be preserued from the same sinne. When wee are free in euery of these, wee are not truely accessarie to the sinne.
64 Wee must beware of drawing a thicke skinne on our conscience, and of searingHow to preserue a te^der conscience, and to keepe our hearts from hardning. it vp, but rather labour to keepe it in a feeling of sinne, and in a bleeding plight, so as the least straine may presse out somewhat. Otherwise we shall soone fall to hardnes of heart; and consequently lie open to the iudgements of God. And as the wound, which at euerie small crush shrinketh, and yeeldeth forth pure bloud, is lesse dangerous, and more curable: and as the sore, which hardly being pressed feeleth nothing there not at all bleeding, or if it yeeld, affording but a little blacke and corrupted bloud, is more dangerous, and lesse curable: Euen so the conscience, which at euery checke is melting, and resolued into godlie griefe, as feeling the least smart of the least impression of God his correction, is furthest from hardening, and neerest to the hearing: and that minde whatsoeuer, which at a griping pinch remaineth vnsensible, and at a dead blow continueth as one vnremouable as a blocke, is not onely furthest from recouering, but also in danger of a finall obduration.
65 Where God his mercies are most wonderfull, there, if they bee contemned, theHow dangerous to reiect grace and light offered. iudgements of God ensue most feareful. The serpent of all beasts the wisest, abusing that wisedome, became of all the cursedst. Sodome the beautifull valley, being puft vp with pride, became the filthiest pit. The church of the Iewes, the valley of vision, not vsing it dignitie, was as a scattered wildernes, Ierusalem is an heape of stones, Sion as a thicket, the Temple as a vast vessell. The Church of Rome refusing Christ, is become the seate of Antichrist. The churches of Asia lost their candlesticke, because light comming to them, they loued darknes more than light.
66 Vntill a man by feeling the sorrowes of sinnes determineth to arise and goe to his father,How co^trary the iudgme^ts of the word and worldare. the word doth say, he is not come to himselfe, as Luk: 15. in the lost child: contrariwise, when a man by feeling the sorrowes of sinne, saith, he will arise and goe to the father, the

world crieth with Festus, he is besides himselfe, too much learning hath made him mad. So farre differ the iudgements of the word and of the world.
67 As the Serpent was the first instrument of sinne, ^o sinne retayneth still a qualitie ofHow sinne (...) the qualitie of the Serpent. the Serpent. For first it windeth round about vs, as though it would imbrace vs, but in the end it playeth the Serpent, and with the tayle it doth sting vs. For the sorrowes which belong vnto sinne, do not commonly accompanie the fact to be committed, but the fault already committed, and doggeth the conscience to sting it to death at the time of most aduantage, for sinne taketh occasion by the law, and deceiueth, and therefore s^ayeth vs. And let not him thinke that findeth not a present controlement of conscience for euery sinne committed, that therefore he hath not offended God, for we are o^t suffered to haue the spirit of slumber for a while, that the spirit of Christ Iesus might more perfitly awake vs.
68 God his children are to reioyce, for the day of their Resurrection is their day of Redemption.The iudgement day of Gods (...) day of (...) redemption. Their iudgement day was, when Christ was iudged, at what time all, that are in Christ were iudged. And as the wicked are now damned, but then shall haue the sentence of damnation, so now the godly are saued, but then they shall haue the full testimonie of their saluation by Christ, yea with Christ they shall be assistants in iudg^^^^^ to condemne others, so farre they shall be from comming into iudgement to be condemned.
69 Bersillai hauing done a great benefit to Dauid, the King could no^ (...) estimation how sufficiently to recompence it, but referred him and his children to ^eat Salomons table,To sit (...). Bersillai thought in himselfe this to be so great a recompence, that he re^use (...). If it were both in Dauids estimation, and in Bersillaie^ opinion so great a (...) to (...) Salomons table, how much more glorious a benefit is it to sit at Christ his table, (...) Salomon but a greater than Salomon is present?
70 It is our corruption, that we are more grieued, when we suffer as ^el-doers, than^ when we suffer for euil-doing. For this is the logicke of the world, I am grieued that I am thus dealt with, because I neuer deserued it, had I done any thing worthy of punishment, it would not haue grieued me, though I had beene punished. Thou speakest like a foolish man, thou knowest not when to be grieued, and when ^ot to be grieued. For whether is it better to suffer, when thy conscience is free and suffereth not, or when with thy outward affliction thou art afflicted also of thine owne heart? And is it not a glorious thing to sufferNote. for well doing, wherein thy cause of griefe is the lesse, and an ignominious thing to suffer for euill doing, wherein the cause of griefe is the more? For if rather the cause of affliction than affliction itselfe should grieue^ hee, then affliction without cause of affliction being for God his cause should rather comfort thee.
71 Companie is the best thing and worst thing in the world* how much and how (...)^^. are men beholding to it? it maketh and marreth whatsoeuer commeth neere it (...) as wormes do easily breede in the softest wood, so doth it commonly spoyle the best ^^^^sition.
72 When we haue any crosse it is hard lucke say we. Well, that luck, as you call it, andHow profitable ^he crosse it. prouidence as I iudge it, is often more worth vnto vs than all our substance. And why so? the reason seemeth simple, and yet is most forcible, for then we begin to be in necessitie. That is, as you thinke, a cold comfort, and I should hardly perswade you, that this argument is good. For, if I shall say that if ye did beleeue, ye should see this, as sure as your life, I know, that you would smile at it. Notwithstanding it is sure that the sense of our necessitie causeth vs to looke for a remedie, the asking of it by prayer doth assure vs to obtaine because of the promise.
73 Herein is a difference betweene children and bastards, that originall sinne in theChildren and bastards how they differ. refused, hath the roote as rottennes, the branch as dust, the bud as blasphemie, the fruite as despaire: in the elect being ouerturned with the power of affliction, then ariseth in stead of it both the blossoms of rising from sinne, and the sweete smelling fruite of conuersion vnto God.
74 There is nothing so good, but priuie pride will corrupt it, nothing so euill, but a lye will couer it. For priuie pride cast the Angels from heauen, exiled Adam out of Paradise,Priuie pride. ouerthrew the deerest of God his children, when they were most full of the spirit, and was

the last but most fierie temptation, wherewith our Sauiour Christ was assaulted. It is seeneMatth 4. of others, before it is espied of our selues, it commeth with greatest graces of God, whereas other sinnes come with sinne, it was the first sinne in God his childe, and it will be last. For euen when all sinnes seeme to bleede, and all graces seeme to stand, herein we can be proude, that sinne is so dead, and godlinesse so abundant in vs.
75 It is good still to attend vpon hearing the word, although we feele not that inward ioy and working of God his Spirit, which either we haue felt, or desire to feele. The preachingThe hearing of the word preached. of the word is God his ordinance: if it hath no^ wrought heretofore, though it worke not presently, it may worke hereafter. And because we know not who is the man, what is the time, where is the place, which is the sermon that God hath appointed to work on vs, let vs in all obedience attend on the ministerie of euery man, watch at all times, be diligent in euery place, and runne to euery sermon which we can conueniently, because though the Lord touch vs not by this man, in this place, at this time, through such a sermon, yet he may touch vs by another. Let euery one therefore thus meditate with himselfe: Though I hearing am as dead as a stone, and feele as little as a blocke, yet I must heare still, because it is God his ordinance, I will heare, that I may obey his ordinance, and though I goe an hundred times without any profit, yet I shall neuer goe without some peace, because though I haue not that which I desired, yet I haue done that which God hath commanded. This I am sure of, so long as I am vnder the dressing hand of the Lord, I shall not perish, but in his good time I shall bring foorth fruite. But thou wilt replie, I may happily sometime feele, but it is so short and so little, and so many haue fallen away before me, that I feare I shall fall, and of a naturall vine I shall prooue wilde and an vnnaturall branch. Well, the Lord by his word will purge thee and prune thee, he will dresse thee, if euer thou hadst any working, thou shalt haue more: thou shalt not only bring forth Christ being graffed into Christ, but much fruite also being trimmed by the word. Onely seeke thou God in his word, he will not faile to be found of thee, vse thou the word which is his pruning knife, and he will worke on thee at one time or at another.
76 Great is our corruption, which turneth the grace of God into wantonnes, and makethHow corruption ^urneth grace into wantonnes. his bounteous liberalitie in outward things an occasion to serue our sinne, whilest abundance in the vnsanctified bringeth an inglutting of the minde, the inglutting of the minde breedeth vnthankfulnes, vnthankfulnes causeth coldnes, coldnes beginneth carelesnes, carelesnes is the way to hardnes of heart and vtter prophanenes, and prophanenes ripeneth vs for the iudgements of God to fall on vs.
77 Our owne kindred, that should draw vs most to God, often hindereth vs most fromHow our own kindred may hinder vs with God. God, and it is Satans policie when he cannot preuaile against vs with the world, to vndermine vs with nature. So he suborned Lots daughters against their father, Iobs wife against Iob, and our Sauiours owne kinsfolke against him, Kain against Abel, Ishmael against Isaac, Esau against Iacob, the eleuen brethren against Ioseph, Ioab against Abner, Saul against ^onathan.
78 If we count it a great benefit to receiue a Nobleman, or any appertaining to the Nobilitie into our house, because they may after gratifie vs; or if we thinke it a great iniurie toHow to entertaine and loue the Saints. hurt one of the blood royall, and to withstand one of princely linage, then what a dignitie is it to entertaine the Saints allianced to Iesus Christ? what a traiterous villanie were it traiterously to offer violence to one fearing God, who is of the blood royall and of the Lord^ linage, whom he accompteth as mother, brother, or sister?
79 Vntill we are fully staied in minde with a contentation of outward things, we canHow to labour for contentation if we will profit in godlinesse. neuer be very godly. For, if either our minde be about liuing, when we haue too little for our estate; or if our hearts wander as being stollen away to the things of this world, whe^ we abound, we can neuer aspire to the spirituall power of true godlinesse. And then are we most fit to be wrought vpon by the word, and most free to striue in trauaile against ou^ owne corruptions, when we are at peace and at a point for outward things, when being content with that we haue we can say, O Lord, thou art my portion, thy word haue I chosen as mine inheritance for euer, thy kingdome is my principall labour, thy face is th^ chiefest thing I seeke for, thy fauour is the ioy of mine heart.
80 To haue that measure which God hath appointed vs, wee must vse such meanes asHow to attaine the measure of blessings which God hath appointed for vs. are warrantable, and with good meanes wee must vse a right heart; neither trusting too much in them, least wee be worldly minded, neither mistrusting too much, least wee be murmurers. In this vprightnes of heart, wee must not onely be iust, that is, by euery iust title claiming our owne interest, but mercifull, that is, remitting of our owne for pities sake, euen as God remitteth vs.
81 As wee truely shew our selues to hate sinne; we loue the contrarie grace, and as we truly loue vertue when we abhorre the contrarie sinne: so we indeed hate sinne, when weA good note of our loue to vertue. hate euery little occasion to the sinne; and wee truly loue vertue, when wee seeke and receiue euery little meane helping to that vertue, as namely euill companie, which we must carefully auoide, vnlesse wee haue either some speciall calling, or some particular gift of God his grace, which doe onely priuiledge vs in this behalfe.
82 It is daungerous to proceede in iudgement against a man vpon a bare suspition,Not to proceed rashly in iudgement against any man. when no proofe can be had, both because we would be loath that the Lord should so enter iudgement with vs, as also, because it were the way as well to iudge good men vndeseruedly, as a wicked man deseruedly, for that the one may be suspected as well as the other. The Lorde hath therefore appointed, that rather an offender not conuicted of offence should goe vnpunished, then that a man vpon surmise should suffer, least so a good man should oft come into vndeserued danger.
The wicked shall be sunke in destruction, and though they be not moued with God hisThe ende of the wicked. iudgements, yet whatsoeuer they doe, they shall spinne a threed of their owne destruction, and hatch an egge of poyson to themselues.
83 Men must not be in wrath when they pray, for then it is not pleasing vnto the Lord.Prayer. For as when an Instrument is played on, and it being out of tune, it doth jarre, and the noise is not so pleasing vnto them that should heare it: No more are our prayers pleasing vnto the Lorde, when we are in contention one with another, the Lord cannot abide it.
84 When one hath broken an arme or legge, and the same is healed againe; will that man by and by lift withall, as hee doth with that other arme which is strong and perfect inHow to cure contention. health? No, hee will spare it still a great while, for feare hee bring it out of ioynt againe, and so it should be worse to heale than it was before: So, when enemies are made friends, they must beare one with another, and not giue themselues leaue to speake anie nipping words one to the other, for then they will fall out againe, and so their contention will be worse then it first was.
85 Wee desire for the most part to doe dutie, when wee may receiue like proportionPrayer. againe; which thing in praying one for another ought much to moue vs. For as we pray for others by vertue of Gods commandement; So by the force of the same Law are wee to bee prayed for of others, all being bound vpon paine of Gods highnes displeasure to pray for vs.
86 There is a selfe-will that breeds selfe-loue, and a selfe-loue that brings a selfe-will,Selfe-loue and selfe-will. and selfe-will bewrayes pride, which is a monster of diuers heads. Some are proud in arrogating that to themselues which they haue not: some haue the things they boast of, but they thinke they proceed of themselues: some thinke their gifts proceed from God, but by their owne deserts: some acknowledge Gods gifts to be free and vndeserued, butPride. they are proud of them.
87 It is strange that we should not abide to be threatned, and yet can be content to beAdmonition. afflicted, when as naturally wee rather desire the lesse euill; or we would leuer bee admonished of an euill, then punished with an euill. Now a threatning forewarnes, but plagueth not, an affliction punisheth rather than forewarneth. Howbeit this bewrayes the great pride of mans heart, in that hee had rather be pressed vnder the hand of God, than reproued of a man.
88 In the estate of mariage choise may well be made of foure things. First, wee are toMatrimonie looke the woman be religious. Secondly, that she be chaste. Thirdly, that she be louing to her husband. Fourthly, that she be an huswife. For other things, if God cast them on vs, they are not to be refused; if we want them we must reme^ber godlines is the best dowrie.
89 As God his children haue the greatest ^l^ssing^, so haue they oft the greatest crosses:Affliction. which would seeme strange, but that God his wisdome must stay our ranging wits. It is good therefore to promise this assurance, that we belong to God, which will most comfort vs, though affliction so belongs to vs.
90 Because a truth may be taught, and not an whole truth, it comes to passe that manyDoctrine. learned men, though not of purpose, open the doore to many heresies.
91 As in receiuing of a purgation, a man shall thinke himselfe sicker then in receiuingHow troubled mindes feare threatnings. a cordiall, and yet in the end hee is not so; so it is incident to troubled mindes to thinke themselues worse in hearing threatnings, than in receiuing of the promises, and yet it is not so: For by hearing of the Law both their title is better to the promises, and the promises more appertaine to them.
92 As no gift or bribe doth so much whet vp the minde of a good Physition, or skilfullHow greatly God is pleased with faith on his prouidence. Lawyer, as to r^lie and rest in their Arte and faithfulnes, for which they will doe farre more then for any other thing: so there is nothing doth more drawe out more assurance from GOD, as when hee seeth that throughly and confidently, yet with all humilitie we depend vpon his promise, prouidence, and power.
93 It is a danger to make a priuate offence publike, because priuate offences would be priuately admonished. Howbeit, if we see that notwithstanding our priuate dealing theAdmonition. sinne doth still growe, then wee are rather to make some hole into the same, than to loose the soule of such an offender, and in such a case (not wee, but they) haue published their owne names.
94 Although we are not to accept persons, yet we may make difference of persons, becauseHow to put difference betweene persons. some are more capable of good things than others. In which respect our Sauiour Christ tooke some of his Disciples with him to pray, and yet but two, ^^d those of choise: shewing and teaching vs thereby, that as wee must auoide popularitie, to seeke our owne* glorie, so we must not hinder God his glorie, nor cease to doe pure things before others, who for their faithfulnes haue vpright harts, and for their wisdome can discerne of things to be well iustructed thereby.
95 It is one thing to haue as it were the pricke of a point of a needle, and another to haue a wound with the dint of a sword; It is one thing to bee stung with the tongue of:The passions of Christ in his death. Serpent, and another thing to be hissed a^ of a Serpent hauing lost his tongue; it is one thing to drinke the cup of gall and poyson to the dregges, and another to drinke of a cup, the bitte^nes whereof is drawne out, and Balme placed in the steed of ^t; it is one thing to drop a fewe teares, and another to sweate drops of bloud; it is one thing to be grieued in measure, and another thing to be heauie vnto death; it is one thing to feele the wrath of God for sinne in our selues, but discharged in another; another thing to haue the sinne committed of another, and sustained in our selues.
96 It is a good thing to looke to ones hart in all things, especially for vncleannes euenObserue well the heart in all things. creeping vpon vs in holy things, and with most holy persons; as when one shall desire in comforting afflicted mindes, to doe it rather with women then with men, and with beautifull women, rather then with others, and with rich women, rather then with poore women, wherein the heart is very corrupt, and full of matter to humble vs.
97 The diuell is a skilfull pyrate, as for emptie Barkes he neuer makes after them, butHow the diuell malignes the best. for those that are po^sed and furnished with best wares, those he pursues with maine sailes: so those that haue nothing in them the diuell esteemes them no preye, but if once wee be fraught with Gods graces, then hee malignes vs, and hoysteth euery saile, to take vs as his spoyle.
98 No man hath so good a memorie, but hee shall forget a benefit; no man hath so illMemorie. a memorie, but he shall remember an iniurie.
99 It is worthie to be marked that Paul saith, flie Fornication: and Iame^ saith, resist theWherefore the Lord bids vs flee Fornication, but re sist the diuell. diuell: for Fornication must not be stood long withall, but to put our safetie out of question, let vs flee all occasions of it: and contrariwise Sathan must not be fled from, (for that will embolden him) but he must be resisted by the word, and by prayer, and the power of Christ.
100 It is a maruellous thing, that a young man should be so zealous in youth, and aboutThe zeale of youth and of age. 40 or 50 yeares should be honest and hold his owne, but haue no such vigor as before: But we must know that euen his heate is mixed much with heate of youth, which shooteth and thrusteth out a little with a great heate and outward shew in the beginning, and that afterward the strength of godlines being sounder, a man shall be lesse vehement but farre more solid, at what time his pure zeale being naked in it selfe, for that his yong heate forsakes him, seemeth happily to be lesse, but sure it is more sound and substantiall than it was before.
101 It may seeme strange, that we are so much moued with the sermons of godlieThe differe^ce between our feelings in our first conuersion and afterwards. men at our first calling, and after we haue long beleeued, that we should find ourselues so coldly and seldome mou^d. Here we must know, that at our first entrie to Christianitie, there is a more combustible matter in vs, and that euery little sparke of fire would inflame vs, that is, that we had such great ignorance, that euery principle of knowledge did affresh vs, and such prophanenes, that euery precept tooke hold on vs: but afterward being much purged and clensed both in life and iudgement, wee are not so lightly moued, we are not so soone caried away, euery course di^t will not satisfie vs as at the first. Againe, the graces of God are sweetest at the first, and sprout out much in the beginning; for then weSimile. are as yong plant^, which in their first rising spring out more sensibly, though lesse substantially, whereas old plants spring not so fast, nor so much in sight and sense, and yet grow into a more firme and solide substance. So we sprout with a more sensible ioy at the first as vnacquainted with that thing, but after we bring forth greater fruites, things not so sensible vnto our feeling.
102 God doth alwaies heare the prayers of his children, though not according toPrayer. their desires it may be, yet certainely for their good and saluation.
103 We are not so much to haue an eye to the beginning as to the ending in godlines.The end tries all. For Paul begun euilly, but he ended well: Iudas began well, but he ended ill.
104 Many men will praise themselues, but who shall find a faithfull man, that is, suchTo be faithfull in our owne busines. a one as doth more negotiari in suo, than otiari in alieno opere? It is not good, if the Lord bids vs to worke in one field, that we should go gleane in another.
105 If they be faultie that let the Sunne go downe on their wrath, what shall becomeAnger. of them that let the Moone change on their wrath: if the good man for speaking good things but out of time be faultie, what shall become of them who speake wicked things with a wicked heart?
106 As it is better with a silly Sheepe to feede in a low pasture with peace and quietnes,The godly mans peace. than with the sturdie Bull to be in a fat pasture with a continuall baiting, so it is better with God his children to haue a little with ioy of conscience, than with the wicked to haue much with terrour of spirit.
107 Iohn Baptist was a good patterne for Chaplaines, who spared not his Lord andChaplaines. Maister in due time.
108 We must not grow to be parched heathes, or flintie rocks, that let all the drops ofHardnes. grace fall, for such cannot be softned.
109 The Lord doth often let the wicked liue in iudgement for themselues, and for aIudgements. terrour of God his iudgements to others.
110 Many seeke the world before the kingdome of God, and so by preposterous orderTo seeke first the kingdom of God. they lose both the world and the kingdome of God. Some indeed seeke first the kingdome of God, but not for the righteousnes of it, but for the ^ase of it.
111 Many play the diuels registers in espying the weakenesses of the godly, whoseThe Diuels registers. worme of conscience shall eate vp themselues.
112 We seeke as Demas, being more loth to forgoe the world than the Lord, or asSound profession. Lots wife, who caried away her body from Sodom, but left her soule and affections behind. It is good therefore to professe no more than we will performe.
113 We must so hide our treasure, that though the world strip vs, yet we must keepe itHow to hide our treasure. from them, as the Martyrs did, whom when the world did search from top to toe, and euery veine in them, yet could they not finde this treasure.
114 God dealeth with vs as a louing father with his prodigall sonne, that is, when heeHow God rewardeth vs. cannot get vs to doe duties, he will hire vs to do well. Seeing then God bargaineth so with vs, that he will giue vs more for our seruice than all the world, or the diuels are ready or able to giue vs, let vs receiue him: for Christ will giue vs for euery peny an hu^dred folde.
115 We must not leaue, or lend time, but make a through*fare of it. A man hauing soldNot to dwell in sinne. an house may come into it, but it is as a stranger, not as the owner and dweller in the house: So we may doe sinne againe, but not as they that will continue in sinne.
116 We must leaue all sinne, one dore is as good as twentie for Satan, one poyson is enoughTo empty our selues of euery one. to destroy, one plague-sore will destroy vs: wee must be wholly emptied of sinne, least wee be like to him that emptieth his mouth of filthines, and so may taste a little of sweete medicines, but because the stomacke is not emptied, filthines comes againe.
117 Oh Lord iudge me not, I iudge my selfe, oh that I may doe it in truth.

1 I haue not so loued the meanes, nor set by the Sabbaths as I should doe.Priuate examination and confession.
2 I haue felt exceeding pettishnes where I did owe dutie, and hardnes of heart, where I should haue pitied.
3 Besides exceeding filthy thoughts, most dangerously did I offend in, Lord.
4 My prayers are more monkish then powerfull.
5 Great hypocrisie of heart, and vaineglory in speech hath ouertaken me.


Good Lord strengthen me to auoyd these things:
1 Customable praying.
2 Vaine-glorious speaking.
3 Desire of being from the meanes.


Good Lord strengthen me to doe these things.
1 To be giuen to a contemplatiue life.
2 To keepe my selfe in fasting, mine eyes in heauen.
3 To meditate ofOr spiritual speciall things without superstition.
4 To remember my former couenants.

118 Wee must endeuour to discerne betweene one sinne and another, by the qualitiesDifferences in sinne. and circumstances following the same; for circumstances make euery sinne greater or smaller.
119 Being asked, whether this may be said, that a childe is, or children be regenerated?Children regenerate. he said, we might in hope so say, because the Apostle saith, that the roote being holie, the branches are holie, and one of the parents being holie, the seede is holy, 1. Cor: 7. yet here we must know, that he speaketh of that holines which is according to the couenant.
120 It is a great mercie of God to haue a good affection when wee haue a good occasion;Affections. for God neuer ceaseth in offering good occasions, but wee often cease in hauing good affections.
121 When a poore man contemptuously in his charge had denyed him his tithe, heeTithe. saide, if he can charge me with want of dutie, I will supplie it, but that I may not hinder my successors, he must pay it; And if he thinke I respect gaine more then mercie, I will giue it to the poore mans boxe.
122 Concerning our studie, it may be that a speciall working of God is in vs, that PhilosophieStudies. is made vnto vs so vnsauorie, and Diuinitie so sweet. In our studies generall precepts, which may make for the truth, are to be gathered, auoiding foolish quiddities, wherby manie studie Philosophie, as heretikes the scriptures, who chuse that which confirmeth their heresies, and leaue the body and substance of the truth.
123 We then doe truly apprehend by faith Christ dying for our sinnes when we feeleA liuely faith. sinne dye in vs.
124 A good man being vehement with him in speeches, he said, you are fire, and I willVehement speeches. be water.
125 Euen as hauing a wheale in our hands, be it neuer so little, we will not let anotherAdmonition. let it out, but wee will doe it our selues; so when we deale with the smallest infirmities in another, let vs doe it with great tendernes, least they desire rather to admonish themselues of it, then to be admonished by vs.
126 Euen as a man hauing corne ripe, when it is readie, for ^eare it should fall away againeDeath. into the earth, reape^h it: so the Lord when a man is readie for his kingdome, least he should become earthly again, he cuts him off by death, and carrieth him into the barne.
127 As when the Arke of God was with great gladnesse receiued of the Bethsa^ites, 1. Sam. 6. 19 when it came from the Philistims, but with little reuerence vsed, it caused aThe co^tempt of the Gospell a signe of wrath. death and destruction to many: so it is to be feared, and almost looked for, that vnlesse better order be taken, the Gospell which should be our life, will be our destruction and death.
128 Because we are dimme of sight, and the Lords workes haue, like the curtaines ofHow to respect aduisedly the workes of God. Salomon* beautie within, it is requisite that we hold our eyes neerer vnto them, and put our heads as it were within them and consider them, C^nt. 1.
129 He said to one troubled: You see now by experience, that which the world seeth by bare knowledge, that is, how God corrects in mercie, and with mercie corrects. You are humbled for vsing euill meanes; Iob said, he desired to be strangled, and the ^aylor went aboutA co^solation to one afflicted. to kill himselfe. You sometime speake idly, but when you are well you must presently be thankfull. You thinke you cannot pray, the Saints pray, and when they pray not, Christ prayes for you. You feare much; feare to sinne. You are glad when good men are with you;Iob. 7. 15. Act. 16. 27. but take heed you tie not Gods helpe to bodily presence. You must labour for two things: first, to come to the word: secondly, to the workes of yourThe afflicted must flie idlenes. calling.
130 It is a great mercie of God to be foolish and to be bunglers in sinning: and as great a iudgement for men to be wise in their sinnes.
131 When a man is most merrie, he is most neere to danger. We must feare God inSinne. prosperitie, loue him and beleeue in him in aduersitie.Mirth.
132 He desired neuer to lay any worldly griefe neere his heart.Griefe.
133 When he spak to one vehemently, against want of reformation, he said, I would our speech were lesse violent, and our spirits with God more vehement. Againe (he said) itVehement speeches. is hard to spend our heate against our owne sinnes first, next against the want of household reformation, and against our enemies, if they be present; otherwise it is no diuine courage. And (saith he) we must in this case euer trie our selues, if we speake with mourning and pitie: and we must be thankfull for the measure we haue, which if it were more would couer many hypocrites, etc.
134 To a Noble woman asking him for good counsell, he said: Madame, first God hath giuen you a birth, blood passing many, credit and countenance, wealth and abundance:A graue counsell to Ladies. in all which as you excell others, so these things require in you the greatest care of well doing. Wherfore my aduice and counsell is vnto you, to trie your heart, whether you haue in any measure beene answerable to these things in your obedience to the Gospell.
135 To one very ciuill and vnspotted in life, in outward appearance to the world, yetTo a man of ciuill life much troubled in minde much tempted and troubled in minde, he spake, not as some would do, charging such with couering grosse sins vnder the cloake of hypocrisie, but farre otherwise: Because you are so blamelesse and vnspotted before men, it is Gods great mercie (least you should be an Heretike, Papist, or proud person) to humble you euen in the sight of your naturall corruption, seeing that thus you may see your selfe to want Christ, as well as others.
136 They that wil teach others effectually must be affected with the things they teach,Teachers. 2. Cor. 1. 3. Ioy and griefe as he that will humble, must be humbled, he that will comfort must be comforted.
137 There is a griefe that ends in laughter, and there is a ioy that ends in weeping: there is a mourning of the law for not doing good, or doing euill, and there is a weeping in the Gospell when we are glad if the things we haue done please God, and this ends in consolation.
138 Is not the sanctifying of the Sabbath commanded? If they say it is a figure, then ISabbath. aske what truth is therein foreshewed? If they affirme it to be a shadow, then where is the bodie resembled? If it be neither figure nor shadow, but a rudiment, whereunto doth it instruct vs? And I would desire you to shew me, where they finde it rather enioyned to the Iewes, than to vs: or if it was not commanded to Adam in Paradise? But if they can neither shew it to be shadowing nor rudimentall, but will graunt the permission of sixe daies trauell,

^ (...)? Now ^^ ^^ the working ^n (...) be a permission, who (...)? ^^ the (...) of the (...) be a commaundement, who ^^^^ forbid it? As (...)* (...) leaue to ^^te of all the fruites of the garden, who could re(...), the Lord restraining from one for his probation, who could haue giuen l^^^e to ^^^^ of it? Or the Lord hauing permitted (...) of all (...), who for conference ^^^^ ^^^ forbid them? The Lord hauing forbidden the vse of them in fasting, who can permit them?
139 He said thus to ^ne in an agonie, vttering desperate things: When you are well, (...) these speeches, because God is much dishonoured by them. And then ^^ said, thatHow to ^^rrie our selves in the temptation. to giue place in temptation is to make ^^ grow on vs: we must therefore (...) ^he diuell, and he will flee from vs. And if we feele paine, the best is in meekenes to (...) to the Lord, and to stay in Christ. For though many in pride of nature doe conte^^^^ the diuell, yet that is his aduantage, as much as in a fearefull nature. In any wife, in the temptation be afraide of yeelding: for if once our mindes be out of peace, if ^^^ forsake the word, we shall goe into great extremities, vnlesse it be for the prayers of the Saints* For as giuing place to lust, anger, or sorrow is dangerous, ^^ also to giue place to feare is euill.
140 We must in all things euery day labour for increase of faith and repentance; whichFew meanes vsed in truth better than many in ceremonie. because it cannot be done without meanes, therefore we must vse them, but ^^^ in ceremonie. For we shall see that after f^^^r meanes, vsed in truth, followes greater (...), than vsing many meanes in ceremonie.
141 To perswade a difference between (...) and feeling, he said, that as we cannot feele the loue of a friend, when he (...), and yet are perswaded of his loue: so weFaith and feeling. may be without a feeling of Gods loue, and (...) perswasion of it.
142 It is wonderfull to see how God directeth the hearts of men simply minded, in theHow God blesseth and directeth the single and simple heart. feeblenes of their senses: for as ^^^^^ being ^^^^^lly minded, though he gr^ped was deceiued, so Iacob being spiritually minded, was by Gods prouidence directed, when he blessed Iosephs children, Gen. 48. 10. 14.
143 Dauid had many troubles and yet ouercame all, but the falling into sinne brake Dauids heart.Isaac was blinde, and so was Iacob.
144 We must humble our selues to see Heretikes doe more for vaine glorie, and for their sect, than we will doe for Gods glorie and for his truth.
145 If once we giue consent to one sinne, we are made readie to fall into many sinnes:Sinne. and making no conscience of one sinne, we shall not make conference of many and greatHeretikes. sinnes: and so being once inwrapped in sinne, it is a hard thing to get out of the clawes ofTo lie in any one sinne how dangerous. the diuell.
149 If any man make no conscience to walke vprightly, I will not free him from pouertie, from sicknes, from heresie: for as well can and will the Lord punish the minde asTo walke vprightly. the bodie.
147 It is the greatest iudgement of God that can be to thriue in sinne.To thriue in sinne.
148 When men begin to suffer themselues to be deceiued, it is to be feared they will be hardened* Heb 3. 12. 13.Deceitfulnes of sinne.
149 If you slip backe from the Gospell the stranger sort will be offended, either by noting in you singularitie, or by suspecting you for inhumanitie: But O cursed corruptions of our sinfull nature! if we giue libertie, they will grant licentiousnes; if we affoord consolation, they will set on presumption; if we call for humiliation, they crie to desperation.
150 Looke often vpon Christ when you are alone, be carefull to please him; for carefulnes and cheerefulnes may meete together in a sanctified minde.
151 He would giue to others, not such things as he loued not, but such things as he loued dearely, that they might know it to be a gift of loue.
It is the temptation of the godly to feare whatsoeuer they doe, that they doe it in hypocrisie.


