



A Diuision of the estate
of the Poore.
THE poore of this
Common-Wealth
are of two sorts, viz
The impotent persons
not able to
releeue themselues
with their labor, and
the idle Rogues, able
to mintaine the selues, and do their
Countrey good, if they were set on worke,
as the Statute Lawes of this Land prescribeth.
The impotent is the blinde, lame, wounded
souldier, fatherlesse childe, aged person,
or diseased by Leprosie, Dropsie, or
else visited with other greeuous sicknesse,
not able to labour, to releeue themselues
sufficiently.
The Idle poore is the Theefe, the Rogue,

the Rogue, the Strumpet, the sturdy Beggar,
the Filcher, the Couzener, Cut-purse,
and such like.


The Misery of the Poore, with the danger
of their soules.
GREAT is the misery that the Carkasses
of the poore sustaine, as extreame
hunger, pinching colde, pittifull nakednesse,
great disdaine, strange surfeits,
greeuous sores, deadly diseases, and painefull
deaths: but greater and much more lamentable,
is the daungerous distresse of
their silly soules. For, they are the slaues
of Sathan, in the Galley of Idlenesse, fastened
to the seate of Pouerty, with the Chaine of
Slothfulnesse, where extreame Cruelty, with
his Whip of Necessity (whose biting Cords
are Hunger and Cold) forceth them to haste
the fearfull Voyage, vnto the dolefull Hauen
of Hell, by greedie rowing with the Oares
of Iniurious Wrongs, as Theft, Cozenage,
Witchcraft, and such like: but I hope to see,
that Serpent so encountered with that
goodly Ship, called, The good Gouernment of

England, and that Loue that good Gunner
therein (with the Powder of Zeale) will so
thunder forth those Bullets of Iudgement out
of the battering peeces of the Law, that Sathan
shall be enforced to deliuer those silly
slaues out of his thraldome, and yeelde
his huge Vessell, to remaine a famous monument,
vntill the end of the World.
Excellently was that on-set giuen in
the making of sundry Statutes* for the releese
of the Impotent, and setting the ydle
on Worke: but if we consider how Negligence
hath ouerthrowne that Famous
Worke; wee shall finde, how Selfe-Loue
is setled farre into euerie mans heart, and
that we so hotly hunt after priuate Gaine,
that wee freezing coldly, seeke not any
Publike Profite. Wee play the sloathfull
hand, loath to come out of a warme pocket,
to heale and helpe to couer the whole
bodie from pinching cold.
But come, come, deere Christians, let
euerie man now bee more mooued with
pittie. And according vnto their seuerall
Callinges, so charitably to further some

good prouision, that the poore heereafter
may be otherwise releeued, and not bee
forced to beg or steale for maintenance.
And the ydle so set on Worke, that they be
not compelled to runne about the Countrey,
haunting of Ale-houses, and vsing all
bad and wanton exercises, to driue away
the time withall. And let not Parishioners
do stil (as some do now) beare out theeues
in their theeuerie, for that they take their
prey with the Foxe, farre from his home,
which otherwise should charge the town.
Let them not winke at the matter, when
they finde the Theefe, and so the thing
stolne, nor make the Host of the Alehouse
their Constable, that diligent Setter for all
misorder, and Maister of mis-rule, their
cheefe Officer, to see good Order kepte.
Let them not suffer suspected persons, to
be playing in Ale-houses, especially in the
time of Diuine Seruice, nor play there for
more (at any time) then they haue honestly
gotten.
And, whereas many poore Parents be
so foolish, to plant their Children on the

roote of ydlenesse, which will yeelde no
other fruite, but the Berries of Iniquitie;
whereby our Countrey is pittifullie and
greeuously pestered, with such as for want
of other Trade or meanes to liue by, doe
practise Robbing, Filching, Stealing,
Cozening, and such like. Now therefore,
I would heartily wish, that euerie Christian
(as his Calling serueth for that purpose)
should be some meanes, that those youthfull
plants, may be trained vp in some honest
course of life; whereby they may hereafter
get their liuings by some good and
lawfull meanes: so shall they greatlie glorifie
God, by their dutifull diligence in doing
of his will, ouerthrow the power of
Sathan by the confusion of Idlenesse: rescue
those silly soules out of that Tyrantes
thraldome: and worke a publike profite
to the whole Land, by freeing it from that
extreame charge, to maintaine so manie
thousands of people without their labor.



The Euill of Idlenesse, and what men
do for want of Exercise, and Maintenance.
IDlenesse maketh mens bodies
the Demeanes of the Diuell:
for the bodie of an Idle person
is the Diuels home, Viz:
Empty of Grace, swept of all Goodnesse;
and so garnished with Naturall Euils,
that it may well entertaine Sathan, and seuen
more as bad as himselfe.

The Euill of Idlenesse.
Idlenesse, is the head of that Serpent Sathan,
which where it entreth, windeth in
his whole bodie, with all the poyson of Iniquitie.
For first, for want of exercise,
wee see idle people hunt and runne after
euill Company: seeke out disordered Alehouses,
where they sweare and forsweare,
Banne, Cursse, Blaspheme God, disdaine
good things, slander and backe-bite their
Neighbours, vse all vnlawfull Exercises;

tell Tales, that are taken for Tales, and lies
of others that are taken for truth, so setting
much variance, yea often among Friends,
and driuing away the time with the wretched
workes of Wantonnesse, and disfiguring
themselues with the loathsome sin
of Drunkennesse. Then, for want of
maintenance, they practise Pilling, Polling,
Promooting, Wrangling, Defrauding,
Robbing, Begging, Filching, Stealing,
Iuggling, Connicatching, Cosening,
False Dicing, and with such like shifting:
like Caterpillars, Waspes, and Droanes,
they eate and deuoure vppe the Fruites
and sweet Commodities of this Commonwealth.
But how might I enlarge this Volume
(if I so entended) with painting foorth the
deformitie, which Idlenesse hath bred in
these Roguish Trauelling people, which
in their Common Whoredome, resemble
lawlesse Beastes; in their Cousening, Filching,
Stealing, and Deuouring, imitate
vilde Vermine; in their Drunkennesse; do

shew themselues loathsome Swine; and in
Banning, Cursing, Forswearing, Lying,
Out-facing, and egregious Dissembling,
both with GOD and the World, painted
forth, the verie perfect pictures of Sathan:
O that Christian hearts can abide the sights
of these most greeuous and monstrous Euilles.
Come then therefore, O yee painefull
Iudges, and carefull Iustices of this Land:
Yee watchfull Magistrates, and diligent
Labourers in the Lords Vine-yard: cutting
of the branches will not suffice, but
strike at the Roote (which is Idlenes) with
the Axe of Iudgement, and the flourishing
Tree of all Iniquitie, will quickely fade away.




Reasons to releeue the Impotent,
and to reforme the Idle.
IF the body haue a lame and
withered foote, whereof it
can haue small vse, yet if it
bee whole and sound, and
the blood of the bodie hath the course
therein; wee see euery member is helping
the same with necessaries, and assisting
the same from hurt: but beeing
infected with a running or rotting sore
or Thistela, that sharpe Corsies cannot
eate out the filthy corruption thereof:
then all the members (not regarding
the present paine) giue their consents,
that the same shall bee cut off with the
Saw of the Chirurgeon, least it bee the
decay of the whole body: Euen so the
Impotent with the lame foote, is to bee
defended and sustained by euery member
of the body of this Commonwelth;
hauing a will (although it want power)

to requite the same. But the idle persons,
infected with that running and
rotting sore of Whoredome, Theft, Cozenage,
and such like; must bee cut off
with the sword of Iudgement, if the
sharpe Corsies of Correction, cannot
eate out the filthy Corruption thereof,
least it runneth vp so neere the hart, that
it ouerthrow and bring vnto ruine the
whole body of this Commonwealth.
This Rotting sore hath runne farre
of late, if wee consider how many of
these people the Warres hath swallowed
vp: How many of them are shipped
to that famous Plantation of Virginia and
Sommer Islands: How many the Judgement
of the Law hath turnd ouer: How
many of them greeuous diseases haue
ended their dayes: How many haue perished
in the fields: And how the realm
is yet pittifully pestered with them: so
that it is more then time for the Eye,
with stedfastnesse to visit the same; the

Head with carefulnesse to deuise a help,
and the Hand with maruailous diligence
to minister it thereunto.
The Husbandman couereth close
his Hiues of Bees from colde stormes,
and setteth watchmen to preserue them
from the stinging Waspe and the ydle
Drone: Euen so our Soueraign Prince,
whose Highnesse Hiue is this Land, couereth
the same from the stormes of
Oppression; and setteth his Watchmen
to take away Waspish Theft, and Dronish
Begging: which if it were effected
(according to his Highnesse intention)
then no doubt, the labouring Bees
would worke with Comfort, Courage,
and Strength, filling their Hiue full of
Hony, his Highnesse Countrey full of
sweet Commodities.
The wise Housholding Husbandman,
will suffer no ydle persons in his
house, onely for two causes. First, hee

knoweth, it is a charge to maintaine
them that doenothing: And then, that
those ydle people, with their Wanton
and vaine Exercises, bring his whole
housholde out of Order. Euen so, let
the Wise Husbandmen of this Common-wealth,
consider; That it is not
onely a charge to the Land, to mainetaine
so many thousands of those ydle
people without their labour, but also
it bringeth the whole Commonwealth
so out of Order, that euery man
wanteth now, that seruice at his Seruants
hands, that heeretofore they haue
had. For our yonglings heads, are alwayes
occupied with those wanton Exercises,
which they see ydle people dayly
deuise and practize.



THE POORE WITHout
Releefe.
LOOKE with hearts of Charity,
and eyes of pittie, vnto
the distressed estate of the
poore (good Christians) for
first, although the Commons with co^mon
Commodities in some Towne be
woorth an hundred, or two hundred
pounds a yeere, or more; yet the poore
of the same Towne, vnto the third part
of the Towne in number, shall not bee
thereby releeued, to the value of fortie
shillings in a yeare: So are the Commons
surcharged by the Rich: and the
profit of their Towne-lands* employed
to beare other common Charges withall.
And how may I complaine therewith
of the decay of Hospitality in our Land,
whereby many poore soules are depriued

of that releefe which they haue had
heeretofore. The time hath bene, that
men haue hunted after Worshippe and
Credite by good House-keeping, and
therein spent great part of their Reuennewes:
but now commonly, the greater
part of their Liuings, is too little to
maintaine vs and our Children in the
pompe of Pride: yea, and yet all is well
if wee may maintaine that, though no
Hospitallitie be maintained there withall.
And thus, though the number of the
poore do dailie encrease, all things yet
worketh for the worst in their behalfe.
For, there hath beene no Collection
for them, no not these seuen yeares, in
many Parishes of this Land, especiallie
in Countrie townes; but many of those
Parishes turneth forth their poore, yea
and their lustie Labourers that will not
worke, or for any misdemeanor want
worke, to begge, filtch, and steale for

their maintainance, so that the Countrey
is pittifully pestered with them:
yea, and the maimed Soldiours, that
haue ventured their liues, and lost their
limbes in our behalfe, are also thus requited:
For when they returne home,
to liue by some labour in their naturall
Countrey, though they can worke well
in some kinde of labour, euerie man
sayeth, Wee will not bee troubled with
their Seruice, but make other shifte for
our businesse So are they turned forth
to Trauaile, in Idlenesse (the highway
to Hell) and seeke their meate vppon
Meares (as the Prouerbe goeth,) with
Begging, Filching, and Stealing for
their maintenance, vntill the law bring
them vnto the fearefull end of hanging.
But our Sauiour Christ hath taught
vs Christians to do good vnto our Ene
mies, and shall we then do nothing for
our Friends? If wee ought to loue them

that hatevs, shall we thus recompence
them that haue ventured life and limbe
for vs? No, no, for their good Seruice,
let vs see their bodies heereafter better
releeued, and some good and godlie
meanes vsed, to saue their soules from
the Torments of Hell, that GOD may
be better pleased, and those poor Soules
that fight for vs, much more animated.
And I would wish all men to consider,
that the Lord of Heauen, hath retained
those poore Soules, with the hyring-penie
of Life, that they might Labor
in this his Vineyard or Common-Wealth,
and make it flow with all kinde
of Commodities. Then may not wee
which are Stewards, turne them foorth
of his seruice, to Cozen, Begge, Filch,
Steale, and such like; excusing our selues,
that it is a trouble to vs to keepe them
in order, and so put vp the Lords allowance
in our owne purses: For then, hee

hauing tried and found vs vnfaithfull
with the dust of the earth, will neuer
trust vs with the heritage of heauen.
But no doubt some wil say, the fault
is in those poore people, that they are
not set on worke; they are either vntrue,
froward, vnruly, slothfull, or some
such matter, which indeede I cannot
deny: but if there bee not the like, or
worse in vs, let vs be thankefull to God;
who thorough Grace hath made vs
Conquerors, of those naturall euilles.
And let not vs, because they of weakenesse,
goe ouer the shooes in sin, shew
so much vnchristian Crueltie to them,
to thrust them ouer head and eares into
Hell, by forcing them to liue by vnlawfull
meanes.
Can wee not content our selues with
the Priest and Leuite to see their misery
being thus robbed, bound, and wounded

by that Theeuish Sathan, but wee
must much more cruelly, with our
swords of extreamity, smite them vnto
death? O when and where shall they
then finde, the Neighbour-hood of the
good Samaritanes, to binde vppe their
wounds with compassion, carrie them
home with troble, moue others to take
care of them, and prouide for them sufficiently
with charge.


What filleth this Land with
Poore.
THree kindes of Oppressions
much pestereth the same with
pouertie, Viz. The taking in to
the Lords hands of Coppy-hold Lands:
whereby many Housholders are vtterly
decayed.
Secondly, the surcharging of Commons,
so that the poore cannot haue any
benefit of them.
And lastly, the purchasing of Land

vnto Land, vntill rich men get whole
Townes into their hands: and then dispeopling
the same, by letting downe of
Houses, and turning forth of Tenants,
they recouer the Commons from the
poore, and make them their owne seuerals*
And therewithall, they take the
cheefe Commodities with ten or twelue
Husbandmen, omitting the rest: whereas
before that time vpon that Ground,
were set on worke and maintained, not
lesse then a hundreth men, women, and
children: yet the Landlords had their
rents duly paide them, and the poore
amongst those Farmers otherwise prouided
for. This is the Incroachment,
that will bring the woe of the Prophet
vpon the Land.
Euen thus as you see, the poore man
with that which heretofore he had, and
of right should now haue, is swallowed
vp into the rich mans possession: but let
mee shew those people their folly, by a
simple simile.
The subtile Fisherman hideth his
Angling hookes in the backes of little
Roaches, and draweth the same too
and fro in the sight of deuouring Pikes
(within the Water) which after long
dalliance, vnaduisedly swalloweth the
same vp with greedines into their hungrie
bellies, and thinking themselues
fully possessed thereof, the Fisherman
draweth the hookes, pulleth them from
their Fellowes, carrieth them vnto his
home, fryeth them vppon the Coales,
and with sharpe Vinegar maketh them
dishes fit for his owne dyet. Euen so,
that subtle Fisherman the Diuell, hath
Hookes in the backs of all those Rochlike
Little-loues, being heere vppon
earth, drawne too and fro in sight of
those deuouring people, which swalloweth
them vppe with all greedinesse
into their vnsatiable possessions.
But let them know, that when they

thinke themselues fully possessed of
this their prey, and say with the Rich
man, Now soule take thy rest, the Fisherman-like
Diuell by the strength of
the strings of Gods vengeance and Iustice,
will drawe the Hookes of death,
pull them from their fellowes, carrie
them to his homely Hell, dresse them
after a diuellish fashion, fry them vvith
vnquenchable Coales: and so sowsed
and soaked in the sharpe sawce of Gods
euerlasting wrath, he will make them a
dish whereon he will feed, world without
end.
Yet I hope the LORDE of his
mercie, will breath nowe vppon the
bodie, the blessed quickening spirit of
life, that all the members hauing their
senses so restored, may perfourme
theyr seuerall duties: to the helpe, succour,
and sustentation one of another:
which GOD graunt for his owne
clorie, the peace of his Church,

the Ioy and pleasure of our Soueraigne
Prince, the releefe of the needie, and
the publike Honour and profite of
this Christian Commonwealth.
FINIS.

