a publication of gviana plantation to all faithful and well affect christian for as much as diverse of this nation be depart hence into foreign country as well for the propagate of God truth most likely as their own private benefit whereby the word of the lord may be fulfil in those heathen through God infinite goodness and mercy as in we christian former say rom. 9 25. 26. I will call they my people which be not my people and her belove which be not belove and it shall be in the place where it be say unto they you be not my people that there they shall be call the child of the live God neither be it to be doubt but that there be diverse yet remain which retain the like christian resolution but want of true knowledge of a plantation that may prove profitable to the church of God and them-themselves cause such to live here like plant which many time prove less fruitful in their natural soil then when they be remove to place better like they for which cause I have think good at this present to discover brief to all such as be well affect the knowledge of a most hopeful plantation new undertake by the right honourable the earl of Berkshire knight of the most noble order of the garter and company for that famous river of the amazon in America as by that which follow may appear but before I proceed further herein I think it not amiss to speak somewhat of the lawfulness of plantation in foreign country whereby such as make doubt thereof may be beet satisfy herewith now in plantation there be these two principal to be consider first whether it be lawful to remove from one place or country to another second whether it be lawful to possess a country already inhabit by other touch the former it have these two several head namely ordinary and extraordinary extraordinary be that when God shall please immediate to cause any man to depart from one country to another as he cause Abraham to depart from Haran to Canaan and jacob to return from Padan aram to the land of his father gen. 12. 1 4 5 31. 3. 18. but no man may now expect any such removal and call as these former have the latter of these which I call ordinary be that when man shall be either move themselves or by other to leave their ancient habitation and go and inhabit some other place and this I take to be warrantable from that place of the king where the child of the prophet say unto elisha 2 King 6. 1 2 3 4. @ behold now the place where we dwell with thou be too narrow for we let we go now to jordan that we may take thence every man a beam and make we a place to dwell in and he answer go and one say vouchsafe I pray thou to go with thy servant and he say I will go so he go with they and when they come to jordan they cut down wood which work of they without question be no other to they then a new plantation for they see the inconvenience that be like to ensue by stay long in their ancient habitation do thereupon remove to a place more spacious and commodious for they @ in which progress of they we may learn not to conceal any thing to ourselves which may as well prove profittable to other but discover the same for their good as doubtless the child of the prophet here do from hence then we may gather th^ man may lawful remove with their family from one place to another and that for diverse cause as here the child of the prophet do by reason of the straightness of the land wherein they dwell and it be to be fear that many also among we have as great cause to do the like by reason of the daily increase of all sort of people whereby city town and country be so throng that man can hardly live well one by another appear by the general complaint of many in these time neither have the say straightness alone 2 king 8. 1 2. cause a removal from one place or country to another ruth 4. 1. 2. but also famine 1 Chro. 10. 7. sword and other alteration happen in the world jer. 14. 18. and to speak true if that some in all age have not depart into other country with their family as God be please to move they by his divine providence the world assure have not be so much inhabit abroad as now it be Heb. 11. 37 38. and man have be more burden at home than now they be therefore such man deserve rather to be commend then condemn by any @ and that because they do nothing herein but what god have command to be do as appear gen. gen. 9 1. 1. 28. bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the earth and this again be ratify to Noah and his son say bring forth fruit and multiply and replenish the earth which place be no way contradict in all the scripture as I can ever perceive be sufficient to prove the lawfulness of plantation in all age and the rather when king shall be likewise please to allow the same freedom to their natural subject and that not only to the poor but also to the rich who have the like privilege of removal as appear by the place before mention gen. 13. 2 5 6 1^ and by that of Abraham and lot who depart one from the other because the land wherein they dwell be so straight that it can not bear they by reason their substance be so great so then we see all man have a like liberty of remove from one place to another except such only rom. 12. 7. which for the time be have any office or shall be marry 1 cor. 7. 5. in which case man ought not to depart from their wife without consent 1 pet. 3. 7. nor child from their parent without their like colo. 5. 20. 22. nor servant from their master without their leave it remain in the next place that I show the lawfulness of possess a country already inhabit by other which be our second question true it be that all man through Adam fall be deprive of the glory of God and world good until by Christ the use of the creature be again restore to all believer therefore the right of that which we possess come now to we by Christ for which cause the heathen have no right to that which they deem they psal 115. 16. notwithstanding the lord have be please to suffer such to live on earth with he gen. 2. 32. and not to be root out from the place of their habitation until the day of harvest Isaiah 27. 13. during which time the land wherein such have live have be call they 2 Chron. 32. 21 as the land of the philistines the land of Egypt jer. 37. 7. and of ashur of who it be say Isaiah 13. 14. that he return with shame @ to his own land and of the egyptian it be say Isaiah 19 17. they shall return @ into their own land 2 king 5. 2. ^ in like manner the land of judea and Israel psal 44. 1 2 3. be take from the heathen by God special command and assistance be afterward call @ their own land Ezech. 36. 17. for as the israelite land be not the heathen as say the prophet Esa. 14. 1. lo I raise up the chaldaean to possess the dwell place @ that be not they Habak. 1. 6. neither be the heathen land the israelite gen. 24. 37. as God tell Abraham say know for a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land @ that be not they gen. 15. 13. from whence we may gather that God permit not he to dispossess a people or nation of their ancient habitation for the enlarge of their own border nevertheless if such shall be willing that God people shall inhabit with they as Abimelech be willing that Abraham shall dwell with he in his land where it please he gen. 20. 15. and 47. 5. 6. and Pharaoh like well that jacob and his son shall dwell with he in the best of the land of Egypt in such a case man may doubtless possess a country already inhabit by other @ but the inhabitant of Guiana be willing that our nation shall inhabit that goodly and spacious country with they as appear more full in mr. harcourts relation of Guiana dedicate to the king most excellent majesty 1626. therefore without all question the plantation there make of late by our nation be lawful thus have brief show the lawfulness of plantation in foreign country for the better satisfy of such as make doubt thereof I come in the next place to speak somewhat of the nature of the river quality of the land climate and people of Guiana with the provision for man sustenance and commodity therein grow whereby such as be ignorant of the same may be encourage to adventure for the good of themselves and of those poor native which sit still in darkness and in the shadow of death as touch that great and famous river of the amazon in America Harcort it be call for the excellency thereof by josepus a the empress and queen of all flood and for the large extent of the same it be call by other the sweet sea suppose to be the great river not only of all India but also of the whole world it be say to slow from the mountain of Peru and run with many wind and turn for the space of 1500 league contain at the mouth thereof near sixty league in breadth in it be many land diverse of which be inhabit by the indian it do ebb and flow near three hundred league and have in it great store of excellent fish for the use of man of which more shall be say hereafter when we shall come to speak of the provision of the country for man sustenance the quality of the land be of diverse kind as low middle and mountainous as here with we it abound in wood of diverse sort have plain in some part thereof with plenty of grass beside pleasant stream of fresh water all which be very needful and fit for a plantation the earth in those part be of sundry mixture as black mould clay and such like beside stone for build if occasion serve the season there differ much from we for the dry weather which we call there summer begin about August and the reins and wind which we account there winter begin about February which latter season be term by we their winter by reason of the rain then fall extraordinary and not by reason of the coldness of the weather for there be no frost or snow as with we here @ but a continual spring and summer season for no soon do the leaf wither and fall away but present it begin to spring again as here with we some year it seem the like for when our autumn prove somewhat warm then common appear a second spring which yet never come to perfection and that by reason of the sun decline from our horizon and the cold winter present approach which cause always our latter spring to keep back until the time of our summer season @ which in Guiana be not so for there be little difference of heat and cold throughout the year but a most pleasant grow weather which common cause those part to be much more fruitful than many other part of the world @ the day and night be there always equal the sun rise at six of the clock in the morning and set at six in the evening or near thereabouts the year throughout the provision for diet be many as first the root call cassavie of which the guianian make their bread there be likewise a kind of great wheat call Maix it yield great increase and make excellent meal or flower for bread of the aforesaid Cassavie and this wheat be make a sort of drink call Paranaw much like the best march bear here with we other sort also they have which for brevity sake I omit here to speak of there be dear of diverse sort wild swine hare and coney in great plenty beside which there be a great beast call Maipnry which in taste be like beef and will take salt there be also another creature which usual come into the fresh water and feed upon the grass and weed in the marsh and be call by we the sea-cow be in taste like beef and will also take salt as the former of these there be great store in their season they will serve well for the victual of ship homeward bind as of late have be prove of fowl there be diverse kind namely wild-duck wild-goose hen heron crane stork pheasant partridge pigeon stockdove parrot of sundry sort beside ravenous fowl and hawk with diverse other sort not know in these part the variety of fish be great as first mullet seabreame sole scate thornebacke swordfish seal a fish like a salmon but differ in colour shrimp lobster and oyster other sort there be beside freshwater fish of many kind which in these part of Europe be not know to we the fruit there grow be the Pina Plantana Medler plumb and nut of diverse kind beside store of potato as for the Pina it exceed all other fruit in those part be in taste much like ripe straberry with claret wine and sugar the Plantana taste like a old pippin the meddler exceed we in greatness and the nut in sweetness have thus brief touch the several sort of provision necessary for man sustenance it remain I show the variety of commodity therein grow for the trade of merchandise which in shorttime by god assist our endeavour may be bring to return great profit to the undertaker the first commodity of estimation there grow be sugarcane whereof in some part there be store which by orderly plant and erect of convenient work for boil and make of sugar may through God blessing be return yearly great profit to the adventurer @ as the plantation of sugarcane make heretofore in Barbary by the moor and since that in brasseile by the portugal may witness there be also cotton wool grow of the fine sort it be a profitable commodity for make of sustian calico and candle-wicke there be a natural hemp or flax of great use it be much like raw silk and be call of some silkegrasse there be likewise many commodity for dyer as namely a red berry call Anotto which die a perfect oringe-tawny in silk and a yellow in cloth of which there may be get good store every season for myself with some other set forth a ship former for those part by way of trade receive upon return above three thousand weight of the say Anotto which then bear a good price here but much better in the neatherland other die there be beside hope of Cutcheneale which at this present I purpose brief to pass over there be likewise find of late store of nutmeg grow with their mace some of which I have recevy upon return of my foresay adventure which no man I suppose but myself can show the like except some gentleman which upon request have receive some of i which no doubt may in short time be bring to a more full perfection by either crop the old tree and dreaning the water from they or by transplant the young tree as by experience be common see how that nature be much help by art and industry there be likewise Gumma Lemina Ginnipepper long pepper Cascia fistula tobacco spleen stone speckled wood honey and wax as for mineral or mine of metal it be very likely this country afford many not only of the base but also of the rich which hereafter may come to be discover if God shall be please which he grant to his glory and our good or that otherwise they may ever lie hide now as touch the nature of these people they be general hold harmless tractable trusty and somewhat laborious in which respect they differ much from all other american and which be better to be like in they there be good hope conceive of their conversion to the christian faith act. 16. 9 10 for as the man of Macedonia pray st. Paul in a vision to come into Macedonia and help they so have some of these poor ignorant soul desire captain Charles Leigh purchas p. 1021. to send into England for some man to teach they to pray since which one be convert harcourt p. 9 and become a christian be at the point of death desire some of our nation then present to sing a psalm with he which be end he tell they he can not live and do withal acknowledge that he have be a wicked sinner but do hope that he shall be save by the precious blood of our saviour jesus Christ and moreover he desire all of they there present to bear witness that he die a christian @ yea say he a christian of England a happy work no doubt it be to recover those poor soul out of Satan snare who be take captive of he at his will 2 tim. 2. 26 may we not well fear that as he murder the body that deny it nourishment when extremity require it so do he no less to the soul of who nourishment be implore Alsted chron. in tit deconuer and yet he deny it be not the nubian case most miserable once a christian people in Africa when have not able minister of their own they send to the abassine their neighbour for teacher and be deny do not such deserve worthy the calamity of a perpetual ignorance who so uncompassionate slight the reasonable request of other Heylin ^ 121. on the contrary when some of the east indian send their ambassador to Demetrus patriarch of Alexandria for teacher to instruct they in the faith of Christ he willing condescend thereunto and send not only such as preach true doctrine but also adorn the same by a holy conversation so that by their pious diligence they win many of they to the faith which be the crown of their rejoice and who know but that he that infuse such desire into a inhabitant of the east indy may work as powerful in they of the west and may likewise bless these as he bless they with the ^lessed light of his most holy word to which let every faithful christian say amen now see that the hope of worldly gain cause most man to adventure in one kind or other and that the gain conceive of this plantation may prove very profitable both to the church of God and all adventurer it may therefore the better encourage and stir up man of all sort to become adventurer herein @ and chief such as have receive of the lord both grace and ability for the further set forth of his glory and although it can be deny but that our nation of late year have be very forward in settle of diverse plantation beyond the sea yet have they not all thereby so much glorify God as can be wish nor deal so faithful with some adventurer as be expect which thing no doubt be consider by many have be the only cause of keep they back from be adventurer and no marvel if when we consider the person common send I speak not of all but of such only who live be base and idle here at home can hardly be expect to be much better abroad in foreign plantation which to speak true have be no other for the most part former then common sink wherein too many grieve father have cast forth their desperate offspring and the commonwealth her most lawless inhabitant such as by their conversation cause the good name whereby they be call 1 pet. 2. 12. to be rather evil speak of among the gentile than otherwise by mean whereof it have happen that the heathen have deem that God as evil as their own who servant be worse than themselves do not God and nature teach that whatsoever a man sow gal. 6. 7. that shall he also reap not grape of thorn matth. 7. 16 nor fig of thistle can man expect and now though plant of grace like fruitful tree be chief to be wish for in all plantation yet no doubt may civil man be send in case of want as nature flower for ornament I wish therefore that care be have @ to send those plant and leave the bad as for the temper of the climate it exceed not so in heat as some man have think of it for though the situation be in part under the equinoctial yet be it habitable as appear by the experience of our countryman which have live in those part and find it both healthful and pleasant for God in wisdom have so order the heaven in their horizon as that by mean of a breeze or fresh gale of wind blow in the day time it quallifi the heat @ and make the climate much more temperate as with we be often feel the like in heat of summer beside the dew there fall common in the night add much to the cool of that climate and which be to be note the continual absence of the sun from the horizon for the space of twelve hour every day can but cause the temper of that climate to be moderate there be a perfect mixture of heat and cold each qualife the other in the space of twenty four hour by a equal division of day and night as before have be show their house be build most common in length like our barn here with we some of which be so large as that they contain in they above a hundred person have therein hang bed in which they lie call hamackoe make of cotton will very artificial their vessel for use be make some of clay of which sort some be so great as that they will contain more than one hogshead of water they will work a month or more for a axe of eighteen or twenty penny price for which they will fell your timber clear your ground plant your sugarcane Anotto and Cotten tree and build your house after their fashion @ which in other plantation be not so for in all other our plantation the adventurer be enforce to carry man over to do their work for they lest otherwise they be drive to work themselves as Virginia st. Christopher and new England with other can witness beside which in most former plantation except new England man have adventure only upon hope of one commodity as namely tobacco but here be many more commodity than one as have be show @ therefore be this plantation more hopeful than all other the foundation of which be already lay may give man better encouragement to become joint adventurer herein especial be thereupon present interest in the ship stock and profit of the say plantation for the preservation whereof we have not only send diverse honest and able man marren and other but also some piece of great ordnance with ammunition and other material very useful towards building of a fort for the better secure of our planters person from the danger of a enemy have moreover cause a pinnace to be send to abide with the colony in the river for their better safety and trade in the country @ intend likewise this summer if God shall be please to set out a new supply of more man as artificer and other beside woman as also more ordnance ammunition and other material fit for the defence of the plantation beside another ship great than the former to stay and abide there together with the colony in the river for their better defence and trade in the country aforesaid in which supply I also purpose God will to go with my wife and friend to inhabit some part of that spacious and goodly country but here some may object fear of the enemy object answ answ it be no other than what have be usua vent at the first set forth of all our plantation for America as Virginia and other can witness and if there be so great cause to fear as some have suppose man will not assure have adventure so free but this plantation here mention be far from the spaniard habitation and therefore less cause to be fear but yet it may be further object object that though the Spaniard be somewhat far distant yet the portugal in Brasill be near unto it may prove as ill neighbour as the other answ answer if we consider the spatiousnes of the country be suppose to be more than twenty time great than this kingdom of England we have no such great cause to fear they for if we like not their neighbourhood there be room enough and diverse goodly river beside in the country we may if we please go further out of their reach where no doubt through god assist of our endeavour we may come to return as great profit by mean of sugar cane and such like commodity grow in those part as in the river aforesaid for to speak true it be great weakness in any to presume to sit near a enemy and have not sufficient strength to oppose he or have room enough to go out of his reach will notwithstanding abide near he yet I deny not but that a colony may be able to subsist near a enemy by mean of fortification and especial when they be such as fear God be provide with ammunition victual and all other thing needful for the defence of the same for to raise a fort for the relief of a colony and not to victual it as some have careless neglect through indiscretion be to make it with such our people grave and not their preservation and if a hundred of our nation or thereabouts have neither fort nor artillery for defence be able not long since by mean of the native to cause about eighteen hundred of the enemy to retreat and abandon the river with loss of many of their life how much more than be fortify and fit with all thing needful for the defence of the same may we be better able through the help of the almighty to repel and beat back a more potent power now as the raise of fort for the defence of colony and neglect of store they with victual and other thing needful for preservation of the same show the great indiscretion of some sort of people @ so in like manner be their folly as great who look after present profit neglect plant provision needful for the preservation of their life which we take into consideration have give express charge that first of all they take care to plant provision needful for sustentation whereby they may be able in short time to subsist of themselves without help of the native which usual furnish our english plantation with store of provision for diet at marvellous low rate yet notwithstanding we have send thither some few cattle for breed beside other creature which in those part have not yet be hear of by we to have be among they and if any man shall desire to be further satisfy concern the proceed of the say plantation or shall make doubt of any thing they may please to repair to the place of meeting hereafter mention and there receive further satisfaction now as touch the manner of the adventure it be as follow every one that shall be admit into the colony or company of the right honourable the earl of Barksheire for his plantation in Guiana be to be admit one of these three way that be to say either in person and purse or in purse or in person only the first be call personal adventurer the second purse adventurer and the latter be servant to the colony concern the former they be such as not only adventure their person but also their purse of which sort none may be admit under fifty pound at least put into the joint stock be a single share in consideration whereof every such adventurer be to have for his personal service over and above the profit of his stock of adventure his transportation and diet free both in the passage and country beside a certain stipend or yearly allowance as other towards the maintenance of his apparel and bed and also aleventh part of a twelve of all the profit that shall arise by the industry and labour of the colony beyond sea and last a proportion of land over and beside his stock of adventure of fifty pound or more as every one please to put in @ who respect in the colony be hold fit to be measure according to the greatness of every man adventure worth and quality as for those which be call purse adventurer they be such which adventure their money but not their person @ who name and sum adventure be not only register but also acknowledge by indenture under seal by authority from the say earl for their better security and more assurance of faithful deal to become joint adventurer with the say earl and company for his plantation aforesaid and that at every return during the term of five year after the first return from the plantation every adventurer his heir executour administratour or assign shall receive the profit of his stock of adventure and shall the first return from the plantation after five year shall be expire receive out the just residue and remainder of his stock of adventure and profit thereof or may if he please continue the same long in the joint stock than the term aforesaid for his further benefit and shall have moreover set forth for his use a proportion of land correspondent to his say stock of adventure and to the end that every adventurer his heir executor administrator and assign may clear see that they have the due proportion of the profit of their adventure it be covenant in the say indenture that the heir executor administrator and assign of they shall upon every set forth and return see the full sum of all the disbursement and receipt from time to time pay and receive touch the proceed of the say joint stock and plantation which in like manner every adventurer as well personal servant as other have the like indenture for their better satisfaction and more assurance of faithful deal as aforesaid now concern the latter which be servant to the colony they be such which adventure only their person be bind by indenture to serve the say earl and company in the plantation five year in consideration whereof the say servante as well wife maid as man be to have their transportation thither free as also their diet lodging apparel and all other material needful provide for they at the charge of the joint stock for the term aforesaid apparel themselves here for the first year and to receive moreover for their better encouragement a twelve part of all the profit that shall arise by their labour and industry and the woman a fifteen as of sugar nutmeg mace cotton wool anottoe honey wax tobacco mineral and all other such like commodity as shall be get in the plantation in manner aforesaid as also at the end and term of five year every man servant to have livery and season of thirty and some forty acre of land and woman twenty which say land be to be set forth for their use by the governor or governor and council then be and to the end that every one may know what profit be due unto they by reason of their service it shall be free for they to make choice of any two or three among themselves which shall once in the year or thereabouts upon reasonable request make to the governor or governor then be see the account and what be due unto they upon the foot of the same @ for their better satisfaction and avoid of suspicion and furthermore all such servant as shall be artificer as suger-cane and vine planter sugar baker druggist dyer lapidary minerallman refiner founder Potashe maker barbersurgeon ingener gunner survayer shipwrightes mill-wrightes carpenter joiner Cooper turner wheeler sawyer oar maker blacke-smith locke-smith gunn-smith pike-maker armourer cutler edge-toole-maker roper sayle-maker mariner net-maker fisherman baker butcher brewer distiller of hot-water feltmaker spinster weaver tailor tanner currier tawyer of fur fellmongers girdler glover shoemaker potter mason brickmaker bricklayer basket-maker thatcher and such like be to receive a nine part of a twelve more than other which be no artificer of all the profit that shall arise by their labour and industry as a recompense of their several art for their further encouragement and last it shall and may be free for every servant appertain to the colony to put into the joint stock such sum of money as they shall be able from under fifty pound to five as already some have do the receipt of which sum be acknowledge by indenture shall be as sufficient a warrant for they to receive the just profit of the same correspondent to their several stock of adventure as to any other before mention and now to conclude see that work of this nature require some time for preparation of ship and all other thing needful for transportation and that the summer season be most convenient for the performance of the same it be therefore think fit to give notice to all such as shall become willing adventurour with the say earl and company to bring in their stock of adventure so soon as convenient they may and the soon the better for the reason aforesaid to the place of meet appoint to be keep for the receive in of adventurer and servant to the company at the house of mr. Edward the king pikemaker in Philip lane near Cripplegate London which first meeting be appoint on Thursday the first of march at two of the clock in the afternoon and so to continue every Thursday after until such time as the joint stock number of adventurer and servant shall be full thus have brief show the hopefulness of this plantation above other whereby such as be faithful have ability may become chief adventurer herein and that such as be outward poor yet rich in faith may likewise adventure their prayer with they jam. 2. 5. for the prosperous success of this new plantation that it may be as a vineyard which the right hand of the lord have plant and may grow up before he in the wilderness be fill with the fruit of righteousness which be by jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God among the heathen who see our pure conversation may be win thereby to the knowledge and love of God our father and the lord jesus Christ which that they may so do grant o most gracious God that as thou be please to love we when we be enemy as these so likewise be please to love these with we that we and they may both agree to worship thou in sincerity of heart and unity of faith which work of grace and power be thou o let thy work and power appear psal 90. 18. 19 and on thy servant light and show unto thy child dear thy glory and thy might lord let thy grace and glory stand on we thy servant thus confirm the work we take in hand lord prosper they to we amen i. d.