



A
PVBLICATION
OF GVIANA'S
PLANTATION.
To all faithfull, and well affected Christians.
FOR as much as diverse of this
Nation are departed hence into
forraine Countries, as well for
the propagating of Gods truth
(most likely) as their owne private
benefite, whereby the word
of the Lord might bee fulfilled in those Heathen
(through Gods infinite goodnes and mercy) as in us
Christians formerly saying,Rom. 9. 25. 26. I will call them my people
which were not my people, and her beloved, which was
not beloved, and it shall be in the place where it was said
unto them, yee are not my people, that there they shall be
called the children of the living God. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that there are divers yet remaining,
which retaine the like Christian resolution, but

want of true knowledge of a plantation (that may
proove profitable to the Church of God and themthemselves)
causeth such to live heere like plants,
which many times prove lesse fruitfull in their naturall
soile, then when they are removed to places
better liking them, for which cause I have thought
good at this present, to discover briefly (to all such
as are wel affected) the knowledge of a most hopefull
plantation newly undertaken by the right
honorable the Earle of Barkeshire (Knight of the
most noble order of the Garter) and company,
for that famous river of the Amazones in
America, as by that which followeth may appeare.
But before I proceede further herein, I thinke it
not amisse to speake somewhat of the lawfullnesse
of plantations in forraine countries, whereby such
as make doubt thereof, may be beetter satisfied
herewith.
Now in plantations there are these two principalls
to be considered: first, whether it be lawfull
to remove from one place or countrey to another,
secondly, whether it be lawfull to possesse a countrey
already inhabited by others: touching the former
it hath these two severall heads, namely, ordinary,
and extraordinary; extraordinary is that
when God shall please immediately to cause any
man to depart from one country to another, as hee
caused Abraham to depart from Haran to Canaan
and Iacob to returne from Padan Aram to the land
of his fathers,Gen. 12. 1, 4, 5, 31. 3. 18. but no man may now expect any

such removall and calling as these formerly
had.
The latter of these which I call ordinary, is that
when men shall be either moved themselves, or by
others to leave their ancient habitation, and goe
and inhabite some other place: and this I take to be
warrantable from that place of the Kings, where the
children of the Prophets said unto Elisha,2 King. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. @ Behold
now, the place where wee dwell with thee is too narrow
for us, Let us goe now to Iordan that wee may take thence
every man a beame, and make us a place to dwell in; and
hee answered goe, and one said, vouchsafe I pray thee to
goe with thy servants, and hee said I will, goe so he went
with them, and when they came to Iordan they cut downe
wood. Which worke of theirs (without question)
was no other to them then a new plantation, for
they seing the inconvenience that was like to ensue
by staying longer in their ancient habitation, did
thereupon remove to a place more spacious, and
commodious for them. @ In which progresse of
theirs, wee may learne not to conceale any thing to
our selves, which may as well prove profittable
to others, but discover the same for their good, as
doubtlesse the Children of the Prophets heere
did.
From hence then wee may gather, th^
men may lawfully remoove with their familyes
from one place to another, and that for
divers causes; as here the Children of the
Prophets did, by reason of the straitnesse of the
land wherein they dwelt: and it is to be feared that

many also among us have as great cause to doe the
like, by reason of the daily increasing of all sorts of
people, whereby cittyes townes and countries, are
so thronged, that men can hardly live well one by
another, appeareth by the generall complaint of
many in these times.
Neither hath the sayd straitnesse alone,2 Kings 8. 1, 2. caused
a removall from one place or Country to another,Ruth. 4. 1. 2.
but also famine,1 Chro. 10. 7. sword, and other alterations, happenning
in the world:Ier. 14. 18. And to speake truely, if that some
in all ages had not departed into other countries
with their families (as God was pleased to moove
them by his divine providence) the world assuredly
had not beene so much inhabited abroad as now
it is,Heb. 11. 37, 38. and men had beene more burthened at home,
then now they are: therefore such men deserve rather
to be commended, then condemned by any, @
and that because they do nothing herein, but what
God hath commanded, to be done, as appeareth
Gen.Gen. 9. 1. 1. 28. Bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the
earth: and this againe is ratified, to Noah and his
sons, saying, bring forth fruite and multiply and replenish
the earth, which places, being no way contradicted
in all the scriptures (as I coulde ever perceive)
are sufficient to proove the Lawfulnesse of plantations
in all ages. And the rather, when Kings shal
bee likewise pleased to allow the same freedome
to their naturall subiects, and that not onely to the
poore, but also to the rich, who have the like priviledge
of removal, as appeareth by the places before
mentioned,Gen. 13. 2, 5, 6, 1^. and by that of Abraham and Lot, who
departed one from the other, because the Land

wherein they dwelt were so strait that it could not
beare them, by reason their substance was so great.
So then wee see all men have a like liberty of
removing from one place to another, excepting
such onely,Rom. 12. 7. which for the time being have any office,
or shall bee married,1 Cor. 7. 5. in which case men ought
not to depart from their wives without consent,1 Pet. 3. 7.
nor children from their parents without their liking,Colo. 5. 20. 22.
nor servants from their Masters without their
leave.
It remayneth in the next place, that I shew the
lawfulnesse of possessing a countrey already inhabited
by others, which is our second question:
True it is, that all men through Adams fall were
deprived of the glory of God, and worlds good,
until by Christ the use of the creatures was againe
restored to all beleevers, therfore the right of that
which we possesse, commeth now to us by Christ,
for which cause, the heathen have no right to that
which they deeme theirs,Psal. 115. 16. notwithstanding, the
Lord hath beene pleased to suffer such to live on
earth with his,Gen. 2. 32. and not to be rooted out from the
place of their habitations untill the day of harvest,Isay. 27. 13.
during which time the Land wherein such have lived
hath beene called theirs:2 Chron. 32. 21 As the land of the Philistims,
the land of Egipt,Ier. 37. 7. and of Ashur, of whom it is
said,Isay 13. 14. that he returned with shame @ to his owne land,
and of the Egyptians it is said,Isay. 19. 17. they shall returne
@ into their owne lande:2 Kings 5. 2. ^ In like manner, the lande
of Iudea and Israel,Psal. 44. 1, 2, 3. being taken from the Heathen
(by Gods speciall command and assistance) was
afterward called @ their owne Land:Ezech. 36. 17. for as the

Israelites land was not the heathens as saith the Prophet,Esa. 14. 1.
Lo I raise up the Caldeans to possesse the dwelling
places @ that are not theirs,Habak. 1. 6. neither was the heathens
land the Israelites,Gen. 24. 37. as God telleth Abraham;
saying, know for a suretie that thy seed shall bee a stranger
in a land @ that is not theirs;Gen. 15. 13. from whence we
may gather, that God permitteth not his to dispossesse
a people or nation of their ancient habitation
for the enlarging of their owne borders; neverthelesse,
if such shall bee willing that Gods
people shall inhabit with them, as Abimelech was
willing that Abraham should dwell with him in his land
where it pleased him,Gen. 20. 15. and 47. 5. 6. and Pharaoh liked well that Iacob
and his sonnes should dwell with him in the best of
the land of Egypt. In such a case men may doubtlesse
possesse a country already inhabited by others:
@ But the inhabitants of Guiana are willing that
our nation should inhabit that goodly and spatious
country with them (as appeareth more fully in
Mr. Harcourts relation of Guiana dedicated to the
Kings most excellent Majestie, 1626) Therefore
without all question, the plantations there made of
late by our nation are lawfull.
Thus having briefly shewed the lawfullnesse of
plantations in forraine Countries, for the better
satisf^ing of such as make doubt thereof, I come in
the next place to speake somewhat of the nature of
the river, qualitie of the land, climate, and people
of Guiana, with the provision for mans sustenance,
and commodities therein growing, whereby such
as are ignorant of the same, might bee encouraged
to adventure for the good of themselves, and of

those poore natives, which sit still in darknesse,
and in the shadow of death.
As touching that great and famous River of the
Amazones in America,Harcort. it is called for the excellencie
thereof, (by Iosepus A costa) the Empresse
and Queene of all Flouds, and for the large extent
of the same, it is called by others the sweet Sea,
supposed to bee the greatest River (not onely of
all India, but also) of the whole world; it is said
to slow from the Mountaines of Peru, and runneth
with many windings and turnings for the space of
1500 leagues, containing at the mouth thereof
neare sixtie leagues in breadth; in it are many Ilands,
divers of which are inhabited by the Indians;
it doth ebbe and flow neare three hundred
leagues, and hath in it greate store of excellent fishes
for the use of man: of which more shall bee
said hereafter, when wee shall come to speake of
the provisions of the country for mans sustenance.
The quality of the land is of divers kindes; as
low, middle, and mountainous, (as here with us)
it aboundeth in woods of divers sorts, having
plaines in some parts thereof, with plentie of grasse,
besides pleasant streames of fresh waters, all which
are very needfull and fitting for a plantation.
The earth in those parts is of sundry mixtures,
as blacke mould, clay, rossey, and such like, besides
stone for building if occasion serve.
The seasons there differ much from ours, for the
dry weather which wee call there summer, beginneth
about August, and the raines and windes,
which we account there winter, begin about Februarie;

which latter season is termed by us their winter,
by reason of the raines then falling extraordinarie,
and not by reason of the coldnesse of the
weather; for there are no frostes or snowes, as
with us here, @ but a continuall spring and summer
season: for no sooner doe the leaves wither
and fall away, but presently it beginnes to spring
againe, as here with us some yeares it seemeth the
like; for when our autumme proves somewhat
warme, then commonly appeareth a second spring,
which yet never commeth to perfection, and that
by reason of the suns declining from our horizon,
and the cold winters present approaching, which
causeth alwayes our latter spring to keepe backe,
untill the time of our summer season: @ which in
Guiana is not so, for there is little difference of
heat and cold throughout the yeare, but a most
pleasant growing weather, which commonly causeth
those parts to bee much more fruitfull then
many other parts of the world.
@ The day and night are there alwaies equall, the
Sunne rising at six of the clocke in the morning,
and setting at six in the evening or neare thereabout
the yeare throughout.
The provisions for diet are many, as first, the
roote called Cassavie, of which the Guianians
make their bread; there is likewise a kinde of great
wheat called Maix, it yeeldeth great increase, and
maketh excellent meale, or flower for bread: of
the aforesaid Cassavie, and this wheat, is made a
sort of drinke called Paranaw, much like the best
march beare here with us; other sorts also they

have, which for brevity sake I omit here to speake
of.
There are Deere of divers sorts, wilde Swine,
Hares and Conies in great plenty, besides which
there is a great beast called Maipnry which in taste
is like beefe, and will take salt; there is also another
creature which usually commeth into the fresh
waters, and feedeth upon the grasse and weedes in
the marshes, (and is called by us the sea-Cow) being
in tast like beefe, and will also take salt, as the
former; of these there are great store in their seasons,
they wil serve wel for the victualling of ships
homeward bound, as of late hath beene proved.
Of fowles there be divers kindes, namely, wild-duckes,
wilde-geese, hennes, herons, cranes, storkes,
pheasants, partridges, pigeons, stockdoves, parrats
of sundry sorts, besides ravenous fowles, and
hawkes, with divers other sorts not knowne in
these parts.
The variety of fish is great, as first, mullet, seabreame,
soale, scate, thornebacke, swordfish, seale,
a fish like a sammon, but differing in coulour,
shrimpes, lobsters, and oysters, other sorts there
are, besides freshwater fish of many kindes, which
in these parts of Europe are not knowne to us.
The fruites there growing are the Pina, Plantana,
Medler, Plumbes and Nuts of divers kindes, beside
store of Potatoes, as for the Pina, it exceedeth
all other fruites in those parts, being in taste much
like ripe straberries with clarret wine and sugar; the
Plantana tasteth like an old pippin, the medlers
exceede ours in greatnesse, and the nuts in sweetnesse.

Having thus briefly touched the severall sorts of
provisions necessary for mans sustenance, it remaineth
I shew the varietie of commodities therein
growing for the trade of Merchandise, which in
short-time (by Gods assisting our endeavours) may
bee brought to returne great profit to the undertakers.
The first commodity of estimation there growing
are sugar-canes, whereof in some parts there
are store, which by orderly planting and erecting
of convenient workes, for boyling and making of
sugars, may (through Gods blessing) bee returned
yearely great profit to the adventurers, @ as the
plantation of sugarcanes made hertofore in Barbary
by the Moores, and since that in Brasseile by the Portugals
may witnesse.
There is also cotton wooll growing of the finest
sort, it is a profitable commodity, for making of
sustians, callicoes and candle-wicke.
There is a naturall hempe, or flax, of great use,
it is much like raw silke, and is called of some silkegrasse.
There are likewise many commoditie^ for
diers, as namely a red berry called Anotto,
which dieth a perfect oringe-tawny in silke, and a
yallow in cloath, of which there may bee gotten
good store every season* for my selfe with some others
setting forth a ship formerly for those parts,
(by way of trade) received upon returne, above
three thousand waight of the said Anotto, which
then bore a good price here, but much better in

the neatherlands, other dyes there are (besides
hope of Cutcheneale) which at this present I purpose
briefly to passe over.
There are likewise found of late, store of Nutmegs
growing, with their Mace, some of which
I have recevied upon returne of my foresaid adventure,
which noe man (I suppose) but my selfe can
shew the like, excepting some gentlemen, which
upon request have received some of mee, which
no doubt may in short time bee brought to a more
fuller perfection, by either cropping the old trees
and dreaning the waters from them, or by transplanting
the young trees, as by experience is commonly
seene, how that nature is much helped by
art and industry.
There is likewise Gumma, Lemina, Barrata,
Ginnipepper, long Pepper, Cascia fistula, Tobacco,
spleene stones, speckled wood, Hony and wax*
As for mineralls, or mynes of mettals, it is very
likely, this Country affordeth many, not onely
of the basest, but also of the richest, which hereafter
may come to bee discovered, if God shall be
pleased, which hee grant to his glory, and our
good, or that otherwise they may ever lie hid.
Now as touching the nature of these people they
are generally held harmelesse, tractable, trusty,
and somewhat laborious; in which respect they
differ much from all other Americans, and which
is better to bee liked in them, there is good hope
conceived of their conversion to the Christian
faith,Act. 16. 9. 10* for as the man of Macedonia prayed St. Paul
in a vision, to come into Macedonia and helpe them;

so have some of these poore ignorant soules desired
Captaine Charles Leigh,Purchas. p. 1021. to send into England
for some men to teach them to pray; since which,
one being converted,Harcourt. p. 9. and became a Christian, being
at the point of death, desired some of our nation
then present, to sing a Psalme with him, which
being ended, hee told them hee could not live,
and did withall acknowledg, that he had been a wicked
sinner, but did hope that hee should bee saved
by the precious blood of our Saviour Iesus
Christ; and moreover, hee desired all of them there
present, to beare witnesse that hee died a Christian;
@ yea said hee, a Christian of England.
A happy worke no doubt it were to recover
those poore soules out of Sathans snare, who are
taken captive of him at his will;2 Tim. 2. 26 may wee not well
feare, that as hee murthers the body that denies
it nourishment when extremity requires it, so doth
hee no lesse to the soule of whom nourishment is
implored,Alsted chron. in tit. deconuer. and yet hee denieth it; was not the Nubians
case most miserable, (once a Christian
people in Africa) when having not able Ministers
of their owne, they sent to the Abassines their
neighbours for teachers, and were denied; did
not such deserve worthily the calamity of a perpetuall
ignorance, who so uncompassionately slighted
the reasonable request of others?Heylin ^. 121. on the contrary
when some of the East Indians sent their
Embassadours to Demetrus Patriarke of Alexandria
for teachers to instruct them in the faith of
Christ, hee willingly condescended thereunto,
and sent not onely such as preached true doctrine,

but also adorned the same by a holy conversation,
so that by their pious diligence, they wonne many
of them to the faith, which was the crowne of their
reioycing: and who knoweth, but that he that infused
such desires into an inhabitant of the East indies,
may worke as powerfully in them of the west,
and may likewise blesse these as he blessed them
with the ^lessed light of his most holy word, to
which let every faithfull Christian say, Amen.
Now seeing that the hope of worldly gaine causeth
most men to adventure in one kinde or other,
and that the gaine conceived of this plantation may
prove very profitable both to the Church of God
and all adventurers, it may therefore the better incourage
and stirre up men of all sorts, to become adventurers
herein, @ and chiefly such as have received
of the Lord both grace, and ability, for the further
setting forth of his glory.
And although it cannot bee denied but that our
nation of late yeares, hath beene very forward in
setling of divers plantations beyond the seas,
yet have they not all thereby so much glorified
God, as could be wished, nor dealt so faithfully
with some adventurers, as was expected, which
thing no doubt being considered by many, hath
beene the onely cause of keeping them backe from
being adventurers; and no marvell, if when wee
consider the persons commonly sent (I speake not
of all, but of such onely) whose lives being base
and idle here at home, can hardly bee expected to
be much better abroade in forraigne plantations,
which to speake truely, have beene no other (for

the most part formerly) then common sinkes,
wherein too many grieved fathers have cast forth
their desperate ofspring, and the commonwealth
her most lawlesse inhabitants, such as by their conversations
cause the good name whereby they are
called,1 Pet. 2. 12. to be rather evil spoken of amongst the Gentiles,
then otherwise: by meanes whereof it hath happened
that the heathen have deemed that God as evil
as their owne, whose servants were worse then
themselves, doth not God and nature teach, that
whatsoever a man soweth,Gal. 6. 7. that shall hee also reape, not
grapes of thornes,Matth. 7. 16 nor figgs of thistles can men expect.
And now, though plantes of grace (like fruitfull
trees) are chiefest to be wished for in al plantations,
yet no doubt may civill men be sent in case of want,
as natures flowers for ornament: I wish therefore
that care were had, @ to send those plants, and
leave the bad.
As for the temper of the climate it exceedeth not
so in heate as some men have thought of it, for
though the scituation be in part under the equinoctial,
yet is it habitable, as appeareth by the experience
of our countrimen, which have lived in those
parts, and found it both healthfull, and pleasant; for
God in wisdome hath so ordered the heavens in
their horizon, as that by meanes of a brieze (or
fresh gale of winde) blowing in the day time, it
quallifieth the heate, @ and maketh the climate
much more temperate, as with us is often felt the
like in heate of summer.
Besides the dewes there falling commonly in the
night, addeth much to the cooling of that climate,

and which is to bee noted, the continuall absence
of the Sunne from the horizon, for the space of
twelve houres every day, cannot but cause the
temper of that clymate to be moderate, there being
a perfect mixture of heat and cold, each qualifing
the other in the space of twentie foure hours
by an equall division of day and night, as before
hath beene shewed.
Their houses are built (most commonly) in
length, like our barnes here with us, some of which
are so large, as that they containe in them above an
hundred persons, having therein hanging beds, (in
which they lie) called hamackoes, made of cotten
woll very artificially, their vessels for use are
made some of clay, of which sort some are so great
as that they will containe more then one hogshead
of water.
They will worke a month or more for an axe of
eighteene or twentie pence price; for which they
will fell your timber, cleare your ground, plant
your sugar-canes, Anotto, and Cotten trees, and
build your house after their fashion: @ which in
other plantations is not so, for in all other our
plantations, the adventurers are enforced to carry
men over to doe their worke for them, least otherwise
they bee driven to worke themselves, as
Virginia, St. Christophers, and new England;
with others can witnesse.
Besides which, in most former plantations except
new England, men have adventured onely upon
hope of one commoditie (as namely Tobacco) but
here are many more commodities then one, (as

hath beene shewed) @ therefore is this plantation
more hopefull then all others: the foundation
of which being already laid, may give men better
incouragment to become ioynt adventurers herein,
especially being thereupon presently intressed
in the shipping stocke, and profits of the said plantation;
for the preservation whereof, wee have
not onely sent divers honest and able men (marren
and other) but also some peeces of great ordnance,
with amunition, and other materials very
usefull towards building of a fort, for the better
securing of our planters persons from the danger
of an enemy; having moreover caused a pinnace
to bee sent to abide with the Colony in the river,
for their better safetie and trade in the country;
@ intending likewise this summer (if God shall
bee pleased) to sett out a new supply of more men
(as artificers and others) besides women, as also
more ordnance, amunition, and other materials,
fitting for the defence of the plantation, besides
another shipp, greater then the former, to stay and
abide there together with the Colony in the river,
for their better defence and trade in the country aforesaid:
in which supply I also purpose (God
willing) to goe with my wife and friends, to inhabit
some part of that spacious and goodly countrie.
But here some may obiect feare of the enemy.Object.
Answ.Answ. it is no other then what hath bin usualy vented
at the first setting forth of al our plantations for
America, as Virginia and others can witnesse; and
if there were so great cause to feare (as some have

supposed) men would not assuredly have adventured
so freely; but this plantation here mentioned
is farre from the Spaniards habitation, and
therefore lesse cause to be feared.
But yet it may bee further obiected,Object. that though
the Spanyard bee somewhat farre distant, yet the
Portugals in Brasill (being neare vnto it) may
prove as ill neighbours as the other.Answ. Answer, if
wee consider the spatiousnes of the country (being
supposed to bee more then twenty times greater
then this kingdome of England) wee have no such
great cause to feare them; for if wee like not their
neighbourhood, (there being roome enough,
and divers goodly rivers besides in the country)
wee may (if we please) goe further out of their
reach, where no doubt (through Gods assisting
of our indeavours) wee may come to returne as
great profit (by meanes of sugar canes and such
like commodities growing in those partes) as in the
river aforesaid: for to speake truly, it were great
weaknesse in any to presume to sit neare an enemy,
and have not sufficient strength to oppose him, or
having roome enough to go out of his reach, will
notwithstanding abide neare him; yet I deny not,
but that a Colony may bee able to subsist neare an
enemy by meanes of fortification, and especially
when they are such as feare God, being provided
with amunition, victuall, and all other things needfull
for the defence of the same: for to raise a fort
for the reliefe of a Colony, and not to victuall it,
(as some haue carelesly neglected through indiscretion)
were to make it (with such) our peoples

grave, and not their preservation: and if an hundred
of our nation, or thereabout (having neither
fort, nor artillery for defence,) were able (not
long since) by meanes of the natives, to cause about
eighteene hundred of the enemy to retrayte,
and abandon the river, with losse of many of their
lives; how much more then being fortified, and
fitted with all things needfull for the defence of the
same, may wee bee better able, (through the helpe
of the almighty) to repell and beat backe a more
potent power.
Now as the raising of forts for the defence
of Colonies, and neglect of storing them with
victuall, and other things needfull for preservation
of the same, sheweth the great indiscretion of
some sort of people: @ So in like manner, is
their folly as great, who looking after present
profit, neglect planting provisions needfull for
the preservation of their lives: which wee taking
into consideration, have given expresse charge,
that first of all they take care to plant provisions
needfull for sustentation, whereby they may bee
able in short time to subsist of themselves, without
helpe of the natives, which usually furnish our
English plantations with store of provisions for
diet, at marvelous low rates; yet notwithstanding
wee have sent thither some few cattell for
breed, befids other creaturs, which in those parts
have not yet beene heard of by us to have beene amongst
them.
And if any man shall desire to bee further satisfied
concerning the proceed of the said plantation,

or shall make doubt of any thing, they may please
to repaire to the place of meeting (hereafter mentioned)
and there receive further satisfaction.
Now as touching the manner of the adventure,
it is as followeth.
Every one that shall be admitted into the Colony,
or company of the Right Honourable the Earle
of Barksheire for his plantation in Guiana, is to be
admitted one of these three wayes, that is to say;
either in person and purse, or in purse, or in person
onely. The first are called personall adventurers,
the second, purse adventurers, and the latter are
servants to the Collony.
Concerning the former, they are such as not
onely adventure their persons, but also their
purses; of which sort none may bee admitted under
fifty pounds at least, put into the ioynt stocke
(being a single share) in consideration whereof, every
such adventurer is to have for his personal service
(over and above the profits of his stocke
of adventure) his transportation and diet free,
(both in the passage and country,) besides a certaine
stipend or yearly allowance (as others) toward
the maintenance of his apparrell and bedding,
and also aleventh part of a twelfth, of all the profits
that shall arise by the industry and labours of
the Collony beyond sea; and lastly, a proportion
of land over and besides his stocke of adventure
of fifty poundes, or more as every one pleaseth to
put in, @ whose respect in the Collony, is held
fitting to be measured according to the greatnesse
of every mans adventure, worth and qualitie.

As for those which are called purse adventurers,
they are such which adventure their monies but not
their persons, @ whose names, and summes adventured,
are not onely registred, but also acknowledged
by indenture under seale, by Authority from
the said Earle, (for their better security, and more
assurance of faithfull dealing) to become ioynt adventurers
with the said Earle and company, for his
plantation aforesaid, and that at every returne, (during
the terme of five yeares) after the first returne
from the plantation, every adventurer, his heyres,
executours, administratours or assignes, shall receive
the profits of his stocke of adventure, and shal
the first returne from the plantation (after five
yeares shall be expired) receive out the iust residue
and remainder of his stocke of adventure, and profits
therof, or may if he please, continue the same longer
in the ioynt stocke then the terme aforesaid,
for his further benefit: and shall have moreover,
set forth for his use a proportion of lande correspondent
to his said stocke of adventure: and to
the ende that every adventurer, his heires, executors,
administrators and assignes may clearely see,
that they have the due proportion of the profits of
their adventure, it is covenanted in the said indenture,
that the heires, executors, administrators and assigns
of the^ shal upon every setting forth and return,
see the full summe of all the disbursements, and receits
from time to time, paid and received, touching
the proceede of the said ioynt stocke, and
plantation: which in like manner, every adventurer,
as well personall, servant, as other, hath the

like indenture for their better satisfaction, and more
assurance of faithfull dealing, as aforesaid.
Now concerning the latter, which are servants
to the collony, they are such, which adventuring
onely their persons, are bounde by indenture to
serve the said Earle and company in the plantation
five yeares, in consideration whereof, the said servantes,
(as well wives, maides, as men) are to have
their transportation thither free, as also their diet,
lodging, apparrell, and all other materialls needfull,
provided for them, at the charge of the ioynt stock,
for the terme aforesaid (apparrelling themselves
here for the first yeare) and to receive moreover,
(for their beter incouragement) a twelfth part of
all the profits that shall arise by their labours and
industry, and the women a fifteenth (as of sugars,
nutmeggs, mace, cotton wools, Anottoes, honey,
wax, tobacco, mineralls, and all other such like
commodities, as shall be gotten in the plantation,
in manner aforesaid) as also at the end and
terme of five yeares, every man servant to have livery,
and season of thirty, and some forty acres of
land, and women twenty, which said landes are to
be set forth for their use, by the governour, or governours,
and councell then being.
And to the end that every one may know what
profits are due unto them by reason of their service,
it shall be free for them to make choyse of any two
or three amongst themselves, which shall once in
the yeare, or thereabout (upon reasonable request
made to the governour, or governours then being)
see the accompts, and what is due unto them upon

the foote of the same, @ for their better satisfaction
and avoyding of suspition.
And furthermore all such servants, as shall bee
artificers. As Suger-cane, and Vine planters: Sugar
bakers, Druggists, Dyers, Lapidaries, Minerallmen,
Refiners, Founders, Potashe makers, Barbersurgeons,
Ingeners, Gunners, Survayers, Ship-wrightes,
Mill-wrightes, Carpenters, Ioyners,
Coopers, Turners, Wheelers, Sawyers, Oare makers,
Blacke-smiths, Locke-smiths, Gunn-smiths,
Pike-makers, Armorers, Cutlers, Edge-toole-makers,
Ropers, Sayle-makers, Mariners, Net-makers,
Fishermen, Bakers, Butchers, Brewers, Distillers
of hot-waters, felt-makers, Spinsters, Weavers,
Taylers, Tanners, Curriers, Tawyers of
Furres, Fellmongers, Girdlers, Glovers, Shoomakers,
Potters, Masons, Bricke-makers, Bricke-layers,
Basket-makers, Thatchers, and such like;
are to receive a ninth part of a twelfth (more then
others, which are no artificers, of all the profits
that shall arise by their labours, and industry) as a
recompence of their severall arts for their further
incouragement.
And lastly, it shall and may bee free for every
servent appertaining to the colony, to put into the
ioynt stocke such summes of mony, as they shall
be able from under fifty pounds to five (as already
some have done) the receit of which summes being
acknowledged by indenture, shall be as sufficient
a warrant for them to receive the iust profits of the
same, correspondent to their severall stockes of adventure,
as to any other before mentioned.

And now to conclude, seeing that workes of this
nature require some time for preparation of shipping,
and all other things needfull for transportation,
and that the summer season is most convenient
for the performance of the same: it is therefore
thought fitting to give notice to all such, as shal become
willing adventurours with the said Earle and
company, to bring in their stockes of adventure,
(so soone as conveniently they may, and the sooner
the better, for the reasons aforesaid) to the place
of meeting appointed to be kept (for the receiving
in of adventurers, and servants to the company) at
the house of Mr. Edwards the Kings Pikemaker in
Phillip lane neare Cripplegate: London: which
first meeting is appointed on thursday the first of
March (at two of the clocke in the afternoone) and
so to continue every thursday after, untill such time
as the ioynt stocke, number of adventurers, and servants
shall be full.
Thus having briefly shewed the hopefulnesse of
this plantation, above others, whereby such as
are faithfull (having ability) might become chiefly
adventurers herein, and that such as are outwardly
poore (yet rich in faith) might likewise adventure
their prayers with them,Iam. 2. 5. for the prosperous successe
of this new plantation, that it may bee as a
Vineyard which the right hand of the Lord hath
planted, and may growe up before him in the wildernesse
(being filled with the fruits of righteousnesse,
which are by Iesus Christ, unto the glory and
praise of God) amongst the Heathen, who seeing
our pure conversation may bee wonne thereby to

the knowledge and love of God our Father, and
the Lord Iesus Christ: which that they may so do,
grant O most gracious God, that as thou wast pleased
to love us, when we were enemies as these, so
likewise bee pleased to love these with us, that we
and they may both agree to worship thee in sincerity
of heart, and vnity of faith.
Which worke of grace and power being thine,


O let thy worke and power appeare,Psal. 90. 18. 19.
and on thy servants light,
And shew unto thy children deare,
thy glory and thy might,
Lord let thy grace and glory stand,
on us thy servants thus,
Confirme the workes we take in hand,
Lord prosper them to us.


Amen.
I. D.






